EUROPAE Modernae SPECULUM: OR, A VIEW of the Empires, Kingdoms,
Principalities, Seignieuries, and Commonwealths OF EUROPE: IN Their present
State, their Government, Policy, different Interest, and mutual Aspect one
toward another, from the Treaty at Munster, Anno 1648. to this present year.

LONDON, Printed for Peter Parker, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Popes-head-Alley, next Lombard Street. 1666.

By Order and appointment of the Right Honorable Mr Secretary Morris, let
this be Printed.

JOHN COOK.

To the READER.
WHen the whole World stands amazed, suspecting its own Fate; and most of the
Kingdoms of Europe are a Riddle to themselves: When the wiser sort of Mankind
discourse Events, and the rest dread them: When Men apprehend Things by
piece-meals, and discourse Business by parcells; A clear, complete, and
impartial State of Affairs (such as this, representing all Europe in one entire
View) must needs be as Useful in the Perusal, as it was Plausible in the
Undertaking: Especially since,

1. It contains such Discourses, as were not the Author's Reading, but his
Observation of Things that happened, not only since he remembered, but since he
observed too.

2. It Is not only Lumen Siccum, I mean such an Account of Things, as is not
steeped, in either Humor, or Interest.

3. It Is not only a Superficial Relation of Affairs, but a deep and solid
Inquisition into their Grounds and Bottomes: Not a short Gazet of 1665. but
prudent Reflections on the State of most Kingdoms, since the Peace at Munster,
1648.

With what Content the Politician here may observe the Interests and
Pretensions of Europe; With what Satisfaction the Curious may here discern the
Fate of Empires; With what Pleasure the Gentleman notes here the Successions,
Alliances, and Relations of Christendom; With what Gust the Novelist gains here
the Ground and Reason of most Undertakings, Transactions, Successes, and
Miscarriages; With what Delight the Retired Man looks, in one View, on the
several Aspects of each Kingdom one toward the other, and expects in silence
the issues of Grand Counsels and Revolutions; looking wisely into the dark, but
pleasing Prospect of Futurity, upon the Concerns of late Posterity, Is not so
easily expressed, as experienced; it being the issue of calm Reason in large
Breasts, that are not content to Inhabit the World only, but to Understand it
too.

To see the Grandeur and Glory of France, the Decaying and Infirmities of
Spain, the fatal Resolutions of Holland, the uncertain Fortune of the Empire;
the Troubles and Disorders of Poland; the Settlement and Strength of England,
Sweden, and Denmark; the general Design of Europe for Free-Trade; the old
Claims, Pretensions, and Titles of States and Kingdoms; the Riches, Power,
Sea, and Landforces, and Policies of each Government; the Failures,
Over-sights, Errors, and Defects of most Potentates; the Plots, Designs, and
Inclinations of each Commonwealth; the Situations, Dependencies, Respects, and
Confederacies of most Nations, in one entire Prospect, is such a Satisfaction
to inquisitive and reasoning Spirits, as may excuse this publication of a
Posthumous work, whereof the Author saw two third Parts printed; especially
since, that next to Authors and Composers of Books, their Conservators and
Guardians deserve most Thanks and Commendations. We think we owe a great deal
to such as Photius and Stobeus (and the publick-spirited Sirmondus, of the late
Times) through the industry of whom, we do enjoy many things, which but for
them we might have lost. How comes it to pass, that we have nothing, (unless
mere Fragments, and arrant Scraps) of such as Berosus, Citesius, Megastenes,
Theopompus, Eughorus, Callisthenes, and Timuus? Or that we want so many Books
of Diodorus Siculus, Polybius, Livius, and Dion Cassius? But because there were
not, in all Times, Men of faithful, industrious, and public Souls, that looked
on themselves as Citizens of the World, and could not enjoy a thought of their
own, but what they made (as we do these Discourses) common to Mankind.

Vale.
Europae Modernae Speculum: OR, A VIEW OF THE Empires, Kingdoms,
Principalities, Seigneuries, and Commonwealths OF Europe, In their Present
State; WITH Their Distinct Interests, Policies and Concerns.
THere was once but one uniform, simple and genuine Reason, the sure Guide, and
unerring Rule of all humane Counsels, until the depravity of Man's Nature, by
its Luciferian Arrogance, would needs exalt Sense above her, and sought out
many devices to accomplish it. One of the chief Projections hereto was the
deriving and slucing out that comprehensive and capacious receptacle, the
conservation of the public good, lodged in the depths of wisdom, into manifold
branches, and oblique narrow windings and Maeanders of private advantages,
which so drained and exhausted that first Bed and copious source of all those
blessings which the first Age of the World enjoyed, that it is now become a
mere shallow conception, and like the Springs of the River Nilus, more in
Notion and Speculation, than of any certain Existence.

And this has been the labor and industry of all Persons in all ages, the
Populacy, and the Vulgar as guilty of the Innovation as those Potentates whom
they implead of a most injurious Usurpation of their right: all times
concurring in their suffrage against this first Law, seeking nothing else in
the changes and vicissitudes of so many Governments, but their temporary ease,
and some particular Emoluments to themselves, although they have vainly
pretended, that those their restless Agitations, and irregular confused ways
to the perturbation of the public, were nothing else but natural tendencies,
how violent soever to that common Center, the Good of the Whole.

That Principle of Common Good how iluded.
By which means it has come to pass, that the World has put on another dress,
and has been disguised in various shapes of Policies, such as would best suit
the Humor and Genius of People, without consulting that first and perpetual
Principle, which in this crazy declension of all things, must needs be supposed
to abate and lose of its vigor; And to help out this Position, Men have
invented an Artifice, by placing such and such Nations under such and such
Climes and Temperatures, which either do so rarefact and attenuate it in some
sharper and serener Aires of Europe, that it is as good as lost, or else
condensate it in some thicker and grosser Regions, that it is as difficult to
be found.

And under these, or the like Capricies, are the Europeans rendered obnoxious to
one another, by natural Antipathies framed to keep them in mutual abhorrence,
(as if wise Nature, when she framed but one Man in the beginning, out of whose
Loins all Nations should proceed, had composed him to their very purpose of
inconsistent and unsociable Qualities and Materials) which has been fomented
also by two of the most powerful Passions, Jealousy and Ambition, the Effects
whereof, in sundry National Quarrels, have almost extinguished both the
Combatants. But Jealousy is the uncurable Disease, which has made Christendom
to languish under a tedious and wasting Consumption, in spite of all cure and
remedy, even of the peaceful and saving Gospel, by the ineffectual operation
whereof, we are not only like to become a Prey, but are already the scorn and
reproach of Turks and Infidels.

Me thinks I hear that of Lucan, in his elegant flattery to Nero, given as true
counsel and advice in the Courts of some Princes and States,

-- Librati pondera Coeli
Orb tene medio. --
To get so high, that they may govern and balance the World, and overlook the
Affairs of the Universe; which Elevation to so ticklish a point of Grandeur and
Felicity, as it has been fancied by some, is so incapable of persistency, that
the Fate of Phaeton has attended their ambitious Designs, and cast their
Dominions into Flame and Combustion.

Not to deny, but that a just Temperature of a formidable power and greatness,
ought to be nicely regarded, when the vicinity of so many united Dominions and
Soveraignties unequally distributed, may give suspicion of Encroachment; but
when such Discourses are like the story of 88. antiquated, and very
unpracticable; and the very Umbrages of those things disappear, and are
vanished, for that the Spanish Monarchy, and the House of Austria, (whose great
accessions of Territory gave rise to those Observations on which the Policy of
the last Age was founded) are concluded to be consumptive, and to stand merely
on the defensive part; the present divisions of Europe in this unhappy Juncture
cannot be palliated or covered with this fig-leaf.

As, if the Toss of Ambition be in the other Bucket, which in counterpoize of
the formers aspiring glories, has strugled through a War of almost a 100.
years duration, but has now interchanged Aims and Designs by Conversion,
intending the self-same advantages of a Purse and Puissance; the said
Differences are more enviously calamitous, and are so far from Color of
Excuse, that they give the World to see, that they do not act by the Rule of
what they ought, but what they may or can do; and that the longest Sword has
no measure but its Scabbard, to which once drawn, it seldom returns. Such as
these may be the occult cause of our Differences, (not imputing it to the
present War between the Muscovite and the Pole, which is an Haereditary and
National Quarrel about the Lands of their Dominions, conterminate and
confining upon one another; or to some small mis-understandings in Germany, not
considerable but for this Juncture, of both which we shall treat in its place
more amply) but there is a kind of Evil, which has attended every grand and
happy Revolution in Christendom, that is assignable as the principal and
general Motion to these present Troubles.

Fortune was never yet so respectful and officiously kind, but that her Train
was very chargeable; nor does she in her greatest Indulgence but faenerate and
commute her Favors. The late general Peace was not given Gratis, nor those
Palladian Semblances of Accommodation, without armed force in the womb of those
concealed Designs which yet amuse Christendom; and it is most true, that the
Pope his Holiness, who, in the beginning of his Papacy, laid about him so much
for the Reconciliation of the two Crowns, was not over-pleased when he saw it
was finished, and yet not out of any pique with the Cardinal Mazarine, (who
attributed to himself the glory of the Affair, by timing it to his own Notes)
as has been supposed, but because he prudently foresaw that the overgrown
power of that King would be dangerous to the Ecclesiastical State.

So that Peace and War are like Generation and Corruption, they follow one
another, naturally and commonly the greater the pacification is, and the more
things seem to be stilled and composed, the more vehement and violent the
rupture; for War is like an Earthquake, presaged by a serene Sky, and a quiet,
gentle Air, sooner than by any other prognostic or sign whatsoever. And so
much less sufficient is the state of Christendom to provide against the
suddenness of such a calamity, for that the scale of Politiques, as was hinted
before, is quite altered, and of a different and various administration, the
power being circulated to another Corner, and with the Wind may blow where it
list, while the Eastern Torrent or Inundation carries all before it.

Having thus glanced at these Causes which have embroyled Europe, we come now
to the Effects in the description and account thereof for the plain and perfect
Elucidation of the premises; and first we consider Europe in General, where we
content our selves with the survey of its Extent and Definition.

Of Europe in General.
IT is reputed one and the chief Quarters of the World, though far less than
any of the other three; whom it as far exceeds in Magnificence, Nobleness,
Number of People, Arms, Arts, Prudence and Prowess, and the result of all
these, Fame and Renown. It is bounded on the North with the North Ocean, or
Deucalidon Sea, on the South with the Mediterranean, on the East with the River
Tanais, and a Line drawn from thence to the Scythian or Frozen Sea (which has
been unknown to our modern Geographers, who supposed the Tanais to be of a
longer and further derived Current than in truth it is) and on the West with
the Western or American Seas. It contains 28. Kingdoms, reckoning those petty
Royalties of Spain, and the Hereditary Dominions of the Empire.

The Principal Provinces are, Germany, France, Spain, Belgium, Italy, Slavonia,
Greece, Hungary, Poland, Lituania, Moscovia, and that large Territory toward
the North, called Scandia, being its general name, but divided into the
Kingdoms of Norway, Denmark and Sweden, with their Provinces of Jutland,
Finland, Lapland, etc. The Islands are Great Britain (containing the Kingdoms
of England and Scotland) Ireland; and Zeland, Holland, Engroveland in the
Northern Ocean. In the Mediterranean are Sicily Candy, Corsica, Sardinia,
Majorca, Minorica, Nicropont, Malta, Corfu, and many other in the Archipelago.
The Air is excellently good, wholesome and Temperate, and the Soil Fertile;
which qualities appear in the Constitution and good Temper of the Natives, by
which they have excelled all other Nations, in Courage, Arts, sharpness of Wit,
and all other Gifts of Nature; to the perfection whereof it is stored with many
famous and learned Universities, the peculiar Dignity and Advantage of this
quarter of the World. In former and more ancient times it commanded Asia and
Africa, under the Greek and Roman Empires; the last obscured in the House of
Austria, and the other as much if not more renowned in the Ottoman Family,
whose present Arms are the Terror of the Whole. It is also solely famous for
Navigation, and the great acquisitions made thereby upon vaster Regions of the
unknown World. So that it may be reckoned the Mother of one of the biggest and
largest quarters of the Universe, to wit, America.

Having thus briefly described the whole, we come to a particular view of the
distinct Regions, their Site, Advantages, Government and present Interest; and
that we may take the Round the more commodiously for the purpose of this
Discourse, we will begin with the retrograde course, from North to the
Westward, and so Eastward, the Point and main Entendment of this Perambulation,
and in order thereunto begin with Poland, though lying Eastward also, but now
faced to the Northward, and has wholly unconcerned it self in the War in
Hungary, and so of less moment to this Treatise, which directs chiefly to that
sole Affair.

POLAND.
POLAND is bounded on the East with Muscovia, and Tartaria, and part of
Moldavia, on the South with Hungary, on the West with Germany, and on the North
with the Baltique Sea. The Air is most extraordinarily pure, and the Soil so
excellent, that it is almost impossible to suppose the quantity of Corn which
is hence transported into foreign Countries. It is a champian plain Country,
interlaced with Lakes and Rivers, and beautified with many little Woods, but
this Character chiefly respects the Greater Poland, which lies between Dantzick
and Cracovia, and all Lituania, wherein notwithstanding are very massy Woods.
The Lesser Poland, which contains the rest, even to the Frontiers of Hungary,
is not less fruitful, although it be not so uniform, where it is divided from
Prussia with little Hills, rather than Mountains. In it are many Mines of Salt
and Silver, with Wines, infinite quantities of Honey and Wax found in their
VVoods, and other excellent Fruits. The Air hereof is so temperate, that it is
commonly called, the Entrance of Italy, that is to say, the Gate and Portal of
all Delights and Pleasures imaginable. It contains, as its now in Circuit,
120. German Miles, from the uttermost bounds of Livonia, or Liefland, to the
borders of Hungary, and from the borders of Silesia, East and West to Muscovia
as many. It comprehends many goodly and large Provinces, as the two Polands,
Massovia, Podolia, Prussia, Russia-Nigra, Volinia, Livonia, and Lituania.
Poland was the Proper Seat of the Polonians, but Prussia, part of Pomerania,
Podolia, Volinia, Massovia, and Livonia, were gained by Arms; Lithuania, and
Symogythia, once Provinces of Russia, were the Inheritance of the House of
Jagello, who in the year 1380. taking to Wife the Princess Hedwiga, the
youngest Daughter of Lewis King of Poland and Hungary, was in her right, upon
his Conversion to Christianity, accepted for King of Poland; since which time,
that Duchy has been united to the Crown; the last Heir of this Family was
Sigismond Augustus, after whose decease, the Lithuanians dreading the power of
the Muscovite, agreed to the way of Election of a King, with the other
Provinces of the Kingdom. As to Prussia, the other great Limb of this Kingdom,
it did belong to the Dutch Knights, their great Master residing herein, who
being weakened by many combats, at last yielded himself Feudatory to King
Casimir; Since which time, Albert of Brandenburg, their great Master, becoming
a Protestant, changed his Title, and was created Duke of Prussia by King
Sigismond, and the Country divided into two parts, the one Regal, immediately
holden of the Crown, and the other Ducal. In the former stand Marienburg,
Thorn, Elbing, Culma, Varnia, and Dantzick, enjoying the Privilege and Title
of the second Hanse Town. In the latter, the chiefest place is Conincksburg, a
Port of traffic, where the Duke sometime keeps his Court. As to Livonia, it
came to be reckoned into the Poles Dominions on this manner; in the year 1558.
these People being spoiled of the greatest part of their Territory by the great
Duke of Muscovia, and the great Master of the Order no longer able to maintain
them; nor his own Dominions therein (the Country being wholly his) submitted to
Sigismond King of Poland, who took them into his protection, and maintained
them under it, maugre all the force of the Russians. At present there is a
third Proprietor, namely the Swede, who has a good, and the chiefest part in
it, being possessed of Riga, the principal City of trade (with many other
considerable places, as Revel, Narve, Pernow, etc.) which was besieged in 1658.
by the Russian Emperor in person, when the King of Sweden was engaged in
Denmark; but as the Town was brought to extremity, some dismay or despair
seized the unwitting Assailants, and made them abandon a very hopeful
Enterprise. The Town is now better fortified and provided, and dreads not the
power of the Pole or Muscovite. This Province, as also Prussia, for the
nearness of the Sea, Concourse to the Havens (many of them of good worth) and
commodiousness of the Rivers, has fairer Cities, goodlier Buildings, and by
traffic greater plenty of Riches than any of the rest; but Poland is better
and more generally peopled. Samogythia being a more Northern Country, is more
rude and barbarous than any of them; and Podolia more barren; the fault whereof
is not in the soil, reported by Dr. Heylins Author to be miraculously fertile,
but in the barbarous and unmerciful depopulations of the Tartars every year
commonly, but of late it has pretty well recovered it self.

Having thus discoursed of the Provinces, it will be requisite to describe in
brief manner some of the principal Cities thereof, which do concern this
discourse. Dantzick is the first, Dantzick Described.
seated upon the Weysel, and accosting the Baltique Sea. It is particular State
of it self, in the manner of a Republique, or Free State, once reckoned an
Imperial City, under the protection of the King of Poland; who appoints
annually the chief Burgo-Master, but He is to be taken out of the body of the
Citizens. It is as well and as proudly built as most of the Cities of Germany,
but beyond all in Poland, and as regularly fortified. It is the Magazine of
Poland, for hither is brought all the Corn that grows there, and there
exchanged for all foreign Commodities, as Cloth, Spices, (which the Polanders
mainly use) Wine etc. And indeed Grain is the chiefest Riches of the Country,
and supplies most parts of Europe. The Haven is very advantagiously sited, and
defended by four Fortresses, each of which is able to sustain the impression
and effort of a powerful Navy. Next is a most magnificent: Arsenal, excellently
furnished and provided. The Church of our Lady is a Fabric of great and
beautiful Dimensions. The Lutherans have here the precedence and pre-eminence,
the Catholics next, the Calvinists are third, and the Anabaptists last of
all, under a general Toleration and Liberty of Conscience. Their Language is
partly Polonish, and High Dutch. 2. Thorn is one of the Principal Cities of
Prussia, its buildings, and Guild Hall are very splendid; nor is Elbing much
inferior; these two places fell in the power of the Swede in 1656. and
somewhat after, but are now in statu quo subject to the Crown of Poland.
Warsovia.
3. Warsovia is the Regal Seat and Residence, and lies in the Province of
Poland the Greater, built upon the Weysel, of little extent, but full of
people; there is considerable in it, the great Place, the Pyramid, the Arsenal,
the Palace, the Castle, and the Royal Garden; the two chief Churches are the
Jesuits, named St. John, and St. Mark. 4. Cracovia in Lesser Poland, once the
Court of the Kings of Poland, a wealthy and well-peopled City, sited likewise
upon the Weysel. In it is remarkable an Academy of great Renown, founded by
King Casimir the First, and supplied at first with Professors from the Sorbonne
of Paris. 2. The Castle, built upon the banks of the River, of a great compass,
and of great state and magnificence, although outwardly it appear rough and
disproportioned; the Cathedral is enclosed within it. This City, by way of
Excellence, is called, the Rome of Poland, and its University, the Daughter of
that at Paris, The City of Casimir is built on the other side the water, and
will hardly forget the Swedish Arms. The Jews City, which is Neighbor to it,
may for honors sake, be called, the principal and first Street of Hell, it is
so filthy, etc. Not to mention Vilna in Lithuania, and Koningburgh in Prussia,
both Universities; Dantzick and Cracow, making up four in this Kingdom. As for
the other Towns, as Grandentz, Newamburg, Culmen, and the like, they are mere
Names of Cities, and nothing else. Pauperum Tabernae, quatuor aut septem si sit
latissima villa. Seven or Eight Houses make a large Town.

As to the People, and their Manners, the Gentlemen are extraordinary large and
strong of body, and will skilfully manage a Shabel or Scymiter, are well
skilled in foreign Languages, are liberal Givers, good Cavaliers, and good
Catholics. On the contrary, and the reverse of the Medal, they are much
brutal, superstitious, fierce and proud, and sacrifice to their own approbation
of things, and acknowledge no Soverain but their Liberty. From whence have
proceeded those Mischiefs which they have often suffered, more mediately from
the Tartars and Muscovites; and by which means the late King of Sweden brought
them to the utmost degree of Extremity, followed with no more than 40. thousand
men, when as the Pole is able to bring a 100000. Horse into the Field. This
happened by that small power and authority which is allowed the King, and that
little good intelligence that was maintained between their Generals, and the
divisions and revolts of their Troops. An Apprentice, a Novice, will be thought
a Master; and a simple Gentleman, who never saw a Battle, The King of Polands
Chiefest Praerogative.
but in picture, will not want of confidence and presumption to believe of him
self, because he is born a Gentleman, that he is able, at the first Essay, to
manage and conduct the Forces of an Empire. And in effect, private Gentlemen
are so frequently raised to Places of the greatest Office and Command, (which
is the fairest flower of this Kings Prerogative, and is legally vested in him
as the Fountain of Honor) that every man thinks himself of merit and capacity
enough for the greatest Employments. Besides, they hold themselves all equal in
blood, and have the same Voices in their Diets and Assemblies, the same
Privileges, Rights, and Franchises; their Riches only distinguish them one
from the other.

These Gentlemen, for the defense of the Kingdom, are bound to serve at their
own charge, which they do generally on Horseback, gallantly furnished and
attired in Cassocks, and garnished with gold and silver, and variety of other
Colors; they also adorn themselves with Eagles Plumes, the Skins of Leopards
and Bears, with many Banners, and parti-colored Ensigns, which distinguish
them from the ordinary sort, and strike terror (but sometimes covetous
desires) into their Enemies; and most an end they carry, like the Philosopher,
all they have about them. It is reckoned that Poland after this manner can
raise a 100. Lithuania 70. thousand Horse, but not so good as the Poles; whose
best are very small, yet nimble, and far more courageous than the Dutch. In
this Cavalry, consisting of Gentlemen, and their Servants, with their
Auxiliaries, as the Circassion, the Cossacks, they are so confident, that they
slight all Fortifications, unless Frontiers: And for the Country being all
Champian, is most and only fit for that service; the Foot they have are
borrowed of the Hungarians and Germans; and for Camp Drudgery, as Pioneers,
etc. they use Tartars their Slaves. Of Priests there is great store in this
Country, and they held in good esteem and veneration. Of Merchants there are
very few, scarce worth mentioning: But of all men, the Boors and Pesants are
the most miserable, for they possess nor enjoy a Farthing; and are mere
Vassalls to their Lords, which treat and use them with all the rigor and
tyranny in the world. A Gentleman in a slight matter, among his Domestiques and
Clowns, has and does exercise the power of life and death.

The Government represents rather an Aristocracy than a Monarchy, and is a
kind of medium betwixt both, or both together. It is Monarchical, in that it
acknowledges one Supremacy and King: it is Aristocratical, because the King is
not an absolute Prince, to do what he pleases; and because the Nobility, who
have also the greatest Authority in the Diets, do Elect Him. They have neither
Law, nor Statute, nor Form of Government written, but it is all by Tradition;
as by mere Custom, from the Death of one Prince to the Election of another, the
supreme Authority resides in the Archbishop of Gesne, who is always President
of the Council, appoints the Diet, rules the Senate, and proclaims the new
Elected King. Before King Stephen's time, who erected new Bishops, Palatines,
and Castellanes in Livonia, there were but 14. Bishops, 28. Palatines, and 70.
of the chiefest Castellanes, that had Voices in the Election of a King, who is

Rector Senatus sed Regnantis.
Ruler of a reigning Senate.
Whereby he is obliged to comport with them in these things following; In any
Affair of Importance, the King by his Chancellor sends Letters to the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Palatines, which are called Instruction is Literae,
Letters of Instruction, because they contain the account of that Business which
His Majesty will propose to them at the Diet, and therein appoints them the
time of their meeting. These Letters being received, every Senator examines the
particular quality, nature and consequences of the Proposition, to which he
has free liberty to answer negatively or affirmatively, and as he judges
best, either for the public good, or his particular advantage. The King also
sends his Letters to the respective Palatinates, the Nobility whereof presently
assemble together, to choose a Nuncio, as they call it; that is, a Person of
merit and sufficiency, to be their Speaker; and the manner of that Palatinate,
is to bring things to an universal consent and accommodation: For if it should
happen, that any single Gentleman should dissent from what this Assembly has
concluded, there is no further proceeding to be had, the Nuncio must not depart
to the Diet, nor that Province have any Voice or Interest amongst the States
General.

When the Provincial Assemblies are finished, by the time appointed by the
Kings Majesty; the Senators, and the Nuncio's come to Court; where the King,
attended by the Chancellor, having again declared to them the Subject, and the
Cause, for which he summoned them, receives and hears their advice, and so the
Affairs are ended; Nemine contradicente, nemine dissentiente: Otherwise, the
Diet is dissolved, every one departs, and the Proposalls, so far advanced,
return again to their Idaeas. The ordinary Matters are decided by those Judges
that are established in every Province.

It is reported, that all sorts of Persons are admitted to enter, and to hear
that which is proposed in the Provincial Assemblies, but not in the General
ones; so that the meanest Pesant may divulge that which ought not to pass the
Cabinet of the Prince. If they treat of War, the Enemy having news of it,
stands upon his Guard, and oftentimes prevents that, whfch, after long debate,
is concluded for the Conduct of their Troops. Every man knows how many men
shall make the Vantguard, or the Reserves: what Provisions, Advantages or
Dis-advantages; and in fine, every thing relating to the menage of the War.
When this is considered, and these Maxims of State examined, with the slowness
and the difficulty of concluding any thing, together with the bounded power of
the King, and the license, and caprices, and ignorance of the Subject, as to a
particular Person, whose No spoils all: And lastly, those Engines which move
this Empire; it may be assuredly affirmed; that the Policy thereof cannot be
much advantageous to the Public; and that the Being thereof depends more upon
the Valor, than the Prudence of the Poles; unless in Matters merely Military,
and in Action, and in the General's Disposal; And that the Allies of this Crown
shall never receive any advantage or succor from it, for that this way of
Government was solely invented for the subsistence of poor Gentlemen, who
render themselves necessary and considerable by this liberty of their Vote and
Suffrage.

Notwithstanding this Liberty of Election and Voice, it was never known, that
the States passed by any of the Children or Descendants of these Princes in
their Elections, and when the direct Line of them has failed, commonly choose
no Strangers (though the Tartar has put in for this Scepter) as could be
instanced in the present King Casimir, and his Predecessors, and the former
Election of Stephen Bathory, Prince of Transylvania, who married the Sister of
Sigismond the 2d. excepting Henry of France: as now the Duke of Enguien, Son of
the Prince of Conde, is like to succeed the present King, who has no Issue of
his own. This King is the second Son of Sigismond, who valiantly repelled
Sultan Osman 1622. Crowned at Cracovia in 1587. in consideration of Katherine
Jagello his Mothers right, who was the Daughter of Sigismond the 1st. right
Heir to the Crown of Sweden, as Son of John, eldest Brother to Charles, the
Sons of Gustav Ericus, who chased the Danes out of Sweden in 1560. by virtue of
which Primogeniture, the Poles laid claim to the said Kingdom of Sweden.

As to the present Aspect of the Crown of Poland, something has been hinted,
as it is now engaged in a War with the Muscovite, the ordinary and usual
Employment of its Arms; which have the Great Duke (and sometimes the Tartar)
for their continual Enemy, in the same nature as the Scots and We before the
Union The old Quarrel is the detainer of the Duchy and City of Smolensko, and
the Province of Moloch, taken first from the Pole, (to whose Duchy of
Lithuania they were annexed) by Ivan Vasilowich the great Russian Tyrant, in
the Reign of Sigismond Augustus; and after many Changes and Vicissitudes,
subdued again by this present Emperor in 1654. when the Swedes threatened
Poland on the other side. Both Armies are now in the Field (for neither of them
value the weather) but the Russian will hardly put it to a decision by Battle,
keeping himself encamped, unless upon great Advantages; but they are now upon
Treaty.

The Pole is otherwise at perfect Peace with all his Neighbors, having the
Tartars and Cossacks, very various of adhaerence, to his assistance in this
War; and he is pretty well assured at home, the Nobility having so sorely
smarted for their Pride, and Dissentions, by the Swede; and the late Army of
the Confaederates, notwithstanding the Grudges thereof, are wholly disbanded;
but this course is taken to vent the Humor abroad. But he does ill requite the
House of Austria (who undertook his assistance in 1657. when the Emperor sent
an Army of 16000. Men into Poland) in denying any aid or supply, or to concern
himself in the Quarrel against the Turk, from the constant Precedent and Policy
of the former Kings; who lying so obnoxious to the Tartars, always ready at
the Beck of the Grand Seigniour, might endanger their own Estates. There is
something to this purpose, a memorable Saying of King Stephen, to the Emperors
Ambassadors; Let me see the Princes of Christendom at Peace and Unity, and I
will not be backward in appearing against the Common Enemy. This Kingdom has
indeed suffered much by the Turk, as confining upon his Dominions; but how he
will save his Stake, when he comes to be his nearer, and more potent Neighbor,
by his designed Conquest of Hungary, Time must determine: At present he is
resolved not to meddle or make with the barbarous Enemy, but await the issue,
and keep his League with them duly and inviolably.

This Casimir the 5th. succeeded his eldest Brother Uladislaus the 7th. after
whose Death the Kingdom was dangerously afflicted with the Factions of the
Nobility, and by the mutinous and rebellious Cossacks, who bordering Eastward
upon Lithuania and Podolia, being part of the Cireassians, but Christianized
according to the Greek Profession, of which there are several Bishops in
Poland, have for some Ages since submitted to the Crown of Poland; but upon all
occasions are ready to revolt, and to side with the Tartar, Russian, or any
other People, for their advantage; as living chiefly upon spoil, being a
murderous and wild People: Nor will the Mischiefs caused by Chimelinsky their
General in the years 50, 1, 2, 3. be easily forgotten. The Wife of this Casimir
(formerly an Ecclesiastique, and of the Order of Jesuits, in his Brothers
Reign) is a Daughter of the House of Mantua and Nevers; unto which Family the
Duke of Enguien is Married, which will have a great influence upon the Crown of
Poland.

The Revenues of this King are Computed at 600000. Crowns per annum. arising
chiefly out of Salt, and some Mines of Silver; which the King disposes, either
by making Portions for his Sons, or Kindred; for as to his Daughters, they are
married at the Charge of the Kingdom. The War neither stands him in a Farthing
of his own Treasure, for the Expense thereof is levied upon the People by
Excise or Taxes; as his Court Expenses are born by the respective Places of his
Residence: all the Provinces partaking alike of the same Privileges and
Honors with Poland especially so called (which has been one chief Policy to
win them the better;) it seems reasonable, that they should equally partake
with them in defraying the Charge.

The Interest of this Kingdom requires, that a good Understanding and
Correspondence be maintained betwixt the King and the Nobility; not to quarrel
with the Turk; to preserve Friendship with the Swede; to make Alliance with the
Persians; and to keep the Tartars at home; to ruin the Muscovite; to have an
eye upon the House of Austria; and to respect France, as that which can put a
stop to the Imperial Arms, if they should enterprise upon that Kingdom.

CURLAND.
BEfore we dismiss this Kingdom, we must mention the Duchy of Curland, being
one third part of Livonia, the other two being called Eastland, and Lettenland,
and a Sovereignty of it self, but held in Fee of the Crown of Poland, upon this
account. Gothardus Ketler, a Noble Dane, the last of the Dutch great Masters in
Livonia, having surrendered the Province to Sigismond Augustus in 1562,
conditioned for his Investiture in this Duchy, to him and his Heirs, but to be
holden of that Crown: Since which time, the Nobility having accepted him as
their Haereditary Prince, the succeeding Princes have continued Feudatories
unto Poland, but are not reckoned as Parts or Members of the Body thereof, for
they come not to the Diets, nor have any Voice in the Election of the King, nor
are liable to any Taxes; but are accounted, as indeed they are, Strangers, and
not natural Lords or Peers of that Kingdom.

The present Prince of the same Family of the Ketlers, is near allied to the
Marquess of Brandenburg, whose Sister is his Mother; so that for want of Issue,
all those great Estates of the Elector, in the Ducall Prussia, Germany, and
Cleve, etc. will come to this Duke, as his next Heir. During the late Danish
War in 1658. the Swede expecting some Invasions of this Duke, as being so
interested in both his Enemies Cause and Quarrel, ordered General Douglas to
secure him; who surprised him in his Residence at Mittaw, by some Boats full of
Soldiers, pretending for the Pole; and carried him and his Duchess away
Prisoners; in which condition they contiued till the Peace was made and
concluded between all Parties; so that he has no great affection to that
Nation. He is a Prince of little Power, as his Subjects of Trade, although his
Country border upon the Sea, but it affords no convenient Harbor for Traffic
any where in his Coast: Yet so much must be said for his Honor, that he
supplied our late Sovereign Charles the 1st. with two Ships loading of Arms,
upon his own account, during those unnatural Wars in England; and was ready to
do him any further Offices of Respect and Friendship.

I should next speak of the Europaean Tartars, and the Circassians, as
confining to the Eastern parts of Poland; but I will reserve the discourse of
them to the succeeding Chapter of the Russians, with whom they will best suit
and agree.

RUSSIA.
THis spacious Empire is bounded on the East by Tartary; on the West with
Livonia and Finland, from which divided by great Mountains, and the River Poln;
on the North by the frozen Ocean, and some part of Lapland; and on the South by
Lituania; and the Tartars and Circassions inhabiting the Lake Maeotis, and the
Euxine Sea. It is partly seated in Asia and Europe, distinguished by the River
Tanais, the common Boundary of those Parts of the World.

It stretches in length 3660 English Miles, from Cola in the North, to
Astrachan in the Caspian Sea; and in breadth 3300. which is 4400. Versts (to
adjust which to English Miles, we deduct one fourth part) From the Narve in
Livonia West, to the Province of Severia East, a vast Extent: but nothing so
populous as spacious; especally since it was drained of so many Men by the
continual Wars of Vasilowich the Great Tyrant, and his Predecessor the Great
Duke John, who took the great Dutchyes of Severia and Smolensko, Nielchess,
Plescovia, Novogorod, Jaroslaw; most part, or indeed all Livonia, with the
Kingdoms of Casan and Astrachan, from the Tartars: as the other from the
Polanders; but for want of supplies to reinforce their Armies, lost them all
again, except some few Places, and the two Asian Kingdoms, which yet they
maintain.

The Tartars have formerly as much, nay more plagued this Country, than the
Christian Enemies thereof; for by their frequent Conquest, and Invasions, they
made the Great Duke their Tributary, with this kind of service to be performed
by him, to the Emperor of the Praecopenses, or the Great Chrim Tartar; that is
to say, every year, the Russian, on foot, fed the Chrim's Horse, he sitting
thereon, with Oats, out of his Fur Cap, 1140.
in his Castle of Musco; for commonly every year the Tartar (bordering nearer
to him than seven days journey, at which distance he now stands) progressed
thither as in State: whereas of late times he comes every other year likely,
like a sudden Tempest; and having wasted and ruined the Country, and made up
the number of his Captives, departs as hastily: unless the Sultan in person
make it an Expedition Royal, or when the business comes to battle; where, if
the Russian prevails, the War and Ravage is carried as far into the Tartars
Country: But to prevent this danger, the Russian does all he can to be at Peace
with him, both by Bribes and Presents.

And it will not be unworthy the relation (as I my self in 1654. have been
particularly informed in that Country, from the Deputy Governor of the Castle
of Archangel) how the Tartar came to lose that Claim, his Hold and Sovereignty
in this Kingdom; which the Russians ascribe to a certain Boyar (in the Reign of
Basilius, some a 100. years since) or Nobleman, entrusted with a strong Castle
of the Great Dukes, which the Tartar, upon the last reduction and subjugation
of Russia (having compelled the Great Duke to sign an Instrument of Vassalage
and Fealty to him his supreme Lord) in his return besieged, no other Place then
standing out against him. This Fortress he therefore strenuously attempted,
withal intimating to the Governor, when he saw Force would not presently do,
that his Master had himself yielded and submitted, and that it was to no
purpose for him to resist, unless he had a mind to draw upon himself the
Punishment of Treason: and to this purpose he had such a Writing, etc. to
produce. To this the prudent noble Governor made present answer, that if such
a thing were real, and he might see it, for his Justification to his Prince,
upon the surrender, it should bind and conclude him; which the unpractised
Tartar had no sooner sent into the Castle, but the Governor caused it
presently to be torn into pieces, before the Messengers face, whom he returned
with a more resolute defiance than at first: And in fine, so long delayed him,
and so wasted his Army, that the Great Duke resuming his Spirit, was making to
his relief; when the Tartar, in no condition to oppose a fresh Force, quitted
his Camp, and made have homeward. Since which time, that Yoke could never more
be put on the Muscovite.

The Country is divided into these Provinces, of Muscovy, especially so called.
2. Novogorod. 3. the Great Smolensko. 4. Nosaisk. 5. Pleskow. 6. Corelia. 7.
Biarmia. 8. Petzora. 9. Condora. 10. Obdora. 11. Ingria. 12. Severia. 13.
Permia. 14. Rhezan. 15. Wiathka. 16. Casan. 17. Astrachan. 18. Novogorod
Inferior. 19. the Mordwitz. 20. Worotine. 21. Tuvir. 22. Wolodomir. 23. Dwina.
And 24. the Russian Islands, in these are contained 15. Dukedoms, and 2.
Kingdoms.

As to the Temperature of the Air, it is governed solely by the Seasons of the
Year, and vast is the difference betwixt Summer and Winter, when the Ground
lies covered with Snow for seven Months; and the Cold is so rigid Northward,
that Water cast into the Air, or dropped down will congeal in the way: And
going out of a warm Room into a Cold, Men have sensibly perceived their Breath
to wax stiff, and have been near stifled in drawing it in. Oftentimes
Travelers are brought dead and stiff in their Sledges to Towns, without any
perceivance of it while touched; so sudden and piercing is the outrage of that
Climate. In the Summer time, which lasts four Months, it is absolutely the most
pleasantest Country in the World; the Meaddows so rarely green, such variety of
Flowers, and melody of Birds, especially of Nightingales; which Verdure
proceeds from the warmth the Snow keeps in the ground, and when dissolved
richly drencheth it. The Summer is extraordinary hot, as the Winter is cold,
but not so extremely. The Soil is covered Northward with Woods, Branches of the
Hercinian Forest, and Lakes, which are dispersed all over the Country. Here
grow the goodliest biggest Trees in the World, and spontaneous Honey, left by
the Bees in the Trunks of them, of which there is a vast quantity, and of Wax
there cannot be less. The greater part is Meadow and Pasture, in which graze an
innumerable quantity of Cattle; the Beef the best incomparably in the World,
would it long endure Salt: other Flesh nothing near so good, except their Fruit
of all sorts, and incredibly plentiful. There are also wild Beasts in
abundance, famous for their Furrs, as the Sabel, Martin, Ermin, the rarest in
the World. Their great Commodities they vent are Hides, and Tallow, Cavear,
Hemp, and Tarr; Fur or Deal Planks they have the longest in the World. They
have also some quantities of Yarn, and course Linen, with other smaller
Merchandise. They have in many places plenty also of Corn.

The Inhabitants are perfect Slaves, both to the Cazar, or Great Duke; whom
they never mention, as the Jews reverence the Name of Jehovah, but under the
Circumlocution of His Clear Eyes, which they believe sees all things: as to
their particular Lords; these likewise have no Haereditary Titles to their
Honors, but are continued at the Emperors pleasure: but degraded, are in the
rank of Gentlemen, if such distinction can be allowed, as Soldiers, and in the
Emperors Pay. The Boyars are very proud and surly, yet valiant in War; but
strangely given to Sodomy, as are most of the Russians: The generality of whom,
are a most malicious and perfidious People to one another, so that they would
steal Goods, and get them conveyed into their Enemies Houses; which Villainy
grew so frequent, that of late it has been made highly Capital to commit it.
They are likewise very theevish, and most cunning Knaves in their bargains, and
impudent withal, to outface any thing. They are spunged and fleeced by their
Superiors, and therefore right or wrong they will make themselves whole. They
are generally given to drink, from which the Priests do not abstain; and covet
Tobacco, severely forbidden them, with which they will make themselves most
abhominably drunk. In all the Oppression they suffer, they think rather better
than worse of their Prince, and begin to reckon their Sins, and seriously
lament for having offended him. None of them ever stirrs out of the Country,
unless with Ambassadors: nor Stranger neither, if once in, if he articled not
for his liberty of return, excepting Merchants; who having formerly traded by
the Baltique Sea to the Narve, now sail about the Northern Cape, in the great
Ocean, to the Granwick Bay, and so to the Port of St. Archangel, near the mouth
of the River Duina. The other chief Cities of Trade are Volegda, Musco. The
Imperial Residence Novogorod, Smolensko, etc. The Language is a mixed Slavonian.
The Religion is the same with the Greek Church, except in some Ceremonies of
their own devising; being instructed in the Christian Faith by some Priests
sent from the Patriarch of Constantinople, to whom this Patrarch of Russia
acknowledged subjection; but since a 100. years last past he has withdrawn it,
and the Patriarch is now nominated by the Emperor, and Consecrated by his own
Suffragans.

The Government is merely Tyrannical and Arbitrary, and comes nearest to that
of the Turks, as one of the Viziers resembled them: For he is sole Executor to
the Estates of deceased Persons, and sometimes too to those that are living;
for if he sends for a Sum of Money to such a Person, of whose Wealth he has
information, it is presently sent him, without the least grumbling: and if he
sends for his Head, it is sent him, with the same dispatch: And this may be,
and is the Case sometimes also of the greatest Nobleman in the Empire; more
frequently used to very great Barbarities in the Reign of that monstrous Tyrant
Vasilowich.

Since whose death, by reason of two pretending Impostors, who usurped the
Throne: and the Faction of the Grandees, who advanced others; the Nobility have
had the Liberty of Electing their Prince: And yet such is their natural
Fondness of Slavery, that they advanced their Fellow Subjects to the same
unbounded Sovereignty. No Prince can be served in greater State: He seldom
shows himself unto the People, but in Apparel of inestimable value, all
glistering with Jewels; and in his Court, at any solemn Entertainments of
Ambassadors, the great Audience Chamber is furnished with all sorts of Plate of
infinite value, and filled with men in Vests of Cloth of Gold, which are
ordinarily some grave well-Countenanced Citizens, who for this purpose are
apparelled out of his Wardrobe; a most glorious Cheat to such as know not the
mystery of this Pomp and Magnificence.

His Revenues, by what has been said, may be what he pleases himself; but
these two last Princes have used a very moderate hand toward their Slaves, as
they style themselves. His ordinary means and way of amassing Treasure is, by
engrossing or forestalling most of the homebred Commodities, (besides, all the
Drink that is drawn in the Empire, is Farmed to his use; and a monthly account
taken of the Cabacks or Victualing Houses, how much is spent, which must be
presently satisfied to his Officers) and hindering all Trade till his own be
sold, is a most vast and therefore uncertain Revenue. 2. By his Provision and
Purveyance of Rent, Corn and Victual, raised some years to 200000. Rubbles,
which Coin makes little more than an Angel. 3. The Poll Money to 200. thousand
Pound Sterling. 4. His Customs, which arise chiefly and solely from his Ports
of Archangel and Astracan, to 400000 l. 5. By his own Domain, Escheats, and
Forfeitures, and Presents: (very considerable on this account) All which may
make up two Millions of Pounds Sterling, or two and a half at most; which were
no great Sum, were he to pay for the service of all his Horsemen, who, like the
Turks Timariots, have Farms allowed them.

As to his Forces, and the Militia of this Empire, they are of a very
formidable and considerable Power: For first, He has of his Dworancy, or the
Guard of his Person, 25000. Horsemen, who are always in readiness where ever
he resides. Then there are Lands let out to several of his great Men, which are
never aliened from that use, only the present Proprietors changed at his
pleasure; for the Profits whereof, they are bound to maintain 65000. Horse
more; and these likewise are always to be ready at sound of Trumpet; which
makes a standing Body of 90000. which with Officers, and other Volunteers, are
effectually in the Field a hundred thousand.

Besides these, He may raise what additional Numbers the Country will afford;
whish is so plentiful of Horse, that it is said, he is able to bring 300000.
into the Campania: but it is of the other side supposed, he cannot find so many
Riders by one half; especially considering, that at the same time as these
Horse are in service, his Foot hardly exceed the number of 40000. not only, for
that he confides not in his Infantry, as unapt to the War: but because of the
thinness of his Countries. Of late years he has found out a way to supply that
defect, by entertaining foreign Foot, chiefly Germans, and once some English,
about the year 1633. in a Regiment transported by Colonel Sanderson, amounting
to near 3000. Men; at which time he besieged Smolensko, (once a Province, under
the protection of the Pole; distant Southwest 80. Polonian Miles from Mosco;
taken by Vasilowich, and retaken by the Poles in 1610. with the loss of 200000.
Muscovites) two years together; at last came the Pole, when the Russian was
wearied out, and besieged the Besiegers, and reduced them by Famine to a
surrender: For which the General lost his Head at Musco, although Cosen of the
Emperor; and his Son was whipped to death, as was the Major General; the
Lieutenant General escaped at the intercession of the English, who had done
excellent service, (and had taught the Russians how to stand a Shock of the
Poles Lances, and to break their Troops) and could give a handsome Character of
performance, as to his part; ever since which time the English Officers have
been highly respected and preferred.

This Emperor therefore is better provided of Foot than any of his
Predecessors, who could never make 20000. and therefore lost that they had
gained, because they wanted those standing Defenses to make good their ground;
having trained up a number of his own Subjects to the Discipline, and by the
example of Strangers; so that he is able to bring near 50000. into the Field,
if necessity require.

He is excellently and infinitely stored, as much as any Prince in Christendom,
with all manner of Artillery great and small, with Ammunition and Provision
suitable. His Soldiers most patient of Cold and Hunger, and sustained with
little: but better to maintain a Fortress, than to assault it, or engage in
Battle: Notwithstanding, they will do what they are commanded, in the most
present dangers, but it is not out of boldness or bravery of Spirit.

They have been twice invaded with the Turks alone (not joined with the
Tartars) the first time was in the Reign of Vasilowich, in 1569. when Selymus
the Second attempted to cut a Navigable Trench betwixt the Tanais, and the
River Volga; and brought his Fleet out of the Euxine Sea: but the Russian
overthrew his Forces, and spoiled his Navy and Design together. The other was
in 1598. by 70000. of them, in the Winter time; 40000. of whom were presently
nummed and killed with the Cold, not knowing the Russians preventing Chirugery;
which is to rub their Nose and Ears every foot with Ice or Snow, to recall the
motive Spirits to those parts, which otherwise they might lose: the remainder
ran home to catch themselves a heat; since which time the Turk has never
troubled this Country: Nor does the Russian think it worth his pains to invade
his Southward upon the Euxine Sea, being parted from all other his Territories
by Poland, Moldavia, and Transylvania; so that without their leave, he can
attempt nothing against him: and their leave he is never like to have, unless
invincible necessity and calamity persuade it.

His continual Goads and Thorns are on the West of his Dominions, the Pole, and
the Swede; to whom he has lost more than he has gained of the Tartar:
Notwithstanding, since the Empire has been settled in this new Family, whereof
there have been but two Princes in the tract of near 50. years; especially in
the Reign of this present Great Duke, they have not got much Ground: nay, the
Pole has lost the Duchy of Smolensko in 1654. with some other Places, which
is the present Quarrel and Cause of this Polish Expedition.

The Peace with the Swede, which the Russian prefers, has been long in
agitation, by reason it is clogged with so many Demands, and nice Claims of
both Parties; but it is believed, the Russian must quit many of his Pretensions
and Punctilioes, lest that Negotiation take no Effect, and the Swede take
advantage. Little else can be said of this Monarch, as to his Interest in
Europe, where he was never further concerned, than these two Provinces of
Lithuania and Livonia; and scarce known to our Parts, till almost 90. years
since: They maintaining Correspondence with Us in point of Commerce only, and
with our Nation especial Friendship and Affection, particularly toward the
Sovereigns of England: Besides, they are of very little or no Address, there
being not a Scholar among them, for even their Priests can but read.

Furthermore, They never made any Alliance by Marriage with any Christian or
Neighbor Princes, but choose their Wives from among their own Subjects: nor do
they marry their Princes Children to them; in this, like the Grand Seigniour,
whose Policy they resemble; and certainly this is some secret Principle of
State; for it is not many years ago, since Wolmar, the Brother to the present
King of Denmark, came thither a Suitor to one of the Sisters of the Emperor,
and was there nuzled with a fruitless Expectation of a Match, but in conclusion
had much ado to escape out of their Dominion. In sum, They care not for,
indeed abhor, the Introduction of new Customs, and to that purpose prohibit
Communication with Strangers, as the only bane of their Government: nor must a
Foreigner stir abroad without leave, etc. And lastly, They are so Proudly
conceited of their own Prudence, that they think their Politiques the most
perfect and absolute in the World.

No question he would lend his Hand against the Turk (if for no other Cause
than the Vindication of the Greek Church, of which he is the sole Sovereign
Protector) but it is not Long enough, and will not reach that distant Enemy,
but by the ways aforesaid.

The present Emperors Name is Alexei Michalowich, that is, the Son of Michael,
which is all the Surname they use, both Prince and People: His Fathers
Christian Name being Michael Fedorowitz, the Son of Theodore, who was Patriarch
of Musco. This Michael, the Nobles (having been twice imposed on by the
Polanders, who brought in two counterfeit Princes, named Demetrius, pretended
Sons of Vasilowich, the last Prince but one of the Royal Blood; and in their
quarrel subdued Mosco, and almost ruined the Empire) weary of their own
Confusions, and the intolerable oppression of the Poles, unanimously chose for
their Emperor; who settled the State, and managed it in a more constant way of
Peace with the Turk, Tartar, Pole, and Swede, than any of his Predecessors had
done before him. He began his Reign in 1615. and died in 1646. much lamented
and adored of his Slaves, as well for his foreign Acts, as those at home; and
for his Justice and Moderation: And so we pass Westward to the Kingdom of
Sweden.

SWEDEN: OR Swethland.
THis Kingdom is bounded on the East with Muscovy; on the West with great
Hills, which divide it from Norway; on the North with the great Frozen Ocean;
and on the South with Donmark, Livonia, and the Baltique Sea. For the quantity,
reckoning in Lapland, it exceeds France and Italy by 900. Miles: and for
fertility, if you count Wells, Stones, Mountains, and Lakes; it excels them
both likewise: but Gothland and Finland are excellently well stored with all
Necessaries, and supply their Neighbors with Malt and Barley.

The Religion is Lutheran, introducted by Gustavus Ericus, or de Vasa,
descended from the last King Magnus, who coveted the Revenues of the Church,
but kept up the Episcopal Dignity, who have Voices in Parliament. The Swedish
Gentleman is a well-accomplish'd and gallant Person, a good Soldier, and a
good Captain, understands the Politiques, and speaks most Languages. They are
something fierce and insolent on advantage, but it is in War, which excuses
it. The People are naturally strong and active, provident, patient and
industrious; are very humble, and hospitable to Strangers; and in the Northern
Parts so healthy, that they live commonly to the Age of 130. or 140. years; and
this is imputed to the purity of the Air, but sometimes over-cast with Foggs,
by reason the Inhabitants neglect the Watercourse of their miry standing
Lakes. Of no great note for Arts or Arms, till that Gustavus Ericus, who
chased out the Danes, under their King Christiern the 3d. and Gustavus
Adolphus, whose Conquests were admirable, and his Conduct not to be matched by
any Parallel: They are exceeding apt to learn the Mechanic Arts, so that every
Soldier is his own Smith, Cutler, Carpenter, etc. They are very Valiant, both
their Horse and Foot, as they have given good proof, both in Germany, Poland,
Russia, and Denmark. Their Religion is wholly Lutheran; Bishops they have, whom
they call Surintendents, and who retain their Voice in Parliaments, but have no
settled Church Revenue, being paid and maintained by the King, with an
inconsiderable yearly Pension.

The whole Kingdom is divided into two Parts, the one lying on the East, the
other on the West side of the Gulf or Bay of Bodner, or Sinus Boddicus, a
spacious Branch of the Baltique Sea; according to which division there are, 1.
the Province of Gottoland. 2. Of Sweden, lying on the West side. And 3.
Lapland, on the North. 4. Bodden. 5. Finland. And 6. the Swedish Islands; so
that He is a Prince of no small Territory: but, like the Russian, he is not
very Populous, by reason of those cold Regions, which none but Savages inhabit,
under a certain tribute of Furrs; of which this King has his share from the
Laplanders.

As for the Government, it is Monarchical and Absolute to the King in Actu, but
the Senators pretend it to be Elective, although the Son has continually
succeeded his Father in the Government, which was made a Sanction by the
States, at the instance of the same Ericus, who would not accept of the Crown,
urged upon him, without such a Law: and this has prevailed ever since, but in
the Case of Sigismond, beaten out of Sweden by the Faction of Charles Duke of
Suderman his Uncle: for we have seen the Infant Son of the late Charles
Gustavus advanced immediately upon his Fathers death to the Throne. And when
the King is once seated there, he governs pro imperio, for he lays what Taxes
he pleases, as 5, 6, 7, 8, Dollars yearly upon every Householder, according to
his quality: And that which is chief, all Appeals for final Determination are
made to him, not to his Parliament or Council.

This Kings Revenue consists in four things, the Tenths of Ecclesiastical
Livings, Mines, Tributes, and Customs. 1. The Revenues of the Church arise to
a great Sum, consisting before the Reformation of seven Bishoprics, and sixty
Monasteries, which enjoyed very great Possessions, now incorporated into the
Crown, except only some small maintenance to the Bishops, as abovesaid. 2. His
Mines, a great deal more considerable, for that his tenth part of three Copper
Works, almost a hundred years ago, yielded him 3000. Dollars, whereby
estimation may be made of his Silver and Gold. And those Mines may be found in
every place, if the Country People (bound to carry wood, and do other servile
work there) did not hide and hinder the discovery. Most fine Silver is found in
the Province of Vestras, were it not for the envy and jealousy of the
Inhabitants, either murmuring that Strangers should be employed, or suspecting
that they should be overreached; so that his Revenue is mightily hindered by
this means. 3. But his Taxes do far surpass all his other Incomes, for he
levyeth the Tenth of Rye, Wheat, Barley, Fish, Skins, Oxen, etc. Of the Tenth
of Oxen he has gathered at some times 18000. Dollars, with all which he
maintains his Court, Officers, Navy, and Armies. In the time of War with Dane
or Muscovite, his Neighbors, he allows his Soldiers Victuals, which by his
Taxes he provideth at easy Rates: He gives them likewise a Coat or Cassock
every year, which makes them ever fully ready to obey his Commands. The
Marriage of the Kings Daughters is at the disposal of the Senate, who give them
for their Portion, besides Silver, Plate, and other Gifts, a 100000. Dollars.
Of the Uplandish People, which pay not the Impost of Victuals, the King is
accustomed to exact of every Poll acording to his ability, five Dollars or more
yearly. 4. His Customs, that are paid in the Haven Towns, the Chief whereof in
Sweden are Caymare, Lodhuys, and Stockholme, where at some times four hundred
Ships of Burden lie at Anchor: Also Auge, Revel, Riga, Parnovia, and the Narve.

But these Customs are much improved since the Confirmation of his Acquists in
Germany, by the Munster Treaty 1648. by which he had the Upper Pomerania, the
Inheritance of the Marquess of Brandenburg, with the City of Wismar, in the
Duchy of Mecklenbury, and Isle of Rugia, with the Bishoprics of Bremen and
Verden, etc. bordering along the other side of the Baltique Sea; by which he
has a wide inlet into Germany, given him in recompense of those Places he had
Conquered in the more inward Parts: so that this great addition of Territory,
has made him a far more considerable Prince than ever he was; and the Dane by
sad Experience found as much in that War he managed against him in 1658. when,
by the Conjunction and Contiguity of those German Provinces, he speeded without
Obstruction out of Poland, to stop the Progress of the Danish Arms, and with
speedy success reduced that King by the Agreement at Rosckeild, to a very petty
and pittant Sovereignty; for thereby as good as one half of his Kingdom was
passed over to the Swede, the Principal Member whereof was Schoneland, one of
the fruitfullest Provinces, but formerly belonging to Sweden, with some other
Places, particularly the great Bayliwick of Drontheim in Norway, which would
have dis-membred that Kingdom, and rendered the Dane but a precarious Prince of
the rest: But this, and diverse other former Concessions by that Treaty, were
annihilated or retrenched by the succeeding Agreement, in the Swedes Leageur
before Copenhagen, after their Defeat in the Assault of that Town, by the
Mediation and Guaranty of the English, Dutch, and French Ambassadors, in May
1660. nevertheless Schoneland remained to the Swede, with some of the Baltique
Islands; and other Places, not to be particularized in this Discourse.

All which Estates being laid and joined together in some manner, it were
supposable at first view, that he might easily render himself Master of the
Baltique Sea: but when it is again considered, of what strength the Dane, the
Hanse Towns are, as Lubeck, Hamborough, Dantzick; together with the Interest of
the Dutch in the Trade therein, it will seem a tougher matter, and too big for
his Naval strength, which yet of it self is very considerable: No doubt the
Swede has chawed deliciously upon the Design, but could never digest it; it
suffices him at present, that his Ships are Toll free as they pass the Sound:
and that he enjoys other Privileges, which the Violence of his Arms have
purchased him, of the Princes his Neighbors.

As to the Force of this Kingdom, it has been perceived of what Effect and
Puissance it is, by that War it carried on, under the late King Charles
Gustavus, against the Pole, the Dane, and the Muscovite, at one and the same
time: But truly, I cannot tell, whether I may ascribe those Numbers of Men,
with which they have enterprised so much lately, either to the Production of
their own Country, or their Fortune, which has drawn so many Foreigners into
their service, in which there is a certainty of Pay, and general good respect
had to them, if they prove men of desert. It is certain, that in the late
Danish War, he had above sixty thousand men in Pay, which is a number that few
Princes can long maintain together; and yet such is the good luck of these
Martial Princes, that they have been served faithfully, without any Pay, for
many Months together, as certain of Satisfaction somewhere, either by the
Swede, or from the Enemy, who is looked upon as very good Security, in all the
Undertakings of this Prince.

As to the Policy of this Kingdom, having touched before, that the Government
is Monarchical, we will briefly describe the menage of it: Matters of Peace,
and War, of Embassyes, and Alliances, are proposed by the King to the Senate,
for their Resolution, which the Senators deliver with an entire Liberty, and
most Voices carry it: but if it happen, that the Vote be contrary to the Kings
purposes, he will assemble the States General, to obtain of them what he cannot
of the Senate. These Estates are composed of the Nobility, of the Clergy, of
Merchants, and of the Peasants of the King; that is to say, Peasants that serve
not Gentlemen (in English Yeomen) but subsist of themselves.

The Nobles that sit in such Parliaments, or Estates General, are of the eldest
of their Families: the Church sends two Priests of every Community or Diocese,
the Cities two Merchants, and every Shire two of its Inhabitants: These four
Bodies consider of the Kings Will and Demand, and by the major Voice determine
of it; if their Voices be equal, the King makes the Election himself, and gives
the casting Voice for his own Designs and Interest: All other Matters are
referred to one of these seven Councills, viz. The Council of Justice, where
presides the Lord Chief Justice, assisted by four Senators, six Gentlemen, and
six Doctors. 2. The Council of War, where presides the Constable, assisted by
four Senators Marshalls. 3. The Council of the Admiralty, where presides the
High Admiral, with four Senators Vice-Admiralls. 4. The Chancery, where
presides the High Chancellor, assisted with four Senators, and the Secretaries
of State. 5. The Council of the Revenue, where presides the High Treasurer,
assisted by four Senators, [These five Officers are called the five great
Lords, and are Tutors of the King, and govern the Kingdom absolutely, during
his Minority, being now in the 8th. year of his age.] 6. The Council of Trade,
where a Senator is President, assisted by four more of the same rank and order.
7. The Council of the Mountains (as we have of the Marshes) where sit the same
number and quality of Persons as in the Council of Trade. The whole Kingdom,
into which are reckoned the late Acquists, is divided into five Governments
General, viz. Of Finland, of Ingermanland, of Liefland, of Pomerania, and
Schonen; and obeys four great Presidents of Justice: He of Finland holds
Judicatory at Obo, He of Ingermanland and Schonen at Norkopin, the third of
Liefland at Dort, and of Pomerania at Wismar; and acknowledges twenty nine
Lieutenant Generals, Governors of Provinces for the King.

The Interest of Sweden, is to keep and maintain Peace with the Muscovite; to
alarm equally, and to divide Poland and Denmark; not to quarrel by any means
with the Hollander; and to esteem and highly respect their strict Confaederacy
with France; and to seek all occasions of a War in Germany, to be therein
assisted with the French Money and Supplies; not to neglect the friendship of
the King of England, who can, when he pleases, interest himself in any
Difference in the Baltique Sea, by a potent Umpirage.

Touching the Turk, they are not over-forward in that service, as expecting
nothing but blows for other men's sakes; nevertheless, as the King is a Prince
of the Empire, He is also a Prince and Member of the Circle of the Rhine.
made so by the aforesaid Treaty at Munster, he is obliged, and has
accordingly sent away his Aides into Hungary: but so unwelcome is the Nation to
the Germans, that they had like to have been engaged, and set upon, in their
passage near Erford, by those whom they came to assist; so that they have
little encouragement to that service: Besides, He is in League, or some rude
manner of Friendship with the Tartar, who merited of him well in the Polish
War; and he himself is so great an Invader, and Soldier of Fortune, that
Religion, or its Interest, weighs little with him, however our Puritans cried
up the Great Gustavus for a Zealot: All therefore that will be done by him in
this Affair, will be more out of necessity, and the Laws and Decree of the
Empire, and the Example of other Princes, than his own Choice and Generosity:
And so we pass to his Neighbor the Dane.

DENMARK.
DENMARK is bounded on the East and South with the Baltique Sea: On the North
with Norwey (bounded on the West and North with the German and Frozen Sea) and
Sweden, and on the West the said German Ocean. The entire Body of this Kingdom
was made up principally in form of three Parts; The First is the Realm of
Denmark, containing both the Jutlands, part of Scandia adjoining upon the
Swedes Country, as Halland (and Schonen, which is now in the Swedes possession)
and the Islands of the Baltique Sea. 2. Norwey, To which must be added the
Islands of Iceland and Freezeland (in the Northern Ocean, where such abundance
of Cod is taken by the Dutch the Danes and Us) of large extent, but of little
benefit to this Crown. 3. The Dukedom of Holstein containing 4. Provinces, but
now exempt from the Kingdom, and other Jurisdictions added to the said Dukedom,
which are likewise aliened from Denmark, of which more hereafter.

The Kingdom of Denmark lies partly in the Cimbrick Chersoness adjoined to the
Dukedom of Holstein, as both the Jutlands (out of which some part is newly
borrowed, to add to the said Duchy) divided into several Districts; and
partly in Scandia, but principally in the Islands. As for the Duchy of
Holstein, it has of late years been unfortunate to the Danes, being overrun
by the Imperialists in 1628. in the Reign of Christiern the 4th. but honestly
restored by the Emperor upon easy Conditions: Then it was harrassed by the
Swede in 1643. and 4. and now finally freed by them from the Crown of Denmark,
only the best part of Jutland remains in its pristine obedience. In Scandia,
Schonen being gone, Halland and Blecking is all he holds there; and indeed they
are fine Provinces, but the unkind separation of their Sister of Schonen (which
signifies Beautiful) renders them a little unpleasant to the Kings view and
prospect.

So that his chiefest strength of his Dominions lies in the Islands, in number
35. two of which, Zeland, and Fuenen or Fionia, are most considerable, and made
more eminently famous by the late Swedish War; the Latter, for the Passage of
the King of Sweden over to it upon the Sea on the Ice, with Horse, Foot, and
his great Artillery, with the loss only of two Troops: and the Defeat of his
Forces there afterward, by the Confaederate Armies: The Other, for the Castle
of Cronenburg, that guards the Sound; and Copenhagen, the Royal Residence of
the Kings of Denmark; and which, for almost two years space, withstood a most
perrillous Siege, and finally beat off the Swedes with great loss, and thereby
overthrew all their Designs, which proved in effect the death of that King. It
is a low Town, ordinarily built, and has nothing of Magnificence in it, but
the Spirit of the Inhabitants; the Kings Palace being no extraordinary
Building, save that its covered with Copper.

The Kingdom of Norway, toward the North, is separated from Lapland by high and
craggy Rocks, and the Eastern and Western Parts are hard to travel for the same
reason. The Land is not very fruitful of Corn, and therefore the Inhabitants
(the meaner sort) eat Stockfish, which transported into other Parts, is
exchanged for Corn. The Inhabitants are naturally honest, and not a Thief among
them; and very Civil to Strangers; and formerly very Martial, for these People
were first called Normans, and were Ancestors to our Conquerours; but such is
the hard Condition under which they are kept by the Danes, though in appearance
Fellow Subjects, ever since the Union of the two Kingdoms, by the Marriage of
Aquinus in 1359. with Margaret the Daughter and Heir of Waldemar the 3d. of
Denmark, (the Issue of which Marriage died, and left this Kingdom to the
Usurpation of his Mother Margaret, whose Successors have continued it to this
day) that the Norwegians have wholly lost their Courage, and former Valor, not
being suffered to go out of the Kingdom to traffic their own Commodities;
which, besides Fish; are rich Furrs, Tallow, Butter, Tanned Leather, Train Oil,
Pitch, Clap-board, Masts, Deal-boards, and Firewood; from the Custom whereof
arises the Kings greatest Profits, being received for him at Bergen and
Wardhouse; but this Revenue is very inconsiderable. The whole Realm is divided
into five Lieutenancies or Governments, which in this uncultivated remote
Country, will not concern us in any particulars, no more than the appendixed
Islands above mentioned.

Having thus summarily discoursed of the Parts of this Kingdom, we will briefly
mention the Government, which having been placed in an Haereditary Monarchy
from the Foundation of this Estate, was challenged as Elective by the Usurped
Power of the Nobles and People, by their Deposing of Ericus about 1420. and
Electing his Cosen Christopher, Count Palatine of the Rhine, who dying without
Issue, they again chose Adolph, Duke of Holstein, who excusing himself by
reason of his age, by his advice, they chose his Nephew Christiern, Earl of
Oldenburg, who brought both those Estates to this Crown: Since when they
continued the fashion of an Election (but never passed by the next Heir) until
the year 1660. when, in consideration of this Kings extraordinary Care, Valor
and Vigilance in defense of his People against the Swedes, they resolved to
restore what they had so long detained, by returning the Government into the
old Channel, and making it again Haereditary in the Family of this Prince
although with much reluctance and discontent of many of the Grandees.

By which change, so lately made, there can no perfect account be given of the
present administration, being solely at the Kings disposal, as it is with other
absolute Monarchs. As to the Nobles, they are reputed the most ancient of all
Europe, and the Gentry the like; and to preserve and maintain that honorable
Esteem, they never match into Plebeian Families, but keep their Blood unmixed
and pure in its first Current. The Gentry are neither so fierce, nor so subtle
as their Neighbors; and are very generous and hospitable to Strangers. The
People generally thrifty and diligent in their Callings, and of very good
converse and civility. The Religion is altogether Lutheran, but the Bishops
have more Authority, and better Maintenance here than in Sweden: but I know not
what they do for a Metropolitan, since the Archi-Episcopal See of Londen in
Schonen, which was the Primacy of Denmark, was assigned to the Swede. In elder
times this Church depended upon the Archbishopric of Bremen, and then the
eldest Son of the King of Denmark (which was in use till the Treaty of Munster)
was styled the Archbishop of Bremen; but that dependence was removed to London
above 500. years since, and whether it will be removed now, is uncertain.

The Strength of this Kingdom is mostly Naval, the Danes proving better Water
than Land Soldiers, and more affecting the Employment; yet of modern times,
they have dared also by Land; their Conquest of Sweden was not above 300. years
ago; (not to mention their old Conquests with Us) in 1628. they enterprised
upon the Emperor, in behalf of the Liberty of Germany (of which, as Duke of
Holstein, he was a free Prince) although unfortunately: Nevertheless, the Enemy
could not but acknowledge the Gallantry of King Christiern, and dealt with him
accordingly: Since which time they were willing to be at quiet, till the
opportunity of the Polish War invited this King Frederick the 3d. to revenge
the injurious Violence done to his Country of Holstein, by the Swedes in 1643.
and 4. which was acted partly by the instigation of the Dutch, who perceiving
the Dane screwed up the Rate of the Toll Money in the Sound, for which by an
old Treaty those Netherlands were to pay but a Rose-Noble for every Ship,
without searching or visiting: (and this was paid, because of the Lights, Tuns,
and Marks at Sea, kept and maintained by the King of Denmark; which Payment,
from the time of their separation from Spain, he had raised at his own
pleasure, searching the Ships, and seizing the Goods, under pretense of
Contrebanda, or prohibited Merchandise) By a League made in 1640. with the
Swede, they insinuated this Grievance, which also offended that Queens
Subjects; so that in conclusion, the Dane, betwixt the Swedes Land Forces, and
the appearance of the Dutch Fleet, was forced to a new Agreement with the
Hollander, at a set easy rate, for the Toll; which afterward in 1650. (having
made the like defensive League with the Dane) they Farmed at 140000. Pieces of
8. per annum. for some term, with a Proviso and Caution of not being searched
for any Goods, the Master only declaring what they were,

To return to an account of his Forces, they may be thus computed. First, Such
as the Nobility and Gentry are bound to raise for the public service, which
are a considerable number. And, Secondly, What the People furnish upon such
occasions; and these have formerly amounted to great Armies: But the strength
of the Kingdom is now exhausted, and it is yet able to do little.

The preceding discourse leads me to consider of this Kings Revenue, which
chiefly consists in his Toll upon Ships aforesaid, (for he makes little of his
own Customs, Fish being his greatest Commodity, and no great Port of Trade in
all his Realm) which has fallen much since his late Agreement with the Dutch,
who have the sole Trade here almost; and more by the Northern Passage to
Russia, found out many years since. He had also a Toll of 50000. Oxen, which
went yearly out of North Jutland into Germany by Holstein, but the Duke now
receives that at his Toll-house, erected at his Residence of Gottorp. There are
also some Crown Lands, but they do not amount to any considerable Revenue.

The Interest of Denmark is, by no means to dis-oblige the Emperor, as his
surest Friend against the Swede; nor the Hollander, unless upon insolent
Encroachments, against which he has the King of England, his nearest Ally, to
a sure Friend and Defense; to watch and keep fair with the Swede, his constant
and natural Enemy; and to that purpose, to keep the Russian always
enjealousied of their Greatness; to be at League with all the German Princes,
and make his Interest as strong with them as is possible; to be perpetually
Confaederated with the Pole, Offensively and Defensively; and so to cherish the
French Kings Friendship, as to keep him a Neuter betwixt the Swede and himself;
Lastly, to love and respect the Crown of England, above all other Friendships
whatsoever. With other Princes than these he has no Concern, only a civil
Correspondence with Spain and Portugal, in point of Trade and Commerce.

What he can do against the Turk, or what Supply he can give the Emperor, may
appear by the preceding Discourse, the late Wars having utterly disabled him,
so that, besides his good will, and his Prayers, he can no way advantage the
Christian Cause, without much despoyling and injuring himself, which that
Occasion cannot expect, and perchance will not need. And it is most certain,
that the Turk took his Resolution of the late Invasion, from the Embarassement
and Difference between these two Northern Kings, in which the Emperor, the
Pole, and the Marquess of Brandenburg, were so far engaged; so that having
suffered sufficiently, and he being the only loser upon that account, he may
well be excused: And so we pass to the Duchy of Holstein.

HOLSTEIN.
THis Duchy of Holstein ought to have been referred to the Survey of Germany,
of which this Duke is a Prince, although he never comes to the Imperial Diets,
nor is subject to any impositions or Taxes laid upon the Empire; only in case
of Appeal some Causes have been carried to the Rix-Chamber at Spiers, which are
now discontinued, because of its former dependence to the Crown of Denmark, to
which it was annexed some Ages since by the Election of Christopher Count of
Oldenburgh Heir to Adolph last Duke hereof, and has remained as the Title and
posseson of the eldest Son, or the younger brothers of the said Crown, we will
not dis-joyn it from this entire view of both together.

It is seated in the Southern part of the Cimbrick Chersoness, or the Peninsula
made by the Baltique Sea on the German shore, and is divided from the Danish
Provinces of Jutland by the River Eydore: It contains four Provinces, viz.
Heagerland, in west near the Sea, and the fall of two Rivers, Lubeck is seated,
a famous Hanse Town, neatly built, and well traded, but of more estimation in
former times. 2ly. Stormarsh, whereupon the Elbe stands. Hamburgh another Hanse
Town, and of late more famed than Lubeck (by reason of the English Staple of
Cloth) for its greatness of commerce. 3ly. Ditmarsh, and 4ly. Holstein,
properly so called. The whole Peninsula is but 75 miles in length, and 60 in
breadth, with the 2 Jutlands belonging to the King of Denmark; so that this
Duchy can be reputed of little force, although it consist of a great number of
walled Cities and Towns, and is very populous, but the liberties of the said
two Hanse Towns, and the Danish part, retrench the estimate of its force.

It was overrun by the Swedes in 1643. during the residence of this King
Frederick the third, as Duke thereof, to the great surprisal of old King
Christiern, yet he so notably bestirred himself, with the help of the Emperor,
both against them and the Dutch, at Sea and Land, that he brought the business
to some advantage on his side, had not the French King interposed his Authority
in the very nick of a decision of it by Battle, and did the Swede a notable
kindness; since when, by the marriage of the late King of Sweden with the
Daughter of this present Duke, who is a lineal Descendant of John the younger,
Son of Christiern the 3d. King of Denmark, it has suffered in that War from
the Dane and his Confaederates what it had formerly underwent by the Swede, who
to show his Affection to his Father-in-Law, had procured him some Concessions
and Assignments by the Roschild Treaty, which being afterward violated by the
Swede, this Country paid for the Swedes undue courtesy by the forces of the
Marquess of Brandenburgh and the Emperor; notwithstanding in the last Treaty
in the Leagure before Copenhagen it retained thus much, that the Jurisdiction
of Swabstadt, together with half the Chapter of the Duchy of Sleswick (lying
in North- Jutland) together with the sovereignty thereof, was assigned and
passed over to this Duke for ever.

So that this Dukes Interest is at present bound up in that of Sweden, having
countermarched its Ground, being formerly more strictly tied to the Dane; but
we see what Fate and Revolutions can do As to the Turk, being he is exempt from
the Decrees and Injunctions of the Empire, it is not to be expected he will put
himself forward, for that he is none of the wealthiest Princes, having not one
Farthing of Customs by Sea, but only his Toll for the 50000. Oxen above
mentioned, and some Patrimonial Lands belonging to the Duchy. We are now
obliged to pass to Oldenburg, because it had formerly the same Dependencies and
Aspects to Denmark; but because I will not trespass too far upon Germany, we
will leave it to its place there: And so we pass by Sea to Holland, and the
seven United Provinces of the Netherlands.

THE NETHERLANDS: OR, The 7. United Provinces OF HOLLAND, etc.
THese Countries are bounded on the North and West with the German Ocean, on
the East with part of Germany, and on the South with Flanders, etc. They were
once under several Lords and State-holders, who by the Power, and their
Interest with the Emperors of Germany, made themselves absolute; from whom, by
the Marriage of their Heirs General, they devolved at last into the Sovereignty
of the Dukes of Burgundy, whose Daughter conveyed them to Maximilian Archduke
of Austria. By his Grandson Charles the 5th. they were designed to be made
with the other ten Provinces, one entire Kingdom: but the Discrepancy of their
Laws and Customs, and the irreconcilable Contrariety thereof, made him give
over that Resolution.

About the Year of our Lord 1567. at what time the Duke of Alva raged against
all these Provinces, they shook off the Spanish Yoke, and the Government of
Philip the 2d. Son of Charles the 5 th. who settling himself in his Realm of
Spain, intended to govern them by a Stat-holder: That Discontent, together with
the memory of their former Oppressions, the Insolence of their present
Governors, the Contempt of their Laws and Privileges; together with the
Decrees of the Council of Trent, the revived Edict of the said Charles against
Haeretiques, and the Introduction of the Inquisition; to which may be added;
the hated Administration of Perennot the Cardinal of Granvelle, the Death of
the Counts of Egmond and Horn, and the tenth and hundredth Penny, taxed by the
Duke of Alva, and his Cruelties thereafter; so animated these People, that they
entered into a Confaederacy, under the Conduct of William, Prince of Orange,
Count of Nassau, and in the year 1581. by a public Instrument, declared the
said King to have rightfully fallen from the Dominion and Jurisdiction of these
Provinces, then united under the Profession of the Reformed Religion,
(Nevertheless, they are not yet, nor are ever like to be, an entire
Commonwealth, while each retains its Sovereignty distinct; and therefore it is
a new Module of a Republique, without any Pattern) viz. Guelderland, Holland,
Freizland, Zeland, Zutphen, the Bishopric of Utrecht, and Groeningen.

Now the Cement and Principles of these Confaederate States, and the Contracts
by which they are Combined together, and by which they have so gloriously
subsisted, come next, under a brief Consideration. The First of them is; That
they shall continue inseparably united, nor shall act distinctly in the common
Affairs. 2. The Rights, Privileges, and Franchises, etc. of each particular
Province, shall be continued inviolate. 3. They shall strennuously assist one
another; and if any Difference arise between two Places, they shall submit to
the ordinary Course of Justice; and shall attempt nothing to the prejudice of
one another. 4. They shall mutually aid and defend one another against the
Arms of Spain, and shall sympathize with one another Losses, 5. The new
Fortresses shall be made at the common Charge, but the Frontiers at the
particular Charge of each Province. 6. Peace, War, or Truce, not to be made
without the common Consent of all the Estates and People. 7. Liberty of
Conscience shall be allowed. 8. All Care shall be used by each particular
Province, and all of them in general, that they give no Cause of Quarrel or
Offense, whereby they should become engaged in any other War, than that of
Spain.

These were the Originalls of this Republique, and the Fundamental Laws
thereof; we will now see the Practice and Execution of them, in the
Administration, and the Policy of the Government. 1. Every City of these United
Provinces, acknowledges its particular Magistrate; the Provincial Magistrate,
and the College of the Lords, the States General. By the Magistrate of the
City, are understood the Councillors, whose total number is forty; (which are
paid for their service, and hold their Places for life, because they may act
freely, without those resentments of a future private Condition; these
deliberate of the Affairs of the Province, and inspect and choose all other
Magistrates, and are in effect the Peoples Servants, as they will sometimes
taunt them) the Burgo-Masters, and Sheriffs, together with a Baily, who judges
absolutely in Criminal Causes; but he holds his Place not longer than Durante
Placito, of the Council of the City.

The Provincial Magistracy is composed of a Counselor of every City of the
Province, whose Office is to Conserve its Privileges and Immunities; to this
Court there lies an Appeal from the Sentence of the Sheriffs Court.

The College or Assembly of the Lords States General, is constituted of the
Deputies of the Provincial Councils; these make the Alliances, and Treaties, or
War with foreign Princes and States; and these raise Money, and impose Taxes,
and take the Care of the Peace and well-Being of the Public. In this
Assembly, one of the Assessors, or Pensionary Counselors, opens the Matter or
Affair in a proportion, which the Deputies receive, but give no answer till
they have received one from the Provincial Councils, who likewise must be
resolved by the respective Cities, which makes State Business very tedious, but
that is recompensed by a good digestion, and mature deliberation. So that the
Sovereignty resides not in the Assembly of the States General, although they
seem to have all the Power, but in the Estates of every Province, and the
Council of the Cities. In effect, the Cities frame their particular Laws, and
do their own business, without communicating it to the States General: But the
States General cannot undertake any thing, without first writing to the
Provinces, and obliging their Negotiation with the Cities, to obtain the
permission of their Determinations.

The States General meet at the Hague, where every Province presides weekly;
Every Province sends one or more Deputies, who all of them make but one Voice;
Each Province takes Place of other in their own Territory, to preserve
Aequality, and their Votes are of the same Validity: Every Province likewise
Pays its own Deputies, and changes them once in three years, to make room for
others to finger the Government; but they must be such as have Desert and
Estates, that they may solely intend the Public, without Detriment to their
private Fortune.

The People are generally good natured to Strangers, and free in their Converse
one to another; their Looks very vivacious and pleasant: yet are they wondrous
subtle and prudent, and love in things most excessively Money and Liberty: But
such the Capricies concerning the latter, that they suit that Character of
Tacitus; Nec possunt Libertatem, nec Servitutem pati: Or that of Strada, which
comes nearest the matter; Nulli magis Servitutem execrantur, nulli melius
patiuntur; They can neither endure Servitude nor Freedom: for every man will
take upon himself to rectify the present Government; and in this their Presses
are very scandalous. As to the latter, the many miseries and violences they
have done to Trade in all Nations of the World, both by private Men, and
public Commission, have made it too notorious; and this Kingdom chiefly
feels the Mischief thereof. And here were occasion to speak of those
Encroachments, both upon our Fishing at Home, and our Traffic Abroad,
especially in the East Indies, where they have in a manner engrossed all the
Trade: Not to mention their Attempts upon Guinea, and their Insolences
committed there. By which means, in a few years, if un-interrupted, they will
gain all the Wealth in the World into their Hands; which that they drive at, is
apparent by those vast Fleets they have for a good while maintained in those
Indian Seas, and those Acquists they have made by Land there also; so that they
are Formidable to all the Princes of those Parts: And it is very Credible, that
the repute and dread they have gotten there, is partly obliged to a quantity of
English Seamen, whom they have for some late time employed and shipped upon
Voyages to those Coasts, and left them dispersed in Garrisons, contrary to
Articles and Agreement made at their Embarquing; by which means they deprive us
also of Seamen. But to proceed.

They have been declared a Free State, and the High and Mighty Lords the States
General, ever since 1648. when the King of Spain, wearied with a 80. years War,
was more than willing to relinquish his Claim, and Regal Title, (being
perplexed and engaged on the other side with the French) for that the Dutch
were obstinately bent against a Peace with him: Nevertheless Prince Henry,
their General, and State-holder, being induced thereunto by great Advantages to
himself and Family, as well as the States, it took effect. Since which, they
concerned themselves, that neither the French, nor the Spaniard grew too Potent
in the Low Countries; and to that purpose, maintained a good Correspondence
with their new reconciled Enemy, supplying him with Money in his Distresses,
upon security of his Plate Fleet, in which they have deeply interessed
themselves: who likewise omitted no Courtship nor Civility, to oblige them to
his side.

Being thus absolute, and looked upon as one of the most considerable Members
of Christendom, their Ambition and Arrogance transported them to quarrel with
the new usurping States of England, as their Juniors, and to try Title for the
Dominion of the Sea, and all things seemed to favor the Enterprise, for the
State had been in sore Troubles newly before, by the Interest of the Prince of
Aurange, the Husband of the Princess Royal; who perceived the Republicans began
to grow weary of his Authority, by which, and the Merit of his Ancestors, they
had attained to their present Greatness; but he dying soon after, all mention
of those matters was laid aside, and the Commonwealth Faction predominated
every where.

It is true, some of those Grandees, after the ill success of the War,
cunningly shifted the engaging in, and inducement to it, upon that Princes and
his Counselors Designs and Interest, in respect of his Alliance with the
King of Great Britain: But there appeared no such thing in the menage of the
whole War; Nor would the Hogen Mogens own either of them throughout the
Contest, but most unhandsomely disclaimed and denied both in the Conclusion,
although they never were in the Premises.

By this War, when they might have boasted of a precarious Peace, granted by
them to our new Coddled States, who courted, and earnestly sought their
Republican Friendship, out of fear of the joint revenge of all the Kings of
Christendom, for their late perpetrated Regicide, they were reduced to a very
low Ebb; and they may thank the Protectoral Revolution, that they were not
left dry, and exhausted, and the Sea wholly debarred from them, but what they
sailed by our permission. Nor was the Death of their Renowned Admiral Van
Trump, one of the least of their Losses, as they publicly expressed; and I
think I shall gratify the Reader, if I present him him with a Copy of his
Epitaph, inscribed on his stately Monument at Delfe, being a Person so much
celebrated in every man's discourse.

Aeternae Memoriae Martini Harperti Trompi
Qui batavos qui Virtutem ac verum laborem amas.
Lege ac Luge.

Batavae Gentis Decus, Virtutis Bellicae Fulmen hic jacet qui nunquam jacuit
and Imperatorem stantem mori Exemplo suo docuit. Amor Civium, Hostium Terror,
Oceani stupor, quo nomine plures Continentur Lauds; Cui Schola Oriens and
Occidens; mare materia Triumphorum, Universus Orbis Theatrum Gloriae fuit.
Praedonum certa pernicses, Commercij faelix assertor, Familiaritate utilis non
vilis: Post quam nautas and milites (durum genus) paterno and cum Efficacia
benigno rexit Imperio, post tot praelia quorum Dux fuit aut pars magna, post
insignes supra Fidem Victorias, post summos infra meritum Honores, tandem Bello
Anglico tantum non Victor, invictus certe 20. Aug. Anno 1654. Aetatis suae 56.
Vivere ac Vincere desiit:

Faederati Belgij Patres Heroi optime merito Monumentum hoc ponunt.

With this gallant Persons Death, the Dutch resolution of Fighting changed into
milder and humbler thoughts: but sad was the face of this Country, upon the
return of their Fleet, so maimed and unmanned; nor did they forbear to deplore
this lamentable loss, and to demand openly a sudden Peace with the English,
with whom if they were Friends, they would defy the World: And now their
Governors were blamed, for commencing such a destructive Enterprise, (and the
English Merchants, and others, highly carressed, who some while before had
changed and transferred their Staple from Rotterdam to Dort) and they terribly
threatened, if it were not quickly set an end to, and composed, by any manner of
Agreement: And yet as soon as it was concluded, they fell presently to their
old Depraedations in the East Indies, and have continued them there, and
elsewhere, ever since. So natural it is for these People to take all advantages
for gain; and such the dilatory proceedings of their Courts of Justice, and
removal from one Chamber of the East India Company (which are six in all, viz.
Of Amsterdam, Delf, Rotterdam, Middleburgh, etc.) to another, that it is a
worse vexation to prosecute the recovery, than is the loss of our Goods; as
might be instanced in the Case of those interessed in Squire Courtens Ships;
(who lost not only the Ships and Goods, but his Factories also, the best and
richest in all the Indies, and ever since 1643. possessed by that means by the
Dutch, for that Squire Courten was thereby wholly deprived of any means to
supply them) and this one thing has proved as great a Damage to the English
Nation, as any Action of theirs since Amboyna.

We have been thus liberal in discoursing of their Trade, because it is the
Soul, nay, the best part of the Body of this little vast Republique; and is the
only considerable thing: For alas, what are those puny Provinces they till and
manure, and make Pasture of, (and much of that torn from their better Parent
the Sea) to be compared with those vast Regions they possess abroad? So that
Holland seems to be the Hive; but the sweet Flowers from whence the Honey is
gathered, and with which they sustain themselves, are planted in more blessed
Countries. It has been said, and it is true, that the Bank of Venice gives Law
and Rule to the Exchange of Money in Europe: and hereafter it may be said, if
the Dutch Trade go on thus, it will give Law to all Trade throughout the World,
if it presume not also to the Sword.

And as they are thus careful and industrious for their profit and glory in the
East Indies, where they aspire to an universal Sovereignty, and have already
entitled themselves to the Southern Seas: so do they as diligently mind their
near Concern in the Baltique Sea, and the Trade about the Northern Cape to
Russia, of which we had experience in their stickling so between the two
Northern Kings, And although they were adventrously engaged in that Business by
the Brandenburger, their old Confaederate and Ally by the House of Orange, who
afterward left them to their own Councils: yet did they at last come off
handsomely with the King of Sweden, by the Treaty of Elbing 1657. though with
great loss of Money; and afterward more gloriously with him, when, by their
assistance given the King of Denmark 1659. they made the Swede to understand,
that He could not be Master of the Sound without their leave. As for the
Emperor of Russia, they carry fair with him, and cheat him sufficiently, but
yet they find good respect from him, and a kind Correspondence; so that he will
be no Enemy to them, unless upon an English account, which he highly prefers.

And incredible is the Profit which arises by their Trade out of those
Countries by Corn, (which they disperse into Europe) Hemp, Tarr, Cordage,
Masts, Deal-boards, Clap-boards, etc. which they have in Exchange for their
Spices from India; so that 600. Sail have gone together out of the Texel for
the Baltique Sea: Nor is their Herring Fishing less considerable, of which they
make three Millions Sterling yearly, and of Codfish little less, beside their
Whale Fishing; so that they do not trade and barter for less than forty
Millions yearly. Now to encourage People to settle themselves with them, and to
carry on their Navigation: they give great and equal Privileges to all
Comers; nor are the Duties upon Goods Exported or Imported, any way so
considerable as in other Kingdoms: Besides, they will not suffer any
Corporations, or the Enclosure of any Trade, but it shall be free for all men,
either to Voyage whither they please, or to adventure their Money on the joint
Stock, that menageth that Employment, without any distinction or difference
whatsoever; which courses, with their Toleration of all Religions, have made
them so thrive in this manner, and to be so Populous as they are at this day.

We come now to speak of their Forces, and their present Posture, which is
chiefly Naval, as may be concluded from the foregoing discourse; and that
Naval Power supposed to be greater and better now than e're it was, so that
they can arm and man 200. Ships of War built for service in a very short time,
and upon a sudden alarm, but we will leave that to time. Certainly they are
well provided, but it is as much certain, they care not for a War, especially
with the Englsh, it being so contrary to their Interest, that every Cabin Boy
will not endure to hear of it. He that reads their Books Printed upon this
subject, will perceive as much, together, with what fine Artifices they have
contrived to flur their Misdemeanors, and compound them underhand by Friends;
and this is avowedly laid down, as a method to Satisfaction beyond all
Comparison: And then their Temporizing, and peremptory Promises, is another
Shift, which may chance to help them to better Opportunities. At this present
they assure the King of giving him Content, and have promised him to call a
General Assembly of the Estates to that purpose: And by an express Envoy, have
entreated his Majesty, to take off the Quarantayn or Demoorage upon their
Ships, by reason of the Plague; but there is more stiffness in the wind.

As to their Land Forces, they always keep up a standing Militia, both for
fear of the Spaniard, their near Neighbor, and for all Emergencies at home;
but of late they have reduced it to a less number than formerly;
notwithstanding, it is sufficient for Defense, and for any sudden Employment;
and if they want upon any Rupture, their Money will raise them Soldiers: but
the great Armies they maintained under the Princes of Aurange, for the gaining
of one Town in a Summer, makes 'um now very parsimonious.

They are now in firm League both with France and Spain, and all the other
Princes of Christendom, (excepting some Piques in East-Friezland, about the
Eyler Sconce, with the Earl thereof, which Prince William, by their order,
besieged, and had it yielded, during a Treaty above) so that they have leisure
(if they mean to be honest with Us) to revenge themselves of the Algier
Pirates, who have done them most despiteful outrages: and to supply the
Emperor with some assistance by Land, which is the Consideration of this
Discourse.

And indeed, there are no People so engaged to assist against this Enemy, as
these, especially by Sea, where they themselves have made them thus powerful to
do mischief, by yielding their Ships to them without striking one blow, (which,
by the Turkish Custom, gives Liberty to the Mariners, upon such innocent and
speedy rendition) which Ships have formerly served for the Piratical Trade,
till with those they took better of theirs, and so framed their Modules. They
have now a Fleet, under De Ruyter, preparing to set sail for Algier, but upon
no other account, than to repress their Insolences; not intending to give any
offense to the Grand Seigniour, whose Coasts and Maritime Places, a Conjunction
of the Christian Fleets now hovering in the Streights, would quickly reduce,
and do him thereby a great deal of mischief, if the War were prosecuted;
otherwise it we e labor and time lost. As for Land service, they have the same
convenient passage for them to Hungary, as the Princes and Provinces of the
Rhine, if they were free, and open-hearted, in this time of danger; but it is
to be feared, the Emperors Ambassador will not have his answer from them in
any reasonable time, or that it will no prove satisfactory and effectual, for
they have little inclinations to the House of Austria, unless the Case prove
very dangerous, and threaten them nearer: And there is a Saying of a former
Grand Siegniour; That if they should have provoked him, as they did their
Sovereign the King of Spain, he would have sent Fellows with Shovels, and have
thrown that little Marish into the Sea. Of late they have driven a great Trade
in his Countries, till very now, and the War in Hungary, (by which our Clothes
are risen there to good price and estimation) and do all they can to maintain a
good intelligence at the Port; where, and in other Places, they enjoy the
Privilege of Ambassadors or Consuls. I would not omit, that they have been
long and much pressed by the French, and Catholic King, and sometimes by our
Sovereign, at the instance of the Grand Master, and Knights of Malta, to make
Restitution to that Order, of some Lands they enjoy and possess of theirs, in
the Low Countries; but they take it unkindly, to be urged to such stale Demands
and Pretensions.

The Interest of Holland is considerable in a double respect, either to Land or
Sea. As to the Land, they are obliged to look to their Frontires, and maintain
their Places of Strength, as those that will secure them best, it having been
proved by experience, that one Leagure has destroyed whole Armies. They are
likewise concerned to keep their Commonwealth free from the Disturbances that
may arise by the Estates of some petty Soveraignties, that are within their
Precincts, and out of their Jurisdiction, for fear of Potent Interests in the
Quarrel, from their Neighbors, and therefore to suppress them with all speed:
Of this nature there are some Places belonging to the Earl of East-Friezland,
some to the Bishop of Munster, as the Eyler Sconce, about which the present
Troubles are arisen, by the Injuries of that Garrison, as is pretended; and the
Earldom of Culenburg in Guelderland, (the County of Buren, the fair Patrimony
of the Prince of Aurange, in the same Province) separated from the Duchy of
Guelderland, and so dignified by King Philp the 2d. of Spain, who had respect
to the entire and rich Situation thereof, with its Dominions and Appurtenances.
This Earl is likewise in a readiness to be embroyled with the Hollander about
the same score, and its Credible he has Parties to back him. They are also
more nearly interessed, that the French, nor no other Potent Prince, get any
further footing in Flanders, upon the King of Spain, who is the best, and most
advantageous Neighbor they can have. They must keep fair with the Prince of
Aurange, and abridge him of no Rights his Predecessors enjoyed; but of his
Concerns we shall speak more particularly in the Original of his Family in
Germany. An even and equal hand must be carried between the Swede and the Dane;
and they must have good Friends in Germany, of which Brandenburg will always
be one, and most of the Calvinian Princes, whom they keep at their Devotion
with some small Offices or Kindnesses done them.

As to the Sea, there is a necessity of a firm Correspondence with the Hanse
Towns, not in point of Commerce, for they grudge them any society in it, but
out of security to their own, in Case of a Rupture; for by their entitling
themselves to Lubeck and Hamburg, and the like Places, in the late War between
them and Us, they cheated Us of many considerable Prizes, which were owned by
those Cities. As to the French, they must be likewise firmly Leagued, for the
benefit of their Ports, and the protection of their Shore, if they gain not
something else of that King in Case of War. As to the Portugal, they must, as
Cases go, suffer him to go away with his Conquests in Brasile, whatever amends
they make themselves in the East Indies, by their late taking of some Places
there, and the further progress of their Arms in those Parts; but it is
supposed, they have some aspect upon the same Brasile. As to the Turk,
sufficient has been spoken concerning them in the Premises.

I should have described the Situation, but it being so near a Neighbor to Us,
I suppose it unnecessary; all therefore that I shall add, is, that it is
conveniently and commodiously seated for Trade with all the Provinces of
Europe, either by Land or Sea. For the Air, it is indifferent, according to the
Season of the Year: And so we pass to the other ten Provinces, under the
Jurisdiction to the King of Spain.

BRABANT and FLANDERS: OR THE Ten Provinces of the Netherlands, under the
Dominion of the King of Spain.
THe Names of these Provinces, are, First, Brabant, Flanders, Limburgh,
Lutzemburgh, Namur, Zutphen, the Marquisat of the Sacred Empire, Mechlin,
Henault, and Artois; of the two latter whereof, the King of France is near
possessed; as of some Towns in the Country of Flanders, of which more at large.
For the Situation of them, it is so different, in respect of every particular
Province, and so well known to our Nation, that I will not stand to describe
it. The Country is generally very pleasant, and far exceeds the 7. United
Provinces for Corn, Grain, and production of Cattle; and affords all manner of
good Diet, in a plenteous manner; and a very wholesome Air to digest it.
Brabant is the first in our way, although the States General do share in the
two first Stages thereof (and some other Towns, as Hertogenbush, etc.) namely
Breda, the Dominion and Jurisdiction of the Prince of Aurange, and Bergenapzom;
and that they had not Antwerp was their own fault, when undertaken by Prince
Henry of Aurange in 1648. (assisted thereto by 6000. French Horse and Foot,
sent them by the Duke of Orleans, the French Generalissimo, then besieging
Dunkirk, to his great dis-advantage, for want of the said men, to carry on the
Siege of Dunkirk) but given over by him at the order of the States, and the
instance of those of Amsterdam, who foresaw that that Town would carry away
the Trade from them, and deprive Holland of that Wealth and Glory she had so
long enjoyed in the Traffic of that her grand Emporium. And indeed it is one
of the finest Places in the World, famous for its Exchange, from whence ours
was patterned, and that general resort made it so some a 100. years ago from
all Parts of the World, when Amsterdam was in its Infancy, and might never have
risen to any grown Estate, but for the War with Spain, which eclipsed the
luster of this Mistress of all Negotiation, and pent her up in the Shallows of
the River Scheld, (hard by the Sea Port Towns of Middle-borough and Flushing,
and the Block-house of Lillo) which had had all the Deeps flowing in upon her
with the Treasures of the World. And in this Condition she yet remains, an
Impost being still paid to the Dutch for all Goods passing from Flushing, by
Lillo, and so thither: It continues nevertheless the residence of many wealthy
English Merchants, (and of all Nations besides) who live there in great
splendor, and are highly respected by the civil Inhabitants.

The Government being Monarchical, with the Intervention of the Estates of the
Country, to advise upon occasions, and the raising of Moneys, it will be
unnecessary to give a further account thereof, because common, and the same
with all Regal Administration, save that this is not so absolute as other
Soveraignties; for although the House of Burgundy, by a standing Militia,
raised at first (and paid by the consent of the Estates) for the Honor and
Majesty of their Persons, which they increased afterward at their pleasure to
a formidable number of Gens d' Arms, did keep them very low; and the House of
Austria (into whose Patrimony this Princely Estate fell, with the Marriage of
the sole Daughter of Burgundy to the Archduke Maximilian) endeavored to
subjugate them totally by the same and other Means and Policies; upon which
followed many terrible Revolts, particularly that of Ghendt: yet could they not
be brought to abandon their Pretensions to Liberty, the Terms and Name whereof
they held as precious Relics, and would boldly talk of them, though to no
effect. But when the Hollanders, by their valiant struggling, had shook the
Power of Spain, and as good as shook off that Yoke; that King found it high
time to carry a gentle sweet hand over those Provinces that remained in his
Subjection, and their Allegiance, and gave them that Gratis, which the other
had extorted, although not to that full Liberty, yet as much as satisfied this
People; who being addicted to the Romish Religion, (which was the main
Grievance of the Revolters) and eased in point of Taxes, were content with
their old Master; being naturally of a more tractable and ducible temper, than
the stiff and storm-driven Hollander, who could never compose or quiet his
thoughts after the first rupture.

And indeed, had not these People been fast and sure in Allegiance, which was
sweetened to them by many Acts of Grace, this King had never been able to have
withstood such Potent Enemies, as for 12. years together, from 1636. to 1648.
set upon him on both sides; notwithstanding, in which year, or somewhat sooner,
without doubt he had been driven out of this Country, betwixt the French, and
the Dutch, and the Prey shared betwixt them; but that the Dutch were more
jealous of the French, as a potenter and nearer Neighbor, whose entire
strength might at one time be powered in upon them: So, that although they made
a show of pursuing their Confaederacy in 1646. and so to 48. yet in the mean
while, notwithstanding all the French Instances to the contrary by Mounsieur
Servient at the Hague, they secretly proceeded to an Agreement with the
Spaniard, and finally concluded it at Munster aforesaid. By which means, the
more Northernly and Westernly Provinces, as Brabant, Namur, etc. had a
discharged respite from the harass of War, but the Easternly and Southerly
suffered as much as ever from the French.

Nevertheless the King of Spain made shift to make his Party good against the
French alone, gaining one Summer what he lost in another; until Oliver Cromwell,
upon account of Partnership, joined with the French, and turned the Balance;
wherefore the King of Spain, who had begun a Treaty, and debated most of the
Particulars, in the year 1656. at Madrid, earnestly resumed it in the Summer
1659. at St. John de Luz, in the Confines of both Kingdoms of France and
Spain, by the Plempotentiaries of the two Crowns, Cardinal Mazarine, and Don
Lewis de Haro, who in November concluded it, and made this Agreement, as to
these Provinces, which were assigned to the Crown of France for ever; Namely,
the County of Artois, with the Town and City of Arras; Hesden, and the
Liberties thereof; Bethune, with its Jurisdiction; Bapaume, Lents, Lillers,
Terroane, de Pas, with the Liberties, etc. together with the Count of St. Pol.
Excepting the Towns and Jurisdictions of Air, and St. Omer. With the Town of
Renty, as belonging to either of those two Places. Within the Province and
County of Flanders, the Towns of Graveling, the Forts, Philip, Sluice, Hanouin,
and Bourbourg, together with St. Venant. (Since which time the French are
likewise possessed of Dunkirk and Mardike Fort) Within the County of Hanault,
of the Towns of Landrecy and Quesnoy, the Ducal Title of Marshal Turenne, with
all their Jurisdictions and Appurtenances. Within the Province of Luxemburg,
with the Towns of Theonville, Montmedy, and Damvilliers, with their
Dependencies; the Government of Ivoy, Chavanty, and Marville, as belonging
partly to the Duchy of Bar.

In lieu whereof, the French King exchanged the Towns of La-Bassee, and Bergen,
St. Wynox, with the Fort Royal, built upon the Channel, in the way to Dunkirk,
for the Places of Marienburg, and Philippe ville, seated betwixt the Rivers
Sambre, and the Maes; together with Avennes, seated upon the same Rivers: And
as to other Places, taken by the Arms of France, in these Countries, the
French re-delivered the Towns of Ypres, Oudenaerd, Dixmude, Furnes, with the
Forts of La Fintelle, La Quenoque, Merville, upon the River Lys, Menene, and
Comines, with the Forts of St. Amor, Bleverans, and Joux; the Towns of Rocroy,
Catelet, and Linchamp; which is a small Restitution for the Acquists the French
have made by this Treaty.

As to the Forces of these Provinces, it is, and has appeared to be very
redoubted; the Walloons being excellent Soldiers, both for Horse and Foot, as
they have approved themselves, both at Home and Abroad: nor are they less
numerous; besides, the Gentry are very ready to the service of their Prince and
Country. (and are most accomplished Persons, speaking promptly six or seven
Languages, of which, Latin very readily; but this reputed to the continuance
of the War, which brought a Conflux of all Nations into those Parts) As to
maritime Affairs, their Dunkirk Navigations sufficiently tell the World what
they were able to do at Sea; but now they have but two Port Towns, Newport and
Ostend, and neither of a convenient Station or Harbor for Shipping, being very
narrow and difficult to come out of with some Winds; notwithstanding, they will
serve well enough for Pyratical Conveniences, but to Fleets let Flanders bid
adieu.

The Revenue of these Provinces was considerable, were it not for the constant
Charge which the King is at in maintaining them; so that they have been said to
be the Correlative of the West Indies, during the late Wars, when they spent
and consumed all that Treasure, and bankrupted the King of Spain besides; And
sure it will be a long time, and there must be as long a Tract of Peace, before
their Incomes will balance the Account, and make the King of Spain a Saver:
However, at present he is in hopes of being no further Loser, and of reducing
his Revenue to some settlement, which the late times so perplexed and
squandered; and the Care and Frugality of the present Governor, the Marquess
Caracence, has made a fair progress therein already. In former times these
People would not be content without a Prince of the Blood to be their
Governor, which made King Philip the 2d. send his Daughter Isabella Clara, and
afterward invested her, and her Husband Albert the Archduke, with the
Sovereignty; and since the Cardinal Infanta, the Archduke Leopold, and Don
John of Austria: but such is the present acquiescence under this fair and
amicable Government of the Marquess; besides, such is the paucity of the
Princes of the Blood, both of Spain and Austria. that they willingly accept of
soever the King sends; but such is his aequality and evenness with the People,
that the States are interested in the Administration more than ever any Prince
would in former times allow; but now they are grown up into a mutual
Confidence, and right Understanding one of another. The Marquess of Caracena is
supposed to be upon his departure, and the Marquess Castle Rodengo is appointed
to succeed him.

As to their Interest, it being conjoined, and depending upon that of Spain,
further than what the Ecclesiastics will do voluntarily of themselves, in this
Grand Cause of Religion, against the Turks: Besides that, this People, and
Clergy especially, are mainly devoted to the Imperial Family; we will consider
it when we come to treat of the Kingdom of Spain.

FRANCE.
THe Kingdom of France has on the East the River Aa; the Alps, which divide it
from Italy; the Rhosne, which parts it from Savoy; Sagona, which separates it
from Lorrain, and the Duchy of Luxemburg: On the South, the Mediterranean Sea,
and Pyrenean Mountains: On the West, the Atlantic Ocean: And on the North, the
English Ocean. The nearer to the North, the narrower it is, and narrowest of
all near Calice. The Figure thereof between round and square, and therefore
bigger than a man would take it. It contains many large Provinces, as
Picardy, Normandy, Britain, Aquitayn, Gascoyn, (by which Names the two last are
better known to Us, than by the modern Divisions of them by the French) the
Isle of France, Champayn, Auvergn, the Duchy of Burgundy, Daulphia Province,
Languedoc, etc. The two last lying toward the Mediteranean Sea, brings forth
all sorts of Fruits, like that of Italy; whereas Picardy, Britain, and
Normandy, brings forth little or no Wine; and the rest abounds with it, and
other Fruits; so that it is under great diversity, and various temperature of
Air. It contains in length 520. Miles, from the Alps to the Atlantique or
West Ocean; and in breadth 584. from Marseilles to Calice.

The whole Land of France is fruitful and fertile, and though the Apennine
Hills, spreading over almost all the South of Italy, are barren, yet in the
Mountains of Auvergue (which are the only of note, and few else in France)
stand many good Towns, richly seated, where Clothing is exercuted, and a good
part of the Kingdom served with Butter and Flesh of excellent relish; the rest
of the Kingdom is almost plain, here and there garnished with fruitful Hills,
and green Valleys, whose plenty does contend with variety, fertility, with
delicacy, commodiousness of situation, with the beautiful Fabrics and
Structures of Cities. And herein, without controversy, Italy gives place to
France; for although some one Corner thereof affords exquisite Pleasure, and
delightful Prospects, with happy Conveniences of Situation, as Rovera d' Sala,
Campania, the Territory of Croton, Tarent, and some other Cities of Calabria:
yet those are singular, and few in Italy, common and frequent in Fra ce;
especially in Burgundy, Brie, the Isle of France, Turen, Anjou, Xaintong, and
Languedoc: In each of which Provinces, it seems that Nature has set apart,
and as it were dedicated by allotment, some Places to Ceres, some to Bacchus,
some to Pomona, and some to Pallas; Yea, it happens very often, that the
Western or North-west Wind arising from the Sea, brings the Springtide
before the Winter be fully expired, so decking the Fields with Flowers, and the
Gardens with Herbs, that the Inhabitants of Poitou, Bourdeaux, the Isle of
France, etc. enjoy as forward a Spring, as those of Jago d' Garda in Italy,
which is reckoned one of the most praecoce Frutages in Europe.

But there is nothing in France more worthy the noting, than the number and
pleasure of the Navigable Rivers, whereof some as it were gird in the whole
Realm, as Sagona, Rhosne, and Mosel; some other cut through the middle, as the
Sequan or Seyn, Layre, and Garon; Into these Streams fall so many other Rivers,
some from the utmost bounds, some from the inmost Parts of the Realm, that it
makes the whole Country commodious for Traffic and Exchange of each others
Wants: Insomuch, that by this facility of carriage, and intercourse of
Merchants, all things may be said to be in common to the whole Kingdom. In
Anjou alone are forty Rivers, great and small, whereupon Q. Katherin de Medicis
was wont to say; That this Kingdom contained more Rivers, than all Europe
besides: This indeed was an Hyperbolical Speech, yet something of affinity to
truth. And we see, that this easy and ready conveyance, with the goodness and
luxuriance of the Soil, has been the original of so many great Cities, and
good Towns, in this Kingdom, and those most commonly seated upon the Banks of
Rivers. And although it have many goodly Havens, yet the Up-land Towns are
fairer and richer than those that stand near the Sea, Marseilles excepted;
which argues their wealth to be their own, and not brought from foreign
Countries; for there the Sea Towns excel those of the Land, as Genoa, Venice,
Ragula: but where the prosperity of Cities depends wholly upon the Land,
there it is otherwise, as in Millain, Nurenberg, and most of the Towns of
Germany, Flanders, and Hungary. All this notwithstanding, although almost like
goodness of Soil be proper to the whole Realm of France, as likewise the
situation of the Rivers commodious; yet, Paris excepted, (whose largeness
proceeds from the Kings Court, the Parliament, and the University) the Towns
there are for the most part but small and mean, yet beautiful, commodious, and
very populous; so that, in a Description of the Number of this People, written
in the Reign of Charles the 9th. it is asserted, that the Number of the
Inhabitants exceeded 15. Millions.

And as the Cities and Towns in France may boast of their Rivers, so the
Castles and Villages of Noblemen are no less pleasured and favored with the
pleasure and strength of Lakes and Marshes; which, although they may not be
compared to those of Italy and Switzerland: yet are they so many, and so fall
of excellent Fish, that the numbers of the one may aequal the largeness of the
other. The same may be spoken of Woods, not so well as thick grown, out of
those Woods in times past the Kings Revenue did arise, and the Noblemen do make
great profit, by selling great quantities thereof for firewood; but greater by
sales of Timber Trees, which they use, for want of Stone, in the greatest part
of their Buildings.

In regard of the commodious situation and current of these Rivers, serving so
fitly for the transportation of Victuals from one place to another, this
Kingdom is so abundantly furnished with all plenty of Provision, that it is
able to nourish an Army in the Field, how multitudinous soever. When Charles
the 5th. entered France, first by Provence, and afterward by Champaign, it
maintained One hundred and fifty thousand Soldiers, besides the ord nary
Garrisons. In the Reign of Charles the 9th. (and since that, in the time of the
League, a greater number) there were maintained in this Kingdom 20000. Horse,
30000. Footmen Strangers, and of French 25000. Horse, and 100000. Foot.

Besides this plenty, there is enough to spare, being four ways or Loadstones
to draw Riches from foreign Nations 1. Corn, carried into Spain and Portugal.
2. Wines, transported into England, Scotland, the Low Countries, and the
Inhabitants of the Baltique Sea. Together with Salt, wherewith the whole
Kingdom, and the bordering Nations are plentifully stored. This Salt s made in
Provence, of the salt water of the Mediterranean Sea; and at Brouage in
Xaintong, where the heat of the Sun cease his virtue of making, getting, and
boiling Salt of Sea water, not daring to yield so great a favor any farther
Northward; I mean of Sea water, because further North there is Salt found also,
but made either of some special Spring water, as in Lorrain; or compound of
some Mineralls, mixed with fresh waters, as in Poland, England, Germany; or
else taken forth of some Salt Mines, as were once in Sweveland; but of this
Merchandise of Salt, something more shall be said hereafter. The 4. and last
Commodity, is Canvass, and Linen Cloth, whereof what profit arises is hardly
credible to those who have not made an inspection into it; what abundance
thereof is carried into Spain, and Portugal, and England, and Holland also, to
make Sayls for the furnishing of Shipping? There grows also Woad, Saffron,
and other Merchandise of smaller value; which, though they arise not to
aequalize the abovesaid Commodities, yet they arise to a competent sum; so
that the Emperor Maximillian used to say; That France was a continual
flourishing Meadow, which the King did mow as often as he listed. And Foreigners,
from the mouth of Maximillian the Emperor, who Charactered the several Princes
and Subjects of Europe, call him, Rex asinorum, for the continual Burdens and
Pressures he lays upon his People; so that in Normandy the Peasants wear
wooden Shoes, and neither eat nor drink, Flesh, Wine, or Beer, throughout the
year.

Having intimated before that we should not travel this Country, for that it is
so generally known; we will survey only those places that are of modern
concernment: Omitting therefore the names of some eminent places, which have
given title to the Kings of France, as Valois, Bourbon, which aspect the
History, but are far deducible, and supposed to be generally known; (here also,
to pass by the Sabique Law, which admits no female to a Scepter; under pretense
whereof our Edward the 3d. was put from his title to France, by Philip the
first King of the House of Valois) we will mention only three places, which of
all the Members and Provinces of France keep themselves yet distinct and
absolute Soveraignties, notwithstanding that the French Kings in all times
endeavored the Union of the like parcels to the Crown; witness the Duchy of
Britany, of some late Ages; and now the Principality of Aurange, the County of
Venascine, or the Papal Jurisdiction of Avignon; and lastly, the Duchy of
Nivernois, all which are totally exempt from any dependence on the Crown.

The Principality of Orange did belong to the County of Provence, as did
Avignion, being Tributaries thereto, and made 2 parts of 3; the other being for
many years in the Kings possession, by the resignation of the last Earl of
Provence, who died issue-less, and is governed by a Parliament held at Aix.
This Principality was once in the Possession of the noble family of Chaalons,
who had it in marriage with an Heir General, and obtained the absolute
Sovereignty thereof from the Earl of Province; with the Privilege of Coining,
and all other Royalties added to the Title of Prince of Orange by the Grace of
God. To this Family succeeded the House of Nassaw, by their marriage of the
Heir General likewise, about the year 1500. in which House it has ever since
continued without any disturbance, until the year 1660. In the beginning
whereof, the Cardinal Mazarine seeing the Restitution of our Government,
resolved to seize it into the French Kings hands, before any stop might be put
to his proceedings by our Kings Intervention, and accordingly by menaces to the
Count of Dhona the Governor, and other artifices (upon pretense of
misdemeanors and outrages committed by those Protestant People upon their
Catholic Neighbors, to the endangering the Peace) by a Treaty managed by
Monsieur Jure Millet, the Kings Commissioner, possessed himself of the Town,
Castle, and Principality, upon Condition to render it, with all the stores,
etc. to the Prince at his Majority, or in case of his decease to the Family of
Brandenburgh, but what the performance will be, is not determinable, though he
has not scrupled to detain the like intrusive Guardianships in lesser places,
as we have mentioned in Wittenberg and Alsatia. As to the Revenue of this
Principality, it is computed worth some 35000 Crowns a year, amounting to 10000
sterling; but the force of this Province no way available, for that it is every
way encompassed with French Provinces, and Avignion; so that in effect it is a
distinct Sovereignty but as long as that King pleases.

Concerning the County of Avignion, It is seated to the Southward of Orange,
and bordereth upon the Mediterranean, as Neighboring Marseilles, and was given
in fee to the Popes of Rome (who had a right of Possession before, and had also
had an actual Possession for some time) by Queen Joan of Naples, the rightful
Proprietor of this whole County of Province, for the defense and assistance she
had from Clement the 5th. in restating her in the Kingdom of Naples, whence she
had been expelled by Lewis King of Hungary for her murtherous hanging of his
Brother Andrew her Husband. Not long after, the same Pope removed the Papal
Chair thither, where it continued for 20 years, while Italy was grown into so
many factions, and the Romans and they so disgusted against the Pope, that Pope
Gregory found it high time to return in the year 1377. since when it has been
governed by Vice-Legates, till the year 1663. when the King of France took
possession of it, the manner whereof having been already published, 'twill be
superfluous here to repeat.

But the Difference between the Pope and the French King concerning the affront
given the Duke of Creque his Ambassador at Rome being composed and reconciled
by the agreement at Pisa, But the French King has a Governor there yet.
the said Town and County, by virtue thereof, was forthwith returned into the
Popes hands, as the French found it, and there it remains.

The Duchy of NEVERS or NEVERNOIS has beyond memory continued absolute,
though in several Families, although it be the smallest Province in France, not
to deduce the Princes or Dukes thereof from long antiquity, we will look no
longer than the last Century, when in 1563. Henrietta the Daughter of Francis
the 4th. and Sister to Francis the 5th. the last Duke hereof, being the Heir
General to this Estate, married with Lewis, second Son of Frederick Genzaga,
Duke of Mantua, who; in her right was invested in this Estate, their Son
Charles chose to succeed in Nevers, and gave Mantua to his Cosen German
Vincent, whose Line failing, it reverted to this House of Nevers, placed there
by the potent Arms of Lewis the 13th. although then busied in several other
Wars, so that both Dutchyes were now united, until of very late, Cardinal
Mazarine, to instate his Family in the Splendor of France, purchased Nevers
for his Nephew Mancini, at a very considerable rate, the Particulars whereof
are extant in that Cardinals Will, lately Englished by my self, to which the
curious Reader is referred.

In the same Sovereign condition stood Bearn, till the time of Lewis the 13th.
(an Estate governed distinctly by H. 4. their Sovereign, as united to the Crown
of Navarre some Descents before) who, with his Arms, and his Presence, reduced
them under his Obedience: and imposed a Parliament upon them of his own
Nomination, whose Residence is at Pau, leaving them notwithstanding the
exercise of their Religion, as he did all the Protestant Towns, and Cautionary
Places, viz. Rochel, Montalban, Saincterre, etc. who, since their Calvinists
Arms have been taken from them, and their Forts dismantled, enjoy their
Conscience a great deal more securely, and as priviledgely from the King, as
when they took upon them the quality of Free States, and would all have been
Sister Genevas.

We have next to consider the Revenue of this mighty Monarchy, mighty for its
Populousness and Chivalry, mighty for its large and compact Territory, as for
its Fertility, and convenience of Conveyance from Province to Province, and for
the Inland Fortresses, and of late suspectful also for their Maritime
Advancements, while other Princes slept, or regarded not that growing Mischief;
more potent also by many additions of Conquest of late years, since Fortune
has turned her balance, and rejected the Spaniard; so that the French King is
absolutely the greatest Prince in the Continent of Europe: And he aspires also
now to the Sea, by his late Projects of making Guilds and Companies for the
East India Trade, where scarce a Ship of his has been ever seen Trading. But
to return to his Revenue; In the year 1643. the Taxes and Tallages alone
amounted to five Millions Sterling. The Impost of Salt amounts yearly to two
Millions of Pounds Sterling, which is an insuportable Burden upon the poor
People, who are forced to take such quantities yearly, more than they can use,
at the Kings excessive Rates. It is true, that Henry the 4th. had once designed
to buy all the Salt Pits in Poitou and Brittany, that were in particular men's
hands, and to have fold the Salt at those Places to the Merchants, at a Price
he should set, and they to sell it over the Kingdom, as Corn is in the Market,
without any Compulsion or Impost; by which means, twenty thousand Officers
would be spared, all which are paid at the Charge of the King: and the poor
Subject should have it four times cheaper than it is now sold, and the King
also put more Money in his Pocket, with-not any trouble.

His next Revenue consists in his Customs of all Merchandises, exported and
imported, which arose in the year 1648. as by Computation was found, to the
sum of ten Millions Sterling; and his Customs do not grow less, but greater
every day: but of all this Revenue, scarce the tenth part comes and remains in
the Kings Treasury. Thus large is the Intrado or Income, and the Issue is but
little narrower. The Kings Table stands him in 500000 l. yearly, besides the
Daulphins, and the Queens Expenses of Court. The King has every day nine Suits
of Clothes appointed to be made him, but the Money designed thereto, comes into
the Lord Chamberlains Pocket, this King not affecting too frequent shift. Then
in Pensions, and yearly Interest, there is paid seven Millions more; And for
many years together, numerous Armies have been maintained, although in such
Cases the King extends his Prerogative, and takes what he pleases: Not to
mention his Sale of Offices, which amounts to very vast sums; (the Office of
the Great Master of Artillery being worth 500000 l. Sterling) nor his disposal
of Ecclesiastical Benefices, the right whereof is solely his, without the Popes
intermedling in the least; and the Clergy possess there no less than 30.
Millions Sterling of yearly Rent.

And because we have here instanced his Armies, and touched before something of
the Force of this Kingdom, we will give a summary account of those Forces he
had on foot in 1662. to bring down the Discourse to these modern times. Of
Horse, besides 12. Comets of Foreigners, he had in Pay 240. Troops, Cavaliers
of his own Nation, which in all amounted to above 30. thousand: Of Foot, he had
210. Regiments, some few of them of 30. Companies, and consisting of 90. Men in
a Company; not reckoning in the Switzers, who make 6. or 7000. besides some
Scots, Irish, Italians, and Luyckers. At Sea, he had 30. Ships of War, and 25.
Gallyes, and the number is now increased; and their Lord Great Admiral, the
Duke of Vendosme, which was before a mere Titulado, with great Profit and
Revenue, become an Officer de facto, and of great service in that Kingdom: The
Duke of Beaufort his Son, commanding the Fleet before Algier.

The King has four Guards; the first of French Gentlemen, in Place and
Attendance like our Gentlemen Pensioners, they are 200. in number, their Pay
20. Crowns a Month. The second consists of Scots, and they Gentlemen, some
attending on the Kings Person, others appointed to other Offices in the Court,
and go always armed either with the Halberd or Harquebuze; those which attend
on the Kings Person are 24. and receive yearly 400. Franks apiece, the residue
300. and a Livery. The third sort is of inferior French, and their Employment
is such as the service of the Yeomen, and the Guard in England. The fourth
consists of Switzers, and they wait at the Court Gate in warlike manner. This
King retains the Switzers, more to dis-engage them from their Respects to the
House of Austria, and that Families service, than for any other reason, though
the long Correspondence maintained with those Cantons, has abated of that
jealousy. Now notwithstanding, for the number of the Gentry, which is infinite
almost, the greatness of the Offices, goodliness of Towns, and multitudes of
Forces, and store of Ammunition, this Kingdom may seem to challenge Precedence
before any Court in Europe; yet for Majesty of the Prince, Order of the Court,
Provision of the Courtiers, and Entertainment of Strangers, it may no way
compare with that of England; and this is not mine, but a Foreigners judgment
of them Both.

As to the Government, it is Monarchical to Excess; as it was said of Caesar,
Voluntas Caesaris pro Lege habebatur, so it is as true of the French Kings,
Their Will is the Law; For though they have now nine Parliaments in the
Kingdom, and that of Pau in Bern added by Lewis the 13th. yet are they no more
such a Constitution as Ours, than Our Late High Courts of Justice, which were
Persons picked for the Usurpers purpose. The main work of these Parliaments is
to ratify the Kings Edicts, which are sent to them with a Command, that such
is Our Pleasure: Nor does this Ratification, when done, signify any thing to
the Validity of the Kings Acts, but is merely for show, and to personate that
Authority, which was in the former Parliaments, even till the time of Lewis the
13th. By which means, the King imposes upon his Subjects what he lists, and
supplies that want of Patrimony, which is mostly aliened, and is the great
Blemish of this Crown, which commands so fair and spacious a Territory, and yet
has very few Mannours or Houses of its own, except about Paris.

And for the better support of this way of Government, the Nobility are most of
them employed in Offices and Commands; the whole Kingdom being divided into 12.
Lieutenancies, as Imperious altogether as our late Major Generals, and who;
enjoying the sweets of their Arbitrary Power, help to awe the People to a
stupid Acquiescence under their Oppression: And these Governors continue
during life, and are sometime Haereditary; so that not seldom they have
disputed it with the King, and stood upon their Terms.

The Interest of this Crown is of late very perplexed, and very closely
carried; the late League with Spain seems to be zealously regarded; and many
good words are given the Emperor of Assistance and Friendship; Greater Respect
was never given, nor higher Professions of Amity ever expressed toward the
Crown of England. The Pope and He seem to be reconciled, and the Confirmation
of the Friendship between them is now in Actu, by the Popes Performance of the
Conclusion made at Pisa; for that Cardinal Chigi, the Popes Legate, for the
greater solemnity of this Affair, is on his way with the Satisfaction agreed
on: The Duke Crequy is ready to return to Rome, where the Pyramid is erected,
in memory of the Fact of the Corsi; and Don Mario, the Popes Nephew, upon his
departure: But when all this is done, no man conceives the Christian World more
assured, or freed from those jealousies, which it has long conceived of the
Potency of this King.

He has lately made a motion in Germany about Colmar and Slecksladt, and it is
suspected, they are the light Trepidations of some greater Rupture thereabouts;
for that the French have long aimed upon the Imperial Dignity, is obvious to
every eye, and this Prince is supposed to be more ambitiously bent upon that
design, than any of his Predecessors. He has to the purpose baffled and
terrified the Pope, the Emperors left hand, and scared him before hand; and
for his right hand, the King of Spain, besides the Peace between them, he will
not be remiss in fomenting the War with Portugal. The Princes of the Empire
therefore give him fair words, and will oblige him, by performing his Demands
about those Towns. He is sure of the Duke of Savoy, so long as he enterpriseth
not upon Italy, for then he would become a Morsel between his Grinders. As to
the Princes of Italy, they do not care to see him there, but love him well
enough in France. We neither suspect nor dread this Riddle of Fate, nor shall
want a Sword to solve it, if with the Dutch, and any body else, he could make a
threefold Cord of it; and so we leave him to the Revolution of Time. His
Kingdom of Navarre lying in Spain, we shall mention it there.

SPAIN.
SPAIN is defended toward France, on the North, with Confines strengthened
both by Nature and Art, viz. by the Natural Height of the Pyrenean Mountains,
which separate the one Country from the other; and by the Artificial Forts of
Scialon, Parpignian, and Pampalone, the Metropolis of Navarre: on all other
sides it is encompassed with the Atlantic Ocean, and the Mediterranean Sea.
Its Empire is divided into four Parts or Members, but we shall mention one only
here, viz. 1. The Kingdoms of Spain. 2. The States of Italy, Sicily, etc. And
3. Flanders. And 4. The Dominions of India. Spain is by the Spaniards, for the
greater grace, divided into 15. Kingdoms, namely, Castile, Aragon, Murcia,
Granada, Gallicia, Guypuscoa, Biscay, Oviedo, Leon, Corduba, Toledo, Navarre,
Catalonia, Majorca, Valentia, and lastly Portugal: but it being wrested from
the Spanish Dominions, as it was formerly, and now is a distinct Soverainty, we
will treat of the other 14. together, and of that by it self.

The Country it self is very barren, if we consider each part thereof by it
self alone, but all being reduced together, it abounds, and is suffiently
stored with all Necessaries, and is particularly furnished with Minerals. It is
not very Populous, both by reason the Spanish Man is not apt for Generation,
being more hot than virile in his Lust; and the Women are Mothers so young and
early, that Nature is decayed in them before the half of their Teeming. And 2.
Because such vast numbers have been drawn thence continually, to serve in the
Wars, and to reinforce Garrisons; as also, for that many of his Subjects do
exercise Navigation, especially in great numbers to the Indies; which is
peopled, what it is, with Spaniards only, and the Natives, for they will not
trust other people on shore, they are so jealous of their wealth; nevertheless,
the Country is by this means rid of all slothful home-livers.

Most of those Kingdoms above mentioned were conquered and won from the Moors,
and the Achievement made by Ferdinand and Isabel, Kings of Castile and Aragon;
which two Kingdoms, with Leon, became united by their Marriage at this same
time: And for Navarre, it was seized by the Policy and Valor of this
Ferdinand, as we shall speak more at large of it, because it is the Title of
the French King, and the House of Bourbon.

NAVARRE is bounded on the East with the Principality of Bearn, (in the Kingdom
of France) and acknowledging the same Sovereignty; on the West with the River
Iberus, which divides it from Castile; on the North by the Cantabrian
Mountains, which part it from Guypuscoa; and on the South with Aragon. It
takes up some parts of both sides the Pyrences, but the sixth part of it lies
on the French side, and is very steril, it is called the Base or Low Navarre,
which Lewis the 13th. united with Bearn, to the French Crown; the other being
called the High Navarre, lies on the Spanish side, and is fertile, and adorned
with Trees.

In the Reign of John of Albret, who had married Catherine, Sister and Heir of
Francis, the last of the House of Foix, Kings of Navarre, Ferdinand, the most
Catholic King, who had Conquered the Kingdom of Granada from the Moors, and
united the two Potent Kingdoms of Castile and Aragon, to which all the other,
but this, and Portugal, were one way or other incorporated; resolved to add
this also, and to complete the Monarchy of Spain. Hereupon, in the year 1512.
pretending a final and utter Extirpation of the Moors, he raised an Army, and
of a sudden marched toward Navarre, demanding of them passage for his Army
into France; Lewis the 12th. the King whereof, with all his Subjects, were then
under Excommunication, the Executioner of which Ferdinand undertook to be, as
his Successors have done ever since; which being waved by K ng John, and his
Queen, he immediately en red the Country, and without the striking of a blow,
reduced it; the French King being backward to the relief of it then, but
afterward endeavoring with all his Power to recover it, when it was too late,
being fortified and secured by the Conqueror. Not long after, in 1556. by Joan
the Daughter and Heir of Henry of Albret, this Title, with the sixth part
mentioned before, came to Anthony of Bourbon, Duke of Vendosme, Father of Henry
the 4th. of France; but the design of regaining this his paternal Inheritance,
(by reason of his tedious War for the French Crown) was to him also unfeasible;
but had he survived that fatal stroke, given him by Ravilliac, no doubt he
would have bid fair for this his just Right; to which his Successors have such
an appetite, (as Patrimony is a great Magnetic) that in all Treaties with
Spain since, they insert a salvo jure, a saving of their Claim, Right and Title
to Navarre, to be lawful for them to prosecute in an ordinary Course of
Justice; but that Justice has no Courts, nor have Princes Patience or Hope in
the Brawles of Lawyers, or those Decrees which cannot give Seizin and Delivery.
A lucky opportunity for a re-surprize, is only worthy of their expectation.

The other Kingdoms taking up too much room and time in their Limitation and
Description, we will mention and comprize together, giving the Reader to
understand, that Castile and Aragon are the most noble, as who have made all
those Acquisitions of the Spanish Greatness; and their distinct Titles were
these; to Arragon belonged Sicily, Sardinia, Majorca, Valentia, Catalonia,
Navarre, and Naples: To Castile belonged Leon; Gallicia, Toledo, Murcia,
Biscay, Granada, and America, because Queen Isabel furnished Columbus. Nor was
Navarre, when under its former Princes, far behind them in such Achievements
on the French side. Note we also, that the County of Rossilluon, formerly a
Member of the Kingdom of Majorca, is by the late general Treaty, together with
the Viguery of Conflans, and part of the County of Cerdana, as is situate in
the Pyrenean Mountains toward France, and not belonging to Catalonia, assigned
by the Spaniard to the French for ever, to whom it was long since pawned for
300000. Crowns, but remitted by Charles the 8th. of France, to Ferdinand the
Catholic, upon condition he should not hinder him in the Conquest of Naples.
By the same Treaty the French surrendered all his Garrisons and Places he had
taken in Catalonia, excepting such as should be found to belong to the County
of Cerdana aforesaid.

These 14. Kingdoms are governed by the same Court, or Imperial Laws,
intermixed with some Customs of the Goths, and some additional Constitutions
of their Kings, and the Government conserved by Justice, impartially here
executed, and the Inquisition in Ecclesiastical Affairs; so that there is never
like to be a War upon pretense of Reformation in this Kingdom. To give the
People their due, (whether it is, that that Inquisition has awed them to it)
they are very devout and zealous, and most Loyal to their Prince, whom they
will spare no blood nor treasure to aggrandize, and of whom they never speak
without great reverence and honor, and in his service, no men can possibly be
more patient, or endure more misery and hardness, than will they, even to the
utmost and worst of Extremity; and as faithful and true they are to him, there
having been few Traitors of all his Subjects, nor any Command or Trust betrayed
by any of them. Generally of themselves, they are very grave and serious in all
their Actions, and yet notwithstanding so addicted to Pride, that they think
all the World pitiful Fellows and Fools, in comparison of themselves. In sum,
they have effected great and noble things, viz. their Conquest over the Moors,
and the New World, together with Philip the Second's Conquest or Possession of
Portugal: and they have failed of as great, viz. their Design upon England in
88. and in their Grand Project of an Universal Empire, which has almost broke
the Heart of this Monarchy.

The Government is Absolute and Royal, Matters of several qualities are handled
in several Councils, and they are seven in number; which, that the King may be
the better informed of all Affairs, they keep always near about his Person, in
several Chambers under one Roof; their Names are these, The Council of Spain.
2. Of the Indies. 3. Of Italy. 4. Of the Low Countries. 5. of War. 6. Of the
Order of St. John. And 7. Of the Inquisition. In these the slow and considerate
Advisoes of Fabim, rather than the praecipitant Resolutions of Marcellus, are
received. In as much as may be, Innovations and change of ancient Customs are
avoided, by which constancy, and their wariness in their Actions, they do
seldom commit any oversight, or fall into any disorder or rupture at home. By
this way of Council, the King rangeth under his Obedience Castilians, Arragons,
Biscayners, Flemings, Italians, Indians, Christians, and Gentiles; People
utterly different in Laws, Customs, and Natures, as if they were all of one
Nation, and all his natural Subjects.

The ill Correspondency that is always amongst those Counselors, who
aemulate one another greatness, is the Cause of long Deliberations and
Slackness in Matters of greatest Importance; but all Matters once resolved on
in Council, pass indifferently, with incredible and surpassing secrecy, as well
those of mean, as those of the weightiest Consideration. Secrecy of all
securing every particular, and being indeed the true scope of all Matters of
State; for Designs as soon as they have taken air are blasted therewith.

In this point, Philip the 2d. of Spain, the ablest Prince of his time, was
very tenacious, doing many things with his own hand, which never came near his
Secretaries, but were transmitted by himself uncopied (but what he took
likewise himself) to his Expresses and Dispatches. In his last Advice to his
Son there are these words; Do not offend or anger the Secretaries, deliver them
always work of small or great importance, and make proof of them rather by
your Enemies than your Friends, lock your chief secrets in your own breast. In
this Prince failed that high-flown Ambition, which had tormented his Father
Charles and Himself, during the whole course of their Reign, namely, the
Conceit of an Universal Monarchy; nor did it dye with him, for having all his
life studied nothing more than the ruin of France by the League, and his own
Arms, he commended the pursuit of the Design to his Son; having also a little
before his death resolved on another Expedition for England, having procured a
more exact account of its Havens, the Roman Catholics, etc. but his Successor
Philip the 3d. (for his Son Charles was murdered in the Inquisition (as
suspected to favor the Protestants) by his own consent) seeing how the
Treasure was wasted, and his Fathers Credit engaged for diverse vaste Sums of
Money, not fully paid to this day, but running on Interest, and discharged by
degrees, resolved to steer another Course, and first made Peace with England,
and then a Truce with the Dutch for 12. Years; and, as the greatest Act of his
Reign, utterly expelled the Moors, 1100000. being driven out after their former
Expulsion by Ferdinand, who, lest the Country should be dispeopled, suffered
such as would turn Christians to stay, but now the Inquisition discovered them
all for Hypocrites, and entitled the King to a brave Patrimony. This same
Philip the 3d. was a great Stickler for the House of Austria, in the German
War, newly begun with the Elector Palatine, at which time in 1621. he died, and
his Son Philip the 4th. succeeded, with whom was that fruitless Treaty of the
Marriage of the Infanta, and the Restitution of the Palatinate.

This Prince has been embroyled in the Dutch and French War all along against
his Inclination, which is otherwise disposed, for he loves quiet and pleasure,
and vacancy from those troubles of Empire which afflict ambitious People; and
it is hoped therefore he will hearken, now in his old age, to a Composure with
Portugal, from which he has reaped more loss and dishonor, than the Kingdom
can be worth to him. Besides, there are some Reasons of State, why the Army of
Spain should be disbanded, and no Forces more than usual kept on Foot, lest the
General make some disturbance in the Succession, who has the Clergy and the
Soldiery on his side. However, at present nothing is more eagerly carried on,
than the Preparations for this Campagnia; but what the issue will be, either
Peace or Victory, time will decide.

As to the Forces of this Kingdom, the same may be said of them as of the Bees;
Quae Regio in terris nostri non plena laboris: There is no Nation in Europe,
but the remote Northern Kingdoms, that have not felt the Puissance thereof;
and it is well known, that in all ages, the Spanish have been accounted one of
the most Valorous Nations in the World. The French in nine Years were subdued
to the Roman Yoke, the Spaniards held out 200. and then too, the Fortune and
Person of Augustus Caesar, the Universal Conqueror, was requisite to their
Subjugation. They serve better on Foot than on Horseback, although they have
Horses of excellent Courage, and better with the Harquebuze, than with any
other Weapon. As concerning their Cavalry, it cannot be gainsaid, but that the
Spanish Gennet is the noblest Horse in Christendom, far excelling the Courser
of Naples, or the Horse of Burgundy, so much esteemed of the French; or the
Friesland Horse, in so great request with the Germans. And it should seem, that
Nature her self has armed this People, in giving them the Iron Mines of
Biskay, Guypuscoa, and Medina, with the Temperatures of Bilbo, Toledo, etc. To
conclude, as to the number of the Forces aforesaid, this Prince is of that
Mightiness and Reputation to this day, that, besides his own Subjects, he is
able to wage what numbers of Horsemen and Footmen of the Germans, Italian, and
Dutch Nations it pleases him; besides, his Noblemen are bound to bring so many
Horse into the Field, etc. And he that remembers how the War was carried on in
Catalonia, Portugal, Italy, and the Low Countries together, cannot but resolve,
that his Puissance is most considerable. At all times his Majesty is likewise
constrained to maintain a strong Armada in these Seas, to safeguard the
Navigation to the Indies; besides 24. Galleys to guard the Coast from the
Turks, the Charge whereof is a Million of Crowns. There are besides 8000.
praesidiary Soldiers, and no more, in the Frontier, and Coast Towns of Spain,
the Charge whereof I saw not computed.

As to the Revenue of this Potentate, the ordinary Income thereof amounts to
six Millions of Gold, or 11. Millions of Crowns yearly, whereof much is engaged
for the Debts of the Crown, the rest is spent in Charges of the Wars, the
maintenance of the Kings Household, and in the Galleys furnished against the
Barbary Pirates. To this may be added, as another ordinary Revenue, the two
Millions of Crowns which he receives yearly of the Clergy, together with the
Commendams of vacant Praesentations, and the praeferring to Benefices. The
whole Revenues of the Clergy are valued at six Millions of Gold yearly Rent,
there being 34. Cathedral Churches, all richly endowed, some whereof having 50.
some a 100. and some 200. Millions of yearly Revenue, and in particular, the
Metropolitan Archbishop of Toledo has more than 300. Millions: Neither do the
Kings of Spain care to parcel these Churches to a greater number, although
overgrown with their plenty, for then they should with more difficulty make
use of the Revenues and Notes thereof, when occasion required, which is very
often, upon any disastrous Event. As he likewise lays extraordinary Taxes upon
the Laity in the like Occurrence, for in the Kingdom of Castile alone, Philip
the 2d. had nigh 8. Millions of Gold in one year; reckonning hereto also the
Profits which his Orders of Knighthood yield him, viz. 200. Millions of Crowns;
so that here is Revenue more than enough, were it not for the Canker of
Interest at the Bank of Genoa, nor are the Merchants of Antwerp without their
share in the partition thereof; and now the Amsterdammers also.

This Princes Coin notwithstanding is the best in Europe, since all their
Neighbors make a gain of them, as a Piece of Reals, or 8. Six-Pences in our
Money, goes in France for 4 s. 6 6. a Doublin in Gold, that which is a
Pistolet with them, being 13. Shillings, is in France, and other Places, 29.
Reals, which is 14 s. 6 d. of our Money. Most of the Coin that passes for
Wine, Bread, Fruit, etc. is of Brass, which they call Quartas, and Quartillas;
of their Maravedies, 20. make threepence; but sometime the King enhanceth the
Price of this Brass Money of a sudden, and with a great deal of profit to
himself, brings a great loss upon Trade. All their Meat, Fruit and Bread, are
sold by the Pound, and not except before an Officer, which they call Alcalda,
so that no Stranger can be deceived in price or weight.

As to the Interest of these Princes, it has been evidently seen what it has
been; but since the French mated them under Francis the First, and held them to
it, till Lewis the 14th. was too powerful for them; since the Dutch baffled
them, and We triumphed over them, they have been put to defend their own,
instead of overrunning others. Their Designs are now to secure their Estates,
and to draw from them that Revenue into their Coffers, which was squandred away
in the War, without any account; and yet to be as gentle a Sovereign as
possible. For all the late League, the Spaniard nor French will ever join
Interests, or agree together, more than they do in their Humors or Fashions.
In fine, they really hate one another, but more revengefully the Spaniard frets
at the French, as he that first put a stop to his Career of Ambition; and
therefore there is nothing but Jealousy and Suspicion between them, however
smoothed and oyled over with Court Artifices, alike understood for such on both
sides; nor have their late frequent Consanguinities and Marriages any
influences to draw them nearer to any amicable understanding.

With the Dutch he firmly keeps a good Correspondence, as his very good
Friends, since Fate would needs have it so, and uses them very respectfully,
as his good Neighbors, and as security to his Estates in Flanders; for the
Dutch, as was said, do not love the Frenchmens vicinity. For the King of
England, he cherishes a more than usual respect, testified by those public
Honors done his Ambassador Sr. Richard Fanshaw in that Kingdom, and inviolably
observes the Peace betwixt us. With the Duke of Savoy he is newly reconciled,
and certainly that Duke (who has the Citadel of Verceil restored him by this
King, by virtue of the late Treaty) has no great Antipathy against Him, for he
has suffered twice more from the French, than from the Spaniard, who is as
well able to Defend Him, as he is conveniently scited to Offend him upon every
displeasure. The Duke of Parma is allied to him, and so sure to his Interest.
The Florentine is stiff, but is aequal between the French and Him. The Mantuan
will be Neutral; and the Pope his secret Friend. The Prince of Modena will
hardly engage any more against Him, for in a manner he is the Umpire of all
Quarrels between those Princes. He is Patron also to the Commonwealth of
Luca. And for the States of Venice, ever since the Duchy of Millain came to
the possession of this Crown, they have set them down with great quietness,
rather looking to the strengthening of their own, than attempting his; and good
reason too, for our Ancestors have seen the Spanish, favoring the Venetians,
(when their Estate was dangerously hazarded by the Turk) cheerfully to have
entered into the Actions of Cephalonia and Lepanto, when nevertheless at the
same instant they had at their own Doors Algier, Tunis, and other African
Ports, their dangerous Enemies. The State of Genoa must favor the King of
Spain, and stand by him, for he is their Protector, and owes them vast sums,
which by any partiality of their side will be wholly lost. With all the
Catholic Princes of Germany he is in perfect Correspondence, and how great a
relation and necessity of mutual adhaerence there is between the Emperor and
Him, no man is ignorant, confirmed now, and more intimately contracted by the
late Marriage of the Infanta. With the King of Fez and Morocco his Catholic
Majesty is in League, but it is of no use or availment to him. Of the Religion
of Malta the King takes a particular protection, as that in like sort depends
wholly upon his pleasure, and does readily execute his Royal Commandments,
serving him often in keeping the Coasts of Spain, and the Kingdoms of Naples
and Sicily from Incursions of Pirates, and that without one penny cost or
charges to the King.

As to the Turk, he maintains no intercourse, nor uses any Trade with him, and
yet he has neither Peace nor War with him; Peace he pretends he ought not to
have, and the other he cares not for; and the Turk is as unwilling to quarrel
as he, remembering what he suffered from him at Lepanto: So that pivate Damages
are privately made good, and the Algier men do take upon themselves the
Rupture, if any louder Mischief happen, of which the Spaniard will not
complain. It is thought that this King is Superior to the Turk in Naval
Furniture and Provision, and the Courage and Ability of Seamen, for his
Biskayners and Catalonians are hardly to be paralleled for enduring of Winter
weather and Tempests: and the Turk is always moared at home from October to
March; besides the convenience of his Coast for building of Ships and Galleys,
of which he has a 100. in readiness: and the Turk has but two Places all
along his African Coast, viz. Algier and Tunis, where he can build a Vessel.

Upon this account it was, that Philip the 2d. was advised to seize upon the
Morea and Greece, those People being willing to embrace a Christian Defender
against that unsupportable slavery which they suffer from the Turk; but he
considering his Fathers ill success in Africa, (though ascribable more to
Tempest, than to any other Cause) would never cast his eye upon that
Enterprise, being bent upon far worse, to the disturbance of Christendom; so
that it appears, he is the only Prince, that is able to give him a Potent
Diversion, were not his Fleets otherwise employed.

But withal, this King at present is so exhausted, that he is not in a
Capacity to undertake such an Expedition, without the assistance of other
Christian Princes, which the Venetians have a long while in vain implored, and
he cannot hope to expect it till the danger is more eminent, and then he will
find ways to defend himself: This may be certainly concluded on, he will do
what in him lies, to keep the Turk from swallowing the Haereditary Countries
of the Emperor, in which he has an Expectation and Reversion, and will spare
him such Supplies, however he pincheth for it, as shall testify his Zeal,
Affection and Care for the Imperial Family: And so having finished this survey
of Spain, we will next take a short view of Portugal.

PORTUGAL.
INto this Kingdom of Portugal are reckoned, as in Spain, two other Kingdoms,
so teeming are these little Soveraignties of other Principalities, namely, the
Kingdom of Algarve, and that of the Isles of the Azores, or the Terceras.
Portugal is bounded on the North with two Rivers, which part it from Gallicia;
on the South with Algarve, on the West with the Atlantique Ocean; and on the
East with the new and old Castile. Extended on the Sea Coast from North to
South, reckoning in the Kingdom of Algarve, 400. Miles; in breadth not
exceeding a 100. and in some places not 80. and 60. The Country is very
destitute and unprovided of Corn, but that supplied by Wine, Oil, Figgs, and
other Fruits; as for Cattle, they have no store, nor have they much use of
them, as in Spain, the People being naturally hot and dry, and delighting in
Fruits and Sallads, as cooling and satisfying also.

This Kingdom is now governed by Alphonso the 6th: (who has a Brother, a very
hopeful Gentleman, named Don Pedro) of the House of Braganza, whose Claim
against Philip the 2d. (descended of Mary, fifth Daughter of Emanuel King of
Portugal, but immediate surviving Heir to Henry her Brother, (third Son of
Emanuel) Cardinal and King of Portugal) was judged lost when the Crown came
into his Fathers Possession, for that his Ancestor had married Katherine, the
Daughter of Prince Edward, fourth Son of Emanuel, who dyed indeed before his
Brother the Cardinal King Henry. It is true, the Prince of Parma had married
Mary her elder Sister, but against that the Civilians alleged, that the Crown,
by a peculiar Law of that Kingdom, passed in such Cases to such Heirs as were
Natives of the Realm: However the Title was, the People were resolved the House
of Braganza should have the Crown, which was wonderfully accomplished in 1640.
and of which we will discourse no further.

This Crown has had wonderful Successes, both in the East and West Indies,
where they have wrested Brasile from the Hollanders; and at Home also; for
though they be but a handful of People, yet by immuring themselves in such
strong Places, as they took by Shipping and Naval Sieges from the Indians; and
venturing in all weathers to relieve one another, to the disappointment of
their Enemies, who thought by Sieges at Land to recover the Places they had
lost by the opportunity of such tempestuous seasons, they have fixed themselves
so in those Indies, that they command a great part thereof, and the best also,
till by our Assistance, some forty Years ago, the Persian recovered Ormus, the
notedst Place of Trade then in the East; and in defense whereof, they defeated
two Navies of the Turks, who has his City and Port of Aden in the same Sea;
but now the Turk and they have done, and the Persian is in their room.

At Home he is engaged against the Spaniard, but the War has proved so
fortunate to him, that he has rather got than lost by it; however, it is hoped
it will be composed by a Peace, although there are several Interests which do
withold it all they can. The French deserted them by the late general Treaty,
but it is conceived they would stick as close to them now. The Dutch do no way
care that the Portugalls should have Peace at home, for their fingers itch at
Brasile, and they have been long quarrelling about it for Damages, but they are
in fear of Seconds; besides that, they are now in prosecution of a War in the
East Indies, where also they have had some Successes. It concerns Us, that the
King of Portugal, our chief Ally, should be advanced to a Condition of
Prosperity and Grandeur, and no ways will be omitted conducing thereunto. With
other Princes and States this Kingdom has not to do, save with the Pope, who
has at last promised the Confirmation of all Ecclesiastical Preferments, and
the Bishops other Clergy in that Kingdom: Unless with some of the African
Potentates, which Affair is devolved upon our Shoulders, by our Possession of
Tangier, as we are likewise of some Places in the Kingdom of Goa, in the
East Indies. By all which it may be guessed, what a great loss happened to the
King of Spain, when this Kingdom, and all its Dominions, at the same day
revolted from him.

The Force of this Kingdom is not very great, the Commanders finding much ado
to bring 20000. Effectif Men into the Field against the Spaniard, nor are those
well provided or harnessed; but such has been their resolution and animosity
against their old Enemy the Castilians, that they have generally carried away
the Victory; and what Wings We have added to Her, Fame has already told the
World. As the Force but the Fortune of this Kingdom is little considerable, so
is the Revenue, saving that the Patrimony of this Prince is of great value, and
yearly Intrado, for, as Duke of Braganza, he possesses more than one third of
the Kingdom, and there is a little belonging to the Crown. The rest of his
Revenues come by his Customs, with this he maintains several Storehouses all
along the Country, a days march commonly from one another, for the subsistence
of the marching Army, and the relief of the sick or traveling Soldiers with
Passes; as he does Ships of War for security of his Trade, that of Sugar
bringing him in exceeding great Profit.

As to the Turk, he has no leisure to look toward him, nor is he accommodated
with Ships or Naval Apparel to engage him, His Navy consisting chiefly of great
and slow Gallions, built for Burden, and Defense, and against swelling Seas,
and for other Coasts, and the great deep Ocean, so that they would soon perish
in the windings of the Mediterranean; and therefore we cannot consider him as
any Help against the Common Enemy, but must look upon his Quarrel as fatal to
the Christian Cause; and therefore we should pray, that it would please God,
maugre all Opposition, speedily to reconcile it: And so we pass through the
Alps to the States of Italy.

GENEVA.
GENEVA is an Imperial City in Savoy, situated at the South end of the Lake
Lemannus, upon the brink of the said Lake. It is in circuit about 2. English
Miles, very strong both by Nature and Art, as well for that it is seated on a
Hill, which on the West is not easily accessible, as also for that it is
exceedingly well fortified with Ravelings, Bulwarks, and Platforms, besides a
deep Ditch, the East and West parts thereof standing continually full of water,
the South part remains dry continually, and is well defended with Casemates,
the better to scour the Curtayn. The Town is so much the stronger, for that it
tandeth almost in an Island, having the Lake aforesaid on the North, the River
Rhosne upon the West, and the River of Arba upon the South, being from the Town
half a mile, and by reason of the swiftness of the Current, and great moveable
Stones in the bottom, which are violently carried down, the River is not
passable, but with great danger.

The River Rhosne divides the Town into 2. parts, the one is called the High
Town, and the other St. Gervais. It is well peopled, some 20000. of all sorts.
Their Territories are small, being no way above 2. Leagues and a half, yet by
reason the soil is fruitful, being well manured, it brings Grain of all
sorts, and good store of Wine. There are likewise many pasture and feeding
Grounds, by means whereof the Inhabitants are well provided of all sorts of
good Flesh, at a reasonable rate; no want of good Butter and Cheese; and of
wild-Foul, as Partridge, Quayl, Mallard, etc. There are also excellent Fruits,
the rarest Pear-mains in the World; and the River, and the Lake, afford all
manner of fresh Fish, as Carp, Tench, Roach, etc. But above all, the biggest
Carps in Europe. Besides, they are served out of the Duke of Savoy's Country,
and the Canton of Bearn, by the Peasants of each, for that ready Money cannot
be had elsewhere. It stands also convenient for, and does exercise
Merchandise, being the ordinary transport of Commodities out of Germany to
Lions, and so into France, and back again; by which means the Inhabitants are
grown very rich: As also, for that the Savoyards, and the said People of Bearn,
do resort hither to buy their Armor, Apparel, and other Necessaries, the
Citizens being for the most part Mechanics, and making excellent Muskets,
Carbines, etc. As also Satin, Velvet, and Taffaty, though not so good as that
of Italy. The Merchants that are here, are generally rich, and of great Estates.

The Revenue of this Town is some 100000. Crowns, which arises out of the
Gabels of Merchandise, Flesh, their Demayn, and Tithes, which is conserved in
the common Treasury, and issued out thence to public uses. The Duke of Savoy
pretends a Title to this Town, as governed before the Reformation by a
Catholic Bishop, who being Lord thereof, as his temporal Estate, did homage
for it to the said Duke; that the Money the Bishop coined bore his Inscription;
that the Dukes of Savoy had always an Office there, without acquaintance of
which no sentence of Law could be executed; that the power of pardoning
Offenders remained in the said Dukes. But the Genevois turn a deaf Ear to those
Pretensions, but do therefore bear him a perpetual grudge, and hate him worse
than all their Neighbors; nor do they much fear him, for neither the French,
nor Spaniard, nor any of the Princes of Italy, will suffer him, or he, or they
suffer one another, to possess themselves of this strong, commodious, and most
convenient Fortress. Insomuch, that when any Design has been formed against
them, they have had timely notice thereof, besides Money to provide themselves
with necessaries; but such is the careful Government of the place, that there
is always 6. Months Provision in the Storehouses, and of Men and Munition they
have enough within the Town; no less than 20. Guns being mounted on their
Bulwarks, besides what they have in their Arsenal, wherein are 10. or 12.
Canons and Culverins, with some lesser Ordnance, with Powder, Match, and Ball
proportionable to 4000. Muskets, lodged in the same Arsenal; they can also
raise and maintain 2000. Men.

The Town is governed by a Council of 200. called the Great Council, out of
which is chosen another Council, composed of five and twenty, and out of these
4. especial Men, whom, by a Greek term, they call Syndiques, that is,
Co-Judges, who have the managing of the whole Commonwealth, unless it be in
some great matters, wherein the whole State is concerned, as in making of Peace
or War, Leagues offensive and defensive, etc. and then the whole Council is
assembled. They are governed by the Civil Law, as generally the Germans are,
the Judge whereof is called a Lieutenant Criminal, before whom all Causes are
tried, and from whom lies no appeal, but to the Council of two hundred. They
allow no refuge to any Offenders of other Countries, but punish them as they
should have been in the place where the Crime was committed.

I have been the more prolix in describing the Military and Secular Government,
with the site and strength of the Place, because this is the Palladium and
Original of Presbytery, of whose Discipline, and its share or influence in the
Administration of this Commonwealth, I purpose to speak more largely in the
Conclusion, and will now take in some other Observations.

It is for certain, the Receptacle of diverse English Transports, who will, or
now can comply with the Geneva, though not with the London Presbytery, forsooth
it is here in purity, and has not contracted the Pride and Covetousness of our
Rabbis. But among the rest, here is that Illustrious Nothing, or at least here
he was not long since, who was knaved into, and was fooled out of, his
ridiculous Usurpation in England, I mean Richard Cromwell, the eldest Son of
the late Oliver; the Town he guessed could not but be civil to him, for the
great Expense his Fathers 3. Commissioners, Mr. Pel. etc. made here about the
Composition of the Piedmont Troubles, and out of respect to the Moneys which
was deposited in their hands. How he lived here is not discoverable, for
privacy has enveloped the fond Glories of this short reigned Usurper, and
obscurity is the best foyl to this once glittering Pibble; but enough of this
example to ambitious wretches.

And here out of hand is to be formed, as it was most ingenuously and aptly
represented, a huge Army, in aid and assistance of the Turk, who will
publicly profess the Religion hereof, as agreeing best with that Tyrannical
Government. But to proceed.

This Religion was introduced by Calvin, 1541. the sum whereof was this, viz.
All Ministers to be equally great amongst themselves. 2. Laymen out of the
People to be joined unto every Minister, and these were called Elders; the
Ministers to continue for term of Life in this power, but the Elders to be
chosen every year, which was very grateful to the Burgers, who hoped each of
them to come to the Administration of the Ecclesiastical Authority; these,
together with other Parish Elders, being met together, to be called the
Presbytery, and to have power of Ordination, Excommunication, and Absolution,
and whatever else was done by their Bishop in times before, whom he made the
Genevois utterly to abjure, and to receve this Platform as sent from Heaven.
But -- Nevertheless the People did not long like it; but Calvin, by his
Authority, and the awe of the Canton of Zurich, kept it rigidly up, during his
life time; after which, the succeeding Ministers allowed the People the use of
all manlike Exercises in the Morning, and intervalls of Divine Service, which
something mitigated the Humor, and, like the Roman Sports, took them off from
quarrelling with their Ministers.

What they are like to do against the Turk, the Passage abovementioned
declares; 'twas Luther that gave admittance, I mean his Reformation, to the
Turk to invade Christendom; that is to say, he took advantage of those
Divisions that reigned then; and it may be now said, that the troubles in the
Roman temporal Estate, have engaged him, which the Romanists lay all upon the
Heretic, so that it comes to this Door at last, or they will leave it there.
In fine, They are able to do nothing, and are the only Snayls in Europe. They
are confederate with the Canton of Bearn, but it is for their security.

Switzerland.
IN our passage from Geneva to the Switzers, lies a Country called Wallisland,
governed by a Catholic Bishop, and leagued with the 7. Catholic Cantons: They
are divided into 7. Resorts, and 2. Districts or Provinces; the lower, and the
upper; they lie included betwixt Mountains, out of which they seldom issue, and
therefore we bid adieu to them, and make way to their Neighbors.

SWITZERLAND is bounded on the West with Mount Jour, and Lake Leman; on the
North with Swevia in Germany; on the South with Wallisland, and the Alps; and
on the East with the Grisons, and part of Tirol in Germany. It is reported to
stand upon the highest ground in Christendom, yet has it plenty of Rivers,
which it dispenses in the greatest Channels through the mightiest Provinces of
Europe. It has many Lakes, and abundance of fresh, and excellent good Fish, by
which Lakes and Rivers there is good passage and conveyance; there are also
Medows, as pleasant, and as eminent for their fertility, as their Mountains are
prominent, rough and sterile. The whole Country contains in length 240. Miles,
and in breadth 180. The People rude and Military, as all Mountainers use to be.

They were once under the Government of the House of Austria, as Earls of
Halspurg, the Castle whereof is standing in this Country, which gave Original
and Title to that Family, but rising for their Liberty, provoked by the Rape of
one of their Daughters, they, by 2. terrible Defeats given the Austrians, shook
off their Yoke; and immediately 3. Cantons combined in a League, with which,
after some Ages or Years, all the 13. entered, and in which they now continue.
The first thing they did in the beginning of this Confederacy, was to root out
all the Gentry, and not leave a remain of them, as those that were the
Instruments of their slavery under the Austrians: So that no man there pretends
to be gentilely descended, for thereby he is made incapable of any Office in
the Commonwealth; yet there are some noble Spirits, that prefer their blood to
such slovenly Magistracies, where the Butcher, and the Shoe maker takes his
turn in the Government, and is in his Town the supreme Ruler, and to this
module they yet keep.

Their Exemption of themselves in this manner from the House of Austria, made
them notable in the World, which they were not since Julius Caesar; but their
defeat and slaughter of Charles Duke of Burgundy, and their renew for the Duke
of Millain against the French, made them terrible and famous; until finding
their own strength, they began to play fast and loose with their Confederates,
and to become open Mercenaries, losing Millain, which they had preserved, and
serving the French and Spanish King, the Venetian, and others, at the same
time, under certain secret Pensions, which the chief Counselors do receive at
this day; so that all the Honor that is left them (which they might have
blazoned by many Conquests upon their Neighbors) is borrowed from their
attendance as Guards to the Person of the French King; and Sedan-men, or some
such Office about the Pope. Nevertheless, it is to be confessed, that they are
very good Infantry, and will stand a shock firm, and in good order, which is a
main security to the French Foot, that can hardly endure an easy impression.

Their Government at home is divided into 3. Members: 1. The 13. Cantons, being
7. Roman, and 6. Protestant. 2. The States and Cities confederate, as the Abbot
of St. Gall, Multiuse, a free City, etc. And lastly, The Praefectures, or
several Lordships and Towns, which they possess in the Alps, in the Duchy of
Millain, etc. which are a distinct part of the Commonwealth, but are subject
to the Cantons, and obey their Decrees (without any Vote in their Councils) as
Subjects; and of these Towns and Lordships they have some number, which yields
the best of their Revenue. The Regiment or Magistracy is altogether Popular,
and consists in a Great Council, summoned upon any great and emergent Occasion;
and yet the particular Cities, and Resorts, or Hundreds, in number 148. are
governed by one Officer. So has every Canton a supreme Mastistrate, called the
Ungman, or single Person, who is assisted with a Council in Cases of
Importance. The Diets are held commonly at Baden, for the beauty and
commodiousness of the Place, where all things concerning Peace and War,
Embassies, Leagues, and the like, are always determined.

Their Revenue is very inconsiderable, for having no Commerce with Strangers,
they have no Customs, nor have they any Manufactures. Cutlery is a great
Trade. What they raise is by Impost upon Wine, and those Taxes laid upon their
Prefectures, whom yet they use very tenderly; besides, the yearly Pensions they
receive from the Crowns of France and Spain, are brought into the public
Treasury, save what comes privately into the hands of the Grandees, and those
that manage the State, one of the greatest blemishes and prejudices to their
State; but as it is no shame to be mercenary in the Field, so it is no blame to
be a Mercenary in Council.

As to their Force, it far excceds their Revenue, for upon occasion, they can
bring 30. thousand Foot into the Field, besides what the confederate Cities
will add thereunto: As for Horse, they are of no use in those hilly Countries,
nor a quarter of the number of the Foot, to defend a Region so impregnable; and
they have no ambition, as we have mentioned before, of invading others. And if
there should happen a Division, and Quarrel should arise betwixt the Cantons,
as lately there did, and that to Arms, such Forces are only requisite as may
oppose the numbers of the adverse Party, for they cannot march in great Bodies;
and, as I remember, there were not 3000. Men engaged on either side in the late
Difference; Fights are there by hundreds, and twenties, for few more have room
to combat.

But what they want at home, they have in the wide World; they are now in the
service of the French, Venetian, Spaniard, and Genoise, whose Dukes Guards
likewise they are; and they are raising 6000. more Foot for the Spaniard
against the Portuguez, among the Catholic Cantons, if the late Broyl do not
hinder the Levy. But not a word all this while of any Forces for the Emperor,
so true is their usual Proverb; -- Non point L'argent, non point Swisse, No
Money, no Swisse; besides they no way affect the House of Austria: and their
late solemn Embassy of 30. of their Sages, and their no less magnificent
reception in France, with more Ceremony and Punctilios than was ever used
toward them before, does argue some Intrigue that way, but what Time must be
tell troth; nor care for his service, or regard his distresses; what ever
betides him, they are secure by their Mountains; and there we must leave them,
for the Turk, if Victorious, to look up to.

THE GRISONS. OR THE Valtoline.
THis is another Member of the 5. which make up the Estates of the Alps, and
the Duke thereof formerly the first Duke of the Empire. They are a
Commonwealth, seated in more abrupt Ground, yet enjoying as fruitful Valleys
as any of the rest, and as good Wine growing therein. By Religion generally
Protestants, and confederate with the Cantons of Switzerland, and, like them,
divided into 3. Leagues or Shires, considerable for nothing more, than that
they are a Passage for the Spaniard from Millain to Germany, and so contrarily,
which the Spaniard secured, and thereupon, in 1623. happened a War in this
place, the French, and Confederates, forcing the Spaniard to a Treaty, whereby
nevertheless, in the lieu of Sondrio, a pleasant and strong Province, the Town
and Castle being of that name also, he enjoyes the Fort Fuentes, he built, and
has still a passage open to Germany, but Millain being to supply another War
another way, there is no occasion to speak farther of these Grisons.

SAVOY.
THis Noble Duchy of Savoy is another, and the principal Member of these
States of the Alps, and though we have not given it praecedence in this
Transition, yet it justly claims it, but our design was to mention it in our
way to Italy, and to place it before that most excellent Region, and those
Soveraignties and Principalities which better aspect it, than the uncouch
rudenesses of those Mountainous Commonwealths.

It is bounded on the West with Daulphine; on the South with Province, and the
Mediterranean; on the East with Millain and Montferrat; on the North with
Switzerland, and the Lake Leman; and is divided into 2. Members, Savoy,
properly so called, and Piedmont; the later of these is the most noble, as
wherein stands Turin, the Dukes Residence, and wherein are abundance of
Marquisates, and other noble Titles, and their Mansions, a number of Towns, and
as well built and fortified, but better peopled; famous also for the Valley of
Ast, and for one of the strongest Fortifications in the World, viz. Nizze, a
Seaport, which before it had any Walls finished, baffled and baulked the
famous Turkish Barbarossa, called in by the French King, against Charles the
5th. with 200. Galleys, but now it is impregnable. The vulgar Savoyards are
naturally stupid, and no way given to Military affairs, but the Gentlemen of
excellent Address, as are the Citizens, and many of the middle sort.

This Duke is indeed Master of a fine Country, and a good People; the Country
of a large extent, and the people of a large Heart and Liberal Hand to their
Prince, when upon occasion he demands supplies, especially the Piedmontese; for
besides his ordinary revenue, which some have reckoned at 400000 l. sterling,
he usually doubles it by impositions upon his Subjects, if he increases it not
beyond that proportion.

And he had need of a good Revenue; for he has a number of Garrisons, both
Frontire, Midland, and Maritime to maintain, out of which in Field service he
is forced to draw his Army, although he is served voluntarily by the Gentry,
who with their retinnue and attendants do furnish out his Troops. This Prince
assumes to himself the style and title of his Royal Highness, as King of Cyprus
and Jerusalem, and will have his Ambassadors treated as the Ministers of a
Test Couronne, and to be placed and received like them, which has of late
times been admitted in most Courts of Europe, although scrupled by the
Venetian, Hollander, etc.

As to his Interest in the World, he appears very considerable, both the
French, and the Spaniard, willing to be his Friend, and his Concern is to be
neutral to them both, as his mighty and potent Neighbors on both sides his
Dominions; He sided in this last War with the French, but 'twas by reason of
his marriage with Christiana, the French King's Sister; as when coupled with
Spain, he engaged there: But formerly these Dukes were constant Sticklers for
the House of Austria; but it is judged that the French Friendship is more
necessary and safe for this Duchy, not only by the Event of the late War,
whereby he has all restored him in the general Treaty: but also as to the
present Juncture, and the likely aspect of future Affairs: But to proceed.

This Duke is challenged as a Feudatory and Feif of the Empire, but he cannot
of late be drawn to acknowledge it, although Charles the 5th. reinstated one of
these Dukes, after he was despoyled in his quarrel by the French King; and
though it is alleged, they were first invested by the Emperors in these
Dominions, and upon this account he exempts himself from any Subsidy or Aid to
be given the Emperor, but he pleads a Release of all Feifs, etc. and so sub
judice lis est. At present there is no noise of any Preparations for that
Expedition, the Court being in mourning for the death of the Duchess Royal,
the Mother of the present Duke. There have been some late broyls about the
Protestants of Piedmont, for the old Grudge, heightened by that mischief-maker
Oliver, in those stout-hearted people, but by his Majesty's prudent
intercession, the Duke has acquiesced, and they have composed themselves
without any Stir or Articles: And so we pass hence to MILLAIN.

MILLAIN.
IT is bounded on the West with Piedmont, on the East with Mantua and Parma,
South with a great ridge of Hills, called the Apennine, and North with the
Marca. This Dukedom yet the first in Europe for Dignity, was piece-mealed by
the Venetians, the Florentine, Mantuan, and others, while it was in Contest,
and embroyled by Pretenders. It is the Garden of Italy, and for the delights
and pleasures thereof so striven for by France, and Spain, in whose possession
it now is. It Is Revenue is computed worth 300. thousand Pound a Year, but that
never served to defray the Expense of the Government during the War, by reason
of the number of Garrisons that were constantly maintained, but since the Peace
it yields some advantage to the Crown of Spain. As to the War in Hungary, this
Province is the ready way for the Forces of Spain to march for the relief of
the Empire, but instead thereof, such Forces as can be made ready, are bending
the other way, to the Sea coast, to be embarked for the War in Portugal; so
that the House of Austria is mainly disappointed of their great support, in a
very fatal Juncture: And so much for Millain.

MANTUA.
IT is bounded and surrounded with Millain on the West, Romandiola, the Marca,
and Parma, seized from a tyrannical Lord thereof, by Lewis de Gonzaga, in a
tumult at Mantua, and conferred upon him afterward by the Emperor, and in his
Family this Dignity continues: The Spantard, and the Emperor Ferdinand the 2d.
made opposition, and would not admit of the Duke of Nevers of France, the next
Heir to the deceased Duke, but Lewis the 13th. although engaged in the Rochel
business, by an Army sent into Italy, relieved Casal distressed by the
Spaniard, who had spoiled Mantua, and stated the Duke in quiet possession;
which brave and admired Enterprise, was worthily reckoned as one of the great
Actions of that King.

The Territory of this Duke is very large, but his Revenue not so great as
amounting to 230. thousand Pound sterling. He is the next Prince in Dominion to
the Florentine, but more easy to his Subjects, for he might improve his
Exchequer by Imposts, but either the danger, or the uncustomariness of the
thing, makes him forbear it: Besides, he has no Trade, nor Seaports, as the
Tuscan Duke, being altogether inland; but with this Intrado he lives like a
Prince indeed, though, like the rest of the Princes of Italy, they have scarce
a Foot of Land of their own. As to the Turkish War, the Princes of this
Territory were far readier, as were all the rest of the Feudatories of the
Empire, to assist the Germans, than now they are; for William, one of those
Dukes, in Person, with 2000. Foot, and 500. Horse, assisted the Emperor
Maximilian the Second; at the same time the Duke of Florence sent 3000. Foot,
the Duke of Savoy 600. Curasiers, the Duke of Ferrara in Person led 1500.
Horsemen, and Henry of Lorrain, Duke of Guise; commanded 300. Gentlemen; the
Commonwealths of Genoa and Lucca assisted him with Money; and at the same
time, being the Year 1566. and when Solomon took Zigeth, several English
Gentlemen served as Volunteers, for whose Families Honor I will particularize
some of their Names, as Mr. Greenvile, Mr. Champernoon, Mr. Cotton, Mr.
Pudshall, Mr. Smith, Captain George an eminent and skillful Commander. But all
these Italian Aides are now quite disappeared, and they think themselves scarce
secure with what Force they can make for their own Defense, such are the
Jealousies now in Italy. This Duke is very well affected to the Imperial House,
as being near allied to it, but, except some Money, it is supposed, he will not
supply him with any thing else, unless, if such be the ill Fate of the Empire,
things come to Extremity. He has no Piques or Feuds any where, but is a Prince
of very great Esteem and Reputation, and allianced with the best Families in
Europe, and yet he is less in Demesne, and perhaps Interest, having lately sold
to the deceased Cardinal Mazarine his Duchy of Nevers, of which before in
France.

MONTFERRAT.
THis pleasant Region is seated betwixt Piedmont and Millain, and belongs to
the Duke of Mantua; it is the best Flower in his Garden, and yields him more
profit. It is moreover the best security of his Estates, for herein stands the
famous Casal, the jealousy of the French and Spaniard. In former times this
Marquisate suffered much by several Intruders, but being finally settled by the
Emperor with Mantua, upon the Family of Gonzaga, with which it remains
combined under the same Laws and Privileges.

MODENA and REGGIO.
THese 2. little Dutchies are situate in that great and fertile Territory once
called Lombardy, as are all these we have mentioned hitherto, and were assigned
by Clement the 8th. to Caesar de Este, the Grandson, by a Bastard, to Alphonso
the last Duke of Ferrara, in lieu of his claim or pretense to that Duchy; the
Pope with an Army of 20000. Foot, and 2000. Horse, persuades the Duke to accept
of these Conditions of the Exchange, with this clause also, that he should
acknowledge the Pope as his supreme Lord, and therewithal he seized the said
Duchy and City of Ferrara, as an Escheat to the Church.

Now although this be a small Duchy, yet are the Dukes of good Renown,
especially the last, who approved himself an excellent Captain in the late War
betwixt France and Spain in Italy, on the behalf of France, which procured that
match between the now Duke Alphonso, and one of the Cardinals beloved Neeces,
and whom he dowried well, and has legacied her in the same manner. By the late
Treaty between France and Spain, the Spaniard is reconciled unto him, at the
instance of the French King, and both Kings jointly are to use their endeavors
and supplications with his Holiness the Pope, for the restitution of the
Valleys of Comachio to him, of which such often mention has been made in the
public week Books.

This Comachio is a District of Marish Ground for the most part, lying in the
Duchy of Ferrara, and was formerly the Title of the House of Este, before they
had that of Ferrara given them by the Emperor, and was their proper demesne
Estate and Inheritance; now when Clement the 8. possessed himself of this
Duchy, and agreed by Treaty that all Lands, or what properly belonged to the
said Family of Este, he notwithstanding seized upon this Estate, with the rest,
without any distinction; and hereupon Complaints have since been made to the
Apostolical Chamber, reinforced by the instances of the French King, in which
he has engaged the Spaniard, and lately made it a Pique against his Holiness.

This Duke, like the rest of the Princes of Italy, desires to be at peace, and
live in quiet, nor to see no Arms in Italy, now enjoying a serene
tranquillity, after a most tedious harassing War; He is fast in the embraces of
his beautiful Lady, and will hardly arm himself like his Predecessor in the
Emperors Cause, some supplies he may chance to send him of Money, and do as
his Neighbors that are Feifs of the Empire like himself; and some Moneys the
Emperor has had already from some of the Princes; but he cannot be very
liberal out of his Revenue, for it amounts to but 40. thousand Pound a year
sterling.

PARMA.
THis Dukedom is bounded on the South with the Apennine, North with Millain,
East with Modena, West with Montferrat. Pope Paul the 3d. of the Family of the
Farnese, gave this Duchy to his bastard Son Petro Luigi, and in lieu thereof,
and recompense to the Church, assigned to it the Duchy of Camerone, situate in
the Duchy of Urbin; but he proving a most vicious debauched Person, was
assassinated, and his Son Octavian forced to guard himself in Parma; whither
soon after came Charles the 5th. in Person, and besieged him, although he had
married his base Daughter Margaret, afterward Governess of the Low Countries;
to the relief hereof came the French King, and a 4. years War ensued, for
Charles was resolved to ruin his Son in Law: but he resigning, Philip the 2d.
to disoblige him from the French, not only proffered him his Friendship, but
gave him the Dukedom of Placentia in Millain, although for the present he kept
the Citadel with a Garrison of his own; but afterward, in recompense of the
great services of Alexander, Prince of Parma, in the Low Countries, he not only
withdrew that Garrison, but added to his Estate the Territory of Novara in
Italy.

This Prince lays also claim to the Duchy of Camerone, and much solicited
the Court of Rome, aided therein also by the mediation of the French King, who
continues to afflagitate the same things to this day, as a main Concern of his
own, as in which he has so far engaged himself, and his honor, and vogued it
as a part of his Quarrel, that it is supposed, he will not recede without
something done in it, in the Conclusion of this magnificent Business at Paris.
The Duchy of Parma it self is considerable for its Revenue, but the best part
of it, and more, is expended upon Garrisons, being surrounded on all hands with
the Estates of other Princes; not to mention other Charges of the Government.
He is a good VViller to the House of Austria, as their Ally and Kinsman, and
will advance what he can, but the narrowness of his Fortune is a Clog to his
Affection; besides, the petty Princes of Italy live to the height of their
Revenue, to make themselves seem more considerable than they are: And so we
pass to the Papal Dominions, or Ecclesiastical STATE.

THE DOMINIONS OF THE Church of Rome.
IT is dis-joyned West from Naples, South-west from Florence, North-west from
Venice, and lies North and South cross from the Adriatic to the Tuscan Sea,
broad 100. long 300. Miles; a fair advantage and opportunity to the Lords
thereof, either for enlargement of Empire, or increase and improvement of
Trade; but the Popes are not much for Force, since they can effect more by
Fraud; and the Romans retaining the humor of their old Ancestors, will not
bargain and traffic, nor follow any Trade, as a sordid and vile life; but
this Pride is accompanied with a generous Courage, and they are generally
daring Spirits, and reputed the best Soldiers in Italy; for which reason they
are invited frequently to foreign Commands, which they discharge with great
Reputation.

The Estate of the Pope is of 2. sorts, the one consists in Temporal
Dominion, the other in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: His Temporal Dominion is
divided likewise into 2. sorts, the one immediate, which yields a Revenue, the
other mediate, which is holden in Fee of the Church; of the first kind, are St.
Peter's Patrimony, Avignion in France, etc. of the latter, Naples, etc. The
immediate Temporal Estate consists of 7. Members, Romandialo, Ferrara, with
Urbin, Marca Anconitana, the Duchy of Spoleto, St. Peter's Patrimony, and
Campagna de Roma. 1. Romandiola, famous for the City and University of Bononia,
or Bologna, and the Exarchate of Ravenna, once the Seat of Emperors, and
extorted by the Popes from the Venetians in former times, with some other
adjacent Territories, and made Holy Ground. 2. Ferrara, in which the Valley of
Commachio aforesaid, a brave Dominion, and worthy the state and splendor of
the Papacy, both for Revenue, Delight and Fertility. 3. Urbin, in it the Duchy
of Camerone, belonging, as abovesaid, to the Duke of Parma; Urbin is 60. Miles
in length, 35. in breadth, and yields 100000. Crowns Revenue. 4. Marca
Anconitana, in which stands the famous Chapel of our Lady of Loretto, one of
the notable Sights of Italy. 5. Spoleto, the old Demesne of the Church. 6. St.
Peter's Patrimony, lying in Tuscany, and given to the Church many Centuries
since by Pope Paschal. 7. Campagna de Roma, wherein Rome, the Mistress of the
World, is seated; and the Pope presides with as much Empire and Authority as
any of the Roman Caesar's, by what means it is too tedious and unnecessary to
relate, the Story of it being so public in many Prints; for which reason also
we shall pass the manner of the Election of Popes, of the College of Cardinals,
of the Consistory, and whatever concerns the Civil Polity of that prudent and
subtle Government, because we will not nauseate the Reader.

The ordinary Temporal Revenue of the Ecclesiastical Dominions is 2. Millions
of Crowns, and for the Spiritual Intrado, its a Mystery, or a Miracle, for all
Luthers Execrations against Indulgencies, and the wiser Worlds Discovery; yet
is their Exchequer mostly empty, the reasons whereof are reputed to be the
great Pomp and Magnificence of the Popes, in their Vesture, and the Ornament of
their Persons, their vast Allowances to their Nuncioes, and Legates, (when
extraordinary Occasions happen) and other Intelligencers and Spies in the
Courts of Princes, but of late the Jesuits have saved that Expense.

As to the Force and Power of this Potentate, it has been greater than now it
is, yet still he had the misfortune in any Quarrel to be worsted, if left to
himself, I mean in the defensive part; for how often has Rome been sacked, and
the Popes changed and imprisoned? But as a Specimen of what Armies they can
raise, set us consider, that Clement the 8th. had 20000. Foot, and 2000. Horse,
to the reduction of the Duchy of Ferrara; and Paul the 3d. in the League
betwixt him, the Emperor, and the Venetians, against the Protestants, bore the
sixth part of the Charges of that War; Against the Protestants, and in aid of
Charles the 5th. he sent 12000. Footmen, and 500. Horsemen, bearing their
Charges during the War. This man was he that advanced his House to that Honor
wherein it continues to this day in Florence. Pius the 5th. aided Charles the
9th. of France, with 5000. Footmen, and a 1000. Horsemen: And Xistus the 5th.
raked together in the 5. years and a half of his Pontificy, 5. Millions of
Crowns, and expended magnificently notwithstanding, in bringing Water-Pipes,
and erecting Conduits in the City, with Pyramids, Palaces, and other sumptuous
Buildings, Churches, and Porticoes. This Money so left in the Treasury, was
immediately squandered away by the succeeding Pope; such is the successive
variation of Humor and Temper of these Potentates, that men imagine they do
purposely run Counter to one another designs

This considered, the Papacy seems in this present condition to go below it
self; the Pope one of the Prudentest that ever sat in the Chair, all things
composed, Money enough, but ( hinc illae Lachrymae) No Friends, or Backers. The
Church of Rome are very tenacious of their Forms, and its supposed they will be
now held to one, the untunable Recantation of their Injury to the French. The
Pomp and Triumph of the Legates Entry is intended to dazzle the eyes of his good
Catholics, and the Affair is excellently well clothed, but the World sees
the nakedness of it; and that the Church of Rome has not this first time
yielded to the will of her Sons, like a kind and indulgent Mother, when her
Chastisements cannot reach them. In the mean time her bosom has been opened
to her eldest Child the Emperor of Germany, and she raised her Levies to his
assistance to the same proportion as the forwardest; and without question has
not been wanting either in her Advice or Purse.

THE Republique OF VENICE.
VENICE, (of whom it is written by a well known Author, That were it within the
reach of humane society, to prescribe Rules for fixing a society and succession
of People, under the same species of Government, as long as the World lasts,
that Republique were the fittest Pattern on Earth, both for Direction and
Imitation) a Place of that strong constitution in point of Government, that in
spite of all the Powers of Europe and Asia, of the Eastern and Western Empire,
bears up her Liberty and Authority for well nigh 1100. Years, being still in
case to make good Thuanus his Prophecy, Venetiae non nisi cum rerum natura and
mundi machina periturae.

It is bounded Southward with Ferrara, and the remainders of Romaniola:
Northward with a great part of the Alps: Eastward with the Adriatique, and the
River Arsia, on the Ceast of the Schavonian Province Liburnia: Westward with
Millain. Containing these Estates and Places, viz. 1. Histria, a woody, barren,
and sickly Peninsula in the Adriatique; a Nest of Thieves, formerly troublesome
to Rome, till Manlius, Cl. Pulcher, Sempronius, and Augustus Caesar reduced it:
And as troublesome to the Venetians. Duke Petro Candiano, An. 938. and Duke
Henry Dondolo, An. 1190. made it tributary and serviceable for Timber, Marble,
and a Passage to Hungary. 2. Friuli, a pleasant and fruitful Country, 50. Miles
square, lying between the Marque of Treviso, the German Alps, and the
Adriatique. 3. The Marque of Treviso, parted Southward by the Po, and Athesis,
from Ferrara, and the rest of Romania: Westward by the Rivers Mineiris and
Sarla, from Millain: Eastward adjoining to Friuli, and the Gulf of Venice: And
Northward divided by the Alps, from Tirole in Germany. A most temperate and
fruitful Country. 4. The Adriatique, a Gulf extending 700. Miles in length, and
140. in breadth, under the command of Venice. The Duke whereof marries every
Ascension Day, with a Ring thrown in very solemnly, in token that it must be
subject to them, as the Wife is to the Husband: As on every Epiphany Day it is
Baptized by the Bishop of Zant, in token that it shall continue Christ's
faithful Soldier and Servant against the Infidels for ever. The Principal
Islands whereof, under their Jurisdiction, on this side, being 1. Mala mollo,
2. Torcellan, 3. Muriano, 4. Chioggia, 5. Bovegia, 6. Judaeha, and 7. a shot of
72. little Islets, near the main Land of Friuli, whereon stands Venice her
self, with 4000. Bridges, and 10000. Boats, to pass from one part of it to
another; 8. Milies in compass, containing 1300000. Inhabitants, built within
the Adriatique, in the midst of salt Lakes, for 90. Miles round, and deep
Marshes for 5. Miles, several Monasteries and Churches (as Forts and Castles)
lying between it and the Ports of Italy, not under its obedience; whence its
impregnable, and not to be taken, but by an Army that extends 150. Miles in
compass.

On the other side the Adriatique, she has Briscia, Bergamo, Verona, Crema,
and toward Dalmatia, 1. Corfu, within a Mile of Albania, 120. Miles in
compass, a craggy and mountainous place, whose Castles are the Keys to the
Adriatique Gulf. 2. Zant, 60. Miles round; where they have no use for Currants,
but to dye clothes, or fatten Hoggs with them. 3. Candia, that noble Isle in
the Mediterranean, 270. Miles in length, and 50. in breadth; so opportunely
situated, that Aristotle would say, She was made to be Mistress of the Sea. An
100. Miles distant from Syria and Egypt, and 300. from Caramania, Cyprus, and
Albania.

Neither does the situation of the Seignory more befriend it, than the Nature
of the Inhabitants, both close and reserved, the People being so much
advantaged by a native gravity, that in a Book called Le Treature Politic,
its recommended, for the great School of it, to all public Ministers, Bodin
himself saying thus of them, Quae de consilii capiendi ratione diximus nusquam
sane melius quam Venetiis fieri consueverunt.

The great Maxims they proceed upon are these.

1. To be Umpires and Spectators in the troubles of the World, rather than
Actors; to embroyl all other States, and say, as their Motto, Pax tibi Mart;
none being more reputed for their open Intercessions for Peace, none more
suspected for their clandestine Incitations to a War; for as they stole at
first, so they must stand at last, a Republique only, because of the common
troubles; But being addicted to Peace, Trafique, Wealth, and Repose, the first
and fundamental Maxim they propose to themselves, is, to maintain common
freedom, and live secure.

2. To balance the Powers of Europe, keeping them all out of Italy: In pursuit
of which Principle, many have been its Contests with the French and Spaniards;
being as famous for varying Counsel, Alliancies, Dependencies abroad, as for
keeping close to her Constitution and Government at home; where the Rule is,
the Venetians deliberate long before they decree any thing, but when it is once
seriously decreed, it is as irrevocable as the Laws of the Medes and Persians.

3. To understand all the Intrigues of Europe; whence it is that they observe
this method in the Employment of their Ambassadors: First, They send a man to
Switzerland, thence they employ him in Holland, from thence they transmit him
to England, and from England to France, from France to Spain, from Spain to
Germany, and from Germany to Constantinople, and are said to expend 140000 l.
per Annum in Intelligencies.

4. To keep their People in a perfect state of Obedience, always ignorant how
to dispute, always knowing how to obey their Superiors Orders, which they will
endure no Jesuit, or any other. Ecclesiastics, to discourse, or cavil at; and
therefore are out with the Court, rather than Church of Rome most commonly,
because it propagates a Religion that is so prejudicial to the Interest of
Government, and the Peace of Commonwealth; insomuch that I find applied to
Venice what the Historian says of Lacedaemonia, Diu stetit, non quod Rex been
imperabat, sed quia Populus been parebat: It lasted so long, not so much
because the Prince did command well, as because the People did obey so.

5. To make use of the French Power to check the Spaniard, and the Spanish to
check the French in their Encroachments upon Italy, and both to watch the
Popes, since they have been transported: by their own interest, to neglect or
betray the common good.

6. To admit neither Churchmen nor Women into her secular Council, the one
being subject to their own humors, and the second to others, I mean those of
the Pontifical Interest; advancing none that have a foreign relation in her
domestic service; keeping likewise a watchful eye over Priests and Pulpits,
that none, from the meanest Friar, to the highest Patriarch, meddle with the
Transactions and Designs of the Senate, upon pain of the severest punishments:
Only that State has 2. very eminent men, the one a sound Divine, the other a
learned Casuist, always in Pension, and ready; in case of any Contest about
excentrick and irregular proceedings of Rome, to defend and vindicate her by
public writing, as Padre Paulo did Anno 1612.

7. To entertain for Generals and Soldiers, whom, when she loses she misseth
not, when she has finished her War, she discharges, to avoid Expense on the
one hand, and Faction on the other, which are usual in Commonwealths, where
the Members are advanced to too high an Employment; to which purpose, she puts
such restraints to the Power of her Duke, and the Riches of her Nobility, that
neither can attempt or maintain any Design prejudicial to the public Interest.

8. Yet to encourage any Person that shall find out or invent any thing that
may tend either to her advantage or honor, as suitably with rewards, as they
punish those that attempt or conspire any thing against them agreeably with
punishments; every Design against the Government there being Death without
mercy, as is the revealing of the least secrets from the Council of State;
whence it is a part of every foreign Ambassadors instruction, not to entertain
conference with any Senator in private, it being a matter of an implacable
jealousy in that Republique, where no Senator receives a Pension from any
foreign Ambassador, nor Ambassador any gratuity from any foreign Prince, save
what they openly acknowledge, and bestow upon the Treasury of St. Mark, of late
grown a Proverb for Riches, as the Arsenal is for Strength.

9. To which you may add, that the Venetians are so good and publick-spirited
Patriots, that every Galley that goes out in course, thinks she has Venice
her self aboard her, every man's care being Ne quid Respublica detrimenti
capiat: And every man is as grave and as silent as the Duke, owning a slowness
of apprehension abundantly recompensed by the exactness of their judgment.

10. The Character of the Italians running thus, the Veronians are studious and
faithful, the Paduans fierce, the Vincentians revengeful, they of Friuli
ungrateful but inconstant, they of Histria Cowards and short-lived, and they of
Venice publick-spirited, crafty, and greedy: And in reference to War, the
People of Padua manage Horses, those of Bergomo lay Stratagems, those of
Brescia digg Trenches, those of Treviso bring Swords, and those of Venice
contribute Money, Counsel, and Resolution, especially Counsel, being the People
of whom Machiavel observes, that whatsoever they lose by War, they recover by
Treaty.

11. To enlarge their Territories by the several Opportunities which they
watch, of the Inrodes of the Turks, or the Divisions of Christians; by their
Encounters with the first whereof, they have gained all the Islands they have
at present in the Aegean and Ionian Sea, or Peloponnesus: by observing the
second, they became Masters of many Places belonging to the Empire, and the
Church of Rome, and of the best Havens in the Adriatique, belonging to Naples,
and some Towns of Millain; they seldom assisting any distressed Neighbor,
without the Mortgage, or direct sale of one Place or other: whence the Princes
of Christendom conspired in the League at Cambray, to deplume the proud Jay, as
they did, leaving her only her own bare Isles and Marshes, till partly by
working upon the Pope, to whom they quitted all their Interest in the Towns
aforesaid; and by severing the Confaederates the one from the other, they
recovered all but the Town of Naples, for which they are not willing to contest
with the Crown of Spain, their Bullwark against France, and the Pope too, with
whom she had to do about some Church Donations, prejudicial to the Republique,
and the peremptoriness of the Ecclesiastiques in defense of the same, until
encouraging the Prince of Parma (in whose behalf all the Italians were
confaederated) to face the very Walls of Rome, she got off with ease, and had
her ancient Elogium set up in the sala Regia, in the Vatican.

12. Neither was she any sooner reconciled to the Pope, than the Malteses
having taken at Sea some Galleys, and Curamusulls, with Passengers to Mecha
(among whom was one the Sultans Mistresses, and another of the Ottoman Race)
and being entertained at Candia, belonging to Venice, the Grand Seigniour vowed
to revenge the Sultana upon Christendom; and, as Sir Sackvile Crow advertized
the Venetians (though they believed it not, having no notice thereof from their
own Bailio) with a formidable Fleet, and Land Army, in a manner surprised
Canea, the second Port of Candia; which yet the Republique recompensed by her
next Summers success in Dalmatia, where she took Clistu, which after a great
debate whether it should be demolished or no, was fortified, and is a Curb to
the Turkish Inrodes at this day; and afterward pursued the Turkish Fleet to
the Bay of Foggia, where if not Commission bound (a Defect in that State) their
Navy had utterly overthrown them. Toward which Genoa, upon Condition she
treated with her as Serenissima (which she does, it being a cheap Assistance
that is got by Complement) allows 500000. Livers, and 10. Auxiliary Galleys:
the Jesuits coming up to no less, upon the terms of their readmission,
negotiated by the King of Polands Brother, who is of the Society himself.

13. To set up Tumults in Turkey among the Janissaries, as they did in the Year
1648. with the assistance of a Renigado, with 600000. Livers, when their great
Enemy Ibraim was deposed, and his eldest Son Mahomet, the present Sultan, then
a Youth, was set up in his stead; whose glorious and aspiring Designs
awakening the drowsy Valor of the World, the Venetians checked in the Defeat
at Foggia, Anno 1653. where he lost 48. Galleys, 6. Galliasses, 12. Mahones,
and 9. Ships, with his Admiral Bassa: And another in the Dardanells, the
Straight of the Hellespontique Sea, between Asia and Europe, Anno 1654. where
20. Ships of War and Galleys were taken, 6000. Turks slain, and the Captain,
Admiral of the Port (Amurath Bassa) mortally wounded: These two successful
Victories, the industrious Venetians pursued with the old Design of Dissentions
and Tumults in Constantinople, that cost the Prime Vizier his Life, and had
almost cost the Grand Seigniour his Empire; the Bassa of Aleppo upon their
suggestions revolting, and all Asia falling off, had not the generous Bassa of
Damascus, the present Prime Vizier, nobly met the approaching Fate with
singular Prudence and Conduct, and (notwithstanding the Venetians Treaty with
the Persian) made a League with Persia, settled Asia, overthrew the French
Auxiliaries of Venice, under Prince Almeric de Este (of the House of Modena) in
Candia, upon intelligence given him from France, which the Venetians have
thought fit to cut off by a more strict Alliance with that most Christian
Kingdom: Recovered Tendos, lost An. 1655. after the great Fight in the
Dardanells, under Mollenique, who got a stern of the whole Turkish Navy, and so
hemmed them in, that 40. Galleys were taken, 28. Ships burnt, 9000. Men lost,
9. Mahones scattered, the Captain Bassa only saving himself, and 14. Galleys,
and he well deserved his Chain of Gold, worth 2000 l. and the Generals Place.
But this Government aims at the Commendation of Wariness, rather than Valor;
practicing with Money, rather than Arms, and contenting themselves more with
their first Title of Fishermen, or their second of Merchants, than that of
Warriors: Besides that, it is their general Interest to keep the Peace of
Italy, to which, as things stand yet, they are able to give Law. Its no wonder
that their Agents are so busy in Mediations for Peace over the Christian
World, as in Spain, France, Holland, and wherever else any Controversies are
like to arise, since that Enemy that astonished all Christendom, is like to
fall now entirely on this Republique, excluded the late Peace, and
(notwithstanding the late Opportunity of ingratiating her self upon the French
Rupture) likely to be deserted by the Pope, who, by her Entrenchments upon his
Jurisdictions, her Affronts to his Nuncioes and Clergy, particularly his
Jesuits (to whom she gave a bitter farewell, Andate, minte Pigliate, and may
returnate, Go your ways, take nothing, and never return) and her readiness to
comply with the French for a Passage into Italy, is so far disobliged, that he
seems intent, upon the Peace of the World, to bring down that City; having no
other Design doubtless, 1. in his Connivance at the Turkish Arsenal, built in
Candia; 2. in his strange submission to the French King; 3. in his obstinate
refusal of those advantages that might serve in this Conjuncture, than the
settlement of the Church in Italy; whereby a man may guess, how much a Courtier
Don Mario was, when he told the Venetian Ambassador, It was not reasonable,
that the discontent for particular Affairs, should cause a prejudice to that
which concerns the general; which is to maintain the Grandeur of that State
(meaning Venice) inseparable with the Splendor of Italy. Though yet the
Venetians have done wisely in this, that they have involved their Neighbor
States in the same Praemunire against the Church with themselves, having wrought
on the covetous humor of the Tuscan, and that more ambitious of the Genoan, to
retrench the Papal Encroachments so far, that they are concluded within the
same jealousy, and obnoxious to the same displeasure, as only secured by the
Favor of Spain, as Venice may be by the Power of France.

Her great defect (as the wisest have a soft place whereon they may be hit)
lies in this compass, viz. that being so near the Turk, that upon any affront
from the Christians, they must make War with him: And yet so near him too, that
for want of Provisions of their own, they cannot live without him (for all her
Territories afford her not Bread to eat) (to which I may add, the distance of
her Territories from her, and from one another) she does not either engage the
Christian Princes more vigorously against him, or engage him more closely to
her, a Particular more worthy of her consideration, 1. In regard that all the
Isles, Coasts, and Maritime Places, which the Seignory possesses, do confine
with some part of the Ottoman Empire, where she may be easily invaded and
surprised. 2. In regard that being the best peopled City in Italy, she cannot
support her self without the Friendship of the Mahumetan, and his plentiful
Country. 3. In regard a War in the Levant, stops Trade, the chief Stay of that
Mercantile Town.

THE Republique OF GENOA.
NExt to Venice in Reputation, and Tuscany in Situation, lies the
Commonwealth of Genoa, between two Rivers, commanding formerly the Islands of
Corsica, Sardinia, and the Baleares in the Mediterranean: Lestos, and Chio,
with some others in the Ionian: Capha, or Theodosia in the Taurican Chersonese:
Pera, and a considerable Portion of Tuscany, and thereby able to arm (as they
did once) 58. Galleys, and 8. Phamphyli (Vessels of 140. Oars a piece) for
present service, in 3. days time; but now confined to Liguria, and the Isle of
Corsica, by their Intestine Divisions, and Foreign Defeats, particularly by
Venice, which has brought them to live by Usury, Retail, and Mechanical
Trades, under the Protection of the King of Spain, or the Viceroy of Millain;
who value it the more, because its Metropolis, or chief City Genoa, is so
seated, that it is esteemed one of the Keys of Italy; being much courted by
the Pope, out of envy to the Venetians; and as much by the Italian Princes, for
fear both of France, and Spain.

Its Interest seems to be as much limited as its Situation, for it has but
6. things to do: First, To exclude the Nobility, and keep the Commonwealth
even, by a restraint upon all Excesses of Power, Riches, Honor, or Popularity.
Secondly, To assist with Men, and Money, in all the Wars round about them, at
that rate maintaining their own Peace. Thirdly, To be the Bank of Spain, and
other Kingdoms, where they take Money at that excessive rate, that the
Revenues of Millain and Naples go to pay Use Money; the Commonwealth of Genoa
so obliging the Spaniards more to its self, than all the Powers of Enrope could
do: Though Charles the 5th. and his Son Philip, thought, by borrowing their
Money, to weaken, and engage them rather to himself; which they might do the
better, since France attempted the reducement of the Seignory to its old Yoke,
shaken off 1528. by Augustine Flisci, and his Family, who seized their Navy,
slew their Captain John Dorya; but leaping from one Galley to another, to
secure all, stumbled and fell into the Sea, where he, and his ambitious
Treasons, were both drowned together. Fourthly, To keep 12000. Men in Arms, to
guard their Territories; and 30. Galleys at Sea, to keep their Trade, together
with some Auxiliaries, to serve their Protector of Spain; which they may well
maintain, considering their Revenue amounts to no less than 44000. Crowns per
Annum, besides their Bank of St. George, the most famous in the World, whose
original, growth, use, and influence is thus.

When the untoward War between the Genoese, and the Venetians, was at an end,
and the Genoese could not pay their Debts, they assigned over first their
Taxes, and after that their Revenue and Demain, to such private Citizens hands
as were their Creditors; who electing among themselves a Common Council of an
hundred, with 8. Officers over them, managed this Intrado and Stock so orderly,
that they became at last possessed of most of the Commonwealth; the Towns and
Territories whereof they govern by Officers chosen by their own common
suffrage; insomuch, that the common People, in all times of Dissentions, stick
to St. George, regarding no Faction any otherwise, than in relation to that
Bank; to which they require all Parties to swear faithfulness. This prevailing
over the rest of the Republique, because it has no changing of Officers, and
the other being subject to that Inconvenience, their Duke, his 8. Assistants,
and 400. Gentlemen, that is their Mayor, Alderman, and Common Council, being
changed every two year, so that they are out of their Places before they know
to what end they are in.

Its Territories are either Liguria, or the Isle of Corsica.

1. Liguria is parted Eastward by the River Warus from Provence, Westward by
Magia from Tuscany, and Northward bordering on the Apennine Hills, as Southward
on the Tyrrhenian Seas; in length, from Luna, a Port in the East part of it, to
Monaco, in the West, 40. Miles long, and all centring upon Goa, the stately and
pleasant Metropolis on the Ligustick or Ligurian Shore; fortified toward the
Sea by Art, toward the Land by Art and Nature, there being but one way to go
to it by Land, and that steepy and craggy: Indeed the whole Country is its own
Fortification, all Historians concluding, as he in the second Punique War, That
it is a harder thing to come at them, than to conquer them. Aliquanto major
erat Labor invenire, quam vincere, are the very syllables of my Author: And no
more than needs, considering the temptations the aforesaid Neighbors have to
invade it, for its plentiful Valleys, covered with Citrons, Lemons, Olives,
Oranges, etc. And its rich Cities, made up of Merchants and Usurers; insomuch
that the Geographer inserts a Story, generally agreeable to all Christendom, as
peculiar to this Place; the Story is this, that one should say, That here there
are neither Scholars, Gentlemen, nor Jews enough: And another answering, That
there were more than enough of all: He should reply, That there were not
Scholars enough, because there were so many double-beneficed men; nor Gentlemen
enough, because so many Mechaniques; nor Christians enough, because so many
turned Jews and Usurers. But Populus me sibilat at ipse mihi plaudo Domi. Let
the World laugh, Genoa applauds it self for that Treasure that supplied the
Kings of Spain in their Wars with England, and the Netherlands, with Catalonia,
Portugal, and France, and thereby endeared them likewise to the Sea of Rome
(whose most devoted Spain is) from whose Territories they fear no danger, as
well for the Spaniards sake, who protects them, as the Venetians, who opposed
them; the Pope being not more their Friend for their Patron of Spain, his
Catholic Son, than their Champion against their Adversary of Venice, his
troublesome Neighbors. And as for Usury, one part of the Interest of this
State, its descryed in all States, and in all States allowed; then to be
abrogated, when Trade may go on without young or mean Merchants, young or mean
Merchants may traffic without borrowing, or borrowing may be without Usury,
or other Considerations more pressing in cases of necessity, and not till then.

2. Corsica, an Island 120. Miles long, and 7. broad, 60. Mile from Genoa, and
6. from Sardinia; first won by the Genoese from the Pisans, next by the French
from the Genoese, and since restored upon the Peace between France and Spain
1557. For securing whereof for the future to this Commonwealth, my Author
tells me, they fell upon this handsome Project, emplying none but natural
Genoese to serve in the Garrisons of the Island, the better to keep under this
rude and untractable People. And filling all their Garrisons upon the Continent
with natural Corsicans, whereby the Island is unfurnished of its ablest men,
who also serve for Hostages of the public Faith. It is the destiny of Princes
and States, who are little in themselves, or who have but a moderate strength.
Its a pitiful thing to see to what Necessity the petty Princes are reduced to
maintain themselves, how many real Evils they are exposed to, to conserve that
vain Image of Liberty, and that sweet Illusion of that Sovereign Authority that
does bewitch them. In Expenses they consume themselves for their defense, and
almost give all that might be taken from them, that nothing might be taken from
them. They are obliged to observe all the Fancies and Motions of their Enemies
and Friends; and if they subsist, it is not by their strength, because they have
none, but by their weakness, and because their Countries are of so little
Concernment, that they beget not a desire in ambitious Persons, nor that
Justice should be violated in the Conquest of them: Or they are under shelter
from the Enterprises of the one, by the Jealousy of the other; and preserve
their Liberty, for that the Ambitious hinder one another to seize upon them,
and to become the Masters.

1. But since men will rather aspire to the shadow of a troublesome Freedom,
than live in the easiest depenidence, and in the most commodious subjection in
the World, the Interest of such men is, to provide for the first Onset of an
Enemy, on their own Charge; it being better to spend themselves, than be
overrun by strangers; and a wasted Country being more Eligible than an
endangered one by Auxiliaries, most commonly adjudged, in little
Commonwealths, worse than Enemies; and though the Charge be excessive, yet
either the Assailant is tired to an Accommodation, or, which is the great
happiness of weak States, they have time to settle their Correspondence abroad,
so as it may check their Enemies, and not endanger themselves.

2. Their Provisions must be timely out of the hazard of surprises,
inconveniences that have befallen the Enemies of these men, the Venetian, both
in the business of Cyprus and Cremona.

3. Their Friends must be employed, rather to divert their Enemies, by an
Inroad upon their Interest, or Country, than to help them: by laying waste
their own. Its fitter the Pope should quarrel with the Venetians in Venice,
than fight with them in Genoa. Assistants are Physicians which cannot cure an
ill Humor, without that alteration and disorder, which leaves a worse
Impression sometimes after it, than the Disease that went before it: Neither is
it to be doubted, but the design of diversion will be effectual, since there is
no Enemy, that values not the security of his own Country, above the honor of
conquering another.

4. Yet if it be necessary that foreign Force be admitted, they must be
inferior to their own, and such as they may always give Law to, and receive
no Jealousy from, that may abate their Authority at home, by that mark of
Dependence abroad: Whence it follows, first, that the Forces called in, depend
rather upon the Prince that employeth, than the Captain that leads them; and
secondly, to keep them from uniting in a Body.

5. But however, a cold and impartial comparison of the Inconveniences on all
sides, both of admitting Friends, or yielding to Enemies, being premised; a few
Fortresses, such as are up and down in Liguria, which control both Friends and
Foes; though I think Genoa (as long as the Pope is angry with the Venetians,
and will want its assistance; the King of Spain is needy, and must be supplied
by its Bank; the Trade of Europe is damm'd up, and must be quickened with its
Coin; the King of France is great, suspected and watched by all its Neighbors)
need do no more than improve its Trade, and leave these Rules, which are rather
Shifts, and Deliveries, than Policies, to their necessitous Neighbors, the
Venetians, from whom this is the best Opportunity they will ever have to
recover their ancient State and Freedom.

The STATE of LUCA.
BEtween this Commonwealth, and the great Dukedom of Tuscany, lies the little
State of Luca; whose extent is little more than one City of that name, 3. Miles
in compass, whereon there are 7. Forts, and containing 24000. Inhabitants (well
skilled in Manufactures, especially in weaving Silks, and Cloth of Gold) the
fittest Place to set up a Free State in the World, being seated in a plain,
walled round with Moutains, except toward Pistoria, in which Post stands a
strong Castle, Art and Nature befriending it so far, that its in the List of
the 4. strongest Cities in the Christian World, Zara in Dalmatia, Canea in the
Isle of Candy, and Legorn in Florence being reckoned the other three;
especially considering it can maintain 15000. Foot, and 300. Horse; no more
than needs, respecting the several Attempts that have been made upon it, 1. By
the Emperor Rodolphus, who at last sold it for 10000. Crowns to the
Inhabitants. 2. By Lewis of Bavaria. 3. By the Genoese, who bought it from that
Emperors Garrison there. 4. By the Emperor Charles the 4th. of whom the
Lucans bought their own Freedom for 25000. Florens, demolishing all his, and
the Usurper Castruccioes Fort; but being not able to secure themselves from
Genoa on the one hand, and the Duke of Tuscany on the other, they betook
themselves to the King of Spain, for whose sake the Civil Power of Millain
backs, and the Ecclesiastical Power of Rome countenances this little Kingdom of
Ivedo, otherwise a certain Prey to the Florentine, who has already as much in
yearly Presents for letting it alone in the Inhabitants hands, as he would in
yearly Revenue were it in his own. Two Defects they seem to labor under, the
first is, That their chief Magistrate, the Gonfalonere, is changed every two
Months, as the Duke of Genoa is once every two Year: And the second is, That
the Genoan Nobility is not so much too mean and depressed, as those of Luca are
magnified and regarded; and that the one does not more discourage an Ambition
that may be honest, as these promote a Popularity that is dangerous; especialy
in the Families of the Buonvisi, Sardini, Galganelli, Senumi, Arnoltini, etc.
whereof every one is able to buy, and every two able to seize this little
Seignory, only they are kept in awe by the Great Duke, in the middle of whose
Dominion they are shut up, having no Corn, or other Necessaries, but what they
have from him; who first directed them to set up a Granary, that brings in
36000. Crowns to the Public, besides supplies to the Tuscan, upon all little
occasions, and Provision for 7. years siege at all adventure: Especially in
this latter Age, when the great State and Empire of Austria, the support of
this place, breaks and fails. For great Empires, says my Lord Bacon, while
they stand, do enervate and destroy the Forces of the Natives which they have
subdued, and awe their Neighbors; who, when they decay, recover their Liberty,
and revenge their former Slavery; So was it in the decay of the Roman Empire,
and likewise in the Empire of Almaign, after Charles the Great, every Bird
taking a Feather; and were not unlike to befall Spain, if it should break. Yet
as things stand at this time, there be but two things that this Republique
should take care of, 1. Trade abroad, 2. Unity at home, toward the last of
which, it was well contrived, that they have Arms for 500. Men, ready charged
and fitted, upon half an hours warning (the Muskets, Powder, Match, Corslet)
hard by the Council House, to be seen by none, without the three Senators
leave, who have each respectively a Key to them. To which I need not add, how
much it concetneth them, to model their Affairs with respect to those of
Venice, at this time likely to part with some of her Privileges to her
Neighbor Commonwealths.

THE Dukedom OF TUSCANY or FLORENCE
THis Dukedom, divided on the East, from the Churches Patrimony, by the River
Piso; On the West, from Genoa, by the River Macra, and the impregnable
Strong-hold Sarizna; On the South, from the Grecian Coast, by the Tuscan Seas;
And on the North, from Romandiola, and Marca Anconitana, by the Appennines, was
the greatest Eyesore in all Italy, to the Commonwealth of Rome, before
Christ's time (the People of this Place, being the first that carried an
Offensive War to the Gates of Rome) and the most considerable Thorn in the
sides of the Sea of Rome since: whence the Popes, as they grew in strength and
power, intermedled with this Province, and finding it sometimes in the
Lombards, sometimes in the French, and sometimes in the Germans hands, made
bold to bestow it themselves, sometimes on the King of Naples, sometimes on the
Dukes of Anjou, until the subtle Florentines bought their own Liberty of the
Emperor Rodolphus Habspurgensis; and after purchased the Town and Territory of
Cortona, of Ladislaus, King of Naples; that of Arezzo, of Duke Lewis of Anjou;
and settling their Duke, have got within their Territories, 1. Florence, which
has the Appennine on the North, and the Estates of Pisa, and Sienna, on the
South. 2. The small, but rich Seigniory of Masta, situate on the Borders of
Genoa. 3. Pisa, lying toward the Sea, betwixt the Genoese, on the West, and
the Territory of Sienna, on the East, able of it self once to wage War, both
with the Venetians, and the Genoese, from it is notable public Arsenal for
Shipping. 4. Sienna, situate between the Patrimony of the Church, and the
Estate of Pisa; the People whereof have been as very Guelfes, that is, Men
devoted to the Emperors Interest; as they of Florence have been Gibellines,
that is, People devoted to the Popes: Upon which account, the Duke of Tuscany
is looked upon, as equally capable of assisting Austria, or France, against the
Pope, as the Pope against either of these. To say truth, says my Author, it
stood with good reason of State, that the Florentine should use all his wit, to
get this City, and keep it; which, besides the accession of 150000. Ducats of
yearly Revenue, was a Rival with Florence in the Command of Tuscany; only I may
say of the Florentine, as Count Imball once did, Non supive dove contestesse O
ingegni tanto celebrate de Florentini: That I could never learn where the
celebrated wit of the Florentines lay, when they yielded to the King of Spain,
upon the Treaty 1558. the Ports, 1. Piombino, 2. Telamon, 3. Droitello, 4.
Argenterats, 5. Hercule, 6. Longone, of so much consequence upon the
Mediterranean and Tuscan Seas, that they do not only keep the Dukes of Tuscany
at the Spaniards Devotion, but likewise enable them to carry the Keys of Italy
at their girdle, and become Lords Paramount of those Seas.

5. The Islands in the Tuscan Seas, as 1. Iola or Elba, 10. miles from Piombino
(which if the Turks had, they would be Masters of Province and Italy) defended
by two Castles, on two little Mountains, made impregnable by Art and Nature. 2.
Giglio, bordering on the Genoese. 3. Capraria, not far from Legorn. Time was,
when the Popes of Rome had so great a kindness for this Dukedom, that on the
great Politician Cosmo de Medici's Coronet, one of them caused this to be
engraved, His Quintus Pont. Max. ob eximiam dilectionem and Religionis
Catholicae Zelum praecipuumque, justitiae Donavit. But since, when one of this
Dukes Successors would have been created King of Tuscary, the Pope answered,
That he was content he should be a King in Tuscany, but not King of Tuscany.
Ever since which time, the great Port, on the main Land Legorn, has been well
defended with 12. Galleys, 2. Gallions, 5. Galliasses, the Maritime Strength of
that Dukedom. The Land has been secured with 16000. Men, always in Arms,
under the most experienced Captains, besides so many Fors and Towns in
continual Garrison, that his Estate is said to be made of Iron. In which
respect this Duke is a dreadful Neighbor, both to Millain, with whom he has
waged 5. Years War at a time, and the Genoese and Lucans, which he spares only
out of his respect to the Kingdom of Spain.

This Duke is at this day the richest Prince, and this State the wisest
Commonwealth in Europe, able as well to buy the Popes friendship, and look
into the Intrigues of France, which is their most profitable Friend, and most
dangerous Enemy. The first in respect of Spain, whose ambitious Counsels,
touching the seizure of Italy, it disturbs. The second in respect of Venice and
Genoa, whose troublesome Pretensions it may effectually assist. Neither is the Sea of Romes favor less considerable to this State, than the Realm of
France's, since, besides it is mediation between this Dukedom, and the Empire
(in whose Court this Duke bestows 35000. Crowns yearly for favor) if the
Pope should be angry, he has an open Passage into Tuscany, advantaged with
supplies of all kinds from Lombardy and Bononia; whereas, on the other side;
the Tuscan has no way to invade St. Peter's Patrimony, but over such craggy
Mountains, as no Army or Artillery can pass, or be maintained. Toward other
Princes he carries a fair respect, as willing to maintain the Trade of Legorn
and Florence; toward which, and the Sea-Forces that must preserve it, this
Prince has amassed an infinite treasure; and may do very well, but that the
Genoans and Venetians have this advantage of him, that they are as wise in
public Counsels, as his People are in private; and that they can alter their
Resolutions with the Occasions, whilst they of Florence stick to their Decrees,
notwithstanding all Events. Besides that, this Prince, with the assistance of
his Brother, and Uncle, of the Sacred College, have this defect, that they
pretend to arrive at that in a short time, to which other Potentates could not
attain, but by a succession of many Ages. Yet the Dukedom being centred in the
very Navel of Italy, is thereby furthest from Invasion on all sides, and the
most participant of the Common Interest, which may secure that State in the
busiest times, though a little overawed by the Spaniard, who holds in actual
possession Pont Hercule, Telemene, and Piombino, the Setlers (as the Historians
call them) of Hetruria.

SARDINIA.
AN Unhealthy Place, where there is no more fresh Water, than what is rained
down, and kept from the VVinter to Summer, which lies West of Sicily, some
200. Miles from Cape Bo^^, or Cape Cow, being a convenient Passage into Africa;
the People of which Place are so given to Hunting, Running, and other riotous
Matches, and thereby so prone to Rebellion, that the Spaniard permits not a
Cutler amongst them; but by reason of the ignorance of their Clergy and People
(so rude, that after the Mass said by rote, they will dance and sing in their
Churches, in a way unbecoming either an Alehouse or Tavern) much devoted to the
Church of Rome, and, for it is sake, to the King of Spain, who governs it by a
Viceroy, who resides at Calaris; and must of necessity be a Spaniard; under
whom are 2. Deputy-Governours, Spaniards also, the one for Cape Cagliari,
toward Africa, and the other toward Cape Lugierdois, toward Corsica; both
secured by the 3. Islands about them, 1. Isola Rossa, 2. Afineria, 3. St.
Peter's, which belong likewise to the King of Spain. It Is security against the
Turks, this Place owes to the Pisans and Genoans; and it is safety upon the
French, and other Nations Incursions into Africa, it is beholding for to Rome
and Venice; so that the King of Spain need not fear it, as long as he is in the
Genoans Books so much for Use-money, in the Venetians for Trade, and the Popes
for Kingdoms.

SICILY.
THis Kingdom, environed round with the Tuscan Sea, contains 700. Miles in
compass, joined to Italy by the narrow Straight Mestaena (not a mile and a half
broad) shooting into the Sea, with 3. Promontories, 1. Capo de Bow, Northward;
2. Capo Passaw, VVestward; 3. Capo Boio, Southward; and secured by the 2.
dangerous Gulphs, Scilla and Charybdis. The Granary formerly of Rome, and now
of Italy, Spain, and Barbary; besides Malta, and the adjacent Isles, made up of
4. Provinces, 1. Vallis de Noto, Eastward; 2. Mazam, Southward; 3. Mona,
Northward; and 4. the Aeolian Islands, VVestward, by Don Pedro, King of
Arragon, after the Sicilian Vespers, added to Arragon, and in right of Arragon
to Spain, with whose Fortunes it stands and falls. It Is 7. chief Port Towns
being guarded by 18. Men of War, and it is 3. Divisions kept under by 3000.
Men. It were worth the while, to understand the reason, why so devout a Son of
the Church of Rome, as the King of Spain, should renounce it is Supremacy in
this Island, forbidding any man, upon pain of death, to appeal to the Court of
Rome; insomuch that Baronius, in his 11th. Tome, writes against him; and he
has forbidden the Importation of that Book, into either Naples, or Sicily,
upon pain of Banishment to Noblemen, and the Galleys to the common People.
Indeed, since that Author has taught the Court of Rome the supposititiousness
of the Bull, whereby Spain holds this Place, it is high time to exclude the
Power of that Court, and deny their Authority to dispose of it to any, since
they find not the Grant whereby it was bestowed on it. But now the Affairs of
Spain are so weak, it were well the Jesuits were banished Sicily, lest, upon
King Philip's death, they solemnly divide what he (as they alleged) unlawfully
united, viz. the Temporal, and the Spiritual Dominion, and give to Caesar, the
things which are Caesar's, and the Pope, the things that are the Popes, making
the Viceroy a King, under the Emperor, and the Bishops Dependents on the
Pope: To which Design, the severity of the Governors (a Spanish Error here)
will contribute as much in Sicily, as the Indulgence of the Emperor in Germany.

THE Kingdom OF NAPLES.
WHen we reflect on the State of this Kingdom, the frequent Seditions in it
were a Wonder, considering the Settlement of the Spanish Reiglement (but for
Spains 2. Over-sights in Government, alterations of Vice-Royes, and oppression
of Subjects) and the present Peace, were a Miracle, considering the subtilty
and restlessness of the Inhabitants; but for Spains two politic Diversions,
the one more serious, an hourly Devotion; the other more jocund, a daily
Comedy; they would revenge their being so poor, but that they are kept so, as
well by their own vanity, which is wisely humored, as their Governors
Impositions, which are necessarily exacted; besides the two Securities for
their Peaceableness, viz. 1. That the Commonalty thinks all Employment above
them, but the Plough: 2. That the Gentry judge all Business below them, but
their Pleasure; the first of which humors will keep them too low, and the
second too bare, to be troublesome; to which I may add two more, 1. Their
Perfidy and Treachery, that makes it impossible for them to trust one another
in a Design: 2. Their Rudeness and Ignorance, whereby they are capable of
managing nothing but the great Horse. Were not half the Neapolitan Clergy
Dependents on the King, Spain might be jealous of Rome; and did not half hold
of the Pope, Rome might distrust Spain; and because they were wholly neithers,
both might fear, did not that, in this last Age, set up for the Spiritual
Monarchy of this, and this for the Temporal one of that. The Fate of Italy is
it is only security against the French, and that of Europe against the Turk;
while this last had often invaded it, as they did 1433. had it not been the Key
of Christendom; and the first had often surprised it, as they intended under
Lewis the 12th. but that is an Inlet into the Papacy: though the People would
out at the Backdoor, under the Saracen, as formerly, but that they choose
slavery (as they call their duty) rather than barbarism: And at the Fore-door,
under the French, but that that is not an Escape, but a change of pressures.
The Emissaries of Richlieu and Mazarine had often embroyled this Place, had not
those more numerous, from the Pope, secured it. The Horse bestowed on his
Holiness, keeping the King of Spain in the Saddle, and the Caution that the
Church puts in at that Ceremony, that she be not prejudiced in her Right, is
the best ground: Of the other, the King of Spain puts, that he be not disturbed
in his Power, especially since the Duke of Modena could do the French against
Arragon, as much right as Gone Salvo did Arragon against France, did not Millain
bestir it is self, on the one hand; and had not the Pope diverted the French, on
the other: Although the modern ambition of the Nepolitan Noblemen, is more
dangerous at this time, than the ancient pretension of the French King (albeit
bottomed on the Duke of Anjou's Adoption, Pope Clement the 7th's Confirmation,
the last Will of the Duke of Main, and the Agreement between Lewis the 12th.
and Ferdinand of Castile, nothing obstructing, but the Popes gift of it upon
Spain) did not the Spanish Preferment divide, and the Castilian Army of 6000.
Foot, and 2000. Horse, awe them, and their King prove too hard for them. I know
not whether more by drayning 22000. Neapolitans into the Spanish Garrisons, or
by drawing 4000. Germans into the Neapolitan. Besides that, every second House
maintains a foot Soldier (a Janizary extraordinary) sent out of Spain or
Germany. 1. Which together with the Spaniards firm League with the Pope, 2.
their Confederacy in Italy, 3. their Impoverishing of the Nobility, 4. their
Indulgence to the Commonalty, 5. their strong Navy at Sea, 6. the Jealousies of
France and Germany, 7. the Largesses bestowed on the Clergy, and 8. the Fears
of Venice (the 8. Branches of their Interest of State) may secure the Peace of
that unquiet Place, for this Age, if it escapes an alteration upon the death of
the King of Spain, whose Treasure is more beholding to the Gabals of Naples,
that come to 4. Millions of Crowns (the People paying there for every thing
they enjoy, to their very Sallets) than to the Mines of India, that cost them
more.

THE Republique OF RAGUSA.
THE Command of this puny State is of little Extent, the Soil very unfruitful
and steril, without any River, and the City situated among abrupt Hills, and
many mighty Neighbors, and nevertheless this Republique, for some hundreds of
Years, when as other greater Soveraignties of Senia, Bosnia, Hungary, etc. were
destroyed by the Turk, has not only preserved her self, but advanced her
Subjects in Wealth and Reputation. She commands in the Dalmatian Coast, from
Cape Cumeno, to Castelnuovo, about 4. Miles into the Land; as also over these
4. Islands, Agosta, Melada, Inpana, Calamita.

The City lying long-wayes, is yet no more than 2000. Paces in it is
Circumference, and cannot be made greater, or enlarged, because of one side it
lies against a Rock, which commands it; and on the other against the Sea; And
because Merchandise and Peace have flourished here so long, it is built very
narrow, with high Houses, and is full of Inhabitants; who being necessitated to
spread themselves among the adjacent Lands, when they have gotten Estates, fix
at home. It is fortified with Walls, and quadrangular Towers, ramm'd and filled
with Earth; but the impregnable Castle standing upon the aforesaid Rock, and
encompassed in a manner with the Sea, commands both it, and the Haven.

No man, but a Gentleman of Ragusa, has any thing to do in the Government; and
he that marries with an under Degree, loses his Gentility; by which means
there are now but 24. Families. All Gentlemen aged 20. are Members of the Great
Council; and of these Gentry there were lately in number 317. In all their
Councils, they vote by Ballot, and to any Offices and Dignities, 3. are first
named, and out of them one chosen, as in Venice. The Rector of the Republique,
with his 11. Counselors, out of different Families, appear in all the
Colleges, there to vote with those of the College. These 12. were called the
Little Council, for they assemble every day, to receive Petitions,
Remonstrances, Agents, Envoyes, or Letters, either from Strangers, or the
Inhabitants, and do deliberate thereupon, but conclude nothing; In this manner
they serve 12. Months, and are then discharged, and are not eligible again for
2. Years, as is usual in all the Colleges, except the Senate, and the Pregadi,
who are always continued. This Senate consists of 48. and with the Little
Council of 12. is made up to 60. who resolve upon all which the Little Council
proposes. Thitty five of these is a Quorum, and may conclude by Major Voices;
for among these 60. are always 5. old men, of diverse Families, who are to be
present at such Resolutions; and to provide Ne quod detrimenti capiat
Respublica.

There are 4. Collectors, who receive the Intrado or Revenue of the Public,
and pay, upon assignation of the Little Council, to the 2. under Receivers,
that which they have occasion for the ordinary Charge of the Public, and that
which remains overplus, is brought into the Treasury, of which 5. ancient
honorable persons (as they do the Money of the Orphans) keep the Keys, and
these men continue 5. Years in this service.

Their whole Revenue can hardly amount to 30000 l. Sterling, which arises
chiefly out of the Impost on Wine, and out of this they pay the Turk for
Protection 5000 l. and lay-out as much upon his Bashaws, to have Friends at
Court; for their great Negotiation in the Levant, makes them always to have
business there; for this Money they are Toll and Custom free, which is a matter
of great advantage to them, and preferrs their Commodities before any others.

The whole Force of this Commonwealth, besides the Burgers, is a 100.
Hungarians, who are a kind of Garrison to the City, and serve the Magistrate to
put Sentences in Execution. These are commanded by City night Captains, 6.
whereof are chosen every 2. Months, 3. of them shut the Gates by day, and guard
them with Burgers, and some of these Hungarians, till midnight, then come the
other 3. Captains, and relieve their Brothers, and in the Morning open the
Gates; before the shutting whereof, according to the Roll, 2. Gentlemen, under
40. Years old, do daily guard, the one the Castle of St. Lawrence, and the
other the new Fort, and tarry there till they are relieved, by Persons of the
same quality, the next day; all other Officers and Captains, who serve the
State abroad, either in War, or Negotiation, are chosen by the great Senate,
some for 7. others for 12. Months.

The Inhabitants of Ragusa are of the Romish Religion, and have a Bishop, but
he must be a Stranger; Moreover they have 2. Churches, one for the Men, where
the Preachers are hired by the year, by the State; and the other for the Women,
where Preachers are hired for their lives; the Commonwealth not fearing the
levity and sedition of the Women, who are naturally modest, and keep always at
home; but suspecting the Men, who, by the constant insinuations and
inculcations of some pestilent Doctrines, might be perverted. The charge of the
Church Goods and Revenue is committed to three Ecclesiastiques. Thus have I
given a more particular account of this little Spot, because nothing was ever
yet published, to give satisfaction, what it is Module was. As to it is Interest,
the Turk governs it wholly, and it is inconsiderable to Christendom. He could
swallow it when he would, for all the Venetian (contrary to the vulgar Error,
that it is a Poize betwixt them) were it not, that he cannot make more of it,
nor so much, as now he does. It suffices, that they do abundance of good
Offices, in relieving of Christans, in their Traffiquing in the Levant, and
that is the best supply to be expected from them.

GERMANY, AND The several Dominions, Principalities, and States thereof.
WE are now to discourse of a great, but heterogeneous Body, made up of diverse
Religions, diverse Laws and Customs, and different Constitutions, under many
Princes; for in the Declension of the Roman Empire, after the frequent
Devastations of it by the Barbarians, when Charlemaign had settled his Conquest
therein, he divided it among his Sons; and their Successors likewise multiplied
it into more Divisions: Afterward, when the Empire came to be Elective, by the
Aurca Bulla (and had lessened the Popes peremptory and absolute Authority
therein, who yet continues formalities of Confirmation, and without which none
can be called Augustus, the only bar to Protestant Princes, on whom he will
never conferr it) and the Power thereof confirmed by Gregory the 5th, a German,
to the three Electors Ecclesiastic, and 4. Temporal, all being within the Pale
of the Empire; the Candidates, for that Dignity, to assure their Advancement,
would bribe Voices with the Patrimony thereof, by which means, and their
liberality to their Favorites, while it was in their power to do them good (as
knowing their Authority was very transient) together with the Covetousness, and
sordid Huckstery of some Emperors, who sold the Imperial Lands for Money,
little or nothing was left to maintain the Majesty of the Place.

Besides these squanderings made in Germany, a great deal more has been limbed
from it, which belonged to it, as it was the Representative of the Roman
Empire, under which name it ports it to this day; but it is but a mere shadow
of that mighty State; for the Pope stripped it of all it is Feathers in Italy
through the frequent Broils raised by Excommunication and Anathemaes against
the Emperors, who were willing to part with that distant Dominion, which they
could not keep, without unsufferable Expense and Hazard of all; then the Dukes
of Savoy and Lorrain refused to own them, more than formally, and in Title,
which were main Members of the Empire; as did also the King of Denmark.

It will be needless to insist longer upon this Consideration, having premised,
that for 10. Descents together, the Dignity has continued in the Austrian
Family, and three before that, the Founder of this Family being Rodulph, Earl
of Habsburg, a Prince of a mean Estate, but great Spirit, who succeeded our
Earl, Richard of Cornwall, after a vacancy of 12. Years, the Electors
continuing it so long in vain, in hope of a Purchaser like Richard, the
greatest Moneyed Man in Europe. The perpetuating of it in this Family so long,
was effected by the policy of Charles the 5th. who caused his Brother Ferdinand
to be Elected Rex Romanorum in his life time, and soon after resigned the
Empire to him; which course has been observed ever since, till the Reign of
Leopold Ignatius, the present Emperor, who was chosen after his Father's
death, but his Brother Ferdinand was chosen before him in this manner. The
College of these Electors was once a Septemvirate, but by the proscription of
Frederick Count Palatine, the Father of this present Prince, the Duke of
Bavaria was substituted in his Place; and upon the Restoration of this Charles
Lodowick, an Expedient was found to make him the Octovir, but so, that he is
the last of them all, by this means. Their Names are the Archbishop of Mentz,
Archbishop of Triers, and Archbishop of Colen, Spiritual Electors; the King
of Bohemia, the Elector of Saxony, Duke of Bavaria, Marquess of Brandenburg,
and Count Palatine of the Rhine: And as to their Precedence, the
Ecclesiastical, who are chosen by and out of their own Function, have the first
place; among the Secular, the King of Bohemia, between the later three of the
four, it is not yet agreed. There are other great and free Princes, who have
Voices in the Imperial Diets, and are Tributaries at will to the Emperor, such
are the Dukes of Brunswick. Lunenburg, Wittenburg, Lantgrave of Hassia, etc.
several Bishops, with secular Jurisdiction, as of Saltzburg, etc. And lastly,
Free Cities, which are of two sorts, not reckoning the Residences or Metropolis
of free Princes, viz. Cities Imperial, in number 60. formerly 96. such as have
bought their Liberties of the Emperors, and pay a small tribute yearly, and
ds. of all Assessements at the Diets to them, such as Spiers, Worms,
Noremburg, Stralburg, and many others; of all which more particularly in the
Description of the several Provinces.

As to the Religion of this People, except under Ecclesiastical States, the
Duke of Bavaria, and the Hereditary Countries of the Emperor, it is altogether
Reformed, but for the most part Lutheran; betwixt whom, and the Calvinist,
there is as great a Fend and Difference, as between the Romanists, and either
of them.

The Force of this whole Region of Germany, has been computed to amount to
200000. Men, and somewhat above half that number has been often seen effect if
in one body, in Expeditions against the Turks; and if we consider the multitude
of Garrisons, and the many Armies on foot, in the late War, between Sweden, and
this Empire, there can be thought to be few less of both sides. The best
Footmen are those of Tiroll, Swevia, and Westphalia: the best Horsemen, those
of Brunswick, Cleveland, and Franconia. Of Weapons, they handle the Sword and
Harquebuze best. In the Field they are very strong, as well to give the Charge,
as to bear the Shock; where Order, which they duly observe, is of great effect,
and it is as it were natural unto them, to keep a stately pace, and firm
standing. They are not accounted on for defense of Fortresses, or to hold
Garrisons: and by reason of their corpulent bodies, they are not fit to storm a
Town, unless to fill the breaches: And therefore they are accounted rather
resolute and constant, than fierce and courageous; for they do not much affect
that service, wherein they see too much of hazard. After the Victory, they do
kill all whom they meet, without difference of Age, Sex, or Calling. If the War
be drawn out at length, or if they be close besieged, they presently either
mutiny, or give up the Town (but there always excepting to general Rules.) In
Camp they can endure no delays, nor will they practice the Art of Temporizing:
If their first Enterprise and Attempt falls not out to their mind, they will
hardly be engaged again, or persuaded to it by any means; and if they once
begin to run, they will hardly turn their backs again, as was woefully manifest
in the Battle of Kevesture, in 1596. betwixt Matthias the Archduke, and Sultan
Mahomet. He that retains them, must be at extraordinary charge, and great
trouble, by reason of their Baggages, and Wives, who follow the Camp, and
consume abundance of Provision, and without that they stand in no stead. Their
Horses are rather strong than courageous, of ten of which, eight are usually
pressed from the Plough, which renders them of small service; and besides, they
quail when they see their blood.

The Revenue of the Empire, which comes to the Emperor, is so little worth,
that it is scarce worth mentioning; for, besides the Tribute paid by the free
Cities, which is but 15000. Guilders yearly, 1500 l. Sterling, there is little
else that can be reckoned as a Revenue; It had need therefore of some Prince,
whose own Estate can support the Grandeur of the Dignity; which has been
another reason, why the House of Austria has held it so long: as also, for
that it is the only Rampire against the formidable Power of the Turks. And his
Authority is as little as his Revenue, for he has no Negative Voice, but is as
it were the supreme Officer, to execute the Decrees of the Diets: whereas the
Princes, and free Cities, are absolutely Sovereign; and can, in their Assembly
General, Depose him, if they see cause.

We come now to Particulars, and pass into East-Freisland, 1. East-Freisland.
a County of the Empire, sub-divided into the County of Embden, or
East-Freisland properly so called, and the County of Oldenburg, both of them
extending Northwards, to the German Ocean; bounded on the West with the River
Emms, which parts them from West-Freisland; on the East with the River Weser,
which divides them from Westphalia; and on the South with the Earldom of Mark.
It is a very fruitful Country, and most populous, thick built, full of Arable
and Pasture Land, affording plenty of excellent Cattle, Butter, Corn, etc. to
their Neighbors. The Earldom of East-Freisland, or Embden, was formerly
governed by Provincial Earls, under the Emperors of Germany, to whom they were
accountable, until the Year 1453. when Ubrick the Governor was invested with
the Hereditary Title of it, in whose Family it continues at this day. That
which advanced him, being his Conquest of the City of Embden, from the
Hamburgers; which City, considerable for its Traffic and Situation, becoming
Calvinist, turned Rebel, and revolted from their Prince, as a Lutheran, and
confederated themselves, as a Republique, with the States of Holland, in 1592.
and so continues.

The Count of Oldenburg is of a far antienter standing, and of a Princely
Descendency, and is Master of as fine, and larger a Country, by some Provinces
bequeathed to him by the Countess of Jevere; infinitely stored with Oxen,
Sheep, Butter, etc. and with Venison also, which run in large and fair Woods,
the pleasant Game of the Gentry of this County. He is allied to the King of
Denmark, as descended from a common Ancestor, Christiern the 2d. King of
Denmark, and the 4th. of the Name of Earl of Oldenburg.

Both these Princes are reckoned as Members of the Empire, but they are lame
ones, and are of no use to it, for they contribute nothing to the public
Charge, nor come to the Diets; but which means they exempt themselves, and are
unconcerned in this Turkish War. The Earl of East-Freisland is like to be
engaged in this Holland Business, about the Eyler Sconce: nor will the Count of
Oldenburg be suffered to be at quiet, if it comes once to Arms and Parties.
However, their Interest is to live at Peace, and good Correspondence with their
Neighbors, the best security to small Estates; but there are some old Grudges,
which this Juncture will give vent to: And so we leave them, and pass to
Westphalia.

This Country is bounded on the North with the Duchy of Holstein, 2.
Westphalia.
and the River Elb; on the East and South with Hassia, etc. and on the West
with Colen, Cleveland, Overryssel, and the two Freislands. The Country is in
most places full of VVoods, which bear plenty of Acorns, and nourish many herds
of Swine, which make Bacon of excellent relish and tenderness: and in other
places as plentiful of Corn. In this Province stands the City and Bishopric of
Munster, infamous for the Story of John of Leyden, and as famous for the late
Treaty, and general Pacification, in 1648. Since which time this City has had
some Disputes with their Bishop, but now composed to a good understanding, by
the powerful Interest of the Hollander, who espoused the Cities quarrel. 2.
Minden, once a Bishopric, now settled upon the Marquess of Brandenburg, with
the Title of Prince, in lieu of what the Swede had of his, by the same Treaty:
He has likewise here a secular Town and County of Ravensberg, in right of his
part-inheritance in the Duchy of Cleve. Here is also the Bishopric of
Osnaling, the alternate succession to the Profits whereof, is given, by the
Munster Treaty, to the Duke of Brunswick, for his cession of his Bishopric of
Halberstadt. Not to omit the Town and Castle of Aremberg, with the ample and
goodly Patrimony thereof, which gives Title to the noble Family of the Counts
of Aremberg, eminent for their service done the King of Spain, in the Low
Countries, where, as his Subjects, they have other Estates.

Lastly, The Bishopric of Bremen, which is the second Division of Westphalia;
formerly governed by its own Diocesans, but of modern times the King of
Denmark's Sons enjoyed the Title, with the Protection of it; till, by the late
Treaty at Munster, it was assigned, together with the Bishopric of Verde, to
the Swede (with condition, that the City and Territory should enjoy their
ancient Privileges and Liberties) who, with much ado, had Possession delivered
to his General Count Coningsmarck. It is a rich and fair City, and much
traffiqued, by reason of its situation upon the Weser, which discharges it
self into the Elb, and so jointly into the German Ocean. In this Bishopric
stands the City of Stoad, famous once, and made for ever, by the English
Staple, upon some discontent removed some time agon hither from Hamburgh.

There are other petty States and Earldomes herein, which, together with the
rest, acknowledge the Emperor, but it is more in show than effect; although
they were scared to some real performances, by the Emperors successes in these
parts, in 1627, when he overcame the Dane. The Title hereof as Ducal, is used
by the Archbishop of Colen, and the House of Saxon Lunenburg; but with the
same Profits thence, as the Emperor receives; notwithstanding, in this
pressing Condition of the Empire, and in all general Taxes, they pay their
proportion, as a Circuit of the Empire.

So we pass Westward, to another Border of the Empire, 3. Cleve.
viz. the Duchy of Cleveland, consisting, while it was the entire Patrimony of
those Dukes, of four Members, 1. Cleve, 2. Gulick, 3. Berg or Mont, 4. Marck;
the two last divided from the other by the Rhine, and severally joined, some
two Centuries ago, to one another, in the Family of Cleve; the last Duke
whereof, John William, dying in 1610. without Issue, this ample and princely
Estate, the main whereof had continued 900. Years in this Family, came to be
divided (after mature consideration of the evil of a War) equally between the
Marquess of Brandenburg, and Wolfgang, Duke of Newburg, a younger Descendant of
the House Palatine; whose Fathers had married the Sisters of the deceased Duke,
but Brandenburg the eldest. It was first agreed between these two Princes, to
govern the Estates jointly, but afterward they fell out, by being too
familiar; insomuch that the Brandenburger, at a Treatment made by him, gave the
other a box of the ear; which unseemly injury, caused the Palatine of Newburg,
to call in the Spaniard, and the other the States General: Of which Story read
more in the Duke of Rohans Observations upon this subject. Both the Partitions
are subject to the Laws of the Empire, and are obliged to the proportionable
supplies.

Adjoining to this Country are the three Electoral Arch-bishopricks, 4. Colen.
the first whereof is that of Colen, a fair and goodly Country, bounded every
way upon some part of the Duchy of Cleve, but on the South limited by the Land
of Triers; the present Elector is the Uncle to the Duke of Bavaria, and
considerable in his Interest, as to the Catholic Cause, being also Prince and
Pastor of the City and Jurisdiction of Liege, the Government whereof resides
in him, and the Canons of that Cathedral, who by right elect their Prince or
Protector as aforesaid: This Archbishop is Chancellor of Italy, and second in
Dignity.

To this succeeds the Archbishopric of Triers, Triers.
whose Bishop is the Chancellor of France for the Emperor: This Country lies
all along South the Moselle, on the East lies Luxemburg, on the West Franconia;
It is a pleasant, but not a fruitful Country.

The Archbishop of Mentz, Mentz.
although last mentioned, is first in Dignity, as being Chancellor of the
sacred Empire: His Jurisdiction, like some of our Diocesses, lies dispersed in
several Countries; so that his temporal Estate is a great deal less than the
other two: Nor had any of them enjoyed such secular advantages of Dominion, had
it not been for that the Empire was made Elective, and they set their price
often upon the Market; Besides, there has happened a dissolution of many great
Estates, out of which they have carved to themselves what they liked, with the
Connivence of the Empire, and under the specious pretense of Deedands, and
Bequests to the Church.

The Interest of these Electors, is to defend the Papal, Imperial, and their
own Authority, of which they are equally jealous, from the Reformed:
Notwithstanding the Archbishop of Triers took part, or was a secret friend to
France, in the late Swedish War, which made the French so hot upon the rescue
of his Country, and so resolute in the freeing of it: But in case of danger to
the Empire, no question is to be made, but they will unanimously concur
against it; and with themselves, they draw all the Ecclesiastical States of
Germany: And are prone enough to assist the Emperor against the Turk.

The next Principality or Duchy we shall treat of is Lorrain, 5. Lorrain.
the Duke whereof is a Prince of the Empire, and the Country reckoned as a part
of the fifth Circle of the Rhine; and as a Feudatory thereof, stickled hard in
the late War, for the Emperor, to the loss of his Country, and his almost
undoing; but by the Treaty of the general Peace, he was restored to a great
part of it. It is bounded and circumscribed between the lower Palatinate,
Alsats, Triers, the Duchy of Bar, Burgundy, and Luxemburg, all of them fine
Provinces; nor is Lorrain inferior to the most of them, were it not for some
dark and thick Forests, which intersperse the Country. There were in it
formerly some Imperial Towns, as Metz, Verdun, and Thoul; but Henry the 2d. of
France, reduced them under his obedience, and erected a Parliament there, to
make it a perpetual Province of France, as it has since proved: Of late it
has lost some Ducal Towns (and Provinces, as the whole Duchy of Bar, taken
from him by Lewis the 13th. and County of Clermont) viz. Moyenvic, Stenay, Dun,
and Jametz; these three last belonging formerly to the Prince of Conde, and
restored to him by this Treaty; and the Provost-ship of Merville; Besides, the
Duke is at all times to give passage to the French Forces into Germany, and to
renounce all Leagues, Alliances, and Intelligences with any foreign States or
Princes, to the prejudice of that Kingdom; withal, he was bound up to an
acquiescence in whatsoever had passed by judicial proceeding, gift, or disposal
of the Kings of France or Spain, until the date of the Treaty, by which these
Conditions were also agreed to be ratified by the Emperor: This was a bad
bargain, but more could not be obtained; so that the said Duke, feeing himself
thus exposed to the Arms of the French King, and any sudden surprise, upon
pretense of passage, besides many other Retrenchments of his Sovereignty, did
offer, by a Treaty, to surrender the same wholly into the hands of the King,
upon Condition, his Family to be admitted, as Princes of the Blood, and to the
succession of the Crown, after those of Bourbon, with some Provision of Money
and Pension, for the support of his Dignity and Family; and this was highly
talked of, and near a Conclusion, but it is not yet confirmed and accomplished.

As to his Interest, we may guess how narrow it is; and how he is pent up, as
to any Concern of his in Europe, by that comprehensive Clause, That he shall
not hold Intelligence with any Prince, to the prejudice of France; which will
be construed so, if he send but a Complement to any of them. The French King
has had a longing envious eye upon his Country, as dis-joyning his Conquests
from his other Countries, and therefore he lives here but precariously, and as
a Tenant at will. As to the Turks, he concludes, there are no such Infidels, as
the French Ministers of State, who laid all ways to entrap him, and finally
forced him to take Arms against France, as a desperate remedy. Besides, he is
extremely poor (although his Revenue is said to amount to 700000. Crowns, a
good part whereof arises from his Salt made here, which the French King has
bargained to be afforded to Metz, and Alsatia, etc. a price current) and cannot
lend a Stiver, nor raise a Hand against them, in his present Condition, the
result of his barbarous plunderings, in which his Forces exceeded those very
Tartars and Turks, and like to like was seldom opposed.

We proceed next to Alsatia, 6 Alsatia.
or Elsas, whose boundaties are these, briefly; On the East the Rhine, with
Baden, on the North the Palatinate, on the South part of Switzerland, and on
the West Lorrain; divided by the Mountain Voyesus; a fine and pleasant Country,
d vided into three parts, the Lower, and the Higher, and the third called
Zuricgaw, bordering upon Switzerland, the two last Divisions, by the Treaty of
Munster, being assigned over to the French King, in the name of the whole (on
Condition only of paying 30000 l. Sterling to the Archduke of Inspruck, the
Province before belonging to the Imperial Family) for his Expenses in the
preceding War of the Lower Alsatia. The Bishop of Strasburg, or Argentina, the
chief City seated therein, is yet Lord and Governor: There are in it besides
many Imperial Cities, free from the Jurisdiction of the French; so that he has
little more than the modern Strengths, and Command of the Country: and yet so
much in that, by his free passage into Germany, that he is well recompensed for
troubling it; having Philipsburg, a most strong Town in the Palatinate, and the
County and Town of Brisac added to the bargain. There is some Difference
arisen, by some pretenses of the French, to admit the Governors of the two
Imperial Cities of Colmar and Slechstadt, both ancient and strong Towns; and
this Duke Mazarini demands, by his right, as the Governor of the Province, and
the King intends to effect by force; which makes many men think, there are some
Designs that way, upon this quarrelling Punctilio; but the free Cities will
assuredly not suffer any such intrusion or violence upon their Privileges, and
the Princes will brook it as little: Considering this, and other the like
Piques, in other places, in this Juncture, it seems as if there were a
Conspiration of those little Mischiefs, like the appearance of the small Cloud,
that will condensate and overspread Christendom at last, and shower it with
abundance of blood and misery.

What this Country signifies against the Turk, is easily resolvable, for hinc
Dolor hinc Lachrymae, here was the fatal Jealousy lodged, that rendered the
Emperor so impotent and feeble against the Barbarians. This, if any thing, is
one of the great Remoras, that retarded the quick work, which would have been
made with that Enemy, by the German Princes, and therefore we will put down
this Province for a Cipher, if it be not already reckoned, with some large
numeral Figure, by the other side.

The Palatinate lies next to this, with which it is bounded on the South; 7.
Palate.
on the East with the Dukedom of Wittenberg, and some part of Franconia; and on
the West with Triers: And because this Country somewhat concerns us, by the
alliance of this Prince Elector to the Crown of England, we will be a little
larger, for full satisfaction and information of the Reader, in the whole
series of the late Affairs of that Family, than we have hitherto been; but
according to proportion, the Lower Palatinate, which is all the Dominion of
this Prince, being in breadth but 90. Miles, and in length 72. It is one of the
most pleasant Countries of Germany, and affords the best Rhenish Wires; the
Princes always, till this late misfortune, reputed the wisest, as who had
enlarged their Estates, and from the beginning raised it from nothing, being
mere Courtiers, or great Officers at first, although else acknowledged to be
the Descendents of Charlemaign.

In this Grandeur these Princes continued till the Year 1620. when the Family
seemed to have received the greatest accession and accrument of Felicity, by
the Marriage of Frederick the 5th. (Nephew to Prince Maurice, by his Sister
Louisa, married to Frederick the 4th.) with our Princess Elizabeth Daughter of
King James, some time before; and his Investiture in the Crown of Bohemia, by
the Election of those States; who indeed, by the Concession of many Princes, of
the House of Austria themselves (Letters reversate they call them) and by their
own Customs and Privileges, had right thereunto; but the choice and
acceptance thereof, being not so free and voluntary on his part, for that some
affronts were like to be put upon him by the Chamber of Spires, who were ready
to proceed to Sentence against him, for his demolishing Udenheim, which the
Bishop of Spires, whose Town it was, was then a fortifying; which Spinola
afterward took in hand, and finished, and called it Philipsburg, now in the
possession of the French. The Reader is here to understand, that in this Lower
Palatinate, there are several famous Imperial Towns and Bishoprics, as Worms,
Spires, although Feudatories, for the most part of their Estates, to the
Princes Electors.

No sooner was the Palatine King of Bohemia, but the War began to flame in
Germany, portended by a fearful Comet in 1618. in the first Battle whereof at
Prague, the King of Bohemia, assisted by Bethlem Gabor's Transylvanians, and
Hungarians, was totally routed by Count Bucquoy, the young Prince of Anhalt
slain, a great slaughter made, and Prague soon after taken: This Battle was
fought on the 5th. of November 1620. and thereupon the King, as he was then
called, fled to Breslaw in Silesia, where he secured himself, committing the
care of his Estate to the Marquess of Anspach, who was General of the
Confederate Protestant Princes; but being corrupted by Spinola's Gold, who was
sent for out of the Low Countries to attaque the Palatinate, basely sold it,
and the Prince's Interest; by which means Spinola shortly after reduced Manheim
and Frankendale, Garrisoned by the English, but hopeless of relief. Soon after
King Frederick withdrew into Holland, expecting some new undertake of his
Quarrel, and the Protestant Interest, of which Ferdinand the 2d. Emperor, was
a most violent and bitter Enemy. And here he heard the issue of the Danish War,
more to his disadvantage, till the Swede entered Germany, when he followed that
King, and was by him, upon some hard terms, restored to his Estates, which he
enjoyed not long, deceasing at Mentz, November 29. 1632.

But soon after his death, and the King of Sweden's, at the Battle of Lutzen,
the Imperialists overran the Country again, having routed and broke the
Swedish Power at the Battle of Nordlingen; and although some Efforts were made
by Prince Rupert, with some Forces out of Holland, in which service, my Lord
Craven, and other English Gentlemen were engaged; yet were they finally
vanquished, and driven out of the Country, and hardly put to it by swimming to
make their escapes. So that the Country continued sequestered from the young
Prince Elector, till the Treaty at Munster, by which he was restored to the
Lower Palatinate, and made an 8th. Elector, with the Office of Arch-treasurer;
for that his former. Electoral Office, together with all the Appurtenances of
it, and the County of Cham besides, was conferred upon his Counn of Bavaria, of
the Gulielmin Line, this being the Elder, and called the Rodulphin; but the
Younger is far more rich and powerful, and the greatest Enemy to the other:
This Dignity and Estate being given the Bavarian for his assistance of the
Emperor with Men and Money in this War. By the same Treaty, the Emperor was
likewise to give the Elector's younger Brothers and Sisters their Portions in
ready Money; which, Pro benevolo Caesareo affectu in domum Palatinam, as the
words run, he did assent to, and punctually pay and perform.

This Prince now quietly enjoyes what he had by that Treaty, and has been
highly carressed by the present Emperor. He has married a Daughter of the
House of Hassia, between which Family and his there have been frequent Marches.
As to his Interest, it lies in a general Peace and Amity with all Princes, but
especially with the Emperor, and next the Protestant Party, and principally
those of the Calvinian way, which is the Religion professed in his Country, and
of which he was the Chief and Head in Europe. His Alliance leads him to respect
the Kings of England and Denmark; and this King of Sweden's Father was born of
his Aunt: The Family of Nassaw and he are likewise near in Blood, his
Grandmother being the Sister of Prince Maurice, and Daughter of Prince William;
so that he stands secure, and may in time repair his fortunes. Against the Turk
he is at his proportionable Charge, assessed upon him by the Decree of the Dier.

We come next to a brief view of the Upper Palatinate, transferted, with the
County of Cham, to the House of Bavaria; whose Duke Ludovicus, Emperor also of
Germany, upon the partition of Estate, resigned it for ever, some Ages since,
to Rodulphus his elder Brother; who, in right of his Mother Gertrude, the
Daughter, and sole Heir of Henry, Count Palatine of the Rhine, was invested in
all those Dominions and Dignities. In this Province is seated Newburg, the
Title of the second Branch of the House Palatine, and Duke of Cleve, in share
with the Marquess of Brandenburg. Here is also the City of Noremberg, famous
for its rate workmanships, a fine and beautiful Town, yet no River near it, but
the curious Industry of the People supplies that defect. The Country very near
as bigg as the Lower, but nothing so pleasant and fruitful, being chiefly
mountainous and barren, except in Mines of Iron, and some of Siver, one of
which is very considerable: So that it is a great retrenchment and dismembring
of the Palatine Patrimony; but what cannot be cured, must be endured: And so we
pass to Bavaria.

It is bounded on the North with the Upper Palatinate, 8. Bavaria.
on the West with Schwaben, and on the East and South with Austria, Tirol, and
Carinthia; divided into three parts, the Higher, the Lower, and the Bishopric
of Saltzburg, a District, and distinct Jurisdiction of it is self. The Country
generally overspread with Woods, and cold, and barren; but the Lower somewhat
more fruitful, and abundantly more pleasant. In the Higher is seated Munchen,
famous for it is seizure by the King of Sweden, who found infinite Treasure
therein; and for that it is the Residence of the Dukes of Bavaria: In the Lower
Ingolstadt, far more famous, for that it put the first affront upon the King
of Sweden in Germany, and made him give over the siege thereof. 2. Regensburg,
or Ratisbone, famous for the Diets held there, being a most beautiful and
pleasant Fabric; and Passaw, as eminent in former times, for diverse
Consultations held there by the Princes, and for the notable Diet made there,
by Charles the 5th. in favor of the Protestants. As to the District of
Saltzburg, it is a barrener Country than the Higher Bavaria, and considerable
for nothing more, than that their Bishop challenges the precedence of all
other Ecclesiastics, except the three Electors. It borders upon Austria, which
shall limit this Discourse of Germany, because we will consider the Hereditary
Provinces together, when we come to Hungary, and the Actions and Designs
there, as more proper for that place, though with some disorderly revulsion of
this great Body.

The Interest of the Duke of Bavaria is very considerable, he being looked upon
as one of the potentest and richest Princes in Germany, or indeed in Europe;
for he was paid in both hands for his service in Germany; and Duke Maximilian
was else very much aforehand with the World, as his Loans to the Emperor
Ferdinand the 2d. sufficiently manifested. The present Duke is a most zealous
violent Catholic, as was his Father, and therefore sure to the Emperor, as
well as by his Alliance, being born or this Emperor's great Aunt, married
young to old gouty Maximilian, who, by some prolifick Cordials, got for him by
the Jesuits, had Issue by her, but the present Duke, and his Brother, are of
weak Constitutions. The Jesuits have also always had a mighty influence upon
this Court, so that no doubt is to be made of the Duke's forwardness in the War
against the Turks, to which the Duke offered himself upon condition he should
be made General; notwithstanding he will, and has advanced already some very
considerable Supplies, by way of Loan; and as to his Proportions rated upon
him, they will be ready with the foremost, and are likest to do the best
service, for that they are accustomed to the Fruits and Wines of that Country,
having none of their own, any being Neighbors to that. By this Electors Voice,
the Papacy has five Votes against three, in any Matter; and in the Vacancy of
the Empire, a pretension, and forcible exercise of the Vicuriat, which belonged
to the Palatine of the Rhine, not as Elector, but as Count of that Circle, as
he alleges, and so did not forfeit that right. And it is concluded also, that
if the present Emperor dies without aged Issue, the Imperial Dignity will be
given to the Bavarian, who is the only Catholic Prince (not reckoning the
Archdukes of Tirol and Inspruck, as nothing considerable without the Patrimony
of Austria, and whom we shall mention there) of power and ability to support
the Empire. And it was this Dukedom that in effect bore up the Austrian against
the Swedes, and the French, and came off with Victory at last: And so we return
by Franconia.

FRANCONIA is bounded on the East with the Upper Palatinate, 9. Franconia.
on the South with the Palatinate of the Rhine, on the West with Wetteraw; and
on the North with Hassia, etc. It is governed by many distinct Princes, some of
greater, others of lesser Power and Dominion; but the Title of the whole, since
the failer of the French Dukes (for the present Inhabitants are descended of
the old French) is given to the Bishop of Wurtzburg. The Country a fine,
pleasant, fruitful Seat (but skirted with great thick Woods) and the People
good-conditioned, and industrious.

The Bishop of Wurtzburg, as he has the Title of the whole Duchy, which is
also called the Circle of Franconia; so has he a large and spacious Territory,
and the largest Revenue of any one Bishop in Germany: Next to him, in this
Province, is the Bishop of Bamberg, once bigger than now it is, but yet of a
competent Jurisdiction, exempt from any subordination to the Metropolitan. Both
these Bishops are Princes of the Empire, and, as their Religion obliges them,
firm Adherers to the House of Austria, and the Papacy; and therefore very
jealous of their Neighbors, the Protestant Estates, that conjoyn to them,
having suffered exceedingly in the Swedish War.

The Marquess of Anspach, a Descendent of the House or Brandenburg, that
Marquess, who was chosen General by the Princes of the Union, for the Defense
of the Palatinate, 1620. being the youngest. Brother of the Grandfather of the
present Elector, who treacherously suffered Spinola, unfought with, to reduce
the whole Country, his Son Christian is now the present Marquess, and is
obliged to follow the Interest of the elder House. There are in this Circle
also the Earldoms of Henneberg, Hohenlo, Rhesneck, Swartzenburg, etc. the last
of which has yielded abundance of gallant Persons, and the Family at this day
in great estimation. As for Imperial Cities, it is not without its proportion;
but especially Frankfurt is most considerable, not only for its famous Mart,
especially of Books, but for the Election of the German Emperor. These several
Estates do live in good Peace and Correspondence, having smarted for their
former Divisions sufficiently: And so we proceed to the Dukedom of Swevia, or
the Circle of Schwaben.

SCHWABEN is bounded on the East with Bavaria, 10. Schwaben
on the South with Switzerland, on the West with Alsatia, and on the North with
Franconia; It is divided into four parts, Hegow, Algow, Brisgow, and
North-swaben: In the first stands the Imperial Town of Constance, famous for
the Council here held about the three Anti-Popes, and the Condemnation of Huss,
and Hierom of Pragne; It is now under the Protection, or rather in particular
servitude to the House of Austria. In Algow is the noted Town of Auspurg,
called in Latin Augusta Vindelicorum, more celebrated for the Lutheran
Confession, called Confessio Augustana, made by the Protestant Princes, to
Charles the 5th. Here the Family of the Fuggers, a wealthy and splendid Barony,
and who have enlarged their Patrimony by Merchandise, contrary to the custom of
Nobles in Germany, have great and ample Possessions. I mention this Family the
rather, because he is at present one of the Major Generals of the Rix Army,
designed against the Turk. In the third Division stands that memorable Town of
Brisach, seated upon the top of a Mountain, and strongly fortified, and as
pleasantly built, but incommodated for want of Water, having but one Well, and
the Water which, with much trouble, they bring from the Rhine, that runs at the
foot of the said Mountain. In the fourth part stands Norlingen, famous for the
great and fatal Overthrow given the Swedes there, by Ferdinand the 3d. where
General Banier was slain, and General Horn taken Prisoner, and the Duke of
Weymor put to his shifts, by whose un-advisedness the Swedes were engaged.
Furstenburg, which gives Title to the Earls thereof, Princes of the Empire, and
Men eminent in their Generations. And lastly, Ulme, the chief among many other
Imperial Cities in this Tract. Nothing more remains to be said of this Region,
but that there is no Person that pretends Title to it, the Dukes thereof being
long since extinguished, and their Patrimony dismembered among the petty
Princes, and Imperial Towns (save that the Archdukes of Austria enjoy Brisgow,
by virtue of a Purchase made with the Proprietor (some Ages since) disturbed in
his Possession by rebellious Subjects) who have well feathered their Nests
therewith. There has nothing of Feud passed in this Circle since the Treaty:
And so we proceed to Wetteraw.

WETTERAW is bounded on the East with Franconia, 11. Wetteraw.
on the South with the Lower Palatinate, on the West with Colen, and on the
North with Hassia; It consists of several petty Estates confederated together,
viz. Of the Counts of Nassaw, the Earls of Hanaw and Solins, the Baron of
Lichteberg, and two Imperial Cities. The County of Nassaw is a most pleasant
fruitful Place; and the Original of that Noble Family, who, by Marriage of
Engelbert the 7th. Count of this Title, with Mary, the Daughter and Heir of
Philip, Lord of Breda, became possessed of the City and Castle, and a large
Territory into the bargain, improved by many additions; by which means his
Successors became first Subjects to the Dukes of Burgundy, and after to the
King of Spain, who endangered the Head of Prince William the 2d. and afterward
caused him to be assassinated. Concerning their Title of Orange, which is of
above a 100. Years more modern Title, we shall speak of it in our view of
France; but it is also here to be remembered, that the Counts of Nassaw are of
late years also Earls of Buren, by the Marriage of Philip (eldest Son of the
abovesaid Prince William, kept Prisoner by the Spaniard to his death) with the
Heir of the Earl of Egmond, to whom this Buren, seated as before in Gelderland,
did belong: The Reader is to understand, that there are three several Branches
of this Family, as that of Count William, Governor of Freisland, and the other
of Weilborough; yet notwithstanding, in case this present Prince, Son of the
late Lady Mary, Sister of our Sovereign, and Prince William the 3d. should dye
without Issue, the greatest part of all these noble Estates, but this of
Nassaw, together with the Title of Count Catzenbogen (a Town seated herein, but
sold, after much difference and contest, to the Lantgrave of Hassia, who
pretended a right to it) goes to the Marquess of Brandenburg, who married a
Daughter of the Family of Orange; as by Contract with the French King, he is
certain of that Principality: This Family is allied to the greatest in Europe.

The Earldom of Hanaw, and Lordship of Lichteberg, belong to the first and
second Branches of the same House, and are a very Illustrious Family for
Descent and Territory, but must give place to the Count of Solins for
Antiquity; and in all times highly esteemed for their personal worth, much
advanced in reputation of late, by the Marriage of one of the late Earls
thereof, with one of the Sisters of Prince Maurice, and afterward with the
Widow of the Earl of Egmond; and very recently, by the Marriage of a Daughter
of that House, to Prince Henry, who proved the Mother of William, the Father of
this present Prince of Aurange.

As to the two Imperial Cities, Friberg, and Wetzelaer, they comply with their
Neighbors in the same Combination; the Religion professed here being Calvinian
altogether, but the Discipline and Pride thereof mollified and accommodated to
the Government, and the Peoples temper, as it is served in most places of
Germany, where it has been received.

We pass now to the Duchy of Wittenburg, 12. Wittenburg:
and the Marquisate of Baden, and will suffer them to go joined together, as we
find them in Geography; and they are thus bounded; on two parts, South and
East, with Swevia; on the West with the Rhine, and Brisgow, another part of
Swevia; on the North with the Lower Palatinate; they are divided from one
another by a high ridge of Hills. Wittenburg is, for the most part, a plentiful
Country, but toward the edges, and has been the Dominion of many Martial
Dukes, to which the present is no way inferior: For want of Military
Employment at home, he would have served the French, in the late War against
the Spaniard, and should have been General of the Horse, being highly caressed
by that King; but that War being composed, he is now engaged in the service
against the Turks.

His Revenue is very considerable, for the Earldom of Montletgard in Alsatia,
omitted there purposely, as to be reduced to this Estate, to which it has
belonged for many Ages, but lately some part thereof has been seized by the
French; who, after they had got Lorrain and Alsatia, stick'd at the Strong
Holds of this Country; the Principal whereof, viz. Montletgard, being strongly
seated on the top of a Mountain, under pretense of securing it for some younger
Descendent of this Family, whose right it was, they yet keep in their hands; as
they do the Principality of Aurange, upon the same score: But his Towns are
very deficient in all furniture of Ammunition, and warlike Provision, otherwise
he would not be inferior to most of the Princes; And yet a Magazine should
concern this Prince, for he is always in Fend with the free Cities, of which
there are six in his Duchy of Wittenburg, as Wimpten, Hailbran, on the Neccar,
etc. But it is hazardous to begin new Troubles in Germany.

The Marquisate of Baden is a great deal less considerable, although it have
the Earldom of Hochberg joined to it, but that advantage is reciprocated by a
disadvantage, that the Patrimony is parted between two Families, this of Baden,
and the younger, that of Baden Durlach; who, by the Imperial Constitution, is a
Field Officer against the Turks this Campagnia. Concerning the Interests of
these Princes, little is to be said, for all things were so lulled and secured
by the Treaty at Munster, that scarce any Seeds remain of any Discontent; but
if any such there be, Prudence will conceal them.

Having thus traversed a great part of the Midland, we will make a transition
to the Eastermost parts of Germany, and in our return thence take in all the
rest of the Country, being hindered from a methodical Conjunction of it, by the
omission of the Hereditary Dominions; and therefore we shall next survey
Brandenburg.

This Province is bounded on the East with the Kingdom of Poland; on the South
with Lusatia, 13. Brandenburg.
Silesia, and Misnia; on the West with Saxony; and on the North with Pomerania.
It contains 180. English Miles in length, and as much in breadth, which makes up
410. Miles in compass; plentiful of Corn, but not thick inhabited, nor well
furnished with other accommodation. It is called, the Marck of Brandenburg,
because they were the ancient Marcks of the Empire, divided into the old
Marcks, and the middle or upper Marcks, in which is Berlin, the Marquess's
Residence; extending from the River Odera (which distinguishes another
Frankfort, abounding in Corn and Wine) to the Borders of Poland; Besides this,
he is possessed of the Ducal Prussia, and the share of the Dukedomes of Cleve,
the reversion of the Bishoprics of Magdeburg, the possession of Halberstadt,
Minden, and Camire, with Title of Prince and Duke thereof, which he had in lieu
of his resignation of the higher Duchy of Pomeren, etc. By the Treaty at
Munster, the lower Pomeren, with the Lordships of Prignits and Cotton in
Silesia, and two Towns in Vorteland, with the County of Rapir, and Jurisdiction
of the Town of Cothins, in the Lower Alsatia.

The Revenue of this Prince, notwithstanding these large Territories, is
computed to be nothing considerable, not to amount to above 200000. at the
utmost, but certainly they reckon without their Host; for although his Intrado
be not any where exactly made out, yet the effects thereof do declare some
greater matter; for what Armies did he maintain in the late Polish and Danish
War, for six Years together, without any impairing of his Dominions, and his
Soldiers constantly paid? And if it be said; that he had a Purse before-stand,
it will appear, that his constant Charge in Peace would consume such a sum, by
the multitude of Garrisons he keeps, with such incident Expenses. Most certain
it is, that his Puissance is answerable to most of his Neighbor Princes, not
has he wanted Conduct and Fortune answerable thereunto.

His Interest is to keep a firm and good understanding with the Hollander, whom
he knows how to use to his advantage; and because of his Expectations there, if
the Prince of Aurange should decease a Minor without Issue. He has respects
for the Family of the Count Palatine, whose Sister he married; and at whose
instance he would have introduced the Calvinian for the Lutheran Profession,
but found it too hot for his fingers; nevertheless he exercises the Calvinian
way in his private Chapel, according to his Stipulation with his then mutinous
Subjects. He is in good and perfect amity with the Emperor, and all the
Protestant Princes; with the Kings of Denmark and France; and Sweden and he
reconciled, but he stands upon his Guard in that Point. In the first beginning
of the Reformation, there was some Difference betwixt Albert of Brandenburg,
and John Frederick of Saxony, but ever since they have continued Friends, for
it was a Difference in Religion, the Saxon being then a Lutheran. He was first
proposed as General against the Turks, but he declined it; but his rated
numbers, with some super-numerary supply, will be advanced by him; besides, he
will be necessitated to keep some considerable: Forces in readiness, if the
Turks, by some sudden Incursion, should ever pass through Silesia, as they have
often attempted to get into it: And so we proceed to Pomerania.

POMERANIA is bounded on the South with Brandenburg, on the West with
Mecklenburg, on the North with the Baltique Sea, 200. Miles in length; and on
the East with Prussia. It is divided into the Upper and Lower Pomerania, the
former whereof, with the Isles of Rugen (a well-traded and inhabited County)
the Isle of Wollin (the Trade whereof was long since conveyed to Lubeck) and
the Town of Stettin, all three belonging to the Lower Pomeren, were assigned to
the Swede; and the Brandenburger, whose it was, otherwise recompensed, but
whether so well contented is the question: By this way the Swede has an
entrance into Germany and Poland, and is therefore a great Eyesore to all the
Neighboring Princes, who look upon this backdoor, as a trap-door to surprise
them unawares; but nothing less would content the Swede, who then had his
Garrisons in every place of it; and because he first set footing in this
Country, the Lower Pomeren is likewise to be his, in case the Male Issue of the
Brandenburger should fail. This Duchy is rated its Proportions for the Turkish
War, which the Swede is not to exceed: And so we pass to Mecklenburg.

MECKLENBURG is bounded on the East with Pomerania; on the South with
Brandenburg, and Saxon Lawenburg; on the West with Holstein; and on the North
with the Baltique Sea. The chief Town hereof is Wismar, built upon the ruins
of old Mecklenburg, but assigned to the Swede at Murster; and the Temporalities
of the Bishoprics of Swera and Ratzenburg given this Duke in lieu thereof.
This is a fine Port Town, and another Inlet into Germany, and renders the Swede
formidable also upon the Baltique Sea. In this Duchy stands Fridland, the
Title of Albert of Wallenstein, the Emperors General, who was afterward made
Duke of Mecklenburg also, in place of Adolph Frederick, and John Albert
proscribed by the Emperor; but was, by his raiser, soon after caused to be
assassinated in his quarters at Egra, upon suspicion of his aspiring to the
Imperial Dignity; but by the Treaty these Dukes were restored, and Gustavus
Adolphus, the Son of John Albert, now enjoyes the Estate. These Dukes are of
little Power of themselves, and afford no discourse of Interest, which is bound
up in the Union and Combination of the Protestant Princes.

SAXONY, bounded on the East with Bohemia and Brandenburg; 16. Saxony.
on the North with part of the same, and Mecklenburg; on the West with Hassia,
Brunswick, etc. and on the South with Franconia. Divided into two main Members,
viz. Upper Saxony, Misnia, Vorteland, and Turingia, the Estate of the Duke of
himself: And 2. the Principality of Anhalt, Earldom of Mansfield,
Archbishopric of Magdeburg (yet administered by the Brother of this Duke, but
after his death to be given the Elector of Brandenburg) and Saxon Lawenburg,
the Estate of another Family of this Duke, besides that of Weymar, descended of
John Frederick, deposed by Charles the 5th. and the Town or Weymar given him
for his maintenance: His Nephew, with Count Mansfield, and the Marquess of
Jagerendorf, followed the fortune of Frederick, Prince Elector, and greatly
molested the Emperor, till forsaken by Bethlehem Gabor, and destitute of all
means, being then in Hungary, to maintain their Army; whereupon Mansfield
hasted, with his most Expedite Troops, through Bosnia, where he dyed of a Flux,
having given himself Poison, as was reported; and the gallant Duke of Weymar,
wasted with the same discontent and vexation, retired into Silesia, and there
also expired; as not long after did Jagerendorf, and Gabor sooner. The Son of
this Weymar proved as gallant a Person as his Father against the Emperor, and
was made Generalissimo of the French Forces in Germany, but he dyed soon after,
and in him by report that Family is extinct: But to return, for we must not
stand to enumerate all Particulars in this mighty Province. The other Part is
merely Feudatory, and that scarcely performed, 1. The Princes of Anhalt indeed
owe some kind of dependence to this Duke, but they are free Princes of the
Empire, and have proved excellent Warriors, and Favorers of the Reformation;
Christian the young Prince thereof, falling unhappily in the quarrel of the
Count Palatine, at the Battle of Prague; and the Interest of this Family is
still the same, although in former times highly honored by the Emperors, and
indeed not yet dis-respected by them. They are by Religion Calvinists.

The Counts of Mansfield have almost traced the same steps of Military Glory
after those of Arhalt, and their Revenue almost as considerable, part of their
Estate being in Mortgage to the Dukes of Saxony, but neither o^ any ^^^ment to
enterprise any thing of themselves; for the late Count Mansfield's sudden (...)
the motions and actions, and keeping his men together, oo ^^^ing ^^me to day,
and getting as many more speedlly after, were rather Miracles, than the Effects
of Reason. This Family is still in being, and thinks it best yet to be quiet.

As to the Bishop of Magdeburg, that Title was abolished by the Reformation,
the Magdeburgers putting themselves sometimes under the Protection of the
Brandenburger, and sometime of the Saxon, with the Title of Administrator,
which Augustus, the Brother of this Duke enjoyes, etc. as aforesaid. And as
much as suffices has been said of the fourth Member of this second Part, the
Duchy of Lawenburg, which depends dutifully upon this Elder House.

The Revenue of this Prince is computed at 400000 l. double to that of
Brandenburg, arising partly out of his Silver Mines, which yield 140000 l. of
the Money; and next, out of his Salt, made at Hall, and the Excise of Beer,
which amounts to great sums; Besides, he levies a constant Tax for Provision,
and maintenance of a War against the Turks, although in the most serenest
times: With this Revenue he keeps a splendid Court, at his Residence of
Dresden, and maintains a noble Magazine, out of which, in a days time, he
can furnish out Arms for above 30000. Horse and Foot; Here also he has a
Stable, which will hold 128. Horses, fit for service; both the Horse, and the
Arms, so neatly kept, of which there is at least 12000. for Horse, with 80.
Cannon, and Demi-Culverins, and 170. other Culverins, and Sakers; Besides which
Magazine, all the Cities and Towns have Armories of their own, well kept and
provided, nor are the Gentry unprovided.

By which it appears, that this Prince is the most Considerable in Germany, as
well as by that advantage and disadvantage he did the Swedes, first by
adhering, and then relinquishing them, by a Neutrality with the Emperor. His
Alliances also with all the Protestant Princes, and the Common Interest of them
all, which has its dernier resort hither, as it rendered him in former tsmes
suspect to the Emperors, who never liked so much Greatness in any House but
their own; so is it not pleasing now to the Catholic Princes and States, and
especially the House of Bavaria, and the Ecclesiastiques. There lately happened
a quarrel in this Dukes Territory of Turingia, at Erford, an University, to
which the Bishop of Mentz lays claim, as founded and built by his
Predecessors; but they having shaken off that Sovereignty, in the time of that
Founder, by name William, the Son of the Emperor Otho the 2d. have since
disclaimed any other Power, but what they exercise themselves, as a Hanse and
Free City of the Empire; having the Duke of Saxony for their Patron, and good
Neighbor; and who, by interessing himself for them, ceased those troubles
which were like to arise between the Bishop and them, in this unhappy Juncture.

He is obliged to do something extraordinary against the Turk, for that Taxes
sake, which he has received for so many Years together, without any occasion
of disbursement; yet his Subjects do not much care for that War in person, and
would wish the Money bestowed in hiring of Mercenaries, for they march heavy,
and laden with Weapons, and Bottles, and a Baggage behind, without which a
Saxon is nobody in the Field: So we pass to Brunswick and Lunenburg.

17. Brunswick.
BRUNSWICK is bounded on the East with the County of Mansfield, on the North
with Lunenburg, on the West with Westphalen, and on the South with Hassia; The
Principal Town is Brunswick, but Imperial; about many quarrels here happened
betwixt the Dukes, and that Town, the Dukes Residence being at Wolfenbittel.
Here is also the Bishopric of Halberstadt, of which these Dukes were
Administrators upon the Reformation, but now conveyed to the Marquess of
Brandenburg.

18. Lunenburg.
LUNENBURG has on the West the Diocese of Bremen, on the North the River Elb,
on the East Magdeburg, and on the South Brunswick. The chief City of Lunenburg
is Imperial and Free, and eminent for its strength and beauty, but acknowledges
not the Duke; And herein is seated the Bishopric of Verda, granted the Swede
likewise at Munster, together with the Bishopric of Bremen. Both these
Families are so interwoven with one another, by Alliances and Descents, that
the one succeeds the other in either Dukedom, if there be a failer of Issue in
either; but now the Brunswick Line is wholly extinct, and a second Brother of
Lunenburg is Duke thereof. These Dukes have always had a kindness for our
Nation, as being originally descended of the Dukes of Normandy; and the late
Duke of Brunswick somewhat allied to this Crown, by marrying with the Lady
Elizabeth of Denmark, Sister to Queen Anne. These are Considerable Princes, but
can be no Undertakers of themselves: And so we proceed to Hassia.

19. Hassia.
HASSIA is bounded on the East with Turingia, on the South with Wetteraw, on
the West with Westphalia, and on the North with Brunswick. It is a very
pleasant Country, stored with good Sheep, who yield the finest Fleeces; and
with Venison; and is also plentiful of Corn; and has good store of Mines of
Brass and Lead, very profitable to the Inhabitants. The Lantgraves of this
Country have been in former times a great deal more powerful than now they are,
for Philip the Lantgrave, in the Reign of Charles the 5th. did in a manner
dispose of the Affairs of the Empire, till Fortune turned, and made him a
Prisoner, although with treachery; he was afterward restored, although much
disabled by his Composition: Since when, the Estate has been more weakened, by
the numerous Issue of his Son William, betwixt whom this Estate was parted, one
Moiety to the elder Brother, the other to the two younger; who are known by the
names of the Lantgraves of Morpurg and Darmstadt, two Cities in this District:
The elder House being distinguished by their Residence of Cassils; who readily
concurred with the Swede in the German War, managed by a Widow, the
Administratrix of her young Son the Lantgrave; and by which, and the Swedes
instances on her behalf at Munster, she came off no loser: no more than did her
Cousin George of Darmstadt, against whom, upon some Pique, she was engaged, by
the Swede, who assisted her therein, toward the Expiration of the German War;
for the Swedes themselves, being bound to a Neutrality with him, and lacking
quarters, and otherwise offended at him, as one which secretly favored the
Emperor (he following there the advice of his Father, upon his deathbed, who
counseled him, that when a War should be raised, upon pretense of Religion, he
should be sure not to take Arms upon that score, against the House of Austria)
found this Expedient to attaque him, but by the means of the Neighbor Princes,
this unnatural Flame was soon extinguished. This Family is reckoned as
Honorable as any in Germany, and of a considerable Interest among all the
Princes of the Empire, especially of those of the Protestant Union, and is in
good terms with all foreign Princes. Thus have we surrounded Germany by a
Circumambulation, and finished the Survey, by bringing it to the Point where we
set out.

THE Arch-Dukedom OF AUSTRIA.
THE Arch-Dukedom of Austria, being allied to the Empire, always (its
Archdukes descending, as some think, from Charles the Great, in a direct
Masculine Line) was very strong; and united to it now, is much stronger; as
Commanding Hungary, which bounds it on the East; Obliging Bavaria, that
encloseth it on the West; Possessing Bohemia and Moravia, that lie on the North
of it; Awing Istria and Friuli, that stand on the South; and seeing nothing
round about it, but its own Territories: Whether we reflect on its Interest
abroad, 1. In strong Obligations upon the Pope, since the kindness of the
Emperors, Phocas, and Rodolphus the First; 2. On the (now useful) Title to the
17. Provinces, by the Marriage of Maximilian of Austria, with Mary, Daughter of
Burgundy; 3. In the many Inter-Marriages with the Kings of Spain, since the
time of Charles the Great: Or on its Condition at home, plentiful for all
manner of Provision, and so strong, with all manner of Strongholds, that (as
Count Hohenlo delivered himself at Regensburg) if Tyrol were well-fortified, on
the Alps, toward France; Walkinstein, Lints, Ens, Ipnewstad, and other Towns,
upon the Danube, and Dravus, well-strengthened, toward Sclavonia; Stiria, or
Stiermark, well-guarded, toward Hungary; If Liberty of Conscience were
allowed, and the Privilege of Princes were abated, this Dukedom might be well
called (as Solomon the Magnificent termed it) The Rampire of Christendom. For,
1. Wien, or Vienna, its Metropolis, on the Banks of the Danube, as strong as
it is stately, has a mighty Wall, that gave the aforesaid Sclyman such a
repulse, as that of 200000. Men he brought before it, he carried away but an
118000. from it. 2. The Alps, with a few Forts, secure it on the one hand: and
the Danube, with the Dravus, wall it on the other; this from Turkey, that from
France. Here is 320. Miles in Land, and yet none of this holding of the
Archduke; 4. Earls. 23. free Barons, and none of these enfeoffed of the
Empire; insomuch that Austria is of late shrunk in its Power, for the Vastness
of its Estate; and eclipsed in its Glory, for the Honor of its Subjects. Yet
223000 l. it will afford in Revenue; 14000. Foot, and 4000. Horse, it can raise
in Forces; Four Years Provision it yields in Necessaries; Furniture and Arms
for 60000. Foot, and 24000. Horse, it keeps up in Magazines; Four Councils it
holds (one at Vienna, for Austria properly so called; another at Insbruck, for
Tyrol; another at Grets, under a Chancellor, for Stiermark; and another at
Gertun, for Carinthia and Carniola) for War and Peace.

The Interest of Austria, Carniola, and Carinthia, is to secure their Bulwarks,
Tyrol, and Stiermark; and the Interest of Tyrol, and Stiermark, is to second
Count Serini, in fortifying upon the Mur, and Dravus, near Gratzpruch, Steckaw,
Petaw, and Canisia, against another Incursion of the Mahumetans; and to follow
the Duke of Insbruch, in strengthening Trent, toward Italy; Hall, Swaz, and
Malh, toward the Alps, to check the Transalpines from passing to Germany, till
the next time they have need of them.

It were not amiss likewise, that Anstria left its State-pretences of Liberty,
under a Christian Emperor, urged by it so long, till it was almost enslaved to
an Infidel; That it ceased limiting its Archdukes Authority to Command it,
before he lose his Power to Protect it; That it quit its Fears and Jealousies
touching Religion and Privileges, before it have none to be afraid or jealous
of: It being never likely to be well in Germany, till the Princes, and the free
Cities agree, who shall Obey; the Emperor, and the Princes consent, who shall
Command; the Catholics and Protestants set down what is Christianity:
Obedience otherwise being likely to become a Snare, Authority a Name, and
Christianity a State of Infidelity. Besides that, the Archdukes hereof
(branched since into three most considerable Interests, viz. that of the
Emperor, the King of Spain, and the House of Burgundy) rising, as it is
observed, at the same time with the Ottoman Family, to restrain the growing
Greatness of that Empire, should, as the first Emperor of that House, since
the last Interruption, keep a strict Correspondence with the Potentates of Asia
and Africa, that border on that dreadful Monarch; to invade the Turk from
Europe, when he lies too hard on either Asia or Africa; and to annoy him from
those Coasts, when ever he looked toward Europe; as the King of Carmania did
in Asia, when Amurath invaded Hungary; and the Hungarians did, when that Surly
Musulman turned short upon the King of Caramania.

HUNGARY.
HUNGARY lying 300. English Miles in length, 290. in breadth, from Presburg,
along the Danube, to the Borders of Transylvania, is all along in danger of the
Oppressions of the Empire, from Stiria, and Austria, that lie on the West of
it; from the Turmoyles of Poland, and Swedeland, that border the North of it;
from the Turkish Power of Sclavonia, Dacia, Wallachia, and Transylvania, that
limit the East and South of it. A Country that can endure neither its Miseries,
nor the Remedies of them; neither the wasting War of the Mahumetan, nor the
suspected Peace of the Empire; especially since the People here are so long
used to War, that they know not how to live in Peace; being so lazy that they
cannot work, they will be so troublesome as to fight for their Livelihood; and
when the Turk does not make it necessary for the Emperor to defend himself,
the Hungarians make it more than necessary for him to offend others. A rich,
but troublesome Clergy they had, which Maximilian the Emperor brought to
Stipends and Pensions. Great Privileges they boasted of, since King Andrew's
time; but they are undone if they lose them not, (for while they are disputing
whether Elective or Hereditary, whether they have not Power to oppose their
King, in case he wrongs them, they are hardly a Nation worth the enjoying, or a
People worth the governing) the Turk having swallowed up almost two Parts of
three. While they are angry with their Master, the Emperor, that they had not
the pleasure to laugh at his ruin, and their own (for some People had rather
be undone than governed) he having clapped up so sudden a Peace, it is well they
have so much Wit in their Anger, as yet to fortify their Borders;
Particularly, 1. Raab (on the meeting of the Danube with the River Raab) 2.
Castlenovo; 3. Gomorrha, an Island encircled by the Danube; 4. Fyleck, the
Place that cost Solomon the Magnificent, and Amurath the 3d. 300000. Men; 5.
Lip, a Fort that commands the Passes to Transylvania; and 6. Tockay, a Strong
Hold of vast service.

Lentulus would say of the Hungarians, then called Pannonians anciently, That
they were so unconstant, that there was no governing them, but by Cittadels; so
unruly, that they knew no other Kings, but their Landlords; that they
understood no Duty, but toward a General; and that they owned no Religion, but
Liberty. And I may add of Hungary, what they say of Scotland, That as long as
the People hang so much on the Nobility, and the Priesthood, neither Nobility
nor Priesthood will stick to the King: Since they are so subtle and proud,
it is well they are so voluptuous, and that their wit and malice is softened by
their pleasures. It Is some security, that a Faction is deboished, especially
here, where none comes to undo the Commonwealth, but a Sober Man; it being an
Hermit that first taught Hungary that dangerous way of Marrying Noblemens
Children as soon as born, and entering them in a Combination, as soon as they
are matriculated Christians. It Is a wonder the Emperor cannot as well be rid
of the Palatine of Hungary, as the King of Spain is of the Justice of Arragon,
both whom pretending a Power between King and People, usurped an Authority over
both; not easily checked, unless, as Albertus, Archduke of Austria, got the
Title to the Kingdom, by marrying the King's Daughter 1431. so his Successors
may keep Possession, by marrying the Palatine's: The Hungarians, and the
Welshmen, agreeing in this, that they would willingly be governed by none but
their own Natives.

But rather than insist on these Niceties, it becomes these desolate People, 1.
To fix upon some Principles that may unite these divided States; 2. That they
promote the general Peace of Christendom; 3. That they provide good Shipping
upon the Danube; 4. That they Victual and Garrison the Frontier Towns already
erected, and erect more; 5. That they set up the Profession of Religion, in so
decent a way, as may work upon their Neighbor Turks, a Reverence at least of,
if not a Respect for it; 6. That they observe those Dissentions that grow among
the Infidels, and make use of their Discontents to weaken their Power: A Lesson
they might well learn from the very Turks themselves, who have invaded Hungary
now 8. times, upon no other Encouragement, than the Contests that they have had
among themselves about Religion, and the Quarrels with their Liege Lords about
Liberty; 7. That they prosecute the Mines that yield the Emperor 162000 l. and
employ 10000. idle men, that might be worse busied: And encourage Tillage,
where Wheat is higher than a man's head, Vines overtop the Trees, Grass
grows up to the Knees, and the Woods threaten the Clouds; And 8. That they
train their Foot to as much Expertness, as they do their Horse; that the Bandi
may be as eminent amongst them, as their Heyduchs: to which purpose, a veterane
Army of 3000. Horse and Foot, such as t ey raised Anno 1561. were not amiss,
since the Emperor holds but one Part of this Country, and the Great Turnk two.

BOHEMIA.
BOHEMIA lies open to the same Dangers with Hungary, from Greece always
obnoxious to Invasions, and from Germany always liable to Pressures; only it
receives not less advantage from Calvinism, than the Neighbor Countries have
done from Lutheranism: For the Emperor had been absolute e're this, and all
the Privileges, contended for here, and elsewhere, swallowed up, had not the
Reformers put in a new stickling Principle into the People, and made those, who
were ready to forgo their Liberties, stand fast for their Religion: The
Italians (says a Statesman) who are very clear-sighted in Matters of State,
have perceived this long since: And Bocalini, when he brings in Apollo, making
answer to Sir Thomas More, That all People will be Catholics, when the King
of Spain will be content with Castile, and the Emperor with the County of
Hasburgh; Makes it evident, That Religion is the Bulwark of their Liberty, and
that which upholdeth all other States, secures this. It was a great weakness in
the Bohemians, to cast off the Emperor, whose Power raised them to a Kingdom,
and whose Hereditary Estates surrounds them: And it were a greater now, to
dispute with him, since it lies so open to the Mahumetan, by the way of
Moravia, lying on the West of it; and to the Swede, by the way of Silesia,
lying on the North. In which Places, were Olmualz, on the River Mark; Brin, on
the River Schwatz, Swaein, on the Teia, on the one stand; Glatz; with Noiste,
on a River of that name; Breslaw, and Glogaw, on the River Odera, well guarded
with Forts, Redoubts, and Lines of Communication, the 200000. Foot, and the
32000. Horse (that Dubravi says the Emperor could raise here, taking only a
tenth man) might make such an impression upon the debauched and divided State
of the Turk, as might alter the present settlement, and fear of the World. Only
the Cavalry here are not so excellent, by reason of the generous freedom
allowed their Gentlemen, as the Foot are unserviceable, by reason of the
despicable dejectedness impressed on their common People: Otherwise, this King
of Bohemia, might bid for the Eastern Empire, as fairly as Sigismond of
Luxemburgh, another King thereof, did for the Western; of whom it is said, that
being in the Diet, for the Choice of an Emperor, after the Death of Robert of
Bavaria, spoke the first, according to the Custom; and saying, That he knew no
man more worthy of the Empire than he was, named himself; whereupon, the rest
of the Electors, his Colleagues, admiring his freedom and generosity,
unanimously gave him their Voices. An Interest as easily made, had this
Emperor three Lay-Counsellours, and three Clergymen of his Council ( Bohemians
by Birth) as that had, who might give such safe Counsels in the grand Points
of Religion and Liberty, as might accommodate all the Pretenses of both kinds,
those Bohemians made against the Emperor Mathias; Provided always, That that
Emperors mistake be avoided, and than no Person there be advanced so far,
that he has nothing more to be ambitious of, save his Power that advanced him:
For I shall never forget, how Theodosius, Duke of Braganza, and the richest
Lord in Portugal, being displeased with Philip the 3d. his Liege Lord, because
he was not permitted to walk side by side with him, withdrew from Court; and
how the Courtiers, foreseeing the danger of so great a Person's discontent, in
so unsettled a Kingdom, entreating his Majesty to satisfy him, before he went
home; the King sent for him, and upon his approach, with an extraordinary
sweetness, said to him, Pedid Duque. Ask what you would have, my Lord: The
Duke, swelled with his Grandeur, answered, Senor, los Mayores de vuestru
Majestad, que tanbien han sido los mios, hizieron tautas mercedes a m^^^sa, que
no me queda, nada que pedir: Sir, Your Majesty's Ancestors, who were mine
also, have bestowed so many favors and bounties upon my House, that there
remains nothing for me to ask. Whereat the whole Court was surprised, and,
after much Discourse, concluded, That though it be honorable for the Sovereign
to aggrandize his best-deserving Subject, yet ought he to be very circumspect
in the distribution of Favors, if he would not lose that honor and respect
which his Inferiors owe him; especially, if there be an Opportunity left too,
by a pretense of Election, to be the Sovereigns Competitor: A Pretense, however
plausible, has cost Germany, Poland, Hungary, and Bohemia, more blood and
treasure, than would have made their respective Princes Universal Monarchs;
Wherefore it is expected Hungary and Bohemia would make it part of their
Interest utterly to exclude it, and set up Succession, a way least obnoxious to
Disorder and Anarchy, to Encroachments and Usurpations, to Feuds and
Animosities, to Charges and Impositions, with many other Inconveniences, this
last Age is so sensible of, that another will not venture the Experiment. But
allow the 1200000. Imperial, raised from the Mines, and other Revenues, to the
Emperor, for its peace and safety, whose Power is the more firm by the last
shaking, and more rich by the last Confiscation: For there was something in
Gondomar's humor (though failing in the instance it was occasioned by) who,
upon the famous Revolt of the Portuguez upon Christmas Day 1640. went to his
Master, and challenged Allobricias, that is, a Reward for good News; who asking
what it was, he told him very seriously, that Portugal was fallen off: And his
Majesty standing amazed, both at the News, and the Relator; the strangeness of
the one, and the impudence of the other: Nay, said he, Sir, be not amazed, for
now the whole Realm is your own, every man has forfeited his Estate, and
stands at your mercy. What People soever go to disturb a Monarchy, settle it,
as giving advantage to that Power, which in the ordinary times of Peace was
limited, in those extraordinary of War to become boundless: And provoking that
Authority, which, by the Constitution of it, is regular, in its own, and the
Publicks defense, to become arbitrary: As it must needs be here, where there is
no hope of flourishing again, until Bohemia is divided now, as it was
formerly, by Charles 12. into 12. Parts, under 12. Governors, like the Bashaws
of Turkey, and the Major Generals of England.

TRANSYLVANIA.
TRANSYLVANIA, into which, 1. The Turk has so easy an entrance, by Moldavia,
on the East of it; 2. The Emperor, by Upper Hungary, on the West of it; 3. The
Polander, Muscovite, and Swede, by Russia Nigra, and Wallachia, on the North of
it: And all by the Differences between its seven free Cantons, has its
Concerns reduced into a narrow Compass, having no more to do, than to submit to
a great Master, that may awe its Neighbors to Civility, and its self to a
Peace, by an Army of its own Natives; who (so populous a Place it is) seldom
appear under 70000. Men, and these so fierce and warlike, that if, leaving a
competent number to manage their rich and fertile Country, they were employed
(especially the Heyduchs or Horsemen) abroad, would rescue the Liberties of
Christendom, while with Intestine Animosities they lose their own: Especially,
since the Princes of that Country are guilty of the same oversight with the
Bishop of Rome, permitting, as he does, some pretendingly Noble Families, who
have no other visible subsistence, than those Pensions allowed them by their
respectively Royal Patrons, to observe the Defects, and disturb the Peace of
the Places they live in: Which yet they attempted in vain, as long as
Clausenburgh was well fortified, Alba Julia is secured, Waraden is furnished,
and the wild Province Zaculiria is reduced to any order or civility; Which
being but once happily done, Moldaviaes. plentiful Wilderness, that lies on
the West of it, 300. Miles round, might be recovered; Wallachiaes barbarous
Country, that runs 500. Miles in length, and 120. in breadth, might,
notwithstanding its woody Mountains that environ it, be subdued; Poor Rascia,
that lies 80. Miles Northward of it, might be peopled; Rich Servia (that lies
on the East of this Place, and Upper Hungary) and its Mines, might be seized;
Bulgaria, and its Hills, might be attaqued; the Danube might be commanded: But
I leave these things to those mighty Emperors of the East and West, who having
spent most of their own, and their Neighbors ill humors, in the late War,
have now both security and leisure to settle their Dominions, and improve them.
Only we may observe one great Defect in the Policy of both these Potentates,
that they transplant not the Natives into other Countries, and settle Strangers
here, to keep these unquiet People in some order; who can endure neither
Liberty or Servitude, and know as little how to Command themselves, as to Obey
others. What the Emperor may do, who has Waruden, Enguiden, and such Places,
on the one hand: and the Polander, who has Zilhali, and Gela, on the other; we
shall see, when the Succession of Spain and Poland is settled, and the
Discontents between the Turk and Constantinople are heightened: In the mean
time, if Abell shows not his Superiors a Trick, he is no Calvinist.

CROATIA.
IT were a Wonder, why the Grand Seigniour, 1663. as soon as he had set up his
Standard at Constantinople, should command the Prime Vizier, and the main Body
of his Army, to so inconsiderable a Place as Croatia, did not the World since
understand, that it is the Habitation of the Serinies, and the Croates, the
best Commanders and Soldiers this day in the Christian World; who not only
kept this Place against the Impressions of Windischland, on the North of it;
Bosnia, on the East; Cantado de Zura, on the South; being assisted only by
Carniola, on the West: but also threatened as much mischief to the Mahumetans,
on the Christians side, as the Cossacks or Tartars did the Christians, on the
Mahumetans. Especially, since they have the Hungarians to assist them, under a
pretense of right in one part of Sclavonia, on the one hand; and the Venetians
pretending to another part of it, on the other: The House of Austria having a
ready passage into it, from their part of Winchesland, one way; and the Serene
Republique the like, by the way of Dalmatia, another: Only the Republique of
Ragusi, having its Peace of the Turk, on Condition to distract the Christian,
does unfortunately interpose ever and anon; upon which account, it is thought
the Interest of Christendom, that there were no such thing as a Commonwealth
in it: but that the whole were guided by the same Principles, in order to the
same grand Interest; Only the mischief of it is, the Venetians command Zara,
the chief City of Contado de Zara, for which they, and the Hungarians, had such
long Wars, as the Key into Ragusi, Croatia, and Hungary it self: Which
Inconvenience yet the Serinies, and other brave Gentlemen would remedy, did it
stand with the Interest of Germany, their Religion with Arms, or their
Popularity with Power.

Of those Parts OF EVROPE, That are under THE TURK.
HItherto of the Christendom of Europe, now of the Turkey thereof; Having
surveighed our own State, and what we may hope, take we a view of the
Mahumetans, and what we may fear; whose Dominion is placed most conveniently
for the Universal Monarchy he aimed at, being evenly situated between Europe
and Asia, as some think, on the Center of the habitable World; whereby he is
ready, on all Occasions, to stretch his Conquest every way, being able to
conveigh Recruits, Supplies, and Armies into either Coast: His own Seat,
Constantinople, the boundary of both Parts of the World, lying on the shore of
the Seas of either the Euxine, and the Mediterranean, which command the Plenty
of each Region, to the very Walls of the Seraglio; and then conveigh the Power
of that mighty Place to both those Countries: As,

1. To Europe; and there, 1. to Sclavonia, lying so obnoxious Eastward to
Macedon, and Epirus; whence their great Lord pours forth, over the River
Drinus, his numberless Slaves, upon all Occasions; when either Germany
threatens them Westward, by the way of Carniola, Venice, by the way of
Histria; or Hungary, by the way of

BOSNIA; Formerly united to that Kingdom, till Mahomet the Great, having taken
Constantinople, and with it most part of Greece, in the Year One thousand four
hundred sixty and four, seized it, and its new King, whom he stead alive,
annexing his Kingdom to his own Empire, and settling a Bashaw over it, with
order to alter the Constitution of that Place, as the North of Dalmatia, along
the Adriatique (where the Venetians pay Custom to the Grand Seigniour, for all
their Merchandise, wherewith to conjure him to Peace) settling the People of
Bosnia in the Garrisons of Dalmatia, and those of Dalmatia in the Strong Holds
of Bosnia; which is bound to send 1500. young Ladds a year into the Seraglio,
as a token of their subjection, and a security for their good behavior:
Besides that, no Inhabitant must be a Field Officer, without a special License
of the Grand Vizier, within an hundred Mile of his Native Country; save at
Ragusa, a Place the Turk keeps from the Usurpation of the Venetians, and the
Venetians keep from the Oppressions of the Turk; as the little Republique of
Geneva is kept by the Duke of Savoy from Spain, and by Spain from France, and
by France from both the former. And in the Isles Curzola, Zara, and Coreym;
Places too remote for this great Potentate to pass, and yet too near to trust;
especially, since the Republique of Venice possesses the greatest part of the
Islands, and all the Seacoasts, from the River Arisia, to the Bay of Calthaw.
And the Emperor, as King of Hungary, the Inland parts of Windischland and
Croatia; He himself having only Bosnia, some Cities in Windischland, and among
the Croates, with a little share of Dalmatia, only from the Bay of Calthaw, to
Albania; which would be quickly lost, had not Solomon, in the unseasonable
Dissentions, between Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria, and John Sepusio, Vayvod
of Transylvania, seized, with other Towns; which seizure is now so far
improved, by the possession of Newhausell, and diverse other Places, which the
Turk keeps upon the last Peace, so far, that no eminent Places, save
Presburgh, Gomorrah, Raab, and Tockay, are reserved to the House of Austriae;
the whole Country besides lying open to the Power of that mighty Monarch, not
to be checked, but by new Fortresses upon the Borders and Frontiers of that
Kingdom; especially toward Belgrade, a strong Place upon the Confluence of the
Dravus, and Danow, by the former whereof it is walled in Northward, and
Eastward by the later; formerly the Bulwark of Christendom, lost, for want of
succors, to Solomon the Magnificent, and now the Strong Hold of Turkey;
especially, since it is reinforced by Gran, Newhausell, and Novigrad.

DACIA: And the stronger for the absolute Power and Command the great Sultan
has in Dacia, on the East of Hungary, which contains not only Transylvania, of
which at large before, but Moldavia, Wallachia, Rascia, on the North side of
the Danow, together with Servia and Bulgaria on the South.

MOLDAVIA; Guarded by the dangerous, and miscalled Euxine Sea, Eastward; with
unsettled Transylvania, Westward; with the turbulent Niiestru, and the more
turbulent Podolia, Northward; and with Wallachia, Southward. More plentiful in
Provision, than in People; and more abundant in People, than in Habitations for
them; and in more Habitations for Men, than the thousand heads of Cattle, that
run, for want of Owners, from the fat Pastures of this untilled Country, to the
better peopled Parts, toward Crakow, on the one hand, and Constantinople, on
the other. So rich a Country, but for the sad Neighborhood of the depopulating
Tartars and Cossacks, that the Turk dares not trust it to its own People, for
fear of a Revolt: nor to the Neighborhood, for fear of a War; but keeps it,
for 300. Miles round, as broken in its Constitution, as it is in its Religion;
the one being but the Image of Government, allowed at Constantinople: and the
other but the Shape of Religion, professed in the Greek Church. He that gives
most Money at the Seraglio, has the tributary Vayvodship of this Place; and he
that drives most Cattle, has the most Money. One whereof was so Potent, I mean
John, who was Vayvod 1570. that assisted by Peter, his Neighbor of Wallachia,
he shaked off the Turshish Yoke: As did likewise Aaron, another Vayvod,
confederate with the Prince of Transylvania, and sheltered by the King of
Poland, and the Emperor; till all these, weary of the daily Incursions of the
Turks, rendered it up a Prey to their fury, 1622. Since which Year it submits
peaceably to its great Masters, and attends their service most dutifully in all
their Wars; so that they never marched into, or traversed over this miserable
Coast; which wants nothing but a resolved number of Inhabitants, such as
overstocked Europe would easily afford, backed by the Pole and Muscovite, who
might be this way better employed, than they are at present, to garrison,
fortify, and husband it; in order to that Freedom, to which the Turkish
Dissetledments give no little Opportunities; especially to a Place utterly
unaccessible to the Ottoman Army, which never durst attempt any farther than
its Borders, where it rather Frighted, than Conquered it, to that Vassalage,
that is unworthy of Humane Nature, either to Impose, or Submit to: A Vassalage
no part of the World groans under, but this, and its next Neighbor

WALLACHIA; Distinguished from it only by a ridge of Mountains, otherwise so
near a kin in barbarism and misery, that they went under one sad Name of
Moldavia, till their last Devastation, more merciful on this side that Place,
than on the other. That there should be a Country, in so civil a Place as
Europe, five hundred Miles in length, an hundred and twenty in breadth, so
plentiful, as to be the Granary of the wasted Confines of Asia; and to give as
much Reputation to the River Ister, as it borrows Fertility from it; That
admits neither a Scholar, a Book, nor a Letter into its Borders, upon pain of
death, were a Wonder: but that a man's second thoughts inform him, this
ignorance contributes so much to the Mahumetan Government, that the banishment
of Learning, is no less a part of its Constitution, than the forbidding of
Wine. Since their suing for Protection in Hungary, had almost ruined it; since
their resignation of themselves into the hands of their several Neighbor
Princes, as the necessity and occasion of War required, proved successless to
themselves, and fatal to those Neighbors; and since the Great Turk, finding
the entire Conquest of the Country so difficult, by reason of the defense
Nature had provided, with its Rocks, Mountains, and Precipices, cunningly, some
30. Years ago, declined any further Enterprise of War, undertaking those more
subtle of Peace, whereby he managed the Intestine Divisions of the Brethren,
Wladus, and Dracula, with suggestions, and supplies on either side, to such a
degree of Devastation and Ruin, that his own Auxiliaries there, were able to
make him acknowledged Lord of the Country, under Conditions and Limitations to
his absolute Authority, as the nearness of a continual Aid from the Christian
World adjoining, induced him to: Thereunto allow, I say, the nearness of the
Christian Succors, which Ragotzi had effectually raised, to assist the late
Vayvod, but that the Fate of Germany had rather undergo a general Calamity,
than assist those particular Undertakings; as if it were more Eligible, to have
these Limbs of Europe unnaturally turned against its self, than prudently
strengthened against its most dreadful and irreconcilable Adversary; who, I am
confident, must quit his hold here, as soon as ever it pleases God to recover
the ancient and lively Impressions of Christianity, which, if not defaced,
would ennoble its Professors with thoughts above their present condition;
especially, if some more civil People were invited thither, by their Gold and
Silver Mines (which they will not yet discover) to secure Golatz, on the Pruth
and Danube; surprise the strong Castle of Pralaiba, the Inlet into this Coast;
and furnish Zorza, re-incompassed by an Arm of the Danube, in which, when
Sigismund of Transylvania took, he found 39. great Ordinances, with Arms and
Ammunitions, enough to furnish a Kingdom: Only the mischief of it is,

RASCIA, Which is their Neighbor Country on the East (as it is the Hungarians
on the West, the Transylvanians on the North, and the Danubes on the South,
which indeed, with Temes, coasts it on three sides) is made so desperate, by
the Oppressions of Servia first, and since by the Desolations of Turkey, that
they care not what they attempt upon this Place, by the Authority of their
Master, the Grand Seigniour; under whom they are in better case in times of
War, than in those of Peace: The People hereof being so miserable, that they
have quitted and forgot their very Names, not a man of quality surviving the
general depression, and escaping the common barbarism. Often did they link
themselves to their respective Neighbors of Servia and Wallachia, with whom
they tasted the same fortune: but now they own no body but their tyrannical
Master, to whom they perform excellent service, when their natural Courage,
which, like Brutes, they retain, is emulously provoked by other as barbarous
People. Yea, likewise so far do they retain their primitive hatred against the
Musulmans, their cruel Masters, that upon all Occasions, they have been ready
to show their inclination, but to very little purpose, more than to show their
more Noble Extract and Ancestry, though they have not Colonies to plant there,
the Mahumetans being not so numerous, notwithstanding their Polygamy, as they
are accounted; and their often miscarriages (the Country being so desolate,
that a man cannot find an Inn, or an Harbor, in a days riding) having
discouraged all Expeditions thither on purpose; so that the wretched
Inhabitants, with a little backing, might withdraw their necks from the
Mahumetan Yoke, and save the 200000 Chequins, or 45000 l. Sterling; besides the
Fees and Presents of the respective Tributaries, paid constantly to the Port,
which is most concerned in the two Kingdoms, or Despotical Provinces, on the
Southern shore of the Danube, Servia, and Bulgaria.

1. SERVIA; Which being so happily situated between Bulgaria, which lies on
the East of it; Bosnia, which boundeth it on the West; the Danow, that limiteth
it on the North; and Greece on the South; is so rich in Corn and Mines, as
could not escape the Conquest of the Turks; who mastered all those adjacent
Regions, at first; nor their Colonies since: The People themselves being so
rude, that they seem born for servitude, and good for nothing, but to be
commanded abroad; and so drunken, that it was absolutely impossible they should
hold out against the Impressions of so sober a People as the Turks; whose
abstinence from Wine, is as much their Policy, as their Religion. Though as
rude as they were, they might have held longer against the Infidels, Had not
Fate included them within that desperate Folly of Princes, to undertake an
unjust, though advantageous Design upon others, while there is a superior
Enemy thereby invited to Umpirage the Quarrel; As there was, when the ambitious
Designs of the Despot of Servia, upon Rascias Freedom, was punished with their
own Slavery; which was yet hastened by an Accident as fatal, viz. Peter, John,
and Martin, the Despot Lazarus his Children, flying to the Hungarian
Protection, and his Brothers taking sanctuary at the Port, until the mighty
Power of the Turk swallowed up both their Rights, with dread and terror
breaking the stubborn Natives; whereof Mahomet the Great Impaled some, Gaunched
others, and Flead a third sort; so that they were quickly tamed, and made the
second Province of the Eastern, or Greek Europe: Past all recovery, since
Nyssa, the Key of the Country, is so strongly garrisoned and fortified; and the
Frontier Town, Novigrad, is so impregnable: And indeed, all the Passages into
that Country are inaccessible, 1500. being able to keep out Uladislaus, with
39000. 1564. And Hunniades had much ado to pass through (the weak Despot
complying with the Turk, who only reserved him to his last Conquest) into

2. BULGARIA; Which lies Eastward on the Euxine Sea (Axinos ille foret)
Westward toward Servia, Northward on the Danow, or Ister. Under the Turks
Dominions ever since the last cowardly Prince, Saimenos, prostrated himself, in
a winding, before the insolent Tyrant Amurath the First; who set, in three of
the most eminent Provinces, viz. Nicopolis, Sophia, and Silistria, three
Sanjacks, or Major Generals, under the command of the Begleberg, or Viceroy of
Greece. The Wood of these Provinces affords Constantinople Fuel, the Sea
Shipping: Besides that, it is esteemed a very good Defense against any sudden
Irruption into the more inward part of Romania, as where the Christians, under
Hunniades, had, the greatest Loss ever known in the World: An Argument urged
against the Invasion of the Turk, though holding only for Caution, which way
best to invade him: That it be not in a Country where the People are so
incapable of the noble resentments of Freedom, and patient under any servitude;
but that the fear in the alteration of their one great Principle, being Seldom
comes a better: Though otherwise the situation of it, and its most famous Towns
(1. Axium, 2. Dinogetin, 3. Marcianopolis, 4. Nicopolis, 5. Sophia, 6. Varna,
7. Sillistria, 8. Venuzina) upon the Sea, the Danow, and the Ister, invite any
Undertakers to attempt it, that could have any security from the Inhabitants,
to open their way to it; which cannot be expected, until we take some of them,
and instruct them in the grave Principles of Religion and Liberty, as the Turks
do most of them, in those of Infidelity and Slavery: For the Case would be
quickly altered, if there were but as much Learning here, as there was on the
other side Mount

HAEMUS; A long Line of Hills, from the Euxine Coast, to the Adriatique; so
high and boisterous, that the old Grecian Soldier swear, That eight Months in
the Year it was Cold here, and for four Winter; Commanding Macedon and Epirus,
so that from hence a man may guess, where the best Fortresses, and Strongholds
may be built, in each Place, and which is the best Passage into either. This
Mountain secures Bulgaria so well, by the little River Saltiza, with the broken
Rocks, and dangerous Precipices, that one Attempt this way upon Adrianople,
cost Christendom 49000. Men, and ever since taught them to stand upon the
Defensive, though oftentimes invited over this Place to

GREECE; A Place that looked formerly on all the World as barbarous, is its
self so now, but that, when its Learning could not, its Religion does, bear up
against Mahumetanism; so that there are 21. Churches in Constantinople, and 33.
in Thessalonica, to four Moskies, notwithstanding the Tyranny of the Infidels,
on the one hand, and the hopes of Encouragement, on the other; together with
the 1000. Infants, yearly bred up in the Turkish Worship; and would be more
enlarged, did not the uncharitableness of the Church of Rome, use them more
severely, than the cruelty of their own Masters, whom they would in time shake
off, had they that Communion and Correspondence with the rest of Christendom,
that is due to so considerable a Part of the Catholic Church. In the mean
time, that third Monarchy is fallen into petit and contemptible Cantons, of
that barbarous Seigniory, that aims at a fifth Monarchy, partitioned and
divided under the several inferior, and therefore cruel Governors, all
subjected to the Begleberg of Rum Ili, throughout its present extent along the
Hellespont, and Aegean Sea Eastward, the Adriatique Westward, Mount Haemus
Northward, and the Ionian Sea Southward. Though its pity that Country could not
be recovered, that has Christendom on one side of it, and three Seas between
it and Turkey; since toward a recovery the Government of the Patriarch of
Constantinople is very helpful, who, having many depending Clergymen, who,
insinuating themselves to all those Coasts, might prepare the Inhabitants, at
least those that are Christianly Principled, for a better Condition, than what
they now enjoy: If there be any remainder left, of that either Learned or
Martial Spirit, that possessed it in former Ages, which was so far from being
Captived within its own Borders, that the World was too narrow for it. Greece,
now called Turkey-Romania, was indeed sometimes oppressed by Cyrus and Xerxes
of Persia, but relieved by Philip of Macedon, and his great Son, who made it
the Head of the third Universal Empire, which the Romans swallowing up, left to
the Grecian Emperors, till the Goths invaded, the Bulgares spoiled, the
Saracens depopulated, and the Turks enslaved it; the last whereof possess all
of it, the Continent, and Island (save that the Republique of Venice lays
claim to. And well they may, seeing that through all their Cities, you shall
not find a School to instruct their Youth, or themselves, in any thing Civil or
Religious. In this Condition lies Macedon, Epirus, Achaia, Peloponnesus,
Thrace, and its Chersonese.

1. MACEDON; Which has Albania on the West, Epirus and Achaia on the South,
the Aegean Sea on the East, and the Upper Mysia on the North. And whether you
respect Thessaly, Macedon, specially so called, or Migdonia, or Jamboli, is
most happily situated, being made up of fertile Valleys, amidst most pleasant
Hills. All commanded by that one City (of all that remains of the strong
Fortresses of the Eastern Empire) on the Borders of Albania, whence the Turk
may overrun it when he will. Only, I should think, the 6000. Priests upon
Mount Athos, the Mount of St. Basil (for there are none but Priests suffered to
live there) having such a Privilege, as they have; and such a concourse of
People, daily flocking to them, for their Relics sake; might either deal
with, or overruled the Sanjach, who has not above 5000. Horse, and 4000. Foot,
to guard him; whereof 2000. are to be ready for the Grand Seigniour's service,
upon six days warning, from (...)

2. THRACE; That populous and fruitful Country, secure in its own Wood and
Cold; Lying Northward on Mount Haemus, Westward on Higher Mysia, Southward on
the Archi-Pelago, and Eastward on the Euxine, the Bosphorus, Propontis, and
Hell-spontis. Kept under by the Turk, not so much as his Dominion, as his
Pleasure; Constantinople, that most convenient Place, not only to govern that
Place, but the Empire, being the Metropolis of it; 18. Mile in Compass, a third
part bigger than London, and its Suburbs; Containing 700000. Souls,
notwithstanding the Triennial Visitations of the Plague; Fortified Landward
with three strong and high VValls, the one higher than the other; and Sea-ward
with one Wall, built with many Turrets, which strongly flanker it: And now
that Place is become saucy and dangerous, by the long Residence of the Emperor
there. Adrianople, the Place of his retreat for his Affairs in Europe, now of
his constant Residence, is the next City of Thrace, although very ill
accommodated for so great a Court, being so far from the Port, and therefore
likely to be quitted by that Emperor, who has several instances before him,
of their Miscarriages, who forsake their Imperial Cities in troublesome times,
especially a City seated on so known a Sea as that is (which puts me in mind of
the Lord Mayor of London, that said to a King of this Nation, that threatened a
departure from that Place, I hope you will leave the Thames behind you) and
secured by the two Block-houses of the Dardanelles, which command all Ships
passing out of the Hellespont, into the Euxine Sea; on which the two black
Towers, on the Asian shore of Constantinople, are not a greater Defense of it,
for that Sea, than these two Custom-houses before mentioned, are for the
Mediterranean; wherein the Aegean Islands, Samothrace, Lemos, Imbrus, Enbaea,
Salamis, Aegina, and the 53. Ciclades, or the Isles of the Arches, encompassing
Delos, and the Sporades, yea Candia its self, 270. Mile in length, and 50. in
breadth, in the midst of this Sea, are now either possessed or awed by the Grand
Sultan; who is now at leisure to make himself absolute here; the Venetians
having dis-obliged most part of Christendom, otherwise like to assist them,
upon this unexpected closure with the Emperor in Hungary, being Master of
Cyprus, a famous Place, extending from East to West 200. Miles, and round 600.
on the Syrian and Cilician Sea, which opens the way on both sides, for the
Conquest, either of Asia, or Europe: Especially since

1. EPIRUS, or ALBANIA; Lying Eastward upon Etolia, VVestward on the
Adriatique, Northward of Thessaly, and Southward with the Ionian; A large, and
utterly subdued Country, that furnish so many Ships and Men.

2. ACHAIA, or LIVODIA; A goodly Region, doing the like. And

3. PELOPONNESUS, or MOREA; The Bulwark of Greece, as it was anciently called;
and still so well peopled a Place of Greece, as pours forth more Soldiers,
than the Venetians have power to look upon, much less to Conquer. This is the
best Province of Turkey, as maintaining a 1000. Horse, besides the infinite
number of Foot it sends abroad for the Mahumetan service, with whom it offers
constantly 230000. Ducats. The Turkish Garrisons are so thick in these
Countries, that there is no good to be done, until such time as a great Famine
or Mortality render the People as desperate against their Infidel Masters, as
Necessity made them cruel to the People: In the mean time, the great sway the
Turk carries in these Seas, gives him opportunity, more than enough, to secure
his Interest here, but that he is so intent upon the Borders of Hungary, which
being strengthened, and either a vigorous War, or an honorable Peace, had
with the Venetians, render his Inland Dominions cock-sure: The Christians being
never like to meet with that Opportunity they lost, when Don John of Austria,
after the Battle of Lepanto, instead of retiring, might have entered the
Archi-Pelagus, and (all Persons being amazed under the Consternation of that
great and happy Event) have taken the adjoining Islands without resistance,
shaken the Ottoman Empire, and planted the Crucifix, where the Crescent is
adored: The Grand Seiguiour having lost his Sea Forces at Lepanto, and his Land
Soldiers at the furious Sieges of Nicosia and Pamagoust, lying naked and open,
and his Empire remaining a great Body shrunk with weakness, and wanting force
to sustain its self, and bear its proper weight, fsils of necessity, so soon as
it is justled: An Opportunity never to be regained, now the Naval Force of
Turkey is so Complete, consisting of three Fleets, 1. The one (parallel to our
New Castle Vessels) sailing the Euxine, and Mediterranean, either toward the
Muscovite, Circasse, or Cossack; whence returning with Slaves, Honey, VVood,
and Wax, it sayls to Alexandria, to barter those Commodities for Flax, Sugar,
Tapestry, Sherbats (made of several dry preserved Fruits, as Apricocks,
Peaches, Citrons) Corn, Rice; and come back with Tribute (guarded with a Fleet,
for fear of the Malta and Florentine Galleys, that lie in wait for the
Stragglers) to Constantinople. 2. The other is the Fleet of War, built and
equipped in the Streights. 3. And the third, the Barbary Men of War, which
exercise Pyracy over all Christendom, and depend upon the Grand Seigniour: All
now taught, by the Renegadoes, a skill at Sea, as considerable as that of the
Europaeans.

ENGLAND.
NOW we have gone round the Circle, we finish where we began, in that fortunate
Island, if there be any in the World: If all men, as I, that traveled,
understood either their own, or their Nations Happiness. England, in its
Restoration a Miracle, and in its Settlement a VVonder. 1. At Peace with
Spain, 2. Allied to Portugal, 3. Inward with Denmark, 4. Courted by Sweden, 5.
Addressed unto by the Emperor, 6. Caressed by the Princes, 7. Despaired of by
the Pope, 8. Admired by the Turk, 9. Applauded by the Muscovite, 10. Feared by
the Infidels, 11. Suspected by the French, 12. And Affronted only by the Dutch:
A People it has set up, when in their lowest Estate; and pulled down, when in
their highest: To whom it has been the best Friend, and the worst Enemy; whose
Sea maintains them, whose Fish relieves them, whose Commodities employ them,
and whose Trade has hitherto upheld them.

England now, as of old, the Balance of Europe; giving Law, with its Arms, to
Africa, and its Princes; opening the way, by its Commerce, to the Wines and
Sugars of Spain, to the Treasure of the Indies, to the Manufactures of Turkey,
and China; to the Cordage, and Naval Materials of Muscovy, Sweden, and Denmark;
to the Delicacies of Italy, to the Kersies of Flanders, to the Wines of
Bordeaux; and whatever owneth the Name of Necessary or Convenient. Improving
its Native Commodities with the greatest Art at home, and Exporting them with
the highest Freedom abroad.

Its First Interest is Intelligence and Negotiation; and the World understands,
how Active a Person it employes in Holland, how Wise a Man it has settled in
France, how Grave an Ambassador it maintains in Spain; and what Reserved,
Prudent, and Noble Agents, it has dispatched to Denmark and Sweden; not to
mention the Honorable Person resident at the Grand Seigniour's Court.

Its Second is Trade, and the Dominion of the Sea; and it is not unknown, what
Expert Captains are trusted, what Multitudes of Seamen are bred up, what
Provisions are made for Fishing, what Laws are in force for the Vending of
Fish, what Correspondence is kept with the Northern Coasts for Cordage, how
many and strong Vessels are built; what Stores and Magazines, even beyond what
ever was known, are set up; how blessed a Prince, who makes it his business to
understand and manage the Sea Affairs; how Royal an Admiral, the King's only
Brother; what Noble Officers, all the Nobility, choosing rather a Ship at Sea,
than a Court by Land; how willing the Kingdom is to float upon the Sea, how
watchful the Commissioners of the Navy are to guide it, and how vigilant His
Majesty, and his Honorable Council is upon all; what formidable Preparations,
what abundance of gallant Men, what skillful Builders, what expert Seamen, what
valiant Commanders; and, in a word, what a brave Admiral, whose conduct,
diligence, and success, is known to the World.

Its Third Interest is the Protestant Religion, which it encourages abroad,
and has settled at home; where the Laws against Recusants of both sides, the
Papists, and the Separatist, are very strict; the Uniformity distinct from them
both, is very orderly; Our Doctrine, how confessedly Orthodox; Our Devotion,
how avowedly wholesome; Our Ceremonies, how famously decent; Our Discipline,
how admirably primitive; and our Order, how honorably ancient! Our People
submitting humbly to their Guides, they to their Overseers, they to their
Sovereign, and all to the Word of God, the confessed general Councils, and the
primitive practice. Ministers are restored to their Right, and Bishops to their
Power, Jurisdictions are established, Courts are opened, a Terror hangs over
evil doers, and Encouragements are set before those that do well: Favors are
derived to merit, and Preferments to worth; and a man may be as good as he
will, and as great as he deserves. The Honor of Religion, and its Clergy, is
asserted; the Levity and Petulancy of the Populacy is restrained; and every one
knows his own place, where they serve one God, in one Faith, by one Baptism,
in one Spirit, in one hope of one common Salvation.

Its Fourth Interest is Unity, the Head whereof is an excellent Prince, made up
of power and sweetness, who is feared and loved, whose Veins swell with all the
Royal Blood of this Kingdom, and whose Soul is thronged with all the Virtues of
its Kings; so that his Right is as undoubted as his Possession, and his Merit
as his Right: And the awe upon all men arising from the three Wonders of his
Escape 1651. His Restoration 1660. and his Success ever since. Great is our
happiness in him, multiplied it is in Relations, Uno avulso non deficit alter
Aureus: On his Throne he sits, with a Gracious Queen on his right hand, his
Excellent Mother before him, his Royal Brother on his left hand, his Grave and
Honorable Council at his Feet, his Reverend Bishops about his Throne, his
Loyal Nobility near his Person, his Unanimous Gentry attending his Pleasure,
and that August Council, called a Parliament, made up of all these, as one man,
reconciling his Prerogative, and his Peoples Liberties, to the Envy of most
Neighbors, and the Amazement of all. Look we into their Debates, they are
dutiful: into their Counsels, they are rational, loyal, and resolute; into
their Expedients, they are seasonable; into their Supplies, they are
honorable; and into their Unanimity, and, as one man, they are resolved to
live and dye with their dear and dread Sovereign.

If we return to the Court, it is full, thrifty, wary, and strict. If to the
Exchequer, it is full, with a Revenue, double that of former Kings, 1200000 l.
per Annum; besides the Resolution of the People, to spend their Lives and
Fortunes, for the defense and honor of the King, and in him, of the Kingdom,
and themselves. If to the Courts of Justice, they are filled with most reverend
and famous Men. If to the Church, it is full of venerable, learned, and prudent
Churchmen. If to the Officers of State, they are honorable and experienced. If
to the Cabals, there was never Prince, or Council, since the Constitution of
Empires, a safer Preserver of secrets; and yet none, whose secrecy and silence
we less may fear; where the chief Prelates cast Reverence, and the chief
Nobility, of both Kingdoms, Dignity; and all knowing in Foreign Affairs abroad,
and Domestique Constitutions at home. If into the Church, Disputations are
silenced, Pulpits are modest, Presses are regulated, Learning is encouraged,
Debauchery is discountenanced, Faction is suppressed, and Schism is made
ridiculous. If into the City, the Lord Mayor, and Major General, are active and
vigilant; the Aldermen, and Common Council, are liberal and free (200000 l. at
at time) the Companies, Officers, and Vestries, are settled. If into the
Country, the Forts, Strong Holds, and Havens, are secure; the Militia is
settled, and reduced to excellent Rules, for the ease and service of the
Country; the Lords Lieutenants, and their Deputies, are powerful and honest,
made up of the choicest Gentry; the Sheriffs, that command the Power of the
Country, faithful, and well affected; the Justices of Peace, Men of Estates,
Wisdom, Interest, Repute, and known Integrity: who execute Justice, regulate
Disorders, discover Plots, disperse Conventicles, promote the honor and
security of the Kingdom: and these hold, some their Estates, others their
Places, and all their Honor, of his Majesty; under whom Tillage and Husbandry
prospers, Manufactures are encouraged, Native Commodities are promoted, all
People are employed in the Necessities or Conveniences of the Kingdom, every
man under his own Vine, every one under his own Figtree. If we look back upon
the Pretenses, Methods, or Principles, of the former Rebellion, they are cut
off by Acts of Parliament. If forward, on the Opportunities for a future
Disturbance, they are all vacated by Acts of State. If men pretend Religion for
Disturbance, England knows it is Hypocrisy; If Liberty, our People is too
sensible it is Licentiousness; If Propriety, we have been taught, that the
meaning of that is Taxes, Plunder, and Free Quarter; If Conscience, English Men
have learned to Obey, and not Disobey, for Conscience sake; If Oppression, none
to that of Disorder, Universal Liberty, and a standing Army; If Looseness in
Manners, every man among us, says, It cannot be so bad, as when there is no
King in Israel, and every man may do what is good in his own Eyes; If the
Errors of a Statesman, we see men aim at the Kings head, through the
Statesmens sides: No color for Disturbance among us; and all reason for Peace,
in a Nation, to the Government whereof, the grave, learned, and prudent
Persons, of all sides, submit; wherein no man does or suffers, but what he
consents to himself. We hear indeed of War upon the Borders of the Empire,
but we have Peace in our Borders; being walled in first with the Ocean, and
that Ocean secured by as strong a Navy, as is this day in Christendom. We read
of mutual Challenges of Right between Spain and Portugal, but we are the
People, to whose Land, none so much as pretends Right, save our dread
Sovereign. We observe others failing in their Designs upon foreign Parts, we
great in our own Possessions, maintain our own Right to the full, and forbear
others; equally famous for our Justice, and our Power. They talk of Kingdoms
like to expire in their dying Princes, when we are secured in a Royal Family,
not more a Blessing to us, that it is good, than that it is numerous. If
Neighbor States have provoked the World, we pity them, for we are at Peace
with it. If other Princes throw away their People with vain and ambitious
Attempts, we are only employed to secure our own Borders, to promote our own
Interests and Honor. Some Republiques have the miserable choice of either an
intolerable War, or an unworthy Peace: we give the Law to Africa and Europe,
in utrumque parati, a prosperous War, or an honorable Peace. We stand to no
Nations Courtesy, having made our Friendship, and our Enmity, the most
Considerable this day in the World. Our Kingdom is Populous, our Ground
Fertile, our Gentry Expert, our Yeomen Trained, our Scholars Learned, our
Noblemen Active, our Magazines Full, our Money Ready, our Court Vnanimaus, our
Genius Warlike; and, in a word, every Particular amongst us, sensible of the
Concerns of the Whole, Prays for His most Excellent Majesty (the Breath of
our Nostrils) that his Counsels may prosper, his just Cause may succeed, his
Enemies may be ashamed, and upon his Head his Crown may Flourish: All that love
their King and Country, saying,

AMEN.
FINIS.

