Europes Transactions, DISCOVERED IN A DIALOGUE BETWIXT Democritus an
Englishman, Ernestus a German, and Landerlu a French Monsieur.
Lisenced According to Order.
Democ. IT IS high time for me to put on my considering Cap, and leave Laughing,
for these are sad times, all Europe being as it were in a Flame,


Ernestus. Or rather in a dangerous Sickness, and (as the late King James said
of England) Infected; but the Country (God be thanked) has had a Royal Antidote
since: But of all Germany, more than any Country, laboring under a French
Disease, now and then hot burning Fits, French Plotches, even disfiguring the
finest Features (Cities and Castles, etc.) of all Europe. First Heydleberg,
which being the Seat and Castle of the Electors of Palatine; where was a
stately Seat, a famous University, and a stately Library: Manheim, the newest
and regularest Place for Building (with the fine Castle Frederiksbourgh) in
Germany; Keyserlauther, and now Spire, a large ancient City, as is also Worms,
(though both Roman Catholic Places) and Oppenheim. The poor People of Worms
sheltered themselves in Caves under the Earth, but the French Furioso drove
them out with Cudgels, to others they sunk the Ground, and so buried some under
Ground alive; and now we hear they have new Orders to Burn 18 Villages more
thereabouts. At Spiers they persuaded the People to bring their best Goods into
the great Cathedral Church (under pretense that they had orders not to burn it)
which when they had so done, they Stole and Plundered all; then Burnt the
Cathedral, City, and all to the Ground, as also the Bishops Palace. The Bishop,
Canons and Prebends of the said Cathedral a Foot, they drove before a Troop of
Horse as Prisoners of War to Landaw; though the Bishop was esteemed a Man of
singular Piety, Age, and Noble Family; but the Bishop of Worms had a worse Fate
than all that, for he hoping to preserve his Cathedral, went to say high Mass
at the Altar, exposing the Eucharist, thinking that the French would not
profane or commit Sacrilege: but after the Soldiers had severely cudgel'd him
(though a Man of 80 Years of Age) they cast him and his Breaden God upon a
Cart, and carried him Prisoner to Landaw, to his Brother Colleague. And now very
lately they came to a place called Losheim, in which place they had been
drinking the day before, Plundered and Murdered all Men, Women and Children,
and those in the very Cradle, Burning the Town to the Ground. At Francfort they
brought in three Incendiaries, which were sent out by the French to burn the
Imperial Camp. And in Upper Hungary, as Ternaw, they caught three of them which
had set the Town a Fire (being sent out by Teckley, who does no great matter
since his Wounds at Clodova, or Novigrad) but they gave them their due reward,
cutting of each a Finger at 10 distant places in the Town, afterward cast them
in those Flames alive, which they had kindled.


Landerlu. Po! Po! that is nothain, the King de Fronce does act by Maxim of
State, he is a grand Monarch, and being in League with Teckley must send him
some of his Stoakers, as well as he has done Money and Officers; he so do
thing, alla Merveille, that Hermanstad and Croonstad (being the two chiefest
Cities) and Onoth in Transylvania are burnt to the Ground, and no Body knows
who has done it.


Democritus. Certainly, if ever there was a Tophet prepared for a King, Louis
XIV. will have a great place there; and as the Woman said of her Husb^nd, of
his Loving Fire, so God grant him (that which he Loves) enough of it; but I
hope the Duke of Lorrain and Bavaria, etc. will stop his Proce^dings, the
former is passed the Rhine with 7 Regiments, above Coblents, and they are
followed by a great many more: 3000 Men from Juliers, are on their March to
Join them, and a^ the Confederate Forces in the Electorate of C^llogn, ^re the
same way in a Motion, so that it is believed, they will Besiege Hon and Mont
Royal, both at once, which will give him employ another way.


Landerlu. You are mistaken, we have News that the King de France has demanded
140000 Crowns of the Burgers and Citizens of Mentz; and that 100 Wagons are
coming to fetch* all the best Rhenish Wines away, and the great Canon is
already removing; and after the Burgers have given all they can by way of
Contribution, the King de France will show them his pretty French trick, to
plunder their Houses, and burn the City to the Ground.


Ernestus. It is certainly confirmed, that there is such a horrible Order come
out of France. That as soon as the Germans are passed the Rhine, to burn Ments;
tho the Electoral Seat; and the City Landaw, and all other Cities, Town, and
Villages to Strasborg: Nay, some doubt if Strasborg it self will not be so
served, if the Popes Nunclo can engage the Romis^ C. Cantons to cast off the
Neutrality, for the Governors (Monsieur Chamillys) Wife is removing already her
best Goods, and Household Furnitures.


Landerlu. The King de France is of that Fineness and Policy, that he has
already blinded them of Success, especially those of Solithurn, and Sweits
Cantons, that they have given Permission to raise 4000 Men, so that the French
Pistol do out do the Canon of the Vatican and that shining ^^ettal is more
effications to those Roman Suissers, than the Holy Fathers Admonition or
Benediction.


Democritus. It is pity to see so many fine Cities and Towns laid in Ashes, so
that there is not so much as a token of any Building left in ^landers, they
threaten to burn the Subburbs of Brussels; but the Governor has a watchful Eye
upon them, and has made a Declaration to all Governors, Majors, and other
Magistrates, to give their Aid and Assistance to all French Disserters,
promising 2 Ducatons to every Trooper, and a Market Price for each Horse, and
to every Foot, or Dismounted Dragoon half a Ducaton, exhorting all Subjects
belonging to the Empire, to leave the French Service, according to the Imperial
Advocatoria, wherein they are declared Traitors that shall continue of that
Service. We hear they Des^rt in great Numbers, 20 and 30 at a Time, there being
an Officer from King William, who in a short time Listed 300 Men, most Swissers
and Germans, giving them 8 d. a Day. We hear from Flanders, that a Party of
Lieutenant General Calvo's Horse, came to a place, called Cocheim, near Gaunt,
were they committed several Outrages, amongst others, they entered into a
Carpenters House, where there was a poor Old and Lame Surgeon, called Robert
Smett, whom they bid to abjure his Allegiance from the King of Spain, under
whom he had served 12 Years, and swear for Lowis XIV. which he denying* said,
he was but for one God, and one King, upon which, they laid him before a great
Fire naked, roasting him, and he still remaining constant, turned him, and so
made a perfect Lawrence of him, he dying in less than half an Hour after. They
Write from Flanders, that the Dutch and English, had sunk 7 Vessels, with
Stones and Gravel, before the Haven of Dunkirk, which hinders them from going
out or in.


London: Printed for W. B. 1689.


