THE CASE OF GEORGE EVELYN OF Wotton, in the County of Surrey, Esquire
GEorge Evelyn having one Daughter and three Grand-Daughters (the Children of
his Eldest Son Deceased) but no Issue Male living; did by his Deed in the Year
1692, (a) Uoluntarily Settle his Estate of near Two Thousand Pounds per Annum
Value, to the Use of Himself for Life, without Impeachment of Wast, with
Remainder to his Brother John Evelyn, and the Heirs Male of his Body, with
Remainder to John Evelyn (Son of the said John) and the Heirs Male of his Body,
and for default of such Issue, to the Use of Himself, his Heirs and Assigns.

In which Settlement, the full (b) Intention and Design of the said George
Evelyn, was to preserve the Premises, after his own Decease, to his Brother and
his Issue Male; but upon failure of such Issue Male, that the same should
assuredly Revert to his own right Heirs.

And the said George Evelyn trusting and depending that his Brother and Nephew
would not take any Advantage from the said Voluntary Settlement, further than
was intended thereby, and relying upon their Fidelity and (c) Gratitude
therein, did not (as in Caution he might have done) reserve to Himself, in the
said Settlement, any Power of Revocation; nor did Restrain the Uses to first,
second, or other Sons of his Brother in Tail (as the Course is to do in like
Cases) whereby to hinder their destroying the said Settlement; of which they
taking Advantage (as the said George Evelyn has now lately discovered) (d)
Intend, after his Decease, to suffer a Recover of the Premises to bar the said
Reversion to his own Right Heirs, which being contrary to his Intention, he
has desired his said Brother to join with him in such a new Settlement, as may
effectually Secure the said Reversion to his right Heirs, after his Decease,
according to his true Intention. But the said John Evelyn refusing to comply
therewith, and designing to take Advantage of the said Settlement (though
voluntary) to defeat his right Heirs of the said Reversion.

Therefore the said George Evelyn beseeches the Honorable House of Commons,
to give leave for bringing in a Bill, for the new Settling and Securing his
Estate, according to his Intentions in the said Deed of Settlement ( viz.)
after his own Decease, to his Brother and his Son, and their several Sons
successively in Tail Male, in such manner, that upon failure of such Issue
Male, the Premises may revert to the said George Evelyn's own right Heirs,
without any Power of his Brother, or his Son to bar the same.

REMARKS ON THE CASE.
(a) THe Settlement having been Uoluntarily made so long since, and no manner
of Surprise or Mistake pretended, and the Circumstances of the Family, with
respect to the Issue of each Brother, being exactly the same now, as when the
Settlement was made, it is humbly hoped, there is no Reason for the Parliament to
interpose in this Matter.

(b) The Intention and Design of the Settlement plainly appear from the
Settlement it self, whereby John Evelyn of Deptford, Esquire and John his Son have
Estates Tail successively limited to them, without any Restraint of exercising
the Powers belonging to such Estates.

Besides, this Settlement was drawn by a Gentleman, whose Learning, Experience
and Integrity, are so well known, that it cannot be imagined, but that the
Settlement was made agreeable to the Instructions and Intentions of Mr. George
Evelyn.

But to remove all manner of Doubt concerning Mr. George Evelyn's Intentions
herein, He was, whilst this Conveyance was preparing, Advised, and
Importunately pressed by his Council, to Reserve to himself a Power of
Revocation; but he reasonably suspecting what Clamours he might be Subject to
from his Grand Daughters (all which had been very largely provided for; yet one
of them lately Marrying one Dr. Fulham, a Clergyman, he has raised this Clamor
after so many Years Satisfaction under the Settlement) and also maturely
considering the Circumstances of his Family, positively refused to have any
Restraint upon the Estates Tail, limited to his Brother and Nephew
successively, as aforesaid.

(c) There never has the least Reason yet appeared for suspecting their
Gratitude, but it is humbly conceived, 't will not be thought Reasonable, that
as an Evidence of their Gratitude, they should depart with an Estate Tail, and
Fetter three Generations, by making Grandfather, Father and Son, bare Tenants
for Life, to Gratify the Unreasonableness of Dr. Fullham.

(d) What Revelation Dr. Fulham has had of this Intention is not known, but
it is as certain no one Act has ever been done to create any reasonable
Distrust, as that there has never happened any Variance in the Family between the
two Brothers for 60 Years and upwards, till Dr. Fulham's Marrying into the
Family, to whom only this present Clamor is to be attributed.

It Is most humbly Prayed that no such Bill may be brought in and Passed.

THE CASE Of GEORGE EVELYN of Wotton, in the County of Surrey, Esquire With some
Remarks thereon, by John Evelyn of Deptford, Esquire only Brother of the said
George.


