THE BLOODY VISION OF JOHN FARLY, Interpreted by ARISE EVANS.

With Another VISION signifying peace and happiness. Both which Show remarkable
alterations speedily, to come to pass here in England, Also A Refutation of a
Pamphlet, lately published by one Aspinwall: called a Brief discripton of the
fifth Monarchy. Showing: That the late Parliament was that Beast mentioned,
Rev. 13. that this Representative is the Image thereof, and that the fifth
Monarchy will shortly be established in the Person of CHARLES STEVVART.

Printed in the Year. 1653.

THE PREFACE.
WHen the Lord sent Moses to the Children of Israel which were in Egypt; he
gave him two signs to show before them, that they might believe; and told him
that if they would neither believe the voice of the first sign, nor the voice
of the latter sign, then that he should take water out of the River, and pour
it upon the dry land, and it should become blood, Exodus 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9. Beloved friends, I have written two books and sent them forth in print,
as two signs to the English Nation; and those in power do take no warning by
them; And now also this book is going forth to show that the water of their
River must be turned into blood.

I said in my Petition to the General dated the 16. of the last May, that I
would not willingly turn water into blood, nor publish that bloody Vision
mentioned in the aforesaid Petition; which signifies, that we must have a
bloody War again: and that Right must have Right, though thereby all must be
turned upside down again, But now it must not be as I will, I must publish it,
or have no peace to my Soul: the Lion has roared, who will but fear: The Lord
God has spoken, who can but Prophecy and publish in the Palaces at Ashdod,
Amos 3, 8, 9. 10. 11. the great judgment coming upon it from the Lord of
Hosts, for the Lord God has sworn by his holiness; That lo, the days shall
come upon you that he will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with
fish hooks, Amos 4. 2. Then will you say: Oh, that we had believed ARISE EVANS,
and taken advise by his Books and Petition; as many of the Kings party now
mourn, and tell me the very words that I told them 19. years ago; blaming
themselves for that they had no more regard unto the words then spoken by me,
which now they found to be true by woeful experience: yea, and some of your
late Parliament men expressing their grief now; do wish, that they had
considered my words, and been persuaded by me: but alas, too late repentance is
nothiug worth: but like that of Esau and Judas, only brings despair, Heb. 12.
16, 17. Matt. 27. 3, 4, 5. for as the Tree falls so it lies, Eccles. 11. 3.

Therefore while the AX is laid to the Root of the Tree; it is the best time to
save it, Matthew. 3. 8, 9, 10. so before the judgment over take men; it is the
best time for men to do righteously, and thereby escape the wrath to come: Good
Reader, I hope I shall be clear from the blood of this generation, and leave
them altogether in excuseable: for why, they have had more warning from me;
then ever any had that I was sent to speak unto, for when I spoke to the King
and his party; If they had asked me whether I had spoken any thing by way of
Prophecy before that time? Surely, I could have said nothing to it then, which
might have been any ways sufficient to convince them; because that I had not
before that time been sent of God to any for to declare such things: But now it
is evident how I was called of God and sent to them, and upon their neglect was
sent to the Earl of Essex, and after that to the Presbyterians, and then to the
late Parliament, God confirming my words with as many signs as was required of
me, and also fulfilling the same always in their due seasons. So that, if this
people now shall likewise refuse to hear me, (who have had so many witnesses to
show that God is pleased to declare his determinate will by me:) they of all
others will be the least excusable for disposing me, and so the least capable
of mercy.

For, have they not known how God by me declared the most remarkable things
that befell these Kingdoms since the Wars began? How that 20. years ago, I
declared the things which befell the late King, and that I suffered 3. years
imprisonment for the same? How I declared to the Earl of Essex, 7. years before
he was General, that he should be the peoples General against the late King?
Have they not known how that in the year 1646. I declared the downfall of the
Presbyterians, and suffered two months imprisonment for that also? How I
declared in the year 1651. That the Kings Son would come to England long before
he came to Worcester, and his succes likewise? How I declared to the late
Parliament many times, that they should be destroyed long before their
dissolution? And have I not declared to them in the last month of May, that
King Charles will come in victoriously this year 1653. and had they not a sign
to confirm it, according to their own choosing and desire? Which sign was, that
if it did rain (more or less) 7. Sundays then next following successively, they
would believe my words. And did it not rain accordingly for seven Sundays
together, as many thousands who observed it can witness, although it was in the
very drought of Summer, and that there was scarce any rain all the other week
days besides?

Also many other signs were given by me to several persons diverse times in
several places, to confirm the truth of those things, therefore to God be the
glory of all. Neither was there any remarkable engagement of late days, either
by Sea, or Land, since the people began to inquire of me; but God was pleased
to reveal by me the event thereof. Surely, if these men were either faithful,
or sensible, they might see the mind and will of God, by these things, but
they are dead, Ephesians. 2. 1. They will not see, Isai 26. 11. Isai 42. 18. 19.
20. But still say unto me, Job 21. 14. depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways.

And now, as concerning you, ye murmuring people that meet every Monday in
Blackfriars Church: ye fast, ye pray, and ye preach and complain, that God
does not hear your prayers, and ye cry to God that he would send the spirit of
Prophecy by some one, or other, to let you understand the things to come; and
yet ye cannot see them now when God shows you all these things, by me his
poor Messenger, which are made known unto you by those truths in my aforesaid
books, called the [Voice and the Echo:] and as in the last of them, I said to
the late Parliament about a month before they were dissolved, that their
prayers were answered of God by those my books, and that if they did not
believe what I said, and do the same speedily; that God would send them strong
delusions, and bring sudden destruction upon them, Isa. 65. 12, 24. Isa. 66. 3.
4. 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. so I say unto you now, that if ye will not be
answered by the same things of God in my aforesaid Books, God will likewise
send you strong delusions, and bring sudden destruction upon you; for your
contempt of his truth; in not believing it: ye cry against the late Parl.
because they cheated the people of their moneys, and blame also these men now
of Westminster (as you call them) for treading their steps, and not calling the
other to an account for all the injustice they did: alas, do ye think that
these, or the like men, will ever call them to an account? Nay we must think
these will rather be more chargeable to the people then they were.

For do ye think, that such mean men raised to such high places, who not having
means of their own, sufficiently to maintain their greatness; will not have it
out from the people, over whom they have now the power and command? And will
they not raise their children, friends, and relations to all places of profit?
Truly it were a shame for them if they did it not: and I am confident that if
ye were in their place ye would do no less, although the Country should still
suffer by it: yea, and its like to suffer, until the King, Nobles, and Gentry
of England enjoy their rights again: for they having great revenues of their
own, by which they are able to bear such places of Authority, and govern the
people at their own proper charges: Therefore I say unto you if ye would have
men in places of lawful Authority, that are not self-ended and covetous, why
do not ye bend the strength of your prayers for CHARLES your right King, and his
party, that they may enjoy their rights again? And then ye may be sure, that he
will call your late Parliament to an exact account for all those moneys ye
speak off, and ease the people of their heavy taxations: and doubtless ye shall
prevail with God in prayer for him, and have all your desires accomplished.

I beseech you to consider the difference between this State-Government, and a
Monarchy; Queen Elizabeth had Wars with Spain, and Wars in Ireland, and also
assisted Holland: all which was done with her own revenues, and without any
Taxations from the subjects: but now where are the Crown Lands? What Is become
of the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands, and Delinquents Estates, and many
other things that are gone I know not where? And do ye think that the people
are ever like to be eased from the abundance of Assessments and Taxes, whilst
the great revenues belonging to the Crown are gone, which saved the people from
such heavy and continual Taxes, and by which large revenues Queen Elizabeth did
such great things, and yet left behind her abundance of Treasures?

So that you may clearly see, that there was a great part of the Kingdom
juggled away from the Nation by the late Parliament, when the new State was set
up; because what was the Kings was theirs, for the saving of their own goods,
and bearing their charges: and so was the Church Lands also appointed to ease
the people, that they should be free from being at charge to pay those that
were the Chief rulers of the Church, and took care for their Souls. And now if
ye would have God to hear you, why do not ye hear him, by doing justly to the
King* and Kingdom, that righteousness may run down as a River, Amos 5. 21, 22,
23, 24. or else all your seeking of the Lord will be in vain: for if ye will
still have your prayers granted according to your own sense and will, that is,
for you to prevail, kill and slay all that will not submit to you; then the
Lord will show your folly to all the World. And do not you boast as some of you
do, that ye have had the Spirit of Prophecy these seven years; that your
Armies overcoming their Enemies, is the fruit of your prayers: Alas, it is but
your pride, for it was Gods decree to deliver his people into your hands for a
time, to punish them for their sins: and he revealed it unto me, 20 years ago,
that your party should prevail as they have done, and then come to a miserable
end, as I have declared.

Thus ye may see, that it is not your spirit of Prophecy which you (deceiving
your selves) do imagine to have, nor yet is it the fruit of your prayers, that
has done it: for if ye had never opened your mouths such things had come to
pass: and you shall see within a short time that God will deliver you into the
hands of his people to be utterly destroyed, and all your Prophesying and
praying shall not deliver you in that day. Then leave off sacrificing to your
Calf, for it is no more then if the Egyptians should have sacrificed to their
false gods, for giving them power to overcome the Israelites, and keep them in
bondage: but God had showed to Abraham long before, that his seed should serve
the Egyptians, Genesis 15. 13. 14. and when the time of the Isreal's deliyerance
came, then neither, the Egyptians nor all their gods could keep them one day
longer, Exodus 12. 40. 41. so likewise the Babilonians might have gloried (as
you do) and attributed their success to their own parts, or to the power of
their gods: when they had overcome Israel: but they were more modest then so;
And knew very well that they could not detain them any longer, then God had
decreed: whereby you see that they in the very nick of Gods time set down by
the Prophet Jeremiah, 2 Chronicles. 36. 21, 22, 23, Ezra 1. Did send them home and
restore all which was theirs to them aagain.

Here I have taken an occasion by the way to speak a word also to Mr. Feake,
Mr. Simpson, and others of their party meeting in Blackfriars, not doubting
but when God shall arrest them saying, 1 Kings 21. 19. have thou killed and taken
possession in that place where King Charles and his people lost their blood, in
that very place shall thy blood be spilt, even thine: and set their bloody
deeds to Cry unto their Consciences, saying we are thine, and we will not leave
thee until thy Judgment come: then their courrage will be abated, and they
shall know that they are not for the Interest of Jesus Christ, as they falsely
affirm. But are for the Interest of the Devil, who was 2 murderer from the
beginning, John 8. 44. 1 John 3. 8. and when Nathans Ridle is opened unto
others, saying: thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12. 7. 14. For thou have given great
occasion to the Papist to Blaspheme. saying, these are the works of such as
would be altogether Ruled by the Bible: they will for swear themselves, and
murder their King, and kill, Rob, and Steal, by authority; when like David's
Psalm, 51. 3. their sin as a bloody sheet is set before them, It will make them
roar like David, saying, I acknowledge mine iniquity and my sin is ever before
me, Against thee; thee, only have I sinned by causing the enemies to Blaspheme
thy word, the holy Bible.

Oh now, I will Repent and endeavor to restore the Kings Family and other
Families; which most unfaithfully and unjustly: we have spoiled, and I will pay
my Vows and stop the mouths of the Blasphemers of thy word thereby, so far as I
am able, help me Lord, that I may prevail and appease thy hot indignation
against me: and I could wish that those of Feake and Simpsons party would
Repent and be of the same resolution: but I know of a certain there is a party
in this Land, that shall fall by their wilful impenitency.

Now I draw to a conclusion, desiring all in general to observe diligently the
rest of the matter following in this little book, and if any do desire to know
further of me, let them get the other books here mentioned: for my part, If it
be the will of God, I am willing to be offered for the defense of the faith of
Gods elect. Titus 1, 1. But I cannot desire that God should not take me away in
the midst of my days Psalm 102. 24. because I am already past it, nor say as
Jacob said to Pharaoh, that I have not attaind to the years of the life of my
Father Genesis 47. 9. for I have outlived my Father and elder brother in years;
who died both a natural death; therefore the remnant of days that now I have to
live, I count to be extraordinarily given me of God: even to glorify him
wholly withal; and If it please him that I die a Martyr and that in my death I
glorify God, I hope he will give me strength to triumph that way; but woe to
such a party as takes my life violently from me, for declaring to them the
truth in love, committed to my Charge. Truly I have no cause to doubt these
people; for though they have not yielded to the truth: yet they have been
persuaded that my declaration was so much in the way of Gods spirit, that they
did not molest me at all when I delivered my Petition to the Counsel of the
Army, May 26. 1653. and spoke in the defense of King Charles, at that time when
I disputed it before them all, four hours together. I spoke there more fully
for (him) then ever I did by writing; so that I may say this word of the
Prophet to God, was verified on me, Isai 26. 3, 4. Thou will keep him in
perfect peace, whose heart is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee, I
may say experimentally that this is true, even that I had such a peace of God,
as passes all understanding, Phil. 4. 7. that is peace and liberty to the soul
and body. Therefore, I will trust in the Lord, for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength Isai 26. 4. And now I am as the Paul of this time: he was
a Mechanic, a tent Maker, Acts 18. 3. I am a Tailor, I plant and show these
things, Apollo, that is the eloquent ministers of Christ are to water them, but
God gives the increase Acts 18. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 1 Corin. 3. 6. I recommend
all to God and his Ministers, and I remain your faithful servant in Christ
Jesus.

Arise Evans from Long-Ally in Blackfriars Sep. the 13. 1653.
Errata.
Page 6. line 21. for, it signifies or firmness thereof, the certainty, Read,
it signifies the certainty or firmness thereof,

The bloody Vision of John Farly interpreted, with another Vision signifying
peace and happiness, etc.
BEfore I come to show you the Visions, it will be needful to let you
understand a little of the life and quality of this Mr. Farly, according as I
have heard it, both from himself and others that knew him very well, who
acknowledged him to have been a Gentleman of good estate, living near
Wallington in Shropshire, and always was counted a very honest man, and of a
mild disposition: also in these troublesome times he paid all Taxes freely to
both sides, King and Parliament, and yet was very much plundered and wronged by
both, until at last they brought him so low that he was forced to moregage his
own Lands, and afterward to fearm another Gentleman's Estate in Wales: but
having many crosses there likewise, he was forced to leave that place also, not
being able to manage it for want of stock.

At this time he had a wife and eight children to maintain, and very little
money remaining, so that he knew not what course to take for a lively hood: But
calling to mind that a Gentleman and a dear friend of his was in the Lord
Generals lifeguard, and hoping by his means to get some place under the
Parliament, whereby to maintain his charge.

In the year 1652. He came to London with all his family, and took a house at
the upper end of Drury Lane, where he lived very poorly, and could neither meet
with his friend nor get any employment, but was in great distress for want of
means to maintain his charge, and to pay every one his own.

And on the 21 of January 1652. In the morning he being in his bed, was very
much troubled in his mind at his crosses, but yet meditating and in his
thoughts trusting in the Lord for supply, he fell into a trance and saw the
following Visions, and when he came to himself again, being unaccustomed with
such things, he was much troubled at it, and arising in haste, told his wife
thereof: and immediately went forth to several of his friends, Ministers, and
others, and related what he had seen to them, desiring them to give him their
judgment there upon, for he was afraid that his Visions did only predict some
misfortune to himself, and when some of them told him, they could not give him
the Interpretation; or at least would not: but that these were matters of
higher concernment: he was the more afraid to conceal the same, so that then
they became a burden unto him.

At last he came to another friends house, and told these things also there,
and as they were wondering at the strangeness of those Visions, and could make
no construction thereof: Nor what they did signify, one being there present
that has a book of mine, called [A voice from heaven to the Commonwealth of
England, and lent it to him: And likewise derected him to me, saying it was
very likely that I could give him the right Interpretation of those things, and
after he had read some part thereof he came to my house, and being in a kind
of ecstasy, sat down and showed me the book, and declared the cause of his
coming, and how he had been all that moruing in several places to have his
Visions interpreted, but found none that could interpret the same. But now was
by a devine providence and my book directed to me, he being very confident that
it was given for me to interpret it.

Then I considering with my self that in regard of the multitude of people
daily inquiring of me concerning what hopes I saw of their redemption from
these troublesome times, I having for a whole fortnight before constantly prayed
to God to send me some extraordinary knowledge, now to satisfy and comfort the
people, and found by the strangeness of this man's coming, before he related his
Visions, that he was sent of God unto me therewith, as answers to my prayers, I
desired him to declare them unto me, promising him through Gods assistance to
show the interpretation thereof, and there upon he repeated them to be in this
manner.

1. I saw in a Vision revealed unto me as I was standing upon stone-steps, at a
place in London, there came a man riding before me, and made a stand against
me, and th n I saw a Coatch coming between the man and me passing by, and in
the Coatch was a woman clothed in scarlet, and one who stood by me, said:
Behold this woman, how do you like of her? And I answered, I liked none, but
mine own, and then the man who was on the Horse back, said unto me, then it
seems you like none, but one of your own breaking, then there came six
youths, who were in blue Coats and blue Caps, (like to the Hospital youths,)
and stood between the man on horse back and me, and said, behold, take notice
of the Moon, and thereupon I looked up and saw a sign post, with the sign of
the Moon hanging as a sign under it, which I beholding presently there appeared
a spot of blood upon the picture of the Moon, which spot spread it self over
all the Moon, and the blood sparkled up upon the skey and overspread the same.

Then suddenly falling down upon my knees, and lifting up my hands to heaven, I
called upon the Lord to be my guider and defender, and immediately upon that
there appeared by the picture of the Moon a man sitting, having a candle
lighted in his hand, then came another man with a candle unlighted in his hand,
and he lighted his candle at the other candle, that the other man had in his
hand, and departed: And then the man who sat by the Moon spoke and said, I
thank you all for beholding the same.

Then there came a Chariot with milk white horses like as if it had come out of
a Court by the place where I stood, and as they aproached near me, I thought
them to be of fire, so sparkling that the heat thereof came mightily unto me,
whereby I was forced to shrink back from the extreamitie thereof, and returning
two or three steps back, I beheld the horses and Chariot coming up the steps
after me, thus going back, and seeking for some place to shelter my self from
the heat thereof: but find in the street as I went, neither door nor shop
window open, I could have no place of safeguard.

And seeing before me another Chariot with horses aproaching toward me, I was
greatly troubled in mind, and then beholding upon my right hand a street
turning another way in which I thought to be free, entered the same: And having
gone but a little way therein, it was beset in like manner. And there came
foremost a man having a long light like unto a Tortch in his haud, which when I
saw, I thought it was Domes day, and fell to the ground as a dead man, and
could not move hand nor foot, yet had my remembrance perfect, and when he came
unto me, he said, who is here: but I said nothing unto him, and then he strode
one foot over me, and lift me up from the earth, and held me in his arms and
blue into mine ears three or four times, then said he there was no means to
help me, but to be washed with the blood of Jesus Christ, so soon as he had
spoken I perceived my self to be naked, and then he washed and bathed my body
all in blood; which being done he departed and went foreward, ana I thought he
drew me after him. Then presently I was brought like as if I had been in some
great Church, wherein was much Timber work, and there I saw men washing, and
besmearing all the Posts and Timber with blood, and then I seemed as if I were
to depart out of the same place, but coming to the door of it, I heard as it
were a rushing of a mighty wind, with a noise of Chariots and Horses, with
beholding of sumptuous buildings and multitudes of men, and being astonished
therewith, I returned into the Church again, and then by that time I seemed to
have a great bundel of bladders about me which vanished all, but three, whereof
one was very little, and the rest were very great, especially one of them, and
these two seemed like two earthen pots, which wearied me to bear. And as I went
forward in a bake-way flying from the Church, I heard a voice, saying, go
apace: and when I came to the end, at a place where I could go no further; I
thought these pots did diminish mightily, and there came a voice unto me,
saying, there will not be left the worth of a half penny remaining of all this
fight, so I awaked.

And I being in fear and amazement at this bloody Vision, within a quarter of
an hour after fell into a trance again and saw another Vision, which is as
follows:

I beheld, and lo, I was in a field (as I thought) newly sown with Wheat, and
as I beheld, I saw upon the Land sowed, a company of Doves being milk white,
and all of them stood in a round ring, or ci^kle, and in the midst was only
one alone by himself which surpassed all the rest in brightness, shining like
the Sunbeams in its brightness, so did this Dove appear in brightness and
glory, and I awaked again.

These were the Visions which he related unto me, and now I shall give you the
Interpretation thereof, as I gave it to him then.

The Interpretation of the first Vision.
WHereas you saw your self standing upon stone steps in London, it signifies,
or firmnes thereof, the certainty, and that by degrees, your Vision will be
fulfilled here in England, Jer. 21. 6, 9.

And whereas you saw a man on horse back coming speedily to the place where you
stood, it does signify that they will speedily come to pass, Ezekiel. 12. 22, 23,
24, 25. Habak. 1. 8. also the Vision being revealed to you in the morning,
signifies the day of its fulling is near at hand, Romans 13. 12.

And whereas you saw a Coatch with a woman in it, all clothed in scarlet
passing by, that signifies this bloody Parliament and State, which will
suddenly vanish away and be consumed, Rev. 17. 3, 4, 16. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.

And whereas you saw six youths all in blue, they signify Charles his wayne,
and their voice which said, behold, take notice of the Moon, signifies the
Comet, or blazing Star, that appeared in December 16^2. near the 7 Stars, which
Star, or Comet does presage the dissolution of this present power speedily
also, Judge. 5. 19, 20. Job 38. 7. 31, 32, 33. Amos 5. 8.

And whereas you saw a sign post with the sign of the Moon to it, and of the
sport of blood that appeared upon it, and overspread both it and the skey, by
the sign of the Moon is signified, that when this Parliament is destroyed, they
will make an Image, or a representation of the same Parliament, and in that,
divisions will break out into blood, which will overspread the Kingdom more
then ever it did, Joel. 2. 31, 32. Rev. 13. 14, 15. Psalm. 55. 9.

And whereas you saw a man sitting by the picture of the Moon with a light like
a candle in his hand, and another man coming to him with a candle unlighted,
and lightning it at the other man's candle, and so depart, and then the man
sitting by the picture of the Moon, his giving thanks to the spectators: Is
signified that a great Commander at this time of division shall be hard put to
it, and be forced to issue forth a Commission to one that shall help him, and
he will be very grateful unto such as shall discover the treachery and plots
that are intended against him, Psalm 132. 17. Isa. 24. 13.

And whereas you saw a Chariot with milk white horses coming out of a Court
hard by you, and the Chariot all of fire, so that you fled before it, and could
have no place of safeguard, and that another Chariot came against it: That
signifies that the King and Court interest now begins to be violent and hot on
foot again, prevailing, notwithstanding, there is another Chariot, or power
coming against it, which will meet in London streets, so hot that all will in
that day be forced to shut up their shop-windows and doors for fear, so that he
which is without doors shall not find a place wherein to hide his head, Isa.
21. 6, 7, 8, 9. Amos 9. 11, 12, 13. Isa. 24. 10.

And whereas you saw a street on your right hand in the which you thought to
escape, but found it beset with a multitude of men, and that he which came
foremost had a Tortch lighted in his hand, before whom you fell as a dead man,
yet your remembrance was perfect, and he having compassion on you, calls to
you, takes you up, blows in your cars, to see if that would revive you: but
seeing it would not do, does pronounce that you must be washed in blood, and
after you are washed, you are revived and follow him: The foremost man
signifies the King, who shall enter his Kingdom at this time, and in compassion
lovingly shall send forth his Declaration and proclamation to his people: But
they will not come in to him, nor stir no more then you did when the man called
to you, took you up, and blue in your ears, then seeing that he must do it, the
King will resolve to proceed with Fire and Sword to wash the Kingdom with
blood, then the Kingdom will come in to him, and he will prevail, Judges 7. 16,
19. Thus by compulsion he must draw his people after him, Song. 1. 4.

And whereas you saw that you came into a great Church where men washed all the
posts with blood: It signifies that God will now avenge himself on such as have
destroyed, defiled, and robbed his sanctuaries, I mean Cathetheral Churches,
and other Churches, and things dedicated to Gods service: Insomuch that God
will for that cause require the blood of those, who are guilty of these Crimes,
to satisfy his hot indignation, and to cleanse his sanctuaries with blood, for
if the Lord Jesus was so sore offended with those that sold Doves for the
sacrifice in the Temple at Jerusalem, and so zealous for it that he would not
suffer any to carry a Vessel through it, how much more is he offended with
those that so highly abused, robed, and destroyed the Christian Temples builded
for him to be worshipped in, Mark. 11. 16, 1^. Joh. 2. 14, 15, 16. Jer. 50. 28.
Jer. 51. 11, 51, 52. Malach. 3. 9. Romans 2. 22.

And whereas you saw your self departing out of the Church, and as you were at
the door heard the rushing of a mighty wind, with noise of Chariots
clattering together with beholding of men armed in multitudes, and sumptuous
spacious buildings: It signifies that in the City of London there shall be
great busling, troubles, and most terrible fightings in all parts thereof at
this time, Jer. 23. 17, 18, 19, 20.

And whereas you saw that as you returned again, and found another way to go
out of the Church, you were burdened with a bundel of blown bladders, which
vanished from you as you went, saving only three remained: By which is
signified that the Parliament men, whose wind have voted these mischiefs which
are come upon this Kingdom, and the vain professors who have executed their
votes, and never had any thing of truth in them, but rather delighted
themselves with their vain, wicked, windy, and fruitless notions, now all such
will be troubled and get together, being assured that they shall now be called
to an account for their works, yet thinking to do some feats by raising Armies
to preserve themselves, but they shall be cut off in the bud one after another,
as they are about it, except three that will escape, 1 Cor. 4. 19, 20. Hos. 12.
1. Tit. 1. 16. James 2. 20. Matthew. 12. 35, 36, 37.

And whereas you saw three bladders remaining and that one of them was a very
little one, and the other t^o very great ones, but especially one surpassing
in greatness, and that these became too earthen pots, which by degrees
diminished as you went foreward, then the voice that said to you, go apace, and
after your coming to a place where there was a stop, that you could go no
further: It signifies that three Parliament men, one that has been the
greatest actor in these times* the other has acted much, but the third very
little. These three will get two flying Armies, and being persued will diminish
until at last they get into some strong hold, from whence happily they may
make their peace, Judges 20. 45.

And whereas last of all, you heard a voice, saying, that there will not be
left the worth of a half penny of all this sight: It signifies that of all the
riches and glory that the Parliament and their party seem to have got, there
shall not be left unto them the worth of a half penny, Jer. 15. 13. Isa. 61. 6.
Isa. 21. 16.

This is the Interpretation of your first Vision, which indeed is a terrible
one, and I could wish withal my heart, that if it be possible it come not to
pass: But rather that God would be pleased to pardon the sins of this Land, and
to give them grace to receive the King in peace, and if it be his blessed will,
that the Parliament and State would not bring utter ruin upon themselves, and
upon this distracted Nation.

Now after I had interpreted this bloody Vision, he was very well satisfied in
his spirit, and desired me to interpret the other Vision, which he had within a
quarter of an hour after the former, but he said it never troubled him as the
other did, and I said it shall be also done; for it may be there is more of
comfort in that, then there is of sorrow in this.

The Interpretation of the second Vision.
THen said I, whereas you saw your self in a Field newly sown with Wheat: That
signifies that now there shall be a new Kingdom established again here in
Britain, more glorious then ever was upon earth, Jer. 33. 14, 15. Isa. 44. 2,
3, 4. Psalm. 126. 6. Matthew. 3. 12.

And whereas you saw a company of milk white Doves upon that Field, all in a
round ring, or circle: The Ring, or Circle signifies the endless, everlasting,
and everstanding Court that shall be raised and established here again. And the
company of milk white Doves signifies the spotless Nobles that have continued
faithful all this time. Therefore, both they and their seed shall Triumph
gloriously in the Court for ever, Isa. 66. 22. Psalm. 84. 2, 10. Psalm. 65. 4.
Song. 2. 14.

And whereas you saw one Dove alone in the middle of the Ring, or Circle, which
did shine like the Sun in brightness, by that Dove is signified the King, who
in due time will shine like the Sun over all the earth, to answer the
expectation of all Nations, and fulfill the promise of our Lord Jesus, so that
Jews and Turks shall then acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the only Savior of
Souls, Psalm. 68. 13. Psalm. 24. ^, 8, 9, 10.

And after I had interpreted his Visions, he called for Pen and Ink and wrote
them, and left them to my disposing: but I desired him to get them fairly
written, and that I would get the Interpretations of them also fairly written,
and that he should carry them to the Lord General Cromwell, and a Petition with
them; to show his case and condition, telling him that the General was a good
man, and would perhaps do something for him: And then he was inclinable to take
my counsel, but two days after, he came again to see me, and brought his wife
with him, I propounded the same motion to him again, saying, that it was best
for him to go with his Visions to the Lord General. And he answered me, saying,
That one Mr Wild, (as he heard,) was then, and had been a long time prisoner
in Newgate, for declaring a vision that he had seen, and that if his
Excellency should send him to prison upon it, both he, his wife, and children
might come to starve by that means: But said he, I refer it to God and your
disgression to publish it in due time, according as God shall direct you.

Then I considered how I had prayed, and that God sent the visions to him as a
conduit to convey them to me, and to answer my prayers, and as a Talent for me
to give an account off: therefore I moved him no more to that purpose: And the
man presently after, being much troubled in mind, at his wants and crosses in
the world, went to Virginia with some friends of his to try his Fortune there:
Now the reasons, why I look upon these visions as an immediate warning from God
to this Nation, are these five following.

1. Because he was not factious on any side, or a seeker after new opinions but
was well grounded in the true Christian Faith of the Church of England,
believing the truth of it, and without dispute resting constantly in the same
Faith that he was taught in at first, and hence I do gather, that he was
beloved of God, who showed him those Visions.

2. Because I saw that he had not a spirit of pride, or revenge in him, for
although he lost all he had in these times for no cause, but only that he was
peaceable: yet did I never hear him speak a word against the Parliament, or any
other that had wronged him, but contrarily sought for a place under any of
them, to get any where a poor honest living, patiently waiting on God without
any pride, or thoughts of revenge.

3. Because that after he had seen the Visions, though he said to me that he
was never so troubled before, yet now had he no rest in his spirit, until he
got a satisfactory Interpretation to them from me, and then had perfect rest
and peace in mind concerning the Visions.

4. Because I saw it was the fruit of my prayers to God, who since he called me
to this his peculiar service, never denied me any thing that was needful for
me to know, and whereby to warn this Nation: Therefore whatsoever others think
of these Visions, I shall look upon them as certain truths consonant to the
Scriptures, which suddenly will come to pass.

5. Because that from the time I had these Visions thus left with me unto this
present, it has been a great burden to my spirit, so that I find it
impossible for me to keep them in silence, and have rest: And although I had
rather be a Jonah then a Jeremy, in pronouncing of judgment, and that England
might become a Ninive, and not a Jewry in matter of repentance, Jonah. 3. 4,
10. Jer. 25. 8. Jer. 39. yet Gods decree must stand, Isa. 46. 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. and the stout hearted shall bow down to it, ye stand upon your sword, says
God: And I will call for a sword against it; throughout my mountains, says the
Lord God, every man's sword shall be against his brother, Ezekiel. 33. 16. Ezekiel.
38. 21. Amos 5. 6. That all flesh may know, that I the Lord have drawn my
sword, Ezekiel. 21. 5. Therefore be thou instructed, Oh Jerusalem, lest my Soul
depart from thee, lest I make thee desolate, a Land not inhabited, Jer. 6. 8.

Now I have given you an account of these Visions, to the intent that God might
be glorified, you profitted and my self eased of my burden, I shall endeavor
to inform you further of what I see and discern in Scripture concerning this
Nation, but I shall direct my speech chiefly to those Gentlemen of the
Representative now at West-minster, and then to the rest of this Kingdom,
beseeching all of them to consider what I have said in my former books, the one
called [A voice from heaven,] and the other [An Echo unto that voice,] and
take special notice of the dates of those books, and likewise how those sayings
are come to pass; since they were published, and lay them to heart seriously,
and then consider, that if I keep a clear conscience I must declare the truth.

Admonitions to all the People of this Kingdom, but chiefly to those that have
the power in their hands.
By ARISE EVANS.
MEn and brethren I beseech you, let me freely speak unto you, in the language
of the Apostle, Acts 2. 25. How be it, as his speech was distastefull then, so
I doubt mine will be to many Palets now, but I hope such as fear the Lord; will
hear and be pricked in their hearts, Acts 2. 37. Truly, though I have received
his spirit for my directions herein, 2. Cor. 3. 17. Eccles. 12. 10. Yet if it
were possible I would not displease you: I confess my matter, or message is
contrary to most of your judgments: but for all that; as I shall endeavor to
deliver the same in as fair terms as I can: so I hope ye will accordingly take
the same in good part, surely I look upon your Declaration to be your real
intention, and take it as a great mercy of God that ye are such men, as be able
to hear reproof, Prove. 13. 18. Prove. 15. 5. 10. 31. And of such qualifications
to fulfill such terrible places of Scripture, whereas if it had been the lot of
some proud, hot, intemporate men, who would not endure to be told of what they
were by their station, they might have gone to Hell without mollestation, or
any to pity them.

It is averred by some that a Cockatrice seeing it self in a glass, and by
beholding its own deformity immediately dies, I do not wish you should do so:
But I wish that when I show you by the Scripture what ye are now, that ye would
become what you should be, to your eternal happiness: I know God can turn a
Saul to Paul, Acts 9. 4, 5. and I hope no less of you, for God can turn the
shadow of death into a morning, Amos 5. 8. he can make darkness light, and
crooked things straight, Isai 42. 16. so that there shall be no shadow of
death, nor darkness where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves, Job 34.
22. all these things are possible with God for them that believes, Mark. 9.
23. Matthew* 19. 26.

Indeed my main matter is both hard for me to utter, and for you to understand,
Romans 16. 25. 26. John 6. 27. 1 Timoth. 5. 17. Heb. 5. 11. Nahum. 1. 1, 2.
Haba^. 1. 1, 2. for I am under a burden which presses me sore, and have been
twenty years under the same, and though many think it but an easy thing to
declare the mind of God, and to open the mysteries of his word as they are
fulfilled, yet I tell you it is so hard, and requires so much courage,
strength, and labor, that none knows it, but such as are exercised therein,
Jer. 9. 3. Jer. 23. 16, 17. But it is an easy thing to be a flattering false
Prophet, who swim always with the stream, crying peace where there is no peace,
and the World follow such, Jer. 6. 14. for we see the true Prophets were
generally men of sorrows, condemned, and persecuted by the World: because they
did not flatter, nor spare men in Authority but told them their sins, for which
cause they were so rejected, that some of them wished to die, or that they had
never been born to see the truth, and their love slighted and the people
ruined, Jer. 20. 18. Jer. 22. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 King. 19. 4. and men in
Authority never wanted false Prophets to flatter, and destroy them by
persuading them to go on and prosper, 1 Kings 22. 12. until their sins were
ripe, and no remedy left.

Therefore it is better for you to hear me now while the Sun of prosperity
shines upon you, then to hear those thousands who tell you the World is yours,
and cause you to bless your selves in the imaginations of your own hearts,
Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19, 20. as if God were pleased with injustice, bloud*shed,
tebellion, robbery, opression, spiritual pride, drunkenness, and a many other
abominable inormities which the late Parliament countenanced among us, for I am
assured, that what I do now tell you is true, and will as certainly come to
pass as those truths have done, which I foretold to those that were in
Authority before you.

It is certain that you do by your Declaration require a worship, and
acknowledgement of your power, as if you were a Parliament: why should I wrong
and flatter you, by giving you a false Title, ye cannot be ignorant that
according to the Laws of England, ye are not a Parliament: And I wonder much
that ye did take that name upon you, ye being so unlike to it, for ye know a
Parliament consists of Lords spiritual, and temporal, and Commons called in by
the Kings Writ, and chosen by the people, but the generality of them, as one
said to me, do not look upon you as a Parliament, though many be forced to lie
against their consciences by calling you so: Is it not therefore best that I
tell you the truth, which is that the people do not own you as a Parliament,
which I fear ye will find when they see a fit opportunity, which they wait
for, to rise up against you, whereof if I should not warn you, and tell you the
truth, which is so clearly revealed unto me, I should be a murderer, and bring
your blood upon mine own head, Ezekiel. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 17, 18, 19. then how
can I rest, or hold my tongue, seeing no murderer has eternal life abiding in
him? 1 John 3. 15. and sure it is, that there is a heavy judgment to come upon
you, unless by repentance and amendment ye speedily prevent it.

And now me thinks I hear some of them in power say, what shall we do to
prevent this judgment? I answer, give that unto God which is his due, and unto
Caesar what is due unto him, and unto all people their just rights and
Liberties.

1. Do right unto God, and that is, restore to God all those things which were
taken from the Church by the late Parliament, or any other in Tithes and
offerings, Malach. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Ye know well enough what the
Tithes are, and for the offerings, first, they are the praises of God, which
were sung and said daily in our Churches, both Cathedrals and others throughout
the Kingdom, which singing and praising of God with instruments of Music in
Scripture is called the daily sacrifice, Daniel 8. 11, 12, 13. Daniel 12. 11.
Psalm 150. Psalm 50. 14, 15. Rev. 5. 8, 9. Rev. 14. 2, 3. All which praises
being his due, ye ought to restore unto him again, and for other offerings
belonging to God, they are all those things which have been given by our
forefathers for pious uses, whether to the Church to maintain Ministers in in
several places, or to the maintenance of poor Orfants and aged people, or any
other ways left to be disposed: all which ye are to restore and dispose off,
according to the mind of those good people that gave them; for those things
were sacr^ficed unto God, who takes care for his Ministers and for the poor,
and acknowledges that what was given to them, Matt. 25. 40. was given to him,
and what was taken from them is a robbing of him, and also declares that such
as rob him in those things are accursed, Malach. 3. 8, 9.

But ye will say, those that gave these things were idolatrously devoted, I
answer: Thou that abhorrest idols, do thou commit sacrilege? Romans 2. 22.
Our Church in the days of King Henry 8. King Edward 6. and Queen Elizabeth took
sufficient care for that matter: Therefore take heed, least ye by running away
from idolatry split your selves upon sacrilege, and robbing of God, but rather
do right to God in restoring these things, that ye may be blessed.

The next thing is, that ye do right unto all men from the highest to the
lowest, and that you restore to every one what is his Birthright and due by
the Laws of the Land, according to the intention of our worthy predecessors
that made them: And that ye neither alter nor destroy those Laws, they being
experimentally found to be the best in all the World for the government of a
people, according to the word of God. Insomuch that before this time Britain
might have been called the glory of the whole earth, for righteousness toward
God and man, if they had not come short in the execution of the Laws, according
to the true meaning thereof, for the Laws are good, though the administratours
thereof being corrupted, have through bribery many times wrested them, and
thereby wronged the subjects, and it is a notable Character of the beast, or
Antichrist, that he shall think to change times and Laws, Daniel 7. 25.
Therefore it were good that ye would leave off your destroying of our Laws, and
changing of times.

3. The third thing is; That ye restore the government of the Church, and
preserve the Laws and Ordinances thereof as well as of the state, according as
they were established in the beginning of these troubles: And that for the
better purging and taking away of all abuses and errors crept in since that
time, ye advise with such conscientious learned, sober, and honest Bishops, and
other Orthodox Clergy and Lawyers as be most able to direct you as from the
mouth of God: But beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, I mean the
Presbyterian, or Puritanical faction, who have brought all this misery upon
themselves and us: for though they be now so sensible of their errors, that
many of their Ministers and Ringleaders do begin to creep toward the Bishops
good old way: yet it will not be wisdom to trust them: least their old Leprosy
break out again. And now in the name of God Almighty, I testify and affirm
unto you, that this is the very mind of God and of the most conscientious, and
judicious men in the Kingdom, which here I present unto you to be done for the
good and happiness of the Nation.

Therefore, (as I said,) whilst ye stand in the station wherein ye are now, I
dare not (for my part) lie so grossly agrinst the truth and mine own conscience,
as to call you a Parliament, for I have proved by the Scripture in my book
called [A voice from Heaven,] written in the year 1651. That the late
Parliament which was rightly called together at first, by doing those
unreasonable actions which the beast spoken off, Rev. 13. was to do; according
to the Scripture, became that beast: Now the beast being wounded by a sword and
dissolved, yet lives in its acts, that ye are the Representative, or image of
the same beast, Rev. 13. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And what penalty is appointed for
any that gives any Title of Honor, Worship, or reverence to the beast, or to
his image is evident, Rev. 14. 9. 10.

And truly, let me tell you mine own infirmities also, that it is no small
grief unto me, that I am confined upon pain of eternal damnation, not to give
you the Titel and reverence that ye expect from these three Kingdoms, for I am
confident that some of your intentions and meanings are good, though your
errors and want of true understanding be very evil: so that it is harder for
to bring you, or such as profess so much knowledge to a right understanding,
then it is to bring them that never made any profession of religion at all, to
acknowledge the truth: for as the Lord Christ found more true understanding and
Faith in Heathens and Publicans, then in the self-conceited Pharisical Jews,
Matthew. 21. 31, 32. So now those that seems to have nothing of value in them by
the judgment of your precisians, I find to be most capable to understand and
to believe the saving truth that I now declare; for the open profane through
infirmities and weakness of the flesh, being right and firm in the true
principles of Faith, are better then those who profess outward holiness with
errors in judgment and faith: yea, and are more humble and consequently more
capable to receive the truth, Luke 18. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. But I hope better
things of you, though I thus speak.

That notwithstanding the great difference between King Charles and you, ye
shall find him to be a Child of God, and appointed to be the most eminent
servant of Jesus Christ in all the World, and that ye will be yet his most
glorious subjects, to vindicat him from all the aspersions laid upon him, and
to wound the head of his Enemies: and yet, Truly Gentlemen, if I should believe
reports, there is small cause for me to stand so much for him: for I heard it
of a certain, that some eminent pretended friends of his, (who thinks to bear a
great sway in this Kingdom;) have positively said: That when he comes to his
Throne, he must of necessity put me to death: Because (say they) I laid too
much honor upon his Father, and did blaspheme therein, but I believe they are
not able to prove their assertion from scripture against me, though they take
up the teners of the Pharisee: for a man may blaspheme God and the King, but to
join God and the King together in one, is no blasphemy by Scripture rule: but
howsoever, I shall both do him right, and not be danted at their ignorant
threats: for I believe the King shall have such wisdom to rule, that all things
will not be done as such ignorants would, for though they think the revolutions
of these times to be nothing, but accidental changes, yet wiser men who shall
then bear rule with the KING, when he comes to his Throne, will find and
believe that these revolutions and changes came to pass, even to fulfill the
words and promises of God, which are laid down in Scripture, as they are and
have been opened and declared by me these twenty years in some measure by Gods
assistance and appointment.

And whereas many say, the Kings blood lies upon this man and that man, and
that the King cannot pardon such, and such a man; and that he can never be
reconciled to such a party, or parties. I am sure, you that so think, or
affirm, are as much concerned in the late Kings death, as any of them you speak
off, and ye do this King more injury then any man does, by persuading the King
and people, that what ye report in this matter is true, so that you most
unadvisedly set one against another: And therefore the hearts of them that are
in power are so hardened against the King, that though they were willing to
restore him to his right, yet will they not do it, least thereby they should
fall into such bloodthirsty men's hands, as they fear you (by your own words)
to be: And I am persuaded (as my reason tells me:) that your threatening of the
late Parliament and Soldiery, was the main cause, why they put the late King
to death; for what is it that men will not do to save their own lives and
estates? Therefore they strike when you do but threaten.

But if you would enquire by humane sense and reason, from whence these
miseries came, ye will find that they did spring from the covetousness of some
Clergy man, 1 Timothy 6. 9. 10. 1 Timothy 3. 2. 3. for ye will find a covetous man
come to the Ministry, and he must have two or three Church Livings whatsoever
they cost him, and he will get some poor Curates for a small matter to serve
for him, who although they be learned, yet they shall never be able to get so
much under him as will buy them books, or hardly bread, so that they being
starved, are not able to feed the people with knowledge: whereupon they hire
themfelves a Lectorer, and these hirelings being Wolves, put on sheeps
clothing, Matthew. 7. 15. 20, 21, 22, 23. and to fill their bags they will
flatter the people, and preach them all to be saints forsooth that follows
them: so they become Puritanes, and say to the other, stand apart and come not
near me, for I am holier then thou, Isai 65. 5. 6. and while the one part of
the Parrish are drunk at the Alehouse, and on the Sundays run into all manner
of incivilities, for want of sober godly preaching, Isai 5. 11, 12, 13. the
other part with immoderate teachings do run in spiritual whoredom and
drunkenness, Isai 29. 9.

And this hireling becomes famous for finding that pleasing to the people, and
profital for his purpose, he will cast out words against the Church Government
and Bishops, until he be taken hold on, and questioned for it: Then most men
cry him up for a gallant man; and rail upon the Bishops, as upon persecuters of
godly men: Then many others of that Coat seeing this hireling-Judas, by this
means to fill his bags so fast, do take up his Doctrine, John 10. 12, 13. and
12. 4, 5, 6. Yea, the Lawyer and Physician finding this trade better then their
own, do follow it also for Lucres sake: Hence the Puritanical faction getting
entrance by the covetousness, and negligence of the lasie Prelates, now like a
Canker runs over and poisons the whole Kingdom, 2 Timothy 2. 16, 17. and the Roman
Catholic laughs at this sport, gets a place to play his Cards once more,
and thinks to get the Game.

But we have another way to cure all this business, and that is by calling a
Parliament: Of which, if the privilege had been maintained, we had been happy
by this time: Now when the Parliament was called, the Puritan and hireling
Ministers of London, etc. began to stir up the City against the King, Bishops
and Major part of the Parliament, (which properly was the Parliament) who for
fear of the tumults durst not appear: Thus Judgment is turned away backward,
and equity cannot enter, Isai 59. 13, 14, 15. And he that is righteous makes
himself a prey, the truth has no place, for lies and faseshood prevails:
Therefore I say that on the authors of those tumults, lies the Kings blood,
and all the blood that has been spilt since; notwithstanding the London
Ministers Remonstrance at the Kings death, who like Pylat seemed to wash their
hands, as being innocent of his blood: but woe unto them, for they have gone in
the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and
they shall perish in the gainsaying of Core, Jude 11. for they maliciously
preached up the people into disorder, hoping thereby to raise themselves in the
casting down of the Bishops, every one seeking his own advantage, but the wheel
turns round, and such as were not thought on then, now rules the roast; so that
they could not so fully compass nor enjoy the ends they aimed at.

How thirsty were the Presbyterian Ministers for the innocent Bishop of
Canterbury, and other men's blood, saying, the cause of their God would never
prosper until such were put to death, taxing the Bishop with Popery, etc.
whereas indeed, the Pope had not such an adversary on earth as the Bishop was,
who if he had lived would have drawn all obedience from him in a short time:
for the Pope fears no Protestant so much, as that man who comes nearest unto
him in order and decency, yet keeps his principles in Faith and Doctrine: And
for those who are now in power, they are not so much concerned in the Kings
blood, as the generality of the people do imagine: The Lord General Cromwell
himself could not either do much for him nor against him at that time, but as
the stream of the Parliament, Army and people went then, so must he go, or else
be disabled, ruinated, and dealt with as a Malignant.

But many of them who are most guilty, (to clear themselves) would fain lay all
upon the Lord General, saying, that he was the busiest in bringing the King to
his end; suppose he was, Divine providence so ordered the matter, that it was
his place, for he was a servant in it to the Parliament, to the Lord General
Fairfax, to the Army, and to the people: And if he had refused, there were many
that would have been glad of his place to have done i^ so that his deligence
and faithfulness appeared in this, as in whatsoever service else he is
entrusted with, although in many things he goes on as he did in this with
simplicity, not knowing the consequence, but hoping by the providence of God
that all will be brought about to a good issue.

Others there be, that say he promised with several solemn Oaths to the King
when he was in the Army, That he would do his best endeavor to save him, and
restore him to his Throne: Truly whether it was so, or no, I know not, God and
himself knows best: but of this I am sure, that if he had gone about to do it
then; he could not have done it: but would have disabled himself of power to do
what he may be forced to do to that purpose now, for I am persuaded so well of
the Lord General, and of many belonging to him, that they have a desire to deal
faithfully, and truly toward God and man: And I doubt not but they shall find
an opportunity to perform their desires. And although Mr. Feack do affirm
before his congregation; that the General and Parliament (as he calls it) are
yet in Babylon: but he shall find to his sorrow, that they will inshort time
obey the truth, and come out of Babylon.

Therefore, all ye of the Kings party, give up your selves to God in prayer,
and serving of him, with a holy and sober life, not giving your selves to
rayoting, drinking, swearing, nor working of plots: for the Children of this
World are wiser in their generation then the Chilnren of God, Luke 18. 8. and
God would not have you to use any such wicked means, whereby to establish your
selves, and get the glory from him: but rather to stand still, wait, and
behold the salvation of God, that ye may give him the glory of your salvation:
And as for you that are Ministers, pray and preach with fervencie of Spirit,
and by the power of the same Spirit laid down in the holy Scriptures, glorify
God, strengthen the hearts of the people in the Faith, and thereby overcome
your adversaries, and glory not so much as ye do in your vain Philosophy,
Coloss. 2. 8. which by a faithful Soul is of no more esteem, in regard of the
word of God in Scripture, then chaff is in comparifon of Wheat, Jerem. 23. 28.
2 Timothy 3. 14, 15, 16, 17. And I dare affirm that a sincere plain man with his
meditating and studying the Scriptures only, and conversing with the like,
shall attain to a more excellent power to maintain his Doctrine, then many of
you have, so that for all your learning, if ye be not so expert in the
Scripture as he is, he will overthrow you.

Therefore if ye expect the blessing of restoration, Matthew. 17. 11. Mark. 9.
12. Acts 3. 20. 21. leave your luke-warmness, and be more diligent in searching
the Scriptures, and in preaching them, lift up your voice like a Trumpet, Isai
58. 1. and 64. 1. to rouse the people out of their slumbering sins, to be
fervent in prayer that the Lord would rent the heavens, and come down to
deliver his people from the hands of their oppressors, that we may praise him
with songs of deliverance. What is the reason that the Bridegroom does not
come? Matthew. 25. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Is it not because the Bride does not make
her self ready to receive him? what is the reason that some of you count me a
Blasphemer in what I say concerning King Charl? Is it not your ignorance of the
Scriptures? Matthew. 22. 29. What is the reason, that though ye have the truth on
your side, yet ye are not able to encounter in Dispute, either with the plain
Contrymen, or Mechanics, or Heriticks of these times? Is it not because of
your ignorance of the Scriptures, and Luke-warmness? for ye only desire to
know them but afar off.

Ah, this negligence will never make us happy: ye shame your selves; that
Child which neither by prosperity, nor adversity will be brought home to his
Father; is a lost Child: Consider what I say, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things, 2 Timothy 2. 7. If ye be the servants of Christ, your
word should be a word of power, such as all your enemies could not be able to
gainsay, nor resist, Luke 21. 15. Acts 6. 10. yea, one of you should chase a
thousand, and too put ten thousand to flight, Deuteronomy. 32. 30, 31. if ye did but
obey the voice of the Lord.

I must needs confess, I speak these things unto you with grief of heart, for
seeing ye walking as men, who have not the Spirit of courage, and boldness as
the Apostles had in adversity, Acts 4. 13, 19. Acts 5. 28, 29, 30, 31. I doubt
very much what will become of you, whether God will not cast you off, and put
into the Ministry men according to his own heart, that will serve him with more
diligence and fervency, with greater boldness and courage, not fearing the
faces of men, though persecutours: I do not thus speak to all the Ministers,
but to the proud, envious, ignorant, and negligent, that will neither do the
work of God themselves, nor allow of such as do it: for many of this sort, I
know there be^; and some of them have come to cavell with me, and to despise
me, because God has made me more bold then they, in delaring the Truth.

But suppose now that a man should meet one of our great Officers walking in
the fields, having a new scarlet Cloak, and enter into discourse with him, if
the man in the midst of their discourse should snatch the Cloak off his back
and rent it into twelve pieces, and give him ten pieces of it again, saying,
the Lord will divide the Army, and give you ten parts thereof and ye shall
prevail, would not such kind of Ministers as you, condemn this man, for his so
bold an act? Yet he might be a Prophet of God therein, and the thing come to
pass as truly now, as it did whensuch a thing was done by the Prophet Ahijah, 1
Kings 11. 28, 29, 30, 31. but these men are miserable comforters.

Again, I find a contrary spirit, not only in the Ministers, but in the
generality of the Kings party also; some do suppose that it is impossible for
the King to come in, because (say they) these men now in power are so strong
and mighty, speaking as if they were the Sons of Anack, by their account, Numb.
13. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. Others there be of Calebs spirit, Numb. 14. 24.
who speak comfortable: words to the people, and declare the hopeful things
which they conceive, surely God is well pleased with these, and they shall
enjoy their desires: But for the other let them, take heed, (as the Lord says,
Numb. 14. 34.) Least they shall know my breach of promise.

And if our adversaries had regard to the works of the Lord against them, they
might see what is become of the most eminent of them that rose against the
King: How fell Essex, Brook, Hampden, Hotham and his Son: how fell Hurry Poyer,
Waller, Brown, Massey, and Love; yea, Fairfax and Bradshow are falling, how did
all the Presbyterians sall out of the sadel, whereis the five treacherous
Members that withstood the late King at first: It is true, one yet remains to
drink the dregs of his fellows cup: Where is the great Ministers that preached
the people into tumults and rebellion? Do they not stink now in the Nostrils of
those whom they preached up? How is their glorious Parliament as it were sunk
quick to Hell? How has Scotland and their great ones there, been punished for
their rising against the King, as a just reward of their folly? for of all men
living they should never have done so, how did the immediate hand of God appear
against Marleborough, it being one of the first Towns that arose in England,
and made them a wooden God to mock the King? How is Coronet Joyce that first
laid hands on the King, as also John Lilburn, and diverse others rewarded for
their services, all which fell, as commonly the enemies of Israel fell by the
hand of their own party, Judges 7. 22. 2 Chronicles. 20. 22, 23.

And as concerning the Churches, how many men have been slain and hurt, whilst
they were in obstructing the work about St. Paul's Church? How were those men
cast down; mained, and spoiled, when they went about building a Preaching place
for the Anabaptists in the stone Chapel thereof? What became of the Lord Brook
that grand enemy of Gods Worship? when he thought his armor inpenetrable, how
was he smote in the head, from the Cathedral Church at Lich-Field, as Goliath
was by David, I Sam. 17. 4, 5, 6, 7, 49. I have said little in comparison of
what might be said in this matter, but if I should say all that can be said,
yet they would not regard it, Psalm. 28. 5. for they are blinded with their
prosperity in the War, though they may know by the things visible against them;
that one days loss now, will keep them under for ever, and that day is not far
off, for it is with them as David says, Psalm. 55. 19. Because they have no
changes; Therefore they fear not God: And as Job says, they prosper, and the
rod of God is not upon them: Therefore they say unto God depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

But ye that hope for deliverance, are to consider, that by your manifold
afflictions ye are corrected to refine you, that ye may be made holy, 1 Pet. 1.
15, 16. and more innocent then Doves, more wise then Serpents, Matthew. 10. 16.
more precious then the gold of Ophir, Isai 13. 12. Malach. 3. 17. The end which
God has in afflicting you, is to bring you to such a condition: And then the
Assyrian (the rod of his anger:) who thinks not to cut off a few Nations,
shall be burned; Isa. 10. 5, 6, 7, 16, 17, 18, 19. For the rod of the wicked
shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, Psalm. 125. 3. and the family of
David; that is, the Kings friends, when they sin, God will correct them with
the rod of men, 2 Samuel 7. 14. 15. Psalm. 89. 32, 33. for God makes his rod most
usually of wicked men; by which he corrects his children, therefore say not
that there is no hopes, but rather comfort one another; look upon Portingals
deliverance! did not God reveal it aforehand unto them, even by a poor Cobbler
that could not write a word, but got little Scool boys to write for him: who
Prophesied many remarkable things that came truly to pass, and among the rest
he Prophesied that in 1640. they should have a King in Portugal again.

Although the King of Spain for this cause sought by all means to prevent it;
yet when the time came: Notwithstanding, the set year was far spent, they
considering that none of the poor man's Prophesies had ever yet failed, but that
all had been truly fulfilled, they were thereby so much the more imboldned; so
that God stirred up the Spirits of the Nobles, and Valiant men of Portugal, and
smote the Soldiery with terror, that (as it were) in a moment the King was
set on his Throne: And suddenly had all the strong holds throughout the Land
surrendered unto him, and there was not three men killed in the quarrel.

Then, why may not God do as much for England? Or why may not those ten Valiant
Commanders that took the Kingdom from the late King CHARLES, and according as
God had decreed, gave it for sometime to the late Parliament, or as it is in
Scripture language, to the beast? Rev. 17. 12, 13, 17. And then afterward
according as God did put in their hearts; to destroy the very same Parliament,
and take the Kingdom again from them: as you may see how it was done, Rev. 17.
from verse. 12. to the end of the Chapter: I say, why may not God now also move
the hearts of the said ten Commanders to give the Kingdom to him whose right it
is, I mean the present King CHARLES, Ezekiel. 21. 27. We say, and it is a proverb
among us, that if a man lie in a ditch, and cry God help me, and not use his
own ability to get out; he may lay there and perish: But if a man call to God
for help, and withal do what he can to help himself* surely God will help him,
for if you understand your selves; when you say God help us: It does not argue
that God shall do all and you nothing; but it does argue that God will help you
in what you go about to do; and that if you put too your strength, God will
strengthen and prosper you therein, when your actions be right, good, and
lawful, and that especially in the fulfilling of his word.

For there is nothing more easy then to fulfill a Prophecy: because God is
assistant to them, and active with them that do it: How was God with Josuah to
encourage him, 2 Kings 9. Josuah 1. How was God with Jehu, with Josiah, with
Nebuchadnezar, with Cyrus: Yea, good Josiah must die for going out against
Pharaohn-echo King of Egypt, who had a command from God to go against the King
of Assiria, 2 Kings 23. 29. 2 Chronicles. 35. 20, 21, 22, 23. And what great rewards
did God give them that fulfilled his word? 2 Kings 10. 30. Isa. 45. from verse
1. to verse 15. 2 Chronicles. 36. 22, 23. 1 Macchab. 2. 55. How prosperous were the
late Parliament against the late King* Why? because it was Prophesied he should
fall; how prosperous was the Independents against the Presbyterians? Why?
because it was Prophesied that they should fall, how prosperous was the Army
against the late Parliament, and how easily did they dissolve it? Why? because
it was Prophesied they should fall, how easily did the Portingals set up their
King? Why? because it was Prophefied of before: Then, why cannot they as easily
set up the King; as they did dissolve the Parliament? And why? even because the
word is gone forth for it, Isa. 55. 10, 11. For there is no word gone forth
against them as yet, notwithstanding all the muttering of their false Prophets
against them.

It is to be considered also what a heavy judgment befell those Nobles of
Israel, who searched the Land of Canaan, that when they came back persuaded the
people that there was no hopes of getting that Land, and that it was but in
vain to go up and fulfill the Lords word by possessing it, Genes. 15. 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. for all those Nobles died immediately of the
plague, before the Lord, Numb. 14. 36, 37. And because the people gave ear to
their persuasion, the Lord would have destroyed them all, had not Moses stood
up and besought the Lord for them, yet for all that, the Lord would let none of
that generation go up into the Land of Canaan save Caleb and Josuah, who were
truly Noble and valiant: yea, and though the people saw what sudden judgments
befell those Nobles that had persuaded them: repented and mourned for their
sins of murmuring, and immediately would needs have gone up and possessed the
Land: yet they found it was too late, for the Lord was departed from them, and
had changed the time, and given out a new decree: Therefore those that went up
presumptuously were smitten before their enemies, as you may see all this
passage, Numb. 13. and 6. 14. Here was a heavy judgment upon Israel, because
they for their own good, would not believe nor fulfill the Prophesies and
promises of God: but it was well for the Cananites, for thereby they enjoyed
the Land forty years longer.

And for certain, there will be no peace to any in this Land until the King
come: but fear upon the one and upon the other, and their hearts shall tremble
for fear one another; yea, men in Arms shall have trembling hearts, and men in
power shall have no rest: Therefore I beseech you once more Noble Gentlemen, to
call him home and set him up, ye have the power to do it, and thereby to save a
great deal of Christian blood: And they in whose power it is to save men's
lives, and will not do it, must expect the like* dealing from the Lord: I could
wish that such as sit at the Helm, would consider the times, Things strangely
work; that what a man may do to day, he may want power to do tomorrow, and what
two Months time may bring to pass in such changing times as these, may
possibly amaze the world to behold.

Surely there will some strange news be abroad before the 20. of January 1654.
be past, Prove. 25. 1, 5, 6. Heb. 12. 16, 17. Prove. 15. 23. Prove. 4. 18. Psalm.
58. 3, 4, 5. I pray God it may be for the best* and that some great person may
escape the hands of his enemies: It is true that fair opportunities misused, or
neglected often bring too late repentance, and sometimes everlasting sorrow.
And who knows the value of a seasonable well spent day? I hope that I do not
speak this in the ear of deaf Adders: neither do I doubt but these things are
already thought upon by some; yet as we say, forewarning is half arming:
Therefore it is not hurtful for any of whatsomever degree, to have their
dangers foretold; But if like Caesar they will not believe, then may such as be
esteemed wise in many other things, prove very unwise in the main thing as he
did.

A Coveat for Astrologers, but more especially to George Wharton, Esquire; and
concerning some passages in his Almanacks, for the year 1654.
MR. Wharton, I perceive that there are two Almanacks come forth under your
name for the year 1654. having two faces; the one seems to be very much for the
Romish Church, and the other as much against it, page 34. 35. you tell us that
you believe the Romish Hierachy shall stand, and do blame those that speaks
against it: And say, that we of Britain, or England at first received the
Christian Faith from Rome: Also you blame such as apply the Prophesies in
sacred write to this Mole-bill of England, (as you call it,) and to particular
Persons therein, who take upon them the name of Protestants, and the rule and
government, as if this (say you) were the place and they (forsooth) the Persons
only aimed at by the Prophets.

Sir, By this I find you are more for Rome than England, I wonder you know not
better by Histories, how that Joseph of Aremathea, (who was the most Honorable
of CHRIST'S Disciples, Matthew. 28. 57. 58. Mark. 15. 43.) Came hither and
preached the Gospel before there was a Church of Christ at Rome; and that he
lies buried at Glassenbury: Besides him, was not Thomas the Apostle sent
hither about the same time, who preached Christ to us, as our ancient
Chronicles declare? And was not Lucius King of Britain, (who builded St.
Peter's Church in Cornhill London) the first Christian King in all the World?
And was not Constantine King of great Britain the first Christian Emperor in
all the World? Where is the like then unto this Molehill of England, for had
it not the Pre-eminence, in regard of its first dominion above all the
Christian World?

It may be in those times of the ten persecutions, that some came from Rome
hither for shelter and did preach, but we stood in no need of them: for we
then had preachers enough besides them, only in love, we received them, as
Christian brethren. And had nor CONSTANTINE, by the providence of God gone over
to Rome, with an Army of CHRISTIAN BRITAINS, and CONQUERED the Tyrants there,
and elsewhere, so far as the City of CONSTANTINOPLE, which was built for the
Honor of his Name; else the Romish Church would not have had such esteem as it
had by his means: Therefore it is evident that the Romish Church was then
beholding to England, so that England may say to God and his Church: I am like
a green Fir Tree from me is thy fruit found, Hosea 14. 8. and God say of
England; Unto thee shall it come even the first dominion, the Kingdom shall
come to the daughter of Jerusalem, Micah. 4. 8. as if he should say to England:
Jerusalem has brought thee forth, thou art her only daughter and her heir:
Thou art that new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 2.

And has God from this Molehill of England in those times sent such glorious
instruments to comfort all that trusted in Christ, and to settle them in peace:
And shall he not do the like now? Or does not the forementioned things predict,
that God has a special regard to England, and snew that it is the glorious
holy mountain between the Seas? And though Antichrist for the present, plant
his Tabernacles here, yet he shall vanish speedily, Dan. 11. 45. and shortly
after, from this Land the glorious presence of God shall go forth into all the
world, to settle them in everlasting peace and tranquillity.

But Sir, you wheel about in the second part of your Almanac 1654. as if you
had met King Henry the eights Ghost in the way; for it is reported that he at a
certain time, when his Parliament would not pass a bill which he would have
done, to extirpat Popery; he came roughly among them into the Parliament house
with his short dagger; saying, who is he that will not pass this bill, and so
examined them one by one, till all said: I, to it, thus did he awe them with
his terrible presence, and prevailed: Then departing the house, said unto them,
all good men, all good men: so it is like that you met with King Henry the
eights Ghost, which made you to change your note, for in the last part of your
Almanac, page, 75. you say in brief from this Eclips, the Pope and Hierarchy of
Rome shall exceedingly suffer: It is evident from holy write that a time shall
come, in which Babylon must fall: And from the rules of Astrology, it is very
evident that that Prophecy will be fulfilled, ere time put a period to this
Eclips, which will be before the expiration of the year 1656. howsoever, if
this public ruin should at this time escape them: I am very confident that
Italy and Rome shall be in great distress, and often troubled with tumults and
uproars.

Indeed, Sir, I am glad of your conversion, if it be real, yet your sentence
here is very sudden against the Pope, and Hierarchy of Rome: and to account of
it as Babylon is very harsh, from you that was a little before so much for it.
But this I tell you in love, that your words ought to be one and the same
constantly, and desire you to take the advice of the wise man, Eccl. 5. 9. 10.
Winnow not with every wind, and go not into every way, for so dothithe sinner
that has a double tongue, be steadfast in thy understanding and let thy word be
the same.

I remember a story of a man that dwelt in a little Town, and he was counted
weather wise and his common custom was, when he arose in the morning to go
along the one side of the street, saying to the people as he went, to day will
be a fair day, and when he came back again on the other side, to say, to day
will be foul weather: whereupon they thought he had some skill, for he had
always as many for him as was against him: So you Astrologers now use many
words, both for and against, so that something must needs be true that you say:
But he that is moved and acts by the spirit, or direction of Astrologers, or
goes to them to have his Nativity cast: and to know the event of his Fortune,
is a mere naturalist appointed unto wrath, 1 These. 5. 9.

It Is usual for Thieves to go to Cunning men, or Astrologers, who tell them
that their fortune is to be hanged, therefore they take such evil courses as
brings them to that end* as I have heard many of the Thieves (when I was in
prison) say, they had been with the Cunning man, who told them their end was to
be hanged, therefore they would steal and not work, yea, and others that go to
them, though they be of great quality, and they tell them of great things that
they shall do, yet commonly they tell them also of an unhappy end too.

But when did any Astrologer speak of a Martyre^ death? For those that go to
Astrologers forsake the direction of Gods spirit, and therefore God will
forsake them: for God is said to forsake his people, because they had regard to
such things, Isai 2: 6. and God sends spirituail Babylon to her Astrologers
that predict for her, and promise her, that she shall not fall: to see if they
can save her, who answer, that they must fall with her, as you may see at large
by comparing Isai 47. with Revel. 18. And as I said before that Jerusalem has
a daughter, called new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 2. who has only the spirit of God
(in his Ministers) for her direction: Babylon has a daughter, Isai 47. 1.
Called spiritual Babylon and Sodom, Rev. 11. 8. Who persecutes the Ministers of
God, and will not be directed by them: But by Inehanters and Astrologers, for
all that are unlawful Preachers, and bring false Doctrine are Inchanters and
Witches, Gal. 3. 10. And in the primitive times, those that went preaching
without a lawful call, and were neither sent from Christ nor his Apostles,
were beaten by the Devil.

And as those that used curious Arts and were converted, even Astrologers and
the like, knowing how inconsistent and disagreeable it was with the Christian
Faith, they burned their books, that they might use such arts no more, Acts 19.
13, 14, 15, 16 17, 18, 19. so I say, it is hard to judge wheather those that
take upon them to foretell things by the rules of Astrology: be Christians or
not, for they are condemned as men contrary to the spirit of God, both in the
Old and New Testaments, and as you said in your first Almanac, that it was a
strange thing to see Mr. George Wharton come forth in an Almanac, so I hope
you will leave to study Astrology, and show your self in some other way that
may be more acceptable to God, and beneficial to his people, which for your
Souls health is the desire of your friend.

ARISE EVANS.

A REFVTATION OF A PAMPHLET, lately published by one ASPINVVALL, ENTITLED, A
Brief Description of the Fifth MONARCHY.
MR Aspinwall, I shall not contradict you, in that there is a fifth Monarchy to
be expected in this World; and that it will shortly appear. But in what you say
as concerning K. Charles; though I be the least of the flock, by the assistance
of Gods Spirit, I hope to confute and drive you away, and make it appear, that
you are a venomous Asp, pulling your Pine out of your Wall, on which you hang
all your glory, and that your Asp-pinewall Isa. ^9. 19.

Deuteronomy. 32. 33.


will down: For I am sure, that you are beside the mark concerning K. Charles;
in that you condemn the just, and justify the unjust; and though you huddle up
a great many Texts to Isa. 22. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 21* 22, 23, 24, 25.

Isa. 5. 20, 21, 22, 23.


make your matter good, and to blind the Reader; yet it is clear, that you lay
a wrong foundation, and err in applying of those Texts to K. Charles. For, if K.
Charles be one of those ten horns, or kings, as you affirm him to be the last of
them; then he cannot be the little horn, as you unjustly assert him to be;
seeing the Texts alleged by you, Dan. 7. 8. 24* prove that the little horn is
not one of those ten; for the little horn comes up after the ten horns, and
plucks up three of them by the roots.

The words are plain in the Vision it self, v. 8. I considered the horns, and
behold there came up among them, another little horn; before whom there were
three of the first horns plucked up by the roots. Here it is evident, that the
little horn is none of the ten; which is yet more plain in the interpretation
of v. 24. And the ten horns out of this Kingdom, are ten Kings that shall
arise; and another shall arise after them; and he shall be diverse from the
first, and he shall subdue three Kings. Neither is the little horn called a
King in all the Scripture; but, He shall be diverse from the first, and he shall
subdue three kings; giving us to understand, that the little horn is an enemy
to kings; as a thing of a contrary being, or differing in nature. The little
horn is also called a Beast, v. 11. And as the fourth Beast is diverse from the
other three, who were true to their heads; both it, and the little horn, are
alike adversaries to kingly power, as you see.

The State of Rome clipped and turned out the Emperor from his superiority; So
in a more barbarous manner the State of England turned out, and put the late
King to death. So it is evident, that this little horn is not a king, but a
State, that completeth the wickedness of the State of Rome, and fourth Beast.

Good Reader, take heed therefore of this Aspinwall, and all such; for this is
not only a matter of life and death, but also of salvation and damnation of
souls; and know for a certain, that he either understands not, or wresteth
the Scriptures, as you see apparent by what has been already spoken; so that
he is both deceived, and deceives others, making them serve his turn, in
speaking for the present time, be it never so wicked.

Now M. Aspinwall, I hope you see it is clear, that you have said a wrong
foundation for your Fabric, or fist Monarchy; in applying those Texts to K.
Charles; which does further appear Dan. 7. 24. He shall subdue three Kings; and
this [He] you say is K. Charles. How did K. Charles subdue three Kings? Did he
ever take any Kingdoms from any? It is true, by Birth he was Heir to three
Kingdoms, and did enjoy them, to the great happiness of his subjects; until
that unreasonable Beast Parliament, violently and unjustly did wear out his
people, took his three Kingdoms from him, and his life too. And did not that
Beast Parliament, v. 25. Change Times, and Laws?

And was not that Beast Parliament destroyed April 22. 1653. as ye have it v.
11? And though that Beast Parliament be destroyed in part; that is, as they
were a Body consisting of so many men, yet the Parliament men being in Gods
account, every one of them a Beast by himself, and are called Beasts, v. 12.
who though their Dominion be taken away from them at the time of their
dissolution; yet have they their lives prolonged for a season, and time fit to
call them to a further account, and total destruction; as ye have it v. 26.

Again, M. Aspinwall, you may clearly see your error; That K. Charles was not
the little horn, neither are the Kings of Europe those Beasts who had their
Dominion taken away when K. Charles died: For where is any of those seven Kings
whereof you speak, that have lost their Dominion? But it is evident to all;
That the Parliament was that Beast, or little horn; and that the Parliament men
are those Beasts; who lost their Dominion when the Parliament was destroyed.

Further, By this also the little horn appears to be the last Parliament; The
little horn had eyes, and a mouth speaking great things; and looked more stout
then his fellows; v. 8. 20. Is not the eyes, their knowledge, by which the late
Parliament pretended to see more from Scripture, then any other before them? So
that in their own conceits, they were both wiser and stouter then any former
Parliament: That their mouth and Votes spoke great and monstrous things, even
such as were never heard of before in any Heathenish Assembly of State; so that
all Christians, yea I am confident, some of themselves, do now abhor the
wickedness that proceeded from them, 1 Samuel 24. 13. And as concerning the ten
horns or kings, there is no judgment to come upon any of them all, but only
three of them; namely, England, Scotland, and Ireland, for they suffer very
much; and according to their sufferings, they shall be exalted again, to reign
with their King in glory. Dan. 7. 27.

For as you have it v, 9, 10, 13, 14. 18. 22. By the Ancient of days there, is
signified Jesus Christ; and by the Son of man, is signified K. Charles; who in
regard the Lord Jesus found him faithful to the death, for the maintenance of
his Laws in Church and State, will make him Ruler, (according to the promise,
Luke 12. 42, 43, 44.) over all that he has. So that this Charles Stuart (thus
being found so just a Steward) whom Aspinwall does vilify, is indeed that wise
and faithful Steward, whose seed shall rule all that the Lord Jesus has, for
ever; and is the most High on earth; Dan. 7. 25. 27. and Prince of the Host, or
Prince of Princes: Dan. 8. 9, 10, 11. 25. who (under Jesus Christ) is the only
father, and begetter of the fifth Monarchy; and his seed shall be chief in it
for ever. And the Laws of England, both for Church and State, as it was
established in his time, for the maintenance of which Laws he died, even that
Law shall go over all the earth, and shall be the law of the fifth Monarchy for
ever.

And to make it yet more clear, the little horn in Dan. 7. 8. is that Beast,
Rev. 13. 1. that has its ten horns also; as is evident by the mark in its
mouth: For, as the little horn had a mouth speaking great things; 1 Dan. 7. 8.
20. 25. so the Beast in Rev. 13. 5, 6. has a mouth speaking great things.
Again, the late Parliament in Scripture is called by diverse names; sometimes it
is called the little horn, Dan. 7. 8. 20. sometimes the Beast, Dan. 7. 12. Rev.
13. 1. and sometimes the Whore, Rev. 17. 15, 16. in regard of its unfaithfulness
and treachery to their King, Head, Father, and Husband of the Kingdom. And as
the Beast, or Where was to be destroyed with its own ten horns, Rev. 17. 16. so
the Beast Parliament was destroyed, April 22. 1653. by the now Lord General,
and about ten of those horns that before defended them; for the Beast was to be
destroyed without hands; only by the spirit of his mouth; Dan. 8. 25. Dan. 11.
20. 2 These. 2, 8. So that Beast Parliament (a raiser of Taxes) was destroyed
without anger, without battle, without hands; only by the Word from the
Generals mouth: Whereby it is evident, to all who are not wilfully blind, that
the late Parliament was this little horn, or Beast, expressed in the former
cited Scriptures.

But as concerning K. Charles himself, there was much anger, and after many
battles fought against him, he, and his followers, had many hands laid upon
them, and then (according to the Word, Rev. 20* 4.) they had their heads cut
off, because they would not worship and submit to that Beast Parliament.

And see how the holy Spirit long before takes notice of the Nature and
Cowardlyness of this Beast, who (as before) says of them, That they should be
destroyed without hands; that is, without so much as one Box of the ear; much
less then to have a sword drawn against them; And yet says, that this Beast
should have its deadly wound by a sword, Rev. 13. 3. 14. so that but only ten
of their servants came into the House, and spoke to them, not in anger; the
very thought of a Sword, struck them all dead; so that they who about nine of
the Clock came into the House, looking upon themselves to be the greatest
Princes in Europe, before eleven, went out baser then the basest of all the
people; insomuch that the very Boys in the streets, and the most vulgar sort of
people, did hiss and hoot at them, as at the most abject and abominable
creatures* not worthy to live; yea the very Balladmongers had them in derision.

Whereas indeed, had they been valiant men for the truth, and worthy to rule,
before they had quitted their places, and left the Nations, who depended upon
their protection, in such a distraction, as to deliver them unto the power of
the Sword, hundreds of them would have risen up, and seized on those ten, and
committed them to the Tower, and immediately also sent to the Army in all
places, not to stir, on pain of death, without their commands. But the General
knew what they were; and that most of them durst not behold the drawing of a
sword, much less to contend with such a man as he is. Yet K. Charles his valor
was such, that he contended to the death, for the Truth; being faithful, and
trusting in God, not fearing what man could do unto him.

And further, if we would compare K. Charles with them; we shall find him to be
the true shepherd, who gave his life, and all that he had, to maintain the Laws
and Liberties of his people; John 10. 11, 12. But contrariwise the Hypocritical
hireling Parliament, that styled themselves, The Keepers of the Liberties of
England, at the sight of a few soldiers coming to the House, where they sat,
did shamefully fly, and surrender the people into the mouth of the Wolf, or
power of the sword; to have all their Laws, Lives, Liberties, and substance,
devoured by it at pleasure. And thereby their hypocrisy is discovered to all
the world; for they gave out themselves to be Saints, that feared God, and
trusted not in the arm of flesh, nor feared it; but coming to the trial, it is
evident, they trusted not in God, but in the arm of flesh, which they only
confided in, and feared. For no sooner did the General (who is but a mortal
man) appear, but they vanished; so that to stand out for God, and his people,
in hope of assistance from him, against the Arm of flesh, was counted folly by
that hypocritical generation.

Therefore for your pretended saints, we deny them to be any of the saints of
God; or that they have any godliness, and true faith, justifiable by Gods word
in them.

For, will you make solemn protestations in hypocrisy, lifting up your hands
before the Lord, who is the searcher of all hearts, whereby to draw the people
(who entrusted you) from their dutiful obedience to the Lords Anointed, both to
ensnare them, and damn their souls with false oaths; and say, this is
godliness? Is not this the height of hypocrifie? Hos. 10. 4. Zach. 5. 3, 4.
Eccles. 8. 2, 3, 4. Romans 13. 1. 4. 1 Samuel 24. 6. 10.

Will you destroy Gods Ministers and Ordinances? Will you destroy and defile
his sanctuary? Will you rob him in Tithes and Offerings, committing all manner
of sacrilege against him; and say, This is godliness? 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. Mal.
3. 7, 8, 9. Romans 2. 22.

Will you break all your Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to God and the King?
Will you break your Protestations and Covenants, calling God to witness to
them; and say, that all this is godliness still? Zach. 5. 3, 4. Hos. 10: 4.
Prove. 24. 21, 22.

Will you (contrary to your solemn Oaths) destroy the King. the Lords Anointed,
for keeping his Oath to God, and his people, committed to his Charge? Will you
rob him, and his posterity of all their Rights for ever; and say, this is
godliness too? Eccles 8. 2, 3, 4. Eccles. 10. 20. 2 Chronicles. 13. 10, 11. Zach. 3.
7.

Will you kill, destroy, and rob the Lords people, that keep faith, and a good
Conscience, by observing their Oaths to God and the King; and say, This is
godliness? Jer. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Will you make Jesus Christ as your Captain who are such apparent Robbers,
Murderers, spiritual Whoremongers, and false Swearers? Surely he will be
avenged on you for these things. 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. Luke 18. 7, 8 Dan. 8. 24.

Will you (through your Policy) betray the Nation of their Laws, Lives,
Liberties, Livelyhoods, and their good Conscience also, by forcing them to
forswear themselves; and say. This is godliness? Isa. 29. 15.

Will you seek the ruin of other Nations? Will you yet thirst after more
innocent blood, until ye be drunk therewith; and say, This is godlyness? Isa.
10. 7. Rev. 17. 6.

Will you set up your abomination that makes desolate in every place where it
comes; destroying the faithful ones, tolerating all sorts of wicked Atheists,
Blasphemers, Heretics, and cursed Rebels against God; and say, This is
godliness? Matthew. 24. 15.

M. Aspinwall, you know, such are your saints, on whom you put all the glory;
They come near to God with their mouths, but their hearts are far from him, and
their works abominable to God and man: And how contrary their sending forth
Preachers to preach, is to the way of Jesus Christ, who sent his Disciples, is
evident; They send forth their preachers with swords, pistols, and Troops of
horse; as Vavasour Powel went into Wales, with Commission to raise forces to
propagate the Gospel, as they call it; and such kind is of the Devil, Mahomet,
or John of Leydens sending forth to preach. For Jesus Christ when he sent forth
his Disciples, though he could command legions of Angels to go with them, does
not; Matthew. 26. 53. but he bids them take no provision for their journey, no,
not so much as a staff for their own defense; Matthew. 10. 9, 10. Luke 9. 3. Luke
10. 3, 4. Yet M. Powel in his Commission, must have a power to raise a Troop of
horse, and soldiers, to guatd him, and to terrify and plunder the Country.
Jesus Christ bids his Disciples wheresoever they came, to salute all with
peace; and if the people should rise up against them, to flee from that place
to another; Matthew. 10. 12, 13. 23. Luke 10. 5. M. Powel bids his disciples with
Arms to salute the Country, and if they rise, to persecute them, and beat them
from one place to another. Jesus Christ bids his Disciples freely heal the
sick, where ever they come; Matthew. 10. 8. Luke 9. 2. M. Powel is so far from
healing them, that he bids his disciples fight and wound them. Thus you see
clearly how opposite in all things you are to the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6. 15.

For my part, I have no spleen or malice against any man's person: God knows, I
speak the Truth; for I am as a dying man, lame, and sickly, not able, but
creeping about the house; every night at deaths door; yea, desiring to die, and
to be with my Lord Jesus Christ: But I would die with a clear Conscience, and
not have my Talents buried with me; but lay them out to the glory of God, and
for the benefit of the living: Therefore (I beseech you) bear with my boldness
of speech (for I would not willingly offend any one) and though you will not,
yet I must not forbear to declare, and make the things of God fully known; for
a necessity is laid upon me, and woe is me, if I do it not; 1 Cor. 9. 15, 16.

Now I proceed further concerning the late Beast Parliament; which though it be
destroyed according to the word of God, yet it lives still in its Acts; and
the same (One) that did destroy it, commanded to make a Representative, or
Image thereof. And he (the Lord General) had power to give life to the Image of
the Beast Parliament (which Image is this present Parliament, as they call
themselves) that the Image of the Beast should both speak, and cause that as
many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed.

And if you look upon the manner of the dissolution of the late Parliament by
the Lord General, and his Council, and upon the continuing of their Acts still
in force, as they were before; by which the late Parliament seems vet to
live; and upon the manner and calling of this present Representative, or Image
of them (a Representative being but an Image like something that it does
represent; as the Image of a Man, Beast, or whatsoever else) as also upon the
manner how these had their power from the Lord General, as he gave them
authority, life, or spirit to act; and compare all these particulars with Rev
13. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and you shall find that this Scripture was so really
fulfilled, both in the manner of the Lord Generals destroying of the late
Parliament, and his setting up of this; as if he had purposely set this very
Scripture before his eyes, and taken it for his absolute direction therein; he
not erring one jot in the performance of the substance thereof.

Hence you see, both what the Beast is, and his Image; in the next place I
shall show you, what the mark of the Beast is; and what is the name of the
Beast; and likewise, the number of his name, Rev. 13. 16, 17, 18.

1. Concerning the Mark of the Beast; it is a word abused: For they call (as I
proved before) the height of wickedness, godlyness; and that is the mark. For,
says the Author of the Grand Politic Informer, Upon the seventh of July,
1653. it was Resolved, That no person should be employed, or admitted to
public service, but such as this Representative should be first satisfied of
their real godlyness; says he, This word Godliness, will shortly become the
mark of the Beast.

Indeed there is a god of this world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. which many expound to be the
Devil; and there are those, who account that godiyness, which is most contrary
thereunto; 1 Timothy 6. 5. and such such, as put light for darkness, and darkness
for light; Isa. 5. 20. Now if we enquire who is a godly person after their
account? It will appear to be such an one, as has broken his faith to God and
man; or one, that is a robber, murderer, salse swearer; or has been, or is an
approver of all the bloody Actions of the late Beast Parliament; So that this
sort of people are their godly persons; and this pretended godlyness, is the
mark of the Beast, as the Apostle describes them sufficiently, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4,
5. 2 Timothy 3. 4, 5. and bids every true Believer withdraw himself, and turn away
from such, as from the most dangerous people to converse withal. Whereby it is
evident, that this pretended godliness is the mark of the Beast; which they
that will be gainers in this Weal Public of England, must needs have; else
they shall not be preferred, trade, or prosper in these times; Rev. 13. 16, 17.

And now having showed you what the mark of the Beast is, viz. a pretended
godliness; next in order I shall (through Gods assistance) show you, what the
Name of the Beast is, and the number of his Name, Rev. 13. 16, 17.

He that will have any preferment from these people, or gain by them, must
acknowledge them to be the States of England, or the Commonwealth of England,
or the Weal public of England; for if he call this the Kingdom of England, and
stick to that ancient name; he shall be cast off, as one that has not their
stamp, and have nothing to do in matter of office* or way of profit from them,
Rev. 13. 16, 17. And I find, that it cannot bear the name of the Commonwealth
of England, since the Election of a Parliament was taken away from the
Commonalty, or generality of the People; and that a public Party excludes all
the rest, and sets up a Parliament: But I find its proper name to be, the Weal
public of England; For the word Commonwealth is excluded long ago from a Weal
Being; so that none but those in public places do prosper; Therefore (I say)
it is not the Commonweal, but the Weal public of England. And I find the
number of this name [The Weal pVbLIke of EngLanD] to be 666. for the numeral
letters of it, are these; DLL. 600. LVV. 60. VI. 6. so that in all, they come
to 666.

There is also another name no less proper both to the late Beast Parliament,
and to this Representative, which is its Image; in regard the people did and do
so much Idolize them, by their petitions to them, and their esteem of them
otherwise more then ordinary; Rev. 14. 11. so that they way be called Englands
Idols; which word Englands Idols, in the ancient Welsh, or British language,
is, Delwau Lloiger; and I find the numoer of this name, Delwau Lloiger, to be
666. for the numeral letters of it also, are these; DLL 600* LVV. 60. VI. 6. so
that in all, they come likewise to 666. Now the words of the Scripture that
declares the number of the Beast, are these; Rev 13. 18. Here is wisdom, let
him that has understanding, count the number of the Beast, (for it is the
number of a man,) and his number is six hundred sixty and six.

Now it remains that I should speak something of this Man; for it is the
number of a man, says the Text. This Title [a Man] is a note of Eminency;
which signisies a man of God; 1 Samuel 2. 27. 1 Chronicles. 13. 1. or, a man of a
thousand, Eccles. 7. 28. so that from Rev. 13. 18. mav be observed, that the
man expressed by these words, for it is a man; is such a man, as carries a
divine Majesty with him. So that I must needs infer from those words, that the
Apostle John means here* a justified man, a man opposite to the Beast, though
in the number of their names they partly agree. And know, that in the new
Testament, none is called The man of God, but only a Bishop; 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16,
17. And we may gather also from the same Scripture, and the scope of the
Apostle Paul's words to Timothy, when this Bishop, and man of God is to appear;
which will be in the last days; 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4; 5. 17. when men break
forth into rebellion against God and his Church; and certain it is, That the
late Bishop of Canterbury was the same man: for the number of his name, as
diverse affirm, that in all businesses which he subscribed, he wrote only thus,
Will* Laud. And I find the number of this name, WILL LaVD, to be 666. for the
numeral letters are these, and they be the very same that ye have in the other
names before, DLL 600. LVV 60. VI 6. so that in all they come to 666.

But if we take notice of the name of this man of God, as it is at large; we
shall find another mystery therein. For I find the number of this name,
William LaVD, to be 1667. And the numeral letters are these, M 1000. DLL 600.
LVV 60. VII7. so that in all they come to 1667. and that is the year of rest;
for before it be Anno Dom. 1667. most of the world, yea, and Rome it self will
acknowledge their error; see the truth, and submit to William Lauds rule in
form of worship, doctrine, and discipline, as the only way to salvation, the
most decent and agreeable to Gods word, being without doubt the true way
whereby to worship God, long before preordained of God to abide, for the
direction of men for ever and ever; which Rule was given in King Edw. 6. his
days, preserved and refined in Queen Elizabeth and King James their days,
sealed and perfected, to the glory of Jesus Christ, with the blood of his noble
mattyrs, chiefty of King Charles, and Bishop William Laud; who as the Scripture
says, Heb. 11. 35. would not accept of deliverance, when he was offered by the
Parliament to go into New England with M. Peter's; but he chose rather to die,
that he might obtain a better Resurrection.

Therefore to conclude, I say, that the Book of Common Prayer, as it was
established in the Church of England, is the only true way whereby to worship
God; as I have sufficiently proved by the Scripture, in my Book called A Voice
from Heaven; and in my other Book, called An Echo to that Voice from Heaven;
written in the years 1651. and 1652.

And as for your vain jangling, God has not any delight in it, 1 Timothy 1. 6. 2 Timothy Titus 3. 9. for the coming near unto God with the mouth, and the
worshipping of God according to the Commandments of private men, is a vain
thing; Mat. 15. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. that is, when they command that every one may do
in the worship of God, what seems right in his own eyes, Judge, 17. 5, 6. and
21* 25. as Israel did when they had no King; But the event of such a State, was
destructive to them; as you may read and see, Judge. 19. and 30. and 21. But for
the Kings Command, it is said Eccles. 1. 2. I charge thee to keep the Kings
commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God; thou have sworn to obey
him. Again, its said, Prove. 16. 10. A divine sentence is in the lips of the
King, his mouth erreth not in judgment. Thus a true Christian King is endued
with an infallible judgment, and so is the sentences of K. Charles his mouth;
To this King the Apostle commands obedience in all things, 1 Pet. 2, 13, 14.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King, as supreme; or unto Governors, as them that are sent by him: For
the Apostle foresaw by the Scripture, Zach. 14. 2. Zeph. 3. 9. That the Lord
would hold forth at last, a King whose Laws in all things should be right: of
this you have more at large in my fore mentioned Books; for there is no right
nor peace to be had; but where there is a King of righteousness, and a King of
Peace; That is, when the King Comes in by the right way, being the right Heir.

And though the title [King;] be given by the Scripture sometimes to Usurpers,
set up by the peoples power, and by money; which is but a molten Calf; God owns
them not; but calls them, their Idols, for says he, Hos. 8, 4, 5, 6. They have
set up Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes, and I knew it not; of
their silver, and their gold have they made them Idols; that they may be cut
off; Thy Calf O Samaria, etc. And again says he; Eze. 43. 9. Let them put away
their whordoms and the Carcasses of their Kings far from me; and of such Kings,
he speaks Rev. 17, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. as you shall find it made Clear at
large in the postscript of my book, called, A Voice from Heaven. And of such
Kings the Lord says, that they had set their thresholds, by his thresholds;
and their post, by his post; Ezekiel. 43, 8. for the Lord had a post by which his
Kings of the seed of David stood; 2 Kin. 11. 14. Ezekiel. 46. 2. according to Gods
command; and it seems the usurping Idolatrous kings, set up by the people,
presumed to come there, as our great Ones presume now, to bury their friends in
the Royal sepulchers at Westminster; where none but the Kings Family was wont
to be buried; yet certainly their carcasses shall be removed, as the Lord has
spoken, Eze. 43, 7, 8, 9.

But the true King that comes to judge the wicked ones, is called the glory of
the God of Israel, that is, the glory of Jesus Christ; for he is the God of
Israel; And if we compare Scripture with Scripture, we shall find it so; for
you shall fine, Ezekiel. 43, 1, 2. That the King coming form the Ea^t with his
Train and Army, is called, the glory of the God of Israel; and v. 3. he says
it was like the glory that he saw when he came to destroy the City; That is,
like Nebachadnezzars coming in the head of his Army to destroy (...); and v. 5.
he says, that the glory of the Lord filled the house, v. 6. he tells us, that
this glory spoke to him, and it a man, and says he, the man stood by me, and
he said unto me, etc. v. 7, 8. he tells you what this glorious king said; to
make it yet more clear, observe v. 4. that this glory came into the house at
the east gate. And compare it with Eze. 44, 1, 2, 3. and you shall find, that
the East gate must be shut, and that none must com in or out by that gate, but
the king

Here M Aspinwall may see, that the true Kings, set up of God; may come to the
post, and the threshold of that gate, as their own place; Ezekiel. 46, 2* 2 Chronicles.
23. 13. and that the usurping Kings, set up by the people, and called (their
Kings) must be put away, Ezekiel 43, 9. And though Saul, who indeed was the Lords
Anointed, 1 Samuel 24 6. 1 Samuel 8 4, 5. 1 Samuel 12, 13. 1 Samuel 13, 13, 14. yet for
that the first moving cause for him, was from the people; his heart was not
real to God* Therefore Saul relying so much upon them, t^ ^^ease the people*
disobeyed the command of God, and lost the kingdom, 1. Sam. 15.

(...) Aspin wall, concerning your throwing away of our Laws, therein you talk
idly; for do you think that your generation (who are of no such wisdom and
learning as our former Parliaments were) can make better Laws in one year, then
out Laws be* which were in making and ^^^^ing above five hundred years? and had
not our former Parliaments the word of God for their direction therein, as well
as you or any now a days? and were they not more sober and prudent in the
understanding of those Laws? I pray entertain no such foolish conceit. And you
tell us likewise of the Statutes of Omri* Mica 6. 16. that is, even such things
as you set up; for if you observe Jeroboam, Omri and Ahab, though they had many
sorts of worship, yet any one abject of the people, served to be a Priest, or a
Teacher of them, 1 Kin* 12, 31. 2 Chro. 12, 8, 9. 1 Kin, 16. 25, 26. And must
the statutes of David be cast away, because the statutes of Omri be naught?
must the statutes of K. Hen. 8. K. Edw. 6. and Q Eliz. which are against
popery, be cast away, because other Kings statutes are Idolatrous, and for
popery?

And further, you tell us an untruth; That Jehojada the Priest having the
supreme authority in his hand, took men recommended to him by some others, whom
you call the Church; to put them in civil authority. No Sir; Jehojada had not
(as you affirm) the supreme Authority then; for it is evident, Athaliah did
reign that six veers while he was guardian to the Kings Son, 2 Kings 11. 3. But
in the seventh year (he being the Priest of God) God stirred up the Spirit of
Jehojada, to do right to the King, Princes and Levites; so that he sent to
bring the Princes, who by right were rulers over hundreds; and took an oath of
them to be true to the King, and presented him before them; and they by his
command gathered the faithful Levites to come to their charge; neither took he
anv man's advise in the business, nor was any upon the attest of others
received by him, and put into Civil Authority, as you falsely assert; for he had
the Spirit of God to direct him (as our every one to his charge and place; and
directed them in what they should do, as from the mouth of God; and all of them
did so obey Jehojada, that the work was perfected, even the King set on his
Throne, as you may see, 2 Kings 11. 2 Chronicles. 23.

But you seem (by such fal^e grounds) to set up the tenent of the Romish
Church, which is, if a man by birth be Heir to a Kingdom, and ought there to
rule, yet if the Church of Rome do not approve of him; they will deprive him,
if they can; and give his right by their attest unto another, whereby to enjoy
that Civil power; so that their Church do unjustly in this thing.

Thus, there will be brave stir, when your divided Churches, which are part of
Iron, part of clay, even the toes of the Image, Dan. 2. 33, 34, 42. go about to
set up men by their attest to govern, in Civil Authority. Then Jack Straw is
set up by one Congregation, and Hob. Carter, by another, to throw him down; so
that there shall be an endless war among them, until the Stone cut out of the
mountain without attest of hands to justify it, smite the Image upon the feet,
and break it to shivers; Dan. 2. 34, 35, 45. for the King needs not the attest
of men, because all know him to be the Ruler by right.

Another untruth you would force upon us, on that Text in Genesis 49. 10, which
says; The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between
his feet, until Shilo come; from Judah many Kings have sprung, who gave good
laws and kept the Scepter; what say you of David and Salomons writings, are
there therein no Laws given out by them? sure they had power from God to do it,
and Jesus Christ himself allows of their Laws; insomuch that he sometimes
defends himself thereby against his enemies; and did not Jesus himself come of
Judah, who removes that earthly Scepter from Judah, according to the word, and
gives it to Shiloh? which Shiloh we must understand to be another Tribe, come
from Japhets loins, and not from Sem, Genesis 9. 26, 27. yet you say, the kings of
Judah gave no laws, nor could any give laws, till Jesus came. How contrary to
the truth, even to Christ's own words, this your assertion is, is manifest by
the Scripture. Christ would no^ be troubled with such outward things; for when
the people would have enforced him to be their King, he absolutely refused it;
Joh. 6. 15. neither would he be so much as a Judge in a civil cause, Luke 12.
13, 14. nor would he take, but rather give tribute, Mat. 22. 17, to 22. and 17.
24. to 28. Therefore your assertion is utterly false, and you force the Text to
a quite contrary sense, as you do in all the rest of your Pamphlet wrest other
Scriptures.

Now for the law of Christ, it is altogether a spiritual law, which serves not
for any particular Country, but for all in general, as a rule whereby to frame
laws. Therefore says Christ, By me kings reign, and Princes decree justice; by
me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth; Pro. 8. 15, 16.
that is, what laws they make according to his word, are made by him. For this
cause the Apostle Peter says, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; first, to the king* as supreme; then, to
them that are sent by him. And why? because whatever is done by the king, and
his nobles, or judges, is done by the Lord Jesus; for they being his ministers,
Romans 13. 4, 5, 6. are directed by him; and the kings heart is in the hand of
the Lord, Pro. 2^. ^. therefore his mouth cannot err in judgment, Pro. 16. 10.
Now to leave Gods rule, and set up silly mean fellows to be judges, and they to
search for precepts, that are (as you say) scattered up and down the scripture
whereby to rule all Countries, in all causes, and then be subject to their
wresting those Scriptures what way they please, would be a brave way of judging
the people, who having no known laws whereby to walk, must be always waiting
what scripture the Judge will make use of to please his fancy, either to make
them offenders, or to favor them; and if you say, the Judge must allow a
dispute, then may the greatest offender beat him with his own weapon, and
escape; no, Christ has not promised to rule by such vile persons, but by men
of eminency, viz. by kings, princes, nobles, and judges, who decree justly Pro.
8. 15, 16* and if that land be blessed, whose king is the son of Nobles, Eccl.
10. 17. then that land is cursed, whose rulers are sons of clowns, that have no
Nobility in them. Therefore to conclude, I beseech you to consider seriously
what you do, and pull not down your house, before you have ability, skill,
opportunity, and time to erect another; lest you become in a worse condition
then the wild beast of the field; all the Statute laws, that were in force in
the days of K. Charles, were right. But for the evil Customs that crept into
Courts, and places of Iudicatory, through the corruption of men in authority,
which the law never intended, I am against, as much as you can be. And now M.
Aspinwall you see wherein we differ, and that it is, because you did not search
the Scriptures so exactly, as to find out the truth of them; wherein therefore
you err concerning K. Charles, for I am better opinionated of you; then to think
you did it wilfully, because the times favor such things; or that you are so
hardened, but that you may be yet converted; which is the humble desire of your
friend, and Servant in Christ Jesus,

ARISE EVANS.

POSTSCRIPT.
YOu may please to see the folly and falseness of this Aspinwall, in his
Pamphlet; who first, would needs persuade us, That the late K. Charles was a
fierce arrogant Tyrant; whereas indeed, the World knows, there was not a more
mild and gracious King upon Earth, to his Subjects, then he was.

2. He would blind our eyes, and persuade us, that those people are saints, and
must govern the world, who when they had gotten from K. Charles more then ever
was g^^^ted by any K. of England to the subject; Who so rewards evil for
good, evil shall not depart from his house.

Prove. 17. 13.


rendered him evil for good, most abominably rose against him, and deprived him
of life and all. Surely there is no man, having the spirit of Jesus Christ in
him, dare say, such doings are the deeds of Saints; or they are Saints, that to
deceive, will forswear themselves, and keep no faith toward God or man.

3. He would have (...) think Jesus Christ to be the Head of such perfidious
people; and that He will put the power of (...) Kingdom, or fi^t Monarchy, into
such went hands; as if he intended that when they get the power of the Kingdom
of Jesus into their hands, they may serve him as they did K. Charles, and
deprive him of all his right on earth; But they cannot (...) who is the
searcher of the heart, as they deceived K. Charles, Ier. 17. 10. for says he* I
the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give to every man according
to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings; so that we must rather
believe that Jesus will judge them for their wicked deeds against him, and his
Anointed, then put the power of his Kingdom into the hands of such a perfideous
generation; and that he will exalt Charles (that was faithful to the death for
him) to the throne, Re. 2. 10. and 3. 21 that Charles and his seed for ever,
should have the pre-eminence ever all the earth.

4. He would persuade us to cast away our Law, made and composed by holy men,
according to the word of God; which by all men's judgment, has brought England
to such a Civility, that no Country can be compared to it; and seek a New Law,
he saying, it is scattered up and down the Scripture. Truly the Scripture is a
sweet garden for that purpose, and serves for all the world; but since our
Predecessors sought in this garden, and gathered the sweetest flowers thereof,
and composed them together into so sweet a Posie, that we, and all the world
(as many of them as came among us) have found the experience thereof, and bear
witness, that there is not the like on earth; For us to cast this Law away, and
look for a new Law from this generations composing, were, as if a man should
leave his sheep, and go snear the hogs; so he should find a great cry, but
little wool; as we found from our long sitting Parliament, great Votes, but
little good Laws: or as if a man have a great sack of wool, and cast it away,
and then go a wool gathering among briers and thorns, it could not but be
counted a great folly; so for us to cast away our Laws, and be persuaded by
such silly fellows as Aspinwall, is a greater folly.

5. I beseech you also to consider this shallow brained fellow; a child that
can but tell 20. will tell you that ten, and one, is 11. yet Aspinwall cannot
make more of the ten horns, and a little horn, (which ten and 1. must needs be
counted 11.) but ten; which interpretation of the horns, he makes the principal
matter in his Pamphlet, both in the first and last page thereof; and judge you
whether a man that is not able to tell 20. but misseth 1. in 11. is fit to
declare such high things to the world, and to presage of times Consider what I
say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. 2 Timothy 2. 7.

Arise Evens.

FINIS.

