A Rule from Heaven* OR, VVholsom COUNSEL TO A Distracted STATE: Wherein is
discovered, The only Way for settling THE GOOD OLD CAUSE, AND* Removing the
Maladies incident thereunto* and Mr. Pugh his Prophesies* opened*

By ARISE EVANS.

1 These. 5. 20. Despise not Prophesyings.

Mat. 6. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and
all these things shall be added unto you*

LONDON* Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at his House in Long-Alley
in Blackfriars. 1659.

The INTRODUCTION.
ALthough we have been of all Nations the most sinful, yet from time to time,
God in Mercy did deal with us, that we Britans might be a People saved to the
Glory and Honor of his free Grace: as it is written, Isa. 43. 2. This people
have I formed for my self: they shall show forth my praise. And as it is seen
from age to age, Gods Justice is such, that it will not pass by the sins of any
people, but especially his own people, as you see, Amos 3. 2. so he owning us,
did severely punish us for our sins at all times: First, by the Grecians, when
our Royal City of Troy was destroyed; and then after we came hither, by the
Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans; yea; God made use of all the Nations round
about us, when we sinned, to punish us for our sins, not according as our
enemies willed, who would have utterly destroyed us, nor according to our
deserts, who deserved no less then utter destruction; but God, according to his
purpose, corrected us in mercy and measure.

And when our City of Troy was destroyed, and we scattered from thence, to seek
a new habitation; some of us came to Italy (which Country long after gloried in
being Trojans) but the Nobles followed Brute their Prince, and from all parts
as they were informed, came unto him, into Grecia, where in time, Brute became
potent, having with him in Towns, Woods and Deserts a strong Party: and when at
the Request of Brute, Pandrasus King of Greece would not grant them Liberty in
his Country, or leave to depart out of his Country, but went about to punish
them; Brutus overthrew the King in battle, took him prisoner; that Pandrasus
King of Greece, to reedeem himself according to agreement made between them,
was glad to furnish him with a Navy and much Treasure, and give him his
Daughter to wife: whereupon Brute and his company leaving Grecia, came through
many Countries, found many more of the dispersed Trojans, fought many Battles
victoriously, got much honor and riches, and made no stay until he came to
this Land, which God had promised him in a Vision at Leogitia.

And coming, by Gods Providence, to this Land, we found here certain Giants
descended from Ham the son of Noah, who then called the Name of this Land
Albion; from Albion the fourth son of Neptune, that was the first King which
reigned here of that Race: those Giants did oppose us; but we destroyed them
all; and the name of the Land we called according to the name of Brute,
Britain: and as we searched the Land, we found in many places of it, but most
of them inhabiting North Wales, a people descended from Japhet the son of Noah,
called Samotheans. This Samothea by Moses, Genesis 10. 2. is called Meshech, and
he came here within 200 years after the Flood; he excelled all the men of that
age in wisdom, learning and knowledge, both in Divinity and Philosophy; and
being skilful in the Law of God and Man, he was exceedingly given to the
Religion of his Grandfather Noah, which he upheld in his Family; and when the
earth was dividid, Genesis 10. 5, 25. he had for his portion in Europe all the
Country lying between the River of Rhene and the Pirenian Mountains; which
Lands he peopled with such number as could be gotten in those days: but he
chose for his own habitation this Island, and called it Samothe: he dwelt in
North Wales; and Samothea* begat Magus; Magus, begat Sarron; Sarron, begat
Drius; Dri^^, begat Bardy: these five, Samothea, Magu^* Sarron, Drius, Bardy,
reigned here long time before Albion came; and they were so famous for
learning, that every one of these erected a College of himself; so that the
Greeks, Persians, Athenians, even all the Gentiles, had their Characters and
Learning from these Colleges first; which then was pure Knowledge, though
afterward corrupted by new devises among them of other Countries, who thought
they were no body if they did not add to it.

When we Britains being descended of Gomer the son of Japhetand found these
Samotheans our Brethren, not only because of kind, but also for their
Learning and Virtue, we were right glad to meet with them, so that we joined
with them, and became one people; and in short time after, things in Britain
were so settled, specially in matters of Religion, that as I may so say, we
were Christians above a thousand years before Christ was born.

First, we believed in the only true ever-living God, Maker of all things.

Secondly, we had three Names to the same God, by which we called upon him, and
did worship him; believing that he was three in One, and One in Three.

Thirdly, we believed that the soul is immortal; and that when one died, his
soul entered into another body prepared of God for him: so that if he that died
was a good man, his soul was raised and went into a more honorable and
glorious body; but if he that dyed was a bad man, his soul descended and went
into a more dishonorable and base body: God in this case judging every man
according to his works done in his body: thus we believed the Resurrection; and
surely it does in some measure agree with the Gospel, as may be proved by many
Texts; and was not the soul of Elijah in John the Baptist, which made our
Savior affirm that John was Elijah? Mat. 11. 13, 14.

Fourthly, for the Government of this Religion, the Land was divided into 28
parts, where were seated 28 Flamines, whereof three of them were called
Archflamines, which were then as the Bishops and Archbishops of our time, but
after a more perfect manner; for then there was three Archflamines over the
Britains, which did signify the Trinity and Personalty of the Godhead; but our
Church of England had but two Archbishops.

Therefore it was not a hard thing for Lucius King of the Britains to stablish
the Christian Faith in his Kingdom, it being all one with that they had in
Doctrine and Government, only differing in Names and Ceremonies; so that
Lucius which was the first Christian King in the world, quickly, and without
violence, brought the Britains to the Christian Faith: who hearing Christ
preached, immediately believed, and were baptized: that Lucius changeing the
word Flamine into Bishop, thus altering few Names and Ceremonies, the work of
reformation in Britain is done quickly.

And in Contemplation of these things, I see Jesus while he was on earth
viewing the Daughters of the Gentiles, to find out his Spouse; and among them
all, concludes Britain to be the most amiable; and being in love with her
beauty, according to Solomon, song 4. is resolved to take her to wife, that he
might beget a son of her body to inherit his glory: therefore Jesus the King,
after the manner of Kings, sends the most honorable of all his Disciples,
Joseph of Arimathea by Name, an Ambassador to Britain; and he coming to
Arviragus then King of Britain, was so courteously received, that the King gave
him some Land to inhabit, and liberty to declare his message to the British
Lady, so called for method sake: but the said Lady, notwithstanding the Kings
consent, for modesty sake, as prudent Ladies use to do in such a case, does not
seem to grant her love to her beloved at the first motion, because she might
have been judged to be of an unconstant mind, for altering her estate
suddenly, and without mature deliberation: for these causes the suit
continues; so that the agreement is not fully made between Jesus Christ and
the British Lady until King Lucius time, and then they were married with great
joy: and not long after, the British Lady brings forth a son to Jesus Christ,
namely, Constantine the great, who gave such a wound to the enemies of Jesus
Christ, that they could never recover it: we then being assured that the
British Lady should bring forth another son to destroy all the enemies of Jesus
Christ, and receive of his glory, for this cause Britain had many enemies that
envied her, because of this honor that God was pleased to give her: which is
worth your consideration.

Britain being thus exalted, and her son made Emperor, Satan's Friends fell
into a tottering condition; therefore he stirs all his instruments against
the British Nation; as the Saxons, Danes, Normans, and all the Nations round
about sought to destroy them, till they drove the Britains into Wales; and at
last, after much Wars for a long time, through a guile used in their agreement
with Edward the first, who privately sent his Queen to Carnarvon, where the
first Prince of the English Race was born; and the Britains submitting to him,
brought themselves into such misery, that from Edward the first, to Henry the
sevenths time, the Britains were in great slavery; the English using them
cruelly, destroying their ancient Records, prohibiting them to bring their
Children up in Learning, intending to extinguish their ancient Language, and
bring the prophesies and promises written in the same Language to none effect:
but for all that, the Britains through Gods Providence preserved their
Language, and so much of their Writings as is needful to hold forth the truth
for them.

And of all the enemies that we had since our coming to Britain, the Romans
were the most honest and noblest Enemy; for they indeed esteemed the Britains
according to their worth and quality, making a difference between us and the
Barbarous people round about us, because the Romans found the Britains to be as
good men as themselves were: for all the Countries hereabout submitted to
Julius Caesar without any great resistance: but when he sent to Cassibelan King
of the Britains to have him submit, Cassibelan sent him word, That he and the
Britains had not learned as yet to live in servitude; and that Caesar should
find it a hard matter to bring them to it: whereupon Caesar being in wrath,
came to Britain with all his Power; but he found Britain so hot, that he was
forced to go back into France from whence he came; and after many returns to
little purpose, being half ashamed, Caesar sought to gain the Britains by
love, and at last came to an agreement with them, that the Romans and the
Britains should become one people. Thus they concluded* So that you may see in
the Chronicles (as many more were) Constantine the Great was a Britain by the
one side, and a Roman by the other; for which cause Pompey who was sent from
Rome to conquer the other side of the world, sent a jeere to Caesar, for that
he could not otherways overcome such a small handful of people as he judged the
Britains to be: therefore Caesar bore him a grudge for it to his dying day; so
that before Pompey came to Rome, Caesar having many of the Britains with him,
met him, and showed him the Britains Valor in a Battle where Pompey was slain,
and Caesar made Conqueror of the World.

And know this also, that the Romans should never have had footing in Britain,
had Britain then been united within it self: for King Lud died, and left behind
him under age four sons: Cassibellan his Brother was made Protector; and
usurping the Throne, Androgeus son and heir to Lud, being deprived of his
right, agreed and sided with Caesar, and went to Rome; therefore many towns not
submitting to Cassibellan, because he was not their lawful King, made much for
Caesar, and brought in the Romans as abovesaid: so that Caesar's report is true,
saying, That Britain was divided when he invaded it: but had he come in King
Luds time, he had found no entrance into Britain. Yet as the truth is, our
Confedracie with the Romans did us much evil: for our men going out of the Land
to maintain the Romish interest, made our number decrease, and emboldened our
pilfring Enemies to set upon us, specially after they saw that huge host go out
of Britain for the service of Christ under Constantine the Great. Thus much
touching the Romans, as being worthy of note, I thought good to show you.

And now to return where I left: The Britains, as before you see, were in great
distress, from the time of Edward the first, to the time of Henry the seventh;
that is to say, above two hundred years; and for all their enemies could do to
them, the Britains kept their Language, Records and Prophesies: so that Henry
the seventh being a Britain-promised Prince, had them Prophesies as his guide;
and he observing them, came accordingly to the Throne, to the comfort of all
people: for he united York and Lancaster, redeemed Wales, and was the means to
bring England and Scotland under one head; and from that time to this day, the
Welsh British blood, according to the Welsh Prophesies, has continued on the
Throne of great Britain.

Thus far God has done for us in fulfilling our prophesies; blessed be his
Name for ever: and more is yet to be fulfilled of the said Prophesies, which
will infallibly come to pass as the rest did; for God is come in his promises,
therefore now it is time for you Englishmen to consider it, (and not
henceforth to despise, deride and scorn the Welsh) that ye may as Britains be
made partakers of the blessing with us, denying your English or Saxon interest;
for surely the Saxons shall vanish, as God has determined it by our Prophesies.

The mystery of our Prophesies and Knowledge was delivered to us of old, by
Samothea, or, as Moses calls him, Genesis 10. 2. Meshech, that is, a Messenger or
Angel of God: others call him, Diese, that is, God; they attributing the
Godhead to him, in regard of the light come from him to the world: but we call
him Samothea, that is* a man endued with wisdom or sapience above others; who
indeed at first laid the platform of true Knowledge among us; by which
Evangelical Divine Rules, our Bards were guided to prophecy: and specially
having the mystery opened by the coming of Jesus Christ, they were the more
informed by his Spirit; so that they became undoubtful and certain in what they
said and delivered to the Britains.

And there is a Book of one Mr. Thomas Pugh, called, British and Outlandish
Prophesies, printed 1658, for Lodowick Lloyd at the Castle in Gornhil in
London; In which Book you shall find much of our Welsh Prophesies, (though
mis-applyed by the Author) to which Book I refer you: for in that Book you are
to look upon a thing done according to the pattern, Heb. 8. 5. that is, a thing
in form like the old Testament, and beginning the 540 year of Christ, page 1.

First of all, you shall find there a second Moses, or an Angelical Child
taken out of the water, called Taliesin, whom many our Nation much honor: for
the said Taliesin tells you many things that were in the beginning, as Moses
does; pronounces woes against all sorts of sinners; shows you his belief in
Jesus Christ; warns you of the Romish Faction; and tells you a forehand of the
Britain Captivity being overcome by the Saxons, and of their Restoration in due
time by the seed of the woman, whom he calls by name Angharad, many hundred
years before she was born, page 13. and page 20. and that out of the said woman
should come a valiant Conqueror called Kar, that is, Karolus or Charles, page
24. This Taliesin, and the Prophets or wise men that followed, do foretell you
the death of King Charles, the place of it, the manner of it, and show you by
whom it is done, page 43. and who for a time shall enjoy his Territories, page
37.

Secondly, you shall find that Charles the King, and Oliver that enjoys his
Kingdoms, are both the seed of the same Angharad, as Jacob and Esau were, Genesis
25. See for this, page 151, and 252, and 168.

Thirdly, you shall find that these Prophets do agree, and testify that the
said Charles, called by them Koronog vaban; in English, the crowned son of
Anne, shall rise again, and not only conquer Britain, or recover his own, but
also shall conquer the whole world: that is, the Line and Race of the said
Charles, shall do it: for you must understand it in a reasonable way: See for
this, page 37, 38. and also page 47, 48, 49, 50, 51.

Fourthly, for a miraculous witness, that that Race and Line of Koronog vaban
shall be raised again to conquer, as abovesaid, you shall find, page 104.
Taliesin's Prophecy of great stones raised from a bottom, and set on a hill
(which stones are so big, that no creature can move them) when the head of
Koronog Faban was to be raised; and that came to pass at the Coronation of King
James in England, who had been crowned many years before in Scotland while he
was in his Cradle; which being in that regard a crowned baby, is also upon that
account Coronog Faban: for Koronog Vaban in English, is either the crowned
baby, or the crowned son of Anne; both are included in the word. And the Author
confesses it to be a word of a double signification, 47. neither durst he put
out such prophesies, had he not seemed to be exceedingly for Oliver: therefore
he wresteth the prophesies to speak for him; and it was GOD's Providence that
brought them forth: for Oliver was rather more angry then pleased with the
Author for such a discovery.

Fifthly, you shall find that after Taliesin had set forth Olivers deeds, p.
22. he termineth and limiteth his time; and then page 23. he saluteth Charles
the second by name, though mystically; and there the Author is at a stand, not
daring to interpret it, nor knowing what to say: but page 149. he seems to
show the time of the beginning of the departing of Oliver and coming of
Charles, and of his deeds, as follows, page 50.

This is the whole substance of Pughs Book, and it is agreeable to the
Scripture; it is agreeable to the Jews Expectation, and agreeable to our
Christian Religion.

And these prophesies did never fail hitherto, as our Contrymen know; but at
one time our Countrymen and Bards were amazed, and thought they had failed:
for in 1623. the golden number being 9. the Moon also changing on Lower
Sunday-Eve, there was a prophecy that pronounced a woe to Britain in that year;
and moreover, bidding us beware of a fire upon the Land (that year) the second
Thursday after Midsummer day; and therefore they looked for that day to be the
day of Judgment: but finding nothing come to pass then, they thought all their
prophesies were lies, and that no more credit was to be given to them.

But, as I was informed, upon that very Thursday, in that very year, Oliver
Cromwell presented a Petition to King James touching the Fens in Lincolnshire,
and about Eli, he being backed with abundance of Countrymen, on stilts; and as
soon as King James took the Petition, his Nose fell a bleeding, that he swore
it was an ill Omen, saying, If he could tell how, he would hang that fellow
that had given him that paper. But Oliver had a strong party with him, so that
the King was pacified, and thought it best to be quiet. Thus the King and
Country began to jar about the Fens, which the King had sold from the Country
to some Dutchmen; and Oliver at the first began to gain the love of the people
by this means: for none durst head them then but he. Now you see how the fire
began between the King and Country on that very day: so that the prophecy was
fulfilled, though our Country were ignorant of it: which fire burned the King
and his party to nothing; so that as S. Clement says, They shall be renewed,
and rise as the Phoenix does, out of its own ashes: and for this Nation, I
believe that the generality of the people of this Land are Britains (or Welsh,
as now we call them) by descent: for though they lost their Language by reason
of their mixture with Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans, and other Nations which
came to this Land from time to time; yet they did not lose their Consanguinity:
and you must conceive thus much, that though this Land was many times conquered
by forrainers, yet none of the poor people and Husbandmen, nor any that did
submit to the conquering party, were removed; and that it was always the chief
Nobility, being overcome, fled to Wales, or to any place where they could find
a Refuge. Therefore we, whose noble descent you see, ought not to be divided:
truly Wales had never been brought under England, but for its division: and now
what danger are we in, being divided, and do no righteous things? we cannot
stand long if we have not a King. But you will say, Who shall be King? If you
go in a righteous way, I will show you that Charles Stuart is the man who by
right should enjoy it according to our ancient custom: for he is the true heir
of all; for in him runs that stream of Royal Blood that shall make glad the
City of God: for all the Blood Royal of the Britains, Scots, Saxons, Normans,
is primary in him. I could make this out, and show you his lineal descent, if I
thought you would question it: I could also make it appear abundantly by their
prophesies in Mr. Pughs Book, that God long before this time has determined
and declared his Fall and his Restoration; and that word Koronog vaban, which
is the Key of all our prophesies, belongs to him; and that it cannot be brought
to speak for Oliver Cromwell, as Mr. Pugh would have it. But what should I
trouble you with these things which you cannot relish? I shall show you a more
excellent way; for God did not cast down Charles, to the end that he should be
set up again upon the same slipery foundation: for he had better he a step
lower then he was, that he might stand surer: Therefore take this as follows.

Men and Brethren:
I Having read Histories, and seen the course of the world from time to time, I
find that from the Creation to this day, there is troubles in the world about
superiority, and that much innocent blood has been spilt by Governors to
maintain their worldly Interests; yet for all that, could they never make
themselves and posterity sure to hold long, nor find a way to govern, that was
not defective in the Issue: their Foundation being bloody, could not stay them
from falling: they would not come to judgment, nor be called to an account for
what they did, and their shedding of innocent blood: but they could not shun it
when Gods time came. I might prove this, not only from Histories, but also
from the holy Scripture, that it is so now, and has been so at all times, in
all the habitable world, among all nations from the beginning: but my business
is not to make great Volumes to show all that might be said in this Case: only
I say, that all sorts of Government, yet known and established among men,
whether by Kings Hereditary, (counted best) or by Elective Kings, or by States,
or whatsoever else is or has been, it is naught, and destructive to men:
therefore I through Gods help briefly shall show you a Form of Government that
has not been yet made known to the world, though figured forth in the Gospel
by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, this sixteen hundred years: And now our
necessity requires me to hold it forth: we have had much talk of the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, but we are ignorant of it all this while; none shows it,
though it be time: for if the Protector, Army, and Parliament, striving about
the Militia (as they did with the late King) fall to War again (as it is like
they will) then woe to England, that ever the Gospel shined so bright in it, and
that by it, it could not find the way of peace: therefore take this as
follows for your direction.

1. Let not the chief of Great Britain and Ireland enter into his Power and
Government, until he be above fifty years of age.

2. Let him be a poor, honest, godly man; even so poor (though industrious in
his calling) that he has been forced to take Alms: and let him be chosen by
lot.

3. When he is king (for that Title the Scripture gives him, 1 Pet. 2. 13. and
that Title is best known to England by our Law) let him have the sole power in
Church and State: namely, the Militia, or whatsoever else is appointed for the
good and defense of the Nation, shall be his; and let him be accountable to no
man.

4. Let all Writs go, and whatsoever is done, let it be done, as heretofore in
the Kings name, and let him have but a hundred pound a year to maintian him.

5. Let the Kings personal work be so little, so plain, and easy, that
notwithstanding his great power, yet so that he cannot err in what he does:
which shall be only to call a Parliament, and sit with them; and let there be
but one house of Parliament.

6. Let the Protector, Steward, Deputy, King, or whatsoever you please to call
him, be hereditary in a male line, of ability and stature to rule, and let him
go on ruling as the Protector does now: only he must give account before the
King and Parliament every third year; for all that is done amiss in ruling, by
him or his Officers under him (though done by a Constable or Corporal) shall be
laid to his charge, because that upon knowledge thereof he did not punish the
Offenders.

7. The King every third year, upon the third week of December, shall send
forth Writs to call a Parliament, and command them to meet him at the
Parliament House the first week in March, and they are to sit until the first
of September, and no longer.

8. That no man be chosen to serve in Parliament, but such as are above fifty
year old, and that are judicious able men in knowledge of Law and Judgment.

9. That none be put in nomination to be chosen, but such as fear God, hate
covetousness, love the poor, and is peaceable. Choose none that has not been
just and honest in his dealing with all men, good and charitable to the poor,
and is full of the holy Ghost.

10. That none be chosen, which be in places of profit or preferment under the
Deputy or Protector, as now ye call him, nor any Commander of the Army, who all
are subjects to be judged by the Parliament, and not to sit as Judges in their
own Cause: For though the Protector be liable to suffer for every fault his
officers do, he not avenging the oppressed that made his complaint to him, or
he not sitting in the seat of Judgment to hear complaints thrice a week, where
the poorest sort, as well as the rich, without hinderance may come, be heard,
and relieved: yet shall his Officers suffer every one for his own fault
according to his desert, and the King and Parliament shall judge it; but
whosoever he be that sought not to the Protector first, and is not relieved in
a weeks time after his complaint made, though the wrong be done him in
Parliament time, yet shall he not be heard by the King and Parliament.

11. The Deputy, or Protector, every week thrice shall sit on a throne in an
open place, where every one may come and make his complaint to him, clearing it
by evidence; and after that, he must give just judgment speedily in a weeks
time, or else the King and Parliament shall call him to account for it: neither
is it intended that the Protector must judge all causes between man and man,
but to judge the wrong done by any in authority to a private man or woman.

12. If by chance there come into the house a close hypocrite that is
contentious, the Parliament speedily shall cast him out, and by their Order the
Country shall suddenly choose another, or send him up which he out-voted at the
time of Election: neither may he at any time be chosen again to sit in
Parliament. Country and City, as one man, upon every occasion, shall stand up
for King and Parliament, to beat down their opposers: for in them is the safety
of the Nation; and whatsoever in our Law is contrary to this Rule, shall be
made void and of none effect.

Direction to choose a King.
IT is fit that London being the chief City of these Nations, England,
Scotland, and Ireland, who are now one body, should have the pre-eminence as
the Royal City of all; and that the King should be chosen in London; then let
the Lord Major (when a King is to be chosen) take the names of all the Parishes
under his command, and divide them, and cast lots until the number be under
eight: Then shall he send unto those parishes which the Lord has taken, that
every parish at such a day shall send a man to such a place; whereupon every
parish of them shall call a Vestry to choose a man that is above fifty years of
age, that has been a seeker of God, and that fears God, that is full of the
Scripture and holy Ghost (not full of the Scripture, yet deny it to be Gods
word, as some do) that is diligent in his calling, yet his getting being so
small, that he is forced to take some alms to preserve himself and family: a
poor man, that is not worth five pounds, nor is five pound in debt; one that
can write and read, and has good understanding and reason, and one that is a
native born in Britain or Ireland. Such men shall be chosen and sent to the
Lord Major at the time appointed, and he and the Aldermen shall question them
one by one, and take out of them eight in number, two of the fittest persons
among them; and after prayer, the Lord Major shall cast the lot; and he on whom
the lot is fallen, always shall be proclaimed by the name of King Charles; and
there shall be allowed him that is King, two hundred pound a year: one hundred
for himself, to maintain him during his life; the other hundred to be divided
among fifty poor old men for gowns, and the rest for them in money yearly, and
to be paid out of the kingdoms treasury: and in regard of it, the old men are
to pray for the King while he lives; and when he dies, to accompany him to
his grave; and his burial shall be decent according to his means, and not
costly as the former Kings burialls were.

2. I thought of another way of Election: Namely, that he which is the oldest
Charterhouse-man, shall be always King (I mean not the oldest in years, but he
that was longest in the house) it would save the trouble of electing the King,
for there is a continual succession or supply of poor old men coming in there
continually; but that it is necessary to choose a King of the purest sort, and
at last to let God choose him, or decide it by lot, which is his own Ordinance
that he always answers by, in such matters that cannot be known or decided
otherwise; as you see in the Old Testament and New, Joshua 7. 14. Judges 1. 1.
2, 3. 1 Samuel 14. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. Jonah 1. 7, 8. Acts 1. 23, 24, 25, 26.
Besides, there might happen some treachery among these old men: for it is not
convenient for any to know aforehand who shall be the next King: and the King
being always of one name Charles, there is no interregnum, notwithstanding the
time of choosing a King should be somewhat long; for the King is always living,
though not declared until elected: Therefore the first is the best way for
election.

And now I shall show you how this is our Savior Christ's Institution for his
Kingdom.
FIrst, take notice of Matthew 20. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, Mark 10.
35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. 43, 44, 45. Luke 22. 24, 25, 26, 27. All which
shows, that when the Apostles strove for greatness in his Kingdom, he tells
them that they must not be as the Gentiles were, who did always exalt their
great and rich ones to reign over them; but they contrariwise, are commanded to
exalt the low and poor to reign over them. And indeed, there is weighty
reasons why it should be so, that the great ones should be kept down: for the
great ones always striving to be greater, and to have more wealth and honor,
they being never satisfied, was the destruction of themselves and followers;
and were the disquieting and ruin of good, meek, innocent, peaceable men: and
is it not so to this day among us, and all them who would be accounted
Christians?

2. The holy Apostle Saint Paul further expounding the abovesaid words of our
Savior Jesus Christ, says, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29. God has chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise, and God has chosen the Weak things
of the world to confound the things which are mighty: And base things of the
world, and things which are despised, has God chosen: Yea, and things which
are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his
presence. And further he shows, who are those chosen ones; and that they are
not them whom the world only count base, but also such as the Church do
despise and undervalue: even such men as is above mentioned in the Election,
poor, yet wise men; as you see 1 Cor. 6. 4, 5. saying, If then ye have
judgment of things pertaining to this life, set them to judge which are least
esteemed in the Church: So that it is clear, the holy Apostle would have the
Christians (according to Christ's words) to make them Judges, or Kings, of poor
weak old men, which never had any state in the world, nor look for any thing of
the world, but food and raiment. And 1 Cor. 12. 22, 23, 24. he there tells you,
that there is a necessity of such men for this purpose; and that upon such ye
should put the greatest honor, they being godly and wise in a just way.

3. The holy Apostle Saint James clears it further, showing you, that such poor
men are the Royal seed of Christ's kingdom, James 2. 5. Hearken my beloved,
(says he, regard what I say) has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich
in faith, and heirs to the kingdom which he has promised to them that love
him? Christians, this is the kingdom that ye daily pray for, when ye say to
God, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth, etc. And yet you will not
have it come on earth: for (speaking to the generality or middle sort of men)
says he, James 2. 6. Ye have despised the poor: Do not the rich men oppress
you, and draw you before the judgment seat? As if he should say, I appeal to
your own knowledge, whether it be not the rich ones that bring all evil upon
you: ye despise the poor harmless men, which love God and not the world; and
ye would not have them which by Gods apointment should reign over you, and ye
have chosen the rich to reign over you, that love the world and not God; but
what do you get by it? do they not make war among you; and to maintain their
humors, draw you, drive you, yea, consume you to nothing many times? this you
see is true. And again, these poor must not be such poor as make themselves
voluntarily poor; you know some of the Church of Rome do so, and glory in it;
but alas, it is a vain glory. Neither are they such as become poor by
prodigality and evil-husbandry; but such poor as the Lord does delight in, and
which follow him, and have been industrious also: yet through crosses and
temptations have been kept always under by the power of God, so that they
could not attain to any state in the world, for they do not desire it; much
being content with what God sends them: for they know riches is a tempting
thing that does cause many to forget God, and be as strangers to him; and that
of this sort is the tempting love of riches, to which most men's wills are
inclinable; and therefore it is a dangerous temptation, 1 Timoth. 6. 9, 10.
buried in oblivion by them: for the temptation they are acquainted with, is
their sufferings, and their adversaries reproaching of them, because of their
godliness and low condition; and to such poor our Savior says, Luke 22. 28,
29, 30. Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations, and I
appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed me; That ye may eat
and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve
tribes of Israel: And as Saint James says, James 1. 12. Blessed is the man
that indureth temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of
life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him: for you must
understand, that these poor must be just and holy ones; and that no wicked ones
shall inherit this kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Let this suffice to prove,
that Christ's kingdom is that which I have showed you in the foregoing passage:
Now I say unto you, It is in vain for any to think of setting up any other
Government (as says the Angel to Ezra, 2 Esdras 10. 54.) for in the place
wherein the highest begins to show his kingdom or city, there can no man's
building be able to stand; and God has begun here to show it this many years;
therefore your buildings fall.

Reasons why this kingdom should be set up among us.
1. Because it is of Christ founded: Therefore it is his kingdom, which is
most perfect (though contrary to the kingdoms of men) which shall stand for
ever, to his glory.

2. Because we were taught by Christ to pray, saying, Thy kingdom come:
Therefore we ought to endeavor to fulfill our prayers in setting it up, for
our good.

3. Because such a King, being old, and has not long to live here, and but a
poor allowance of a hundred pound a year; one that fears God, and is chosen of
God by lot; one whose integrity is known to men before he is chosen, so that he
never was for the world: I say, such a one will do right, and cannot do wrong;
for the fear of God, his age, weakness, disability in money, and the Law, will
bind him to it. There is none else can do us right, but such a one as Christ
and his Apostles, and I, do show you: for our former Kings had mighty Revenues
and power, therefore they did what they listed against Law and Reason, for
which cause they came to destruction many times: Our former Parliaments being
up, were worse then our Kings, laying heavier burdens on us: Therefore the
General of our Army pulls them down, and he sets up himself under the name of
Protector: but nothing is mended; therefore the Army pulls him down, and are in
confusion, not knowing what to do; and nothing shall stand but this kingdom
that I show you, because it is of God: it is in vain for you to set up any
other form of Government; for it shall fall, it shall be pulled down by others.

4. This Kingdom is not any way against the Kings of the earth, but of much
advantage to secure both great and small in their just Rights: for whereas now,
they, through their corrupt and boundless resolution, hazard souls, bodies,
and States, to maintain their prodigal unjust deeds, until they lose all for
it; this kingdom and King will keep them in safety and sure possession: for
understanding that they are to give account every third year, they will take
heed what they do, and not run in such extravagant, unjust courses, and ungodly
ways, and have much more comfort by it then now they have: for God and the
people will bless them, and there is no other way to establish and confirm
every one in his just right but this: for Christ is the Prince of peace, and
will not disinherit any line, yet will punish offenders, and preserve their
seed that amend.

5. It prevents all treason: for to what end should any conspire against this
King, that has but a hundred pound a year, which they shall not enjoy, if they
kill, him? the Law goes on, another is chosen, and they are to suffer the most
infamous and cruel death as can be devised, and none can come that way to reign
in this kingdom. It shall not be here as formerly it was, or as the saying is,
Treason never prospers: for if it prosper, who dare call it treason? They
shall not advance themselves thereby: all treason aims at some good advantage
and preferment; but here is nothing to be had; if any do it, death and
damnation is their reward, which none living can desire: therefore this King
needs no guard, God and his innocence is sufficient for his guard; and let not
his Deputy have any guard to encourage him in wickedness, but let him have
officers, persons to keep order about him, as the Lord Major of London has now
about him.

6. Because in such a King Christ comes to reign upon earth; for Christ's coming
must be as the coming of Eliah was in John Baptist, for Eliah was taken up to
heaven, 2 Kings 2. 10, 11. as Christ was, Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. and it was as hard
a thing to see him ascend, as it was to see Eliah ascend; and as there was a
promise that Eliah should come on earth again, Malachi 4. 5. So he came in John
Baptist, Luke 1. 17. and Christ says, that John was that Eliah, Matthew. 11. 14,
15. Therefore Christ comes not as men imagine, but according to the Scripture,
as I show you here; and they that look for his coming in this way, shall see
him, Heb. 9. 28, and the rest shall never see him, but shall be shut up in
darkness.

There is abundance more reasons that I could give you, to show the beauty and
excellency of this kingdom: which I omit for the present; because I intend to
be brief, and the time does require it: Therefore now I shall show you some
reasons to show why this kingdom was not set up before this time.

1. Because our Savior Christ foresaw, that the Kings of the Gentiles would
not have suffered the Gospel to be preached in their kingdoms, if so be that
the Apostles had gone then to put them down, and set up of the poor to be kings
over them.

2. Because the Gospel of this kingdom, was first to be preached in all the
world for a witness to all Nations; and then (which is now) comes the end of
their kingdoms, and Christ's kingdom takes place, Matthew. 24. 14, 30. and the
Princes of the Gentiles shall mourn, because they must bow to this kingdom,
and become servants to the poor.

3. Because the Gentiles have their times limited, Luke 21. 24. and though
known then to none but the Father, Acts 1. 6, 7. So that the Apostle then
speaking of it, puts a certain time for an uncertain, Revel. 11. 2. but now the
tokens are come, the time is manifested, Matthew. 24. 32, 33. that all may see it.

4. Because the Scripture was engrossed heretofore in the great men's hands, so
that they might do as they pleased with the people that knew little or nothing
of Scripture; but when the Art of Printing was found, and they had liberty to
have the Scripture, knowledge is increased among the People, and shall
increase: So that they will not be ruled by the Kings set up after the manner
of the Gentiles any more. Here is the Good Old Cause that God raised our Army
to stand for; and if they will not stand for this kingdom and government of
Christ's own institution, which I do show here, they shall fall: and those that
take up this Interest shall prevail.

Here you see the Reasons why this kingdom ought to be set up, and Reasons why
it was not set up before this time. And if you ask me the reason why King
Charles is so unfortunate, since I make him to be the best of all Kings: truly
I answer, Because his resolution is not right, for he would come in and settle
all things as formerly we had them, therefore he cannot prosper; but let him
leave that resolution, and resolve to stand for this way, surely he shall find
better fortune, and be more glorious, and more surer in his throne then any of
his Predecessors, though he seem to be a step lower then they were: For I say
to him that shall be King, and to him that is Deputy and King also, for a
Deputy was King, 1 Kings 22. 47. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that
he is exalted: But the rich, in that he is made low, James 1. 9, 10. Here is
matter of joy for both.

Men's Good Old Cause shall fall: indeed Mr. Prin does show the right cause of
this War, as at first it was declared, and that was but a pretense, for they
quickly routed such as stuck to that: their Cause was to get all from the King,
Country, and Church, and to keep it; and this they call the Good Old Cause,
and they that stand for this, are counted the good people and well-affected;
but I am sure their Cause is neither good nor old: and if the long Parliament
come together, and sit to maintain it, according to their invitation; let them
beware of John, lest they also be served as Baal's worshippers were, 2 Kings
10. 25. and it was a wise saying of the Philistines to their King, 1 Samuel 29.
4. Wherewith should he reconcile himself unto his master? should it not be with
the heads of these men? Thus you see men's Cause, and Gods Cause; men's end, and
Gods end and intention.

Therefore let the Parliament at their next meeting settle this government, for
none else will stand: for if the long Parliament go settle themselves as
heretofore, their General in time will break them, and set up himself, so that
there shall be nothing but tossing the Nations to and fro in blood, until this
way of Christ be settled.

And if you desire to know who has wrote these lines, you may come to know me
by my face, and form of my visage, which of late has been changed: I nor any
other can give a reason for it, but this, that it is a Sign of God, and a Seal
to this work of God, that should stop the Kings of the Gentiles mouths, Isaiah
52. 13, 14, 15. But methinks I hear some say, The Jews will have no such poor
King as you set forth; they refused King Jesus, because he was outwardly poor.
I say, God has provided one that is so noble in birth and parentage for them,
that none is equal to him upon that account; yet he and all such shall be
servants to our poor Kings: and the Jews shall be satisfied in my next that
follows, both in English and Latin, that was a long while ago given to the
great Jewish Rabby, Manasseh Ben Israel.

A word to the Soldiery, and the people in general.
ANd truly the people are now in such amazement, that they know not who to
obey with safety: for Lenthals Parliament sits, though few in number, to
maintain (as they call it) a Free State; but the main end of it is to hug and
make sure to themselves the unrighteous Mammon gotten by deceit. Chiefly,
Church and Crown Lands; and this is a matter of joy to their party: Bampfields
Parliament, as report goes, look upon themselves as yet not dissolved, but
rejourned, and have in their meetings more members then Lenthal: But Prins
Parliament exceeds both, in regard of its Members and Right Cause; which truth
the Records of the times, and all honest people can witness, that the Army was
raised for the defense of the King and Parliament, as Mr. Prin maintains. These
Parliaments signify nothing, no nor the head-Officers of the Army; but the
noble spirits of the Underofficers and Agitators does all: Therefore you brave
Britains, stand up for Christ's kingdom, let not self-interest blind your eyes;
the glory is yours, for you are Christ's chief Instruments; Kings or Parliaments
are as nothing before you: yea, you Soldiers can take down your head-Officers,
if they stand between you and Christ: O go on as ye are Christians, and go on
as ye are bold Britains of a noble stock (as ye have it in the introduction of
this Book) to set up Christ's Kingdom. Was it not a bold British Soldier, under
King Belinus the Britain, that struck one of the grave Senators of Romes beard,
while yet they were Gentiles? for when Belinus King of the Britains had
conquered all so far as Rome, the Roman Senators said, and sent to him, saying,
That he must not come there, for it was the seat of the Gods: and when Belinus
boldly resolved to try whether they were Gods or no, he marched to them, and
found no resistance, because they were not able to fight him: for the Senators
thought, they being set on Thrones in a gallant posture, to daunt and persuade
the Soldiers, that they were Gods that could destroy the Soldiers in a
moment; but the undaunted British Soldiers being not afraid of their presence,
came to see them; and a bold Soldier, to try their Deity, taking one of them
by the beard, made them all flee, and be glad to give of their gold to serve
the Soldiers need. Here were gallant spirits; and much more gallant were the
Britains that went with Constantine the great to raise up Christ's Church, and
make it famous in the World; but your work is more eminent then both the
others. O fail not to do it, set up Christ's kingdom.

And because none shall disgrace me, saying, He set a time for the Kings coming
in 1653. and it came not to pass: I did not conclude so, but made a doubtful
case of it, as you may see in my Book called The Echo, page 134. and printed
1652.

And now I shall show you a seasonable Vision that I had in 1634.
I Saw my self standing on a pool of water in Merionithshire, at the parish of
Talyllun; the pool is called in our Welsh language Llunniamgyl; the honorable
Colonel John Jones, one of your House, knows the place: and as I stood upon the
water, I saw a company of black Foxes pursuing a young Lion; and as they
followed the Lion, they ran round about me, sometimes on the water, and
sometimes on the high way, that is on the North-side of the pool: I pitied the
Lion, and cast stones at the Foxes with all my might: but as I was throwing
stones at the Foxes, immediately they appeared to be young children, that stood
still a while on the way, the North side of the pool; and a voice said to me,
Why do thou cast stones at the children? and as I came to land, immediately
they turned to be black Foxes, pursuing the Lion again: but on a sudden, the
Foxes being on the water, became white Lambs, stood still; and the Lion being
on the water turned to them; and they, as it seemed to me, kissed each other:
Thus the Vision ended.

The Interpretation, as I humbly conceive, is this.
CHarles is the Lion, and you are the Foxes, the stones are the words of my
former Books against you, for which I was reproved: your becoming children was
your dissolution, or interruption, which made you repent that you did not
before make your peace with Charles: your turning to black Foxes again,
signifies that you are the same now as ye were before your dissolution; your
turning to be white Lambs, is, that you shall propound this way of peace to
Charles;and your kissing each other, signifies that you will effect it, and
settle peace in a glorious manner.

This is the sum of all in few lines to you: consider it; and know, that
these words are faithful and true. This Vision I had quite forgot, until
within this twelve-moneth: I told it many, but I could not tell how to apply it
right, until this time of your second meeting: I pray God it be rightly
interpreted, so that there may be no more innocent blood spilt in this Cause;
and that this word become not unprofitable to you, through the deceitfulness
of riches gotten in these times, and that you do not lose the immortal glory
set before you here: and take notice, that this word I present you withal, is
the word of the kingdom, Matthew. 13. 19. And I know nothing more against it,
then seeming godly men's self-interest in the world: which Interest will ruin
them, if they go on in holding for it as they do.

The Postscript.
ANd to show you all in a word: First, you see that Jesus Christ is for a
Single person, and not for a Free State (as you call it:) He that is chief,
Luke 22. 26. Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign, Luke 19.
27. So that Jesus when he speaks of these things, he is for a King, and a
kingdom; as you may see throughout the Gospel. Secondly, you see that he would
not have the great and rich to be his Kings (like as the Gentiles have) but
would have the poor and low exalted to the Throne, Lu. 22. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30. Thirdly, you see, that (as I said before) there must be two exalted in his
kingdom, yet one above the other must be the Chief: for when the mother of
Zebedees children petitioned our Savior Jesus Christ, for her two sons James
and John, saying, Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right
hand, the other on thy left, in thy kingdom; he does not answer her, saying,
There is no such thing to be in my kingdom; but says, To sit on my right hand
and on my left, is not mine to give; but it shall be given to them for whom it
is prepared of my Father, Matthew. 20. 21, 22, 23. Here you see that two are to
be exalted, yet differ in power one above the other, as the right hand is above
the left: and if you consider this word, prepared and promised, you shall find
the harmony of it touching this kingdom, and admire it: for, says the King,
Inherit the kingdom prepared for you, Matthew. 25. 34. and Saint James calls it,
The crown of life, and kingdom promised of God to them that love him, James 1.
12. James 2. 7. And to you, I say, the Parliament that now sit (for I have not
addressed my self to any other power before, though I had this knowledge long
before now) Do you set up this kingdom, for you are those like Zorobabel that
began the work, do you also finish it, Zachar. 4. 9. Do you make an agreement
with Charles Stuart, and call him in (if you think fit) to rule, and inherit
his own, and set a King above him according to this discovery: for I do
believe, seeing things going on since as they did, many of you repented that
you did not agree with him before you were dissolved; but then you had not this
way to propound to him, which being observed, will secure every man in his
right, after the agreement, so that none shall wrong another: for Christ in the
poor man being exalted to the right hand, having the sole power, will keep all
in order and subjection. And as God has been preparing this kingdom for us,
from the foundation of the world: So you, after your late repulse, are better
prepared to set it up, then you were before: and do it: let no self-interest
hinder it; for you may secure all ye have thus in peace, better then to keep up
your free State (as ye call it) by war and fear, until at last you lose all:
and it is necessary that ye are now in such a state, else you could never have
power to make agreement, and to set up Christ's kingdom; but have a care that ye
lose it not again before you do the work: for our noble Army, whose wisdom and
valor you know, whose descent I show from the Original, may have a design
which ye cannot apprehend.

FINIS.

