THE SPEECH Of the RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD Chancellor OF IRELAND Made as he
was one of the LORDS JUSTICES in their Name and behalf of the opening of the
PARLIAMENT there, the 8th. of May 1661.

LONDON, Printed, for Abel Roper at the Sun in Fleetstreet, over against St.
Dunstans Church. 1661.

The Lord Chancellors SPEECH.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WE the Lords, Justices, who have the Honor to represent his Majesty's most
Royal Person this day in Parliament, are glad after so great disorders,
Tumults, and Confusions which have been for many years pasts in all parts of
this Kingdom to see this goodly appearance, and Assembly met together in this
orderly and beautiful manner. To see the most Reverend Fathers of our Church
settled in their former Stations, and remitted to their ancient and undoubted
right: To behold our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at the
beginning.

I am sure if the wisest Daniel amongst us had two years since foretold us of
this day, and of those great things which our eyes have seen, and which we have
heard with our ears, which are now come to pass, and that our Captivity should
be so soon at an end, we should have given little credit unto him: nay, I doubt
me if an Angel had been sent to proclaim these glad tidings unto us, whether we
should have believed him; For the things we see fulfilled this day before our
eyes are above humane reason, They are Mirabilia Dei, The wonders of God
Almighty, and ought to be mavelous in our Eyes.

Add unto this which is the height and complement of the solemnity of the day,
That we do not represent this day the Person of a Tyrant or Usurper as some of
late have done, but the Person of our natural Lord and King, Charles the
second, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, and
that you are by a legal Power, derived from him, called together to advise with
him, De arduis and urgentibus Regni Negotiis

We are also glad to see the general Convention of Ireland turned to a
Parliament, and the Mortallity of the one swallowed up in the Immortality of
the other, and why so? because though the general Convention of Ireland for the
time it contained, acted very worthily, yet it could not do the work which is
intended, For neither the Convention, nor his Majesty's gracious Declaration,
nor any thing but a Parliament could complete the great work which is to be
done.

It is true that the Convention had excellent conceptions tending to the good
of the Kingdom, and brought many of them to the birth, but it wanted strength
to bring forth, and therefore it was one of their humble Desires by their
Commissioners unto his Majesty, That a Parliament might be called with
convenient speed for the putting of several things (which they presented to his
Majesty) into Laws for the good of this Kingdom, and thus this Phoenix was
contented to be consumed with the ardent affection which it bore to its
Country, That out of the ashes thereof another more excellent then it self
might spring, as it is at this day.

This might serve in general for a reason why this Parliament was called, but I
shall in a more particular manner give you the reasons of it, and that very
briefly, summa sequar vestigia Rerum, and leave the fuller Declaration thereof
to my Lord Primate of Ardmagh, appointed Speaker of the House of Peers pro
tempore.

The main and fundamental occasion of calling you together at this time, is to
settle every man's meum and tuum, which are are the great concernments of this
world, in such a way as every man may know which is his Meum and tuum.

You well know that these are the things which accasion most differences in
this world, This is made most commonly the ground of War betwixt Princes, and
of all differences in civil societies, and how hard a thing it is to do this
you cannot but apprehend, when as at present there is that incertainty of men's
Estates in this Kingdom, as hardly can any man say This or that Land is mine
own; and uncertainty we all know is the mother of Contention, and men's minds
are seldom quiet until their Estate be settled: The Law says, that the
Freehold cannot be in abeyance, except in one only case; But as the condition
of affairs now is in this Nation, the Freehold is in abeyance in most men's
cases: What is that namely, as the great Master of our Law says, in
consideratione Legis, in consideration of the Law, and must be settled by a Law
(there being first, Matura consideratione habita) before there can be any
settlement.

The first sort of men who ought to be secured and settled in their just
possessions are the Adventurers. I say just possessions, for if the foundation
which is now to be laid be not right, the superstructure cannot be firm or
lasting, Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it;
and certainly there is all the reason in the world that these men should be
secured in their just possessions, For these were Adventurers indeed, for when
there was no visible means for the relief or recovery of almost lost Ireland,
when the Northern Rebels were rampant in the field, and like a Land-flood
carried all before them, when the Town of Tredah, which was the only Bulwark
left betwixt us and them, was besieged with twenty thousand of them, when
Dublin the Metropolitan City of this Kingdom was threatened with a siege, and
the whole Land as it were in a flame round about us; when we could hear
nothing but the rattling of Drums, the found of Trumpets, the neighing and
trampling of Horses, and the noise of Cannons; when a common destruction
threatened every English man in this Kingdom; when we could hear in every place
the word of Command given, Kill, kill, etc. And no difference made of age or
sex, Then did these noble Adventurers open their purses, and sent relief unto
us, when all was in a manner lost, and ought not these men to be performed with
in a fitting way, according to the solemn undertaking in the Statute of xvii.
Caroli. No man will or can in Reason speak against it.

The next sort of men that are to be provided for, are the Soldiers, and these
were Adventurers indeed, for they carried their lives in their hands, and
adventured themselves and all they had in our Quarrel, and for our
preservation, and amongst these those Worthies commonly called the forty nine
men, who stood in the breach, and made good their ground until they were
seconded out of England by those Forces which came from thence; These must not
be postpon'd as they were in the Usurpers time, but special regard must be had
of them, as of those who did undergo the brunt and fury of the Rebels.

The Adventurers without these could do little, and the Soldiers without the
Adventurers purse would not do much, For who goes to War at his own charge,
But the Adventurer and Soldier joining together, did carry on this great work,
and ought to be satisfied in a reasonable and fitting manner.

There is another sort of people who are not to be forgotten, Namely, the old
Protestant and innocent Papist, whose right is to be inquired into, For it is a
Maxim in our Law, That androit ne poit morier, an ancient right cannot die.

If Naboths Vineyard should fall unto any man's lot, it had been better for him
to be without it, We must not rob Peter to pay Paul, as the common saying is.

You are now made Judges of this matter, and in a word your work is suum cuique
tribuere, which is the highest work of Justice, and it is for this end you were
called together, and if that you will follow those heavenly Rules given by the
most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Down, in his warning Sermon,
which I wish were imprinted in all your hearts, you cannot do amiss. His
Majesty has in his great wisdom shown you by his Declaration the way to go
through this great work, which if he had not done you would find it a most
difficult work, and Bills are in preparation for you to that purpose: God grant
you wisdom and understanding to do that which becomes wise and sober men. His
Majesty's gracious Declaration must be the corner stone of this great
structure, but this stone must be polished, squared and fitted for the
building, for nihil est ex omne part perfectum. And now that I have in brief
declared unto you the reasons of calling this Parliament, I should leave it to
my Lord Primat of Ardmagh to be further amplyfied and so to conclude; But in
brief let me put you in mind of some of those great things which his Majesty
has done for us, since his most happy Restoration.

First, Whereas the General Convention of Ireland did by their Commissioners
present unto his Majesty three and twenty humble requests for the welbeing of
Church and Commonwealth in this Kingdom, his Majesty denied them none of their
requests, but either granted them in terminis, or what he did not, his Majesty
referred to his Lords, Justices and Council to grant.

Secondly, when the Convention had all they desired thus granted to them, His
Majesty has held out unto us by his most gracious Declaration much more then
the general Convention of Ireland desired.

Thirdly, His Majesty has left the disposing and distributing of all his Royal
Escheats and forfeited Lands in Ireland, which I am confident are more then all
his Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England have had since the Conquest, to
be distributed by honorable Commissioners, Secundum equum and bonum, which I
pray God they may do to the satisfaction of all Interests; His Majesty has
reserved none of those Lands to himself, no not so as for Forests, Chases,
Parks, or like uses, which he might justly and lawfully do.

Fourthly, his Majesty has been graciously pleased to grant us a Parliament to
begin as on this day, which if that he had denied us, all his Concessions to
the Convention, all his Grants comprised in his Declaration, and that vast and
unparralled Concession of all his forfeited Lands in this Kingdom had fallen to
the ground and come to nothing, for none of those could be settled but by
Parliament, wherein we are to observe the circumstance of time, when our
Parliament was to begin, namely on the very day when the Parliament in England
was to begin, as if his Majesty had an equal care of both Kingdoms, like Royal
Queen Dido, who said to Enaeas, Tros teriusque mihi nullo discrimine agitur, or
did conceive that the Parliament of England could not settle the business of
Ireland, as indeed it cannot.

Fifthly, His Majesty has given us all his Revenue in this Kingdom, certain
and casual, and whatsoever may be called his toward the maintenance and
keeping of the Army in Ireland; this his Majesty could do without a Parliament,
and therefore ex gratia speciali has done it.

Lastly, His Majesty, notwithstanding so great debts contracted by in him
foreign parts abroad during his banishment, has sent us very lately out of
his own private Purse twenty thousand pounds at one time, and thirty thousand
pounds at another time to pay part of the Army for our ease, whereby his people
here might be eased of part of the Charge of the Army, and if his Majesty could
have done more, he would have done it.

Will you know what has been done by the Lords Justices in order to this,
truly it is very fit that you should be made acquainted with it, and therefore
I shall in brief give you an account thereof.

The Army is now modelled according to the establishment sent by his Majesty
out of England; and in order thereunto they have in the first place disbanded
an entire or whole Regiment of Dragoons and Officers.

Secondly, they have reduced forty Troops of Horse to thirty.

Thirdly, the Officers of one hundred and six Foot Companies are reduced to
sixty six.

And lastly, they have disbanded 1650. private soulders which will be a very
great ease to the Country, but I must tell you withal that there are twenty
three months Arrears due to the Army, whereof eight months since his Majesty's
Restoration.

And now it is time for us to recollect our selves, and to consider, Quid
retribuimus; what return shall we make to his Majesty for all this his
goodness, You know whose saying it is; That to whom much is given, from them
much is expected. And now I confess I am at a stand:

His Majesty has given us more then I can express, and forgiven to us more
then I can set forth unto you, But whether he has given or forgiven most I
cannot determine with my self, Only this, That in forgiving he has given, and
if he had not forgiven first, he could not have given, nor were we persons
capable to receive.

Has he not past by the greatest wrongs that could have been committed against
a sacred Majesty, even Rebellion of all sides, which is as the sin of
Witchcraft; Nay has he not rewarded many of his open and known Enemies in a
high measure, to the amazement of the world, and the great regreat of his best
and most Loyal Subjects, Has he not forgiven you these great arreares of rent
due unto him during his banishment, for the payment made by you to usurpers
hands, could be no discharge unto you of what was justly due to the Lord
Paramount, as my Lords the Judges will tell you; All that you have, your Lives
and Estates were very lately at the Kings mercy, and you could not call any
thing your own: If you should give him all you have, you give him but what was
his own before, but his Mercy has triumphed above his Justice, and blessed be
God for it, Therefore let your hearts be enlarged, and remember in due time to
give to our Royal Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and be sure to give unto
God the things that are Gods, Remove all heresies and profaneness out of the
Church for except the Church which is the Pillar of Truth be placed right, the
whole structure will inevitably come to the ground; But I fear that I am
entering upon the Province of another man whose proper work is to enlarge
himself on this subject, and to begin where I leave; I mean my Lord Primate of
Ardmagh, Who is appointed by his Majesty to be Speaker of the House of Peers
pro tempore. Which I shall leave (with the Dismiss of you to your own House to
choose a Speaker) to his Lordship.

FINIS.

