THE HISTORY Of the THREE late famous IMPOSTORS, viz. Padre Ottomano, Mahomed
Bei, andSabatai Sevi. The One, pretended Son and Heir to the late Grand
Signior; The Other, a Prince of the Ottoman Family, but in truth, a Valachian
Counterfeit. And the Last, The Supposed MESSIAH of the Jews, in the Year of the
true Messiah, 1666. With a brief Account of the Ground, and Occasion of the
present War between the TVRK and the VENETIAN. Together with the Cause of the
final Extirpation, Destruction, and Exile of the JEWS out of the EMPIRE of
PERSIA.

In the SAVOY, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Sign of the Anchor in the
Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange. 1669.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY, Lord ARLINGTON, etc. Principal SECRETARY of
STATE.
My Lord,
THESE ensuing Discourses entitle their Original to the noble industry, and
affection to Truth of an Illustrious Person; and to the great and worthy
Ingenuity of a Persian stranger, lately amongst us, from whose mouth I have
received the two following first Narrations, and from whom I have been
abundantly satisfied, that the Particulars are of undoubted Verity. For the
Third and Last, which concerns the Story of that Impudent Jew, it will need
little Analogy; since it proceeds not only from an Eyewitness, but from the
hand of a Person, who has already gratified the Public with the Fruit of many
rare and excellent Observations, and which becomes due to your Lordship upon a
just claim; so as your Lordship having been so pleased with the first Relation,
cannot be less with the following, though I should never have presumed to be
their deferent in this unpolished dress, had I not received some assurances of
your pardon.

It will doubtless appear very strange, that Impostures of this magnitude
should so long abuse the World, were there no other Interest in it than the
vanity of the Persons, who assume to themselves the Titles: Whatever the reason
of it be; Here we have matter of Fact; and it was more than time the World
should at last be disabus'd, which has been so long imposed on, and even
labored under the common Mistake, That, the cause of this obstinate War and
Quarrel 'twixt the Turk and the Venetian was grounded only upon the taking of
Sultan Osmon and his Mother (pretended Son and Wife of Sultan Ibrahim) by the
Galleys of Malta. This was, my Lord, the believed Report at my being at Venice
the very Year this Action fortuned; and it has since gained credit, and filled
our Ears, and all the Histories of this Age, as a thing unquestionable; but,
with what pretense of truth, these Papers will both inform your Lordship, and
give day to some other Passages worthy the Notice of Inquisitive men, and of a
Conjuncture so seasonable for it; while the Eyes and Thoughts of all Europe are
intent upon the success of Candia. What concerns the Valachian Vagrant will be
a service both to His Majesty and other Christian Princes, whom this bold
Impostor has had the front to abuse; but eripitur Persona -- the Mask is now
off, and I have no more to add, than that of being

My Lord, Your Honors Most obedient, obliged, and humble Servant J. E.


To the READER.
THe Great Scaliger was wont commonly to say, Omnis Historia bona, that all
History was good; meaning, that it was worthy of notice, so it were true, and
matter of fact, though the Subject of it were never so trivial. This, though
but a Pamphlet in bulk, is very considerable for the Matters it contains, and
for that it endeavors to inform, and disabuse the World of a current Error,
which has mingled, and spread it self into diverse grave Relations that have
been Printed, and confidently published many Years without Suspicion.

How I came to be enlightened for these Pieces, I have in part declared in my
Dedicatory Addresses; and if I forbear to publish the Name of that Intelligent
Stranger, and that other Person, from whom I received my Informations; You are
to know, that it is not out of fear of being detected of Imposture, whilst we
declare against it, and which cannot serve any Interest of the Relators; but
because, being Strangers, or Itinerants, and one of them upon his return into
his Native Country (which may possibly engage them to pass by Malta, and other
Levantine parts obnoxious to these Discourses) it would appear but ungrateful
in us to expose them to an Inconvenience. Let it suffice to assure you, that
they are Persons of no mean Parts, Ingenuity and Candor; well acquainted with
the Eastern Countries and Affairs, and that have themselves been witnesses of
most of these Transastions.

It were to be wished that our Christian Monarchs had always near them some
dextrous Person of this Gentleman's abilities; were it but to Discover such
Cheates as frequently appearing under the Disguise of Distressed Princes,
Merchants, etc. are, to truth, but Spies, and bold Impostors, and whom
otherwise it is almost impossible to detect; not to suggest the many other good
Offices, as to the Eastern Commerce and Affairs, they might be useful in: But
this is more than I have Commission to say from those who have no other design
in what they Relate, than their Affection to Truth. It is not yet a full Year
since there went a Crafty Varlet about the Country, who pretended himself to
be the Brother of the famous Peter Serini (whose brave and Heroic Actions had
so celebrated him against the Turks) and related a Story by his feigned
Interpreter, how he fortuned to be cast on shore on the West of England, as he
was conducting Supplies from abroad. This he performed with a confidence and
success so happily, as caused him to be received, presented, and assisted (like
another Mahomed Bei) by diverse Persons of Quality, and some of them my nearest
Acquaintance, in his Pretended Journey to Court; But being at last discovered
in a Tipling-house on the Rode, where un-mindful of his Part and Character, he
called for a Pot of Ale in too good English, and a more natural Tone than
became so great a Stranger, and the Person he put on, we heard no more of the
Gamester: I wish our Fin-land Spirit, who is of late dropped out of the Clouds
amongst us, prove not one of his Disciples; for the Age is very fertile; and I
am told, that our Mahomed having received his Ajuda de Costo from the Bounty
and Charity of a great Person of more easy Belief, is slipped aside for fear of
the Porters-Lodge, and yet it is possible you may hear more of him before his
Ramble be quite at a period.

You have at the end of the last Impostor an Account of the Jews Exile out of
that Vast Empire of Persia, happening but the other day; which, together with
the miscarriage of their late Messiah (the Twenty-Fifth Pretender to it (as I
am credibly informed, it stands in their own Records) might, one would think,
at last open the Eyes, and turn the hearts of that obstinate and miserable
People: But whilst the Time not yet Accomplished, I could wish our modern
Enthusiasts, and other prodigious Sects amongst us, who Dream of the like
Carnal Expectations, and a Temporal Monarchy, might seriously weigh how nearly
their Characters approach the Style and Design of these Deluded Wretches, least
they fall into the same Condemnation, and the Snare of the Devil.

ERRATA.
PAge 15, Line 17, Read defide. l. 28 r. dignita, 18. 6. r. Spina Longa, 21 l.
12. r. DETECTED. 24 l. 23, r. Wafer. 30. 14. dele and 58. l. 17. Essendo. l.
21. promessa per gli suoi Profeti e padri nostri. 59. l. 2. r. digjuni. 66. 11.
r. should be wrought. 77 l. 18. r. not only. 85. 22. r. one that (as it was
said. 93. l. 22. r. tenor. 97. 15. dele which, and read it. 99. 7. r. As that.
110. l. 12. r. Cymeterie.

THE HISTORY OF PADRE OTTOMANO, The first Impostor.
SUltan Ibrahim began his Reign in the Year 1049, according to the Turkish
Hegira or Period, which was of our Style Anno 1640. He was about nine years
Emperor, and had born to him (after the first three years) a Son named Mahomed,
who is the present Grand Signior now swaying the Ottoman Scepter: The Halaki or
Great Sultana his Mother (for by that Adjunct of Great she is distinguished
from the rest of that high title) being extremely weak after her delivery,
necessitated them to seek out, and provide a fitting Nurse for the newborn
Infant. But, before we can proceed in the event of that, some other
Circumstances require the Readers attention.

It fortuned that from the Year 1640, to 44 there lived in Constantinople one
Giovanni Iacobo Cesii native of Persia, but descended from a noble Family in
Rome, who, being by profession a Merchant, did use to traffic not only in
this Port, but held commerce likewise in diverse other places of the Levant; so
as being a Man of more than ordinary note, he came at last to be particularly
favored by the Grand Signiors chief Eunuch, whose name was Iumbel Aga,
otherwise called Keslar Agasi, a great Minion of Sultan Murad, who deceasing a
while after, his following Successor confirmed to him his former Charge, which
was to take Care of the Ladies, who were kept in the Seraglio, and
superintended the Women (for so the name imports) nor is the dignity of less
esteem than that of the Vizier himself, within the precincts of the Seraglio;
since it intitules him to the same Access to the Emperor his Lord and Master,
whom he serves as Pimp of honor; if there be any true honor in so vile an
Employment.

This Kefler Aga, Eunuch as he was, and of no denomination for Sex, (for his
Lower-belly was pared as smooth as his Chin,) would for all this, be thoughr a
Lover of Women; not for his ability and furniture; or that he took pleasure in
their Embraces; but because it is the Style of the Country, and a mark of good
breeding and Courtly Grandeur.

It was upon this Occasion that he one day sent for Iacobo Cesii, and desired
that he would search out and purchase for him the most elegant and handsome
Wench he could possibly light upon, amongst such slaves as are daily exposed to
sale in the Turkish Dominions.

The Merchant was not longbe'r he happened upon a very beautiful Creature, of a
modest Countenance, and, as near as could be guessed, a Virgin. He bought her,
and brought her to the Aga, who being extremely taken with her shape and mine,
paid him for her 450 Dollers, which was the Price she was valued at. But this
pretty Girl had, for all her simpering and innocent demeanor, been corrupted,
it seems, before she came to the Eunuch; and after some time that she had been
with him, (for he kept her in a house of his own, and not in the Seraglio)* was
suspected to be with child. Her Lord was wonderful importunate to sift out who
it was that might be the Father of her great belly; but she would by no means
be induced to discover it; which so incensed him, that the Aga forthwith causes
her to be turned out of doors; and thus for some time she remained in
disgrace, though in the house of her Major Damo, to whom he had given her to be
disposed of, till she was at last brought to bed of a goodly Boy.

Some time after the Child was born, the Aga, whether moved with Compassion or
Curiosity, we need not enquire, begins to discover a most passionate desire to
see the little Bastard; which was no sooner brought to him, but being
exceedingly pleased with the Babe, he immediately orders it a rich Vest, and
other fine things to wear, though it was then not above eight or nine months
old; commanding that it should still be kept in his Stewards house, where it
was born.

It fortuned, that not long after was the Birth of the present Turkish
Emperor; and the Great Sultana (as we said) being indisposed, The grand Aga
was sent for to provide a Nurse for the young Prince, that care belonging
likewise particularly to his charge: Immediately the Aga reflects upon his
disgraced Slave, whom he speedily sent for to him, and brought to Court,
(together with her pretty By-blow, the present Padre Ottomano) recommending her
for a Nurse to the Royal Infant, upon which account she stayed near two whole
years in the Seraglio: Sultan Ibrahim (father of the young Prince) during this
time grew so taken with the Nurses Boy, as being much a lovelier CHILD than his
own, that he grew infinitely fonder of him; which so enraged and displeased the
Great Sultana, that being now no longer able to dissemble her Resentment, she
grew in wroth with Ibrahim, and gave a second and more cruel exilement to the
unfortunate Nurse, and her darling Child; whom she banished out of the
Seraglio, and could never after abide the Aga that introduced them.

This violent action of the Sultana made, you may imagine, a foul house in the
Court, and it grew at last to that height, that the Emperor (who took it
greatly to heart, his pretty Favorite should be thus thrown out of the
Seraglio, running one day to the Sultana, he snatches his son out of her arms,
and threw him into a Piscina or large Fountain, which was near them, where he
had like to have been drowned. This passionate and unnatural action of Ibrahim
enraged the Sultana now more then ever against the Aga, so as she sought all
occasions possible to put him to death, as imputing the illnature of her Lord
the Emperor to some wicked impressions of his Favorite; but chiefly, for his
bringing the fair Slave and her Bastard into the Seraglio.

The continual hatred and machinations of the G. Sultana caused the Aga to
consult his safety; and besides, he was not a little apprehensive of the
capricious and unconstant humor of Ibrahim, who being of a weak complexion and
understanding, he feared might in time be wrought upon by the Sultana to
destroy him; and therefore makes suit to the Emperor that he would permit him
to go on Pilgrimage to Mecha, since Absence might possibly mitigate her fury;
and for that he was now grown aged, and less capable of doing him service in
his charge, which he desired he would give him leave to resign.

But Ibrahim, finding him by long experience to be a discreet Person, and one
that had faithfully served the Emperor his Brother, would by no means hearken
to his Request, or permit him to go from him; since as the constitution of the
Seraglio stands, That had been to have for ever deprived him of a Servant, whom
he so dearly loved. For you are to understand, that whoever obtains leave to go
that holy Pilgrimage, is ipso facto made free; No Eunuch belonging to the
Seraglio (being Slaves of honor to the Grand Signior) can obtain his Liberty,
but by the Emperors especial Grace; which also entitles him to a certain
Annual Pension, arising from the Revenue of Grand Cairo, set apart for such
Rewards: And for this reason it was, that Ibrahim was very unwilling to part
with his Eunuch: However, being vanquished at last with his continual
importunity, and for that it was upon condition, that notwithstanding the
Custom^ and Style of the Seraglio in such Cases, he should go but as his slave,
and having performed his Devotion, return to him again, and to the Office which
he would have resigned; he grants him his Request. Upon this stipulation he
dismisses his Favorite, and the Eunuch prepares for his Journey in the Caravan
of Alexandria; the Grand Signior having at that time never a Man of War in the
Port.

The whole Fleet consisted of but Eight Vessels, whereof Giafer commanded the
first, Mahumed the second, Arab Ogli the third, (this Arab O^li was Pa^tner
with the above-named Gio Iacobo Cesii) Cura Mahumed commanded the fourth, Memi
the fifth, Bodur the sixth, Nicola a Christian the seventh; and Ian^ another
Christian Captain the eighth, who brought up the rear: These being ready to set
Sail, the Aga embarkes with his Family, and whole Equipage (amongst which was
his beautiful Slave, and her little Son) in the first Ship, whereof, as we
said, Giafer was Commander: And now directing their course toward Alexandria,
they touched a while at Scio (an Island in the Archipelago) where lingering
some little time, they happened to meet with a certain Dominican Friar (well
beloved of the chief of the Country) whom, for a former prevarication with them
in matter of Religion, they would needs have constrained to abjure his Faith,
and become a Turk; which the Religious Man refusing to do, the cruel Eunuch
caused him to be immediately burnt alive: This was in the Year 1644.

Loosing from Scio, they were surpised with a dismal Tempest, which caused
them to put in at Rhodes, where they were likewise forced to continue for some
days ever they durst adventure out; But at last pursuing their intended Voyage
from thence (being now about 15 Leagues distant from Rhodes) they discover six
Galleys: It fortuned to be a great Calm, and yet they were hardly within Ken,
so as to distinguish what they were; yet supposing they might be the Galleys of
Bailer (who are certain Turkish Guardians of the Archipelago) that were making
toward them, they seemed not to be so much concerned: But when a little after
they came to find their Mistake, and that they belonged to Malta, they were
strangely surpised, and in great confusion what to resolve on; for diverse
Vessels of their company were so dispersed, by reason of the calm, that they
could not possibly join them ^or want of VVind. This happened upon the Tenth of
May, in the Year 1644.

Well, for all this, the Aga resumes courage, prepares for the Conflict; and
upon their approach, begins bravely to defend himself. The Fight continues for
some time very fiercely on either part, and not without mutual loss; till by an
unlucky Broadside from one of the Malta-Gallies, the Eunuch receives a
Canonade on his breast, which dashed him into the Sea; and at the same instant,
there was also fallen dead the fair Sciabas, (for so was that female Slave
named, a Russe by Nation, and Mother of our Padre Ottomano) without any mark or
wound, or so much as the least bruise to be found, which made diverse believe
she died of very fright and apprehension; and with these perished likewise
diverse others in that Vessel; upon which the rest immediately struck Sail, and
submitted to Mercy.

The Maltezes now boarding their Prizes, and seeing so many Women, Eunuchs, and
other Passengers (for as we recounted, one of these Vessels was wholly taken up
by the Aga, and his Domestics) asked, What pretty Child that was? the
distracted People, partly out of terror, and happily, upon hope of better
quarter, tell them, that he was the Son of Sultan Ibrahim going to Meca to be
Circumcised. Greatly pleas^d with their success, they set Sail immediately for
Malta, where the hopes of their fancied Prize had so far exalted them, that
they soon noys'd it over all Christendom, that they had taken the Grand
Signiors Son, and the Sultana his Mother, with many like stories which passed
about the World for current, and it gained credit, and was indeed generally
believed by themselves: Nay, the whole College, and Religion of Malta were so
elated and possessed with the conceit of it, that they began seriously to
consult of proposing an Exchange for Rhodes, which had been their ancient Seat,
and which they almost made themselves as good as sure of.

The Great Master, and the Grand Croci were absolutely of th^s Opinion; and did
thereupon write Letters to Constantinople, to Smyrna, and to several other
places and correspondences, to certify where they might find their young
Prince, and his Mother, provided they would come up to their Conditions. For
though she were dead in the Combat, yet it seems they had either dressed up a
Property to Personate her amongst the She-slaves that were taken, or willing to
have it believed so, and both her own, and the Portrait of her young Son, were
Painted to the life, and familiarly sold in Italy and France, for the better
confirmation of this Belief: But after long expectations, receiving no Answer
to their satisfaction, they begin to be in some doubt, and could not well
divine what to make of it, and whether they were not all this while deluded of
their Boast, and entertained in suspense to abuse them; for so it appears they
were to the very Year 1649. But how far this contributed to the Quarrel with
the Venetians, whom they unexpectedly surpised soon after, will be made appear
by the Sequel.

It was in this Year that the Person who gives us this Information (returning
from Rome, where he had finished his Studies in the College De Propaganda
Fide) into his Native Country of Persia, happened in his Journey to arrive at
Malta; where making some stay, he came to be known to diverse of the Order, and
principal Persons there; as namely to the Treasurer, several of the Grand
Croci, to the Great Master himself, the Commandator, the General of the
Galleys, and most of the Nobility there. The Grand Master was then Johannes
Lascaris, the Grand Commandator, Monsieurde la Hell, the General Monsieur de
Beauchamp, etc. to omit the rest. These enter into a Solemn Consultation, what
was to be done to fifth out the truth, and value of their Prize; that is, to
know whether the Child were indeed Sultan Ibrahims Son or no; And finding this
Person, as they conceived, a fit Instrument for their Purpose, as being well
experienced in the Turkish Language, and the Customs of their Country, and for
some other Relations of his at the Port, and one who had given them good Marks
of his capacity and faithfulness, they resolve to dispatch him forthwith to
Constantinople, accompanied only with three or four Turkish Slaves, who had
redeemed themselves, and with Instructions to their Envoye how the Design was
to be managed.

Signior Pietro (for so we will now call him) Sails from Malta, arrives at
Constantinople; makes Friends in the Seraglio; enquires with all the sedulity
imaginable, Whether any Child of the Grand Signiors were missing? and whether
it were true, that the Hasaki, or Great Sultana, had some years since been
lost, or taken by the Maltezes in her Pilgrimage toward Mecha? etc. But after
all the diligence he could possibly make, he could never discover any
likelihood, or so much as shadow of it: In sum, he finds there was not a
syllable of it true; and that the Religion of Malta had all the while but
abused themselves in their Credulity, and all Christendom in the Report of it.
Pietro writes back to the Religion, and assures them by many indubitable
Evidences, nay Oaths and Affidavit's, which he had procured, and several other
Effects of his diligence, that it was all Imposture, and that they ought to
give credit to the Romance no longer, or hope for the least advantage by it:
This was in the Year 1650; for so long, and somewhat longer it was, ever they
would be dis-abus'd: And now at last they begin to defend themselves, and by
little and little to let their boasting dye, and to neglect any farther
Ceremony to their pretended Royal Captive; In short, they now grew very cold,
hardly made any more account of him; Yet so, that having for a long time abused
the World, as ashamed at their credulity, and to prevent reproach, they
continually endeavored to have it still thought true; and therefore gave the
Boy the Title of Ottomano, which he wears to this day, Non per dignitatem
(says our ingenious Informer) ma per la vanita.

This is the true and real History of the so much talk'd-of Padre Ottomano, and
consequently of that groundless and vulgar Opinion, which has been spread so
long about, that this Accident alone was the only sourse and cause of the
Grand Signiors Quarrel with the Venetians, but of which there is so little
appearance; the Interest of that Republic, being so different from that of the
Maltezes, who are Sworn never to be at Peace with those Miscreants; whilst the
Venetians, on the contrary, were in a profound, and un-interrupted League with
them.

It is indeed commonly pretended, that contrary to a stipulation with the Grand
Signior, the Venetians had protected the Knights of Malta, after this Exploit
of Surprising the Sultana and her Son, going with an infinite Treasure to
Mecha; but the truth is, finding no occasion to Commence the War upon this
suggestion, they give out another, and which is believed was the more real
ground of it.

In the reign of Sultan Amorat, there were destroyed and burnt by the Venetians
no less than five and twenty Fusti Barbaresche, or Barbary Galleys, who were
Rovers and Pirates upon those seas, and greatly infested the Commerce; These
they attaqu'd in the Port of Avelona, demolishing withal their Castle:
Complaint hereof being made to Morud, he was provoked to declare War against
them as the first Aggressors; though in truth this had been no violation of any
Article between them: However, upon their earnest instigation, Amurat seems
highly to resent the Affront, as done against his Allies; Hereupon the
Venetians offer to give them two Galeasses in satisfaction, and to pay for all
the loss which they had sustained. But in this interim the Grand Signior
engaged in the War at Babylon, dies soon after his return, and leaves the
Quarrel to his Brother Isruhim; who, insensed also somewhat more for the
Vessels that were destroyed, upon the neck as it were of this, by the Maltezes,
when Padre Ottomano was taken by them, and his Favorite Aga slain (his Design,
which was first against the Maltezes failing) without the least pretense of
renewing his Predecessors qua^rel with the Venetians, or declaring any formal
War) with a Fleet of near 500 sail, he Lands an Army of Threescore thousand
Men near the City Canea, and in little time became Master of that, and of the
whole Kingdom beside; Candia the Metropolis, Spina Songa, Carbusa, Suda, and
some very few Posts more excepted, and leaves the pursuit of this War to his
Son Mahomed, who has continued it to this present day. By what Accident the
Maltezes contributed to the fatal rousing of this immane Lion we have seen, but
without the least appearance of intituling it to the Merit of this
supposititious Child and his Mother, upon which yet it is so vulgarly and so
weakly founded.

But what may farther elucidate the utter impossibility of Padre Ottomano's
Title, as Heir to that Family, it is notoriously known, that the last Emperor of
the Turks (Father to the Sulran now Reigning) never had but three Sons; that
the present Grand Signior was always the Eldest; and that the other two (by an
extraordinary Effect of their Brothers goodnature, or Address of the present
Valadir or Do^ager) are still living in the Seraglio, out of whose precincts
they are never allowed to stir abroad, but in company of the Grand Signior, and
under the strictest guard: Next, that no Prince of the Ottoman blood, or the
Sultana her self, does ever Travel to any place whatsoever out of the Palace,
but when the Emperor goes himself in Person. This being so, how probable and
likely it is, he should hazard the Great Sultana, and the Heir of the Crown in
a weak and ordinary Caravan, with so small an Equipage, and so little
concernment for their loss, as never so much as to treat about their Release,
etc. let any rational Man determine upon mature consideration, and prospect of
the Circumstances.

Besides, as our Intelligence argues and assures us, those of Malta are so
insatiably covetous, that if they could sell even the very Maltezes themselves,
they would not stick to make Money of them; and that it is familiar with these
Holy Corsaires, to spoil all the Oriental Christians, without distinction, who
come in their way; neither regarding their Faith, nor their Profession: So as
when ever they surprise any miserable Slaves, who for the diead of torment have
been forced to turn Renegadoes; but would now most cheerfully revert to their
Faith again; the Maltezes will not hearken to them, but sell them a second time
to the Turks, to satisfy their prodigious Avarice: How much more then (as our
Informer concluded) had it been to their Advantage, to have sold this pretended
Royal Boy, being a natural Turk; than to have suffered him to become a
Christian? But they reserved him upon furture hopes, and when they perceived
that fail them, to rid their hands of the Expense of the mock-state, they had
so long been at, and yet to preserve their Reputation, make out their Boast,
and credit their Religion; they find a pretense of sending him to be bred in
Italy, and now suffer him to be made a Dominican Friar forsooth, under the
Pompous Title of PADRE OTTOMANO.

THE STORY OF MAHOMED BEI, Who calls Himself Ioannes Michael Cigala; Being at
the Writing hereof in the COURT of ENGLAND; Where this Second Impostor was
first DELATED.
THe better to acquaint our Reader with the successful Impudence of this famous
Impostor, he is to understand, that this Rodomontade had lately published a
Book, at his being not longsince in France, to which he had procured the French
Kings License, with all the Formalities of it, which he Intitles, The History
of Mahomet Bei, or John Michel de Cigala, Prince of the Imperial Blood of the
Ottomans; to which he annexes other his Dignities, Bassa and Sovereign
Plenipotentiary of Jerusalem, and of the Kingdom of Cyprus, Trebizond, etc.
Dedicated to the French King with a Front of steel.

In this Treatise, or rather Romance of his Knight-errantry, he sums up the
Antiquity of the Family of Cigala, which he extracts out of several grave and
sober Authors; Intituling it to most of the Royal Houses and Crown'd-Heads of
Europe; making himself at last to be descended from Scipio, Son of the famous
Vicount de Cigala, who was taken Prisoner by the Turks Anno 1561, after that
signal Battle and Victory of the great Andrea^ Oria. This Scipio, being now a
Captive with his Father, and persuaded to renounce the Faith, was, as he
pretends, advanced to the Dignity and Charge of Grand Vizier, by Solomon the
Magnificent, under the new name of Sinan Bassa; after that honor, he was made
prime Aga, or Generalissimo of the Ianizaries; then Seraschier or General of
the whole Army; sometimes higher, and sometimes lower; and at last again First
Vizier, and Second Bassa of the Port, and had above all this preferred to him
in Marriage several great Ladies, whom he names, and amongst the rest, Canou
Salie Sultana, daughter of Sultan Achmet, sister of Osman, and Sultan Amurad
(who took Babyl^n) and of Ibrahim father to the Emperor now reigning.

From this illustrious Mother our Bei deriving himself, he goes on to relate
the Story of his Princely Education under the Mufti, and of the strange and
prodigious Accidents that advanced him first to Tephlici or Viceroy of the
Holy Land, where we have the miraculous Dream and Vision, and the assistance of
the good Hermit, and his own Christian Physician, by which he became converted
to the Faith, and diverted from his Sacrilegious purpose of plundering the
Chapels of the Holy Sepulchers in Jerusalem of the Silver Lamps, and other
sacred Treasure, which he reports to be there in great abundance; but that
still dissembling his Profession, he got to be advanced to the Government of
Cyprus, etc. Here he acquaints the Reader how he came to be made absolute
Commander of all the Forces designed against Candy; and that being of the first
who entered that City, he privately heard, and assisted at Mass, delivered many
Christian Slaves, etc. Hence, after two years Gallantry, and notorious
Exploits, (which no man ever heard of but himself) the succeeding Emperor
constituted him Sovereign of Babylon, Caramania, Magnesia, and diverse other
ample Territories. In his Journey about these Governments another Miracle
confirms him at Iconium, by the wonderful Iuster of an enclosed Host, in which
a splendid Child appeared through the Chest or Cabinet of a certain Christian
Woman that had procured and locked up a consecrated Water, for fear of her
jealous and unbelieving Husband; to this adding the Phenomenon of no less than
nine extraordinary and refulgent Stars, which appeared for diverse nights over a
place where certain Christians had lately been Martyred. Coming back from
Iconium to Candy a second time, he communicates his resolution of openly
declaring his Conversion, and consequently of quitting his high Employments:
But the poor Jesuit (his Ghostly Father) unhappily dies before it could be
accomplished, and so, as Fate would have it, does that other intimate Confident
of his designs, Lazaro Moccenigo, the Venetian General. Upon this disaster our
illustrious Bei conveys himself again to Constantinople, where he is made
Viceroy of Trabisond, and Generalissimo of the Black Sea in order to his
purposed retreat. Upon the confines of this it was, that he trusts a vast
Treasure of Jewels, etc. to a great Person whom he had Redeemed out of Slavery
from the Tartars, and dispatched before him into Moldavia, which was the
Rendezvous agreed upon, and where he had appointed to meet him upon the first
opportunity of totally renouncing the Grand Signiors Service, to declare
himself the Christian, which he had hitherto but disguised. Chamonsi (for so
was this Confidents name) in stead of receiving his Friend and Benefactor at
the place designed, plotted with the Governor of Moldavia to have perfidiously
surprised and slain him; but our Don Herchio Bei, after wondrous proofs of his
valor, and giving death to almost all that opposed him, escapes their hands,
though extremely wounded; In this plight, he meets with a poor Shepherd, with
whom he changes his Princely Robes for the Shepherds Gray Coat, and travels on
his ten-toes a tedious and unknown way for many days together. In this
unfortunate Encounter it was that he lost his faithful Counselor, another
Jesuit, and all his glorious Retinue, who were every one of them killed upon
the Spot, save one poor honest Jew, and in this lamentable condition came our
devout Prince on Foot, and in the Snow to the Cossaque Army, then in hostility
against the Muscovite, amongst whom he found three Soldiers that he had
formerly freed from Turkish Captivity. These were the first who made his
Quality known to their Chief, by whom he was civilly treated, and p^^swaded to
honor Muscovy with his intended Baptism: But our Prince designing from the
beginning to make his solemn Profession at Rome, and receive that Sacrament
from his Holiness's own hands, the Captain being, it seems, a Schismatic, and
of another Church, neglects and despises him, whom he had hitherto so
generously treated. Upon this the Prince steals secretly away from the
Cossaques, and by the assistance of another virtuous Jew, (who likewise knew
him) he at last got safe into Poland, where the then Queen, Lovize de
Gonzagues, hearing the report of his approach, and illustrious quality,
receives him (as himself relates it) with infinite respect; and, in fine,
prevails with him to honor the Cathedral of Warsovia with his Baptism, which
is performed by the Archhishop of the place, the Queen her self standing at the
Font, and giving the name of John, to our Cosen German of the Ottoman
Emperor: Here we have a Relation of the extraordinary Pomp of that Ceremony,
as well as of that of his Confirmation which dignified him with another Name.

Taking now leave of Warsovia he travels toward Lauretto in Pilgrimage to our
Lady; From thence he goes to Rome; at first ^ncognito, making himself known
on^^^ to (...) Sa^ctity, with a brief recapitulation of his ^^ventures. This
was to Alexander (...) VIIth, whose Benediction (...), he returns into Poland
again to (...) and pay his duty to his Royal God-mother. In this journey he was
known to diverse great Persons traveling through Germany, especially to the
famous N. Serini, and this being at a time when the Emperor was at difference
with the Turk, our Hero could not but show some marks of his Courage, and
affection to the Cause he had espoused, which he now signalizes, in not only
offering himself a Voluntier, but by fighting hand to hand with the Turkish
General himself, whom he killed upon the Spot before both the Armies,
performing other stupendous Exploits, which would have seemed incredible had
not himself related it.

For this, and other his egregious services, his Imperial Majesty after a
thousand Caresses and Presents of infinite value, creates him Captain Guardian
of his Artillery, and it is a wonder how he escaped the Golden Fleece. But
nothing of all this would prevail with him to stay longer at Vienna. For the
Peace being now concluded, he returns incognito to Lauretta again, thence makes
an excursion into Sicily to visit some Aliances and great kindred, which he had
living there. Excessive are the Complements and Presents which he received from
the great Princes of Germany and Italy in this Progress. Arrived in Sicily, Don
Pedro d' Arragon receives and treats him in his Palace, and the whole City of
Messina meet and attend him, acknowledging him of the illustrious house of the
Cigala's, from which that Country had, it seems, received many great Benefits.
From Sicily he passes through Calabria toward Rome again, visiting diverse of
his Friends and Kindred in the way, and arriving at Naples has done him the
same honors of the Viceroy and Nobility there, and so by Sea imbarks for Rome,
into which he now makes his public Entry, and obtained Audience accordingly of
Clement the IXth, before whom in a bravado he draws and flourishes his dreadful
Cimeter, in token of his defiance of the Enemies of the Church. Here it is you
have him received, and presented by the Pope, the Nephew, the Cardinals,
Ambassadors, and in sum by all the Nobility of this Mistress of the World;
till resolving to bless France with his Presence, touching a little at Venice
and Turino, he at last arrives at Paris, where he was received of that great
Monarch, who no sooner hears of his Arrival, but he forthwith commands the Duke
of St. Agnan with Coaches and an Equipage suitable to this princely Guest, and
to introduce this glorious stranger. The King receives him according to his
high Quality, so nearly related to his ancient Allie the Turk; and so does
Monsieur the Dauphin, his Altess-Royal, and all the Grandees of that Court, not
forgetting the Grand Prior, and to be sure, the Knights of Malta, etc. a Palace
being assigned him, and at last a Present made him, no less than two Chains of
Gold (they should have been doubtless something else) with the King and Queens
Effigies Medalized at his taking leave of that Kingdom.

Thus far goes the printed Relation of our Errant, I had almost said, Recreant
Knight, with the Elogies Latin and French, which prepare the Reader for the
Wonders and Adventures of his Life.

But now if upon Examination of all this Geer and enormous Rhapsody, we take
the boldness to deplume our Gallant of his mutuatitious and borrowed Feathers;
and that our Ottoman Prince, who has braved it so long and so successfully
amongst the Birds of Feather, shall prove at last but a Iack-daw.

Spectatum admissirisum teneatis, amici? This impudent Vagabond then, and
pretended Mahound Bei, that has indeed abused the French King, and believed he
should have done the same to his Majesty of England, is in fine a Natives of
Walachia, born of Christian Parents in the City of Trogovisti: They were
formerly very opulent and well to pass, and his Father in good esteem with the
Prince Matthias Vaivoda of Moldavia. His Father dying, our pretended Cigala was
taken into the Service of the Prince, as his Father had been before him, and
sent in the Retinue of his Resident to Constantinople about twenty years since;
After some time spent there, he returns into his Country, where he grew
intimately acquainted with a married Priest (as in that place they are
permitted to be) and made love to his Wife; but the Woman, the better to color
and conceal the familiarity and courtship that was between them, makes her
Husband believe he had a kindness for her daughter, and in so honorable and
decent a way, that the simple man believes her, and entertaining him more like
a Domestique now than a Lover, suffers him even to govern his little Family.
But it seems our rampant Amoroso could not so govern himself, but the Priest
began to suspect and discover his Villainy; for either he did, or would have
lain with both Mother and Daughter.

Upon this he is complained of to the Vaivoda, who sought all means possible to
have apprehended and executed him according to their Law; and that not only for
this his Inhospitable Crime; but for sundry other most notorious delicts and
misdemeanors, of which he had been formerly convicted. But, it seems, having
timely notice of it, he gets away again to Constantinople, where he remained
till the decease of Prince Matthias, after which he comes back impudently into
Walacria again, thinking all had been now forgotten, and that by some Address
or other, he might procure to be received amongst the Great men of his
Country; but when upon some Attempts that he made, he perceived they had
discovered who he was, and would have laid hold on him, and chastised him for
his former Insolences; to Constantinople he retires a third time, where
despairing after a while of his designs at home, he makes himself Turk, and
turns perfect Renegado.

Since these Exploits he has ranged from place to place about Christendom, and
in Countries where he was wholly unknown, with that specious story, or rather
monstrous Imposture of his being so nearly related to the present Grand
Signior, and the dignities and charges he has quitted for the love of Christ;
by which he has rom'd about the World, been caressed and really presented by
diverse great Persons, and especially by the French King, etc. With this
Confidence and Expectation he came lately into England, had the forehead to
present himself, and the Legend of his Life to his Majesty. Frequented the
Court in his Ottoman Garb and Eastern-mode, till a Person of Great Quality, who
had seen him the Last year at Vienna in Austria (where he durst pretend to
nothing of all this) del^ted the Imposture, and a Persian Gentleman lately a
Stranger, and by mere accident here at that time, confirms this Relation of
him, from whose mouth we received it, together with this Account of the
illustrious Family of the Cigala, which with a few Reflections upon some
Passages of the Pamphlet we mentioned (which does abundantly discover this
audacious Hypocrite) shall dispatch this second Impostor.

SINEN BASSA otherwise called CIGALA, had but two sons, Grandchildren of Sultan
Soliman: The Eldest son of Sinen was named Alii; the second Mahomed: Alii
deceased after his Father. Sinen a little since, and the second remained alive.
This Mahomed married the Sisters daughter of Sultan Mahomed about the year of
their Hegira 1003 and of our Era 1594 of which Daughter he had born a son
called also Mahomed after the Name of his Father. This Youth was of a singular
good disposition, ingenious, and of a sprit-full Wit, without great Ambition,
or affecting of Command, but add^cted rather to the sof^er pleasures of life,
and was in sum, the Darling both of Sultan Mahomet, and Achmet, and indeed of
all that succe^ded in the Empire to the Reign of Sultan Mahomed Han the present
Grand Signior, who called him Gioran Capuci Pasha, a Title the Emperor usually
bestows on those who are dignified with the Office of secret Porters of the
Seraglio, and whose charge it is to attend upon all extraordinary Occasions,
and that are sometimes dispatched to cut off the Head of a Vizier, or Bassa,
and such signal Executions.

This Capuci Pasha we find afterward made General in Candia, and by degrees
ascended to be Grand Vizier, but he enjoys not that honor long; for he died in
that War about fifteen or sixteen years since.

This is what we can yet discover concerning Sinen, otherwise, Cigala. But
there is indeed besides This, another very noble Family of the Cigala's about
Scio: Who are, it is believed, a Branch of the Race of the Genoveses, and who
are at present called at Scio, Cigal Ogli, which imports as much to say as son
of Cigali, or sons of Meni Pasha C^gala.

This Meni Pasha had two sons that arrived both to be Bassa's and Captains of
Galleys; One of which was called Beker Pasha, the other Holein Bassa. Beker
died some while since, and Holein is yet, I suppose, living: It is not believed
that our Impostor Mahomed Bei is brother to Holein, as he somewhere boasts
himself; because it is against all appearance of truth; Neither is it probable,
that though some of the Cigali might be Merchants, that therefore any of them
should go into Ch^istendom to change their Religion, and renounce a Government
so great and glorious as that of being sole Moderator of the whole Ottoman
Empire (for to no less does this Impost^r pretend) without that ever we should
hear of it but from his own Trumpet. If conjecture may be admitted in this
case, how this Braggadocio comes to assume the name of Cigala, it is possible
his Fathers name may be found to have been Cigo; which founding near that of
Cigala, might prompt him to usurp the Title of that Illustrious House.

There are innumerable Instances throughout his Legend which fall under the
same suspicion; some whereof are notorious Falsities, diverse of them
Incongruous and contradictory; and if there were no other than that of his
egregious ignorance in the Turk^sh Language (which he pretends to be his
Maternal Tongue, but blatters very imperfectly) besides his gross unskilfulness
in the Ottoman Court and Oriental Affairs, it were sufficient to disabuse the
World, and to brand him for a most impudent Impostor.

Some Passages out of his Book animadverted.
Page 14. That the Vicount Cigala dying in Constantinople in the time of his
Captivity, his funeral was openly solemnized by permission of Solomon; his
Corpse publicly carried through the Town with the Cross and HolyWater,
followed and accompanied by all the Ambassadors of Christian Princes then at
the Port, and all the Religious Orders of the City to the Church of Saint
Francis, where he was interred according to the Forms of Christian Burial;
Almost every particular of which carries a notorious Confutation, as all who
understand any thing of that time and place do well know.

Page 1. Selim made Cipio Cigala Vizier, and second Bassa of the Port: Consider
if this were likely, that being a descent; and

Page 21. Whether to be Captain Bassa be a greater honor than to be Prime
Vizier?

Page 45. Whether the Grand Signior uses to permit any Officer to suspend
Execution, or use Ceremony in decollation, when he is the highest incensed?

Page 58. Whether there be any such Treasures of Plate, etc. and other precious
things among the poor Friars at the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem.

Page 86. Whether the Turks make use of any Christian Physicians?

Page 90. Whether the War with (...) Venetian was only for the surprising of
Ibrahims eldest son by the Knights of Malta with the Sultana his Mother, as she
went to have him Circumcised at Meca? which we have already confuted?

Page 112. It Is to be considered how timely he makes his two Jesuits and
Maccenigo die, the chief and only authentic testimonies of his Conversion
and pretended Exploits.

Page 150. That this happens to be known by none save two or three poor slaves,
and as many Jews, neither of which appear with him.

Page 167. That he produces not his Story 'till after the death of both the
Queen of Poland his God-mother, and, I suppose, the Archbishop too, who he
pretends to have baptized him.

Page 167. The Captain Guardianship of the Emperors Artillery, is, (as we are
informed) no more than Master of the Carriages, which is all he had to produce
here for his grand Diploma, without a Word of any thing else to the purpose of
the rest of his high Pretenses.

THE HISTORY OF SABATAI SEVI, The Pretended Messiah of the Jews, In the Year
of our Lord, 1666. The Third Impostor.
ACcording to the Predictions of several Christian Writers, especially of such
who Comment on the Apocalypse, or Revelations, this Year of 1666 was to prove a
Year of Wonders, of strange Revolutions in the World, and particularly of
Blessing to the Jews, either in respect of their Conversion to the Christian
Faith, or of their Restoration to their Temporal Kingdom: This Opinion was so
dilated, and fixed in the Countries of the Reformed Religion, and in the Heads
of Phanatical Enthusiasts, who Dreamed of a Fifth Monarchy, the downfall of the
Pope, and Antichrist, and the Greatness of the Jews: In so much, that this
subtle People judged this Year the time to stir, and to fit their Motion
according to the season of the Modern Prophe^ies; whereupon strange Reports
flew from place to place, of the March of Multitudes of People from unknown
parts into the remote Deserts of Arabia, supposed to be the Ten Tribes and
half, lost for so many Ages. That a Ship was arrived in the Northern parts of
Scotland with her Sails and Cordage of Silk, Navigated by Mariners who spoke
nothing but Hebrew; with this Motto on their Sails, The Twelve Tribes of
Israel. These Reports agreeing thus near to former Predictions, put the wild
sort of the World into an expectation of strange Accidents, this year should
produce in reference to the Jewish Monarchy.

In this manner Millions of People were possessed, when Sabatai Sevi first
appeared at Smyrna, and published himself to the Jews for their Messiah,
relating the greatness of their approaching Kingdom, the strong hand whereby
God was about to deliver them from Bondage, and gather them from all parts of
the World. It was strange to see how the fancy took, and how fast the report of
Sabatai and his Doctrine flew through all parts where Turks and Jews
inhabited; the latter of which were so deeply possessed with a belief of their
new Kingdom, and Riches, and many of them with promotion to Offices of
Government, Renown, and Greatness, that in all parts from Constantinople to
Buda (which it was my fortune that year to Travel) I perceived a strange
transport in the Jews, none of them attending to any business unless to wind
up former negotiations, and to prepare themselves and Families for a Journey to
Jerusalem: All their Discourses, their Dreams, and disposal of their Affairs
tended to no other Design but a re-establishment in the Land of Promise, to
Greatness, Glory, Wisdom, and Doctrine of the Messiah, whose Original, Birth,
and Education are first to be recounted.

Sabatai Sevi was Son of Mordechai Sevi, an Inhabitant, and Natural of Smyrna,
who gained his Livelihood by being Broaker to an English Merchant in that
place; a person, who before his death was very decrepit in his Body, and full
of the Gout, and other Infirmities, but his Son Sabatai Sevi addicting himself
to Study, became a notable Proficient in the Hebrew and Metaphysics; and
arrived to that point of Sophistry in Divinity and Metaphysics, that he vented
a New Doctrine in their Law, drawing to the Profession of it so many Disciples,
as raised one day a Tumult in the Synagogue; for which afterward he was by a
Censure of the Cho^hams (who are Expounders of the Law) banished the City.

During the time of his Exile, he ^ravelled to Thessalonica, now called
Salonica, where he Married a very handsome Woman; but either not having that
part of Economy as to govern a Wife, or being Importent toward Women, as was
pretended, or that she found not favor in his Eyes, she was divorced from him:
Again, he took a second Wife, more beautiful then the former, but the same
causes of discontent raising a difference between them, he obtained another
Divorce from this Wife also. And being now free from the Encumbrances of a
Family, his wandering Head moved him to Travel through the Morea, thence to
Tripoli in Syria, Gaza, and Jerusalem; and by the way picked up a Ligernese
Lady, whom he made his third Wife, the Daughter of some Polonian or German, her
Original and Parentage not being very well known. And being now at Jerusalem he
began to Reform the Law of the Jews, and Abolish the Fast of Tamnz (which
they keep in the Month of June) and there meeting with a certain Jew called
Nathan, a proper Instrument to promote his Design; he communicated to him his
Condition, his Course of Life, and Intentions, to Proclaim himself Messiah of
the World, so long expected and desired by the Jews. This Design took
wonderfully with Nathan; and because it was thought necessary according to
Scripture, and Ancient Prophesies, that Elias was to precede the Messiah, as
St. John Baptist was the forerunner of Christ: Nathan thought no man so proper
to Act the Part of the Prophet as himself; and so no sooner had Sabatai
declared himself the Messiah, but Nathan discovers himself to be his Prophet,
forbiding all the Fasts of the Jews in Jerusalem; and declaring, that the
Bridegroom being come, nothing but Joy, and Triumph ought to dwell in their
Habitations; Writing to all the Assemblies of the Jews, to persuade them to
the same belief.

And now the Schism being begun, and many Jews really believing what they so
much desired, Nathan took the courage and boldness to Prophecy, That one Year
from the 27th of Kislen, (which is the month of June) the Messiah shall appear
before the Grand Signor, and take from him his Crown, and lead him in Chains
like a Captive.

Sabatai also at Gaza Preached Repentance to the Jews, and Obedience to
Himself and Doctrine, for that the coming of the Messiah was at hand: which
Novelties so Affected the Jewish Inhabitants of those parts, that they gave up
themselves wholly to their Prayers, Alms, and Devotions; and to confirm this
belief the more, it happened, that at the same time that News hereof, with all
perticulars were dispatched from Gaza, to acquaint the Brethren in Foreign
Parts: The Rumor of the Messiah has flown so swift, and gained such
reception, that Intelligence came from all Parts and Countries where the Jews
inhabit, by Letters to Gaza, and Jerusalem, Congratulating the happiness of
their Deliverance, and expiration of the time of their Servitude, by the
Appearance of the Messiah. To which they adjoined other Prophesies, relating to
that Dominion the Messiah was to have over all the World: that for Nine Months
after he was to disappeare; during which time the Jews were to suffer, and
many of them to undergo Martyrdom: but then returning again Mounted on a
Caelestial Lion, with his Bridle made of Serpents with seven heads, accompanied
with his Brethren the Jews, who Inhabited on the other side of the River
Sabation, he should be acknowledged for the Sole Monarch of the Universe* and
then the Holy Temple should descend from Heaven already built, framed, and
beautified, wherein they should offer Sacrifice for ever.

And here I leave you to consider, how strangely this Deceived People was
Amused, when these Confident, and vain Reports, and Dreams of Power, and
Kingdoms, had wholly transported them from the ordinary course of their Trade,
and Interest.

This noise and rumor of the Messiah, having begun to fill all places, Sabatai
Sevi resolved to Travel toward Smyrna, the Country of his Nativity; and thence
to Constantinople the Capital City, where the principal Work of Preaching was
to have been performed: Nathan thought it not fit to be long after him, and
therefore Travels by the way of Damascus, where resolving to continue some time
for better Propagation of this Nes Doctrine; in the mean while Writes this
Letter to Sabatai Sevi, as follows.

22. Kesvan of this YEAR.
To the King, our King, Lord of our Lords, who gathers the Dispersed of Israel,
who Redeems our Captivity, the Man elevated to the height of all sublimity, the
Messiah of the God of Jacob, the true Messiah, the Celestial Lion, Sabatai
Sevi, whose Honor be exalted, and his Dominion raised in a short time, and for
ever, Amen. After having kissed your hands, and swept the Dust from your Feet,
as my Duty is to the King of Kings, whose Majesty be exalted, and his Empire
enlarged. These are to make known to the Supreme Excellency of that Place,
which is adorned with the Beauty of your Sanctity, that the Word of the King,
and of his Law, has enlightened our Faces: that day has been a solemn day unto
Israel, and a day of light unto our Rulers, for immediately we applied our
selves to perform your Commands, as our duty is. And though we have heard of
many strange things, yet we are courageous, and our heart is as the heart of a
Lion; nor ought we to enquire a reason of your Doings, for your Works are
Mavelous, and past finding out: And we are Confirmed in our Fidelity without
all exception, resigning up our very Souls for the holiness of your Name: And
now we are come as far as Damascus, intending shortly to proceed in our Journey
to Scanderone, according as you have commanded us; that so we may ascend, and
see the Face of God in light, as the light of the Face of the King of Life: And
we, servants of your servants shall cleanse the dust from your Feet, beseeching
the Majesty of your Excellency and Glory to vouchsafe from your habitation to
have a care of us, and help us with the Force of your Right Hand of Strength,
and shorten our way which is before us: And we have our Eyes toward Jah, Jah,
who will make have to help us, and save us, that the Children of Iniquity shall
not hurt us; and toward whom our hearts pant, and are consumed within us; who
shall give us Tallons of Iron to be worthy to stand under the shadow of your
Ass. These are the Words of the S^rvant of your servants, who prostrates
himself to betrod on by the soles of your feet,

Nathan Benjamine.

And that he might Publish this Doctrine of himself, and the Messiah more
plainly, he Wrote from Damascus this following Letter, to the Jews at Aleppo,
and parts the^eabouts.

To the Residue or Remnant of the Israelites, Peace without end.
THese my words are, to give you notice, how that I am Arrived in Peace at
Damascus, and behold I go to meet the Face of our Lord, whose Majesty be
exalted, for he is the Sovereign of the King of Kings, whose Empire be
enlarged. Sabat^^ ^rote a Letter to Elect one Man out of every Tribe.
According as he has Commanded us and the 12 Tribes to elect unto Him 12 Men,
so have we done: And we now go to Scanderone by his command, to show our faces
together, with part of the principal of those particular Friends* to whom he
has given License to assemble in that same place. And now I come to make known
unto you, that though you have heard strange things of our Lord, yet let not
your hearts faint, or fear, but rather fortify your selves in your Faith,
because all his Actions are Miraculous, and Secret, which Humane understanding
cannot comprehend, and who can penetrate into the depth of them. In a short
time all things shall be Manifested to you clearly in their Purity: and you
shall know, and consider, and be instructed by the Inventor himself; Bl^ssed is
he who can expect, and arrive to the Salvation of the true Messiah, who will
speedily publish his Authority and Empire over us now, and for ev^r.

Nathan.

And now all the Cities of Turkey where the Jews Inhabited were full of the
expectation of the Messiah; no Trade, nor course of Gain was followed: every
one imagined that daily Provisions, Riches, Honors, and Government, were to
descend upon them by some unknown and Miraculous manner: an example of which is
most observable in the Jews at Thessalonica, who now full of Assurance that
the Restoration of their Kingdom, and the Accomplishment of the time for the
coming of the Messiah was at hand, judged themselves obliged to double their
Devotions, and Purify their Consciences from all Sins and Enormities which
might be obvious to the scrutiny of him who was now come to Penetrate into the
very Thoughts and Imaginations of Mankind. In which Work certain Chochams were
appointed to direct the People how to Regulate their Prayers, Fasts, and other
Acts of Devotion. But so forward was every one now in his Acts of Pen^nce, that
they stayed not for the Sentence of the Chocham, or prescription of any Rules,
but applied themselves immediately to Fasting: And some in that manner beyond
the abilities of Nature, that having for the space of seven days taken no
sustenance, were famished to death. Others buried themselves in their Gardens,
covering their naked Bodies with Earth, their heads only excepted, remained in
their Beds of dirt until their Bodies were stifned with the cold and moisture:
others would endure to have melted Wax dropped upon their Shoulders, others to
roll themselves in Snow, and throw their Bodies in the Coldest season of
Winter into the Sea, or Frozen Waters. But the most common way of Mortification
was first to prick their Backs and Sides with ^ho^es, and then to give
themselves thirty nine Lashes. All Business was laid aside, none Worked, or
opened Shop, unless to clear his VVarehouse of Merchandise at any Price: who
had superfluity in Housholdstuffe, sold it for what he could; but yet not to
Jews, for they were Interdicted from Bargains or Sales, on the pain of
Excommunication, Pecuniary Mulcts, or Corporal Punishment; for all Business and
Employment was esteemed the Test, and Touchstone of their Faith. It being the
general Tenent, that in the days that the Messiah appears, the Jews shall
become Masters of the Estates and Inheritance of Infidels; until when they are
to content themselves with Matters only n^cessary to maintain and support
Life. But because every one was not Master of so much Fortune and Provision, as
to live without daily Labor, therefore to quiet the Clamours of the Poor, and
prevent the Enormous lives of some, who upon these occasions would become
Vagabonds, and desert their Cities, due order was taken to make Collections,
which were so liberally bestowed, that in Thessalonica only 400 Poor were
supported by the mere charity of the Richer. And as they endeavored to purge
their Consciences of Sin, and to apply themselves to good Works, that the
Messiah might find the City prepared for his Reception; so, least he should
accuse them of any omission in the Law, and particularly in their neglect of
that Ancient Precept of, Increase and Multiply; they married together Children
of ten years of age, and some under, without respect to Riches, or Poverty,
Condition or Quality: But, being promiscuously joined, to the number of 6 or
700 ^ouple, upon better and cooler thoughts, after the deceit of the false
M^ssiah was discovered, or the expectation of his Coming grew cold, were
Divorced, or by Consent separated from each other.

In the heat of all this Talk and Rumor, comes Sabatai Sevi to Smyrna, the City
of his Nativity, infinitely desired there by the common Jews; but by the
Chochams, or Doctors of their Law, who gave little or no credence to what he
pretended, was ill received, not knowing what mischief or ruin this Doctrine
and Prophecy of a New Kingdom might produce. Yet Sabatai bringing with him
testimonials of his Sanctity, Holy Life, Wisdom, and Gift of Prophecy, so
deeply fixed himself in the heart of the Generality, both as being Holy and
Wife, that thereupon he took courage and boldness to enter into Dispute with
the Grand Chocham (who is the Head, and Chief Exposi^er of the Law and
superin^endent of their will and Government) between whom the A^guments grew so
high, and Language so hot, that the Jews who favored the Doctrine of Sabatai,
and feared the Authority of the Cho^ham, doubtful what might be the issue of
the Contest, appeared in great numbers before the Cadi of Smyrna, in
justification of their New Prophet, before so much as any Accusation came
against him: The Cadi (according to the Custom of the Turks,) swallows Money
on both sides, and afterward remits them to the determination of their own
Justice. In this manner Sabatai gains ground daily; and the Grand Chocham with
his Party, losing both the affection and obedience of his People, is displaced
from his Office, and another Constituted, more affectionate, and agreeable to
the New Prophet, whose power daily increased by those confident Reports, That
his Enemies were struck with Phrensies and Madness, until being restored to
their former temper and wits by him, became his Friends, Admirers, and
Disciples. No Invitation was now made in Smyrna by the Jews, nor Marriage, or
Circumci^ion solemnized, where Sabata^ was not present, accompanied with a
multitude of his Followers, and the Streets covered with Carpits, or fine
Cloth for him to tread on; but the Humility of this Pharisee appeared such,
that he would stoop and turn them aside, and so pass. And having thus fixed
himself in the Opinion and Admiration of the People, he began to take on
himself the Title of Messiah, and the Son of God; and to make this following
Declaration to all the Nation of the Jews, which being wrote Originally in
Hebrew, was Translated for me faithfully into Italian, in this manner.

L'unico figliolo, e primogenito d' dio, Sabatai Sevi, il Messiah, e Salvatore
d' Israel eletti di dio pace bessendo che sete fatti degni di veder quel
grangiorno della deliberatione e Salvatione d' Israel, e consummatione delle
parole di dio, promess per li sua Profeti, e padri notri, per il suo diletto
figlio d' Israel, ogni vestra amaritudine si converta in allegrezza, e li
vestri diginguiti facino feste, per che non piangerete O miei figliole d'
Israel havendovi dati iddio la consolatione inenarrabile, festegiate contimpani
e musiche, ringratiando quello chi ha adempito il promesso dalli secoli,
facendo ogni giorno quelle cose che solete fare nelle callende, e quel gi^rno
dedicato al^* afflictione e mestitia, convertite lo in giorno giocondo per la
mia comparsa, e non spaventate niente, per che haveret^ Dominio sopra, le
genti, non solamente di quelle, che si vedodono in terra, ma quelle che sono in
fondi del mare, il tutto pro vestra consolatione and allegrezza.


Which Translated into English, runs thus;

THe Only, and Firstborn Son of God, Sabatai Sevi, the Messiah and Savior
of Israel, to all the Sons of Israel, peace. Since that you are made worthy to
see that great Day of Deliverance, and Salvation unto Israel, and
Accomplishment of the Word of God, Promised by his Prophets, and our
forefathers, and by his Beloved Son of Israel: let your bitter sorrows be
turned into Joy, and your Fasts into festivals, for you shall weep no more, O
my sons of Israel, for God having given you this unspeakable Comfort, rejoice
with Drums, Organs, and Music, giving thanks to him for performing his Promise
from all Ages; doing that every day, which is usual for you to do upon the
New Mons; and, that Day Dedicated to affliction and sorrow convert you into a
Day of Mirth for my appearance: and fear you nothing, for you shall have
Dominion over the Nations, and not only over those who are on Earth, but over
those Creatures also which are in the depth of the Sea. All which is for your
Consolation and Rejoicing.

Sabatai Sevi.

Notwithstanding the Disciples of Sabatai Sevi were not so numerous, but many
opposed his doctrine, publicly avouching that he was an Impostor, and
Deceiver of the people, amongst which was one Samuel Pennia, a man of a good
estate and reputation in Smyrna, who arguing in the Synagogue, that the present
signs of the coming of the Messiah were not apparent, either according to
Scripture, or the doctrine of the Rabbis, raised such a sedition and tumult
amongst the Jews, as not only prevailed against arguments, but had also
against his life, had he not timely conveyed himself out of the Synagogue, and
thereby escaped the hands of the multitude, who now could more easily endure
blasphemy against the Law of Moses, and the profanation of the Sanctuary, than
contradiction, or misbelief of the doctrine of Sabatai. But howsoever it fell
out, Pennia in short time becomes a convert, and preaches up Sabatai for the
Son of God, and deliverer of the Jews: and not only he, but his whole family;
his daughters prophecy, and fall into strange ecstasies; and not only his
house, but four hundred men and women prophecy of the growing kingdom of
Sabatai, and young infants who could yet scarce stammer out a syllable to their
mothers, repeat, and pronounce plainly the name of Sabatai the Messiah, and Son
of God. For thus far had God permitted the devil to delude this people, that
their very children were for a time possessed, and voices heard to found from
their stomachs, and intrails: those of riper years fell first into a trance,
foamed at the mouth, and recounted the future prosperity, and deliverance of
the Israelites, their visions of the Lion of Judah, and the triumphs of
Sabatai, all which were certainly true, being effects of Diabolical delusions:
as the Jews themselves since have confessed unto me.

With these concomitant accidents, and successes, Sabatai Sevi growing more
presumptuous, that he might correspond with the Prophesies of greatness, and
dominion of the Messiah, proceeds to an election of those Princes which were to
govern the Israelites in their march toward the HolyLand, and to dispense
Judgment and Justice after their Restoration. The names of them were these
which follow, men well known at Smyrna, who never (God knows) had ambition to
aspire to the title of Princes, until a strange spirit of deceit and delusion
had moved them, not only to hope for it as possible, but to expect it as
certain.

Isaac Silvera. King David. Solomon Lagnado. was Solomon. Salom Lagnado jun.
named Zovah. Joseph Cohen. Uzziah. Moses Galente. Iosaphat. Daniel Pinto.
Hilkiah. Abraham Scandale. Iotham. Mokiah Gaspar. Zedekiah. Abraham Leon.
Achas. Ephraim Arditi. Ioram. Salom Carmona. Achab. Matassia Aschenesi. Asa.
Meir Alcaira. Rehoboam. Jacob Loxas. Ammon. Mordecai Iesserun. Iehoachim* Chaim
Inegna. Jeroboam. Joseph Scavillo. Abia. Conor Nehemias. was Zarobabel. Joseph
del Caire. named Ioas. Elcukin Schavit. Amasia. Abraham Rubio* Josiah.
Elias Sevi had the title of the King of the king of kings.

Elias Azar his Vice-king, or Vizier.

Joseph Sevi, the king of the kings of Judah.

Joseph Inernuch his vice-king.

In this manner things ran to strange height of madness amongst the Jews at
Smyrna, where appeared such pageantry of greatness, that no Comedy could equal
the mock-shews they represented, and though none durst openly profess any
scruple, or doubt of this common received belief, yet for confirmation of the
Jews in their Faith, and astonishment of the Gentiles, it was judged no less
than n^cessary that Sabatai should show some miracles, whereby to evince to all
the World that he was the true Messiah: and as the present occasion seemed to
require an evidence infallible of this truth, so it was daily expected by the
vulgar, with an impatience suitable to humors disposed to Novel^ie; who out of
every action and motion of their Prophet began to fancy something extraordinary
and supernatu^al. Sabatai was now horribly puzzled for a Miracle, though the
imagination of the people was so vitiated that any legerdemaine, or slight of
hand would have passed more easily with with them for a wonder than Moses
striking the rock for water, or dividing the red sea. And occasion happening
that Sabatai was, in behalf of his Subjects, to appear before the Cadi, or
judge of the City to demand ease, and relief of some oppressions which
aggrieved them: It was thought necessary a Miracle should now or never, when
Sabatai appearing with a formal and pharisaical gravitie, which he had starcht
on: Some on a sudden avouched to see a pillar of fire between him and the Cadi,
which report presently was heard through the whole room, filled with Jews that
accompanied Sabatai, some of whom, who strongly fancied it, vowed, and swore
they saw it; others in the outward yard, or that could not come near to hear,
or see for the crowd, as speedily took the alarm, and the rumor ran, and
belief received by the Women and Children at home in a moment, so that Sabatai
Sevi returned to his house triumphant, fixed in the hearts of his people, who
now needed no further Miracles to confirm them in their faith. And thus was
Sabatai exalted, when no man was thought worthy of communication who did not
believe him to be the Messiah: others were called Kophrim, infidels or
heretics, liable to the censure of excommunication, with whom it was not
lawful so much as to eat: every man produced his treasure, his Gold and Jewels,
offering them at the feet of Sabatai; so that he could have commanded all the
we^lth of Smyrna, but he was too subtle to accept their money, least he should
render his design suspected by any act of covetousness. Sabatai Sevi having
thus fully fixed himself in Smyrna, and filled other places with rumors of his
fame; declared that he was called by God to visit Constantinople, where the
greatest part of his work was to be accomplished; in order whereunto he
privately ships himself, with some few attendants in a Turkish Saick, in the
Month of January 1666. least the crowd of his disciples, and such who would
press to follow him, should endanger him in the Eyes of the Turks, who already
began to be scandal^zed at the reports and prophesies concernning his person.
But though Sabatai took few into the Vessel to him, yet a multitude of Jews
traveled over land to meet him again at Constantinople, on whom all their Eyes
and Expectations were intent. The wind proving northernly, as commonly it is in
the Helespont and Propontis; Sabatai was thirty nine days in his voyage, and
yet the Vessel not arrived, so little power had this Messiah over the Sea and
Winds, in which time news being come to Constantinople that the Jews Messiah
was near, all that people prepared to receive him with the same Joy and
Impatience as was expressed in other parts where he arrived; the great Vizier
(then also at Constantinople, being not yet departed on his expedition for
Candia) having heard some rumors of this man, and the disorder and madness he
had raised amongst the Jews; sent two Boats, whilst the Saick was detained by
contrary winds, with commands to bring him up Prisoner to the Port, where
accordingly Sabatai being come, was committed to the most loathsome and darkest
D^ngeon in the Town, there to remain in farther expectation of the Viziers
sentence: The Jews were not at all discouraged at this ill treatment of their
prophet, but rather confirmed in their belief of him, as being the
accomplishment of the prophecy of those things which ought to precede his
glory and dominion; which consideration induced the chiefest persons amongst
the Jews to make their visits and addresses to him with the same ceremony and
respect in the Dungeon as they would have done had he then sat exalted on the
throne of Israel: several of them, with one Ana^ago, by name, a man of great
esteem amongst the Jews, attended a whole day before him, with their Eyes cast
down, their bodies bending forward, and hands crossed before them (which are
postures of humility, and service in the Eastern Countre^s) the undecency of
the place, and present subjection, not having in the least abated their high
thoughts, and reverence toward his person. The Jews in Constantinople were now
become as mad and distracted as they were in other places, all trade and
trafficque forbidden, and those who owed money, in no manner careful how to
satisfy it: amongst which wild crew some were indebted to our Merchants at
Galata, who not knowing the way to receive their money, partly for their
interest, and partly for curiosity thought fit to visit this Sabatai,
complaining that such particular Jews, upon his coming, took upon them the
boldness to defraud them of their right, desired he would be pleased to
signify to these his Subjects, his pleasure to have satisfaction given:
whereupon Sabatai with much affectation took Pen and Paper, and wrote to this
effect.

TO you of the Nation of the Jews, who expect the appearance of the Messiah,
and the Salvation of Israel, Peace without end. Whereas we are informed that
you are indebted to several of the English Nation: It seems right unto us to
enorder you to make satisfaction to these your just debts: which if you refuse
to do, and not obey us herein: Know you, that then you are not to enter with us
into our Joys and Dominions.

In this manner Sabatai Sevi remained a Prisoner at Constantinople for the
space of two Months; at the end of which, the Vizier having designed his
expedition for Candia; and considering the rumor and disturbance the presence
of Sabatai had made already at Constantinople, thought it not secure to suffer
him to remain in the Imperial City, whilst both the Grand Signior and himself
were absent: and therefore changes his prison to the Dardanelli, otherwise
called the Castle of Abydos, being on the Europe side of the Helespont,
opposite to Se^tos, places famous in Greek Poetry. This removal of Sabatai
from a worse Prison to one of a better air; confirmed the Jews with greater
confidence of his being the Messiah, supposing that had it been in the power of
the Vizier, or other Officers of the Turks, to have destroyed his person, they
would never have permitted him to have lived to that time, in regard their
Maxims enforce them to quit all jealousies and suspicions of ruin to their
state by the death of the party feared, which much rather they ought to execute
on Sabatai, who had not only declared himself the King of Israel, but also
published Prophesies fatal to the Grand Signior and his Kingdoms.

With this consideration, and others preceding, the Jews flock in great numbers
to the Castle, where he was imprisoned, not only from the neighboring parts,
but also from Poland, Germany, Legorne, Venice, Amsterdam, and other places
where the Iewt reside: on all whom, as a reward of the expense, and labors of
their pilgrimage, Sabatai bestowed plenty of his benedictions, promising
increase of their store, and enlargement of their Possessions in the Holy Land.
And so great was the confluence of the Jews to this place, that the Turks
thought it requisite to make their advantage thereof, and so not only raised
the price of their Provision, Lodgings, and other Necessaries, but also denied
to admit any to the presence of Sabatai, unless for money, setting the price,
sometimes at five, sometimes at ten Dollers, or more or less, according as they
guessed at their abilities, or zeal of the person, by which gain and advantage
to the Turks no complaints or advices were carried to Adrianople either of the
concourse of people, or arguments amongst the Jews in that place; but rather
all civilities, and liberty indulged unto them, which served as a farther
argument to ensnare this poor people in the belief of their Messiah.

During this time of confinement, Sabatai had leisure to compose and institute
a new method of Worship for the Jews, and principally the manner of the
celebration of the day of his Nativity, which he prescribed in this manner.

BRethren, and my People, men of Religion inhabiting the City of Smyrna the
renowned, where live men, and women, and families; Peace be unto you from the
Lord of Peace, and from me his beloved son, King Solomon. I command you that
the ninth day of the Month of Ab (which according to our account answered that
year to the Month of June) next to come, you make a day of Invitation, and of
great Joy, celebrating it with choice meats and pleasing drinks, with many
Candles and Lamps, with Music and Songs, because it is the day of the Birth of
Sabatai Sevi, the high King above all kings of the Earth. And as to matters of
labor, and other things of like nature, do, as becomes you, upon a day of
Festival, adorned with your finest garments. As to your Prayers, let the same
order be used as upon F^stivals. To converse with Christians on that day is
unlawful, though your Discourse be of matters indifferent, all labor is
forbidden, but to sound instruments is lawful. This shall be the method and
substance of your Prayers on this day of Festival: After you have said, Blessed
be thou, O holy God! then proceed and say, Thou have chosen us before all
people, and have loved us, and have been delighted with us, and have humbled us
more than all other Nations, and have sanctified us with thy Precepts, and have
brought us near to thy service, and the service of our King. Thy holy, great,
and terrible Name thou have publi^hed amongst us: and have given us, O Lord
God, according to thy love, time of Joy, of Festivals, and times of Mirth, and
this day of Consolation for a solemn Convocation of Holiness, for the Birth of
our King the Messiah, Sabatai Sevi thy servant, and firstborn son in love,
through whom we commemorate our coming out of Egypt. And then you shall read
for your Lesson the 1, 2, and 3 Chapters of Deuteronomy. to the 17 verse, appointing
for the reading thereof five men, in a perfect and uncorrupted Bible, adding
thereunto the Blessings of the Morning, as are prescribed for days of Festival:
and for the Lesson out of the Prophets usually read in the Synagogue every
Sabbath: you shall read the 31 Chapt. of Jeremiah. To your Prayer called Mussaf
(used in the Synagogue every Sabbath and solemn Festival) you shall adjoyn that
of the present Festival; In stead of the Sacrifice of Addition, of the
returning of the Bible to its place, you shall read with an Audible Voice,
Clear Sound, the Psalm 95. And at the first Praises in the Morning, after you
have Sang Psalm 91, and just before you Sing Psalm 98, you shall repeat Psalm
132 but in the last Verse, where it is said, As for his Enemies I shall cloth
them with shame, but upon himself shall his Crown flourish; in the place of
(upon himself) you shall read upon the most High: after which shall follow the
126 Psalm, and then the 113 to the 119.

At the Consecration of the Wine upon the Vigil, or Even, you shall make
mention of the Feast of Consolation, which is the day of the Birth of our King
the ^es^iah Sabatai Sevi thy Servant, and Firstborn Son, giving the Blessing
as followe^h: Blessed be thou our God, King of the World, who have made us to
live, and have maintained us, and have kept us alive unto this time. Upon the
Eve of this day you shall Read also the 81 Psalm, as also the 132 and 126
Psalms, which are appointed for the Morning Praises. And this day shall be
unto you for a Remembrance of a Solemn Day unto eternal Ages, and a perpetual
testimony between me, and the Sons of Israel.

A^dite Audiendo and manducate bonum. Besides which Order, and Method of
Prayers for Solemnization of his Birth, he prescribed other Rules for Divine
Service, and particularly published the same Indulgence and Privilege to every
one who should Pray at the ^omb of his Mother; (...) if he had taken on him a
Pilgrimage to Pray, and Sacrifice at Jerusalem.

The Devotion of the Jews toward this pretended Messiah increased still more
and more, so that only the Chief of the City went to attend, and proffer their
service toward him in the time of his Imprisonment, but likewise decked their
Synagogue with S. S. in Letters of Gold, making for him on the Wall a Crown, in
the Circle of which was wrote the 91 Psalm at length, in fair and legible
Characters; attributing the same titles to Sabatai, and Expounding the
Scriptures in the same manner in favor of his Appearance, as we do of our
Savior. However some of the Jews remained in their Wits all this time,
amongst which was a certain Chochan at Smyrna, one zealous of his Law, and of
the good and safety of his Nation: and observing in what a wild manner the
whole People of the Jews was transported, with the groundless belief of a
Messiah, leaving not only their Trade, and course of living, but publishing
Prophesies of a speedy Kingdom, of rescue from the Tyranny of the Turk, and
leading the Grand Signior himself Captive in Chains; matters so dangerous and
obnoxious to the State wherein they lived, as might justly convict them of
Treason and Rebellion, and leave them to the Mercy of that Justice, which on
the least jealousy and suspicion of Matters of this nature, uses to extirpate
Families, and subvert the Mansion-houses of their own People, much rather of
the Jews, on whom the Turks would gladly take occasion to dispoile them of
their Estates, and condemn the whole Nation to perpetual slavery. And indeed it
would have been a greater wonder then ever Sabatai showed, that the Turks took
no advantage from all these extravagances, to dreine the Jews of a
considerable Sum of Money, and set their whole Race in Turkey at a Ransom, had
not these Passages yielded them matter of Pastime, and been the Subject of the
Turks Laughter and Scorn; supposing it a Disparagement to the greatness of
the Ottoman Empire, to be concerned for the Rumors and Combustions of this
Dispersed People. With these considerations this Cocham, that he might clear
himself of the blood and guilt of his Contrymen, and concerned in the common
destruction, goes before the Cadi, and there protests against the present
Doctrine; Declaring, that he had no hand in setting up of Sabatai, but was an
Enemy both to him and to hi^ whole Sect. This freedom of the Chocham so
enraged and scandalized the Jews, that they judged no Condemnation or
Punishment too severe against such an Offender and Blasphemer of their Law, and
Holiness of the Messiah; and therefore with Money and Presents to the Cadi,
accusing him as Disobedient in a Capital nature to their Government, obtained
sentence against him, to have his Beard shaved, and to be condemned to the
Galleys. There wanted nothing now to the appearance of the Messiah, and the
solemnity of his coming, but the presence of Elias, whom the Jews began to
expect hourly, and with that attention and earnestness, that every Dream, or
Phantasme to a weak head was judged to be Elias; it being taught, and averred,
that he was seen in diverse forms and ^hapes, not to be certainly discovered or
known, before the coming of the Messiah; for this superstition is so far fixed
amongst them, that generally in their Families they spread a Table for Elias
the Prophet, to which they make an Invitation of Poor people, leaving the chief
place for the Lord Elias, whom they believe to be invisibly present at the
entertainment, and there to Eat, and Drink, without dimunition, either of the
Dishes, or of the Cup, One person amongst the Jews commanded his Wife after a
supper of this kind, to leave the Cup filled with Wine, and the Meat standing
all night, for Elias to Feast, and Rejoice alone; And in the morning arising
early, affirmed, that Elias took this Banquet so kindly, that in token of
gratitude, and acceptance, he had replenished the Cup with Oil, in stead of
Wine. It is a certain Custom amongst the Jews on the Evening of the Sabbath,
to repeat certain Praises of God (called Havdila) which signifies a
distinction, or separation of the Sabbath from the profane days (as they call
them) which Praises they observe to perform in this manner. One takes a Cup
filled with Wine, and drops it through the whole House, saying, Elias the
Prophet, Elias the Prophet, Elias the prophet, come quickly to us with the
Messiah, the Son of God, and David; and this they affirm to be so acceptable
to Elias, that he never fails to preserve that family, so devoted to him, and
augment it with the blessings of Increase. Many other things the Jews avouch
of Elias, so ridiculous, as are not fit to be declared, amongst which this one
is not far from our purpose, that at the Circumcision there is always a Ch^ir
set for Elias: And Sabatai Sevi being once Invited at Smyrna to the
Circumcision of the First-borne-Son of one Abraham Gutiere, a Kinsman of
Sabatai, and all things ready for the Ceremony, Sabatai Sevi exhorted the
Parents of the Child to expect a while until his farther Order: After a good
half hour, Sabatai ordered them to proceed and cut the Prepuce of the Child,
which was instantly performed with all joy and satisfaction to the Parents: and
being afterward demanded the reason why he retarded the performance of that
Function, his answer was, That Elias had not as yet taken his Seat, whom,
as soon as he saw placed, he ordered them to proceed; and that now shortly Elias
would discover himself openly, and proclaim the news of the general
Redemption.

This being the common Opinion amongst the Jews, and that Sabatai Sevi was the
Messiah, being become an Article of Faith, it was not hard to persuade them,
that Elias was come already, that they met him in their Dishes, in the dark,
in their Bed^chambers, or any where else invisible, in the same manner as our
common People in England believe of Hobgoblins, and Fairies. For so it was,
when Solomon Cremona, an Inhabitant of Smyrna, making a great Feast, to which
the Principal Jews of the City were Invited, after they had eaten and drank
freely, one starts from his Seat, and avouches, that he saw Elias upon the
Wall, and with that bows to him, and Complements him with all Reverence and
humility: Some others having in like manner their Fancies prepossessed, and
their Eyes with the Fume of Wine ill prepared to distinguish shadows,
immediately agreed upon the Object, and then there was not one in the Company
who would say he did not see him: at which surprise every one was st^uck with
reverence and awe; and the most Eloquent amongst them, having their Tongues
loosed with Joy, and Wine, directed Orations, Encomiums, and acts of
Thankfulness to Elias, courting and complementing him, as distracted Lovers do
the supposed presence of their Mistresses. Another Jew at Constantinople
reported, that he met Elias in the Streets, habited like a Turk, with whom he
had a long Communication; and that he enjo^n'd the Observation of many
neglected Ceremonies, and particularly the Zezit, Numb. 15. v. 38. Speak unto
the children of Israel, and bid them that they make Fringes in the Borders of
their Garments, throughout their Generations, and that they put upon the Fringe
of the Border a Ribbon of blue. Also the Peos, Levit. 19. v. 27. Ye shall not
round the corners of your Head, nor mar the corners of your Beard: This
Apparition of Elias being believed as soon as Published, every one began to
obey the Vision, by Fringing their Garments; and for their Heads, though
always shaved, according to the Turkish and Eastern Fa^hion, and that the
suffering Hair to grow, to men not accustomed, was heavy, and incommodious to
their healths and heads; yet to begin again to renew, as far as was possible,
the ancient Ceremonies, every one nourished a lock of hair on each side, which
might be visible beneath their Caps; which soon after began to be a Sign of
distinction between the Believers and Kophrims, a name of dishonor, signifying
as much as Unbelievers; or Heretics, given to those who confessed not Sabatai
to be the Messiah; which particulars, if not observed, it was declared, as a
Menace of Elias, that the People of the Jews, who come from the River
Sabation, as is specifyed in the second Esdras, Chap. 13. shall take vengeance
of those who are guilty of these Omissions.

But to return again to Sabatai S^vi himself, we find him still remaining a
Prisoner in the Castle of Abydos upon the Hellespont, admired and adored by hi^
Brethren, with more honor then before, and visited by Pilgrims from all parts
where the same of the coming of the Messiah had arrived; amongst which one from
Poland, named Nehemiah Cohen, was of special note, and renown, learned in the
Hebr^w, Syriack, and Chaldee, and versed in the Doctrine and Kabala of the
Rabines, as well as Sabatai himself, one (of whom it was said) had not this
Sevi anticipated the Design, esteemed himself as able a Fellow to Act the Part
of a Messiah as the other: Howsoever, it being now too late to publish any such
Pretense, Sabatai having now eleven Points of the Law by Possession of the
Office, and with that the Hearts and Belief of the Jews: Nehemiah was
contented with some small appendage, or Relation to a Messiah; and therefore to
lay his Design the better, desired a Private Conference with Sabatai: These two
great Rabbines being together, a hot Dispute arose between them; For Cohen
alleged that according to Scripture, and Exposition of the Learned thereupon,
there were to be two Messiahs, one called Ben ^phraim, and the other Ben David:
the first was to be a Preacher of the Law, poor, and despised, and a Servant of
the Second, and his Forerunner; the other was to be great and rich, to re^tore
the Jews to Jerusalem, to sit upon the Throne of David, and to perfo^me and
act all those Triumphs and ^onques^s which were expected from Sabatai. Nehemiah
was contented to be (...) Ephraim, the a^^licted and poor Messiah; And Sabatai
(for any thing I hear) was well enough contented he should be so: but that
Nehemiah accused him ^or being too forward in publishing himself the latter
Messiah, before Ben Ephraim had fitst been known unto the World. Sabatai took
this reprehension so ill, either out of pride, and thoughts of his own
infallibility, or that he suspected Neh^miah, being once admitted for Ben
Ephraim, would quickly (being a subtle and learned person) persuade the World
that he was Ben David, would by no means understand, or admit of this Doctrine,
or of Ben Ephraim for a necessary Officer: And thereupon the Dispute g^ew so
hot, and the Controve^sie so irreconcilable, as was taken notice of by the
Jews, and controverted amongst them, as every one fancied: But Sabatai being
of greater Authority, his Sentence prevailed, and Nehemiah was rejected, as
Schismatical, and an Enemy to the Messiah, which afterward proved the ruin and
downfall of this Impostor.

For Nehemiah being thus baffled, and being a person of Authority, and a
haughty Spirit, meditated nothing but revenge; to execute which to the full, he
takes a Journey to A^rianople, and there informs the Chief Minsters of State,
and Officers of the Court, who (by reason of the gai^ the Turks made of their
Prisoner at the Castle on the Hellespont) heard nothing of all this Concourse
of People, and Prophesies of the Revolt of the Jews from their Obedience to the
Grand Signior; and taking likewise to his Counsel some certain discontented and
unbelieving Chochams, who being zealous for their Nation, and jealous of the
illconsequences of this long-continued, and increasing Madness, took liberty to
inform the Chimacham (who was Deputy of the Great Vizier then at Candia) that
the Jew, Prisoner at the Castle, called Sabatai Sevi, was a Lewd Person, and
one who endeavored to debauch the minds of the Jews, and divert them from
their honest course of livelihood, and Obedience to the Grand Signior; and that
therefore it was necessary to clear the World of so Factious and dangerous a
Spirit: The Chimacham being thus informed, could do no less then acquaint the
Grand Signior with all the particulars of this Man's Condition, Course of Life,
and Doctrine; which were no sooner understood, but a Chiaux, or Messenger, was
immediately dispatched, to bring up Sabatai Sevi to Adrianople. The Chiaux
executed his Commission after the Turkish fashion in have, and brought Sabatai
in a few days to Adrianople, without further excuse or ceremony; not affording
him an hours space to take a solemn farewell of his Friends, his Followers and
Adorers; who now were come to the vertical point of all their hopes and
expectations.

The Grand Signior having by this time received diverse informations of the
madness of the Jews, and the pretenses of Sabatai; grew big with desire and
expectation to see him: so that he no sooner arrived at Adrianople, but the
same hour he was brought before the Grand Signior: Sabatai appeared much
dejected, and failing of that courage which he showed in the Synagogue; and
being demanded several Questions in Turkish by the Grand Signior, he would not
trust so far to the virtue of his Messiahship, as to deliver himself in the
Turkish Language; but desired a Doctor of Physic, (who had from a Jew turned
Turk), to be his interpreter, which was granted to him; but not without
reflection of the standers by; that had he been the Messiah, and son of God, as
he formerly pretended, his tongue would have flown with variety, as well as
with the perfection of Languages. But the Grand Signior would not be put off
without a Miracle, and it must be one of his own choice: which was, that
Sabatai should be stripped naked, and set as a mark to his dexterous Archers: if
the Arrows passed not his body, but that his flesh and skin was proof like
armor, then he would believe him to be the Messiah, and the person whom God
had designed to those Dominions, and Greatnesses, he p^etended. But now Sabatai
not having faith enough to stand to so sharp a trial, renounced all his title
to Kingdoms and Governments, alleging that he was an ordinary Chocham, and a
poor Jew, as others were, and had nothing of Privilege, or Virtue above the
rest. The Grand Signior notwithstanding, not wholly satisfied with this plain
confession, declared, that having given public scandal to the Professors of
the Mohammedan religion, and done dishonor to his Sovereign authority, by
pretending to draw such a considerable portion from him, as the Land of
Palestine; his treason and crime was not to be expiated by any other means then
by a conversion to the Mohammedan faith, which if he refused to do, the stake
was ready at the gate of the Seraglio to empale him. Sabatai being now reduced
to extremity of his latter game; not being the least doubtful what to do; for
to die for what he was assured was false, was against nature, and the death of
a mad man: replied with much cheerfulness, that he was contented to turn Turk,
and that it was not of force, but of choice, having been a long time desirous
of so glorious a Profession, he esteemed himself much honored, that he had
opportunity to own it; first in the presence of the Grand Signior. And here was
the non plus ultra of all the bluster and noise of this vain Impostor. And now
the Reader may be pleased to pause a while, and contemplate the strange point
of consternation, shame, and silence, to which the Jews were reduced, when they
understood how speedily their hopes were vanished, and how poorly and
ignominiously all their fancies and promises of a new Kingdom, their Pageantry,
and Offices of Devotion, were past like a tale, or a midnights dream: And all
this was concluded, and the Jews sunk on a sudden, and fallen flat in their
hopes, without so much as a line of comfort, or excuse from Sabatai; more than
in general, to all the brethren. That now they should apply themselves to their
Callings and services of God, as formerly, for that matters relating unto him
were finished and the sentence past. The news that Sabatai was turned Turk, and
the Messiah to a Mahumetan, quickly filled all parts of Turkey. The Jews were
strangely su^prized at it, and ashamed of their easy belief, of the arguments
with which they had persuaded one the other, and of the Proselytes they had
made in their own families. Abroad they became the common derision of the Towns
where they inhabited: the Boys houted after them, coining a new word at Smyrna
(Ponftai) which every one seeing a Jew, with a finger pointed out, would
pronounce with scorn and contempt: so that this deceived people for a long time
after remained with confusion, silence, and dejection of spirit. And yet most
of them affirm that Sabatai is not turned Turk, but his shadow only remains on
earth, and walks with a white head, and in the habit of a Mahumetan: but that
his natural body and soul are taken into heaven, there to reside until the time
appointed for accomplishment of these wonders: and this opinion began so
commonly to take place, as if this people resolved never to be undeceived,
using the forms and rules for Devotion prescribed them by their Mahumetan
Messiah: Insomuch that the Chochams of Constantinople, fearing the danger of
this error might creep up, and equal the former, condemned the belief of
Sabatai being Messiah, as damnable, and enjoined them to return to the ancient
Method and Service of God upon pain of Excommunication. The style and tenure of
them was as follows.

To you who have the power of Priesthood, and are the knowing, learned, and
magnanimous Governors and Princes, residing in the City of Smyrna, may the
Almighty God protect you, Amen: for so is his will.
THese our Letters, which we send in the midst of your habitations, are upon
occasion of certain rumors and tumults come to our ears from that City of your
Holiness. For there is a sort of men amongst you, who fortify themselves in
their error, and say, let such a one our King, live, and bless him in their
public Synagogues every Sabbath day: And also adjoyn Psalms and Hymns,
invented by that man, for certain days, with Rules and Methods for Prayer,
which ought not to be done, and yet they will still remain obstinate therein;
and now behold it is known unto you, how many swelling Waters have passed over
our Souls, for his sake, for had it not been for the Mercies of God, which are
without end, and the merit of our forefathers, which has assisted us; The Jews
scruple to say, the head of Israe^.
the foot of Israel had been razed out by their enemies. And yet you continue
obstinate in things which do not help, but rather do mischief, which God avert.
Turn you therefore, for this is not the true way, but restore the Crown to the
ancient custom and use of your forefathers, and the law, and from thence do not
move; We command you that with your authority, under pain of Excommunication,
and other penalties, that all those Ordinances and Prayers, as well those
delivered by the mouth of that man, as those which he enjoined by the mouth of
others, be all abolished and made void, and to be found no more, and that they
never enter more into your hearts, but judge according to the ancient
commandment of your Forefathers, repeating the same Lessons and Prayers every
Sabbath, as has been accustomary, as also Collects for Kings, Potentates, and
anointed, etc. And bless the King, Sultan Mahomet, for in his days has great
Salvation been wrought for Israel, and become not Rebels to his Kingdom, which
God forbid. For after all this, which is past, the least motion will be a cause
of jealousy, and you will bring ruin upon your own persons, and upon all
which is near and dear to you, wheresore abstain from the thoughts of this man,
and let not so much as his name proceed out of your mouths. For know, if you
will not obey us herein, which will be known, who, and what those men are, who
refuse to conform unto us, we are resolved to prosecute them, as our duty is.
He that does hear, and obey us, may the Blessing of God rest upon him.

These are the words of those who seek your Peace and Good, having in
Constantinople, on Sunday the fifth of the Month Sevat, underwrot their names.
Ioam Tob son of Chananiah Ben-Iacar. Isaac Alnacagna. Joseph Kazabi. Mana^seh
Barndo. Kalib son of Samuel. Eliezer Castie. Eliezer Gherson. Joseph Accohen.
Eliezer Aluff.



During the time of all these transactions and passages at Constantinople,
Smyrna, Abydos, upon the Helespont, and Adrianople, the Jews leaving their
Merchantlie course, and advices, what prizes commodities bear and matters of
Traffic, stuffed their Letters for Italy and other parts, with nothing but
wonders and miracles wrought by their false Messiah. As then when the Grand
Signior sent to take him, he caused all the Messengers immediately to die, upon
which other Ianizaries being again sent, they all fell dead with a word only
from his mouth; and being desired to revive them again, he immediately recalled
them to life; but of them only such who were true Turks, and not those who had
denied that faith in which they were born, and had professed. After this they
added, that he went voluntarily to prison, and though the gates were barred and
shut with strong Locks of Iron, yet that Sabatai was seen to walk through the
streets with a numerous attendance, and when they laid Shackles on his neck and
feet, they not only fell from him, but were converted into Gold, with which he
gratified his true and faithful believers and disciples. Some Miracles also
were reported of Nathan, that only at reading the name of any particular man,
or woman, he would immediately recount the Story of his, or her life, their
sins or defaults, and accordingly impose just correction and penance for them.
These strong reports coming thus confidently into Italy and all parts, the Jews
of Casel di Monferrato resolved to send three persons in behalf of their
society, in the nature of extraordinary Legates, to Smyrna, to make inquiry
after the truth of all these rumors, who accordingly arriving in Smyrna, full
of expectation and hopes, intending to present themselves with great Humility
and Submission before their Messiah and his Prophet Nathan, were entertained
with the sad news, that Sa^atai was turned Turk, by which information the
Character of their Embassy in a manner ceasing, every one of them laying aside
the formalitie of his function, endeavored to lodge himself best to his own
conveni^nce. But that they might return to their brethren at home, with the
certain particulars of the Success of the affairs, they made a visit to the
brother of Sabatai; who still continued to persuade them, that Sabatai was
notwithstanding the true Messiah, that it was not he who had taken on him the
habit and form of a Turk, but his Angel or Spirit, his body being ascended into
Heaven, until God shall again see the season, and time to restore it, adding
further, that an effect hereof they should see by the prophet Nathan,
certified, now every day expected, who having wrought Miracles in many places,
would also for their Consolation, reveal hidden sec^ets unto them, with which
they should not only remain satisfied, but astonished. With this only hope of
Nathan, these Legates were a little comforted, resolving to attend his arrival,
in regard they had a Letter to consign into his hands, and according to their
instructions, were to demand of him the grounds he had for his Prophesies, and
what assurance he had, that he was divinely inspired, and how these things were
revealed unto him, which he had committed to Paper, and dispersed to all parts
of the World. At length Nathan arrives near Smyrna, on Friday the third of
March, toward the Evening, and on Sunday these Legates made their visit to
him: But Nathan, upon news of the success of his beloved Messiah, began to grow
sullen and reserved; So that the Legates could scarce procure admittance to
him; all that they could do was to inform him, that they had a Letter to him
from the brotherhood of Italy, and commission to conferr with him concerning
the foundation and authority he had for his prophesies; but Nathan refused to
take the Letter, ordering Kain Abolafio a Chocham of the City of Smyrna to
receive it; so that the Legates returned ill contented, but yet with hopes at
Nathan's arrival at Smyrna to receive better satisfaction.

But whilst Nathan intended to enter into Smyrna, the Chochams of
Constantinople, being before advised of his resolution to take a Journey into
their parts, not knowing by which way he might come, sent their Letters and
Orders to Smyrna, Prussia, and every way round, to hinder his passage, and
interrupt his journey; fearing that things beginning now to compose, the Turks
appeased for the former disorders, and the minds of the Jews in some manner
settled, might be moved, and combustions burst out afresh, by the appearance of
this new Impostor; And therefore dispatc^ed this Letter as follows.

To you who are the Shepherds of Israel, and Rulers, who reside for the great
God of the whole World, in the City of Smyrna, which is Mother in Israel, to
her Princes, her Priests, her Judges, and especially to the perfect wise men,
and of great experience, may the Lord God cause you to live before him, and
delight in the multitude of Peace, Amen, so be the will of the Lord.
THese our Letters are dispatched unto you, to let you understand, that in the
place of your Holiness, we have heard that the learned man, which was in Gaza,
called Nat^an, Benjamin, has published Vain Doctrines, and made the World
Tremble at his Words and Inventions; And that at this time we have received
Advice, that this man some days since, departed from Gaza, and took his
Journey by the way of Scanderone, intending there to Imbarke for Smyrna, and
thence to go to Constantinople, or Adrianople: And though it seem a strange
thing unto us, that any Man should have a desire to throw himself into a place
of Flames, and Fire, and into the Sparks of Hell; notwithstanding we ought to
fear, and suspect it; For the Feet of Man always guide him to the worst:
Wherefore we Underwritten do Advertise you, that this Man coming within the
compass of your Jurisdiction, you give a stop to his Journey, and not suffer
him to proceed farther, but presently to return back. For we would have you
know, that at his coming, he will again begin to move those Tumults, which have
been caused through the Imaginations of a New Kingdom; And that Miracles are
not to be Wrought every day.

God forbid that by his coming the People of God should be destroyed in all
places where they are, of which he will be the first, whose Blood be upon his
own Head: For in this Conjuncture, every little Error or Fault is made Capital.
You may remember the Danger of the first Combustion: And it is very probable
that he will be an occasion of greater, which the Tongue is not able to express
with Words. And therefore by Virtue of Ours, and Your own Authority, you are to
hinder him from proceeding farther in his Journey, upon pain of all those
Excommunications which Our Law can Impose, and to force him to return back
again, both he, and his Company. But if he shall in any manner Oppose you, and
Rebel against your Word, your Endeavors and Law are sufficient to hinder him,
for it will be well for him and all Israel.

For the Love of God, let these Words enter into your Ears, since they are not
vain things; for the Lives of all the Jews, and his also, consist therein. And
the Lord God behold from Heaven, and have pity upon his People Israel, Amen.
So be his holy Will:

Written by those who seek your Peace. Ioam Tob, Son of Chanania Iacar. Moise
Benveniste. Isaac Alcenacagne. Joseph Kazabi. Samuel Acazsine. Caleb Son of
Chocham, Samuel deceased. Moise Barndo. Elihezer Aluff. Iehoshuah Rap^ael
Benveniste.



By these means Nathan being disappointed of his Wandering Progress, and partly
ashamed of the event of Things contrary to his Prophecy, was resolved, without
entering Smyrna, to return again: Howsoever he obtained leave to visit the
Sepulcher of his Mother, and there to receive Pardon of his Sins (according to
the Institution of Saba^ai before mentioned) but first washed himself in the
Sea, in manner of Purification, and said his Tephilla, or Prayers, at the
Fountain, called by us the Fountain Sancta Veneranda, which is near to the
Cymetry of the Jews, and then departed for Xio, with two Companions, a
Servant, and three Turks, to conduct him, without admitting the Legates to
Audience, or answering the Letter which was sent him, from all the Communities
of the Jews in Italy. And thus the Embas^y of these Legates was concluded, and
they returned from the place from whence they came, and the Jews again to
their Wits, following their Trade of Merchandise and Brokage as formerly, with
more quiet, and advantage, then the means of regaining their Possessions in
the Land of Promise. And thus ended this mad Frenzy amongst the Jews, which
might have ^^st them dear, had not Sabatai Reno^^^t his Messiaship at the Feet
of Mahomet.

THE HISTORY Of the Late FINAL EXTIRPATION And EXILEMENT of the JEWS Out of
the EMPIRE OF PERSIA.
YOu have heard in the foregoing ^tory from what Glorious Expectations the
whole Nation of the Jews were precipitated by the Impostorious, but
Improsperous Vilany of their late pretended Messiah: You will in this Relation
perceive farther, how Signally the Hand of Almighty God (about the same time)
went out to their yet greater shame and extermination: And if any thing were
capable to reduce that miserably deluded People, certainly one would think
these continued Frowns, and Accents of his Displeasure against all their
Enterprises; as it ought to confirm the Truth of the Christian Profession, so
it should even constrain them to hasten to it; For the Wrath is come upon them
to the uttermost.

In the Reign of the famous Abas, Sop^y of Persia, and Grandfather to the
present Emperor, the Nation being low, and somewhat exhausted of Inhabitants,
it entered into the Mind of this Prince (a Wise and Prudent Man, and one who
exceedingly studied the Benefit of his Subjects) to seek some expedient for the
Revival and Improvement of Trade, and by all manner of Pr^viledges and
Immunities to encourage other contiguous Nations to Negotiate and Trade amongst
them; And this Project he fortified with so many Immunities, and used them so
well who came, that repairing from all Parts to his Country, in a short time
the whole Kingdom was filled with Multitudes of the most Industrious People
and Strangers that any way bordered on him.

It happened, that amongst those who came, innumerable Flocks of Jews ran
thither from all their Dispersions in the East; attracted by the Gain, which
they universally make where ever they set footing, by their innate Craft,
Sacred Avarice, and the excessive Extortions which they continually Practice.
And it was not many years but by this means, they had so impoverished the
rest, and especially the Natural Subjects of Persia, that the Clamor of it
reached to the Ears of the Emperor; and indeed it was Intolerable, for even
his own Exchequer began to be sensible of it, as well as his Peoples Purses,
and Estates, which they had almost Devoured.

How to repress this Inormity, and remedy this Inconvenience, without giving
Umbrage to the rest of those profitable strangers now settled in his Dominions,
by falling severely upon the Jews on the sudden, he long consulted; and for
that end called to his Advice his Chief Ministers of State, the Muf^i, and
Expounders of the Law: After much Dispute 'twas at last found, That the Jews
had already long since fo^feited their Lives by the very Text of the Alcoran;
where it is expressed, That if within Six Hundred years from the promulgation
of that Religion, they did not Universally come in, and Profess the Mahumetan
Faith, they should be destroyed. The Zealous Emperor would immediately have put
this Edict in Execution; but, by the Intercession of the Mufti, and the rest of
the Doctors, 'twas thought fit to suspend it for the present: But that these
growing Evils might in time have a Period, His Majesty Commanded that all the
Chachammi, Rabbis, and Chief amongst the Jews, should immediately appear
before his Tribunal, and make Answer to some Objections that were to be
propounded to them.

The Jews being accordingly convened, the Sophy Examines them about several
Passages of their Law, and particularly concerning the Prophet Moses, and
those Rites of his which seemed to have been so long annihiliated amongst them,
since the coming of Isai (for so they call Jesus) after whom they pretended
their Mahomet was to take place, and all other Predictions to determine.

The Jews much terrified with the manner of these Interrogatories, and dubious
what the meaning and drift of them might signify, told the Emperor; That for
Christ they did not believe in him; but that they expected a Messiah of their
own to come, who should by his Miraculous power deliver them from their
Oppre^sors, and subdue all the World to his Obedience.

At this Reply the Sophy appeared to be much Insenc'd: How! says he, Do you
not then believe Christ, of whom our very Alcoran makes so Honorable mention?
as that he was the Spirit of God, sent down from him, and returning to him,
etc. If we Believe him, Why do not you? What say you for your selves you
Incredulous Wretches? The Confounded Jews perceiving the Emperor thus
Provoked, immediately prostrated themselves on the ground, humbly supplicating
him to take pity on his Slaves, who acknowledged themselves altogether unable
to Dispute with his Majesty; That for the Christians, they seemed indeed to
them to be gross Idolaters; Men, who did not Worship God, but a Crucified
Malefactor, and a Deceiver: which still the more displeased the Sophy; not
enduring they should so Blaspheme a Person for whom their Alcoran had so great
a Reverence: However, for the Present he dissembles his resentment; '^is well,
says he, you do not believe the God of the Christians: But, tell me, What
think you of our Great Prophet Mahomet? This Demand exceedingly perplexed them,
not knowing what to Reply: and indeed it was contrived on purpose, that
convincing them of Blasphemy (as they esteemed it) against their Prophet, the
Sophy might find a specious and legal pretense to ruin and destroy them,
without giving any jealousy or suspicion to the rest of the Strangers, who
were Traficking in his Country, of several other Religions, but who were not in
the least obnoxious to his displeasure.

After a long pause, and secret conference with one another, it was at last
resolved among them, That though they had denied Christ, they would yet say
nothing positively against Mahomet: Therefore they told the Emperor; That
though their Religion forbad them to believe any Prophet save Moses, etc. yet
they did not hold Mahomet for a false Prophet, in as much as he was descended
of Ismael the Son of Abraham; and that they desired to remain His Majesty's
humble Vassals and Slaves, and craved His pity on them.

The Sophy easily perceiving the Cunning and wary Subterfuge of their R^ply,
told them; This should not serve their tu^ne: That they were a People of
dissolute Principles and tha^ under pretense of their long expected Messiah,
they pe^sisted in a false Religion, and kept off from Proselyting to the true
Belief; and therefore required of them to set a positive Time, When their
Messiah was to appear; for that he would Support them no longer, who had
imposed on the World, and Cheated his People now so many Years; But, withal
assuring them, that he would both Pardon and Protect them for the time they
should Assign, provided they did not go about to abuse Him by any incompetent
Procrastinations, but assign the Year precisely of his Coming; when, if
accordingly he did not Appear, they were Sons of Death, and should all of them
either Renounce their Faith, or be certainly Destroyed, and their Estates
Confiscated.

The poor Jews, though infinitely Confounded with this unexpected Demand, and
Resolution of the Sophy; after a second Consultation among themselves, (which
the Emperor granted,) contrived to give him this Answer. That according to
their Books and Prophesies their Messiah should infallibly Appear within
Seventy years; prudently (as they thought) believing, that either the Emperor
or They should be all of them dead before that time; and that, in the interim,
such Alterations might emerge, as all this would be forgotten, or averted; and
that at the worst, a good sum of Money would reverse the sentence. But that
something was of necessity to be promised to satisfy his present humorous zeal.

The Emperor accepts of the Answer, and immediately causes it to be Recorded in
form of a solemn Stipulation between them; That in case there were no news of
their Messiah within the Seventy years assigned (to which of Grace, he added
five more) they should either turn Mahumetans, or their whole Nation utterly be
destroyed throughout Persia, and their Substance confiscated: but with this
Clause also inserted; That if their Messiah did Appear within that Period, the
Emperor would himself be obliged to become a Jew, and make all his Subjects so
with him; This drawn (as we said) in form of Instrument, was reciprocally
signed and sealed on both parts, and the Jews for the present dismissed; with
the payment yet of no less than two Millions of Gold (as my Author affirms) for
the favor of this long Indulgence.

Since the time of this Emperor Abas, to the present Sophy now Reigning, there
are not only these Seventy years past, but one hundred and fifteen expired;
during which the Persians have been so molested by the Turks, and by continual
War in the East Indias, etc. that the succeeding Princes no more minded this
Stipulation of their Predecessors; 'till by a wonderful Accident in the Reign
of the second Abas, (Father of him who now governs) a Person extremely curious
of Antiquities, searching one day amongst the Records of his Palace, there was
found this Writing in the Iournal of his Father, intimating what had so
solemnly passed between him, and the Chiefs of the Jews in the Name of their
whole Nation.

Upon this the Sophy instantly summons a Council, produces the Instrument
before them, and requires their advice, what was to be done; and the rather,
for that there began now to be great Whispers, and some Letters had been
written to them from Merchants out of Turkey, of the motions of a pretended
Messiah, which was the famous Sabatai: This so wrought with the Emperor and his
Council, that with one Voice, and without longer pause, they immediately
conclude upon the destruction of the Jews, and that this wicked Generation of
Impostors and Oppressors of his People were no longer to be endured upon the
Earth.

In Order to this Resolution Proclamations are issued out and published to the
People, and to all that were Strangers and Inhabitants amongst them, impowering
them to fall immediately upon the Jews in all the Persian Dominions; and to put
to the Sword Man, Woman, and Child, but such as should forthwith turn to the
Mahumetan Belief: and to seize on their Goods and Estates without any remorse
or pity.

This cruel and bloody Arrest was accordingly put in Execution first at
Ispahan, and suddenly afterward in all the rest of the Cities and Towns of
Persia. Happy was he that could escape the fury of the enraged People, who by
virtue of the public Sentence, grounded upon the declared Stipulation, and
now more encouraged by the dwindling of their pretended Messiah, had no
commiseration on them, but slew and made havoc of them, wherever they could
find a Jew through all their vast Territori^s; falling upon the spoil, and
continuing the Carnage to their utter Extermination; Nor did the Persecution
cease for several Years, beginning from about Sixty three till Sixty six, at
Ispahan, the Cities and Countries of Seyra, Ghelan, Humadan, Ardan, Tauris, and
in sum, through the whole Empire, without sparing either Sex or Age;
excepting (as was said) such as turned Mahumetans, or escaped through the
Deserts into Turkey, India, and other far distant Regions, and that without
Hopes of ever Re-establishing themselves for the future in Persia, the hatred
of that People being so deadly and irreconcilable against them. And in truth
this late Action and Miscarriage of their pretended Messiah has rendered them so
universally despicable; that nothing but a determined Obstinacy, and an evident
and Judicial Malediction from Heaven could possibly continue them in that
prodigious Blindness out of which yet, GOD, of his infinite Mercy, one day,
deliver them, that they may at last See and Believe in Him whom they have
pierced; and that so both Jew and Gentile may make One Flock under that O^^
Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, Jesus Christ the True MESSIAH. Amen.

FINIS.

