THE VOICE OF THE PEOPLE FOR A KING, SHOWING The only way for the Future
Settlement and Peace of England. Humbly Presented to his Excellency the LORD
General Monck.

By ARISE EVANS.

When there was no King in Israel, every one did what was right in his own
eyes,

Judge. 17. 6. LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1659.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE LORD GENERAL GEORGE MONCKE.
MY LORD,
I shall not wrap my self in a cloud of high Eloquence, or be able to show your
merits, I hope you are he that God has raised, to make England again happy,
yea, more happy then ever it was, which now is in a sad condition, under many
miseries; her once glorious Church and Kingdom, that shined in prosperity in
the sight of all the world, trodden under foot, Parliaments-priviledges
violated, the peoples Liberties detained, their goods being spent through long
paying Excise, Assesments, and such new devises to pole them, which never was
known in England before, trading utterly gone, the one part of the Nation being
employed to destroy and eat up the other; and of late no visible Authority; and
men kept under and killed for offering to show their agrievances, and yet no
visible hope of redemption, but of that which under God appears in you. Many
have promised well, and God gave them golden opportunities to make thimselves
and the Nation glorious; but their self ends deceived them, and they fell into
contempt, because their minds was not fixed on just things to the glory of God
and good of the whole Nation. For the Nation now are not ignorant as they were
in the beginning of these times; before they fell like Adam, but having tasted
of such a fruit as showed them their nakedness, they are become wise, knowing
wherein their happiness lies, and are ready to say with Israel, 1 Samuel 8. 19.
notwithstanding all the persuasions of self-interest against it: nay, but there
shall be a KING over us; and to speak of Samuel's Case, self-interest is such a
thing, that not only Samuel was blinded by it, but the Angels also that fell:
*for might not Samuel have seen that God promised Abraham that Kings* should
come out of him, and to Jacob that Kings should come out of him also, Genesis 17.
6. Genesis 35. 11. and that Moses had said, that Israel might have a King, Deuter*
17. 14. and how the people did what was right in their own eyes, slighting the
law of God because there was no King in Israel to minister Justice, Judge. 17.
6. and that they did then as bad as the Sodamites, Judge. ^9 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. I say might not Samuel have known these things. I
sure; but it made against his interests for he was for a Government by Judges,
therein lay his and his sons interest; but Israel will have a King for all
Samuels pleading against it, and the Lord persuades Samuel to barken to the
people in it, so that the Lord is also for a King, and a King they have for all
that Samuel could do; and they lived more happy under their Kings, and served
God more truly then ever they did under their Judges; Saul clothed them in
Scarlet, and put Gold upon their apparel; and David did more, but Solomon made
silver at plenty as stones; Gideon the best of there judges got gold from them
and made an Idol of it; and the people left the Lord and iwent a Whoring after
it, Judge. 8. 27. But King Asa upon the repetition of the judges evil times by
Oded the Prophet and his comparing it to the time present, Israel then was
fallen from God, I say Asa took courage from Odeds words and put down the
Idols; and he gathered Judah and Benjamin, and most of Israel* came to him and
agreed with King Asa, that whosoever would not seek the Lord and serve him, he
should be put to death, 2 Chronicles. 15. now I say it appears by this that
Kingship is best for the Nations Souls and Bodies; therefore God and the People
will have a King; let Samuel do what he can, he shall not be able to binder it.
Samuel a glorious Prophet says to the people, that a King was not Good for
them, and uses many arguments to persuade them against Kingship; and in the
conclusion says your King will so oppress you, that you shall cry out in that
day, because of your King, and the Lord will not bear you in that day; what a
strong motive is this from a Prophet, yet the people will say nay, but there
shall be a King over us, 1 Samuel 8. 18, 19. what is the reason they are so
wilful? it is because they knew that Samuel said all this for his own ends*
that his Children might have the pre-eminence over them, and they knew that his
sons were sinful, Judges taking bribes and perverted judgment, 1 Samuel 8. 1. 2,
3. therefore they would not trust them with their warlike affairs for they had
smarted of late days in the like case* When the wicked Sons of Eli did rule,
which lost their own lives, and the Ark of God, and thirty thousand men in the
field, 1 Samuel 2. 12, 22. 1 Samuel 5. And now they must go to war, for Nahash King
of the Amonites came against them, and would not receive them to be his
servants except they would suffer him to thrust out the right eye of every one
of them, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel, 1 Samuel* 11. 1, 2. and Samuel
was old, his Sons were wicked, they must needs have a King to lead them out
against this proud Nahash; and you see King Saul under God ordered it so that
Nahash lost the day, and Saul was Victour, but yet after this Samuel was
displeased with the people, and bids them tell him wherein he had wronged them,
and tells them a story of the excellency of their former Judges, and that they
had highly sinned in asking a King, and threatens them to the purpose; but for
all that they were for King-ship, saying to Samuel who is he that says Saul
shall not reign, bring him forth that we may put him to death, 1 Samuel 11* 12. 1 Samuel 12. then seeing that Samuel is angry with Saul that be could not please
him at all, and whatsoever Saul did he found fault with it; and he laid snares
for him about the sacrifice, though indeed it seems Samuel was in the fault,
for he came not according to his promise; yet he came as soon as Saul had
sacrificed, and then he tells him that he had broke the Commandment, and that
God would have another to be King, 1 Samuel 13. after that Samuel send Saul
against Amalek: and commanded him to do such a thing that Saul could not do,
and then he Pronounces judgment against Saul and came no more at him, 1 Samuel
15. but went and anointed David to be King of Israel, 1 Samuel 16. and after
Samuel died, his Ghost rose from the Earth to discourage Saul, by telling him
of his death, and of his sons death, 1 Samuel 28. 15, 19. here we see what power
self-interest has ever good men; therefore he that can deny himself is higher
then an Angel, for Lucifer fell through Ambition, and that a Witch had power to
raise Samuel is a great dishonor to him, and a terror to me; and shows that
self-interest is to be abhorred; Eli was free from it for he submited to the
sentence of God, when it put a period to his time of prosperity, 1 Tam 3. 18.

And I will now speak touching English men; there is a Book come forth,
entitled, The Lord General Fleetwood 's Answer to the Humble Representation of
Col. Morley, and some other late Officers of the Army: If he wrote it, he is a
self-denying man indeed and, shows in that book the only way for Englands
happiness: he that observes the series of Gods providence, may be assured that
this Stump-Parliament which was just seven years under the band of Ironsword
and brass-Canon; that is, from April 22. 1652. to April 22* 1659. I say, we may
be assured that this Parliament will grow to be full, consisting of KING, Lords
and Commons, as it was at first; and then more excellent Glory shall be added
to it, by their setting up of Christ's Kingdom; For surely the Lord's Decree
shall stand, let self-interest-men do what they can, God and the people shall
bring it to pass; for Nebuchadnezzar's Vision shall be fulfilled again, Dan.
^. for he was but a type of King CHARLES; and this Parliament promised him
according to Dan. 4. 36. that they should add to his Majesty's glory, and so
they shall keep their promise and oaths made to him: God will have the first
Oath performed, Rev. 2. 4. later oaths for self-interest shall not prevail
against it 3 therefore I say to your Lordship and to the Parliament, Remember
your Vows to be true to the KING, 1 Esdras 4. 43. Pay your Vows, Ecclesiast. 5.
4. I looked upon your going to Scotland as a mighty providence for the welfare
of the Nations; and indeed the fulfilling of what I said should come to pass in
that time* for God works by hid wisdom so that men cannot see it when it is
done, no nor for a long time after; but when there eyes are opened by a more
shining of the work, then shall they see in what time it was done.

My Lord, the people came before you, they dare not speak out as yet; they have
been so Curbd, but you may know their mind by their miseries, I beseech you
pity them that their souls may bless you; Else England will be distroyed; for
some old Prophesies says, that if England loose its opportunity it shall be
invaded with three mighty Armies raised and supplied by all Christendom; one
shall appear in the south with the Queen and a great favorite of our Army,
another in the North under the King, and Duke of York* the third in Ireland
under Henry Duke of Gloucester; and before these three Armies meet, English men
will be so few, that the Daughter shall say to the Mother, O Mother! I have
seen a man to day; and London with all the Towns in England will be destroyed,
therefore I say again, pity poor England, and that God may bless you the
more; Oh pity poor decayed men that are daily cast into prisons for debs, by
their cruel Creditors, where they are speyled, being unable to pay, or live
there, the Parliament were about to take some course to help them before now;
Oh move them to do it speedily; you will have the prayers of many poor
distressed souls, which in the day of battle will be a greater defense for you
then your Army; (David, Psalm. 41. 1. 2.) So wishing your excellency all
happiness, I hoping to be in your Lordships Judgment a faithful Servant to
the Public.

And your Lordships servant in particular, ARISE EVANS.
From the Kings Playhouse in Blackfriars, London, Jan 30. 1659.
Gentlemen,
MY last Book printed May 1659. shows you the Kingdom of Christ in part; but
now through Christ's assistance, I shall show you further; and to give you a
hint of what is contained in the said book, called A Rule from Heaven.

First, Ye have page 1. to page 26. the Introduction, wherein is showed the
Descent of our Nation; the noble Actions of our Predecessors, with their
Sufferings at several times for their sin; and a view of our ancient Prophesies
that foretells the trouble and sufferings of our KING, Nobles, and Royal party,
with a promise of great Glory to them at last, and an Assurance of peace for
Ever.

Secondly, From page 26. to page 45. ye have the Kingdom of Christ showed;
though indeed not so fully and so clear as I had done, if time had permitted:
for when the combustion was among us, by the Armies throwing down one
Government to set up another, it was in my mind suddenly before they run into
error, and to prevent it, to show them a better Government then they knew
before, even a Government of Christ's own Institution; and therefore I hastened
and was brief, having not time enough to clear the matter.

Thirdly, Page 45. Ye have a threatening of our Army, if that they would not
suddenly stand up for this Good Old Cause (namely the Kingdom of Christ) and
set it up; else as stout as they were, they should fall and come to nothing;
and their Parliament you know, sought diverse ways their ruin since that time;
and they have been divided; so that now they had need look upon my words, lest
they repent too late, as their Parliament did once, yea twice now, and knew not
how to help it.

Fourthly, (page 46. and page 47.) Ye have a speech to the Long Parliament, to
tell them that notwithstanding their endeavor to set up themselves, their
General should dissolve them; and I bad them beware of Jehu; (for so I called
him:) and though they used all their craft against him; yet I said he should
prevail: and I told them that the Army had a Design they knew not of; and
showed them that they had no way to make themselves happy, but speedily while
they had time, to make their peace with CHARLES STUART; and I gave them a Vision
I had 1634. to assure them, if they sought it, they might have had peace; as
you see all along, if you read to the end of the said book; I say you may
discern (if you read from page 46. to page 60. of that book) how far those
words of my penning have been fulfilled upon the Army and Parliament. Thus ye
have the Contents of the said book.

Now it is true, that it displeases some of the Kings party: the reason is,
because they did not fully understand it; and it is left dark in some points,
because I had not time to open it. (...) cannot abide to hear of any to be in
power above (...) KING. It is true, there is none above the KIN^ namely Charles
the First. We read that Israel had two Kings at one time, and the weaker was
above the stronger; so that the stronger obeyed the weaker: which thing was a
type of Christ's Kingdom; for King David being old and weak, caused Solomon to
be made King long before he died: and King Solomon sat on the Throne, but he
obeyed King David all the time: (and is it not so with the Pope and the
Emperor?) Here was two Kings at one time, the Father and the Son; yet no
striving as you see 1 Chro. 28. and 1 Chronicles. 29.

But Christ's intention is that King Charles which suffered shall not only Reign
in his seed according as our former Kings did, but shall also Reign above his
Seed, he being raised in Name, Spirit, and Power to Reign as chief, having a
perfect body prepared and chosen of God for him: that personally from time to
time hereafter he might be above our Kings to control them (instead of a high
Constable of England) and to be a King of Kings for ever to keep the peace
between the King and people.

The Gods of the Gentiles to gratify their worshippers would fain have done
such a thing; that is, to immortalize them and make them to have a name and
power on Earth for ever; so that from Julius Caesar all the Emperors were
called Cesars for a long time; and so the Pharao's and others had such promise
of their Gods* but alas, none of their Gods were able to do it; their Gods knew
such a thing was to (...) but they knew not the way to do it, it is the (...)
of Heaven, Earth, and Sea, even Jesus Christ (...) do it, and none else.

Again the Royal party cannot abide to hear of a poor Almes-man to be King, and
that he should have but two hundred a year, they thinking I would have young
King Charles Stuart to have no more, and therein is their great mistake, for I
would have young Charles and his Seed after him to have all that belongs to the
Crown; and that he which personates old King Charles should have but two hundred
a year; the reasons why he should be first a poor man, and after his
installment should have no more means, is because old King Charles was made poor
in this world before he suffered, and most rich in Faith; having no Money save
a bare allowance to subsist, though he was the supreme Lord.

Therefore he that personates him (in whom he is to live again) must be like
unto him in Graces and outward state, having but small allowance yet enough to
live: for I believe old King Charles was never better satisfied in this World,
then he was when God took from him his temporal Pomp and Glory, and gave him a
view by Contemplation of his immortal Glory in the World to come, so that I
say, such a body fitted and chosen of God, and made so as he himself was made
at last, is most meet for him, and is most profitable for the King his Son and
for the Nation, to stand in the gap and stop the bloody Issue, a disease that
England is too much subject too.

The want of this Government of Christ (for so I call it in my book) brought
this Kingdom many times into desolation, for when the Court grew corrupt yet
so insolent and prove that it thought none could or durst Control it; then
starts up one great popular Earl or other that watches for an opportunity and
under the notion of a high Constable of England he heads the people, and Wars
against the Court, so that the cure proved always worse then the disease,
because it was done by the Sword: and as Christ says, Matthew. 26. 52. They that
take the Sword shall perish with the Sword; therefore in Christ's Kingdom every
one must observe his rule: there must be a law for the Kings to walk by, as
well as for the people; and they that are weakest, lowest, and least in the
worlds account (Luke 16. 15. James 2. 5* 1 Cor. 6. 4.) has Christ chosen to be
the supreme Judges thereof, yea to personate old KING Charles and to be over the
Kings of the world as ye have it more at large set out in the abovesaid book
called a rule from Heaven.

And there must be in Christ's Kingdom a perfect Law made for all occasion, and
according to the Gospel, a Law that needs not to be altered every foot, but
it must be such a Law as nothing shall be added to it, or taken from it; that
every one may know his rule and the punishment of his error, and the said Law
must be truly and speedily executed upon the offenders, else it profits
nothing, for so long as our Law is imperfect, and that our Parliaments are
always making and nulling Laws, we shall never be quiet or come to rest
according to Gods promise which says, Heb. 4. 9. there is a rest for the
people of God, and the Lord is well pleased for his righteousness (...) Lands
and states in rich men's hands, and they could not deny it? but told them in a
bravado they would spend in law thousands before they should get it: and the
poor knowing aforehand the course of the law was content to loose their Right,
and it was wisdom in them so to do; seeing their going to law will not relieve
them, being sure it will make their condition worse; what a sad thing is it for
men to live under such a law, let all good just reasonable men judge, such
doings are not to be in Christ's Kingdom.

Again a man steals a Horse, and by the laws of England he must die for it;
what reason is for that? is a man's life for whom Christ died of less value with
you, then a Horse or some wordly Lomber which perishes with the using; and
weighs such as set their hearts upon them down to hell; I must tell you and
that from the word of God, that all the thieves that have been put to death for
only thieving (except they were men stealers) have been murdered, and that
their Blood lies heavily upon this Nation; and specially upon the Royal Family
as one of the greatest cause of Gods wrath against them; I remember that one
told me five and twenty years ago, that a thief being to be executed, desired
before his death to have Psalm. 43. Sung, which begun thus, Judge and revenge
my cause O Lord; but the Minister no doubt knowing that by Gods law, Exo. 22.
1, 2, 3, 4, that he ought not to have died for his theft, would not suffer him
to sing that Psalm; yet alas, how sore has God Judged the thieves Cause upon
this Nation, and specially the King and Nobles, it is too evidently written in*
Characters of Blood; and verily it is right that God should do it, for it is a
great contempt against God and his law, for men to attempt and to leave Gods
law, and to make a bloody law for thieves, contrary to Gods law; seeing they
have the law of God extant to judge thieves, what is it? but that men would
have themselves seen to be wiser then God.

The law of God (Exodus 22. 1, 2, 3, 4.) in the case of theft, proves that the
looser, shall be no looser by by a thief, but that in case he find him with the
goods in his hands; the thief must restore it at least double, and if he has
not to pay, he is presently to be sold for his theft.

But by the laws of England, a man may put a poor man into prison upon
suspicion, and keep him in to his undoing a quarter of a year for nothing, and
the poor man can have no relief by law, for the wrong done to him in such a
case; again, if a man take a great thief that stole much from him and put him
in prison, he shall get nothing at last but his life, a sad recompense to
become a Murderer, to loose his soul after his goods; and though the true man
and thief this suffer, the receivers, thieve-takers, Jaylors, and the
Whore-houses get by it, and the Prisons; and Whore-houses the Nurseries of
thieves, to increase and multiply them exceedingly; now if the law of God were
put in execution there would not be so many thieves.

Eor God says Fxod: 21. 15, 16, 17: He that smites his Father or his Mother
shall be surely put to death, and he that steals a man and sells him, or if
he be found in his hand he shall surely be put to death, and he that curses or
revileth his father or mother shall surely be put to death; for all wickedness
flows from disobedience to parents; and a wicked father commonly gives good
council to his son, and will rejoice to see him do well: it is naturally so
with all men, good or bad; but in London and other great Towns, the most part
of children are very rebellious, especially poor men's children are disobedient,
running away from their parents, because they see nothing but hunger at home,
and that charity is cold: then the Thieves takes them up, and feeds them with
good Victuals, telling them, that if they will forsake their parents and follow
them, they will teach them a trade to get good Cheer; and they will make them
swear, that they will forsake their parents, and not work but steal for their
living, and not confess it: and when they have tried them a while, if they find
that a child has any principle of grace remaining, so that they dare not trust
him, then will they make use of him and force him upon some great design, and
after sell him away to Sea, lest being taken, he should confess all: In these
Cases, thieves are men-stealers, and by the law of God they ought to die for
it; and the children also that abuse their parents by smiting and reviling
them, ought to die for it.

Therefore if you would have the wicked rooted out of the Land, you must
destroy the foresaid menstealing-thieves, and be charitable to the poor, by
helping them to bring up their children in the fear of God; and those that
continue stubborn, rebelling and abusing their parents, must be made examples,
that the rest may fear: and for the rest of the thieves make them to restore,
according to Exodus 22. 1, 2, 3, 4. and if they have not to satisfy the owners,
let them be sold away to the Merchants for their theft, and shipped suddenly
whether they will or no; for a thief has lost his liberty to choose, and by
the law of God ought to be sold away for a slave: and if they were so punished,
it would terrify and restrain them more then hanging; for a thief will rather
choose to die, then be so bound to work; it is their nature to be so minded
always.

All the Thieves may be divided into three Sorts: First, the covetous thief,
that has enough, yet will steal to increase his riches; he is worthy to make a
five-fold restitution. 2ly, there is a thief that will not work, but makes a
trade of stealing, yet lays up little or nothing; make him restore double: or
in case he has not to do it, he must be sold. Thirdly, there is a thief that
is not able to work, or that would work and can get none, nor any relief, is
forced to steal or starve; I know no reason why he should suffer, but that ye
should say to him, as Juda said to Tamar, Genesis 38. 26. thou have been more
righteous then we, because thou wast not relieved thou did steal; and you
ought to make restitution for him, and put him in a way to live that his soul
may bless you.

And put no thieves in Prison, but as soon as they are taken, judge them; and
so clear the innocent, and make the guilty to restore, or sell him away to Sea
speedily: and this every Justice of the Peace may do immediately; for the Lord
says, Isa. 42. 22. That the people are spoiled in prison-houses; there they
learn all villainy, and are made ten times worse then they were when they came
in; for judgment must be spedily executed because delays encourages men to do
evil, Eccles. 8. 11. And you see (Lev. 24. 11, 12, 13, 14. 15, 16. Number. 15. 32,
33, 34, 35, 36.) Israel at first put none in prison, but those offenders they
had not a Law in readiness;e to judge them; and as soon as God by Moses gave
them a precept for it, it was immediately executed.

Now to conclude; If you severely (according to God's law, Exodus 21. 15, 16,
17.) punish disobedient children and men-stealers, it will produce these three
Effects following.

First, It will make parents careful and diligent to save their children by
bringing them up always in fear, and not cocker them up in wantonness, and
suffer them to be bold and impudent with them; but to fear and reverence them,
lest they should come to suffer for it.

Secondly, It would make children tremble and give respect to their parents,
when they see the law thus executed upon disobedient children.

Thirdly, It will make such as draw Children away from their obedience to their
Parents, to tremble (least they should come under the Verge of men-stealers)
when they see how seveerly men-stealers are punished with death.

Another great defect in the English law, is this, a man commits an offen ce,
and not only he, but also his innocent Children must suffer for it; when as
God to the Contrary, (says Ezekiel. 18. 20.) That the S on shall not bear the
iniquity of his Father; for example, Sir George Booth and the Cheshire Gentry
is supposed to have committed Treason, but to be sure if their Statebe
sequestered (as many was upon the like score) their innocent Families are
robbed, fot is it not sufficient, that if they have committed a crime that they
only in their own person suffer for it, and not to have their innocent Families
Ruinated also by it.

In King James his time, when I was a Boy, a neighbor of ours being then the
Constable, made bold to steal some sheep* and kill them to spare his own, yet
though he was Constable who thought by virtue of his Office to carry it out
unquestionable, he was brought in for a thief, all his goods taken for the
King; his innocent Children turned out to beg their bread, and the owners of
the sheep, had nothing except a share of the Curse from the poor Children.

But see how God since by way of retaliation met with King James and his seed
for such things, they also were turned out of all to seek their Bread* If King
James had maintained the law of God, the thief might have made Restitution to
the owner of the sheep, and left him enough for his Children; and the Kings
seed been blessed, and not come to such dishonor and want as they did since
that time; though men regard not God nor his law, yet they may behold his works
here, and be sure of his truth, that says vengance is mine I will repay, Romans
1^. 19.

And now to speak something in the matter of Tiths, which many are offended at,
and willingly would pay none. First I need not prove it lawful to take tyth,
for we see it was paid before the law, Genesis 14. 20. and all along under the
law, none can deny it; and after the law our Savior Christ, Mat. 23. 23. Luke
11. 42. presses the payment of tyth as a duty that ought to be done. Therefore
since the Church of Christ came to any Maturity and power to command tithes
has been paid all along to this our time.

But now in my judgment Tything is not rightly done; for in the beginning
Abraham had got a good booty, Genesis 14. 20. And he paid Tithes of it once and no
more, Heb. 7. 4. Jacob also having then nothing but his staff, Genesis 32. 10.
Voweth to God, saying, of all that thou give me, I will surely give the Tenth
unto thee* it is not meant to Tyth all he has every year, but to tyth all his
stock once, and then to Tyth all the increase of his stock yearly; but if his
stock do not increase but decrease, or is at a stand, between both, there is no
more Tithes to be required of such an one; for says he, of all that thou
give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee. And therefore Moses says,
Deuteronomy. 14. 22. Thou shall truly Tyth all the increase of thy Seed; and St. Paul
says, 1 Cor: 16. 2. Let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has
prospered him; that is, every one of the Church of Corinth, truly must lay in
store, (against St. Paul came) the tenth of his increase, and no more; for he
that grows poor ought to have a share of the Tyth, rather then pay it as you
see, Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29.

But our Teachers will have the tenth from a man, whether he prospers or not
prospers, whether he increase or decrease so long as he has any thing, they
will have the tenth until at last drawing him dry year by year; they take all
from him under the notion of Tyths and send him a begging

And to state the Case aright; suppose I were now a rich man entering into my
affairs in the world, and being worth a thousand pound, I give a hundred of it
to the Minister for his Tyth; and I take a Farm of a hundred pound a year, and
I lay out all the rest of my money to stock that land, I keeping a great family
and paying my rent can hardly keep my stock whole, till the years end; what
reason has any Minister to come to me any more for tyths? I paid once and my
State is not increased; why should I give the tenth of my Corn or of my Sheep
to him, since I do not increase; because the Land is not mine? ought he not
rather and more equal get the tenth part of the Rent from the Landlord? for if
he forces tyth from me year by year, I not thriving, he will in time get all
my stock; and how is that just in the Minister, who should teach men to be just
in their dealing one toward another?

Again', There is a Tradesman that takes a great House, and lives at a high
rate, only upon his credit, and at the years end making his account, is more in
debt then he is worth by half; yet this man goes on in his way, and must pay
the Minister more then his neighbor that is in a thriving way and worth
thousands: yea, there are some that lodges in such poor men's houses that are
worth thousands a year in lands* who besides in the way of Merchandise get
sometime a thousand a year clear gain; and why do not the Ministers get tyth of
such men?

Therefore I say the true way of tything is this; for every young man to
observe, when he begins to be for himself, he that has a portion to begin
the world, let him give the tenth part thereof to God, that is for the Minister
and the poor; and if it please God to bless him and he increase in wealth, let
him make his account once a year, and as God is pleased to add to his stock
(whether by wares or merchandise, or cattle, or by the death of friends, or any
way else whatsoever,) let him tyth the addition or increase of his stock year
by year so long as he lives upon earth: and he that has nothing at first, if
God send him an estate, let him do the like; and that is his way to get more
of God.

As for Example, a man at the beginning is worth a hundred pound, he pays ten
pound tyth; next year he is worth two hundred pound, he pays eleven pound tyth;
the third year, he is worth four hundred pound, he pays twenty one pound two
shillings tyth; the fourth year his stock does not increase a penny, then he
pays no tyth; for why? he gave the tenth of all he had already: but the fifth
year his stock increases two hundred pounds, then he pays twenty pound tyth;
and so forward pays the tenth of his increase yearly, according as he truly
valueth his estate; for he must do it between God and himself; and this men
should do, not by constraint, but voluntary in obedience to God that requires
it; and in hope that he will not only pour riches upon them, but will also
rebuke the Devourer, who is ready (if God permit him) to take all creature
comforts from them, as once he did from Job, Malac. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, Job
1. from verse the 6. to the end; so much of Tithes.

Touching the Ministers of our time, the Prophet Isaiah hits them home, for
their greediness after their tyth, and their ignorance in tything, as also in
other things belonging to these times; and therefore he sets up a Ministry of
Eunuchs, Isa. 56. 4, 5. in the House of the Lord; because says he, all these
Ministers devour: and lest they should loose their tyth, they will wink at all
faults, and consent to any sin in Governors, and that makes the holy Prophet
to brand them saying, Isa. ^6. 9. 10, 11. All ye beasts of the field come to
devour ye all the beasts in the forest: his watchmen are blind, they are all
ignorant; they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark: Sleeping, lying down,
loving to slumber; yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough; and
they are shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way,
every one for his gain (or tyths) from his quarter.

Origin one of the most famous ancient Fathers of the Church, for this cause
would have none to be Ministers but Ennuches, and he himself would, and had his
privy Members taken from him upon that account; yet the Church then did not
approve of his judgment in that point; what arguments or reasons he used for
it at that time, I know not; I am sure there is, much more might now be spoken
in it: for beside Scripture and Reason, time and woeful experience does evince
it; so that we may confess it to be an impregnable truth.

For Scripture you see our Savior Christ in his time would have Eunuchs to be
his Ministers, if men could receive it upon that account, Mat. 19. 13. For if
none were admitted or esteemed to be a Minister of the Word and Sacrament, but
such as enter in at such strait gate, Luke 13. 24. I believe we should not have
had such Heaps or Swarms of Teachers, or Preachers as we had of late, 2 Timothy 4.
3. but should have had a pure sort of Preacher, that had rather die then turn;
as Ministers have done in these times; for we believe in reason, that he which
has laid away his privy Members from him for the truth sake, is most likest if
need require to lay down his life, for the truth sake; for that qualification
works a glorious change in nature, so that I may say, if it were possible to
Gold Lucifer the grand Devil, it would bring to the true obedience of God, to
have a saving faith and to become a holy Angel again.

As for Example, Behold the difference between the Ox and the Bull, the Ox is
meek, gentle, and quiet, the Bull hot, furious, and quarrelsome, sometime for
no cause but his humor, he roareth and teareth the ground with his feet and
horns, and if there be stacks of Wheat, or Cocks of Hay or any such thing nigh
him, he will spend his sury in scattering them about; and think it is his glory
that nothing can stand before him, and so is the stone Horse, Bore, Ram, Cock,
or any stoned creature, proud, furious, and of a quarrelsome nature, but being
Gelded they become of a clean contrary nature, so that I say as I said before,
Gelding is so virtual, that it would change the Devil in nature; and make him a
holy Angel* as good as he was when he was created*

Here you see a man may argue much for Eunuchs Ministers* from the different
nature of beasts, and bring many reasons bac'kt with Scripture to maintain it*
for David in the person of Christ says, Psalm. 22. Many Bulls have compassed
me, he does not term them (Priests, Mat. 27. 1, 2. Oxen For the Ox knows his
owner, Esa. 1. 3. And those Priests had they been Eunuchs should have known
Christ; therefore their stony proud hearts was their ruin and destruction; and
now I will show you what time has manifested in this point.

First it is clear that the Apostles in their time allowed Priests to marry,
yet with some restriction, for whereas then Laymen might have two or three
Wives, the Priest must have but one, and after as the Church grew and was
stablished in power, the Priests striving one with another for means, and
preferment sets all in a bloody War; then the parish Priest turn as ours do
now; turn this way or that way, any way to keep their means because of their
Wives and Children after the Wars is ended; the Church seeing the cause of
their misery to be the married Priest, and that such would soon let the Church
sink, rather then suffer the least to save it; made a decree that no married
men should be Priests, and the Church had rest a thousand years.

Then Hus, Luther, Calvin, with many more covetous stone Priests does quarrel,
and will have Wives contrary to their Vows, and divide Christendom putting it
into a bloody War; making a great rent in the Church, (which had they been
Eunuchs, they would not have done it) and we English take part with them, and
excluding the old Romish Church, set up a Church of our own moulding with
married Priests; and no sooner was it ^et up, but some of our Priests having
not preserment, and means enough to satisfy their greedy minds, under pretense
of showing a more holy way, quarrels with the Church; so that all those Priests
whose greedy bellies are not satisfied get together, consults, (and being
called Puritans,) resolve to preach against the decent Ceremonies of the
Church, taking any slight occasion to quarrel, and holding forth any whimsie,
that would work upon the people, and stirring them up for their own advantage;
and this they did in a more cunning way then can be declared, until they
brought it to a bloody cruel war, and overthrew the Church by force of tumults
that knew not what they did; in assisting a few Members to overthrow the
legality of the whole Parliament in 1641.

The said Priests then preaching, that Oaths was not obligary, damn themselves
and the whole Nation in perjury, murders, and theft, beyond all Heathenish
Infidels, that they now stink in the sight of all Nations; thus they preaching
rebellion get upmost: yet being not the Ministers of Christ, none would obey
them, neither could they settle any thing, but were forced to come down again,
to say any thing to keep in, and turn like weather-cocks, or base slaves to the
several humors of their several Governors and Masters; so that if the Devil
would come, they would deny God, and preach him for a piece of bread or the
tyth; and their wives and children is the main cause of this evil: for if the
Priests were single, they would not be so greedy and covetous; and they would
stand to the death for the Church, as we see the Priests of ROME do: but the
Romish entrance to the Ministry, is too broad a way, which was and is the cause
that their Church is subject to miscarry, as I showed before.

But some men will say, Why then did *Paul, Tim. 3. 2. give toleration for
Priests to marry? I answer, because of the hardness of men's hearts did he then
suffer Priests to marry; for if he had said none shall be Priests but Eunuchs;
or that he had said, Priests shall not be married to women, but live a single
life, the Church then being in its Infancy, should have fallen for want of
Ministers; for who then would have been a Minister upon that account? Alas! you
see how the Disciples fall away from Christ for a less occasion, John 6. 66.
But from the beginning of the Creation it was not so; for God had ordained
Eunuchs to be his Ministers; and when those orders of Eunuchs, called the Sons
of God, Genesis 6. 2. broke their order, and would no more part with their privy
Members, but take wives and are become worldings like other Laymen; for whom
it is lawful so to do. Then evil increased so, that God repents that he had
made man, and drowned the whole world, except Noah, a righteous person that
foresaw it, and was saved by obeying Gods command, Genesis 6. and the Prophet
Isaiah understanding this, invites the order of Eunuchs to the House of God
again to be his Ministers, Isa. 56. 4, 5. and Christ himself also does invite
them, Matthew. 19. 12. and that in Matthew. 24. 37, 38, 39. Luke 17. 26, 27, 18,
29. It was not because the Laymen did marry, and give in marriage, eat, drink,
plant, build, which things are for laymen to do; but for Ministers, it is
unlawful and destructive for themselves and Nation, to build, plant, and to
exceed in eating and drinking, or to be worldly given; for why? they ought to
be true Eunuchs only for God's service, as the Ox is, which minds not to
propagate his own seed, but his Masters seed.

Now the Protestant Priest will say, I have the Scripture for my warrant to
marry; says the Romish Priest, I am sure thy marrying will be thy ruin: thou
had best come to me again: says Origin the the Eunuch Priest, ye are both in
the way to damnation; for your Gates is wide, but enter in at the strait gate
as I did; take your unruly member away from you, and then you come into me: I
am sure we shall not have too many Priests, and we shall be peaceable, we shall
care only for God and his Church, we shall leaven the world with our meekness
which we nor they could not obtain, while we had stones to move us to a
choleric nature; we shall be as useful for to feed men's souls as the Oxen is
for their bodies.

And you shall find that the strivings and quarrels of their Priests have been
the cause of all the civil Wars in the world; for the Priests war will at
length prove a national quarrel: and the reason why the Priests quarrel, is,
because there is too many of them; every one of them will be a Priest for
lucres sake, and he that is truly called of God will not refuse it: if he
cannot have it without he came in as aforesaid, it is the only way to try their
calling whether it be of God: or not of God and God says, that he will give
Priests after his own mind; and those must be Eunuchs.

Kings found Eunuchs to be the most fittest for their presence and service as
you may read in the Scripture, and yet in Foreign Countries Kings have them;
and what a glorious fine godly man was that Eunuch of great Authority under
Candace Queen of the Ethiopians who as he was riding in his Chariot was reading
the Scripture: and how sweet was his nature, that as soon as Philip shows to
him Jesus Christ, he presently believes and is Baptized, Act. 8. from v. 25.
to the end, but contrarily, how stubborn against Christ the Priests were, you
see through out the Gospel, and what mischief then and all along they did to
their Nation; one Levite Priest for his Wife or Whores sake, (for she was but
his Concubine) sets all Israel to fight one against the other; that it was Gods
mercy to them, they were not all consumed that bout, Judge. 20. let this suffice
now for this matter.

Now to conclude, 1. The General (as I said before) being a single person must
give us a law; and he must frame it by Scripture rule, and so the people of
Room gave advice, when the King of England (after his conversion) sent to the
Pope to know by what law he should govern, the Pope answered him, saying you
have the Old and New Testament make you a law agreeable to that.

2. The General must be one that knows all the cases in the Nation usually
tried by law; for Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Act.
7. 22. he knew all their laws and controversies, and so does the Master of the
Rolls; our General know all the controversies of this Nation, that is the Man
to give law.

There must be a King to execute the said law, else it will do no good, for
notwithstanding the Israelites had a good law, they did not regard it; when
there was no King in Israel every one did what was right in his own Eyes, Judge.
17. 6. and if you read from hence Judge. 17. to the end of that book, you shall
see what evil they did; ye, as bad as Sodom, Judge. 19. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,
28. and what wars was among them for it, Judge. 20. and the reason is because
they had no King, and the said reason is cited three times to show us the
reason and truth of it, Judge. 17. 6, 18. and 1. 19. and 1. therefore it was
time for Israel to ask a King; and I speak it with reverence, when the people
asked a King, it touched Samuels self interest, and he looked upon it as a
great affront; therefore he is displeased (because the people now would cast
him out to have a King in his place) and speaks bitter things to the people;
yet you see the peoples case was good, for his sons who were made Judges, (whom
he thought should Reign) carried themselves base, took bribes, and perverted
judgment, and the Lord justifies the people and bids him hear them; and the
Lord by arguments persuades Samuel to be patient and not lay it so to heart;
yet self interest is so sweet, that the good Prophet for all that, labors to
persuade the people not to have a King, until they were at last so resolute,
that they refuse to hear Samuel, and said, Nay, but there shall be a King over
us.

FINIS.

