An Exact Account of the Total Defeat of the Irish Army at ANGRIN in Connaught,
by their Majesty's Forces, on Sunday the Twelfth of this instant July, 1691.
24. July. 1691.
THIS Morning arrived an Express from Ireland to Her Majesty, with the Good
News of a Total Defeat of the Irish Army, by Their Majesty's Forces; the
substance whereof is as follows:

That on Sunday last in the Afternoon, about five a Clock, our Army consisting
of about 23000 Horse and Foot, fell upon the Irish at Angrin, notwithstanding
they found them drawn out in very good Order: the Enemy consisted of about 8000
Horse, and 19000 Foot. The Dispute was very sharp, the French and Irish
maintaining their ground for above 4 Hours; in which time there was scarce one
Batallion on either side, but were more or less engaged. The Irish Army in this
their last Effort, behaved themselves with great and unexpected Bravery. But at
length by the Conduct of our General, the Diligence of our Officers, and
undaunted Resolution of all our Men, the Enemy were forced to give way, and
fled in all the Confusion imaginable. Our Army by this Victory became entire
Masters of their Camp, the Irish leaving behind them all their Baggage and
Provision, with nine or ten Pieces of Canon.

As this was the first time that the Irish have shown any considerable
Gallantry, so by the Blessing of Providence upon our Arms, it served only to
render the Conquest more Complete. Of the Loss which they sustained, we have in
general this Account: That Mon. St. Ruth, that Monster of Cruelty, is killed in
this Action; most of their General Officers are killed or taken. Sarcefield is
said to have made his Escape by Flight. The Number of the Irish Soldiers
slain, are computed to be about 5000. Neither was this important Victory
obtained without some considerable Loss on our side: Those of any Note, whereof
we are as yet informed, were Major General Holstein killed, Prince De
Hermanstadt supposed mortally wounded, Col. Herbert killed; the Lord Cutts, who
had signalized his Courage before Limerick the last Summer, has received a
Wound in this Action, but it is hoped not mortal. The forementioned Express
being sent away immediately upon the Action, the particulars of the Pursuit are
not yet arrived: However, the Consequence of this great Affair, can (under
Providence) be no less than a Total and Speedy Reduction of that Kingdom to
their Majesty's Obedience.

I shall trouble you only with one Remarque more, which as it is amazing in its
Circumstances, so it ought not to be passed over by any true Englishman,
without particular Thanks to Almighty God; and that is this present Week of
Wonders, which by God's Blessing, has brought us more particular Intelligences
of Extraordinary and Great Successes both at Home and Abroad, than perhaps can
be met withal in the whole Annals of Time, viz. The D. of Saxony's Passing of
the Rhine, in sight of the French Army; The Confirmation of the Relief of Coni,
The Raising of the Blockade of Monmelian; The safe Arrival of our
English-Smyrna Fleet, Our Success at Athlone; and to crown all, the Account we
have here given you of the entire Defeat of the Irish Forces.

London: Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane. 1691.


