An Exact and Perfect Relation Of the Arrival of the Ship the JAMES and MARY
Captain PHIPPS Commander, With 200000 l. in Gold and Silver, taken up in nine
Fathom Water from the bottom of the Sea, being a supposed Wreck of a Spanish
Galion, Castaway above 43* years ago among the Bahama Islands, as it was taken
from the aforesaid Captain, now riding in Graves-end Road.
MAny have been the Attempts to discover the hidden Treasure of the Ocean,
which by some, is Judged to equalize that of the Earth, but few have succeeded
in this design, till the industrious Captain William Phipps, a Native of
New England, bent his Study and Resolution to bring that Art to so great a
Perfection, as to anticipate Fame, and without such visible Demonstration, as
he has afforded us, to surmount belief it self; For certainly to tell Mankind
of taking up the Cargo of above 40 years Wreck in full Sea 17 Leagues from any
Shore in nine Fathem Water, would be thought to banter the Age, and turn the
same to ridicule. But there having been such a wonderful instance, which will
fill our Pockets with Coin, as well as our Ears with astonishment, I shall
relate the particulars, (viz.)

The said Captain Phipps having for some years pursued the Art of weighing of
Wrecks, and not without considerable progress; and having good information of a
Spanish Galion, that was cast away among the Rocks and Shoals of the Bahama
Istands about the year 1643. not only by some Spaniards that were aboard her
when she was lost, but also by observation of others that had been in search
after her, but all miscarried in the point: The Captain had almost certain
Knowledge that he might discover the place; and so like a good Subject
acquainted His late Majesty first with the design, proffering his Life and
Fortunes at his Princes Service to search after it. But whether the
impropability of the Adventure being looked upon as a Chimera, or some other
reason, the Captain was not countenanced; The said Captain thereupon acquainted
some Noblemen and Persons of Quality with his fi^'d Resolution, and cogent
Reasons to induce the belief of that performance; they readily joined issue
with him, advancing what Money the Captain judged necessary to Equip him to
Sea, being 2400 l. they being Persons not to be imposed upon, (viz.) His Grace
the Duke of Alb. -- e the Right Honorable the Lord F. -- d, Sir James Hayes,
Sir John Narborough, Mr. Nicholson, Mr. Foxcraft, and Mr. Smith, becoming his
Owners or Proprietors, himself having only a Sixteenth part, who having
provided himself with all materials, and one Tender and Sloop, Sailed out of
the Downs in the Ship James and Mary about the 12. of September last, and
having touched at some places for refreshment, he arrived about the middle of
February last among the Bahama Islands, Shoals and Rocks; and after some days
search happily pitched upon, and found the direct place where the Spanish
Galiou in the year 1643. was cast away with great Riches Aboard, though the
same was above 17 Leagues from any thing of Shore, to the Westward of Florida
in nine Fathom Water, where, having Moored his Ship at some distance, set his
four Diverse at work, though they were mightily impeded by the Tempestiousness
of the Season, that they were forced to lie by a long space, having the
prospect of Death every Minuit at the point of their Cable, for the Rocks were
so numerous, that (like Scilla and Caribdis,) they were like to be split upon
one, while they were endeavoring to avoid the other; Besides, they could not
make use of their Engine, being a hollow Vessel evenly deprest almost to the
bottom, retains the Air without filling with Water, whereby the Party diving,
when almost spent his Breath, puts his head under the Vessel which replenishes
him with Breath again; and in this dangerous posture they continued working
above Six Weeks.

And that which is observable, not the least Plank or Hull of the said Ship
appeared; for the Ship being broak to pieces on the Rock, the parts were either
driven away with the violence of the Waves, or consumed by the Worms which in
those Seas will Eat through the thickest Plank in some years time. And it is
further remarkable, that the Silver had so long remained under Water, as to
petrify a congealed Substance into White Coral-Trees growing thereon, some with
mighty spreading Branches, even to a great height, which the Captain has
Testimonials to show, having presented his Grace the Duke with this Curiosity;
and having taken up as much as they could well find, left the said Bahama
Island the second of last May, and with some stress of Weather made sight of
Cilly Island the third of June following, and is now Happily arrived in the
River of Thames on this side Graves end, with such a Treasure as to the Honor
as well as Profit of the, Nation no Ship ever performed the like. His Grace the
Duke of Alb -- upon the receipt of this News, accompanied with Sir James Hayes,
etc. went down the River, to bid the Captain Welcome; who coming on board, found
all things so mightily to his Satisfaction, that his Grace Generously obliged
every Man and Boy of the Ships Crew to Drink his Health; but left order that
none go ashore till she is Unladen of her Cargo, being actually 26 Tons, and
700 l. weight of Silver, fifteen Tons thereof being Pieces of Eight, two Bars
or Ingots of Gold 17 l. weight, six Brass Cannon of thirty hundred weight each,
being as serviceable as at first, which amount in the whole to above 200000 l.
besides all the Charges. She now rides on this side Graves-end, and is well
Guarded, no persons being suffered to go aboard her, nor come ashore, without
special Order. It is observable, that in this whole Voyage, the Captain has
lost neither Man nor Boy, although they were in so great hazard.

This Relation was taken from a Gentleman who was on Board the said Ship the
whole Voyage.

FINIS.

