THE UNIVERSAL Love of God TO MANKIND DEFENDED, Against the Misapprehensions of
some People about the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation

Written for the Sake of the Simplehearted, by John Everard.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street; and at the Bible in Leaden Hall street
near the Market, 1697.

THE UNIVERSAL Love of God TO Mankind, etc.
I Find many Well-inclined People much stumbled about the Doctrine of Election
and Reprobation, as laid down by some, That God did, from Eternity before the
World began, Ordain a small Number for Salvation; and Reprobate the most part
of Mankind, and so pass them by, not giving them Saving Grace. If it be so,
that the Number be so fixed, that not one can be dimished nor added; then the
Prophets nor Apostles, by all their Labor, did not, nor could not, add one to
God; neither by Preaching can any now do it: But Election there is, and
Reprobation, but it stands in the two Seeds: The LORD has Sown his pure Seed
in the Hearts of all Men, and as they join to it, it will Regenerate hem, and
so make them Injoyers and Hairs of Endless Life; but if Man join to the
Reprobate Seed of the Serpent, then they bring Death over themselves. But some
will say, I have chosen you; I say, the Lord said, I Sanctified thee from the
Womb, and Ordained thee a Prophet to the Nations* I grant the Great God, in
Dear Love, did Raise up some, but it will not therefore follow, that he over
did cast away any, without affording them a Day of Mercy: For though the LORD
may have Raised up some in all Ages, yet it was not only for their own Sakes,
but to call to others, and to show them the Mind of the LORD, that he did not
desire the Death of a Sinner, but he had rather they should turn from their
Sins and Live.

And, to let the World know, that he sent his Dear Son into the World, that all
might believe, and be Saved from Sin by him; he tasted Death for every Man; And
said the Apostle, It was the Will of God that all Men should be Saved, and come
to the knowledge of the Truth; And it being so declared by Paul, we may
conclude, that the LORD, who is the Fountain of Love and Mercy, did not decree
the Death of Mankind against his own Will.

But some will say, He Died only for the World of Believers of the Elect? It is
not proper to call the Elect the World; for Christ says, If you were of the
World, the World would Love you; but I have chosen you out of the World:
Therefore it is not proper to call Believers, or the Elect, the World.

Now seeing it is so clearly laid down in the Holy Scripture, That Christ Died
for the Sins of the whole World, and not of Believers only; then we may
conclude, that if Man believe in his pure Spirit, a Measure of it being given
to every one to Profit withal, all that Dye not Saved, must not place their
Destruction on the LORD, nor Blame him, but their own selves, for Rebellion
against the Spirit of the LORD: And so I may say, as said the Prophet, Why will
ye Dye? O Friends! Christ Died, he tasted Death for every Man, and gave himself
a Ransom for all; and he has done much for us thereby: But he has sent his
Holy Spirit into our Hearts, to Sanctify, Wash and Purify our Hearts; so that
obeying the Spirit of Christ, you will have a Possession in the Kingdom of
Glory, obtained for us by his Dear Son.

Now, Reader, thy Teachers may tell thee, that if thou have found thy Heart
Pricked for Sin, and have been Sorrowful for Sin, and have felt the Incomes of
Life to Warm thy Soul, then thou may conclude thy self in a Hopeful State; I
say so too. But where is that Man in the World, but the Lord, at one time or
other, does Prick to the Heart, and bring Sorrow over him; and when he is
brought low, he sees there is Mercy for him, and so Comfort and Hope springs up
in his Soul. Thus is Man Visited; by which he, upon his Death- Bed, clears the
LORD; and upon these Experiences thou art, it may be, Received a Member of the
Church; and so then say, all is well, Christ has paid the Debt, and now the
LORD looks upon thee in his Son: But pray, for thy poor Souls sake, Consider,
If any Man be in Christ, the same is a New Creature, Old things are passed
away, and all things are become New; a new Heart, a tender Heart, a Heart which
Fears to Offend him, in every thing to love him with thy whole Heart, and thy
Neighbor as thy self; a Heart, not only to part with Ishmael, but Offer up
Isaac, if called for; and not to Love thy own Life for Christ and his Gospel
Sake. Oh! If thou can say so, then Happy art thou, if thou continue to the
end thou shall be Saved. And this Love of God will spring so up in thy Soul,
that thou will say with the Prophet, O come to the Waters of Life freely: And
when the Spirit of the LORD fills thy Heart with Gospel-tidings, which shall be
a Message of Joy to all People; then thou will say, The Arm of the Lord is not
shortened, that cannot Save; but wilt cry, The Salvation of the LORD is come,
and all Flesh shall, or may see the Salvation of the LORD, and thou will not be
as one that Mocketh, when thou hold forth his Salvation; but if all take
thee at the Word, by Believing the Gospel Preached there is room enough in
God's Mercy, for the whole Creation, Glory to the LORD in the Highest: But thou
may yet say, Though all have some stirrings of GOD, they are so small and
weak, that it cannot work that Holy Dread in them, not to Offend the Lord: Look
into thy own Heart, and if thou find it so with thee, that it bring thee into a
Holy Fear; so that, having a Hope of Glory, thou Purify thy Heart by thy Hope,
then the same Seed which is sown in thy Heart, is of one Nature in all, and
will work the same in all, according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ. But
thou may yet say, Jacob have I Loved, and Esau have I Hated: So it was not
said in Genesis, but in Malachi 1. 2. But the Elder shall serve the Younger;
which, if it had Related to their Eternal State, it would imply Esau is now in
Heaven serving Jacob; but it was said to Jacob, Thy Brethren shall serve thee.
But Isaac Blessed Esau also, though Jacob had the Dominion for a time: But the
People of Edom were called in Christ, as well as the Seed of Israel, as it is
written, In thee, and in thy Seed, shall all the Families of the Earth be
Blessed.

These things I have wrote in the Love of Christ, that none may shut up the
Kindness of Christ from Man.

And now, my Dear Friends, whom the Lord has called into his Blessed Work, let
us go on still to Preach his Universal Gospel freely, and set forth the Glory
of Christ in Love, in Life and sound Doctrine; then, if the People will not
take Warning, we shall be Clear; and the LORD will be our Exceeding Great
Reward.

So Humbly Prays he, who desires to walk in great Lowliness of Mind before
the Lord, John Everard.

FINIS.

