AN EXACT ACCOUNT OF The Elector of SAXONY's passing the RHINE, with His Army,
defeating several of the FRENCH, and rendering himself Master of several strong
places Abandoned by them: Together with the raising of the Blockade of
Mountmeli an in SAVOY.
THE last Mail from Holland Dated the 17th of July, has brought us the welcome
News of His Electoral Highness of Saxonies passing the Rhine with the Army
under His Command. On the 26 and 27 of June; an Account of so great Importance
and so little expected either by the Confederates or the Enemy, by reason of
the great dificulty of the Enterprice, that it has as much rejoiced the First,
as it has struck a terror amongst the Latter. The particulars of this great
Action is as fallows.

After the French that lay Intrencht on the other side of the Rhine near
Manheim, had for severl days furiously played with their Cannon on this side of
the River to hinder our Men to pass it: His Electoral Highness of Saxony
accompanied by the Electoral Prince His Son, the vel Marshal Caprara and the
General Schoning; went the 27 of June about One a Clock in the Morning toward
the Bridge of the Neckar, to find out a passage over the Rhine; after they were
a^ved about a League below Manheim, they found an Island near a Ferry called
the Sandhofer-Ferry; His Electoral Highness immediately sent some to take a
view of it, and whereas it was observed that it was a very advantageous Post,
and that near it there was still remaining part of the Bridge the Enemy had
demolish't; His Electoral Highness ordered instantly some Hundereds of men to
pass over in Boats and to take possession of it, which before break of day was
executed so secretly that the French, although in a manner done in their sight,
had not the least notice of it, staying all the day following in the Fort only
half a Mile distant from the said Island.

The French that had possessed themselves of this Island were most put to the
Sword. A Soldier of Oppau, called Christeffle Ruff, shot the French Sentenal
like a Bird from a Tree, the rest were driven into the River, and their Cannon
Seized, some of them geting over; and informing of this News, those that lay in
the Fort on the other side of the River, they immediately abandoned the said
Fort, the Foot retreating toward Philipsbourg, and the Horse toward
Creutznak. And His Electoral Highness finding that he was like to have no
opposition, immediately ordered a considerable Body of Men to pass the River,
the Electoral Prince his Son was amongst the first that past it; and in a
little while 8000 of our Foot with two Regiments of Dragoons took Post on the
other side of the River, under the Command of General Hedersdorf.

A great Detachment of the French, furiously attact our Men, endeavoring to
drive them back to the other side of the River; but they were put to the
flight, leaving many killed behind them. In the mean time our whole Army past
the River, and they being joined by 9000 of the Cercle of Franconia, and 10000
Men of the Cercle of Suabia; they will now enter immediately upon some
considerable Action; And its thought His Electoral Highness has a design upon
Landaw, a very considerable Fortress, which is said to be very ill provided,
and one of those places out of which the French have Drawn most of their
Garrison to reinforce their Army.

The French that are still in the Pelatinate are in the greatest terror in the
world, they have abandoned most of the Places they were in possession of,
amongst which there is Worms and Newstad, and all this in so great a have they
were not able to burn them. They have also abandoned the Castle of Leiningen
which the Confederates have possessed themselves of. We have made a great many
Prisoners and amonst them a considerable number of Officers. In Worms alone we
have seiced four French Captains and a Quartermaster.

This glorious expedition as it advances in a great measure the interest of the
Confederates, so indeed 'twill be of great advantage to his Highness the Duke
of Savoy, for the French must needs call hack all the Regiments that Marshal de
Lorge has Ordered to march into Savoy, in case they will endeavor to make the
least resistance. It Is said to the Glory of his Electoral Highness of Saxony,
that by this strenuous Action he has gained no less honor than the great
Gustavus Adolphus did near Opruheim.

It Is said that an Express has not only Confirmed all this News, but has also
informed the Court; that his Electoral Highness was actually besiging Landaw,
and that he had cut off 3000 men of the Rear of the French Army.

From Savoy we have a full Confirmation of raising the Siege of Coni, and
besides, we are told, that the French have been forced to raise the Blockade of
Montmelian, in such a manner that it turns to their everlasting shame. The
Governor of Monemelian sent a Trumpeter to the French commander of the
Blockade, desiring him to grant him a pass port to pay his devotion to a Church
out of the City, very famous amongst the Roman Catholics; The Commander
readily granted it, but the Governor being sensible of the French faith,
foresaw very well they would break their word, and indeed the whole business
was contrived to surprise them. After he had laid a Considerable Body of his
men into an Ambush, he went out in a Procession accompan'd by his Guards. The
French, against their promise did not fail to fall upon him; but he retreating
with his men, drew them into the same Ambush, and 600 of the French were killed
upon the spot: Whereupon the French Commander found himself forced to raise the
Blockade.

London, Printed for R. Bauldwin, near the Oxford-Inn, in Warwick Lane. 1691.


