An Exact and Complete JOURNAL OF ALL THE Considerable Actions OF THE
Confederate Fleets and Armies: From the Opening of the CAMPAIGNE, For this
Present Year, 1695.

Until the Conclusion thereof.

LONDON, Printed for John Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall. MDCXCVI.

A COMPLETE JOURNAL OF ALL THE Considerable Actions OF THE CONFEDERATES, Both
by Sea and Land for the Year, MDCXCV.
March 31st. N. S.

THE Spaniards defeated 1200 French in Catalonia, killed 260, wounded 136, and
made 690 Prisoners of War. As also another Party, whereof they killed 400, took
80, and put the rest to Flight. The King of Spain sent the Officers and
Soldiers 12000 Crowns to be divided among them, for their good Services.

12th. Amst. The French drew a considerable Body of their Troops together, to
cover their Workmen that are employed in casting up a Line, between the Lys and
the Schelde in Flanders.

14th. The Troops of the Allies drew together, to form a flying Camp to observe
the French.

15th. The Turks gained a Naval Victory over the Venetians, beat their Fleet,
and recovered the Famous Island of Scio, which was immediately after abandoned
by the Venetians.

17th. The French finished their new Line between the Lys and the Schelde,
reaching from Courtrary to St. Denny, on which were employed 3000 Pioneers,
they raised several Batteries, and made a Ditch before their Line 8 foot deep,
and 24 broad; and behind it the Marshall de Bofflers lies posted with the
Troops under his Command.

18th. The Marshal de Villeroy was made General of the French Army in Flanders.

The new Grand Signior declared he would Command his Army in Person this
Campaigne.

24th. The Marshall de Villeroy arrived in the French Camp.

25th. The Trident of 64, and the Content of 54 Guns, two Frenchmen of War,
were taken by some English Frigots crusing near Malta.

Centa a Spanish Garrison in Africa, near the Straits Mouth, continues to be
besieged by the Moors.

26th. Captain Bembo forced on shore and destroyed 7 Sail of French Ships, near
Cape de Hague and Grantance Bay, 2 of which they got off, and brought away
laden with Salt and Tobacco; they also destroyed 3 more French Ships at the
same time, and laden with the same Goods.

Alexander Molino, General of the Morea succeeded General Zeno, who after he had
quitted Scio desired leave by Letters of the Senate to return home.

The Intended Siege of Cazal, by reason of the great Snoes and cold Weather is
turned into a Blockade.

27th. It Is given out at Paris, the Dauphin will command upon the Rhine, where
the French are forming a Camp.

The Confederate Forces are also preparing to do the same there.

28th. Marshall de Villeroy viewed the new Line, and afterward drew off part
of his Troops, especially the Horse, and Posted them in Courtray, Minin,
Tournay, and other places near at hand, leaving the rest to guard the Line.

The Guernsey and Jarsey Privateers had taken and brought in 9 or 10 French
Ships, Prizes, laden with Wine and Brandy.

Several new Frigots, Bomb-Vessels and Advice-Boats were launced from the Docks
on the Thames.

29th. The French use all the necessary precautions to secure their Sea Coasts,
both in the Ocean and Mediterranean.

The Muscovites are preparing to enter the Country of the Crim-Tartars with a
very numerous Army, and to attaque Azoff; the Czar commands in Persons, and has
sent General Gourdon a Scotshman with 10000 Horse to Invest that place, and has
left a good Army behind to secure his own Dominions against the Invasion of the
Tartars.

The Elector of Saxony will send a considerable body of his Troops to the
Emperors assistance in Hungary.

30th. The Spaniards and Miquelets in Catalonia, defeated another Party of
French of 2000 Foot, and 500 Horse, of which they killed 414 upon the place,
and took 500 Prisoners, among them, 24 Officers, with a 100 Mules laden with
Provision. The King of Spain to reward these good Services, has given 10000
Crowns, the Queen Regent 6000, and the Queen Mother 2000, to be distributed
amongst the Miquelets and Country People in those parts.

The Hope an English Frigot of 50 Guns was taken by 5 French men of War, after
an obstinate Fight, in which she had 80 men killed and wounded, and was much
disable in her Masts and Riging.

May 1. Prince Eugine of Savoy, and the Governor of Milan viewed the Line of
Circumvalation about Cazal, having left 5000 men to continue the Blockade of
that place being resolved to besiege it in Form, as soon as the weather is
proper for it.

2d. The Elector of Saxony is to Command the Emperors Army in Hungary this
Campaigne, and will send 8000 of his best Troops to join the Imperial Army, to
act against the Turks.

3d. Prince Lewis of Badon arrived at Nurimburg, and has sent orders to the
Imperial Forces to take the Field out of hand.

The French are going to form a Camp near Landaw.

4th. The Duke de Noailles is gone Post to Catalonia.

5th. The Count de Montal is gone to command a body of 5 or 6000 men near
Dunkirk.

Monsieur de Vaubon is at St. Malo, to give the necessary orders for the
fortifying that place.

Marshall Choiseul commandeds on the Coast of Normandy, 5 or 6000 men are to
encamp for that purpose near Bayone. At Marsellies they have planted 200 pieces
of Cannon, and 40 Mortars on Batteries. Marshall Tourville has been there to
view these Works. The Gens-d'Arms that wintered in Savoy are ordered to
Germany: And to make good the late losses the French have suffered in
Catalonia, 3000 men are sent thither, which before were intended for Piemont.
The French are preparing to draw out their Arriere-Ban this Summer, The
Poll-Tax in France produces great complaints, besides 'twill fall short, which
is worst of all, which puts the French Court upon new Methods to raise money;
and the King himself is going to Alienate several of his Demesns or Crown
Lands: besides new Edicts published for creating new Officers. The Deputies of
the Clergy meet the 25th Instant at Paris, in order to give the King a good
round sum of Money.

6th. The Camp of the Allies broke up from Deynse, and the Troops returned to
their Quarters, but they will have orders to march again in few days, and their
Rendezvous will be near Lovain.

7th. The French are very apprehensive of the Confederates breacking into their
Country, and therefore to prevent it, have made a Line between Haure and the
Sambre Marshall de Villeroy is gone to meet the French King at Campeigne. The
Marshal de Boufflers in expected at Namur, being to command the Forces on that
side.

8th. The Assistance, an English man of War took 4 French Ships, Prizes, 4 or 5
Leagues off Heyligeland, laden with Wine, Brandy, Paper, Pruens and Molosses.

9th. The French made a way half a quarter of a League broad, from Namur to
Dunkirk, for the more easy march of their Troops to succor one another, being
resolved to keep within their Lines this Summer.

10th. Lieutenant Admiral Allimonde with some Dutch men of War arrived in the
Downs,

12th. The King of England embarked at Gravesend, and arrived in Holland, with
a Convoy of 22 Sail of Men of War, besides Fireships and Tenders.

16th The General Assembly of the French Clergey met.

17.18, 19th. The English men of War have taken several French Privateers, with
in these few weeks.

20th. Admiral Russell sailed from Cadiz, toward the Coasts of Spain.

30th. The Marshall de Villeroy is drawing his Army together at Leuzey,
between Conde, Tournay and Aith.

June 9. The King of England arrived at Aerseele, between Deynse and Thielt,
and as his Majesty passed through Gent, the same Honors were done to him as
are Customary at the Reception of a King of Spain. The Elector of Bavaria left
his Camp at Ninove, where he had an Army of 40000, to come to wait upon the
King.

A Party of the Allies upon the upper Rhine, advanced very near Philipsburg,
and burnt there a Magazine of the the Enemies of 6000 Sacks of Wheat, and 30000
of Oats.

Monsieur Cattinat the French General lies close in Dauphine.

Marshall de Lorge is arrived at Landau, where the French Army is encamped.

The Prince of Baden arrived in the Confederate Army on the Rhine, which lies
encamped at Gartach, and is about 22000 Strong.

Marshall de Lorge passed the Rhine with the French Army, and have entrenched
themselves near Bruchsal, being about 30000 M^n.

The French Clergy gave the King but ten Millions of Livers, which is not one
English Million, when 20 were expected from them.

The Marshall de Noailles, the French General is fallen sick in Catalonia, and
the Duke of Vendosme, who Commanded in Province, is sent to Catalonia to take
the Command of the Army upon him.

The Armies in Flanders are in motion, and a Body of 25000 of the Allies
actually one the march to Namur.

17th. The Duke of Wirtemberg is marched with the Forces under his Command, to
invest the Fort of Kenoque, where he arrived the same afternoon, and in the
Evening broke ground in order to attaque it. Major General Churchil marched
with a considerable Detachment from his Majesty's Camp, to join the Duke of
Wirtemburg.

The Lines and Reboubts were finished before Cazal, and a Battery was raised,
from whence the Besiegers fired, and did great Execution.

18th. The Blockade of Cazal was turned into a Formal Siege, the Allies begin
to attaque it vigorously, and have already made a good progress.

The Grand Vizer disgraced and cast into Prison, with all his Friends and
Favorites, and their Estates confiscated, toward carrying on the War, and the
new Grand Viezr advanced by the Interest of the Sultana-Mother, who is a young
Man, without any experience in Military matters, and yet must command the Army
under the Grand Signor, who is preparing to march to Belgrade, where the
Sultans Palace is fitting up for his Highnesses Reception.

The Confederate Army upon the Rhine, continues encamped near Gartach, Steppach
and Eppinghem, are very advantageously posted, and have fortified their Camp
very strongly.

19th. The Troops of Hesse and Lunenburgh are on the march to join them, when
the Prince will advance toward the Enemy, who have no other design than to
destroy the Forage, and then repass the Rhine; the Forces of Munster are all
coming up to the Allies. Marshall de Lorge is decamped from Bruchsal to
Viseloch.

The Confederate Fleet under the Command of Admiral Russel appeared before
Toulon, and took several small Vessels. They detached 30 Men of War to Final,
to take in and Convoy some Spanish Soldiers thence, to Catalonia. The
Inhabitants of Toulon and Marseilles, removed their best Effects, and were
under great apprehensions of a Bombardment. The Grand Prior, Brother to the
Duke of Vendosme, Commands the Forces in these Parts, being a Lieutenant
General.

Marshall de Villeroy marched with great precipitation to defend the Lines,
which he apprehended the Enemy designed to force, having detached 30 Squadrons
to observe the Allies motions about Ipres.

A Brisque Action happned between the Allies and the French, near Fort Kenoque,
many killed and wounded on both sides, but the Allies entrenched themselves and
raised a Battery and fired upon the Enemy very warmly, and were preparing two
Batteries more.

22d. The Elector of Bavaria sent a Detachment under the Command of Brigadier
Fagal, to attaque 800 French, who were posted on an Eminence, on this side
their Lines, the only place from whence their works could be discovered, who
repulsed the French and forced them within their Lines.

14th. The Marquess of Carmarthen sailed to the Westward, with a Squadron of
men of War.

The Garrison of Centa sallied out upon the Moors, and beat them out of their
Trenches, and filled them up, and killed a great number of them.

The French are at a prodigous Expense in fortifying the Coast of Province, to
prevent the Confederate Fleets burning their Ships and Towns.

The Radzians defeated a Party of Turks under the Command of the Bassa of
Silestria.

Several Rencounters happened between Parties of the two Armies on the Rhine,
and the Hussars frequently bring in Prisoners, but some of 'em going to near
the French Camp, were attackt by a party sent from thence, and several of 'em
killed,

The Forces of Hanover, Zel and Wolfenbuttel being 3000 men, are marching to
join the Army commanded by Prince Lewis of Baden.

23d. Admiral Russel continues near the Isles of Hiores with a Fleet of 80
Sail, from whence they sail to Toulon, which allarmed the French, who had
posted 3000 Foot, and 400 Horse near the Sea side, and had received 24 Galleys
from Marseills (half maned) to secure the Port, the entrance whereof was
likewise strengthened with Chains and Booms, and Streets unpaved, and the tops
of houses uncovered, and they had planted on Batteries 300 pieces of Canon, and
34 Mortars: the like care has been taken at Marseilles.

The Trenches are opened before Cazal, and the Batteries are finished, and
fired from with great fury.

24th. The Duke of Vendosme arrived in Catalonia, and had taken upon him the
Command of the French Army, and had made a Review of them, and found them
mightily diminished by sickness, and several rencounters with the Enemy, and
had sent to Court for a Reinforcement.

The Earl of Athlone marched from Lovain to join the Forces of Brandenburgh and
Liege, who are encamped near the Mehaigne.

25th. The French in Kenoque have 4 several times attempted to regain the Post
the Allies made themselves Masters of, upon their first coming before the
place, and were as often beat back with considerable loss. They have made a new
Line within the Former, which cuts off Kenoque, in case the Allies should open
a Passage that way. They have opened their Sluices, which has hindered the Works.

Sept. 16. O. S. Lieutenant Admiral Allemonde arrived at Spithead with the
Dutch men of War, Bombvessels, Fireships, etc. from Holland, and joined my Lord
Berkeley.

26th. N. S. Mahomet Bey is returned to Tunis, having rgain'd all the Places
the Algerines had taken from him, and was preparing to carry the War into their
Territories.

Monsieur Cattinat lies still, having weakened his Army by great Detachments
sent from thence to serve the Coasts of Province.

29th. O. S. My Lord Berkeley sailed with the English and Dutch men of War,
Bombvessels and Fireships under his command, to the Coast of France.

27th. N. S. Two thousand Spanish Foot 500 Horse, and 7000 Miquelets, attackt 8
or 9000 French, under the command of Mounsieur de St. Silvestre, to convoy 200
Mules laden with Provisions to Castle Folet, and after a Dispute of 6 hours
forced the Enemy to retire in much disorder, having killed many of their Men,
and taken all the Mules except 25, who got into the Town.

A Party of 600 French Horse and Foot were defeated, who designed to intercept
the Allies Bread-Wagons, and other Provisions coming to the Army, 80 killed
upon the place, and diverse wounded.

28th. The King of England left the Army under the Command of the Prince de
Vuademont, and came with a Guard of Horse and Dragoons to Distleburg, near
Gent, and from thence to Lovain, and will join the Forces under the Command of
the Earl of Athlone, with those of ^randenburgh and Liege, which are marched
toward Namur, as is likewise the Army commanded by the Elector of Bavaria, the
Siege of that place being designed, and the necessary preparations of Cannon,
Morters, Ammunition and other Stores of War and Mouth being brought from
Maestrich, to Liege and Huy; several thousands of Pioneers are summoned in from
the Country round about.

Marshall de Lorge thought to have drawn Prince Lewis out of his strong Camp,
made a faint of a March, but the Prince, tho 10000 weaker than the French,
would not stir, and so disappointed de Lorge, who returned to his old Camp.

Rear Admiral Nevil arrived at Final, with a Squadron of men of War and
Transport Ships, in which were embarked 5000 Soldiers for Catalonia, as also
1800 Bombs, and 1600 Barrels of Powder.

The Elector of Saxony arrived at Viena, and was received by the Emperor and
the King of the Romans, with all immaginable Honor.

Marshall de Lorge fell Sick, and Marshall de Joyeuse took the Command of
that Army upon him.

July 3d. N. S. Namur was invested by the Earl of Athlone on one side, and by
the Brandenburghers on the other side of the Sambre. The King of England
arrived in the Camp the same day, about 5 of the Clock in the Evening: the
Pioneers began to work on the Lines of Circumvalation and Contravalation, and
lay Bridges over the Sambre and the Meuse. 20 Battalions of English and Scots
detached from the Army under the Command of Prince Vaudemont, are on their
march on join the Camp before Namur; Marshall de Boufflers threw himself into
the place, with several Regiments of Dragoons, and commands in Chief. Great
numbers of Deserters come out of the Town of the Camp, being Italians and
Spaniards, taken at the Battle of Martiglia in Piemont. The Garrison consists
of 19 Battalions of Foot, and 8 Regiments of Dragoons, 2 whereof are mounted,
the Horses of the rest being sent away.

The Marquis of Carmathen sailed from Plymoth.

1st. O. S. The Fleet commanded by may Lord Berkeley arrived at Guernsey, and
sails to morrow toward St. Malo.

7th. NS. The Confederate Army before Cazal consists of about 30000 men, and
push the Siege on with good success,

Prince Lewis of Badens Army decamped and came nearer the Enemy.

8th. The Duke of Savoy attaques the Town and Citidal of Cazal at the same
time, and hears no new of Monsiuer Cattinet, whose Army is too weak to make
head against him, while his Forces continues on the Sea Coasts to secure them
from Admiral Russel.

The Army before Namur consists of 90 Battalions of Foot. The Horse under the
Earl of Athlone are posted at Pioton.

9th. The Troops before Cazal are advanced within a 100 Paces of the
Counterscarp of the Town, their Batteries have dismounted several of the
Enemies Cannon; the Inhabitants murmur, and would willingly capitulate, the
Spaniards have raised a Battery of 12 Mortars.

10th. The Imperial Army in Hungary is about 30000 strong, and the Turkish Army
at Belgrade about 20000 strong.

11th. The Prince of Baden having been reinforced with the Troops he expected,
decamped, and advanced toward the Enemy to attaque them, who in the Night,
without sound of Trumpet, or beat of Drum, repassed the Rhine at Philipsburgh,
leaving several sickmen, Tents and Baggage behind 'em.

The Besieged in Cazal, who defended a Redoubt on the other side the Po,
withstood two assaults, but finding the Allies were preparing for a third, they
abandoned it, and retired into the Town, The French Court look upon this place
as lost, and are in great pain for Namur, which is vigorously attaqu'd.

14th. The Marshall de Villeroy passed the River Lys near Courtray, by 5
bridges, and being reinforced by the Troops drawn out of all the French
Garrisons in Flanders, and the Count de Montal joined him, which made an Army
of 90 Battalions of Foot, and 150 Squadrons of Horse, advanded toward the Army
commanded by Prince de Vaudemont, which consisted only of 42 Battalions and 48
Squadrons, which however upon a signal by firing two pieces of Cannon, put
themselves immediately into Order of Battle, the Prince changed his Camp,
posting his Right at Arselle, and his Left between Gramme and Hottum, having
the Village of Woutergem in his Rear. The Night following the whole Army
continued in Arms, and entrech'd themselves, they thought the French would have
attaqu'd 'em by break of day, but they did nothing but amuse them, whilst great
part of their Forces filed off toward their Right, which kept the Prince in
suspense till 3 in the afternoon, when he saw the Enemies Battalions begin to
plant their Colors between Canege and his Right, within 2 Musket shot of his
Entrenchments, while their Horse and Dragoons moved toward the Village of
Finck, in order to get betwixt the Prince and Gent, and then to attaque his
Right wing in Rear and Flank: Whereupon the Prince of Vaudemont gave orders
about 4 in the afternoon for a Retreat, and having sent way the Artilery, the
whole Army marched off in very good order and made a most Excellent and
Soldierlike Retreat, and notwithstanding the Enemies numbers, who by reason of
the great detachments had been made from the Princes Army to Dixmude and Namur,
were stronger than he by almost 40000 men, yet the Prince continued his march
without any other disturbance, than that some of the Enemies Troops charged 3
or 4 Battalions of his that were in the Rear of all, but the French were soon
forced to retire, having several killed and wounded on both sides. The Prince
marched all night and came to Gent the next day about 7 in the morning, and
passing through that City, encamped with the Schelde before him, where he
observes the Enemies motions, and will march either to Brussels or Newport, as
there shall be most occasion. The French being enraged at this baulk. and
unexpected disappointment, took their Revenge on the Country People, plundring
and burning in their march, without any regard even to Religious Houses. The
King of England Congratulated and Complimented the Prince of Vaudemont upon his
Extraordinary Conduct, and told his Highness by Letter, that he had outdone the
greatest General of the Age, and his Retreat was more Glorious, and more
advantageous to the Common Cause than a Victory.

The Princes Army was reinforced with 9 Battalions, and the Earl of Athlone
sent toward him to be near at hand.

18th. The Siege of Namur goes on very successfully, the Besiegers made
themselves Masters of the Forts on the Hill and a great Retrenchment that leads
to the Town, being the most considerable outworks on that side. The attack was
made with great Bravery and Conduct, for after a dispute of about 2 hours, the
French were beaten out, although they had 5000 men to defend them, of whom there
was a great slaughter made, viz. 1600. The Besiegers had about 4 or 500 killed
and wounded, amongst which several Officers of the Guards, English and Scotch.

4. and 5th. O. S. The Lord Berkeley with the Fleet under his Command, came to
an Anchor before St. Malo, and it ^eing resolved immediately to Bombard the
Fort on the Quince Rock to the Westward, and the Battery the Enemy had raised
to the Eastward, on point Danbour between which is the Channel to the Town,
Colonel Richards was ordered to send three English and two Dutch Bombvessels
to the Quince Rock, and 4 other Dutch to the point Danbour, which accordingly
was done with good success against the Quince Fort, they fitting several Bombs
into it. The next day every thing being ready to attaque the Town, the Lord
Berkeley at 4 in the morning, made the signal, which Captain* Bembo with the
English and Dutch Frigates appointed to guard the Bombvessels from the attempts
of the French Galleys and Boats, stood into the Channel leading to the Town,
and came to an Anchor near the Rock, which is about a mile and half from the
Town; at the same time Colonel Richards with 9 English Bombvessels anchored
between Captain Bembo and the Town, and by 6 a Clock began to Bombard; all this
while the Enemy fired very briskly from the shore, and considering the
Batteries on the great and little Bay, Isle Danbour, Fort Vaubon, Fort Royal,
Quince Fort, etc. lay all round, the damage they did was inconsiderable. The
Galleys and Boats were most troublesome, in taking the opportunity of the
Tides, and rowing so near, as to gall the Line of Bombships: about 8 a Clock a
Fire broke out to the Eastward of the Town, which smoked in several places: the
Lord Berkeley, Admiral Allemonde, and Sir Cloudesly Shovel, came in their Boats
to encourage their Men, and were very well pleased with the disposition of the
bombarding, and one English and a Dutch Fireship, attackt the Quince Rock and
lay so well too, that they set fire to the Wooden fort on the top of it, which
continued about two hours, and employed the Enemy all that time; about 4 in the
afternoon another great fire broke out to the Westward of the Town, so that
'twas easy to perceive the Town was extremely shattered; the bombarding was
continued till 7 a clock at night, when having shot away all the Bombs and
Carcasses that were brought in from their Store-ships, being 900 and odd;
Captain Bembo who commanded the frigates and Brigantines, etc. got 'em under
Sail, and about 9 at night they all came to an anchor by the rest of the Fleet.
The whole number of men killed and wounded were about 60.

6th. Five English and 3 Dutch Bombships were ordered to Granville, which was
soon set on fire, there having been 500 Bombs thrown in. The bombarding was
continued till 6 at night, when 'twas left all in flames, the Enemy fired from
3 pieces of Cannon and two Mortars, but did little harm.

9th. Admiral Russel was forced by bad weather into the Gulf of Palma in
Sardinia.

10th. The Allies had advanced their approaches to the Counterscarp of the
Citadel of Cazal, and were preparing to attack it, which the besieged would not
expect, but agreed with the Allies that it should be surrendered, after being
demolished, the outworks by the Duke of Savoy, and the Principal Fortifications
by the French, and to that end there was a Cessation of Arms for a month. The
Allies found great quantities of Provision, Ammunition, Cannon, Mortars, and
all Warlike Stores, which they divied among 'em. The Trenches had been open but
13 days.

11th. Fort Pollard at Namur surrendered to the besiegers, in which was a
Garrison of 55 choice men, under a Captain, two Lieutenants, an Ensign, and
Engineer and Surgeon, who were made Prisoners of War. The Counterscarp near St.
Nicholas Gate was attackt very vigorously, and a Lodgment made, which cost of
English and Dutch about 300 men. Mr. Godfery, Deputy Governor of the Bank of
England was killed with a Cannon ball near the King. The Duke of Bavaria
attackt the Salsine, in which was 400 men, and carried it; as also other Works
and Retrenchments without the Cohorn Fort, upon the Hill toward the Sambre.
Dixmude surrendered to the French.

The Venetians obtained a Signal Victory over the Turks in the Morea.

12th. Ibrahim Bassa, had an Army of 20000 Horse and Foot, and General Steinau
but 12000, who after 5 hours fair battle defeated the Infidels, and made a
great slaughter of them, viz. 4000 killed upon the place, besides many wounded,
and Prisoners; and took 10 pieces of Cannon, and 4 Mortars, all their Tents and
Baggage.

20th. The French Army repassed the Rhine with great precipitation. The Germans
being close in their Rear, and would have given them battle, but they deeamp'd
and sneaked off in the night.

24th. The French demolish several Places in Catalonia, not tenable.

28th. Marshall Joyeuse sent a Detachment of 16 battalions and as many
Squadrons toward Flanders, and Prince Lewis of Badon has sent also from his
Army a Detachment of 10 or 12000 Horse and Foot, which will be at the Camp
before Namur before the French, having a short cut to march.

30th, The French give out the Dauphin will go to the Relief of Namur, but it is
not credited.

Aug. 3d. Lodgments being made on the Counterscarp, after a sharp dispute,
which cost 400 English and Dutch, and all things being prepared for an Assault
on the Town of Namur, the Enemy hung out a White Flag, and desired a Parley,
which was granted, and Hostages exchanged, and on the 4th. the Capitulation was
concluded; and on the 6th. the Garrison marched out of the Town into the
Castle, having the usual Conditions.

Dixmuyde and Deinse were betrayed to the French by Major General Ellenberg a
Dane, who went away immediately to Paris, and by Colonel O Farrel an Irish Man
who commanded in the latter: The Garrisons were, contrary to the Cartel,
detained Prisoners by Marshall Villeroy.

The Marquess de Gastanaga has taken the Field with the Spanish Army in
Catalonia, and is marching directly toward the Enemy, in order to oblige them
to a Battle.

The Great Duke of Tuscany has named a Knight of Malta to go in Quality of his
Envoy Extraordinary to compliment the King of Great Britain upon his Accession
to those Crowns.

The Allies found in Cazal Seventy Pieces of Cannon in the Town, Twenty Pieces,
and Four Mortars in the Castle, and 120 Pieces, and several Mortars in the
Citadel, and in the Magazines 2000 Muskets and Fusils, 150000 Bullets, 1800
Bombs, 10000 Sacks of Grain of several sorts, with abundance of salted Meat,
and other Provisions: The Garrison consisted of 3000 Men.

The Tartar Han sent to the Grand Signior to let him know, that the Czar of
Muscovy was marching with a numerous Army to attack Azof; which would oblige
him to keep his Troops at home, for the defense of his own Country. But the
Sultan not satisfied with this Excuse, sent him Word, That laying all Pretenses
or Apologies aside, he must come with his Forces and join the Ottoman Army in
Hungary. The Grand Signior is on his way to Belgrade, where most of the Troops
are already arrived.

Great Preparations are making in France to relieve Namur: The Troops from the
Coasts are on their march to join the French Army under the Command of the
Marshall de Villeroy; as also Troops from other Parts, so that he will have a
mighty Army when they all have joined him.

The Prince de Vaudemont sent to the Marshall de Villeroy to demand the
Garrisons of Dixmuyde and Deinse; which was roused, and they detained
Prisoners, contrary to the Cartel or Agreement for exchange of Prisoners, which
was settled soon after the opening of the War, from the General who is to pay
50000 Livres, which amounts to 4199 l. 11 s. 8 d. Sterling, to the private
Sentinel, who is to pay 7 Livres and an half, which is Twelve Shillings and Six
Pence Sterling.

The French pretended to demolish the Fortifications of Dixmuyde and Deinse,
and threatened the Inhabitants to do it; but it was only to get a Sum of money,
which they paid, so all was well.

The Garrison and Town of Namur retired into the Castle according to the
Capitulation, breaking down the Bridge between the Town and them. They left
behind them 1430 Sick and Wounded men, whereof 140 were Officers. who are to be
carried to Dinant. They had in the place 2400 Dragoons when the Siege begun,
who are reduced to 7 or 800 men. Their whole Garrison is now computed at 6 or
7000 men.

7th. The King reinforced the Prince of Vaudemont's Army with 30 Battalions of
Foot, and 40 Squadrons of Horse, and ordered the Earl of Athlone to be in
readiness to join them if occasion, because Villeroy was marching toward them,

Aug. 1st. O. S. The Confederate Fleet was before Dunkirk, and sent in some
Bomb-Ketches, Fireships, and Machines, with several light Frigates and
Brigantines to protect them against the Enemies half Galleys, and other armed
Boats; of which they had a great many. The Bomb-Vessels fired 8 hours, and
threw several Bombs into the Rees-bank and Peer-heads, which did some damage.
But the French had secured the Rees-bank and Wooden Forts with Piles, Bombs,
Chains, and floating Pontoons mounted with Cannon; the Machine Ships could not
come near enough to have any Effect; whereupon the Frigates and Bomb-Vessels
came away, having received but little damage from the Enemy, only a small Dutch
Man of War, who in turning out run a ground, and was burnt by the French, the
men having abandoned her.

The French Army in Catalonia have actually demolished Castle-Follet and
Ostalrick, and are retired toward Girone.

The English Frigates have taken within these few days several French Privateers
near our Coasts.

The Grand Vizier, Caimacan, and several other of the Principal Officers of the
Seraglio, raised by Sultan Achmet, are strangled by the Command of the new
Grand Signior, who permits the Sultana, Mother, to have great share in, and
influence upon him and the Government.

Admiral Russel in returning from Cagliari in Sardinia to the Coast of Province
with his whole Fleet, having received no damage in the late Storms, as was
feared.

8th. The Republic of Venice is sending Ambassadors to the Court of England.

9th. The Vaudois make frequent Incursions amongst the French, and bring away
great Booties; they lately took 50 Mules and Horses laden with Provisions,
going to Pignerol.

10th. The Elector of Saxony is gone from Vienna to the Imperial Army, to take
upon him the Command of it; which will be more numerous this Year than was
expected, by the conjunction of the Auxiliary Forces of Saxony, Denmark, and
Brandenburgh, besides the Hungarians and Radzians, which together will make an
Army of 60000 men.

15th. Orders were sent from the French Court to Marshall de Villeroy to
bombard Brussels, to try by that Diversion to draw the Allies from before
Namur. But that would not do: However he came with his whole Army before
Brussels, and sent a Letter to the Governor, to this porpose; That the King,
his Master, had commanded him to bombard that City, except the Allies would
promise to bombard none of his Maritime Towns during the War; and gave him six
hours for an Answer; in which time it was impossible to know the King of
England's mind. Villeroy added, That if the Magistrates of Brussels would give
him eight Millions of Livres (which are about seven hundred thousand Pound
Sterling) the damage the Confederate Fleet had done his Master's Subjects being
computed at that Sum, he would forbear burning. Both which being denied, he
threw in 4000 Bombs, besides red hot Balls, which did great damage, and put
them into some Confusion and Disorder for a time: But the Presence of the
Elector of Bavaria, and the Care and Conduct of Prince Vandemont, prevented the
French executing their full Designs, who attacked the Outworks of Brussels,
and were repulsed with loss. And after some damage done, they retired with
their whole Army, and marched toward Namur, pretending to raise the Siege.

17th. The Siege of Namur goes on successfully; the Trenches are carried on a
pace; the Enemies in all their Sallies repulsed with great loss; Marshall de
Boufflers prevented in his design of getting out with the Dragoons. There are
now in Battery planted against the Castle and Cohorne Fort, above 150 Pieces of
Cannon, and 50 Mortars; so that in few days the Attack will be made against the
Counterscarp.

Three thousand Bavarian Soldiers who are to reinfore the Spanish Army in
Catalonia, have passed the Streights under Convoy of two Dutch Men of War.

19th. Admiral Russel is returned to Barcelona, with the Fleet under his
Command, and had under his Convoy the Tur^ey-Merchants Ships, which he has sent
away to proceed with all expedition on their Voyage homeward, being reinforced
with three Men of War more.

The Forces of the Allies that were before Cazal are marched in three Bodies
toward Pignerol and Susa, whither Marshall Catinat has sent some Troops to
reinforce those Garrisons, and is himself encamped at Diblon, where he
fortifies all the Passes.

20th. The Grand Vizier is advanced a far as Jagodin in his march to Belgrade
with his Army, which is believed to be about 60000 strong. The Tartar Han, to
comply with the repeated Orders from the Grand Signior, is on his march toward
Hungary, to join the Ottomans, The Muscovites have taken several Places from
the Tartars, and are advanced far into their Country with a vast and numerous
Army, consisting of about 400000 men.

The Cossacks have also possessed themselves of several Castles belong to the
Tartars on the River Nioper.

21st. The Confederate Army on the Rhine is decamped, and marched toward
Hailbron, and pretended to advance toward the Enemy on the other side.

The French quitted Blanes in Catalonia, after having plundered and demolished
the Place.

23d. The Detachment from the Rhine has joined the Camp before Namur. And the
French Troops from their Coasts have likewise joined the Marshall de Villeroy.

Several French Merchant Ships were taken Prizes by the English Cruizers and
Dutch Privateers.

The Republic of Genoa has sent an Envoy Extraordinary to the King of England,
being the first time: He is accompanied with several Persons of Quality.

25th. The Detachment from the French Army on the Rhine, being about 7 or 8000
men, has joined the Marshall de Villeroy, who has received Orders from his
Master to advance toward the Allies, and to endeavor to force their Campt at
Mazy, and by that means raise the Siege, which now gives the Court some Pain,
it drawing near a Period one way or other.

26th. The Army before the Castle of Namur presses hard on the ^^si^ged,
repulses their Sallies, and attacks their Out works with great Courage and
Bravery, and has mad^ very considerable breaches in the Castle and Forts. The
King ke^ps the Hessian and Lunenburgh Foot to assist at the Siege, but has sent
the Horse to reinforce the Army, which is very advantageously posted, the Camp
being strong by Nature and Art: All things are disposing for a general Assault
on the Castle and Forts of Namur at one and the same time.

16th. O. S. The Confederate Fleet came to an Anchor before Calas; and the next
day about eleven in the Forenoon Colonel Richards began to bombard the Town,
which by one a Clock was on fire in several places. The French came out with
their half Galleys, and armed Boats, thinking to annoy the Bomb-Vessels, but
they were beaten back and put into Confusion, and recovered their Peer-heads
with difficulty. About two a Clock a Bomb fell into their Magazine, and did
great damage; for after this they never fired from the Cannon or Mortars, of
which they had several Batteries. There were about 600 Shells thrown in, which
did great Execution and has ruined great part of the Town.

The Spaniards in Ceuta have killed 2000 Moors, and beat them out of the
Outworks which they gained by surprise, making use of a scaling Ladders. The
Garrison lost in this Action but 200 men, with some Officers of Note, who were
killed, and some few wounded.

27th. His Majesty left the Camp before the Castle, and put himself at the Head
of the Army at Mazy; and observing the French Army to quit their Tents, and
march in Order of Battle, as if they meant to come to Action, the King also
embattell'd his Army, and was ready to receive them, and lay all night under
their Arms. But the French only appeared before their Lines, and attacked an
Out-Guard, but were soon repulsed, and came on no more. The Breaches in the
Castle* and in the Forts are now wide enough for an Assault, which is resolved
in a day or two; and all things are disposing to that purpose.

The Grand Vizier is arrived at Belgrade, and has laid a Bridge over the Save.
The number of the Turkish Army is not yet certainly known; but it is confirmed
that the Cham of Tartary is returned home to defend his own Country against the
Moscovites.

The Elector of Saxony is arrived in the Imperial Camp at Fusack: He came by
Water from Buda, and was received at his Landing by General Caprara, and the
Principal Officers, with a Discharge of all the Artillery of the Army.

30th. A general Assalt was made upon the Castle of Namur, the Cohorne, and
Cazotte Forts. The English and Scots under the Command of my Lord Cuts,
attacked the Countescarp and Breach of the Terra Nova, being a Detachment of
Grenadiers from the Army, and four Regiments of Foot. Three thousand Spaniards
and Bavarians with Count Rivera, a Major General, at the Head of them, attacked
the Cohorne on the side next the Terra Nova. Two thousand Brandenburghers under
the Conduct of Major General le Cave, attacked the Cohorne on the Right of the
Spaniards. Major General Swerin attacked the Cazotte with 2000 Dutch; and a
Colonel with about 2000 men attacked the Lower Town. The English and Scots
advanced with great Courage and Resolution, and gained the top of the Breach
through abundance of Fire on both sides, but found the Enemy so advantageously
posted and entrenched behind the Breach, with the Ground on their side so very
bad, so that they could not advance in any Front, and so thought sit to retire.
The Spanish Major General was killed upon approaching the Cohorne; but the
Bavarians took Post upon an Angle of the Counterscarp, and maintained a hot
Fire with the French, who disputed hard to dislodge them. And when most of the
Bavarian Officers of the Guards were killed and wounded, and that the other
Regiments had suffered very much, the Enemy continuing their Fire with a great
deal of Obstinacy, the English who had left the Terra Nova, not being able to
do any thing on that side, supported the Spaniards and Bavarians, with my Lord
Cutts at the Head of them; who at the same time ordered a Lieutenant of
Colonel Mackay's Regiment with 30 men to pass the Palisades and attack a
Battery of the Enemies, which he successfully executed, turning 7 of their own
Cannon against them, securing at the same time some of their Mines: the English
and Bavarians planting their Colors on the Palisades, afterward made a very
god Lodgment.

During this Action, Major General de Cave with the Brandenburghers, and Major
General Swerin with the Dutch, each of them made a Lodgment, which put the
French upon thought of Capitulation; which they now desire, and Hostages are
exchanged. In this brisk Assault my Lord Cutts was wounded, together with 54
Commissioned Officers, and 682 private Sentinels, and 19 Commissions'd
Officers, and 319 private Soldiers killed, being the whole that were lost and
disabled of the Detachment which my Lord Cutts commanded in that Service. The
Besieged would have capitulated but for the Cohorn alone, but being rerefus'd
they agreed for the whole; they demand^d to days to expect Succors, but were
only granted, the Articles were such as are usual.

Sept. 2d. This morning the Capitulation for the surrender of the Castle, and
all the other Forts and Works of Namur was signed, and the Allies immedately
to^k possession of part of the outworks. The Articles are too long and tedious
to mention, it shall suffice to say that the French behaved themselves very
well in the defense of the place, deserved and had very good conditions.

The Marshall de Villeroy the French General at the head of a hundred
thousand Men drawn from the Rhine, the Coasts and other parts of France, had
the great pleasure and satisfaction to be Spectators of the Bravery and Conduct
of the Allies, who in sight of this vast Army, the Flower of all France,
attacked and to^k it fairly, inch by inch, with Sword in hand, and not with
treacherous Gold, as the French used to do it; and what yet raises the Valor
and advances the Honor of the Confederates, the Garrison was a small Army
consisting according to their own accounts of 14000 fighting Men, all chosen
Troops, with a Marshall of France, and several General Officers and Principal
Engineers, to encourage them, and were well provided with all things necessary
to make a stout Defense, to which may be added the strength of the Place, by
new and considerable Works, which cost no less than three hundred thousand
Pounds Sterling, which occasioned Mounsieur to believe it to be Impregnable,
and put the French King himself upon assuring the Foreign Ministers at his
Court, that cost it what it would, it should be relieved, tho his Most
Christian Majesty was extremly balked when he found the Contrary.

The Squadron of Men of War under the Command of Cap^ain Wilmot, and the Land
Forces under the Conduct of Colonel Littleton have taken and ruined the Cape
Farn^^is, b^ing the Eastermost settlement the French had upon Hi^panio^a, which
is confirmed by all the Merchants Letters that came lately from Jamaica, and
that they were gone (...) s^m^ further expedition.

Sir George Rook is going to Cadiz with a Squadron of three deckships, to
reinforce and relieve Admiral ^uffel, who will return with the Great Ships
under his Command, as soon as the Compaign ends in Catalonia.

3d. N. S. The Duke of Savoy was indisposed, which ^^^'d to a Double Ter^ian
Ague, but is now so well again, that he is preparing to go to the Army, which
is ^^w joined by the Troops of the Allies, and in full ^^^r^h for some new
Enterprise, having Bombs, Carcas^^^ ^attering Cannons, and all other
necessaries for a Siege, (...) it is believed their Eye is on Susa, or Pignerol,
which a little time with declare. The French Army under the Command of
Marshall de Catinat continue in their Camp at Diblon, without pretending to
attempt any thing, rather seeming contented to defend themselves, having built
s^veral new Forts and Redoubts, and fortified their Camp, and secured their
Passes, withal imaginable Care and Cau^ion.

And Engagement is hourly expected between the Venetian and Ottoman Fleets,
they being near each other, and resolved to come to Blows, their force is
pretty equal; the Chri^ti^n Fleet consists of 23 Sail of Men of War, 22
Galleys, 6 Gallicas^es, 4 Bombships, and between 8 and 9000 ^oldiers. The
infidels have 33 Men of War, 18 Galleys, and 13 Galliots. What the Venetians
want in number, is made up in bigness, their Men of War being larger than the
Turks.

4th. The Grand Signior is arrived at Belgrade, and has abandoned his design on
Peterwaredin, and is marched with his Army into Transylvania, thereby to draw
the Imperial Army after him, that they may come to a fair Battle, which the
Sultain, by his measures seems chiefly to aim at. The Tartar Han,
notwithstanding the Invasion of his own Country by the Moscovites, has joined
the Ottoman Army with a small body of his Troops, so dispotick are the Grand
Signiors Commands.

5th. The French Court has been sufficiently mortified at the news of the
surrender of the Castle of Namur, and the more, because they did not believe it
could be taken by the Allies, flattering themselves that Marshall Villeroy
with his huge Army would scare the Allies from their Campt at Masy, and the
Besiegers from their Trenches. A Fire at Toulon has consumed a great quantity
of Biscuit, baked for the use of the French Squadron sitting out there, which
will retard their going out very much.

5th. N. S. the Garrison of the Castle of Namur marched out at the breach of
Terra Nova, being reduced to 4190 Foot, and 1205 Dragoons, of which only 160
were mounted: 3 or 4 Battalions of the Foot, and all the Dragoons were brisque
and Gallant Men, but the remainder, which was greatest part of the Infantry,
were very contemptible, Marshall de Boufflers, and Count de Guiscard the
Governor at the Head of the with their Swords drawn: The Elector of Bavaria
was on Horseback to see them, and the King of England was in Cognito, with the
Duke of Ormond in his Coach.

Marshall Boufflers was arrested in the Name of the Allies, and carried back
to the Town of Namur, and thence removed to Maestrick't, and there detained
Prisoner, because his Most Christian Majesty had broke the Cartel, or agreement
for Ransom and exchange of Prisoners, by refusing to send back the Garrisons of
Dixmuyde and Deinse. Great quantities of Cannon, Mortars, Bombs, Granades,
Balls of Iron and Lead, Powder, spare Arms, and other Provisions, both of Mouth
and War was found in the Castle, where indeed nothing was wanting for the
defense of the Place, which might have held out longer, but Boufflers was
unwilling to hazard the lives of his Soldiers in another Storm, which the
Besiegers were preparing, some Cannon and a good deal of Powder was thrown by
the French into the Sambre after the Capitulation. The French Army under the
Command of Marshall de Villeroy decmp'd silently, and made great marches to
recover the Lines, having reinforced the Garrisons of Dinant, Phillipville and
others. The King of England is marched after the French, to secure Flanders,
and to dispose his Troops into Winter Quarters, having left a considerable body
at Namur to level the Trenches and other Works, and to repair the Breaches.

3d. O. S. A violent Storm happened, in which some laden Colliers were lost on
the North Coast of England.

7th. N. S. Palomos in Catalonia is actually besieged by the Spanish Army, and
Admiral Russel was come before it, and had landed 3000 men to assist them, and
had fired 120 Bombs into the Town with good success, but the Troops from
Flanders having joined the Spaniards, and the English Admiral receiving
intelligence that the French were fitting out their Fleet at Toulon, he
immediately reimbarked the English, and sailed to the Coast of Province, to
prevent their Fleets putting to Sea, who pretended only to transport some
Troops to Catalonia, but really intended to repass the Straights, and join the
rest of of their Ships at Breast.

9th. Nothing is expected from the Armies on the Rhine, for they begin to talk
of marching into Winter Quarers.

The Turks and Imperial Armies are near one another, and a Battle is expected
on that side.

The French Court was not a little troubled at the Arresting of Marshall de
Boufflers, which has made them resolve to send back forthwith the Garrisons of
Dixmuyde and Deinse, according to the Capitulation and Cartile. Boufflers is
for his good Services made a Duke and Peer of France, and has obtained his
Liberty upon his Parole of Honor, that upon his arrival at Dinant, the
aforesaid Garrisons shall be immedeately returned.

12th. The French Army is encamped at Cambron near Aeth, and the Army of the
Allies at Limbeck.

The unexpected Return of Admiral Russel on the Coast of Province, has not only
allarumed 'em mightily, but broke their measures, for the Troops which have
been their Guards this Summer, were on their March to join their Army in
Catalonia, but are now countermanded, and returning to cover Marseilles and
Toulon, and a stop is put to the fitting out the French Fleet, and the very
Ships that were ready and at an Anchor in the Road, are come back into the Port.

The Marquis de Nesmonde, who went out of Breast some time since with a Squadron
of 6 Men of War and a Fireship is returned, having brought with him two rich
English East-India-men, called the Prince of Denmark, and the Seymour, which he
took 150 Leagues from the West of Scilly.

14th. The King of England left the Army at Limbeck, under the Command of the
Elector of Bavaria, and is gone to Loo, where his Majesty will make a short
stay, and thence to the Hague, and as soon as the Convoy arrives from England,
will embark.

The Late Great Rains that have fallen in Flanders will its thought soon put
and end to the Campaign.

FINIS.

