An Exact ACCOUNT OF The most Considerable Transactions That ^^th Occurred in
IRELAND, SINCE The Late K. JAMES's Arrival there.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Dear SIR,
I Left Doublin Iast Saturday-night, and the Protestants there in a most
confused and distracted condition. That Morning Monsieur D'Aveaux made his
Entry as Ambassador from the French King, and with great Attendance and
Guards, from the Earl of Clancarty's House near the College, to the Castle of
Doublin. He had public Audience between Eleven and Twelve; he concluded his
Speech to this effect: That His Most Christian Majesty did heartily recommend
to the Consideration of his Majesty of Great Britain, the Innocence, Merits,
and Losses of his Catholic Subjects of Ireland; hoping that he would not only
Restore them to their Estates, so long possessed by Heretics and Usurpers, but
also make and contrive some way to make them Amends for the great Damages they
have so long sustained. That which we generally understand by it, is that the
late King should give the Irish not only the Estates forfeited by the late
Rebellion, but indifferently all the Protestants Estates. The same day 'twas
resolved on, that the late King should go this week to Londonderry, and carry
the Earl of Granard with him, hoping that by his presence they might be induced
to surrender. What the Event may be, God knows; but they are all mightily
afraid, unless speedy Succors and Encouragement be sent them, they must submit
to Mercy; not to the Mercy of a King, but of the French: for the late King is
to do nothing in the Government, without the Advice of Monsieur D'Aveaux;
nothing in the Army, without the Consent of the two French Lieutenant-Generals
Roos and Mamoon, Leri and Pusignan the Major-Generals; and to dispose of no
Money, but as the French King's Treasurer does direct. The whole Irish Army now
in Pay, is something above 40000; of which 20000 lay last week before Colrain,
which is a Pass to Londonderry, and 10000 are on their march the other way
toward Derry, through the Country of Monaghan, and another 10000 ordered now to
attend their King, the former 10000 being led by the Duke of Berwick. The Irish
have now in their Hands the whole Kingdom, except only Colrain, Londonderry,
and Eniskillin. They have seized upon all the Estates of those who are in
England: and the old Proprietors have possessed themselves of all the forfeited
Estates, whether the Owners be in Ireland or England. All Munster, and most
part of Leinster, is plundered, so that the poor Protestants are generally in a
most Miserable Perishing Condition. Sir Thomas Southwell and 225 more, most of
them Gentlemen of good Estates, are condemned for High Treason, and to be
Hanged, drawn, and Quartered: Their Crimes were only endeavoring to Escape out
of the County of Cork and Limrick, where there was nothing but Plundering and
Murdering, into the North, where all was Quier: Their Estates are all declared
forfeited: They were in hopes of a Pardon, but they are only Reprieved for some
time, and kept as Hostages. Sir Lawrence Parsons of the Beir, and a great
number of his Tenants, and Gentlemen his Neighbors, were Condemned and
Sentenced last week at Philipstown: Their Crimes was, that they kept their
Doors, shut a few days against the Rabble and Dragoons, who plundered all about
them. Eleven Condemned upon some account at Mary-Burrough; two of which are
Hanged and Quartered: as also one Brown, a Gentleman of an Estate at Cork, was
Hanged and Quartered. And if they have time, I make no question but they will
try and Condemn all the Gentlemen they can find, upon one Pretense of other;
and they keep them with an intention to have such Prisoners of the Irish, as
the English shall ^^^^after take Ex^^anged for them. In the mean time the
Ge^^lemen are under the Sentence of the Law, and most barbarously used.

The 7th. of May a Parliament is to sit in Dublin, the House of Commons will
not have one Protestant in it, the House of Lords it may be three or* four, and
I cannot think above six or seven. They do design to confirm all the English
Estates to the Irish, to Attaint all the Re^^^s, a^ they call them; that is,
^^ll who are ^ow in ^ngland, and who they pl^^se in Ireland, ^^d to ^stablish
^^^pery by an ^^ct of Parliament, and give all the Livings to Papists, leaving
nothing to Protestants, both Laity and Clergy, only Liberty of Conscience as
long as they please. I had much Discourse last Friday with a Papist Lord, who
came from Breast with King James, and was with him at St. Germains; and be being
in former times much obliged by some of my Friends, and most of all being out
of Humor by having some mean pitiful Fellows placed over his Head, which he
was not able to bear, he told me all that was in his Heart, and I am confident
he had no design to deceive me. In the first place, he assured me, That there
are Spies, who give the Duke of Tyrconnel an Account of every thing that was
done and said in London, and especially at White Hall; and therefore bid me be
sure when ever I went to England, to be upon my Guard, for if I should chance
to sp^nk my mind freely, notice would be given of it into Ireland, and
immediately my Friends there would be ruined. He told me, the French King had
made Solemn Protestations, that he would never rest till he had effectually
assisted the late King, in order to which, he lent him about 500000 l. Sterling
in the hands of the French Treasurer, and Arms for 25000 Men, with Ammunition
proportionable, to bich are now in Ireland. That they daily expect from Breast
30 Sail, in which are about 5000 French Officers and Soldiers, with more Arms,
which are to come to Kingsale; and because the French King finds that his
Friend ru^^ed himself by his own Miscarriage, and being too merciful to the
Protestants, as he thought, the Abdicated King, is to do nothing without the
Approbation of Monsieur D'Aveaux, who every one says is a very Cunning Man: But
since he came to Dublin, he has Declared himself already sufficiently against
all Protestants. He says, the Design is, That a considerable Body of the Irish
Army, as soon as Derry has submitted, shall March directly into Scotland, where
some Forces are expected to join with him, in Order to March into the North of
England. And to divert and amuse King William, the French King has promised to
pour into Flanders a great Army, and at one time to Besiege several places,
which I have forgot: And that he was resolved to do any thing in the World at
this Juncture; even to the going on his Knees to the Emperor and the Pope, so
that it might be but at Peace with them now. He said, he told me this out of
mere Love and good Will, and only* with this Design, that I might consider the
Matter fairly, and then take my Measures as far (...) my own particular Concern
goes, from what I ^^^ld reasonably expect would be the Event of those Designs.

His own Opinion, he told me, was, That Ireland would be perfectly under the
Power of the French King, and that England would have work enough. Upon the
whole, the Advised me to be as unconcerned any way as I could possibly. He
added, that King James has more Friends in England than he should have, and
that he makes no Que^^^on but very shortly to see all Protestants toge^^^her by
the Ears.

Thus, Dear Sir, I have after a confused manner (for my Head is still giddy
with the Sea) given you an Account of what I conceive is absolutely necessary
should be known at London concerning the Affairs of Ireland. If I thought my
going up to London, would do the least Service to that miserable undone
Kingdom, I would not stay here one Minute longer. But since Men of so great
Qualities, and Parts, and Eminency, who have left Ireland, are able to declare
the Truth of what I say, I cannot hope that such an obscure and ordinary a one
as I am can say much more. I am told some Men will not believe the bad
condition of that Miserable Nation; I know not whether it be true; if it be, I
wish they were there, to see the Misery and Calamities of those many Thousands
of Miserable, Plundered, and Ruined Protestants, who are not able to come away,
and are in the Jaws of the most Bloody and Barbarous People upon Earth. A few
days ago, the Lord Galmoy took one Dean Dixies Son, and another Young
Gentleman, both bred up in our College, and not in Arms, and hanged them upon
a Sign-Post. A Gentleman was shot in the Head by two Soldiers at his own Door
in Dublin last Thursday Night. They Plundered all round Dublin at Noonday, though
their King be there. There is a Standard set upon the top of the Castle of
Dublin, with this Inscription, NOW OR NEVER, NOW AND FOR EVER. They say, the
Duke of Tyrconnel is to go suddenly to France. I find the People here are not
very apt to believe that the late King is now in Dublin, but I assure you I saw
him several times, and I know his Face as well as I do any man's, and it is
really he. Yet for all this, many Irish Officers are said to desert, finding
the French preferred before them on all Occasions, and more regarded, which
puts them very much out of Humor, and that they are like to fall absolutely
under the French Power. For God's sake let something be done suddenly: Dublin
has not above 1600 Soldiers now in it; I am confident if 10000 Men were
immediately sent thither, and Arms for 10000 more, they would be able to Defend
Leinster. There is now there Hay and Oats sufficient for 2000 Horse, and
therefore they need not stay for Forage.

London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, next the Black Bull in the Old Bailey.
1689.


