An Exact Account of the Affairs in Ireland, And the present Condition of
LONDONDERRY.
With the Particulars of the Barbarous Murder of the Bishop of Waterford; In a
Letter from a Gentleman at Liverpool, to a Person of Quality in London.
Licensed

July 23. 1689.


SInce the state of Ireland in general, and the condition of Londonderry in
particular is now become the subjects of most Men's Discourse and Conversation,
I think it not improper to send you the exactest and freshest Account I can, of
what has been done in that Kingdom, which I have gathered from certain
Gentlemen lately arrived here, some in a small Vessel, others in a Wherry.

They assure us that Major General Kirk had lately sent in another Messenger
into the Town, with Orders to cause a White Flag to be set upon the
Church-steeple, so soon as he got in, and to, fire a Gun for every Week's
Provision they had yet remaining, and that accordingly four Guns were fired
from the Town.

That Coll. Gourdon O Neale, being admitted into the Town, had made a very
plausible offer to the Besieged, That amongst other advantages, they should
have their Lives, Liberties, and Estates, be permitted to wear their Swords,
and go whither they pleased, provided they would surrender. But their answer
was, That they had no reason to trust to any Promise they made, neither would
they hope or look for the performance of any thing that should be offered them,
since the solemnest Assurances, and most formal Capitulations had been violated
to their Friends and Neighbors, when they came under their power, and that
those that had Protection granted them by the late King and General Officers,
had notwithstanding been plundered of all they had, and driven away from their
Houses and Habitations to starve in the Fields; and therefore were resoved to
stand it out to the last Man, hoping in a few days to be effectually relieved
from England.

That Lieutenant General Hamilton being out of favor and employment, for
having, as was pretended, used the Protestants in the North with too much
lenity, the French General, who was commanded to go to the Siege of Derry, had
refused to march, unless he might have a full power to act as he thought fit,
declaring openly, that for his part, he was for putting all to the Sword, and
would have the whole Country depopulated and laid waste, as is usually
practiced by the French. But in this he was opposed by the English and most of
the Irish Nobility, as being a piece of unseasonable as well as of
unjustifiable Inhumanity, in the present juncture of Affairs. However, the late
King condescended so far to his French Importunity, as to leave the Town of
Londonderry wholly to his discretion, not thinking it fit to gratify him any
farther, in regard that several Towns, Families, and Persons in those Parts
were under his particular Protection. Yet how little this Protection does avail
in many places, the miserable and deplorable condition of diverse Towns and
Families does abundantly declare, and the remaining British and Protestant
Inhabitants being daily threatened by their implacable Enemies, with a general
Massacree, and total Extirpation, so soon as the English Forces shall set foot
in that Kingdom. A Tragical Instance of their Cruelty has lately happened to
the Bishop of Waterford, to whose House several French and Irish being come,
they were very civilly entertained by him; till at last some of the Popish
Priests that were in their Company began to pick Quarrels, and say very
provoking things; the Bishop admonisht them, and exhorted them to Civility, and
to a Christian temper of mind and expression, which they not regarding, the
good old Bishop being aged about 70 Years, was barbarously murdered in his own
Parlour, the Dean and several of his Servants were much wounded, and escaped
very narrowly running the same Fate with the Bishop: When they had done this
Villainy, they fell presently on rifling and plundering the House, and carried
with them all they could conveniently bring away, setting Fire to the rest,
which soon laid the whole House in Ashes.

These Gentlemen do further add, That the French and Irish bigoted Papists
being daily set on, and exasperated by their governing Priests and Jesuits,
it is feared they may be soon transported to great acts of Cruelty, unless the
merciful hand of Providence appear for their deliverance. That the late King
himself is not very well pleased with the posture of his Affairs there, finding
that the coining of, and dispersing of so much Copper Money, does do him a
great deal of Disservice in the Minds of the People, who look upon it as a
formed Design to get into his hands what Money, Silver and Gold, he can, to
make provision against another storm; and it is said, that a considerable Sum
of Money is already put on Board a Vessel that went off from Kingsale, bound
for France, wherein were also diverse Priests and Jesuits, who not liking the
present condition of their Affairs in Ireland, and being afraid to stay until
the passages are shut up, thought fit to retire again into France.

That discontent and grumbling do generally prevail amongst the better sort of
the Irish, insomuch that they begin to be less zealous and concerned for the
Interest of the late King; that they are kept together with the hopes they are
daily fed with of invading England, when every one of their Fortunes is to be
made, and great Riches to be had; being made believe, that the English are so
far from being in a condition to invade them, that there is a considerable
Party in England, that has declared for the late K. and will be ready to join
with them upon their first landing; that the French are Masters of the Sea, and
are daily expected to come and transport them over; that Scotland for the most
part has declared for him, Dundee having defeated all those that appeared in
opposition to his Interest, is become Master of the Field, and that Edinborough
Castle holds out still, these being the Arts wherewith the staggering Minds and
Hearts of K. James's Interest in that Kingdom are kept up: This Practice became
so fashionable, that the very Night the News came to Dublin, of Dundee's being
defeated, and of the Castle of Edinborough's being surrendered, great Bonfires
were ordered to be made, and ringing of Bells, to express the Joy for the
Victory Dundee had obtained over his Enemies, and that he was marching with his
Victorious Army toward the Relief of Edinborough Castle.

The Wherry that came in hither yesterday, left Dublin on Thursday last, on
pretense of going to Wicklow for Firewood, and brought over Capt. St. George
and five other Gentlemen. They say, that the News at Dublin was, that about 7
or 8000 Protestants were driven to Londonderry Walls, who when almost starved,
the Town took Compassion on them, and brought them into the Town and refreshed
them, ordering at the same time several Gallowses to be set up on the
Wind-Mill-hill, and all their Prisoners, amongst whom they have considerable
ones and diverse Officers, to be brought forth in view of the Enemy, on purpose
that they might see how they resolved to serve them; which they seeing to be in
good earnest, beat a Parley, and in conclusion it was agreed upon, that all the
Protestants that had been driven to the Town-Walls, should have liberty and
security to return to their Habitations, without any injury or molestation, and
accordingly they were all turned out, and the Prisoners carried back to the
Town again.

They Report also, that the Men of Derry have lately by a Stratagem given the
Besiegers a great defeat, and the manner of it was thus. It was concerted
amongst them, that none should appear on the Walls for some time but two or
three Persons only, who were to walk up and down with disconsolate faces and
despairing countenances, when in the mean time they had planted several great
Guns against the Gate that leads into a Lane through which the Enemy must have
marched if the Design took effect. The Enemy observing so few on the Walls, was
surprised at it, some of them had the Courage to advance nearer, and to ask the
reason of their being so solitary, to which no Answer was at first made, but
shaking of their Heads in token of dislike of their Affairs within the Town.
They proceeded then a little further, and became so familiar, as to discourse
the Sentinels, and move a Parley, which being granted, these Sentinels told them
a melancholy Story of their lamentable Condition, offering that if they would
save their Lives, and give them some Reward, they would next Night after such
an hour open one of the Gates. The Enemy believing all this to be true, drew up
a great part of the Army nearer the Town, and seeing no appearance of Discovery
or resistance from the walls advanced at the time appointed to the Gate, which
the Sentinels presently opened; but they came no sooner within the reach of
their Guns, than they poured whole Volleys of great and small shot amongst
them, which made terrible Execution, and forced them to run back in great
disorder; at the same time they made a Sally upen them, and followed them with
the same Success. In this Action, they say, they killed several hundreds of the
Enemy.

That the Protestants in Inniskilling have also had a very Fortunate Adventure
lately, having taking several Carts loaded with Arms and Ammunition, lately
come from France, and a good deal of Money, which was going to the Camp before
Derry; and this has so exasperated the Enemy, that there are about 15000 Men
commanded to go and besiege that place, but have not yet the Courage to advance
nearer to it than by ten Miles, where they lie in two several Bodies, as well
to secure the Intercourse with Derry, as to hinder the other from Relieving it.

That the Irish being now sensibly Alarmed with the undoubted Reports of a
present Invasion (as they call it) from England, do bethink themselves of
Imprisoning and Securing the most considerable Protestants throughout the
Kingdom: At Dublin they have but two Regiments, and are fitting out two Ships
for Privateers, and to get Intelligence from the English Coast. It is accounted
a kind of Treason at Dublin to say that Edinborough-Castle is surrendered. Salt
is worth 5 s. 4 d. the Bushel, and Coals 45 s. the Tun.

Thus I have sent you the best Relation I could pick up from those several
Persons that are lately come over, and if it can be any ways serviceable to you
or your Friends, I shall have the Satisfaction of pleasing a Person that I owe
so much Friendship and Kindness to, as I do to your self, as being with much
sincerity,

SIR, Your most Humble Servant.

LONDON: Printed for H. Jones. MDCLXXXIX.


