At a Meeting of the Council of the Royal Society, June 24. 1675.
Ordered,

THAT a Discourse, made before the Royal Society the 29th of April, and 13th of
May 1675. by John Evelyn Esquire, concerning Agriculture, be printed by the
Printer of the said Society.

BROUNCKER P.R.S.
A Philosophical Discourse OF EARTH, Relating to the Culture and Improvement of
it for Vegetation, and the Propagation of Plants, etc. as it was presented to
the Royal Society, April 29. 1675.

By I. Evelyn Esquire Fellow of the said SOCIETY.

(...)

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society. 1676.

To the Right Honorable My Lord Viscount Brouncker, etc. President of the
Royal Society, etc.
My Lord,

I Have in obedience to your Lordship, and the irresistible Suffrages of that
Society over which you preside, resigned these Papers to be disposed of, as you
think fit: I hear your Lordships sentence is, they should be made Public. Why
should not a thousand Things of infinitely more value, daily enriching their
Collection (and which would better justify the laudable progress of that
Assembly) be oftener produced, as some of late have been? This, my Lord, would
obviate all unkind Objections, and cover the Infirmities of the present
Discourse, with things indeed worthy its Institution. But, as I am to obey your
Lordships Commands, so both your Lordship and the Society are redevable for
publishing the Imperfections of

My Lord,

Your Lordships and Their most obedient Servant

J. EVELYN.

A Philosophical Discourse OF EARTH.
I AM called upon, by Command from your Lordship, and the Council, who direct
the progress of the Royal Society (and as in course it falls) to entertain this
Illustrious Assembly with something, which being either deduced from, or
leading to Philosophical Experiment, may be of real use, and suitable to the
design of its Institution.

I am highly sensible, as of the honor which is done me, so of the great
disadvantages I lie under, for want of abilities to carry me through an
undertaking of this importance, and before such acute and learned Judges; but I
hope, my obedience to your Commands, and, at least, endeavors, will cover
those defects for which I can make no other Apology.

There are few here, I presume, who know not upon how innocent and humble a
subject I have long since diverted my thoughts; and therefore, I hope, they
will not be displeased, or think it unworthy of their patience, if from their
more sublime and noble speculations (and which do often carry them to converse
among the brighter Orbs, and Heavenly Bodies) they descend a while, and fix
their eyes upon the Earth, which I make the present Argument of my Discourse. I
had once indeed pitched upon a Subject of somewhat a more brisk and lively
nature; for what is there in Nature so sluggish and dull as Earth? What more
spiritual and active than Vegetation, and what the Earth produces? But this, as
a Province becoming a more steady hand, and penetrating wit, than mine to
cultivate (unless where it transitorily comes in my way to speak of Salts and
Ferments) I leave to those of this learned Society, who have already given such
admirable Essays of what they will be more able to accomplish upon that useful
and curious Theme; and therefore I beg leave, that I may confine my self to my
more proper Element, the Earth, which though the lowest, and most inferior of
them all, is yet so subservient, and necessary to Vegetation, as without it
there could hardly be any such thing in Nature.

To begin, I shall in the first place then describe, what I mean by Earth; then
I shall endeavor to show you the several sorts and kinds of Earth; and lastly,
how we may best improve it to the Uses of the Husbandman, the Forester, and the
Gardner, which is indeed of large and profitable extent, though it be but poor
and mean in sound, compared to Mines of Gold and Silver, and other rich Ores,
which likewise are the Treasures of the Earth, but less innocent and useful.

I intend not here to amuse this noble Audience, or my self, with those nice
enquiries, concerning what the real Form of that Body, or Substance is, which
we call Earth, denudated and stripped of all Heterogeneity, and reduced to its
principles, as whether it be composed of sandy, central, nitrous, or other
Salts, Atoms, and Particles? Whether void of all qualities but dryness, and the
like (as they commonly enter into the several definitions of Philosophers,) nor
of what Figure and Contexture it consists, which causes it to adhere and
combine together, so as to affirm any thing dogmatically thereupon; much less
shall I contend, whether it be a Planet moving about the Sun, or be fixed in the
Center of the Universe; all which have been the curious researches and
velitations of our later Theorists, but content my self with that Body or Mass
of Gleab, which we both dwell on, and every day cultivate for our necessary
subsistence, as it affords us Corn, Trees, Plants, and other Vegetables of all
sorts, useful for humane life, or the innocent refreshments of it.

Those who have written de Art Combinatoria, reckon of no fewer than One
hundred seventy nine millions one thousand and sixty different sorts of Earths;
but of all this enormous number, as of all other good things, it seems they do
not acquaint us with above eight or nine eminently useful to our purpose; and
truly, I can hardly yet arrive at so many. Such as I find naturally and usually
to rise from the Pit, I shall here spread before you in their order.

The most beneficial sort of Mould or Earth, appearing on the surface (for we
shall not at present penetrate lower than is necessary for the planting and
propagation of Vegetables) as it consists of a mixed body, is the natural (as I
beg leave to call it) under-turf-Earth, and the rest which commonly succeeds
it, in strata's, or layers, 'till we arrive to the barren, and impenetrable
Rock, be it fat or lean, Loam, Clay, Plastic, Figuline, or Smectic; as Chalk,
Marle, Fullers-Earth, Sandy, Gravelly, Stony, Rock, Shelly, Coal, or Mineral;
such as with the Ancients were the Creta, Argilla, Smectica, Tophacea, Pulla,
Alba, Rufa, Columbina, Macra, Cariosa, Rubrica (I name them promiscuously) to
be found in the old Geoponic Authors, to whom I refer the Critical.

Most, or all, of these lying (as I affirmed) in Beds, one upon another, from
softer to harder, better to worse, usually determine in Sand, Gravel, Stone,
Rock, or Shell, which last we frequently meet with in Marsh and Fenny Delves,
and sometimes even at the foot of high Mountains, after diverse successions of
different Moulds.

I begin with what commonly first presents it self under the removed Turf, and
which, for having never been violated by the Spade, or received any foreign
mixture, we will call the Virgin-Earth; not that of the Chemists, but as we
find it lying about a foot deep, more or less, in our Fields, before you come
to any manifest alteration of color or perfection. This surface-Mould is the
best, and sweetest, being enriched with all that the Air, Dews, Showers, and
Celestial Influences can contribute to it: For it is with good Earth, as with
excellent Water, that is the best, which with least difficulty receives all
external qualities; for the fatness of this Under-turf Mould, being drawn up by
the kindly warmth of the Sun to its superficies, spends but little of its
vigor in the Grass and tender verdure which it produces, and easily nourishes
without dissipating its virtue, provided no rank Weeds, or predatitious Plants
(consummating their Seeds) be suffered to grow and exhaust it; but maintains
its natural force, and is therefore of all other uncultivated Earths, the most
grateful to the Husbandman.

Now as the rest of incumbent and subjacent Earths approach this in virtue, so
are they to be valued; and of these there are several kinds, distinguishable by
their several constitutions: The best of which is black, fat, yet porous,
light, and sufficiently tenacious, without any mixture of Sand or Gravel,
rising in pretty gross Clods at the first breaking up of the Plow; but with
little labor and exposure falling to pieces, but not crumbling altogether into
Dust, which is the defect of a more vicious sort. Of this excellent black Mould
(fit almost for any thing without much manure) there are three kinds, which
differ in hue and goodness.

The next layer in series to this, is usually mixed with a sprinkling of Stones,
somewhat hard, yet friable, and when well aired and stirred, is not to be
rejected; the looseness of it, admitting the refreshment of showers, renders it
not improper for Trees and Plants which require more than ordinary Moistures.
Declining from this in perfection, is the darkish-Gray, or Tawny, which, the
deeper you mine, rises vein'd with yellow, and sometimes reddish, till it end
in pale; and if you penetrate yet farther, commonly in Sand, and a gritty stone.

Of a second Class, is Mould of an obscure Color also, more delicate grain,
tender, chessum and mellow; clear of stones and grittiness, with an eye of Lome
and Sand, which renders it light enough, yet moist, of all other the most
desirable for Flowers and the Coronary Garden.

To this we add, a yet more obscure, and sandy Mould, accompanied with a
natural fattiness, and this, though rarer, is incomparable for almost any sort
of Fruit Trees.

A third participates of both the former, fattish, yet interspersed with small
Flints and Pebbles; not to be altogether neglected.

A fourth is totally sandy, and that of diverse colors, with sometimes a bottom
of Gravel, now and then Rock, and not seldom Clay; and, as the foundations are,
so is it more or less retentive of moisture, and tolerable for Culture: But all
Sand does easily admit of Heat and Moisture, and yet for that not much the
better; for either it dismisses and lets them pass too soon, and so contracts
no ligature; or retains it too long; especially where the bottom is of Clay, by
which it parches, or chills, producing nothing but Moss, and disposes to
Cancerous infirmities: But if, as sometimes it fortunes, that the Sand have a
surface of more genial mould, and a fund of Gravel or loose stone; though it do
not long maintain the virtue it receives from Heaven; yet it produces as
forward springing, and is parent of sweet Grass, which, though soon burnt up in
dry weather, is as soon recovered, with the first rain that falls.

Of pure and sheere-Sand, there is white, black, bluish, red, yellow, harsher,
and milder, and some mere dust in appearance, none of them to be desired alone;
but the grey-black, and ash-colored, and that which frequently is found in
heathy Commons, or the traveling kind, volatile, and exceeding light, is the
most insipid, and worst of all. I do not here speak of the Sea-Sands, which is
of admirable virtue, and use in mixtures, and to be spread on some lands,
because it has of all other good things, it seems they do not acquaint us with
above eight or nine eminently useful to our purpose; and truly, I can hardly
yet arrive at so many. Such as I find naturally and usually to rise from the
Pit, I shall here spread before you in their order.

The most beneficial sort of Mould or Earth, appearing on the surface (for we
shall not at present penetrate lower than is necessary for the planting and
propagation of Vegetables) as it consists of a mixed body, is the natural (as I
beg leave to call it) under-turf-Earth, and the rest which commonly succeeds
it, in strata's, or layers, 'till we arrive to the barren, and impenetrable
Rock, be it fat or lean, Loam, Clay, Plastic, Figuline, or Smectic; as Chalk,
Marle, Fullers-Earth, Sandy, Gravelly, Stony, Rock, Shelly, Coal, or Mineral;
with the Sun and Wind, most of them pernicious, and untractable.

The unctuous and fatter Clay frequently lies upon the other, having oftentimes
a basis of Chalk beneath it; but neither is this worth any thing, 'till it be
loosened, and rendered more kind, so as to admit of the air and heavenly
influences.

I had almost forgotten Marsh-Earths, which though of all other, seemingly, the
most churlish, a little after it is first dug, and dried (when it soon grows
hard, and chaps,) may with labor, and convenient exposure, be brought to an
excellent temper; for being the product of rich Slime, and the sediment of
Land-Waters, and Inundations, which are usually fat, as also the rotting of
Sedge, yea, and frequently of prostrated Trees, formerly growing in or near
them, and in process of time rotted (at least the spray of them) and now
converted into mould, becomes very profitable Land: But whether I may reckon
this among the natural Earths, I do not contend.

Of Loams, and Brick-Earths, we have several sorts, and some approaching to
Clay; others nearer Marle, differing also in color; and if it be not too rude,
mingled, in just proportion, with other Mold, an excellent ingredient in all
sorts of Earth, and so welcome to the Husbandman, and the Gardner especially,
as nothing does well without a little dash of it.

Of Marle (of a cold sad nature) seldom have we such quantities in Layers, as
we have of the forementioned Earths; but we commonly meet with it in places
affected to it, and it is taken out of Pits, at several depths, and of diverse
colors, red, white, gray, blue, all of them unctuous, of a slippery nature,
and in goodness, as being pure and immixt, it sooner relents after a shower,
and when dried again, slackens and crumbles into dust, without induration, and
growing hard again.

Lastly, Chalk, which is likewise of several kinds and colors, hard, softer,
fine, courser, slippery and marly, and apt to dissolve with the weather into no
unprofitable Manure: Some of them have a Sandish, others a blacker and light
surface; and there is a sort which produces sweet Grass, and Aromatic Plants,
and some so rank, especially in the Valleys of very high Hills, as to feed not
only Sheep, but other Cattle, to great advantage, as we may see in diverse
places among the Downs of Suffex. But it has a peculiar virtue above all this,
to improve other Lands, as we shall come to show.

I forbear to speak particularly of Fullers-Earth, Tobacco-Clay, and the
several fictile Clays; because they are not so universal, and serviceable to
the Plow and Spade; much less of Terra Lemnia, Chia, Melita, Hetruria, and the
rest of the Sigillatae; nor of the Bolus's, Rubrics, and Okers, Figuline,
Stiptic, Smegmatic etc. as they are diversely qualified for several uses,
Medical, and Mechanical; but content my self with those I have already
enumerated.

Now besides the Description and Characters we have given of these several
Moulds and Earths, as they reside in their several Beds and Couches, there are
diverse other Indications, by which we may discover their qualities and
perfections; as amongst other, a most infallible one is, its disposition to
melt, and crumble into fine morsels, not turn to Mud and Mortar, upon the
descent of gentle showers, how hard soever it seem before, and if in stirring
it rise rather in granules, than massy Clods.

If excavating a Pit, the Mould, you exhaust, more than fill it again, Virgil
tells us it is good Augury; upon which Laurembergius affirms, that at Wittemberg
in Germany, where the Mould lies so close, as it does not replenish the fosse,
out of which it has been dug, the Corn which is sown in that Country, soon
degenerates into Rye; and what is still more remarkable, that the Rye sown in
Thuringia (where the Earth is less compacted) reverts, after three Crops, to be
Wheat again.

My Lord Bacon directs to the observation of the Rainbow, where its extremity
seems to rest, as pointing to a more roscid and fertile Mould; but this, I
conceive, may be very fallacious, it having two horns, or bases, which are ever
opposite.

But the situation and declivity of the place is commonly a `more certain mark;
as what lies under a Southern, or South-East rising-ground; But this is also
eligible according to the purposes you would employ it for; some Plants
affecting hotter, other colder exposures; some delight to dwell on the Hills,
others in the Valleys, and closer Seats; and some again are indifferent to
either; but generally speaking, most of them choose the warm, and more benign;
and the bottoms are universally fertile, being the recipients of what the
showers bring down to them from the Hills and more elevated parts.

Another infallible indication is the nature, and floridness of the Plants
which officiously it produces; as where Thistles spontaneously thrive; where
the Oak grows tall and spreading; and as the Plant is of kind, so to prognostic
for what Tillage, Layer, or other use the ground is proper; Time,
Straw-berries, Betony, etc. direct to Wood; Camomile, to a Mould disposed for
Corn, and I add, to Hortulan furniture; Burnet, to Pasture; Mallows to Roots,
and the like, as my Lord Verulam and others observe.

On the contrary, some ground there is so cold, as naturally brings forth
nothing but Gorse, and Broom, Holly, Yew, Juniper, Ivy, Box, etc. which may
happily direct us to the planting of Pine, Firs, the Phillyreas, Spanish Broom,
and other perennial verdures in such places.

Mos^, Rushes, WildTansy, Sedge, Flags, Fern, Yarrow, and where Plants appear
withered or blasted, shrubby, and curled, (which are the effects of immoderate
wet, heat, and cold interchangeably) are natural auguries of a cursed Soil.
Thus as by the Plant we may conjecture of the Mould; so by the Mould may we
guess at the Plant: The more herbaceous and tender, springing from the gentle
Bed; the course and rougher Plants, from the rude and churlish: And as some
Earths appear to be totally barren, and some though not altogether so
unfruitful, yet wanting salacity to conceive, vigor to produce, and sensibly
eluding all our pains; so there is other, which is perpetually pregnant, and
this is likewise a good prognostic.

Upon these, and such like hints, in proposals of transplanting Spices, and
other exotic rarities, from either Indies; the curious should be studious to
procure of the natural Mould in which they grow (and this might be effected to
good proportion, by the balasting of Ships) either to plant, or nourish them in
from the Seed, till they were of age, and had gained some stability of roots
and stem, and become acquainted with the Genius of our Climate; or for Essays
of Mixtures, to compose the like.

By the goodness, richness, hungriness and tincture of the Water straining
through grounds, and by the weight and sluggishness of it, compared with the
lighter, conjecture also may be made, as in part we have showed.

To conclude, there are almost none of our Senses, but may of right pretend to
give their verdict here, and first,

By the Odor or Smell, containing (as my Lord Verulam affirms) the juice of
Vegetables already as it were concocted and prepared; so as after long drowths,
upon the first rains, good and natural Mould will emit a most agreeable scent;
and in some places (as Alonso Barba, a considerable Spanish Author testifies)
approaching the most ravishing perfumes; as on the contrary, if the ground be
disposed to any Mineral, or other ill quality, sending forth Arsenical, and
very noxious steams; as we find from our Marshes and Fennygrounds.

By the Taste, and that with good reason; all Earths abounding more or less in
their peculiar Salts, as well as Plants; some sweet and more grateful; others
bitter, mordacious, or astringent; some flat and insipid; all of them to be
detected by percolation of untainted Water through them; though there be who
affirm, that the best Earth, like the best Water, and Oil, has neither Odor,
nor Taste.

By the Touch, if it be tenera, fatty, detersive, and slippery, or more
asperous, gritty, porous and fryable; likewise, if it stick to the fingers like
Bird-lime, or melt and dissolve on the tongue like Butter: Furthermore, good
and excellent Earth should be of the same constitution, and not of contrary, as
soft and hard; churlish and mild; moist and dry; not too unctuous nor too lean,
but resoluble, and of a just and procreative temper, combining into a light,
and easily crumbling Mould; yet consistent, and apt to be wrought and kneaded,
such as having a modicum of Loam naturally rising with it, to entertain the
moisture, does neither defile the Fingers, nor cleave much to the Spade, which
easily enters it, and such as is usually found under the turf of
Pasture-Grounds, upon which Cattle have been long fed and foddered. In a word,
that is the best Earth to all Senses, which is blackish, cuts like Butter,
sticks not obstinately, but is short, light, breaking into small Clods, is
sweet, will be tempered without crusting or chapping in dry weather, or (as we
say) becoming Mortar in wet.

Lastly, by the Sight, from all the Instances of Color, and other visible
Indications: For the common opinion is (though long since exploded by
Columella) that all hot, and choleric grounds, are red or brown; cold and dry,
blackish; cold and moist, whitish; hot and moist, ruddy; which yet, exhalations
from Minerals, the heat of the Sun, and other accidents may cause; but
generally, they give preeminence to the darker Grays; next, to the Russet; the
clear Tawny is found worse; the light and dark-ash-colour (light also of
weight, and resembling Ashes) good for nothing; but the yellowish-red worst of
all. And all these are fit to be known, as contributing to noble and useful
Experiments, upon due and accurate Comparisons, and enquiry from the several
Particles of their Constitutions, Figures, and Modes, as far at least, as we
can discover them by the best auxiliaries of Microscopes, Lotions, Strainers,
Calcinations, Triturations and grindings, upon such discovery to judge of their
qualities, and by essaying variety of mixtures, and imitating all sorts of
Mould, foreign or Indigen, to compound Earths as near as may be resembling the
natural, for any special or curious use, and be thereby enabled to alter the
genius of Grounds as we see occasion.

The consideration of this it was, which gave me the curiosity to fall upon the
examining of a Collection I had made of several sorts both of Earth and Soils,
such as I could find about this Territory; whereof some I washed, to find by
what would melt, reside, or pass away in the percolation, of what visible
Figure they chiefly seemed to consist, armed as I was with an indifferent
Microscope, of which be pleased to take this brief account.

Gravelly and Arenous Earths of several sorts, before they were washed,
appeared to be, most of it, rough Crystals, of which some very transparent and
gemmy; few of them sharp or angular, but roundish; mixed with Atoms and
Particles of a mineral hue, which being well dried, and bruised on a hard
serpentine Stone, and Mullar of the same, was with little labor reduced to an
impalpable whitish Sand, untransparent, as it happens in the bruisings of most,
though never so diaphanous bodies, which may be so reduced.

Yellow Sand had the appearance of Amber; bruised, an untransparent paler Sand.

Fat rich Earth, full of black spots, without much discoloring the water (as
hardly did any of the Sands at all) being dried, was reduced to a delicate
sandy Dust, with very little brightness.

Marsh Earth contained a considerable quantity of Sand, the rest resembled the
Fat Earth.

The Vnder-pasture mould had likewise a sandy mixture, and what passed with the
water after evaporation, seemed to be an impalpable, and very fine
untransparent Sand.

Clay consisted of most exceeding smooth and round Sands of several opacous
colors.

Potters-Earth, of different sorts, ground small, became like Sand, of a
yellowish gray, and other colors, exceeding polite and smooth.

A certain yellowish loamy Earth, which had been brought to me, with some
Orange Trees out of Italy, was reduced to a bright soft Sand, appearing more
gemmy than in the other Loams.

Chalk resembled fine white Flower, and some of it sparkling, especially the
harsher sort; but the ^ender, not.

Fullers-Earth appeared like Gum tragacanth, a little wetted, seemingly
swelled, yet glistering; but when reduced to a fine dust, a smooth Sand.

Tabacco-Earth, not much bruised, was just like white Starch; washed, and well
dried, it resembled the whitest Flower of Wheat a little candyed: I had not the
opportunity of examining the several sorts of Marles; and so I proceed to the
Dungs.

Neats-Dung (the Cattle fed only with Fodder, or little Grass, for 'twas in the
Winter I made my observations) appeared to be nothing but straws in the entire
substance, and color little altered, save what a certain slippery mucilage
gave them, sprinkled with a glistring Sand, like Atoms of Gold; but upon
washing and drying again, the tenacious matter vanished, and the straws
appeared separated and clear.

Sheeps-Dung was much like the former, only the spires and blades of a fine
short grass conglomerated and rolled up in the Pellets, and the glue about it
less viscous, but it passed also away in the lotion.

Swines-Dung had the resemblance of dirty Bees Wax, mingled with straws and
husks, which seemed like candied Eringo, and some like Angelica Roots.

The Soil of Horses appeared like great wisps of Hay, and little straws, thin
of mucilage, and which being washed, was easily to be discerned by a naked Eye.

Dears-Dung much resembled that of Sheeps.

Pigeons-Dung consisted of a stiff glutinous matter, easily reducible to dust
of a gray color, with some husky Atoms, after dilution. Lastly,

The Dung of Poultry, was so full of Gravel, small stones, and sand, that there
appeared little or no other substance, save a very small portion both of white
and blackish viscous matter twisted up together; of all the other, the most
foetid and ill smelling.

These were all I had time and leisure to examine, I cannot say with all the
accurateness they were capable of, but sufficiently to encourage the more
curious, and to satisfy my self, that the very finest Earth, and best of
Moulds, however to appearance mixed with diverse imperfect Bodies, may, for ought
we know, consist more of sandy particles, than of any other whatsoever; at
least, if from this Criterion we may be allowed to pronounce, what they seem to
the Eye, Sands, Crystals, or Salts (call them what you please;) the
consideration of which being so universally the cause of Vegetation, was no
small inducement to me, to see, if by examining the several Earths, (though but
by a cursory inspection) I might possibly detect, what Rudiments of such a
Principle there were lurking in them, abstractedly taken; not that I opine
Earth to be Salt alone, and nothing else (though perhaps little more besides
Sulphur,) for so it produces no Vegetable that I know of, without Water to
dissolve and qualify it for insumption, and perhaps some other matter fitted
to receive the Seeds, and keep the Plant steady; which yet for ought I can
discern, is also but a finer sort of Sand, the clamminess of it being rather
something extrinsecal and accidental to it, than any thing natural, and
originally constitutive: For, the combination of these several Moulds, which
gives the ligature, slipperiness, and a diverse temper, seems rather to be
caused by the perpetual and successive rotting of the Grass, Plants, Leaves,
Branches, Moss, and other excrescences growing upon it (than any peculiar or
solitary principle apart) which in long tract of time, has amassed together a
substance heterogeneous to the ruder Particles, which after the dilutions of
the superficies (that is of the rich and fatter Mould) appears to be little
other than Sand, or fixed Salts, of various Figures and Colors; since even the
most obdurate and flinty Pebble, beaten and ground to powder, or by Calcination
reduced to an impalpable dust, is as fine both to the Eye, and smooth to the
touch, as the most Smectic Earths and Marles themselves; such, at least, as you
shall collect from the subsidence (to appearance) of the most Crystal Waters,
precipitated by deliquated Oil of Tartar, or the like; and the more they be
subdued and broken, the harder they will prove, if (cleared of their nitrous
parts) they pass the Potters Fire, however they seemed before to be of
different constitution: This is evident in Vessels made of Tabacco-Clay, or
whatever the material be, which has of late been so successfully employed, for
the sinding out of a composition (if so I may call it) nothing inferior to the
hardest Pourcelain, and almost as beautiful (by a worthy Member of this Mr.
Hook.
Society).

But to return to our superficial Earth, which we call the Mould, I affirm it
to grow and increase yearly in depth from the Causes aforesaid; and in some
places, to that proportion, as to have raised no inconsiderable Hills and
Eminences, by the accidental fall and rotting of Woods and Trees; such as
Birch, and Beech, etc. which are not of a constitution to remain long in the
ground (as Fir, Oak, Elm, and some other Timber will do, and grow the harder)
without corruption, and relenting into Mould as soft and tender as what they
first were sown or planted in; and of this I am able to give undeniable
Instances. I insist not here on the perpetual successions, and generations of
Flints, and other Stones, in the same places, where they have been sedulously
gathered off, by many (not improbably) thought to proceed from Worm-casts,
hardened by the air, and a certain lapidescent succus, or spirit, which it
meets with: And this, for happening most on Downs, very much exposed (yet
undisturbed) is the more probable; as, on the other side, it establishes our
conjecture of the purest Moulds being capable of such a change; that which is
thus cast up by the Worms, being so exceedingly elaborated and refined:
Therefore let no man be over-confident, that because some Earths are soft, fat,
and slippery, they may not possibly consist of Sands (of which there are so
many kinds,) since it is evident, that even all fossile Bodies, which can be
reduced and brought to sands, may by contrition of the Particles be rendered so
minute, as to emulate the finest Earths we have enumerated; the compactedness,
and accidental mixtures resulting (as we affirm) from things extrinsecal, not
excluding exhalations, passage of liquors and several juices to them, or
conveyed by subterraneous steams and influences; be the Stones or Rock
Glareous, Metallic, Testaceous, Salts, or any other Concretes whatsoever. And
what, if we should indeed suspect all Earth to be arrant Salt, nay Glass, and
that Glass, how hard soever, the offspring and child of water, the most fluid,
crystalline, sincere and void of all other qualities? it is not impossible, I
think, but by the different texture of its parts, even that liquid Element may
be brought to the consistence of a most different body to what it appears: We
know, that Water (besides that it was the first immense body which invested
Genesis 1.
the Chaos) was by some thought to be the Mother of Earth, (nay the principia
soluta of all mixts whatsoever,) and that the bottom of the Sea was made by a
perpetual Hypostasis or subsidence, which precipitated from every part of it to
the Center. I do not stand to justify these speculations, but to illustrate
what I am about; namely, that Water is apt enough to be condensed and made
hard; and crude Mercury, and running metal, Crystals, Gems, and Pearls, do more
resemble it, than that dirty and opace body, which we usually denominate Earth:
Besides we find, how diverse Waters, not only indurate and petrifie other
substances, but grow into Stones, and leave a rocky Callus where they drop and
continually pass, and that all sands and stones are not diaphanous; therefore
that is no eviction, but that they might once have been fluid, since their
opacity may be adventitious and proceed from sundry accidents; so as granting
this Hypothesis, we are less to wonder, that this matter is above all other so
disposed to Vegetation, and apt to produce Plants endued with Color, Weight,
Taste, Odor, and with sundry medical and other virtues, as I think that
excellent Philosopher Mr. Boil (an ornament of this Society) does somewhere
make out from the various Percolations, Concoctions, and Circulations of that
fruitful Menstrue: And if that be true, that there is but one Catholic,
homogeneous, fluid matter, (diversified only by shape, size, motion, repose,
and various texture of the minute Particles it consists of; and from which
affections of matter, the diverse qualities result of particular bodies;) what
may not mixture, and an attent inspection into the anatomical parts of the
vegetable family in time produce, for our composing of all sorts of Moulds and
Soils almost imaginable, which is the drift of my present Discourse? And why
might not Solomon by this means have really had all kinds of Plants in his
incomparable Gardens? even Ebony, Cloves, Cinnamon, and from the Cedar to the
Shrub, such as grew only in the remotest regions, furnished (as he doubtless
was) with so extraordinary an insight into all natural things, and powers, for
the composing of Earths, and assigning them their proper mixtures and ferments.
I do not here enquire, whether there be not a Pansperme universally diffused,
individuated, and specified in their several Matrixes, and receptacles pro
ratione mixti (as they speak) but I think there might very unexpected
Phaenomenas be brought to light, in vegetable productions, did men seriously
apply themselves to make such possible trials, as is in the power of Art to
effect; and how far Soils may be dissembled, and the Air and Water attempered,
(at least for some curiosities, which may give light to more useful things) I
do not conclude; but I should expect very rare and considerable things from an
attentive and diligent Endeavor. To this end, the raising of artificial Dews
and Mists impregnated with several qualities, for the more natural refreshment
of Exotic Plants, were, it may be, no hard matter to effect, no more than were
the modification of the Air abroad, as well as in our more confined Reserves,
where we set them in for Hyemation, and during the most rigorous Colds. As for
mixtures of Earths; Plants we know are nourished by things of like affinity
with the constitution of the Soil which produces them; and therefore it is of
singular importance, to be well read in the Alphabet of Earths and Composts:
For, as we have said, Plants affect the Marsh, Bog, Mountain, Valley, Sand,
Gravel, sat and lean Mould, according to their tempers; and for want of skill
in this, the same Plant not only languishes and starves, but some we find to
grow so luxuriate, as to change their very shapes, colors, leaves, roots, and
other parts, and to grow almost out of knowledge of the skilfullest Botanists;
not here to speak of what alterations do accrue from transplanting and
irrigations alone. I mention this, to incite the curious to essay artificial
Compositions in defect of the natural Soil; to make new confections of Earths
and Moulds for the entertaining of the most generous and profitable Plants, as
well as curious; especially if, as I hinted, we could skill to modifie also the
Air about them, and make the remedy as well regional as topical; and why not
for other Fruits (Strangers yet amongst us) as for Oranges, Lemons,
Pomegranats, Figs, and other precious Trees, which of late are become almost
indenizon'd amongst us, and grow every generation more reconcilable to the
Climate?

Here we might enlarge upon the several enquiries formerly suggested: As, how
far Principles might be multiplied, and differenced by alteration and
condensation? Whether Earth, stripped of all heterogeneity, and uniform
particles, retain only weight, and an insipid siccity? And whether it produce
or afford any thing more than embracement to the first rudiments of Plants,
protection to the roots, and stability to the stem; unprolific, as they say,
'till married to something of a more masculine virtue which irradiates her; but
otherways, nourishing only from what it attracts, without any active or
material contribution: These indeed, with many other quaeries, do appositely
come in here; but it would perhaps render this Discourse more prolix, than
useful, to enter upon them in detaille; nor is it for me to undertake
speculations of so abstruse a nature, without unpardonable ostentation; and
therefore having only offered something toward the discovery of the great
varieties, and choice of Earths, (such as we Gardiners and Rustics for the most
part meet with in our Grounds,) my next endeavor shall be to show, how we may
improve the best, and prescribe remedy to the worst, by labor and stirring
only, which being the least artificial, approaches the nearest to Nature.

At the first breaking up of your Ground therefore, let there be a pretty deep
Trench or Furrow made throughout, of competent depth (as the manner is of
experienced Gardiners,) the Turf being first pared off, and laid by it self,
with the first Mould lying under it, and that of the next in succession, that
so they may both participate of the Air, Showers, and Influences, to which they
are exposed; and this is to be done in severals, as deep as you think fit, that
is, so far, as you find the Earth well natured; or you may fling it up in
several small mounds or lumps, suffering the Frosts and Snows of a Winter or
two (according as the nature of it seems to require) pass upon them, beginning
your work about the commencement of Autumn, before the Mould becomes too
ponderous and sluggish; though some there are, who choose an earlier season, and
to open their Ground when the Sun approaches, not when he retires: But
certainly, to have the whole Winter before us, does best temper and prepare it
for those impregnating agents.

In separating the surface-mould from the deeper, whether you make a Trench, or
dig holes to plant your Trees in, be it for Standards, Espalieres, or Shrubs;
the longer you expose it, and leave the receptacles open (were it for two whole
Winters) it soon would recompense your expectation; and especially, if when you
come to Plant, you dispose of the best and fattest Earth at the bottom; which
if it be of sweet and ventilated Mud of Ponds, or High-way-Dust, were
preferrable to all the artificial Composts you can devise: In defect of this,
(where it cannot be had in quantity) cast in the upper Turfs (if not already
consumed) the Sod downwards, with the next adhering Mould for half a foot in
thickness; on this a layer of well-matur'd Dung; then as much of the Earth
which was last flung out, mixing them very well together: Repeat this process
for kinds, mixture, and thickness, till your trenches and holes be filled four
or five Inches above the level or area of the Ground, to which it will quickly
subside upon the first refreshings, and a very gentle treading to establish the
Tree. Fruit planted in such Mould you will find to prosper infinitely better,
than where young Trees are clapped in at adventure in newbroken-up Earth, which
is always cold and sluggish, and ill complexion'd; nor will they require (as
else they do) to be supplied every foot with fresh Soil, before they be able to
put forth lusty and spreading roots; but which it is impossible to convey to
them, so as to affect the underparts, by excavating the ground, and undermining
the Trees (after once they arrive to any stature) without much trouble and
inconvenience, and the manifest retarding of their progress.

If you will plant in pits and holes, and not give your ground an universal
Trenching (which I prefer,) make them the larger ( five foot at the least
square) but not above half a yard or two foot deep, according to the nature of
the Tree. In dressing the Roots, be as sparing as possible of the Fibers, small
and tender strings (which are as the Emulgent Veins which insume and convey the
nourishment to the whole Tree;) and such of the stronger and more confirmed
parts which you trim, cut sloping, so as the wound may best apply to the Earth.
The Head or Top I advise you to let alone, 'till after the most penetrating
colds be past, and then, about February, to take them off, and shape them as
you please, and as the skilful Gardners can direct you. An Orchard thus
planted, Spring and Autumnal stirrings of the Mould about them is of incredible
advantage; and even during the hottest Summer-Months carefully to abate the
Weeds (but not to dig above a quarter of a Spit-deep, for fear of exposing them
to the Sun, unless it be after plentiful showers) is very necessary.

There are, I confess, who fancy that this long exposure of Earth before it be
employed for a Crop, causes it to exhale, and spend the virtue which it should
retain; but, provided nothing be suffered to grow on it whilst it lies thus
rough and fallow, there is no danger of that; there being in truth no compost or
laetation whatsoever comparable to this continual motion, repastination, and
turning of the Mould with the Spade; the pared-off Turf (which is the very fat
and efflorescence of the Earth) and even Weeds with their vegetable Salts, so
collected into heaps, and exposed, being reduced and falling into natural,
sweet, and excellent Mould. I say, this is a mavelous advantage, and does in
greater measure fertilize the ground alone, without any other additament: For
the Earth, which was formerly dull and unactive, or perhaps producing but one
kind of Plant, will by this culture dispose it self to bring forth variety, as
it lies in depths, be it never so profound, cold and crude, the nature of the
Plant always follow ing the genius of the Soil; but indeed requiring time,
according to the depth from whence you fetch it, to purge and prepare it self,
and render it fit for conception, evaporating the malignant halitus's and
impurities of the imprisoned air, laxing the parts, and giving easy
deliverance to its offspring.

I do not dispute, whether all Plants have their primigenial Seeds, and that
nothing emerges spontaneously, and at adventure; but, that these would rise
freely, in all places, if impediments were removed (of which something has
already been spoken;) and to show, how pregnant most Earths would become, were
these indispositions cured, and that those seminal rudiments, wherever latent,
were free to move and exert their virtue, by taking off these Chains and
Weights which fetter and depress them.

It is verily almost a miracle to see, how the same Land, without any other
Manure or Culture, will bring forth, and even luxuriate; and that the bare
raking and combing only of a bed of Earth, now one way, then another, as to the
regions of Heaven and polar Aspects, may diversifie the annual production,
which is a secret worthy to be confidered: I am only to caution our labourer as
to the present work, that he do not stir the ground in over-wet and slabby
weather; that the Sulcus or Trench be made to run from North to South, and
that, if there be occasion for opening of a fresh piece of Earth, for present
use, he dig not above one Spit-deep, which will be sufficient to cover the
roots of any plantable Fruit, or other Tree; otherwise, not to disturb it again
'till the March following; when, if he please, and that the ground seem to
require an hastier maturation, there may be a Crop of Beans, Pease, or Turnips
sown upon it, which will mellow it exceedingly, and destroy the noxious Weeds;
after which, with a slight repastination, one may plant or sow any thing in it
freely; especially Roots, which will thrive bravely; and so will Trees,
provided you plant them not too deep, but endeavor to make them spread, and
take in the succulent virtue of the upper Mould; and therefore too deep
trenching is not always profitable, unless it be for Esculent Roots, such as
Carrots, Parsneps, Beets, and the like; since Trees, especially Fruit, would be
tempted even by baits, to run shallow; such as penetrate deep, commonly
spending more in Wood and Leaves, than in the burden for which we plant them.

There is only this caution due, that you never plant your Roots where the
stiff and churlish ground is likely to be within reach of them; for though it
be neither necessary nor convenient, they should penetrate deep, it is yet of
high importance, they should dilate and spread, which they will never do in
obstinate and inhospitable land (but revert back toward the milder and better
natured Mould,) which crumples the roots, and perverts their posture to their
exceeding damage. And to this infirmity our rare Exotic Plants and Shrubs are
most obnoxious, confined as they are to their Wooden Cases, and Testaceous
Prisons, and therefore require to be frequently trimmed and supplied with fresh
and succulent Mould to entertain the Fibers, which else you will find to mat in
unexplicable intanglements, and adhere to the sides of the Vessel, where they
dry or corrupt.

Having said thus much of the Natural, I should now come to Artificial helps,
by application of Dungs, and Composts; and indeed, stude ut magnum
sterquilinium habeas, was old and good advice; but for that there be, who
affirm any Culture of the Earth preferrable to Dung, even things so slight as
the haume of Peace and Lupines, or any other Pulse (for when I speak of Dungs, I
mean those excrementitious and sordid materials which we commonly heap up and
lay upon our Grounds,) I beg your patience to suspend a while my stirring that
less pleasant mixture, and, 'till it be well air'd and fit for use, proceed a
little farther on our former subject, and try what aid we may yet expect from
more kind and benign means, before we come to the gross and violent. For,
besides that such compost (at least so prepared as it ought to be) is not every
where, nor always to be had in quantities; to confide in Dungs and Ordure is
not so safe and of that importance to our Husbandman, Hesiod.
as some are made believe, since if we shall look back into the best experience
of elder days, we shall find, they had very little or no use at all of
stercoration. I know some there be, who attribute this neglect to the natural
fertility of the Country, that it is the busy nurse of Vermin, and nauseous
accidents; but waving these, (without intending to desert the aid of Soil in
place and time,) I proceed with what I call more natural helps; namely, as we
have showed, by opening, stirring, and ventilating the Earth, and sometimes its
contrary, by coverture, shade, rest, and forbearance for a season, as we daily
see it practiced in our worn-out and exhausted layfields, which enjoy their
Sabbaths. It Is certain, that for our Gardens of Pleasure, the fairest beauties
of the Parterre, require rather a fine, quick, friable, and well-wrought Mould,
than a rank or richly dunged.

I shall here then begin with an experiment I have been taught by a learned
Person of this illustrious Body, from whom I have long D. Beale.
since received the choicest documents upon this and many curious subjects. And
first, That amongst the mechanical aids, (wherein stercoration has no hand)
that of pulverizing the Earth by contusion, and breaking it with Plow or Spade,
is of admirable effect to dispose it for the reception of all the natural
impregnations we have been discoursing upon, as constant and undeniable, I
think will be evinced. For the Earth, especially if fresh, has a certain
magnetism in it, by which it attracts the Salt, power, or virtue (call it
either,) which gives it life, and is the Logic of all the labor and stir we
keep about it, to sustain us; all dungings and other sordid temperings, being
but the vicars succedaneous to this improvement, which of all other makes its
return of Fruit, or whatsoever else it bears, without imparting any of those
ill and pernicious qualities, which we sensibly discover from forced grounds;
and that not only in the Plants which they produce, but in the very Animals
which they feed and nourish.

I know, Laurembergius (somewhere) denis this, and that Animals in preparing
Chyle, transmute, alter, and insume what is only their proper aliment;
rejecting all that is superfluous; but as our Early Asparagus, Caulyflowers,
and diverse roots, manifestly refute it, so does the taste of the flesh, and
milk of Cattle, and especially Foul, that feed on the wild Garlic,
Fenny-grass, and other rank and putrid things; not here to insist on their
sweet and delicate relish upon their change of Food, and more odoriferous
pasture: But to the experiment.

Take of the most barren Earth you can find, drained, if you please, of all its
Nitrous Salts, and masculine parts; reduce it to a fine powder (which may be
done even in large proportion, by a rude Engine, letting fall a kind of hammer
or beetle at the motion of a wheel;) let this pulverized Earth, and for the
time uncessantly agitated, be exposed for a Summer and a Winter to the
vicissitudes and changes of the seasons, and influences of Heaven: By this
labor, and rest from Vegetation, you will find it will have obtained such a
generous and masculine pregnancy, within that period, as to make good your
highest expectations: And to this belongs Sr. Hugh Platts Contrition, or
Philosophical Grinding of Earth; which upon this exposure alone, without manure
of Soil, after the like revolution of time, will, as he affirms, be able to
receive an exotie Plant from the farthest Indies, and cause all Vegetables to
prosper in the most exalted degree; and, to speak magnificently with that
Industrious Man, to bear their fruit as kindly with us, as they do in their
natural Climates: But a little to abate of this, modestly we may say, that this
Culture (easy and simple as it is) will be found effectually able to render the
Soil of a most extensive Capacity, for the entertainment of foreign and
uncommon plants. For to enumerate some of its perfections; such as refuse Dung,
and violent applications, have here pure Earth; and such as require aid, a
mellow and rich mould, impregnated with all the blessings which the Influences
of the Heaven, and efflorescence of the Earth can contribute to it; fitted, as
it is, for Generation, and yet so restrained from it, as greedily to receive
the first Seeds, which are committed to it, with a passion, and fervency as it
were of animal love. What high and sublime things are spoken more upon this, I
forbear to prosecute; but in Sir Kenelme Digby's discourse of Sympathetic
Powder he affirms, that the Earth in the years of repose recovers its Vigor,
by the attraction of the Vital Spirits, which it receives from the air, and
those superior irradiations, which endow simple Earth with qualities promoting
fermentation. And indeed, such a vegetative activity I have often observed in
the bare exposure of some Plants but for a few hours only, as has raised my
admiration, particularly in the Aloe, and other kinds of Sedums, which, when to
all appearance shrunk and shrivel'd up, have filled themselves in a moment, set
out in the Air, when a very few drops of water (at the same, that is, Winter,
time) would certainly have made it rot, and turn to a mucilage, as, to my cost,
I have experienced. And these Ferments of the Earth, by this amity and genial
intercourse with the Air, are innumerable, to concoct, digest, accelerate, and
restore; equal to, yea, beyond any artificial enforcements of Dungs, and
compost whatsoever. But to return to dust again; by the toil we have mentioned,
it is found, that Soil may be so strangely altered from its former nature, as to
render the harsh and most uncivil Clay obsequious to the Husbandman, and to
bring forth Roots, and Plants, which otherwise require the lightest and
hollowest moulds.

In other cases and affections, the Earth may be likewise fertiliz'd as from
without, so from within, by more recondite and central Causes, and agitations,
whichif if in excess, may be allayed with some feminine or other mixture; since
often times, qualities too intense, rather poison dry and choleric grounds,
than conduce to their advantage, as we shall come to show; and that which makes
a cold and moist ground fertile, will destroy the contrary, as we see it in too
free applications of salt; and therefore it requires no ordinary dexterity, to
be able to direct where, and what remedies are to be administered; since we find
it the same in Vegetable productions, as in the Animal, where Complexions
should be suited; for want of which care, through avarice, and other sordid
Circumstances, Noble Families themselves are manytimes rendr'd Childless, which
might else have multiplied and been perpetuated. To illustrate this by our
present subject: We find, that a thin seifing, or sprinkling of Ashes, has
enriched all the higher Pastures, when, where 'twas strewn too thick, it
became totally barren: sometimes again, defect of sufficient depth may be cause
of sterility; and so it frequently happens, that the proper remedy of some
hungry and shallow surface, is, to superinduce and lay more Earth upon it, and
to find out the medium by diligent trials of some degrees of depths in the same
Soil; but solitary, single, or overhasty Experiments, before the Earth be
prepared by some of our forementioned Essays, may prove discouraging, and
unsufficient, as my Lord Bacon has often advertised us.

Earth is also sometimes improved by mixtures of Fearn, rotten leaves, and the
pourriture of old Wood; the haulm of beans, pease, and other legumina, which
heates, and accelerates Concoction; for which, and all other Medications, the
nature of the Mould is carefully to be examined, that application be made
accordingly; as for instance, If it be sandy, or other light mixed Earth, to
imbody it with something of a fatter nature, as Lime, or Marle, (for I yet
forbear the touch of ordure or animal Composts, as the least natural;) and be
sure so to stir, and lay it (especially if with Lime) that it may not sink too
deep, and suddenly as it is apt to do, and so desert the surface-mould, where
it should do the feat, and therefore it is to be the oftener renewed. But Marle
enters as properly here, and so does Mudd, Slub of slimy Waters; especially, if
the soil be gravelly and mixed, which it will sadden and impinguate, and
consequently combine; but if the Gravel be wet and cold, Lime is preferable:
Wherefore the nature of the mould should be well examined before the
application; as here arenous and sandy Earth wants ligature, and besides
consisting of sharp and asperous angles, wounds and galls, curles and dwarfs
our Plants, without extraordinary help, to render the passages more slippery,
and easy; and therefore relenting Chalks, or Chalk-Marle, is also profitable,
with Calcinations of Turfe, or Sea-Wrack, where it is at hand; and if the Soil
be exceeding bibulous, spread a Layer or Couch of Loame, discreetly mingled, at
the bottom, to entertain the moisture. In the mean time, there are yet some
Plants which thrive almost in nothing so well as in Sand alone, or with very
little mixture, nor that of any Dung: So Melons are said to grow in Jamaica;
and some vast Timber Trees have little or no mould adhering to their roots;
such is that beautiful stranger, the Japan-Lilly, called by those of Garnsey
(from whence we only have them) La belle de nuit; and a certain Palm of the
same Japan, which shrinks and drys at the least touch of Water, as if it were
laid before the fire, which is, it seems, the only remedy that restores it, or
the sudden replanting it in Scales of Iron, or the most burning Sand: But what
if Sand it self, however vulgarly reputed, be not so hot, or interiourly
ardent, as it is given out to be? Indeed, for being of an open and loose
contexture, it is apt to put forth a forward spring, as more easily admitting
the solar rays; but it does not continue, and is an infirmity which may be
remedied with Loam, which not only unites it closer for the present, but is
capable in time to alter and change its very nature also, so as too hot a
Compost be no ingredient with it.

Here I take notice, that Husbandmen observe, a too clean and accurate
gathering of Stones from off those Grounds, which lie almost covered with them,
rather impoverishes than improves it, especially where Corn is sown; by
exposing it to Heat and Cold. Certain it is, that where they are not too gross,
and plentiful, a moderate interspersion of the smaller Gravel preserves the
Earth both warm, and loose, and from too sudden exhalation; whilst the
over-fine grain, or too nice a sisting, makes it apt to constipate, and grow
stiff upon wetting; so as the tender Seedlings can hardly issue through; and
this is a document for ignorant Gardiners, who, when they have a fine Flower,
think they can never make the ground fine enough about them.

Chalky Grounds come next to be considered, and they should be treated like
Gravel, Sand, and Stony, if harsh; but if of the melting kind, it is apt to mix
with all the sorts of moulds, and being of it self so husbanded, composes a
kind of natural Soil fit for most uses, sought for and of admirable effect in
dry Grounds.

Here now of Course something we are to speak concerning Calcinations, all
reducings of Stone into ashes being of excellent use, where Lime is upon any
occasion proper; and indeed all our Composts and Dungings serve but to this
end, namely, so to qualify, and mix the Soil, as may artificially answer to
the varieties of the natural Earth, or such a Constitution of it, as the
skilful Husbandman requires: As for Instance (since all fertility is the result
of mixture contrary in quality) if it want due heat, to apply additions of a
fiery nature; and therefore 'twere profitable, if in the using Lime with Turse,
and Smarth, it were laid alternatively, Turse on Lime, and Lime on Turse, in
heaps for six months, by which means, it will become so mellow (and rich in
nitrous Salts) as to dissolve, and run like Ashes, and carry a much more
cherishing Vigor, than if amassed in greater quantity; and so, by a too
violent application, burn out, and exhaust the vegetative virtue which it
should preserve. There is (by the way) this caution to be used in burning of
Earth, that tho what is torrified into blackness, will exceedingly fructify;
yet, if it proceed to adustion beyond that degree, it consumes the Niter, which
is the principle would be preserved; as we shall come to show, when we speak of
Salts, which we are the most carefully to keep entire, in all our animal or
other Composts: If once the nitrous spirit be quite mortified, the Earth
produces nothing, till being long exposed, it have attracted a fresh supply to
give it life and prepare it for conception: For otherwise, all moderate
burnings, yea, and even sometimes (to appearance) immoderate (as that of
Rose-trees, Reeds, and some other, which makes them bear and come the better,)
is excellent manure, as we see it in Straw and Stubble, enriched as they are
with Salts; and if the very Earth be roasted with the fire, it solves
obstructions, laxes the Pores, renders them attractive of the Influences, and
to cherish with its warmth; and the more simple and unmixt the Ashes be, in
relation to what the Ground produces, it is the better: For as Weeds bring
Weeds, so the Ashes of Fruits and Berries (being burnt) dispose to bring forth
the same; so as no treatment of the seminal rudiments whatsoever, seems totally
of power to annihilate their virtue; so strict is the Union of the parts, from
whence their Form does result. The Calcination then of Earth alone, not only
disposes it to produce great variety, but, if it be intense, increses the very
weight of the Mould; whether from a certain magnetisme which it thereby
contracts (which fortifies it to draw the proper aliment more powerfully) or
upon what other account, let the curious examine.

I come next to Marle, of excellent use to fix light Sand and dry Grounds; some
are for the White and Gray, others the Blew and Red (which I think the best,)
according as it is more or less apt to resolve after wetting; but neither of
them discovering their virtue for the first year: It does incomparably on
Pastures; some on Arable, a good Coat of Compost, suitable to the land, being
first spread, where you will lay it: If your Marle be very unctuous and rich,
apply it less copiously; the too thick covering is the worst extreme; nor is it
always to be used without allay and mixture with other proper Soil; for some
Marle is more Sandy and gritty than other, and should be qualified with a
Contrary: Give lean and emaciated Earth, a covering of the fattest Marle; hot
and dry to the cold and moist: And this is also to be observed in the
applications of all other Composts and Medications.

Marsh, and Churlish Earth will be Civilized, by the rigor and discipline of
two Winters; bis frigora, is the old method to make the stubborn Clod relent;
and with the mixture of a little Sand, if it be too close of Body, it will
become excellent Mould.

Clay is of all other a cursed Stepdame to almost all Vegetation, as having few
or no Meatus's for the percolation of the alimental showers, or expansion of
the Roots; whether it be the Voracious, Hungry, Weeping or Cold sort: In these
cases, Laxatives are to be prescribed, such as Sand, Saw-dust with Marle, or
Chalk, and continual vexing it with the Spade or Plow; but above all, with
Sea-Sand, where it may be procured, and the burning of the Ground to ashes, and
all that it bears, the more the better; for by no less severity will this
ill-natured Mould be subdued: Rotten wood, and the bottom of bavine-stacks, is
good ingredient to this manure; and if it be a cold and wet sort, strewings of
soot is good; if very stiff, rubbish of brick, limestone, and such trash may
properly be laid at the bottom, and on the upper part composts of dung; for
otherwise no limings (which being sleckt is raw and cold) may at any hand be
applied, especially the hungry sort, which (as also most kinds of Marsh-earth)
is subject to chasm, and gape in dry seasons; to prevent which, a discreet
mixture of ashes and sand is used, for if it be in excess, it over-heats the
latter.

I do not reckon Loames among the Clays, though it seem to be but a succulent
kind of Argilla, imparting a natural ligament to the Earth where you mix it,
especially the more friable; and is therefore of all other the most excellent
mean between extremes, fastening and uniting that which is too loose, cooling
that which is hot, and gently entertaining the moisture. The Flower-Garden
cannot be without a mixture of it, nor well any fruit, especially the best
Cider Apples, so it be accompanied with a lighter soil.

To sum up all we have said concerning Natural Improvements by mixtures of
Earth with Earth, rather than Dungs; let us hear my Lord Bacon. He reckons up
Marle, Chalk, Sea-sand, mould upon mould, pond-earth with Chalk, and the
several blendings and tempering of them; among all which, Marle we find to
carry the preeminence with his Lordship, as the most pinguid, rich, and least
over-heating; next to this, Sand, as the most abounding in salt; chalk more
heating, and therefore proper for Clay; cold and spewing grounds, being
suffered to lie a competent time to resolve before you turn it in; earth on
earth that is (I suppose he means) the under part upon the upper, or the second
spit on the first, as we have all along directed at the breaking of fresh
ground with the spade.

Another mixture he commends (and which we have likewise newly touched) of
substances, which are not mere Earth, as Soot, Ashes, not the hard and dry
Cinders of Sea-coal (which we are too busy with about this Town, where the
ground is naturally too hot and dry) but such as is apt to relent, and even the
sprinkling of Salt, where it is wisely sown.

A third is, the permitting Vegetables, abounding in fixed salts, to dye into
the ground, as Peasehalm, Bracks, all sorts of Stubble cast on about the
beginning of Winter: So leaves of Trees mingled with Chalk, and proper compost
of dungs, to heat and preserve the ground from sowring with them, when they are
used alone.

A fourth is (what we have also touched) heat and comfort, procured by
Calcinations, the burning of Ling, Heath, Sedge; covering the ground with
bushes for a time; enclosures of walls and mounds, when the land lies in the
eye of the weather, and in other cases, meridian exposures, and the warmth of
the woolly fleeces of sheep as well as manure, folded or pastur'd: And to this
we may add the very grazing of Cattle, which in some cases has succeeded better
than the best dungy compost, especially for old and decayed Orchards, which
have been observed to recover to admiration, when mowing has been pernicious;
for even the biting of Cattle gives a gentle loosening to the roots of the
herbage, and makes it to grow fine and sweet, and their very breath and
treading, as well as soil, and the comfort of their warm bodies is wholesome, and
marvellously cherishing: But this is to be understood of places where the stems
are of full growth, and where the beast cannot reach to crop.

Lastly, Irrigation, and watering, both by admitting and excluding moisture at
pleasure: And certainly, this has (since his Lordships time) been found one of
the richest improvements that ever was put in practice; especially, where they
have the command of fat and impregnate waters, without grittiness, or being
overharsh and cold; whether it percolate through rich ground, or, which is
better, descending from eminences, and moderate declivities, from whence we
find the Valleys so luxurious and flourishing.

To this belongs the cure of wet and boggy Lands, by cutting Trenches deeper
than the cause of the evil, which proceeds from some concealed springs,
hindered from emerging forth by the sluggish incumbent earth: This makes the
ground to heave and swell, but not giving vent, to stagnate and corrupt both
the water and the mould about it: And though it lie loose and hollow; yet it
gathers no vigor from above, but remains cold and insipid. The remedy is,
opening the ground till you meet with a sound bottom, and cutting your Furrow
upwards to the Bog, about a foot beneath the spewing water: This is to be done
in several places, and when the drains appear to have wrought the effect, you
may fill them up again with sprag and bavine, great and rough flint,
brick-bats, tileshards, horse bones, or any other rubbish, which will remain
loose and hollow, and cover them with the grassy side of the turff which you
pared off, and laid apart; on that throw your other Mould, which being cast up
in heaps for some time, will be much improved with spreading; lastly, sow it
over with hay-seeds.

But the Cure is yet easier, if the Land lie considerably sloping; and if it
happen to be a planted Ground, then cut your Trench deeper than the roots of
your Trees, and apply the foresaid rubbish to intercept the moisture. About the
latter end of October, trench the Ground all over, for near a foot and a half
in depth, and when you are come within three or four foot of the stemm, cut off
all their larger roots sloping inwards, sparing only the fibers, and such of
them as you find tender, and about as big as your finger; leaving also the more
perpendicular to keep the Tree steady: This done, castin some rubbish of
brick-bats, limestone (not chalk) and other materials, that the Mould may lie
easy about them, and with a mixture of good Earth, plenty of rotten stubble,
or other soil, apply it near the Root, and fill your Trench with the rest; and
if your Ground require it, (as being too cold it commonly does) add to your
compost the Dung of Sheep, Pigeons or Poultry very well consumed: And because
Moss is oftener caused by starving and wet Grounds, than by hot and over dry
(for both produce it) the Cure is likewise to be effected by Ablaqueation and
baring the Roots, as above; and for the latter, by a mixture of Loame, with the
scouring of Pond or ditch-Earth, which of it self is the most excellent manure;
and the planting your Trees at greater intervals, for admission of Air and Sun;
since the scraping of it off (which may also be done in wet weather) is but
temporary, and if nothing else be performed, it will be sure to grow again.

Lands which are cold and dry, are (as we have hinted) to be improved by
contraries; namely by application of composts, which are hot and moist; as
Sheepsdung, burning and calcining of the Earth, with the Vegetables on it, and
the like, to excite heat and fermentation; but which is not to be effected
without repugnant remedies, and such as are of heterogeneous parts, to stir and
lift up the Mould, and render it less unactive. If it be cold and clinging, as
frequently it is found, there lime, rubbish, sea-coal-ashes, a moderate
sprinkling of sand, with some proper compost may perform the Cure.

Hungry Grounds require to have the cause well looked into; the water turned,
(as above directed) or if it want, such as is well enriched.

Lands that are hot and burning, allay with Swines-dung, as (say some) the
coldest; or with Neats, which will certainly refresh it.

For Earth which is too light, there is nothing better than Pondmudd, after a
winter has passed upon it.

Earth over-rank (for there may be some too fat, as well as too lean,) sand and
ashes will take down; but still with regard to what you design to plant upon
it; neither the Almond, nor the Hasel will endure a wanton Mould; and though it
seem a Paradox, that any Soil should be too rich, (upon which some Critics have
suspected the Text in Theophrastus, Lib.2^ Cap. 5, 6.
which asserts it twice in two successive Chapters;) it is yet a Truth
indubitable, and holds as well in Plants as Animals, which growing very fat,
are seldom prolific. Some on the contrary are so emaciate, and lean, dry, and
insipid, as hardly any pains will make them fruitful. Such are Minerals, and
Metalic Soils, devouring clays, light and ashysands; so again are putrid and
fungous; others, though fruitful, producing only venomous Plants, Hemlock, and
the deadly Aconitum; and some, though wholesome ground, may be poisoned with
unskilful or malicious mixtures, and with damps and Arsenical vapors, which
sometimes (though natural) are but accidental, and for a season, as when after
extraordinary drouths, and stagnant air, the Earth has not been seasonably
opened, refreshed and ventilated.

Moreover, Ground is sometimes barren, and becomes unfruitful by the vicinity
of other Plants, sucking and distracting the juice of the Earth from one to
another: For thus we see the Reed and Fern will not be made to dwell together;
Hemlock and Rue are said to be inimicous; the Almond and the Palm, which are
seldom fruitful but in Conjugation; and perhaps there are Effluvia, or certain
inconspicuous steams of dusty seeds, which not only impregnate places where
never grew any before, but issue likewise from one to another, as in our
Junipers and Cypress I observe, flowering about April; which are Trees of
Consort, and thrive not well alone. The Ficus never keeps her fruit so well, as
when planted with the Caprific. By what irradiations the Myrtil thrives so with
the Fig; the Vine affects the Elm and Olive (which is at Antipathy with the
Oak, and imparts also such a bitterness to the Mould, as kills Lettuce, and
other subnascent Plants) is hard to say; and why some affect to live in crowds,
others in solitude: But that Firrs, Pines, Cedars, Elmes, and diverse other
Trees aspire, and grow so tall in society, may be (as from other causes) so
from their not overglutting themselves with nourishment (for Compost is not
their delight) which inclines them rather to shoot upwards, than expand and
spread.

Lastly, by shade Ground is rendered barren, and by the dripping of umbragious
trees: To these Air and Sun may be soon restored, by removing of the skreens
which intercept them; and yet all shade is not unpropitious, where the Soil and
Climate are benign, as well as that which casts the umbrage; and of this we
have a notable instance somewhere amongst the Astomori even in Africa, where
the soil and the air are reported to be so genial, that the Olive is said to
grow under the Date-tree, the Fig under the Olive, under the Fig Tree the
Granade, under that the Vine, under the Vine a crop of Corn, and at the feet of
the Corn a certain pulse; none of them impeded by the more than reduplicated
shades. But there are some, we must confess, amongst us, which are not so
propitious; Trees of all sorts (though the perennial Greens least) breath as
much after the air as the soil, and do not thrive without it; nor except it be
wholesome.

But to return to barren Earths, which are either out of heart, by being spent,
or from the nature of the soil (in both which, the Plants which they produce,
though never so unprosperous, run hastily to seed, or make an offer,) they are
to be restored by the Plow, the Spade and the Rake, by stirring and repose,
appositions and mixtures of Earth, Calcinations and Composts; and above all, by
the eye of the Master, and dust of his feet, as the Italian Proverb has it. For
after this Process, and innumerable other Trials (mixtures of things being
endless) all other sorts of Earths and imperfect Moulds may be treated and
meliorated; namely, if it be too hard and close, to mollify and relax it; if
too loose, to give it ligature and binding; if too light, ballast; if too
meagre, to fasten and impinguate it; if too rich and luxurious, emaciate and
bring it down; if too moist, apply exsiccatives; if too cold, fermenting
Composts; if excessive hot, to cool and refresh it; for thus (as we said)
Earths should be married together like Male and Female, as if they had Sexes;
for being of so many several complexions, they should be well confider'd and
matched accordingly; and for this you see what choice I have presented you of
Sand, Ashes, Chalk, Lime, Marle, mixture of Mould, Calcinations, Air, Sun, Dew,
Rain, Frosts and Snows, Trenching, Drilling, Watering, Infusions, and finally,
of Animal Stercorations, and other composts, which is the next, and last part
of this (I fear) over-tedious Discourse: Since indeed it is not sufficient to
find out even the best and most grateful Mould in nature, so as to rely for
ever upon the same performance, without supplys of all sorts; stirring and
repose, constant dressing, and (after all we have said) artificial laetations;
likewise to encourage and maintain it in vigor.

We proceed then in the next place to what farther advancement we may expect
from Stercoration, and manuring the ground by Composts, and to discover the
qualities, which may be latent in their several ferments, and how to apply them
by a skillful and philosophical hand, without which they do always more hurt
than good; and therefore first we will enumerate their several kinds, and next
inquire, what it is we chiefly seek for, and expect from them; and lastly, how
to treat them so as may render them fitting for our service.

From Animals we have the Soil of Horses, and beasts of burden, Neats, Sheep,
Goats, Hogs, Pigeons, Poultry, and Fenny-fowle: We have also Flesh, Fat, Blood,
Hair, Feathers, Urine, shavings of Horn, Hoofs, Leather, Skins, Fish, Garbage,
Snail-mud, etc. From Vegetables, (as of nearest affinity) we have
Vine-cuttings, Stalks, fallen Leaves, Marc of the Wine and Cider-presses, Lees
of Wine, Oil, rotten Fruit, Gourds, Weeds, Fern, Haulme, Stubble, rotten Wood,
Saw-dust; refuse of the Tan-pit, Sea-woad, Linen Clowts and Old Rags; also
Brine, Pickle, Ashes, Soot; and of things promiscuous, Washing of Dishes,
Bucks, Barrels, Soap-suds, Slime, and Scouring of Ponds, and Highwayes, Dust,
Sweepings: In sum, whatsoever is apt to rot and consume in any competent time,
and is either salt, unctuous or fatty: To which let me add, impregnating Rains
and Dews, cold and dry Winters, with store of Snow, which I reckon equal to the
richest Manures, impregnated as they are with Celestial Nitre. But with all
these Auxiliaries, we are not yet to imagine, that any of them are therefore
profitable and good, because they retain an heady scent; are hot, moist, rotten
and slippery, fat or unctuous, and the like, which are all qualities, that
alone, and of themselves, effect little, till they are corrected and prepared;
but, for that amongst these materials we detect the causes of fertility more
eminently than in other substances; partly from their fixed salts, or some
virtue contained in them, or rather drawn from without, and imparted to the
exhausted and defective Earth; and that by such a process, as by converting
them into a Chyle (as it were) it facilitates their being insum'd, assimilated,
and made apt to pass into nourishment, promoting vegetation. This obtained, the
next thing is, how skilfully to apply what we have prepared; and this indeed is
a difficulty worthy the heads as well as hands of the profoundest Philosopher;
since it requires a more than superficial knowledge and penetration into causes.

We know indeed, that the Earth is without any Artificial Auxiliaries, indu'd
with a wonderful prolific virtue; but this, for being possible to be lost and
decay, (at least for a longer time than our necessities can support) and from
some grounds never to be expected without such helps, it may be worth our while
a little to consider, by what expedients of digestion, or other ways, the
desired effect of perpetuating its vigor might best be accomplished.

That the secret we enquire after, and which does most apparently seem to
evirtuate toward this end, is some Salt, I suppose is generally agreed: For
Salt it is which gives ligature, weight, and constitution to things, and is the
most manifest substance in all Artificial Composts.

It Is the Salts, which entice Roots to affect the upper and saline surface of
the Earth, upon which the Nitrous Rains and Dews descend, and the cause that
some Plants, the most racy, and charged with juice of all other, (for such is
the Vine) thrive so well amongst Rocks and Pumices, and in whatever best
maintains this vital pickle.

It Is Salt, which makes all covered and long shaded Earths to abound in
fertility, and renders the dung of Pigeons, Poultry, and other Salacious
Corn-fed Birds, so eminently effectual, before the soil of Horses and other
Beasts, in which it less abounds, as having less virtue to attract it.

It Is Salt, that gives such vigor to places, sprinkled with urine, Soot,
Ashes, etc. which have them not diluted; and to Bones, Flesh, Horn, Hair,
Feathers, Blood, and the rest of those animal excrements: And whence those
seminal Masses should proceed after Calcination of the Earth, when it comes to
be exposed again, is hard to divine; whence I say, they should derive their
life and energy, without being destroyed by so powerful an agent as Fire,
unless they lurk in some vegetant and indissoluble salts, (volatile, fixed, or
nitrous Earth) from whence they Phoenixlike emerge; though I do not say without
any other specific rudiment: But it is strange, what, as I remember Dr. Morison
affirms of the Erysimum or Irio, so seldom seen to grow spontaneously in
England before the late prodigious Conflagration of this City, when there
appeared more of it amongst the Ruins, than was known to grow in all Europe
besides, it being a curious Exotic, to be found most about Naples in the time
of Fabius Colonna, and but rarely elsewhere.

It Is Salt which resuscitates the dead and mortified Earth, when languishing
and spent by our indulgence to her verdant Offspring, her vigor seems to be
quite exhausted, as appears by the rains and showers which gently melt into her
bosom what we apply to it, and for which cause all our Composts are so
studiously made of substances which most engender or attract it.

It Is Salt, which fertilizes, and renders Egypt so luxuriously fruitful after
the inundations of Nile; and the Nitrous grounds of Jamaica, and other places,
which cause so stupendous a growth of Plants and Trees.

It Is the want of Salt, which emasculates the virtue of Seeds too long
macerated in hungry water, and renders floated wood such unprofitable fuel, and
to turn into such insipid ashes; and whatsoever it be some Plants may appear to
affect, as to the external differences of appetite, some of them seeming to
draw in more Air, some Earth, and others Water in extraordinary measure,
according to the several contextures of their parts, or by whatever Magnetisms
and attractives, it is still to come at their Salts, which doubtless create
that inclination, compose the various saps and juices which they present us.
Nay, what if I should say, that all the several parts of Vegetables were
endowed with their peculiar and distinct Salts, through different motions,
complications and percolations? or, that so many Earths, so many kinds of Salts
digested and transported by their different Vehicles and strainers; and those
also, though unlike in quality, yet perfectly congruous to what they produce
and nourish? But what this Vehicle or Menstrue is, I contend not; it is evident,
that Salts unite best with water, Vernal and Autumnal Showers and Dews, as the
most apt to convey their insinuations. You know, who have dignified Salt with
the prerogative of being named Element-earth, the vigor and close of all
things, yea, the first and last of Elementated bodies: What shall I say, quid
Divinum, the Original of all fecundity; nor can I say less, since there was nor
sacrifice, nor discourse acceptable without it. And verily upon serious
contemplation of the premises, and the little experience I have had of their
effects, in this work of vegetation, as far as I am able to penetrate into
causes by them, I am not displeased at the magnificent Epithets which are given
it. In the mean time, I know there be, who are so averse to this Doctrine, as
to prefer Water before it, nor contend I with them, so they allow the near
affinity and friendship which is between them, as I have deduced it at the
entry of this Discourse, where I describe my Autoptical observations of the
several Earths; all that I pretend from hence, being only to excite us to make
diligent enquiry, what may more likely be the cause of Vegetation, and whether
Salt have not a Dominion almost Monarchical in this great Work of Nature, being
so absolute an ingredient in all our Dungs and Composts, which I am next going
to speak of. I cannot in the mean time but wonder, how a thing so eminently
sacred, and fertile, should come to be the Symbol of Malediction, when, as the
custom was, they used to sow Salt on Cities they had cursed, there being in all
Nature nothing so pregnant and fruitful, unless it were to invite the Plow to
go there, and that the fertility of the spot for Corn and Grain might divert
them from rebuilding and covering it again with houses. Indeed to apply Salt in
excess, burns the Earth for a time, so as nothing will grow upon it; but when
once the rains have well diluted it, it springs up more wantonly than ever:
This I daily find by sifting common Salt upon the gravel-walks of my Garden,
and for which cause I have left it off; and we find that the Earth it self
over-marl'd and too highly manured is as unprofitable, as if it were barren for
the time, and that there is in all things a just proportion to be observed.

But neither all this while do I pretend, much less determine, that the
Principle I so much celebrate, is our common artificial Salt, composed of
Urine, and the like, which of it self is so burning and destructive, till its
acidity be qualified by the air and showers from heaven (which endows it with a
natural magnetism, to receive their irradiant virtues;) but a certain more
unctuous spirit, or airy Nitre, pregnant with a vital Balm, which is the thing
we endeavor to find in these materials of Composts: But whether it be
accidental, or essential, corporeal, or more spiritual, principal, or
organical; or (to speak with the Chemists, and later Atomists,) whether
communicated by effluvias, salts embryonate, or indigested and not specificate;
from ferments, spermatic vapors, influences Celestial, or from liquor only
impregnated and concocted, I leave to those who affect to wrap up easy notions
in hard and uncertain terms, whilst the thing would be of use to the
Philosophical Husbandman, were their reduction into just Classes, for the
better discriminating of the several Composts; as what there is of them most
abounds in Nitrous or Vrinous parts; or what of the nature of our crude, common
Salts, and Kali's, Mineral, or other; and thereby be able to pronounce, where,
and how we may apply them with safety and success: For some we know are plainly
exitial and deadly to plants (such as the Mineral,) others properate too fast;
and some are sluggish, and scarce advance them at all. It would therefore be
considered, whether any Salts do universally nourish all Plants alike? or
rather partly, some one Plant, some another; for upon the clear decision of
this secret depends all that is truly curious in this affair; laying, as I do,
for position, that the improvement of all the Earths and Soils I have spoken
of, results from some Salt or Spirit (call it which you please) as from an
indispensable Principle in this of Vegetation, and perhaps the first rudiment
of life in all things else: And till we shall arrive to this (by what I have
observed in the discreet use even of our common Salt, brine, the effects of
Urine and the like,) I firmly believe, that, were Saltpeter (I mean fictitious
Nitre) to be obtained in Plenty, we should need but little other Composts to
meliorate our Ground; since, whether that which so fertilizes it, by any
mixture we can yet devise, effect it from any other cause, is greatly to be
doubted; nor do I think, but the charge of extracting it, (at lest sufficient
to impregnate Water in convenient quantity) might be compassed by the
industrious Farmer without much inconvenience, or the least difficulty, were he
competently instructed in the process of Calcination, Resolution, Percolation,
Evaporation and Separation, put into honest English, and easily to be learned:
Soon we should then see, that this were not to be extracted altogether out of
stinking dung, and found in heady trash (which yet is material) but rather in
the well-impregnated and natural Mould it self, charged with a more generous
spirit, or medicinal Nitre (in congress with a certain sulphur) capable to
warm, and excite to vegetation, beyond all we can promise from any mere
artificial ferments, much less our common mixtures, and ways of stercoration,
which in time grow cold and languish, and are so quickly checked.

And now after all this, I dare not say, that there is nothing more than this
mere Salt, or spirituous Nitre, which concurrs to those desired effects, that
promote fertility, and set the ferment on working: What ignite particles
beside, and special Composts there may be of consanguinity and near alliance to
the respective vegetables (which we know to be of vast difference one from
another,) we pretend not to determine; for some Plants are very brisk and
quick, others insulse and flat; some are acid, others more dulcorous and sweet;
they are salt, sour, luscious, austere, hot, bitter, moist, dry, astringent,
and of strangely different qualities, not to speak of their effects, which it
were hard to number. Therefore, that the same Compost, or remedy should be
promiscuously universal, is the more unlikely, and would be well considered:
But admitting this to be salvable, and that we find by experience, a well
digested Compost beneficial to almost all the vegetable Family; may it not in
all probability spring from its participation of all those varieties of
ferments, (in some at least, though in different proportion) which we have been
speaking of? as by which each single species draws and assimilates that only to
it self, which it finds most amicous and congruous to its nature; and if so it
be, then have we no more to do, than to learn how to prepare our Ferments, and
apply them accordingly; namely, acid to acids, sweet to sweets, benign to
benign, and so the contrary, as we would promote its natural quality; and this
perhaps, either by reducing some parts of them into Composts, as their leaves,
stalks, fruit; or by some more refined extraction of their Salts, conveyed in
proper vehicles. And for the better administering of this, the nicer textures of
vegetables should diligently be considered; their several vessels, and Organic
parts, since every impregnate liquor is not presently fit for all alike; the
figuration of their Labiola, and curious pores (which it is likely draw several
juices and spirits) being very different; as the most sagacious Doctor Grew,
and learned Malpigius (both Ornaments of this Illustrious Society) have begun,
(I think I may say) well nigh perfected the way to us, in those elaborate
Anatomizations, which the world will shortly admire. I insist the rather on
this, because we find some Plants to reject diverse rich compounded liquors,
especially such as pretend to work Miracles in the Protean changes of colors,
and other qualities, from mineral or other substances; and that the very Rains
and Dews differ in several Climes: So as even from this reason alone, to
instance in no more, all Plants do not easily become denizons in all places:

-- Nec omnis fert omnia tellus.
I might add to this the niceness of their palates, and fondness to their own
homes, and to live some in consort, some in solitude, some on dry banks, some
in watery puddles, and some as it were in the very air, and fiery soils; nay,
some which are found to destroy the vegetable virtue where they grow; for such
are said to be Odd, Hemp, etc. and if it be true and constant, that all our
imbibitions of Salts and Composts signify little to Earth pre-impregnated with
a salt or virtue, different from what the Plant does naturally delight in, some
obscure footsteps of which every Plowman seems to discover, which makes him
change the Crop in some places yearly: For the first, second, or third burden
of the same grain, especially Wheat, will exhaust that which is its proper
aliment, and then leave the rest to more ignoble grain, which will be found to
thrive well enough, till at last several successions of different Seeds quite
wear it out, and then it must repose, or be manured with Composts for fresh
life and vigor. And to this we may add, how some Plants again require little
change, or help of Art; such as most of the Perennial Greens, and amongst
these, the most resinous and oily, as the Pine, Firr, Cedar, etc. which thrive
on barren Hills, and grow in Rocky Crannies, without any Earth almost to cover
and protect their Roots. Of this sort I have a Cedar-Table, which was sawed out
of a Spur only of a monstrous Tree growing in the Barbados, which held six
foot long, five foot broad, and three inches thick, formed and wrought as it
stands upon the frame; and his Royal Highness; had another of a much larger
dimension, namely eighteen foot in length, and nine in breadth, cut out of the
Stem, which was of prodigious growth, to be fed and nourished as it was between
the barren Rocks. But to proceed; we find that most esculent and culinary Roots
do rather choose a rich, natural and light Mould, inclining to sand, than what
is forced, or over-muck't; and how much they yield to soil, growing hard, short
and fibrous, and contract the smell and relish of the ferments, applied to
accelerate their growth (for according to the Italian Proverb, Ogni pianta
serba della sua radice, Every Plant has a smack of the Root) I have already
mentioned; so as to confide in Dungs, as our vulgar Gardners about this City
do, is no encouragement; and therefore some, not without good reason, prefer
the Corn and Grain which is reaped from Marle, Chalk, Lime, and other more
natural Manure, before what is produced from a Crop which grows on a Dunghill
in comparison; experience also showing, that the cause of smuttiness many times
proceeds from the impurity, and rankness of the dressing; and therefore we omit
to enumerate amongst our Soils, Stercus humanum, which howsoever preferred by
some before all other, and mentioned by Columella with that of Fowl and Cattle,
does, unless exceedingly ventilated and air'd, perniciously contaminate the
odor of Flowers, and is so evident in the Vine, as nothing can reconcile it.

To give some instances of the nature of particular and simple Composts, (for
so I take leave to use a Solecism, till they are blended together with the
rest, as we shall afterward show) what ever they be, they are by no means fit
for the Earth, and use of the Husbandman, unless, besides their richness, they
be perfectly well digested, made short, sweet, and almost reduced to a
crumbling Mould; so ordered, as not only not to lose any of their virtue, but
improve it, and to excite, entertain, and communicate heat, and vegetative
Spirits to what you shall apply them: And that this is not done per se, that
is, by immediate application, without prejudice (unless it be for the Hot-Bed,
which yet has an Intermedium of Mould) experience tells us, especially in the
soil of Animals, which is of all other the most active, as consisting of
Heterogeneous parts, and repugnancies, without which no fermentation could be
obtained. Now since many of these being freshly made, are not only sensibly
hot, but mordacious and burning, they are with caution to be used. That every
kind of Earth (as well as the Dung of Beasts, etc.) has its peculiar ferment,
and operates accordingly, either by attracting something to it, or embasing
what approaches it, sufficient has been said; together with directions how to
mingle and attemper it, as best may qualify it for Culture. That we may do the
like with the several sorts of Soil, let us consider what their natures are,
what their correctives, and how to apply them.

Horse-dung, the least pinguid and fat of any, taken as it falls, being the
most fiery, excites to sudden fermentation above any; wherefore, as we said,
it is then fit only for the Hot-Bed, and when that fervour's past, may be spread
on fields, where we would have a rank Grass to spring; but is at no hand to be
admitted into the Garden, or where you desire good Roots should grow, unless
the ground be very cold or wet, and then too it had need be well rotted, lest,
instead of curing it, it leave couch, and pernicious weeds, worse than the
Disease; the seeds of Hay, and other Plants, of which the Horses eat, coming
oftentimes entire from them: And such vegetables do commonly spring up from the
Soil of Cattle, of which they chiefly eat; as long knotgrass from this Beast;
short, clean and sweet pasture from Sheep and Cows; the Sonchus, or Sow-thistle
from the Swine: So as ground muck'd with Horse-dung is always the most
infected of any, and if it be not perfectly consumed, it makes your Roots grow
forked, fills them with worms, and imparts to them an unpleasing relish; but
being laid on at the beginning of winter, and turn'd-in at spring, it succeeds
sometimes with Pulse.

The Soil of Asses is highly esteemed, for its being better digested by the
long mastication and chewing of that dull Animal; but since we have no quantity
of it in this Country, it does the less concern us.

Neats Dung, of all other is universally the most harmless, and the most
useful; excellent to mingle with sandy and hot grounds, lean or dry, and being
applied before winter, renders it the most like natural Earth, and is therefore
for the Garden and Orchard preferred to any other. To use it therefore with the
most certain success in such thirsty Grounds, apply a plentiful surface of it,
so blended, as the rain and showers may wash in the virtue of it thoroughly; but
this is best done by making the Dung the finer, and then working it in at a
soaking wet (not stormy) season, and then leaving it also covered with it for
some time, if the rain descend in too great excess.

The next is Sheeps Dung, which is of a middle temper between that and Pigeons;
profitable in cold Grounds, and to impregnate liquors, of choice use in the
Garden.

The Dung of Swine is esteemed the coldest and least acrimonious (though some
there be who contradict it) and therefore to be applied to burning Lands; but
always so early interred, as never to appear above ground, where it is apt to
produce weeds in abundance, from the greedy devouring of what it eats. This,
though not so proper for the Garden, is said yet to edulcorate and sweeten
fruit so sensibly, as to convert the bitterest Almond into sweet, and therefore
recommended, above all others, for experiments of change and alteration: Some
qualify it with bran, or chaff well consumed, greatly comfortable to
Fruit Trees, but especially the hairs and bristles, buried about the Roots of
Pear Trees.

Pigeons Dung, and that of Poultry (especially of Aquatic Fowls which is too
fiery) full of volatile salts, is hot and burning, and therefore most
applicable to the coldest ground. There is nothing so effectual to revive the
weak and languishing Roots of Fruit Trees, laid early to them; but first be
sure they pass their mordicant and piercing spirits, and be discreetly mixed.

Very efficacious is this Dung, to keep frost out of the Earth, and therefore
of great use to cover the Mould in Cases of Exotic and tender Plants; but if
the heat be not well qualified, the very steam will kill them in a moment;
therefore let a full winter pass over this laetation for most uses. The best
way of preparing it, is to reduce it into powder, and mingle it with the Mould,
and to water with its infusion, which alone does wonders; or, if it have been
well exposed and abated, you may use it at the spring without addition: But if
you desire something that is exquisite, macerate it well rotted in the Lees of
Wine, stale Urine, and a little Brimstone beaten very fine, to mingle with your
Earth, for one of the richest Composts. Then is this only to be noted, that, as
the effect of this Dung is sudden, so it lasts not long, and therefore must be
the oftener renewed.

The flesh of Carrion, and dead Animals, being (as, I think, my Lord Bacon tell
us) prepared already by so many curious Elaborations of its juices, is highly
effectual; but it should be very well consumed, and ventilated, till it have
quite lost its intolerable smell, and therefore never applied too crude.

Blood is excellent almost with any Soil where Fruit is planted, especially the
Mural, to improve the blood of the Grape of great advantage, being somewhat
diluted, and poured about the Roots.

Urine, for being highly spiritous and sharp, had need be well corrected, and
then, being mingled with other Composts to allay its acrimonious salt, it
hardly has its equal.

Hair, Horn-shavings, Bones, Skins, Leather, etc. are deeply to be buried, and
so as not to touch but lie about the Roots: These, with Rags, course Wool and
Pitch-Marks, improve the Earth, as being full of volatile salts: And Fish is
likewise spread to great advantage of Grounds, where it is to be had in plenty;
and for being quickly consumed, may soonest be applied. We come to Vegetables.

The Marc and pressings of the Grape are good Compost, and so is the Lees of
Wine, mingled with the Mould: It is of singular comfort to the Roots of
Orange Trees, and Case-Plants; and if you sift a little brick-dust with it, and
bury it near the Roots of Rose-Mary, it will thrive wonderfully. It may be a
laudable Compost for moist grounds, where that Plant so unwillingly grows.

The Leaves of Trees are profitable for their own Fruit, and natural, being
well rotted, and not musty: The Peach-leaf, hurtful to Cattle, is excellent
for the Tree from which it falls; and the Walnut-leaf, noxious to the grass, is
helpful to the Tree.

Saw-dust, Rotten wood, found in the hollow of decayed Trees, under the stacks,
and where Trees grow thick together, as in great and old Woods, but especially,
that which is taken out of an inveterate Willow-Tree, is preferable to any
other for the raising of Seedlings of choice Plants, mixed as it should be with
a little Loam, Lime-rubbish and Mould, as we have taught. This, and the rest
should be well ventilated, and is of great effect to loosen and mellow ground.

Wood-ashes, rich and impregnate with salts, are fit for wet Ground without
mixture, and in pasture, excellent, not sifted-on over thick: It likewise kills
the Worm; but in Earth which is subject to over-heat and chap much, Ashes and
burning Composts do but increase the feavor, and therefore contrary remedies
are to be sought; such as Neats and Swines Dung, but not so when Lands are
naturally or accidentally cold: Wherefore we should endeavor by all means to
detect, as far as we are able, the quality predominant both of the Earth we
would improve, and the Composts we apply, and not throw them on promiscuously
upon every thing without considering of what temper and constitution they be;
for Grounds are as nice as our Bodies, and as obnoxious to infirmities upon
every defect and excess; and therefore it requires skill, and no little study
to be able rightly to marshal this Materia Medica (as I may call it) of
Composts, the virtue of which does sometimes lie very hidden; at least, if that
be true which Sir Hugh Plat affirms, that what we all this while seek after, is
indeed altogether invisible to humane eyes, and to be discerned only by the
eyes intellectual, because it is veiled and clad under so many different bodies,
whereof some are more ponderous, such as Marle, Chalk, the Dung of Beasts, etc.
some more light, as their Flesh, Bones, Hair, etc. and some yet lighter, as
Grain, and generous Seeds; for in such as have Virtue to multiply their own
Species, that Spirit is invested with a very thin and curious integument, as in
effect is apparent in the Blood and Flesh of Animals, so much more powerful
for the enriching of Land than their Dung and Excrements; this industrious man
computing it to no less than twenty times, and to the same advance above this,
Hair, Wool, and calcined Bones, etc. and as to the courser Soils, that the
Dung of Pigeons and Poultry does as far exceed that of Beafts which feed on
gross Vegetables; and tells us, it has been found upon experience, that one
load of any sort of Seed contains as much Virtue as ten load of ordinary Dung;
and therefore it is advisable, that upon all removals of Corn-ricks, Hay-stacks,
etc. the Husbandman reserve all he can of the bottom, offal and shakings, and
to mingle it with Chimney-soot and Blood, and with that to reduce it into the
consistence of a paste: To this add as much dried Neats Dung, tempered with
Urine, and made up in cakes as big as household loaves, and after all is well
dried in the shade, crumble them to dust, to be sifted or sprinkled on the
ground for a very considerable improvement.

Of like effect is Earth blended with Malt-dust, or putrified and decayed Corn
reduced to Meal; so is the dust of old Fur-bushes, (in Devonshire called
Dress;) but this last should not be taken in Seed-time, lest it infect the
Ground with a Plant not easily extirpable.

Lastly, The Mud of Ponds and stagnant waters of ditches, shovl'd up, and well
air'd, is best applied to Roots of Trees, but especially the dust of unstony
highways, where the drift of Cattle, and much passage is: Let it be carried
off from March to November; for it being already a kind of refined Soil
continually stirred and ventilated, there is no Compost preferrable to it for
any use: It is prepared in the highest degree, and will need no wintering, but
may be used immediately; and so may straw, haulm, and other littiere trampled
on in dirty streets, after it is a while rotted and mingled.

Thus with no little industry are found out the several kinds of Composts, and
materials of improvement, and what is the most genuine and true medicament of
every Soil for Arable, Pasture or Garden. I do not say all, or as if there were
no more; for what if indeed there should be as many sorts of Composts, as there
are of Ferments or Salts; and as many sorts of Salts as there be of Vegetables,
or any other putrifiable matter? The more there be, the greater ought to be our
industry and skill to be able to distinguish them, and to know how and when
rightly to apply them.

Nor is it sufficient to consider the nature of the Earth, Mould, and several
Composts, but of the very Plants themselves, for the application of what you
administer, be it for Food or Medicine; as if they be cold of Constitution, to
make use of the hotter Composts; if hot, to prescribe the cold: For instance in
a few of the most useful only:

Fruit Trees do generally thrive with the soil of Neats and Hogs; most Flowers
with that of Sheep, but especially Roots. Peter Hondius tells us (in his Book
intitl'd Dapes inempt as) that by the sole application of Sheeps-Dung, he
produced a Reddish-Root in his Garden as big as half a man's middle, which being
hung up for some time in a Butchers shop, people took for an Hog.

Apples affect a pretty rich soil, with a dash of Loam, but they will bear even
in Clay well soiled, and mixed with Chalk, especially the more winter fruit;
and in Chalk alone for some years, but they produce, though sweet, not so large
Fruit: But both Apples and Pears have a better relish in Grounds that are not
over-moist, and where they may stand warm, and the last will prosper well
enough where the soil is mixed with gravel, and has an harder bottom.

Cherries, Summer and Stone-Fruit, such as have their Roots like thrumbs,
desire a fine light Mould, Sand or Gravel, with Chalk, and good Compost, unless
it be very course and stony, in which case it would be well soiled, and the pit
you plant in, filled with rich Mould, as far as the Roots likely use to extend
before they reach the Gravel, so as to make good spread; and this to be renewed
every third or fourth year; and for this reason it is profitable sometimes to
bait steril Grounds, by laying your Composts at reasonable intervals, thereby
to tempt and allure the Roots toward it, and keep them from wandering, which
they will be subject to do in search of fresh nourishment: For to bear
constantly well, and much, Fruittrees must have frequent laetations. Nor are we
to judge, that what is excellent Ground for one sort, is so for another, since
that which is perfectly good for Corn, is not so for all Fruit - Trees, and
slender straw will be fed and brought up with a great deal less substance and
virtue, than what will serve to furnish the stem, bulk and head of a fertile
and spreading Tree.

Vines (than which there is no Plant more sensibly retains the different
qualities of Earth, or whose juice is of more variety) rejoices in light, but
vigorous, Mould, rather Sandish, and inclining to dry, than either fat,
luxurious or moist. Lime tempered with Blood, exceedingly recreates it, after
the first accidental heats are passed over.

The Fig Tree, (though affected to dry Grounds) is no lover of stercoration,
yet in some Countries they apply Oyl-Olive and Doves-dung, to cause them to
bear early fruit; but omitting the Oil, if the Dung be mingled with Lime and
Ashes, it is not to be reproved.

Artichokes thrive exceedingly with Sheeps-dung, which applied to the Roots
make them produce very great heads.

Melons, Asparagus, and most hasty growers, participate evidently of the Soil;
and therefore we have already showed, how new and heady dung contaminates; and
this is (amongst other) the reason why in the more Southern Countries (where
they are planted in the natural and unforced Mould) they are so racy and
superior in taste and flavor to ours. I should therefore recommend the use of
Sheeps-dung, well reduced, or rather the ashes of burnt straw, and the hotter
dungs calcined for some trials to reform it; or, as they do in Italy, mingle
Dust and Earth manured with Sheeps-soil and woodashes; if after all we have
said, the cause of our application of Composts and Dungs to these ra^^ and
choice productions, be ^ prevent the rains only; for otherwise too rich Soils
impair the most delicious Fruits, rather than improve them; and Grapes and
other Fruits are sooner ripened which stand near the Highwayes, much beaten by
passengers, than by all that you can lay to the Roots, or spread on the Ground
for that purpose, the Dust investing both the Tree and Fruit with a kind of
refined soil, mellow'd with the dews and gentle showers which fall from Heaven.

To give some instances; Roots, as we have showed, desire deep Ground;
Fruit Trees not so, which should never go deeper than the usual penetrations of
the Sun; for no farther is the Mould benign: Besides that they but too
propensely sink of themselves, especially Bulbs of Flowers, whose fibers
freeing their bottoms, draw them down, and then they change their artificial
and accidental beauty, and (as we call it) degenerate; but Trees will grow and
thrive, if planted on the very surface, with little covering of Mould, so it be
often refreshed and established against the wind. Besides, we find, that even the
goodliest Fruit (as well as some Timber Trees) have many times the hardest
footings, with reasonable depth of Earth: So little does it import to have it
profound; and therefore in soft and deeper Sands, they thrive nothing so well,
as on Chalk and Gravel, so long as the root can be kept from descending; in
which case you should (as we showed) bait the Ground toward the surface, and
keep the roots from gadding too far from the stem; for the lower roots are
frequently starved by the upper, which devour the nourishment before it arrive
at them.

To give some other profitable instances of this nature; In Transplanting Trees
(beginning early, and when the Earth is most tractable) endeavor to make your
Mould as connatural to that of the place or nursery from whence you remove
them, as you can. It Is not therefore material, it should be so much richer; but
where Imp-Gardens are poor, the tender Plant (like a Child starved at Nurse)
does seldom thrive where ever you set them; and therefore they should have fair
and spreading roots, and be well fed, what ever some pretend. For other rarer
shrubs and Plants, the Orange ( Herrera tells us) thrives well with the ashes
of burnt Gourds and leaves, and needs not change of Mould, even in the Case,
above twice a year, and that toward the surface; but Amomum Plinii is a
strange waster of Earth, and should continually be enriched and planted as it
were all in dung; so the Myrtil and Pomegranat, whilst the Red-rose, Capers,
Sampier, and other Shrubs and Plants thrive better in Gravel and rubbish; Sage
with ashes, and so Porselan with dust and sweepings: Rue affects the dry Mould,
Lettice the moister; Flowers for the most part detest the Dunghill, but if any,
that of Sheep or Neat mixed with Loam and light Earth: Tulips delight in change,
and rather in poor than rich Mould; yea, sharp and hungry to preserve their
variegations: But because it is sometimes troublesome to transplant them yearly;
place a layer of short stable littier a foot beneath your Mould, and you will
find they may remain unremov'd for some years without prejudice. The Iris loves
the dry beds; Crocus, a mixed, rich and light soil: Carnations would have a
Loamy Earth, qualified, if too stiff, with Sea-sand, and Sheeps dung; if too
poor, with richer Mould; so the Peony, Anemony, Ranunculus, and other Flowers;
but then lay it at the bottom, such as you take from the last years Hot-bed,
giving it a surface of under-turf, which has been foder'd on, sweet and air'd:
In this to plant your Roots, but so as not to touch the Soil, but rather let it
lie about the Pasture-Earth, in which your Bulbs should always be planted: For
all dung'd Earths canker the roots of Flowers, whilst their fibers, reaching
the heartier Mould, draw from it without danger. But if you would indeed be
provided of excellent Earth to plant most Flowers in, lay turf of
Pasture-ground in heaps for two Winters, till it be perfectly consumed: This is
also admirable for Tuberous roots, and indeed all up-land-mould, whether Sandy
or Loamy, may be made perfectly good with Neats-dung laid on the surface about
Michaelmas for one year, that it may wash kindly in; then in September after,
pare this turff off as thin as you can, and for the first foot depth of Earth,
you have bedding for Bulbs and Tuberous Roots superior to any other. Another
proper mixture (much in esteem with our Gardners) is hollow Willow Earth a
fourth part, sifted from the grosser sticks, with almost an equal portion of
Sheeps-dung ( Lauremberg says, Goats is better) with a little natural Mould;
and indeed this is excellent to raise any seedlings of Flowers; but for the
more minute and delicate, such as Cypress, Mulberie, the Samera of Elm, and
the like, prepare a Mould almost of powder, gently refreshed with a dewie
sperge or brush, not with the watringpot, which plainly gluts it.

Auricula, Anemonies, etc. should be raised in the Willowmould described above,
but planted forth where Neats-dung and Loam is sifted among the pasture Earth.

The Pine and bigger kernels make great advance by being coated with dung,
which being grown to great Trees abhor it. Touching change of Crop, something
has been said already, and Pease degenerate betimes, at least in two or three
years, be the Land never so good; so it is observed, that most Plants long
standing in the same bed, impair both the Ground and themselves, especially
Sorel.

To Conclude; for a general good Garden-soil, take the natural under-turff, if
it be not too stiff; add to it a quarter part of Neat or Sheeps-dung perfectly
consumed; one bushel of sleek'd lime to each load of Mould, with some sweet,
though rotten Woodpile or Willow-Earth, mix it well together; and you have a
choice composition for all your rare Exotics, Oranges and Case-shrubs;
remembering to place the sprag of rotten bavins, hampers or baskets, to keep the
Mould loose, with Limestone, Brick-bats, Shells and other rubbish at the
bottom, that the water may pass freely, and not rot the fibers: And therefore
be careful never to make your Cases close below, but rather so barred, as to be
able to keep the course materials from dropping through, whilst auger-holes
(though never so thick boards) are apt to be stopped up, and then your roots do
certainly rot, and your trees grow sick. The same is to be observed in Pots,
and that you place them about an inch from ground, that they may freely drain,
and as freely receive refreshing. But I must not quit these curiosities, to
speak of the cooler Composts, till I have described the best Hotbed that I know
of.

Dig a Pit or Fosse, hot-beddepth, four foot is sufficient, and of what figure
and dimension you think will best entertain your furniture for it; if it be
twenty foot in length, and ten foot broad, I think it competent: Line the sides
with a wall of brick and half thick; fill this pit with fresh soil from the
stable, trodden as other hot-beds are, but without any Mould at the surface. In
this place Woodden-Cases, made like Coffins, (but not contracted at the
extremes, nor lidded) of what length and breadth you think best, but not above
a foot in depth; let these be Dovetail'd, with wooden handles at each end, to
lift in and out, and lastly, boar'd full of auger-holes at the bottoms: Your
Cases thus fitted, fill them with proper Mould, such as you would sow
Melon-seeds in, or any other rare Seed, and thus place them in your bed of
dung. The heat will pass kindly through the perforations, and continue a
cherishing warmth five times as long as by the common way of Hot-bed, and
prevent you the trouble of making new and fresh; for, the whole process of the
Melon, or what other of choicer Plants, require more than one removal: The heat
of this bed continues eight or ten weeks without need of repairing, and if it
should, it is but casting in some fresh-made soil and littier, beneath, and
about your Cases, of which some you may glaze Cheveron-wise at the top, and
with spiracles or casements, to refresh, and give them Air and Sun at pleasure.
And these Beds, where you cannot conveniently sink them for want of depth,
because of water, you may build above ground as well; and you may, or may not
extend a Tent over it, to keep out Rain, Wind and Sun, according as you find
occasion. But thus have you a neat and useful hot-bed, as I have been taught to
make it by the Right Honorable, the late Lord Vicount Mordant at
Parsons-Green, whose industry and knowledge in all hortulan Elegancies requires
honorable mention.

And now at last I am come to set down the several ways of preparing Composts
of Dungs, and those other ingredients we have mentioned, and begin with the
rudest, as that which best accommodates to the grosser part of Husbandry (which
yet requires a special maturation) and so descend to the more refined: And
these I distinguish into the moist, the dry, and the liquid for Irrigation. But
first, here by the way greatly to be reproved is the heaping of a deal of
indigested soil, and other trash, exposed (as commonly we find it) to the heat
of the Sun, continual rains, and drying winds, as it lies in the wide field,
without the least coverture or shade; by which means, all the virtue is drawn
forth and carried away, leaving little more than a dry and inspid congestion of
Caput Mortuum, and perhaps a florid green Circle, or Fairy-Dance at the bottom,
which the impregnated rains have enriched with what it has washed from the
heap; wherefore to prevent this, and make one load of our prepared Soil worth
ten of it:

Cut a square, or oblong pit of thirty or forty foot in length, at the least
four foot in depth, and ten foot over, or of what dimensions you think will
suffice to furnish you with store: Let one of the sides or edges be made so
sloping as to receive a Cart or Wheel-barrow to load and unload easily; let the
bottom and sides also be so well paved, or laid with a bed of small Chalk,
Clay, or the like, that it may be capable of retaining water like a Cistern: If
to this you can commodiously direct any channels or gutters from your Stable,
and other sinks about the house, it will be much the better. The Pit thus
prepared, and under covert (for that I should have premised) so as at least the
downright rains may not fall upon it; cast into it first your Stable soil with
the littier, a foot or more thick, according to the depth of your Pit; upon
this lay a bed of fine Mould, on that another bed of Cider-Marc, rotten fruit,
and Garden off all; on this a couch of Pigeons and Poultry-dung, with more
littier; then a stratum of Sheeps-dung, a layer of Earth again, then Neatsdung;
lastly, Ashes, Soot, Fern, (a moist and a dry) bottom of Wood-stack, Saw-dust,
dry scowrings of Ponds and Ditches, with all other ingredients, as you happen
to amass them, till the Cistern be full and heaped up; upon all this cast
plentiful water from time to time, which if you can have out of some Pond where
Cattle use to drink and cool themselves in, it will be excellent: At the
expiration of two years you may confidently open your magazine, and separate
the Layers as they rise, to cast them into other small Pits or receptacles made
a little concave to receive them; where you may stir, air, mingle and work them
in with fresh Mould, or one with the other, as you find cause, till they become
comparatively sweet and agreeable to the scent: Lastly, you may pass them
through a screen made of lathes placed at moderate intervals, and with the
liquor remaining in your great Cistern sprinkle the several Composts, and make
them up for use, casting the course remaining stuff, which would not pass the
riddle, into the Cistern again for farther mortification, and so keep your Pit
filled with fresh materials from time to time after the same method.

There are some who advise us to suffer your mixture to remain till it be quite
dry, after it is thus refined, and then being beaten to dust, to strew it upon
the ground. And indeed this seems in Pliny's time to have been the Custom; nor
do I contradict it, provided you could water it, or were sure of a shower
before the Sun had drank too deeply of the spirit and vigor of it, which,
reduced in this manner, it does easily part withal.

Now the Reason of our thus treating Compost of various soils and substances,
is not only to dulcifie, sweeten, and free them from the noxious qualities they
otherwise retain, and consequently impart, applied, as usually we find them,
crude, indigested and unactive; but for being immoderately hot and burning, or
else rank, and apter to engender vermin, weeds and fungous excrescences, than
to produce wholesome Plants, Fruits and Roots fit for the Table, and grateful
to the Palate; for which effect, it should be thoroughly concocted, air'd, of a
scent agreeable, and reduced to the next disposition of a sweet and natural
Earth, short and tractable, yet not so macerated as to lose any of its virtue.
The proper season therefore for this work, is the beginning of the Autumnal
Aequinox, and wind westerly, both to prepare and lay it on your Land; that,
whether it be of wet or dry consistence, it may have a gentle soaking into the
Earth. As for fresh Dungs, such as Sheep make when they are folded, it is good
advice to cover it with Mould as soon as possible, before the Sun have
over-dry'd it, for the Reasons before hinted; and by this early application you
will find all that is stiff and yet any ways contumacious, subdued, and
perfectly prepared before you turn it in. If you would meliorate Ground for
Fruit Trees, Roots and Esculents of the Orchards and Olitory Garden, be
cautious, that the hotter Dungs approach not immediately to their stems or
roots, without such a circumposition of natural Mould as we have commended. But
this is a note for such as think fit to use the soil steaming as it comes from
the heap; but if it be prepared as we have showed, there is no danger even of
immediate contact: And the same is to be observed in Ablaqueation, where we
find cause to bare the Roots of Trees, and expose them to the air, for fresh
influence, or to abate exuberances; and that the cavity be not filled all at
once (when we conceive the Roots have been sufficiently air'd) but gradually
from month to month, as from October till the beginning of March; and upon
other occasions, leaving the surface rough, rather than too count, and
exquisitely trimmed, if only you dig your Ground; which once in two or three
years, four or five, (as you perceive your Trees to require Culture,) is
advisable, and then to mingle the Earth with a through soiling, and refresh it
with the impregnate water of your Cistern, will exceedingly recover a worn-out
Plantation. This Irrigation may also be yearly given to the Roots of your
Fruit Trees about June and July; and the spreading of a little good Soil upon
the surface, and rough chopping it in with the spade before winter, is good
husbandry, to wash in amongst the Roots, and to draw them upwards, the shallow
running of which is of so great importance.

And thus having showed how to prepare, ripen, separate and apply the several
Composts (which for distinction sake we call the dry mixture;) I am next to
describe the liquid in many particulars, not much differing from the former
Process.

'Twixt East and North erect a Pergola or Shed, so contrived with a cover, as
to exclude or admit the rain, snows and weather at pleasure; sink a Pit for the
Cistern as you did the former under it; cast into it all the acid Plants,
bitter and rank weeds that come in your way, and grow in the neglected corners
of your grounds, such as Esula, Hemlock, Docks, Thistles, Fumary,
Tabacco-stalks, Wormwood, Cabbage-leaves and stalks, Aconites, the leaves,
trash, and offal, such as Cattle will not touch, to these add Pigeons and
Poultry dung, with their Quils and Feathers; any sort of Ashes, Soot,
Hogs-hair, Horn, hard bones, such as the dogs have gnawn; also Urine, Blood,
Garbage, Pickle, Brine, Seawater, (if conveniently to be had,) otherwise
Pondwater, to sprinkle it with, and keep it moist to accelerate putrefaction;
but when all is well consumed, forbear the pouring on of insipid liquors, and
thus leave it till it be dry; then air, mingle and work your Compost as you
were directed above, or boil it into Peter, casting what you find not well
digested into the Cistern again for another year, and with a little addition,
it will give you half the quantity of the former, and, provided that you supply
the Magazine, a continued and farther increase. Indeed this Salt and Compost is
not immediately fit for use, till it be well dulcified and purged from its over
acrimony, therefore mix it well with your Mould, and dilute it as you see
cause. The Receipt is set down by old Glauber for the effecting of wonderful
Vegetation, by the assistance of certain Circulatory Vessels to prepare the
Oily succus, and pinguid Juice, which that Author teaches in his Miraculum
Mundi, to extract not only out of these Materials, but out of Turf, Wood and
Stone it self, by calcining and burning them in close and reverberating
furnaces, to which a Tube, adapted near the bottom, may convey the spirits into
a Recipient, as he describes the Process. I mention this the rather, for the
real effects which I have been told of this Menstrue from very good Testimony:
And doubtless he who were skilled to extract it in quantity (and to dulcifie,
and qualify it for use,) a true spirituous Nitre may do abundantly more, in
the way of the improvements we have celebrated, with a small quantity, than
with whole loads, nay, hundreds of loads of the best and richest dry Composts
which he can devise to make. But besides this, any houses of Ordure, or rancid
mould, strong salts, vinous liquors, Urine, Ashes, Dust, shovelings of the
kenuel and streets, etc. kept dry, and covered for three or four years, will be
converted into Peter, without half this trouble; especially if you mingle it
with the dung of Pigeons, Poultry, and other salacious Fowl which feed on Corn:
Or those who would not be at the charge of distilling for these advantages, may
make experiment of the so famous Muck-water, not long since cried up for the
doing wonders in the field: Throw of the shortest and best Marle into your
Cistern, exceedingly comminute and broken, which you may do with an iron Rake,
or like Instrument, till the liquor become very thick; cast on this the dung of
Fowl, Conies, Sheep, etc. frequently stirring it; to this add the soil of
Horses and Cows, Grains, Lees of Wine, Ale, Beer, any sort of beverage, broths,
brine, fatty and greasy stuff of the Kitchen; then cast in a quantity of Lime,
or melting Chalk, of which there is a sort very unctuous; also blood, urine,
etc. mixed with the water, and with this sprinkle your Ground at seasonable
times, and when you have almost exhausted the Cistern of the liquid, mingle the
residue with the grosser Compost of your Stable and Cowhouse, and with layers
of Earth, Sand, Lime, S. S. S. frequently moistened with uncrude water, the
taking up of which you may much facilitate, by sinking a Tub or Vessel near the
corner of the Cistern, and piercing it with large holes at the bottom and
sides, by which means you may take it out so clean as to make use of it through
a great Syringe or watring Engine, such as being used to extinguish fire, will
exalt and let it fall by showers on the Ground, and is much the more natural
way of irrigation, and dispatches the work.

This Liquor has the reputation also for insuccation of Corn, and other Grain,
to which some add a fine sifting of Lime-dust on it, and when that is dry, to
repeat it with new infusions and siftings: But

There is yet a shorter Process, namely, the watring with Fishmongers-wash,
impregnated with the sweepings of Ships and Vessels trading for Salt, adding to
it the blood of the Slaughterhouse, with Lime, as above; but this is also much
too fierce for any present use, till it be perfectly diluted, which is a
caution indispensably necessary, when ever you would apply such powerful
affusions, lest it destroy and burn up, instead of curing and enriching.
Another take as follows:

Rainwater of the Equinox, q. s. boiled with store of Neats dung, till it be
very strong of it, dissolve one pound of Saltpeter in every pottle of water;
whilst this is a little tepid, macerate your seeds for twenty four hours, dry
them gently, rather with a cloth than by the fire; sow in the barrenest Earth,
or water Fruit Trees with it, for prodigious effects. Or thus:

Take two quarts of the same water, Neats-dung, as before, boiled to the
consumption of half, strain it, casting into the percolation two handfuls of
Bay Salt, and of Saltpeter ana. Another:

Take Rainwater, which has stood till putrified, add to it Neats, Pigeon, or
Sheeps-dung, expose it for Insolation a week or ten days, then pass it through
a course strainer, infuse more of the same soil, and let it stand in the Sun a
week longer, strain it a second time, add to it Commonsalt, and a little Oxes
Gall, etc. Another:

Take quick Lime, Sheeps dung at discretion, put into Rainwater four fingers
eminent; to ten pints of this Liquor, add one of Aqua-vitae, macerate your
Seeds, or water with it any lean Earth, where you would plant, for wonderful
effects.

Infuse three pound of the best Indian Niter in fifteen Gallons of water,
irrigate your barren Mould; 'twas successfully tried amongst Tulips and Bulbs,
where the Earth should by no means (as we have said) be forced by Composts. But
a gentler than either, is,

A dilution of Milk with Rainwater, sprinkled upon unsleckt Lime, first sifted
on your beds, and so after every watering the Lime repeated.

These, with diverse more which I might superadd, not taken and transcribed out
of Common Receipt-Books, and such as pretend to Secrets, but most of them
experimented, I thought fit to mention; that upon repetition of Trials, the
curious might satisfy themselves, and as they have opportunity improve them,
whilst perhaps, as to irrigations, less exalted liquors were more natural. And
what if Essays were made of Liquors per Lixivium, the Plant reduced to ashes;
might it not be more connatural, since we find by more frequent trial, that the
burning of stubble before the Rains descend on it, impregnates ground by the
dissolution of its spermatic salts? I only name the naked Phlegm of Plants
distilled either to use alone, or extract the former salt; but I say, I only
mention them for the curious to examine, and ex abundanti. For certainly (to
return a little, and speak freely my thoughts concerning them) most exalted
Menstrues, and (as they dignifie them with a great name) Essentiated Spirits; I
say, all hasty motions, and extraordinary fermentations, though indeed they may
possibly give sudden rise, and seemingly exalt the present vigor of Plants,
are as pernicious to them as Brandy, and hot-waters are to Men; and therefore
wherever these ardent Spirits are applied, they should be poured at convenient
distances from any part of the Plant, that the virtue may be conveyed through
some better qualified medium. But when all is done, waters, moderately
impregnated and imbodied with honest Composts, and set in the Sun, are more
safe, and I think more natural: For, as the Learned Dr. Sharrok truly affirms,
Water is, of its own Constitution alone, a soil to Vegetables, not only as the
most genuine Vehicle of the riches which it imparts to Plants, through the
several strainers, and by means of which all change and melioration is
effected; but for that it is of all other substances best disposed for
ingression, to insinuate into, and fertilize the Earth, which is the reason
that floated and irriguous grounds are so pregnant. Besides, it is of all that
pretend to it, nearest of blood (as I may say) to the whole Vegetable Family:
For to assert with any confidence, what part of the mere Earth passes into
their composition; or whether it serve (as we touched before) only for
stability, or as a womb and receptacle to their Seeds and Eggs (for so we are
taught to call the Seeds of Plants,) I shall not undertake to discuss. Every
body has heard of Van-Helmonts Ashtree; and may without much difficulty repeat
what has been experimented by exquisitely weighing the Mould before, and after
a Gourd is planted in it, and till it be grown to bulk and full maturity, fed
with water only; how much liquor is insum'd, and how little of the Earth
consumed, to make some conjecture; though I do not yet conceive the Earth to be
altogether so dull and unactive, as to afford no other aid to the Generation of
what she bears; the diversity of soils being (as we have showed in this
Discourse) so infinitely various, and the difference of invisible infusions so
beyond our Arithmetic. But if we give Liquids praedominion, and at least the
Masculine preference, be they Salts, or Spirits (that is, nitrous Spirits)
conveyed into her bosom how they will; sure we are, that Water and Vegetables
are much nearer of alliance, than either Water or Air are with the Earth and
Mould. But neither do I here also by any means exclude the Air, nor deny its
perpetual Commerce, and benign influences, charged as it comes with those
pregnant and subtle particles, which insinuating into the Earths more steady
and less volatile Salts, and both together invading the Sulphur, (and freeing
them from whatsoever they find contumacious,) that intestine fermentation is
begun and promoted, which derives life, and growth, and motion to all that she
produces. That by the Air, the most effete and elixiviated Mould comes to be
repaired, and is qualified to attract the prolific nitrous spirits, (which not
only disposes the Earth to this impregnating magnetism, but converts her more
unactive and fixed salts into quite another genius and nature,) the Learned
Doctor Mayow has ingeniously Tract Medico-Phys. Medico-Phys.
made out; and all this by a naked exposure to the Air alone, without which it
produces nothing: Nor can Plants (totally excluded from the Air) live, or so
much as erect themselves to any thriving purpose, as being deprived of that
breath and vital Balm, which no less contributes to their growth and
nourishment, than does the Earth it self with all our assistances: For that
Plants do more than obscurely respire, and exercise a kind of Peristaltic
motion, I little doubt, from the wonderful and conspicuous attraction, and
emission, which some of them discover; particularly, the Aloes, and other
Sedums, and such as consisting of less cold and viscous parts, send-forth their
aromatic wafts at considerable distance.

Besides, we find that Air is nearer of kin and affinity to Water, than water
is to Plants, unless I should affirm, that Air it self were but a thinner
water; for how else are those Vines, and other Trees of prodigious growth,
maintained amongst the barren Rocks, and thirsty Pumices, where Rains but
seldom fall? if not from this rorid Air. Not to insist again, that perhaps even
these Rocks themselves may once have sprung from liquid Parents; and how
little, even such as are exposed to continual showers in other Climates, abate
of their magnitude, since we rather find them to increase; and that also the
Fruits and Juices of Vegetables seem to be but the concretion of better
concocted Water, and may not only be converted into lignous and woody substance
(as the Learned Doctor Beale has somewhere instanced in a Discourse presented
to You, and Recorded in the Public Transactions) but is apt enough to petrifie
and become arrant stone.

Whatever then it be which the Earth contributes, or whether it contain
universally a Seminal virtue, so specified by the Air, Influences, and Genius
of the Clime, as to make that a Cinnamon Tree in Ceilon, which is but a Bay in
England, is past my skill to determine; but it is to be observed with no little
wonder, what Monsieur Bernier in his History of the Empire of the Mogol affirms
to us of a Mountain there, which being on one side of it intolerably hot,
produces Indian Plants, and on the other, as intemperately cold, European and
Vulgar. Not here to pass without notice at least, what even the most exhausted
Mould will (to all appearance) produce spontaneously, when once it has been
well exposed to the Air, and heavenly influences; if what springs up be not
possibly from some volatile rudiments and seeds, transported by winds, higher
than we usually place our Experiments, unless we could fix them upon Olympus
top: But Porta tells us with more confidence, that he took Earth from a most
profound and dry place, and exposed it on such an eminence, as to be out of
reach even of the winds; but it produced, it seems, only such Plants as grew
about Naples, and therefore may be suspected.

To return then again from this digression, and pursue our Liquids; where there
is good Water, there is commonly good Earth, and vice versa; because it bridles
and tempers the Salts, abates the acidity and fierceness of Spirits, and
imparts that useful ligature and connection to the Mould, without which it were
of no use for Vegetation. In the mean time, of all Waters, that which descends
from Heaven, we find to be the richest, and properest in our work, as having
been already meteoriz'd, and circulated in that great digestory, enriched and
impregnated with astral influences from above at those propitious Seasons;
whence that saying, Annus fructificat, non Tell us, has just Title to a Truth
we every years Revolution behold and admire, when the sweet Dews of Spring and
Autumn (hitherto constipated by cold, or consumed with too much heat) begin to
be loosened, or moderately condensed, by the more benign temper of the Air,
impregnating the prepared Earth to receive the Nitrous Spirits, descending with
their baulmy pearls, yet with such difference of more or less benign, (as
vapors happily, which the Earth sends up, may be sometimes qualified,) that
nothing is more uncertain. And this we easily observe from the Labors of the
Industrious Be, and her precious Elixir, when for some whole months she
gathers little, and at other times stives her waxen City with the harvest of a
few propitious days. But I am gone too far, and therefore now shall set down
only a few directions concerning watring, and so dismiss the Subject and your
patience.

1. It is not good to water new-sown Seeds immediately, as frequently we do,
and which commonly bursts them; but to let them remain eight and forty hours in
their beds, till they be a little glutted with the natural juice of the Earth.

2. Never give much water at one time; for the surface of the Earth will often
seem very dry, when it is wet enough beneath; and then the Fibers rot about
Autumn, especially in Pots and Cases, wintered in the Greenhouse: To be the
more secure, we have already cautioned Gardners to keep their bottoms hollow,
that nothing stagnate and fix too long; which should be but transitory. If such
Curiosities strike no root by September, the leaves desert them certainly at
Spring: The reason is want of Air, not moisture. Therefore in all intervals of
severer frosts, and rigorous winter-weather, be sparing of refreshings, and
unless you perceive their leaves to crumple up, and fall, (which is their
language for Drink,) give them as sparingly as you can. Indeed, during the
Summer, and when they are exposed, they require almost perpetual irrigation,
and that the liquor be well impregnat'd with proper Compost: But in hard
Frosts, or foggy Seasons, watering your housed Plants indangers them by
mustiness, and a certain Milldew which they contract. On the other hand,

Applications too dry create an intemperate thirstiness, and then they drink
unmeasurably, and fall into Dropsies, Jaundies, Feavors, swell, languish and
rot; and if the liquor prove too crude (as commonly it does, if taken from
running and hungry fountains,) it extinguishes the natural heat, and obstructs
the Pores; and therefore when ever you are constrained to make use of such
drink, expose it first to the warm Sun for better concoction, infusing Sheep,
Pigeons, or Neatsdung, to give it body: But though Spring Water be so bad, slow
running River is often very good, and Pond-water excellent, so it be sweet; but
all stinking pools, mineral and bituminous waters, are not for our use; and
often good Air is as needful as good water; Worms, Mouldiness, Cankers,
Consumptions and other Diseases, being the usual and fatal consequence of these
vices.

If you be to plant in fresh and new broken-up Earth, and that the season or
mould be too dry, it is to be watered; but then give it a competent sprinkling,
or sifting of dry and fine mould upon what you have refreshed, and then beating
it a little close with the back of your spade, plant it successfully; for this
you will find to be much better, than to water it after you have planted (as
the custom is) and as you may observe in setting Violets, Auricula's,
Primroses, and other Capillaries, planted in beds or bordures, and then dashed
with a flood of water, which, so soon as the Sun has looked upon, resign and
lose their tinctures, scorch and shrivel up. Lastly,

For the Season likewise of this work, let it be toward the Evening in hot and
summer days, for the reason immediately assigned; for the moisture being in a
short time drunk-up, deserts the Plant to the burning Planet; and hence it is,
that Summer mists are so noxious, and Meridian watrings; and therefore the best
expedient is, upon such exigencies, to pour your refreshings rather all over
the Area on which your Cases of choice and rare shrubs are placed, and among
the Allees and Paths between your Beds of Flowers, for the raising artificial
Dews, (by which is unfolded no common secret;) or water them per lingulam, and
guttatim, than either with the Pot or Bucket: And after this manner, if at
other seasons they stand in need of heat and comfort of warmth, by strewing
Sand or Cinders on the same intervals, the reflection will recreate them, upon
all emissions of the Sunbeams.

As for grosser Plantations, and Trees of old Orchard - Fruits, moderation is
also to be observed, and not to dash - on such a quantity near the stem and
body; but first with the spade to loosen the Earth about them, especially
toward the extremities of the tenderest Roots, which generally sprout at the
ends of the most woody, whose mouths are shut with tougher bark. These
therefore may be cut sloping to quicken them a little, and make them strike
fresh fibers; especially if some rich and tempting mould be sensonably applied:
For Trees will (as we showed) with very little Earth to cover them, take fast
root, (provided you stablish them against impetuous winds, shocks and accidents
of force,) and thrive exceedingly with this refreshment.

Some make pretty large holes with an Iron-Crow, or (which is better) a pointed
stake, and pour the liquor in at those overtures; but besides, that by this
means they wound the roots, (which gangrenes, and sometimes kills the Tree,) if
the holes be not filled, the Air and Moisture mouldies them: So as, when all is
summed together, there is nothing comparable to frequent stirring up the Ground,
opening the dry clod, and watring upon that; and if you lay any fearnbrakes or
other trash about them to entertain the moisture, and skreen it from the heat,
let it not be wadded so close, or suffered to lie so long, as to contract any
mustiness, but rather loose and easy, that the Air may have free intercourse,
and to break the more intense ardours of the scorching Sunbeams.

Thus I have exercised Your Lordships and these Gentlemen's Patience with a dull
Discourse of Earth, Mould and Soil; but, I trust, not altogether without some
Fruit; or, at least, not improperly pro hic and nunc, as the Subject has
Relation to what has so lately been produced, and with happy event made out, by
those Learned Persons, who have entertained this Noble Society with the Anatomy
of Plants.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 49. l. 22. r. un-uniform.


