PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT AND AN ACTIVE LIFE PREFERRED TO SOLITUDE, AND ALL ITS
APPANAGES, Such as Fame, Command, Riches, Conversation, etc.

In Reply to a late Ingenious Essay of a contrary Title.

By J. E. Esquire S. R. S.

Arist. 1. Polit. (...) Sen. Ep. XXII.

Excute istes qui, quae cupiere, deplorant, and de earum rerum loquuntur fuga,
quibus carere non possunt: videbis voluntariam esse illis in eo inoram, quod
aque far and inisere loquuntur.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for H. Herringman at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in
the Lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1667.

Imprimatur,

Dec. 13 1666. Roger L'estrange.

Ste: Apthorp Coll: Regal: Bank. soc:



To the Honorable Sir Richard Brown Knight and Bt, late Resident at the Court of
France for their Majesty's of Great Britain CHARLES the I and IId, Gentleman of
the Privy-Chamber, and one of the Clerks of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, my most honored Father-in-Law.
SIR,
I Am bold to present this liberal Discourse with the greater Confidence to
you; because you alone being witness with how little application I have been
able to frame it, (importuned as I was by several Avocations) it may with the
better grace presume upon your indulgence: There is this only which I have
infinite cause to regret; that the tenuity of the Oblation, bears so little
proportion to the duty, and the service which I owe you: But, though I might
happily have oppressed you with a larger Volume, I could not with a more
illustrious and becoming Argument; nor indeed, made choice of a fitter Arbiter
then your self to determine between us, who have passed so much of your time in
the Public service of your Prince and Country, and in a period when a less
steady Virtue must have succumb'd under your temptations. With what fidelity
and success you discharged that Ministry, and how honorably you supported the
change during the Nineteen years space of your honorable Character abroad, I
leave others to report, and to the great and most illustrious Persons of this
Nation, whose Loyalties mingled their glorious misfortunes with Yours: I say
nothing of your hospitality, and of the Civility of your house, which cannot be
but gratefully recounted by as many as have made any stay at Paris, and that
shall consider the circumstances of those lessning times: And your modesty
since your Royal Masters most signal Restoration, has made it appear, that you
served him without design, as esteeming your whole Fortune a Sacrifice too
cheap, to preserve the dignity of a Charge in which his Majesty's Reputation
was concerned. I might here mention the constant Asylum which the Persecuted
Clergy found within your walls upon all occasions; because I have seen the
Instances, and have heard them frequently acknowledged both to your self, and
to your most excellent Lady; When your Chapel was the Church of England in her
most glorious estate; at least in the account of Heaven; for she was then the
most persecuted Church in the World: But this is already recorded by better
Sir, The Benediction the Doctor gives to you and yours, in allusion to that
which issued from the Ark to Obed Edoms house, I have a particular obligation
to suffrage in, etc. --

The public exercise of our Liturgy, is the Antitype we reflect upon, which,
by Gods singular indulgence to you, has, when chaced out of the Temple, took
refuge in your House; so that we have been forced many times to argue from your
Oratory for a visibility of our Church; Your easy admission of me to officiate
in it for some months, and your endeavors to have such an establistment made
for me, as whereby in the most difficult of times, I might have had a
comfortable subsistence, and a safe Protection under your sacred roof, beside
the other graces and civilities I had from you, exact this open retribution of
my thanks, etc. -- to you, whose name and memory must be ever venerable to the
English Clergy, as your Person has been most obliging to many of us, etc. --

Rich. Watson in his Epist. Dedicat. before Dr Basiers Treatise of the Ancient
liberty of the Britannick Church, and exemption thereof from the Roman
Patriarchate, etc. Printed Land. 1661.


Pens: Shall I descend to your other noble and more personal qualifications?
That amidst your busy Employments for the concern of States, and the interest
of Kingdoms, you still held correspondence with the Muses, and conversation
with letters; so as what others know but at a great distance, and by reflection
only, You derive from the Fountains themselves, and have beheld what has
passed in the World from the very summit of Olympus: Thus Xenophon, Thycidides,
Polybius; Caesar and Tacitus conceal nothing from you, who are a Critic both in
the Greek and the Latin Tongues, as well as in all the modern Languages: To
these I might add the sweetness and comity of your disposition, the temper of
your Customs, the sedatenesse of your Mind, your infinite contempt of Vanity
and gilded appearances; and in short, all those Perfections which are the
result of a consummate Experience, a prudent and just estimation of the
Vicissitude of things: But I am first to beg Pardon for this attempt on your
Modesty, or rather indeed for this imperfect description of your Virtues: But
Sir, I pretend not to oblige you by your Character, but the Public by your
Example; and if that have been the chief design of this little Piece to declare
it to the World, I attain my Purpose: You have obliged me with many signal
kindnesses, with a contitinu'd affection, a profitable, and noble Conversation,
and in a word, with all these in One, with an Excellent Wife, to make this just
Acknowledgement, and to subscribe my self,

SIR, Says-Court. Feb. 5. 1666/7. Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, and
Son-in-Law, J. EVELYN.

TO THE READER.
I Have this Request to make, and this Account to give of the ensuing
Discourse; That as it was but the Effects of a very few hours, a cursory pen,
and almost but of a sitting, The Reader will be favorable in his suffrage, and
not hastily pronounce against the merits of the Cause: I do not speak this to
justify my discretion, that being Conscious of my defects, I would presume to
engage: Let me be looked on but as the Forelorn, who though resigned for lost,
do service yet in the day of Battle, and lead on the rest: I dare assure the
most instructed for Fight, that it will be no dishonor to be overthrown by
such an Hero; who, if I discern rightly of his spirit, by that of his style, is
too generous to insult over the Vanquished; and it will be no shame to resign
our Arms.

I ingenuously acknowledge, that amongst so many Pens as the Writers of this
Age employ, I find not many that are better cut. On the other side, it must be
granted, that he has all the Topics and Discourses of almost all the
Philosophers who ever writ; and that whilst he declames for Solitude, I am
forced to tread the most unfrequented and solitary paths; and if for that
reason I have not obliged my self to the exactest method, I have yet pursued my
Antagonist, rightly parall'd and compared, who has himself laid down, and
resumed as pleased him; nor in these Prolusive and Oratorious Contentions, is
the liberty without good Example: But that which would best of all justify me,
and the seeming incoherencies of some parts of my Discourse, would be the noble
Authors Piece it self, because of the Antithesis, and the forms of his
Applications. But as I said, I do not pretend to Laurels and Palms, but to
provoke some stronger Party to undertake our Agressor: The War is Innocent, and
I would be glad this way of Velitation and short Discourses upon all Arguments,
in which other Languages greatly outdo us, might exercise our reasons, and
improve the English style, which yet wants the Culture of her more Southern
Neighbors, and to be redeemed from the Province, without wholly resigning it
to the Pulpits and the Theater, to the neglect of those other Advantages which
made the Romans as famous for their Eloquence, as for their Arms, and inabl'd
them to subdue more with their Tongues then with their Swords: Let us consider
it was but their native Language, which they familiarly used, and brought to
that Perfection; and that there is nothing so course and stubborn but is
polished by Art.

This ingenious Stranger (for some Expressions and some Words, (yet apt, and
well inserted) persuade me he is so, (though a subject of his Majesty's) will
justify what I aim at; And the felicity which we have of gracefully adopting
so many Languages and Idioms into our own, frustrates all presences of not
infinitely improving it: This was once the design of the Royal Society; and as
it was worthy their thoughts; so I hope they will resume it: I add not this, as
presuming my self to have attained the most vulgar talent in this kind: My
business has only been the Vindication of an oppressed subject, and to do
honor to Employment: In the mean time, 'twere priety, if at last it should
appear, that a Public Person has all this while contended for Solitude, as it
is certain, a Private has done for Action: But as I persuade my self, if it be
so, he has power to Retreat from Business; I protest I have not the least
inclination to it, though for want of a better, I have undertaken this.

The Gentleman is pleased to call his Book but an Essay; Mine hardly pretends
to so much; which makes me presume, be will not judge me uncivil, nor take any
thing I have said in ill part, the nature of this War considered: But if he
shall esteem it so important, and think fit to Rejoyn; I so far promise to
assert his Cause, and the just conceptions I have of his rare abilities; that
though I would willingly incite some better Pen to wait on him, that I may
still enjoy the diversion and benefit of his Discourses, I will for ever be
silent my self, and after all I have said here to the Contrary, Prefer his
SOLITVDE.

J. E.

Public Employment, AND An Active Life Preferred to SOLITUDE.
IT was an ill Omen to the success of his Argument, that in ipso limine, the
very Threshold of his Essay, he should think to establish it upon so wide a
mistake, as what is derived from the sense of an impious Poet, and the
sentences of a few Philosophers; insinuating by the unconcerned and inactive
life of Him who gives life and activity to all Beings, that to resemble God
(wherein consists our greatest perfection) we should sit still, and do nothing.
Dissolvitur autem religio, De ira Dei c. 8.
si credamus Epicuro illa dicenti: Be this our Faith, says Lactantius, and
farewell Religion: And if Memmius be persuaded to gratify his Ease, by being
made believe that the supreme Arbiters of our actions would take little notice
of them, it was no conclusion to the more illuminated Christian, that to
approach the tranquillity of the Deity, men should pursue their Ease, or hide
their Talents in a Napkin. God is always so full of Employment, that the most
accurate Definers of him, style him to be Actus purus, to denote his eternal
and incomprehensible activity? Creating, Preserving, and Governing: always
doing Justice and giving Laws, rewarding the Virtuous, and defending the
Innocent. For what Cicero affirms of the Philosophic life, relates to their
Science, not their Solitude; and so indeed the Conscience of our Duty, joined
with our performance of it, renders us like our Maker, and therefore rightly
inferred by Plutarch, that the lives of Great Persons should resemble that of
the Gods, who delight in such actions as proceed from beneficence, and doing
good to others; since the contemplation of it alone was superior to all other
satisfactions: But what if the same Cicero tell us in another place, that those
who do nothing considerable in this world, are to be reputed but as so many
dead men in it? C. 2. de Not. Deor.
Mihi enim qui nihil agit, esse omnino non videtur, says he; and what is yet
more remarkable, as it is opposed to what he seems to press from the lazy Deity
of Epicurus: Certainly, God that would not permit the World it self to remain
in Idea only, but published and brought it forth to light by the very noblest
of all his actions (for such was its educing out of nothing,) and that of seven
whole days and nights, Genesis 2. 2.
reposed but one himself; and has been ever since preserving and governing what
he made; shows us us by this, and by the continual motions of the Stars, and
revolutions of the heavenly Bodies, that to resemble him (which is the sum of
felicity) we should always be in action, and that there is nothing more
agreeable to his nature. If we have recourse to the mystic Theology of the
Ancients, we shall find there also, that even Minerva could not conceive
without the operations of Vulcan, which signifies labor and the active life,
no more than Jupiter himself; and that Hercules was not admitted into the
Celestial Courts, 'till he had first produced the Trophies of his heroic
achievements: To this all the Mythology of the Heathens refer; and therefore
doubtless, if Beatitude be our summum bonum (as all consent it to be) 'twas
well said of the Philosopher, (...) that Beatitude was Action, Arist. 7. de
Repub. c. 3 Ethic. l. 1. c. 12.
and that Action by way of transcendency, was proper only to Man.

But to pursue the method of our ingenious Author, whilst he is thus
eloquently declaming against Public Employment, Fame, Command, Riches,
Pleasure, Conversation and all the topics of his Frontispiece, and would
persuade us wholly to retire from the active World; why is he at all concerned
with the empty breath of Fame, and so very fond of it, that without remembering
the known saying, Nemo eodem tempore assequi potest magnam famam, and magnam
quietem, would have men celebrated for doing nothing? Verily there is more of
Ambition and empty glory in some Solitudes, and affected Retreats, than in the
most exposed and conspicuous actions whatsoever: Ambition is not only in
public places, and pompous circumstances; but at home, and in the interior
life; Heremits themselves are not recluse enough to seclude that subtle
spirit, Vanity: Gloriari otio iners ambitio est, Sen. Ep. 78
It Is a most idle ambition to vaunt of idleness, and but a mere boast, to lie
concealed too apparently; since it does but proclaim a desire of being
observed: would thou be indeed Retired, says the Philosopher, let no man know
it: Ambition is never buried; repressed it may be, not extinguished.

Neocles brother to Epicurus, as Suidas tells us, was the Father of that wary
expression, Latenter esse vivendum, whence Balzac assumed it: What says
Plutarch? Even he that said it, said it that he might be known: I will not add
how severely he pursues it (because our Author may be concerned, that a second
Impression has (I Am told) transmitted us his name) but if it be the property of
those who are excessively ambitious themselves to redargue the glory and
dignity of their Corrivals, that they alone may possess it; the resemblance was
not inept, which compared those decriers of Public Employment to the Slaves in
Galleys, Plut.
whose faces are averse from the place to which they tend, and advance forward,
whilst they seem to go backwards. That which renders Public Employment
culpable, is, that many affect Greatness, few Virtue, for which honors are
alone desirable; be good and you cannot be too popular, community makes it
better; for permit me to affirm, that there is an honorable and noble
ambition, and nothing I think which more distinguishes man from brutes, their
low and useless appetites; whilst this (...), this despising of glory is the
mother of sloth, and of all unworthy actions: Well therefore did the
Philosopher assign its contrary, (...), Eth. ad Eud. c. 5
Magnanimity, and even some sort of Ambition too, a kind of rank amongst the
Virtues: and we know Contemptu famae, contemni virtutes, and that even life it
self (if the circumstances be handsome) will be parted withal to preserve it.

But let us suppose the motives why men pursue greatness, to be some of the
particulars here enumerated: may we not as well affirm Celador flies it for the
appendant burden, and because it is expensive, out of closeness and avarice,
humor, or want of ability? some grow sullen and peevish that they be not
advanced; others are naturally Hypocondriacs and Saturnine, tempers of the
basest aloy: But when opulent and great persons (says he) undertake Public
Charges, the very rabble have so much of prudence as to condemn them for mad:
when Philosophers, they serve their Country, not their inclinations, etc. None
indeed but the rabble make that judgment; for being commonly mad, they think
all others like themselves; and when Philosophers pretend it, it seems by him
they cease to be Philosophers, and then it is no matter what they say. The truth
is, men then begin to praise Retirement, when either no longer vigorous and
capable to act, that their spirits and bodies fail; through age, infirmity, and
decay of senses; or when they cannot otherwise attain to what they aspire;
which sufficiently justifies the preference of Employment; since to be thus
happy, they must first begin to dote. Nor does the Merchant traffic so dearly
for Solitude, but for his Ease, and the difference is wide between them: If to
be owner of a stately house, to be bravely furnished, to have a fair Lady, a
rich Coach, and noble Retinue; if to eat good meat, drink the most generous
Wine, and make more noise amidst his jolly friends, than ever he did either at
Sea, or the Camp, be a Merchant or a Soldiers Solitude; who would not desire
the pretty Retreat which he describes? For this (I take it) it is that both
Merchants plow the Seas, that Lawyers break their brains, and Soldiers fight
battles: in sum, to live at ease, and splendidly; who before, and whilst
employed, were the Pillars and Ornaments of their Country. When Caesar is
brought for an instance, aliquando licebit mihi vivere, were it possible to
wrest it to the sense of this argument; it ought yet so far to dissuade us from
the pursuit of his example, as it is perfectly opposite to an Evangelical, as
well as moral position: No man (says S. Paul) lives to himself: Romans 14. 7
No man, says Cicero, is born for himself: Certainly the great Augustus had
learned that lesson too well to affect repose for himself only; or with an
intention to relax the excellent Government which rendered that age of his so
happy above others: He knew Justice and Fortitude were active Virtues, and that
Princes are Shepherds, whose function it is not to play all day on the Pipe, and
make love to Amarillis; but to attend the good of their flock: Nor indeed
should they trifle their hours in giving audience to Bouffoons, or sport with
Apes: Would it become an Emperor, who should march before Legions, and give
Laws to Kingdoms, to play with Cockle-shells, or be stabbing Flys, when
Ambassadors are attending him, as Domitian did? For what can this mihi vivere
less signify in a Prince, whose greatest glory proceeds from actions,
profitable and public, and to live for others, such as renowned the memory of
this gallant Hero? whilst the rest abandoning themselves to ease, effeminacy,
and fantastic pleasures (like Tiberius in his Capriae) became the pity of
their age, and the subjects of Tragedy and Satyr: Caesar then breathed after
Retirement for relaxation only, and that he might revert to his charge with the
more courage and vigor: Thus Scipio and Lelius went apart, thus Cicero and
Varro, and not to sing Verses to the Forests and Rocks, and dialogize with
Echoes, the entertainments of Solitude.

Neither does he less err in preferring it to public business in respect of
dignity; seeing that which takes care for the being of so many Societies, is
infinitely more honorable than what has only regard to it self; and if his
Logic hold, quod effecit tale, est magis tale, those are most to be reputed
happy, who render others so; since God and Nature come under the consideration:
Could his happy man remain in that desirable estate, without the active lives
of others to protect him from rapine, feed and supply him with Bread, Clothes,
and decent necessaries? For it is a grand mistake to conceive, that none are
employed, but such as are all day on horseback, fighting Battles, or sitting
in Tribunals: What think you of Plow-men and Artificers? nay the labors of the
brain that excogitates new Arts, and produce so many useful things for humane
Society, opposed to our Gentleman-hawker and Hunter, who rises so early and
takes so much pains to so little purpose? A good Architect may without great
motion operate more than all the inferior Workmen, who toil in the Quarries and
dip their hands in mortar; and when the Historian had sum'd up a world of
gallant persons who fought bravely for their Country, (...) Aelian.
he did not esteem those to be less employed who served it by their Counsel:
The Commonwealth is an assembly regulated by active Laws, maintained by
Commerce, disciplined by Virtue, cultivated by Arts, which would fall to
universal confusion and solitude indeed, without continual care and public
intendency; and he that governs as he ought, is Master of a good Trade in the
best of Poets sense as well as mine: Strive thou brave Roman how to govern
well, Aen. 6. Tu regere imperio populos --

Be these the Arts, in which thou do excel;
Subjects to spare, and the bold Rebels quell.
For when Epicurus (who chose the private life above all) discourses of Public
Ministers, he is forced to acknowledge that to be at Helm, is better than
lying along in the Ship; not as it is indeed more honorable and conspicuous
alone, but because it is more noble beneficium dare, quam accipere; and the
sentence is of God as well as Man: For so the Apostle, Act. 20. 35.
it is more blessed to give than to receive: But it is not for nothing, that
Patron of the Idle, does now and then so much celebrate action, and Public
Employment: since unless salva sit Respublica, the Commonwealth be secure, even
the slothful man himself cannot enjoy his sloth.

We may with more justice condemn the ambition of Pyrrhus than derive any
advantage from his reply: For my part I think we are obliged to those glorious
Conquerors for the repose, knowledge and morality they have imparted to us;
when but for their Atchievments and heroic actions, more than half the World
had still remained barbarous, and the universe but one vast Solitude indeed.
The Activity of men does best cover their frailties: Arts and Industry having
supplied that which Nature has denied us; and if Felicity consist in
Perfection, certainly whatever makes us to approach it nearest, renders us most
happy. But his Wise-mans wit consists it seems in repute only: I had rather be
wise than so reputed; and then is this no more advantage to Solitude, than the
Melancholy and Silence he speaks of; the one being the basest of humors, and
the other the most averse from Instruction, which is the Parent of Virtue:
whilst Felicity in this article, appears the result of cheat; and imposture,
and in making men seem what indeed they are not; whereas active persons produce
themselves to the world, and are sooner to be judged what they are by what they
do, according to that well known test Officium indicat virum. As therefore
truth is preferable to hypocrisy, so is Employment before this Solitude: Had
he affirmed Peace was better than War, he had gained my suffrage even almost to
an unjust one; but whilst his antitheta are Solitude and Employment to state
the period of Felicity, he as widely mistakes, as one that should affirm from
the Text, that the milk and honey of Canaan dropped into the mouths of the
Israelites without a stroke for it; whilst it cost so many years travels in the
Desert, and bloody battles, and that the wisest and happiest men in it, were
the most active, and the most employed.

To instance in the passion of Statesmen, breathing after self-enjoyment, and
that to posses it a moment, they are even ready to disoblige their dearest
interest; is not certainly to commend Retirement, but declame against it. Had
David been well employed, fair Bathsheba had washed in her Garden securely, and
poor Vriah outlived many a hard Siege: It Is an old saying, and a true one,
Quem Diabolus non invenit occupatum, ipse occupat, the Devil never leaves the
Idle unbusied: But if Nature, Inclination and Pleasure vote (as is pretended)
for Solitude; even the most contemplative men will tell us, as well as
Philosophers and Divines, that Nature is depraved, Inclination propense to
Evil, and Pleasure it self, if not simply evil, no moral Virtue. Public
employment is not unnatural in its ascent; for there are degrees and methods to
it: but if ambitious men will needs leap when they may safely walk, or run
themselves out of breath, when they may take time and consider; the fault is
not in the steps, but the intemperance of the Person: Those who indeed arive to
greatness by their Vices, sit in slippery places, whilst Virtue only is able to
secure her favorites: and in these sublimer Orbs, if men continue humble, and
govern their passions, amidst the temptations of Pride and Insolence; if they
remain generous, chaste, and patient against all the affaults of avarice,
dissolution, and the importunity of Clients; how does such a Persons example
improve the world, illustrate, and adorn his station? how infinitely exceed the
Misers Diamond and all his tinsell, which shines indeed, but is locked up in
the dark, and like the Candle is set under a bushel? Men of Parts should
produce their talents, and not enclosing themselves as Conjurers within their
Circles, raise a thousand melancholy devils that pervert their abilities, and
render them, if not dangerous, useless to their generation. Anaxagoras was a
wary Person, yet he conversed with Pericles; Plato with Dion; Panetius with
Scipio; Cato with Athenodorus, and Pythagoras with all the World: Would
Philosophers be more active and Socratical; Princes and Great-men would become
Philosophers, and States consummately happy; You know who said it: The truth
is, a Wise man is a perpetual Magistrate, and never a private Person; Not one
City, Plato.
or place, but the World is his dominion: whilst those who introduce the
example of Dioclesian, and the fifth Charles, to justify the honor and delices
of Retirement, take for the One a proscribed Prince, whose former tyrannies had
deprived him of a Kingdom, and his fears of a resumption; and for the Other, a
decrepid old Emperor, whose hands were so unable to manage a Scepter, that, as
one tells us, he had not strength enough to open a letter; not to insist on his
other infirmities, and suspicion which induced the more partial Historians to
write; he did it plainly to prevent an ungrateful violence; or (as others) out
of indignation to see himself so far outdone by our English Lo sdegno di veder
si soprafar dal Re Arrigo, and altri che esso haueae uoluto a questo mo do
schifare la fortuna aversa, etc. See more in Lodovico Dolci's vita di Carlo V.
Harry. Whatever motive it were (for there are more assigned) so far was this
felicity from smiling on those who acted the Scene; that the very grimaces of
fortune alone, so affrighted them from society and the public, as to unking
themselves whilst they were living. I will say nothing of another Pageantry
resembling this, which has happened in our own times; because the frailty of the
Sex carries more of excuse with it. But it seems no retreat can secure
Greatness from the Censures and Revenge of those they have once injured; and
therefore even Solitude it self is not the Asylum pretended: But that which can
best protect us, is, and that certainly is Grandeur, as more out of reach, and
nearest Olympus top. Aeleas the King of Scythia was wont to say ingenuously,
that whilst he was doing nothing, he differed nothing from his Groom; and
Plutarch exceedingly reproves this shameful abdication of Princes without
cause: What a dishonor (says he) had it been for Agesilaus, Numa, Darius,
Pericles, Solon, or Cato to have cast off their Diadems, torn their Purple, and
broken their Scepters in pieces for the despondency of a Dioclesian? or to have
given place to proud and aspiring Boys? How was Caius Gracchus reproch'd but
for retiring from his Charge a little, though on the death of his own Brother?
If ever such Retreats be justifiable, it is when Tyrants are at Helm, and the
Commonwealth in the power of cruel persons: When the wicked (says Solomon)
rise, men hide themselves: 29 Pro. 28.
then, been vixit, been qui latuit: if it were not yet infinitely more laudable
with Demosthenes, even then to be most active, and endeavor its rescue: For
things can never arive at that pass, ut nulli actioni honestae sit locus; it is
Seneca's inference from the bravery of Socrates, who resisted no less than
thirty of those Athenian Monsters together: and how many thirtys more our
glorious Prince did not desist to oppose, we have lived to see in the fruits of
our present felicity; and to the eternal renown of that illustrious Duke, who
so resolutely unnestled the late Iuncto of Iniquity. Turpe est cedere oneri,
it is a weakness to truckle under a burden, and be weary of what we have with
good advice undertaken: He is neither worthy nor valiant, that flies business,
but whose spirit advances in courage, with the pressure and difficulties of his
Charge: Were it not gallant advice (says Plutarch) to dissuade Epaminondas from
taking care of the Army? bid Lycurgus enact no more wholesome Laws? and
Socrates to teach Wisdom no longer? Would you bring Virtue into Oblivion?
should not Arts improve? becomes it Doctors to be silent? This were taking
light out of the world, and pulling the Sun from his glorious Orb; would
dissolve Laws, humane Sciences, and even Government it self: But he proceeds,
Had Themistocles been never known of the Athenians, Greece had never given
Xerxes a repulse: Had the Romans still slighted Camillus, where had that
renowned City been? If Plato had not known Dion, Sicily had yet groaned under
Tyranny: But as the light not only makes us known to each other, but also
renders us mutually useful; so the being public, and conspicuous to the World,
does not only acquire glory, but presents us means of illustrating our Virtues;
whilst those who through sloth, or dissidence never exercise themselves, though
they possibly may have good in them, yet they do none.

Indeed the Petalism in Sicily caused the most able Statesmen to retire
themselves; because they would not be subject to the aspiring humor of those
pragmatical spirits who affected a rotation in the Public Affairs; by which
means experienced persons being laid aside, those Pretenders to the Politics,
had in a short time so confounded things together, that the very People who
assisted to the Change, were the first that courted them to resume their power;
abrogating that foolish Law which themselves had more foolishly enacted: To the
like condition had the Athenian Ostracisme near reduced that once glorious
Republic: and what had like to be the Catastrophe even of this our Nation,
upon the same model (when every man forsooth would be a Magistrate) sad has
been the experience. Men may be employed, though not all as Senators and Kings;
every Wheel in a Watch has its operation in the movement, without being all of
them springs: Let every man (says Epicurus) well examine his own Genius, and
pursue that kind of life which he is best furnished for: if he be of a slothful
nature, he is not for action; if active, he will never become a good
Private-man: For as to the one rest is business, and action labor; so to the
other, Otium is labor, and activity the most desirable repose.

I am now arived to the second period, which commences with the anxiety of
great and Public Persons, upon the least subtraction of their past enjoyments:
To this I rejoin, That we can produce so many pregnant instances of the
contrary, even in this age of ours, as all Antiquity can hardly parallel: Never
was adverse Fortune encountered with greater fortitude and gallantry, than when
so many brave men suffered patiently the spoiling of their Goods, sequestring
their Estates, dissipating their substance, imprisoning their bodies, exiling
their Relations, and all that can be named Calamity, to preserve their Loyalty
and their Religion: In sum, when our Princes submitted to the Axe, and our
Heroes to the Haltar; whilst we beheld people of meaner Fortunes, and private
condition, lovers of Solitude and Ease, (repining at every inconsiderable loss)
prostitute both their Honor and Conscience, to preserve or recover, what they
but feared the loss of, and this Elogy is due to thousands of them yet
surviving. I acknowledge that the ambitious person is in his sense a
bottomless-pit; and that Ingratitude and Treason are too often paid for favor
and good Offices: Though I have likewise asserted in what circumstances even
Ambition it self is laudable, and may be styled a Virtue: But have Private men
no thoughts of amplifying their Fortunes, and of purchasing the next Lorship?
Marrying, not to say sacrificing their Children to the next rich Heir, and
marketing for the Portion? Is there not in the best governed Families of
Country Gentlemen, as much purloyning, ingratitude, and infidelity amongst
their few Servants and small Retinue (not to mention ungracious and disobedient
Children) as in the greater Economy of a Commonwealth, proportionably
speaking? Where is there more emulation, contention, and canvasing, than in the
remoter Villages, or next good Towns? They sell us repose too dearly (says
Plutarch) De tranq. animi.
which we must purchase at the rate of idleness; and adds a pretty instance:
If, says he, those who least meddle in Public Employment, enjoy the greatest
serenity of mind, then should doubtless Women be of all other the quietest
lambs in the world, and far exceed men in peaceableness and tranquillity, since
they seldom stir out of their Houses; yet we find the contrary so notorious,
and this gentle Sex (whom so much as the wind dares not blow on) as full of
envy, anger, anxiety, jealousy, and pride, as those who most of all converse
in Public, and are men of business. And therefore we are not to measure
felicity and repose from the multitude and number of Affairs, but from the
temper and Virtue of the subject; besides that, it is often as criminal to omit
the doing well, as to commit evil, and some wise States have accounted them
alike. Indeed if all the world inhabited the Deserts, and could propagate like
Plants without a fair Companion; had we goods in common, and the primitive
fervor of those new made Proselites; 2 Act. 44.
were we to be governed by instinct; in a word, were all the Universe one ample
Convent, we might all be contented, and all be happy; but this is an Idea no
where existant on this side Heaven; and the Hand may as well say, 1 Cor. 2. 16.
I have no need of the Feet, and the Ears, I have no need of the Eye, as the
World be governed without these necessary subordinations. Men must be
prohibited all rational Conversation, and so come under the Category of brutes,
to have no appetites besides eating and drinking; no passions, save the
sensual: I have known as great animosities among the vulgar sort, as much
bitterness of spirit, partiality, sense of injury, and revenge upon trifling
occasions and suggestions, as ever I observed in the greater and more busied
world: 'Twas evident that the Lacedaemonians were more proud of their mean
Apparel at the Olympic Courses, than the most splendid Rhodians in all their
bravery and clinquant; and Socrates soon espied the insolence of a slovenly
Philosopher through his tattered mantle: The Gynic in his Tub currishly flouted
the Eastern Monarch, and despised his purple that secluded him from the common
beams of the Sun. He ought to be a wise and good man indeed that dares trust
himself alone; for Ambition and Malice, Lust and Superstition are in Solitude,
as in their Kingdom: Peritstulto, says Seneca, Recess is lost to a Fool, or an
ill man; and how many weak heads are there in the world for one discreet
Person! It was Crates the Disciple of Stilpon, that bid the morose walker, take
heed he talked not with a Fool: some men, says Epictetns, like unskilful
Musicians sing no where tolerably but in Consort; and it is noted he must have
an excellent voice that can charm the ear alone, which renders them so
difficult to be entreated. There are few Plants that can nourish themselves
with their own juice; Every man grinds indeed, but the mill that has no Corn in
it, grinds either chaff, or sets fire on it self.

But he declames only against the most conspicuous Vices; and every defect in
the brighter Luminaries is observed, whilst the lewd recesses of Tyberius
eclipsed none of his prodigious debaucheries: Sen. Ep. 82.
So true is that of the Philosopher, wherever men abscond themselves humane
miseries, or their vices find them out and ataque them: Multa intus (says he)
many things within us enslave us, even in the midst of Solitude. Were not the
greatest Philosophers, nay the very Fathers of them severely taxed for the
lowest pleasures, and the sins not to be named? Seneca himself escaped not the
censure of Covetous and Ambition; Pliny of excess of Curiosity; Epicurus of
Riot; Socrates of Paederastie; Themistocles of Morosity; all of them of Vanity,
Contempt and Fastidiousness.

To the instance of great men's submissions to the commands of Princes, be they
just or unjust, it holds well had the discourse concerned Tyrants only and
Barbarians; but to produce that Example of Parmenio, and Cleander, is to quit
the subject, and borrow the extravagance of a madman and a drunkard, to decry
Princes and Statesmen, who are the most conspicuous examples of temperance:
But I proceed to the Maxim: If nothing be morally good which labors of the
least defect, then so long as his Celador is not an Angel, he does no more come
within the first part of the Definition, than the greatest and most employed
Person living; and if he insist upon degrees, I answer; he lies not under the
same temptation, and therefore neither can he pretend to approach his merit: but
if I prove the most diabolical Arts, and cursed Machinations to have been
forged by Persons of the most obscure condition, and hatched by the Sons of
night, recluse, and little conversant in affairs, I shall infinitely distress
that opinion of its virtue or advantage; for being either happy in it self, or
rendering others so. The Monks have been so dextrous at the Knife, and other
arts of mischief, that they have not trembled to make the holy and salutary
Eucharist the vehicle of destruction, when they had any Kings to dispatch and
put out of the way; and have made such havoc of the French Henrys, that but
for these solitary birds, those Princes might have survived all their sad
misfortunes: It was not for nothing that Ieroboham withdrew so long into
Egypt, 1 Reg. 12. 2. 16.
(that Kingdom of Darkness) when he contrived the defection of no less than ten
whole Tribes at a clap; and how much mischief, sin, and bloodshed it caused,
the Sacred Story has accurately recorded: The blackest treasons have been
forged in the Closets and gloomy recesles; Who is not amazed at the very image
and thought of the Gunpowder Conspiracy! carried on and excogitated by the
Devil, and a pack of these Solitary Spirits! 'Twas but an Arian Monk, and an
obscure Jew who first encouraged and instructed that mighty Impostor,
occasioning more evil in the Christian Church and State than was ever done by
all the Tyrants since it began: for it spawned not only an Heresy, but
Blasphemy; razing the Christian name out of almost half the World: and the
issues of the Cell are to this day conspicuous in the Fire and the Sword which
has destroyed not Cities only, but whole Empires, and made more Fatherless and
Widows, more desolation and confusion, and done more harm to Letters, than can
be recounted; nor did the uttermost machination of the greatest Person in
Employment, ever approach what one Monk set on foot out of his holy Den, that
ever I could read in story; and what are all our truculent Champions of the
Fift-Monarchy amongst us at this day, but so many Persons who seem to be the
most self-denying people, and the highest affected with Solitude and devout
Enthusiasme, despising Honors, and public Charges, whilst they breathe nothing
save ruin and destruction? They are the close, stagnate and covered Waters
which stink most, and are fullest of mud and ordure, how calm and peaceable
soever they seem upon the surface; whilst men of action, and public spirits,
descending as from the highest rocks and eminences, though they sometimes make
a noise, have no leisure to corrupt, but run pure and without mixture: There is
an heavy Woe denounced in Scripture to those who thus setle on their Lees:
Physicians tell us the body is no longer in health, 1 Zeph. 12.
than the blood is in motion and duly circulates: Action is the salt of life,
and diligence the life of Action: All things in heaven are in motion, and
though it is there only that we can promise repose to our selves; yet neither
dare I say, we shall do nothing there; since the admiration of the beatifical
Vision will certainly take up and employ all our faculties, and set them in
operation; nor whilst we shall there be in perpetual Exstasie, shall we live to
our selves, but to God alone. There is then doubtless no such thing as rest
(unless it be that from earthly toil, anxieties, and the works of sin, which is
that repose mentioned by the Apostle) since Action is so essential to our
lives, Heb. 4. 9.
that it constitutes our Beings; and even in all Theory and Contemplation it
self, there is a kind of Action, as Philosophers do universally agree.

Let it be confessed the Court is a Stage of continual Masquerade, and where
most men walk incognito; where the art of dissimulation (which Donna Olympia
has named the Keys of the Vatican) is avowed; yet it cannot be denied, but
there are some in that warm Climate too, as perfectly sincere, as in the
Country; and where Virtue shines with as much luster as in the closest
Retirements, where if it give any light, it is but in a dark lanthorn: And to
be so innocent there, where there is so much temptation, is so much the greater
merit: Believe it, to conserve ones self in Court, is to become an absolute
Hero; and what place more becoming Heroes than the Courts of Princes? for not
only to vanquish Armies in the field, defend our Country, and free the
oppressed, are the gloricus actions of those Demigods; but to conflict with
the regnant Vices, and overcome our selves, greater exploits than the winning
of enchanted Castles and killing of Giants: For what violence must be applied
to be humble in the midst of so much flattery; chaste amongst such license,
where there is so much fire, and so much tinder, and not to look toward the
fruit which in that Paradise is so glorious to the eye, and so delicious to the
taste? what a disposition to purity, to come forth white from the region of
Smoke, and where even the Stars themselves are not without their spots? in sum,
not to fall into the nets which the noonday Devils spread under our feet,
above our heads, and about us; and who pursue those that fly, and bear down
those who resist? But, as I said, if the difficulties be so great, how much
greater the glory? whilst pretending to no such temptation in his Solitude,
there is less exercise for his Virtue; it being rather a privation from Evil,
than any real habit to Good. Certainly, there is not in the Country, that
admirable simplicity pretended, nor do they altogether transact with that
integrity: For is there not among them as much iniquity in buying and selling?
as much overreaching in the purchase of a Cow, or a score of Sheep? as much
contention about the incrochment of a dirty fence? as much regreating with the
Farmer, keeping up the price of Corn, when the poor are sterving? How many
Oaths and Execrations are spent to put off a diseased horse? Have we not seen
as much ambition and state where the Country Justices conven e on the
Market-days at the petty Towns, to have the Caps and the Knees of the Bumkins?
as much canvasing for Suffrages and Voices? not to insist on the prodigious
debauches, drinkings, emulation, and perjuries at Elections? and even greater
pride, deadly feud, railing and traducing amongst the She-Pharisees, or little
things of the Neighborhood, for the upmost place in the Church-pew, or at a
Goshiping-meeting, as at Court, and in the City between the Ladies of the best
quality? and all this while we grow weary of the Public, and resolve against
Employment, and the sound of affairs; repenting of the lost moments that are
past in Conversation: and yet in every Cave, and every Cottage, there is a
chair for ambition, and a bed for luxury, and a table for riot, though hell be
raining out of heaven: and it may be observed that we do not hear the least
evil of Lot, or the virtue of his daughters, whilst they lived in the midst of
Sodom it self, Genesis 19. 32.
'till abandoning even his little Zoar to his more solitary and cavernous
recess, he fell into those prodigious crimes of ebriety and incest. Verily,
that is truly great to retire from our Vices, not from Cities, or Conversation:
If you be Virtuous, let your Example profit; if Vicious, repent and amend;
Strive not so much to conceal your passions, as to reform them: for little do
solitary persons profit, without a mind adapted for it; Wise men only enjoy
themselves, not the voluptuous or morose; and I have seen some live
discontented even in houses of pleasure, and so in their Solitudes, as if none
were more full of business.

When he celebrates Recess for the little it wants, he gratifies the Cinick; He
could attribute as much to his Tub, and the treen dish that he drank in, which
was all the house and furniture we read of; and an Owl and a Pelican want as
little as the Philosopher; but he does not say by this, that Solitude is
fertile: it is not from the abundance that it supplies then, but from its
sterility and defects, which if it be a commendation to that, is so to nothing
else in Nature.

He proceeds again to the passions of great men, which are indeed more
conspicuous, as lightning and Thunder are amongst the Meteors, and in the Air;
but we do not take notice of the Corruscations, conflicts, and emotions which
are every day in the bowels of the Earth: How impatient and unjust are some of
your Country Gentlemen to their Domestics? how griping to their Tenants? how
unnatural to their Children, and uncivil to their Wives? Pardon me these
reflections, he has compelled me: and it is for your justification (O ye Great
Ones) that I find my self obliged to produce these odious comparisons; whilst
I could give Celadors friend such an example in our first Charles of blessed
memory, Philip the second of Spain, Alphonso of Aragon, and diverse of the later
Emperors, for acts of the highest Patience, Fortitude, Devotion, Constancy, and
Humanity, as would shame all the pretenders to moral Virtues, in his so
celebrated Retirements and private persons: With what constancy, spirit, and
resignation did our Royal Martyr unjustly suffer from the machinations of the
most insolent and implacable of his Vassals, is not certainly to be paralleled
by any thing (...) has recorded, save that grand Exemplar our blessed Savior,
who was a King too, but more than man: from whose emulous pattern he has
transmitted to us not only all the perfections of the most innocent private
persons; but the Virtues of the most eminent Saints. He was imprisoned, and
reviled, spit on, and injuriously accused; he was arraigned, and by a barbarous
contradiction condemned and dispoil'd of three Kingdoms by the most nefarious
Parricide that ever the Sun beheld, and that before his own very Palace: Tell
me yet you admirers of Solitude, in what corner of your Recesses dwelt there a
more excellent soul, abstracted from all the circumstances of his birth and
sacred Character, and considered only as a private person? Where was there a
more sincere man in his actions? a more constant devote to his Religion? more
faithful Husband to his Wife? and a more pious Father to his Children? in a
word, a more accomplished and consummate Christian? Look on him then as a King,
to be superlatively all this, and all that a good and a most virtuous Prince
can be to his Subjects, and you have the Pourtraicture of our Charles opposed
to all the petty Images of your solitary Gentlemen, and decryers of Public
Employment. One day that Philip the second, had been penning a tedious
Dispatch, importing some high affair of State, which employed him almost the
whole day; he bid the Secretary that waited by him, to throw some dust on the
paper; he instead of the Sand snatching up the Ink-bottle, poured it all on the
letters: The King taking a large sheet of clean paper wrote it verbatim over
again, and when he had finished, calmly delivering it to the confounded
Secretary, bid him dry it; but, says the Prince, take notice that this is the
Ink, and this the Sand-box; which was all the reproof he gave him: I instance
in this (because of the rest of those Virtues I have enumerated, there are such
Volumes of Examples) to put to silence all that can be produced, upon the
account of that passion, which is so frequently charged on Great Persons; but
which indeed upon the most trifling occasions, use to discompose the most
retired persons: And what if amongst these, besides many others, I should
instance in S. Hierome himself, and other Fathers of the Church, as recluse and
private as they were known to be Religious.

As to the comparative exemption of Solitude from Vice for want of opportunity;
the advantage is very slender; since (with what I have already furnished to
evince it) it implies only what monsters it would else produce; and indeed the
most formidable that were ever hatched, have thence had their original; as I
have abundantly proved by the dark and infernal machinations of Solitary
Persons: so as his Happy-man seems at best to be but a starved, or Chained
Lion, who would do mischief enough had he liberty, and a power equal to his
will: It Is instanced in the madness of some few Heathen Emperors; but he passes
by the salutary Laws promulg'd by them for the universal good: Nor were there
so many debauched and Vicious of the Roman heretofore, but I can name you as
many Christian Princes religious to miracle and without reproach, if what is
already said be not sufficiently irreplicable. As for the rest, whatever they
might once have been in their ascent; it was said of Caesar, that either he
should never have aspired to dominion, or having once attained it, been
immortal; so just, so equal, and so merciful was his successive Reign: Never
was it pronounced of any private Person, that he was a man after Gods own
heart; but we know it was so of a King, and that from the Almighty himself. And
not to mention Hezekias, Josias, Iehosaphat and many others recorded in holy
Writ: I durst oppose an Augustus, a Titus, a Trajan, Antoninus, Aurelius; to
omit Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, Charles the Great, S. Edward, S.
Jews, both the Alphonsos and diverse more of the Crowned heads, before any, or
all he can produce: Its true, they all dyed not in their beds; no more do all
in his Solitude; for they often hang themselves, linger in Consumptions, break
their necks in hunting, inflame themselves with tippling; perish of the unactive
Scorbut; Country Agues and Catharrs: And if he speak it out, who they were that
stabbed the two Henrys, and our gallant Buckingham whom he mentions; it must be
avowed they were all murdered by private persons: But whilst he is thus exact
in recording all the Vices of ill Princes; because the spots in the Sun are so
easily discerned by his optic; he takes no notice of the light it universally
diffuses, and is silent of the Virtues of the good and the beneficent, who have
both in all ages rewarded, cherished and protected gallant men: But when he
shall have passed through all the Examples of the Great-ones who are come to
ruin and destruction, he does not examine how many private men, Gentlemen and
others, remain in any one Country, whose patrimonial Estates are not impaired
by as trifling contests, neglects, prodigality and ill-husbandry, as any he
charges upon those eminent Persons.

If Solitude be assistant to Religion and Devotion, how much more is Society?
Mat. 18. 20.
Where two or three are assembled together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them: I know no Text, where acts of Religion are commended for being
solitary: It is true, our blessed Savior went apart into desert places Luke 9.
10.
to avoid the importunities of a malicious and incredulous people: but he was
tempted there, Mat. 4. 1.
as well as in the City; and though he sometimes retired to pray; Luke 6. 12.
and which was commonly in the night, when conversation with the world was less
seasonable; he was all day teaching in the Temple, Luke 21. 37.
or continually going about doing good, Mat. 4. 23.
and healing all manner of diseases among the people, giving counsel to, and
instructing his Disciples, whom he dispersed over the world to Evangelize his
holy Doctrine. Mar. 16. 15.
We are indeed bid to offer up our prayers to our heavenly Father in secret,
Mat. 6. 2. 6.
and to do our Alms without a Trumpet; not because it adds to the dignity of
the service, but to avoid the temptation of hypocrisy, and because we have
infirmities; whilst we are yet in another place commanded to render our Works
so illustrious, that both men may see them, Mat. 5. 16.
and God may have the glory. Certainly, the most instructive motives to
Religion are from our imitation of others, and the incentives of devout
Congregations, as they approach the nearest resemblance to the Church Catholic
Militant here on earth, so doubtless do they to the Communion of Saints
Triumphant in Heaven: Is there then no devotion save in Conventicles and Cells?
and yet even the most recluse Carthusian spend eight hours of the twelve in
divine Offices together: The commendation of a true Christian consists in
doing, not in meditating only; and it were doubtless an admirable compendium of
all our notional disputes in Religion, if less were believed, and more were
practiced. It Is true Mary's sitting at the feet of our Savior, and harkening
to his instructions, was preferred before busy Martha's employment; but the
man who laid up his Masters Talent, Luke 10. 41.
and actively improved it not, did worse; Mat. 25. 26. 30.
she was gently reproved, he severely condemned.

But he adds, that most temptations are in Solitude disarmed of the chains
which render them formidable to us in Public, as there wanting the presence of
an inflaming object, etc. But what if I sustain that absence does oftentimes
augment the passion he speaks of, and that our fancies operate more eagerly
when alone, than when we are possessed of the object? Nor is there half so warm
a fire
In fruition as desire;
When we have got the fruit of pain,
Possession makes us poor again;
Sense is too nigardly for bliss,
And pays as dully with what is:
Whilst Phancy's liberal, and gives all
That can within her largeness fall, etc.


Thus we are ever the most inquisitive after mysteries and hidden things,
whilst those we enjoy, we neglect or grow weary of: But I proceed: The most
superstitious of men have been the greatest Eremites, and besides the little
good they do by their Example, there is not in the world a life more repugnant
to nature, and the opportunities of doing our duty; since even the strongest
Faith without Works will not save us: For how can he that is immured perform
those acts of misericord, which shall be so severely exacted of us at the last
Judgment; to feed the hungry, visit, the sick, Mat. 25. 35, 36.
cloth the naked, unless it be in the mocksense of St. James, Ja. 2. 16.
Depart in peace, be you warmed and filled, etc. whilst they give neither meat
nor Clothes to refresh the miserable? But I am altogether astonished at his
instance in David again, as prompted to his lust and murder by the ill fate of
his public Character; when it is evident, had he been employed, or but in good
company, he had never fallen into so sad a crime: Let it be remembered that he
was alone upon the Battlements of his Palace, 2 Samuel 11. 2.
and then all the water in Bathsheba's Fountain was not cold enough to
extinguish his desires; so mighty a protectress is Society from that particular
temptation, that even the presence of a Child has frustrated an opportunity of
being wanton. If it were Gods own verdict, Genesis 2. 18.
that to be alone was an evil state, how come we to have Adams society blamed?
for even Adam, he says, could not live innocent a day in it: But, besides that
the short duration of his felicity is but a conjecture; I have some where read,
that but for Eves curiosity, which prompted her to stray from the company and
presence of her Husband, the Serpent (as subtle as he was) had never found an
opportunity to tempt her: He was indeed too easily enticed by her example, and
no marvel, he was himself alone; God had forsaken his sweet associate, and then
the first effects of both their shame and disobedience was their dark
retirement: Genesis 3. 10.
Doubtless there are many heinous sins which Company preserves us from, for it
is even a shame to speak of some things, which are done by men in secret.

I suppose it was no Widow (as he speaks her to be) who so hospitably
entertained the great Elisha, but a married Lady, 2 Reg. 8. 9, 10.
and of an ample Fortune: For the Text calls her a great woman; and we find her
speaking to her Husband in another place, concerning the building and furniture
of the Prophets Chamber: Nor does the answer she returned him, at all imply her
wants; she plainly needed nothing that the Court could confer upon her; only an
Heir she wanted to inherit: she lived amongst her People, and had company
enough. And verily we shall find the Solitude of the same Prophet to be the
effect of a Persecution, not of his preferring it before Society; and we meet
the holy man much oftener at Court, in the Camp, at the College, and
perpetually employed, than either in the mountains or in the Wilderness. But
let us grant that some Devotions are best performed in our Closets, yet does
the life of a Christian consist only in wearing the marbles with our knees? I
have already showed that there are Works of Charity, that can no where be so
well performed as in company: nor can I assent that the being alone contributes
half so much to our zeal, as the examples of Conversation: How frequently does
David repeat his ardent affections, and address to the Tabernacle, 22. Ps. 25.
35. -- 18. 40 -- 9, 10
and the great Congregation? And though the Country about Sinai, were a howling
desert; Deuteronomy. 32. 10.
yet had it at one time in it, no less than six hundred thousand fighting men
together, Numb. 1. 46.
whereof the most devout were the most publicly employed: Witness Moses,
Aaron, Joshua, Caleb, Phineas, etc. which being but in the minority and
pupillage of that Church, were all this while but preparing for Gods public
Worship, and the constitution of a People in the world the most busy and
employed.

To the Text in Hosea 2. 14. where God says he will comfort his Church in the
Wilderness: I oppose his innumerable sweet compellations under the type of the
Daughter of Zion, which was a great and most eminent part of that populous
City, and that glorious accession of the Gentiles described by Isaiah. The
Tabernacle was indeed for a time in the Wilderness; Isaiah 60.
but neither did that, nor the extraordinary presence of God in it, restrain a
rebellious people from committing more crimes and insolences in it, in forty
years, than in four hundred before, when they dwelt in the Cities of Egypt:
For (as the Psalm) Lust came upon them in the Wilderness, Ps. 106. 14
and they tempted God in the Desert. It is well known that the first occasion
of the Monastical life, we because men could no longer live quietly in the more
frequented places, by reason of the heat of Persecution; and yet even in their
remotest recesses, he that looks into St. Hieroms description of it, Passim in
Epist.
shall find that they were in such numbers, and so near to one another, that
they were almost perpetually in Company; nor does any, I think, consider the
stories of Onuphius, Anthony, Simon Stylites and the rest of that Spirit, but
as hypocondriacs, singular persons, and Authors of much superstition and
unprofitable severity: The invasion of the Goths on the Roman Empire, drove
multitudes of those holy persons to these Latebrae, 1 Cor. 7. 26.
and the present distress (to use St. Paul's expression) might sometimes be a
sufficient argument to recommend, if not prefer, the Coelibate before the
Conjugal estate, and the barbarity of that age to the extraordinary mode of
living, which from compulsion and a certain cruel necessity, became afterward
to be of choice and a voluntary obligation. But does he think to derive any
force to his darling Solitude, from the servile and busy occupations, which
none save Heathens and Mahumitans teach, shall be among infernal torments?
Turks and scoffing Lucians may possibly broach those Fancies of the impertinent
employments of Alexander and Caesar in the other World; but I presume he takes
them but for the dreams of that Philosophical drol, and to have no solid
foundation besides their scoffing and Atheistical Wits. He is now pleased
again, to imagine that there is nothing which does more prevail with men to
affect Grandeur, than what he thinks due only to Phantosms and Ghosts: Though
Fame be indeed a bubble in the estimation of those who are not much concerned
for the future; I find yet how impossible it was for him to secure any praise
even to Solitude it self, by the neglect of it; whilst he so carefully has
consecrated to posterity the Names and Elogies of so many as seemingly despised
it, on purpose to obtain it: But this stratagem is very thin and transparent:
For such as he mentions not, I presume never were, and those he does record,
have purchased more by that artifice, than if they had continued men of the
busiest Employment; Charles the fifth and the rest he ennumerates, being more
celebrated for their supposed voluntary abdication (whatever the true motive
were) than for all the most glorious passages of their former Reigns: But
however these great men are beholden to their Patron, I confess the Pedants (as
he calls them) and the Poets are not less obliged to him for the power he
attributes them of being able to make great whomsoever they please: But those
persons I should think, to have little merited of Posterity, whose memory has
no other dependence then their ayrie suffrages; when it is from the sober Pens,
and the veritable Memoires of Grave and Faithful Historians, that the Heroic
lives of deserving men receive life and immortality after death. Let the
Pedants and the Poets then celebrate the soft and weakest circumstances of the
reigns of those Princes he would justify; the Pens of great and Illustrious
Authors shall eternize those who persever'd in their grandeur, and public
Charges to the end: for such were Xenophon, Polybius, Tacitus, Livy, and even
Caesar himself, besides many others as well of ancient as modern times, from
whose writings we have received the noblest Characters of their Virtues: And if
it be retorted, that whilst they actually writ, they were retired; I grant it;
but if men had not done things worthy Writing, where had been either the use,
or fame of what they so bravely acted, and transmitted to Posterity? In the
mean time I acknowledge, that the greatest Empire is to command ones self, and
that the Courts of Princes have always had this of ungrateful to generous
Souls; that they but too frequently subject gallant men to caparizon'd Asses;
gay, but vicious, or insipid: Princes are not always happy in their choice of
Favorites: But as it is not universally so, and that it is in the breast of
the same Prince to turn them off, or lay by the Counters, to advance Good men,
and bring Virtue into reputation, these external submissions may the better be
supported: For wise men do not bend the knee to the Beast (we have the example
of Mordecai) but to the Shrine it bears, Hest. 3. 2.
as those who adored Isis upon the back of the Animal that carried it: And so
the Sun may shine on a Dunghill unpolluted, and thus it shall be done to the
man whom the King is pleased to honor; which though it denotes obedience in
the observer, does no real dignity to the recipient, nor can they themselves
but believe it with some useful reflection as often as they see a respect paid
them, which they must needs be conscious to themselves they do not deserve. I
cannot therefore accuse the deferent of so much adulation, as praise him for
his obedience, so long as he offers no divine, or Consumptive Oblations to the
Idol, and offends not God: For there is certainly no man merely by being a
Courtier, obliged to imitate their vices, or subject themselves to the unworthy
complyances he would insinuate; since in that case, a fair retreat is always
in ones power; and if on that score, or the experience of his personal frailty,
he be prompted to it, how infinitely more glorious will be the example of
quitting those specious advantages, which can neither be conserved, or attained
without succumbing under a temptation? And when he discourses of society,
instancing in the trisling conversation of idle persons, and Knights of the
Carpet, who consume their precious moments at the feet of some insipid female,
or in pursuit of the pleasures of the lower belly; I heartily assent: There are
a sort of Bouffoons and Parasites which are the very excrements of
Conversation, as well in Country as Courts; and to be therefore treated as
such, wiped off, and cast from us; and there are worthier diversions for men of
refined sense, when they feel themselves exhausted with business, and weary of
action: Certainly, those who either know the value of themselves, or their
employments, may find useful entertainments, without retiring into
Wildernesses, immuring themselves, renouncing the World, and deserting public
affairs; and when ever you see a great person abandoned to these dirty and mean
familiarities; he is an object of pity, and has but a little Soul; nothing
being more true, Noscitur ex socio, qui non cognoscitur ex se. But God be
thanked, the age is not yet so barren of ingenuous spirits, but that men may
find Virtue with facetiousnesse, and worthy conversations without morosity to
entertain the time with: He has else been strangely unhappy in his
acquisitions, who is to seek for good company to pass an hour with, if ever he
sought one of the sweetest condiments of life: and doubtless, did great
persons but once taste the difference which is between the refined conversation
of some Virtuous men, who can be infinitely witty, and yet inoffensive; they
would send some of their damned familiars with a Dog-whip out of their
Companies; because a man of honor (to use Jobs expression) would disdain to
set them with the dogs of his flock: Job 30. 1.
For after their prostituted and flavish sense and contrivances are spent upon
the praise or acquisition of some fair sinner, or the derision of what is more
excellent then themselves, to supply their want of furniture, fill their
emptiness, and keep up a worthy and truly recreative and profitable
conversation, they degenerate into flatness and shame, and are objects rather
of pity then envy. Men of business do not sell their moments to these
triflers; Conversation should whet and adorn our good parts, and the most
excellent endowments both of nature, industry and grace would grow dull and
effete without culture and exercise: let men choose their company as they ought,
and let them keep as much as they please; it is but to sit on a bright place,
and the Camelion it self is all shining: Men will contract both Color and
perfume from the qualities of their associates: This made Moses's face to
glister, and the Conversation of good men as well as bad, is alike contagious.

But it is objected that familiarity creates contempt. I reply, it was never
seen amongst those who know truly what it signified: it is one thing to be
civil, and affable, useful and accessible, without being impudent, rustic or
cheap in our addresses: They skill little of the pleasure and delices of a
worthy friendship, who know not how to enjoy, or preserve it without satiety;
that is left to the meaner sort, and was indeed not to have been instanced in so
generous a discourse. There is no better means to preserve our esteem with
others, then by setting a value on our selves.

To what is alleged of the variety private persons enjoy in their own
cogitations, and the reading of other men's books, so much superior to
Conversation, and the reading of men; One of the greatest Bookwriters in the
world will tell you; Cic. de Amicit.
that should a man ascend as high as Heaven it self, not by contemplation, only
but ocular intuition, and survey all the beauty and goodly motions of the
Stars; it would be little delight or satisfaction to him, unless he had some
body to communicate his speculations to; Sic natura solitarium nihil amat;
whence he nobly inferrs, how highly necessary Conversation is to friendship;
and that he must certainly be of no good nature, who does not prefer it
before all other enjoyments of life whatsoever: We know who it is has
pronounced the Vae soli, Eccles. 4. 10.
and how necessary God found the Conjngations of Mankind, without which nor had
the Earth been inhabited with Men, nor Heaven filled with Saints: Solomon says
Two are better then One, and a threefold cord is not easily broken; Eccles. 4.
9. 12.
and Plutarch tells us that of old they were wont to call men Photo, which
imports light; not only for the vehement desire which there is in him to know
and be known; but (as I would add) for it is universal communication; there
being few of whom it may be affirmed, as 'twas of Scipio, that he was never
less idle, than when alone, and which as the orator has it, do in Otio de
negotiis cogitare, and in solitudine secum loqui; But thus did those great
persons neither affect nor use it, other then as the greater Vessels and beaten
Ships after a storm, who go aside to trim and repair, and pass out again: So
he, tanquam in portum, and therefore by that Master of Eloquence, infinitely
preferred to those who quite retired out of business for ease and self
indulgence only: Seneca in his Book De Otio Sapientis totally condemns this
cogitative virtue, as a life without action, an imperfect and languishing good;
and in the same Chapter: Why does a Wiseman retire himself but as a Bow is
unbent ut cessando majora? instancing the recess of Zeno and Chrysippus, whose
very repose was it seems more busy than other men's actions: But let us hear
him speak; Tran.
what, says he! Solitude makes us love our selves, Conversation others; the one
to comfort, the other to heal; the one allays, the other whets and adds new
vigor: Nothing pleases always; and therefore God who has built us for labor,
provides us also refreshments: Socrates himself was not ashamed to play the
Child with Children; severe Cato took sometimes a chirping Cup; and Asinius
Pollio diverted himself after Pleading; and the wisest Legislators ordained
Holy Days, and some grave men took their pastime at Dinner, or walking in their
Gardens, and among their facetious friends, when the greatest Persons laid off
their State, constraint and other circumstances which their Characters obliged
them to personate; but they did never grow angry with business, and depose
themselves, for Multum interest, remittas aliquid an solvas, there is a wide
difference 'twixt relaxation and absolute relinquishing; and to imagine that
great persons have little repose, when twixt-every stroke of the Anvil the very
Smith has leisure to breathe, is an egregious mistake: The Compass which moves
in the largest Circle, has a limb of it fixed to the Center; and do we think
that Honor, Victory, and Riches (which render all things supportable, besides
the benefits which it is in the power of great Ones, to place on worthy
persons) are not pleasures equal to all other refreshments of the spirits? For
my part, I believe the capacity of being able to do good to deserving men, so
excessive a delight, that as it is nearest the life of God himself, so no
earthly felicity approches it; wherefore wisely (says Plutarch) did the
Ancients impose those names upon the Graces, to show that the joy of him that
does a kindness, exceeds that of the Beneficiary; many (says he) blushing when
they receive favors, but never when they bestow them.

As for Books, I acknowledge with the Philosopher, Sen.
Otium sine literis, to be the greatest infelicity in the world; but on the
other side, not to read men, and converse with living Libraries, is to deprive
our selves of the most useful and profitable of Studies: This is that
deplorable defect which universally renders our bookish men so pedantically
morose and impolish'd, and in a word, so very ridiculous: For, believe it Sir,
the Wisest men are not made in chambers and Closets crowded with shelves; but
by habitudes and active Conversations: There is nothing more stupid than some
of these (...) letter-struck men; for (...), Learning should not do men ill
Offices: Action is the proper fruit of Science, and therefore they should quit
the education of the college, when fit to appear in business, and take
Seneca's advice, Tamdiu istis immorandum, quamdiu nihil agere animus majus
potest; rudimenta sunt nostra, non opera: and I am able to prove that Persons
of the most public note for great Affairs, have stored the world with the most
of what it knows, even out of Books themselves: for such were Caesar, Cicero,
Seneca, both the plinys, Aristotle, Aesculus, Sophocles, Plato, Xenophon,
Polybius, not to omit these of later ages, and reaching even to our own doors,
in our Sidny, Verulam, Raleigh, the Count of Mirandula, Scaliger the Father,
Ticho Brache, Thuanus, Grotius, etc. profound men of letters, and so active in
their lives, as we shall find them to have managed the greatest of Public
Charges, not only of their native Countries, but some of them of the World it
self: Aelian has employed two entire Chapters expressly to vindicate
Philosophers from the prejudices and aspersions of those (who like our
Antagonist) deemed the study of it inconsistent with their administration of
Public Affairs: There he shows us that Zeleucus both constituted and reformed
the Locrian Republic; Var. hist. l. 3. 6. 17.
Charondas that of Catana, and after his Exile that of Rhegium: The Tarentine
was exceedingly improved by Archytas: Solon governed the Athenians; Bias and
Thales much benefited Ionia, Chilon the Lacedaemonians, and Pittacus that of
Mitylena: The Rhodians Cleobulus: and Anaximander planted a Colony at Apollonia
from Miletus: Xenophon was renowned for his military exploits, and approved
himself the greatest Captain amongst all the Greeks in the expedition of Cyrus,
who with many others perished: for when they were in a strait for want of one
to make good their retreat, he alone undertook and effected it. Plato the Son
of Aristo brought back Dio into Sicily; instructing him how he should subvert
the Tyranny of Dionysius: Only Socrates indeed deserted the care of the
Athenian Democraty, for that it more resembled a Tyranny; and therefore refused
to give his suffrage for the condemning those ten gallant Commanders, nor would
he by any means countenance the thirty Tyrants in any of their flagitious
actions: But when his dear Country lay at stake, then he cheerfully took up
Arms, and fought bravely against Delium, Amphipolis and Potidea: Aristotle when
his Country was not only reduced to a very low ebb, but almost utterly ruined,
restored her again: Demetrius Phalerius governed Athens with extraordinary
renown 'till their wonted malice expelled him; and yet after that, he enacted
many wholesome Laws, whilst he sojourned with King Ptolomy in Egypt: Who will
deny Pericles son of Xanthippus to have been a most profound philosopher? or
Epaminondas, Phocion, Aristides and Ephialtes the sons of Polymnes, Phocus,
Lysander and Sophonidas, and some time after Carneades and Critolans? who were
employed Ambassadors to Rome, and obtained a Peace, prevailing so far by their
Eloquence and discreet behavior, as that they used to say, the Athenians had
sent Ambassadors not to persuade them to what they pleased but to compel them:
Now can we omit Perseus his knowledge in Politics who instructed Antigonus; nor
that of the great Aristotle, who instituted the young, but afterward great
Alexander in the study of Letters; Lysis the Disciple of Pythagoras instructed
Epaminondas: I shall not need to importune you with more recitals (though he
resumes the same instances in the 14. Chapter of his 7th Book) to celebrate the
renown of Learned Men for their knowledge and success in arms, as well as in
civil government, where he tells us of Plato's exploit at Tanagra, and many
other great Scholars; but show you rather how he concludes: He (says AElian,
for it seems there were some admirers of solitude too before our days) that
shall affirm Philosophers to be (...)
unfit for public employment, and business, talks childishly, and like an
ignorant: and Seneca gives so harsh a term to those who pretended that public
affairs did hinder the progress of Letters, Ep. 62.
and the enjoyment of our selves, that the language would be hardly sufferable
from any save a stoic; Mentiuntur, says he Wise men do not subject themselves
to the employments they undertake, but accommodate and lend themselves to them
only: So as our Antagonist could not have chosen a Topic less to the advantage
of solitude, or the humor of his happy Celador, whilst being confined to
specnlation and Books alone, he deprives himself of that pleasing variety which
he contends for. These great men were men of Action, and men of Knowledge too,
and so may persons of the busiest employments, were they as careful to improve
their time and opportunities, as those glorious Heroes were: Which puts me in
mind of what I have heard solmnly reported; that it is an ordinary thing at
Amsterdam to find the same Merchant who in the morning was the busiest man in
the World at Exchange-time, to be reading Plato or Xenophon in Greek, or some
other of the learned Authors and Poets, at home in the afternoon. And there
is no man (says my Lord Bacon) can be so straightened, and oppressed with
business, and an active course of life, but he may reserve many vacant times
of leisure (if he be diligent to observe it, and how much he gives to play,
insignificant discourses, and other impertinences) whilst he expects the
returns, and tides of affairs; and his own Example has sufficiently illustrated
what he writes, whose studies and productions have been so obliging to the
Learned World, as have deservedly immortalized his name to Posterity.

But he proceeds, and indeed ingenuously acknowledges that men of letters are
in constraint, when they speak before great persons, and in Company: And can
you praise solitude for this virtue? Oh prodigious effect of Learning, That
those who have studied all their lives time to Speak, should then be mute, when
they have most occasion to speak! Loquere ut te videam said the philosopher;
but he would have men dumb and invisible too: The truth is, it is the only
reproach of men of Letters, that for want of liberal conversation some of them
appear in the world like so many fantosmes in black, and by declining a
seasonable exerting of themselves, and their handsome talents, which Use and
Conversation would cultivate and infinitely adorn; they leave occasion for so
many insipid and empty fopps to usurp their rights, and dash them out of
Countenance.

Francis the first, that great and incomparable Prince, Hist.
(as Sleidan calls him) was never brought up to Letters, yet by the reading of
good Translations, the delight he took to hear learned Discourses, and his
inviting of Scholars to converse freely with him upon all subjects and
occasions; he became not only very Eloquent, but singularly knowing: For this
doubtless it was, that Plutarch composed that express Treatise amongst his
Morals, Philosophandum esse cum Principibus, where he produces us several rich
Examples of these profitable effects: And indeed (says one) a Philosopher ought
not to be blamed for being a Courtier, and that we now and then find them in
the company of great and opulent Persons; nor imports it that you seldom see
their visits returned; since it is a mark he knows what he wants of
accomplishments, and of their ignorance, who are so indifferent for the
advantages they may derive from their Conversations. But I might proceed and
show you, not only what makes our learned book-worms come forth of their Cells
with so ill a grace into Company, but present you likewise with some of the
most specious Fruits of their so celebrated Recesses; were it not better to
receive what I would say from the lively Character which Seneca has long since
given us of them: In earnest, mavelous is the pains which some of them take
after an empty criticisme, to have all the points of Martial and Iuvenal ad
uuguem, the scraps of the ancient Poets to produce upon occasion: some are for
Roots, Genealogies, and Blazons; can tell you who married who, what his great
Grandfather was, and the Portion that came by his Aunt: This was of old (says
Seneca) the Epidemical disease, De brevitate Vitae.
for men to crack their brains to discover how many Oars Ulysses Gally carried;
whether it were first written Ilias or Odyssea; and a profound Student amongst
the learned Romans would recount to you who was the first Victor at Sea; when
Elephants came into use at Triumphs; and wounderful is the concern about
Caudex, for the derivation of Codices, Caudicarius, etc. Gellius or Agellius,
Vergilius or Virgilius, with the like trifles that make men idly busy indeed,
not better: yet are these amongst the considerable effects and rare productions
of Recess, Solitude, and Books, and some have grown old in the learning, and
been greatly admired for it: But what says our Philosopher to it? Cujus isti
errores minuent? Cujus cupiditates prement, quem fortiorem, quem justiorem,
quem liberaliorem facient? Who Is the better, less Covetous, more Valiant, Just,
or Liberal for them? I tell you Fabianus preferred Ignorance before this
unprofitable Science; and certainly therefore useful and Public Employment is
infinitely superior to it: If needs we will be Learned out of Books only, let
it be in something more useful; Qui fructuosa, non qui multa scit, sapit; for
it is no Paradox to affirm, a man may be learned and know but little, and that
the greatest Clerks, are not always the wisest men. Isocrat.
The Greek Orator gives us this description of usefully knowing men: Reckon not
those (says he) for Philosophers, whom you find to be acute Disputants, and
that can contest about every minute scruple; but those who discourse
pertinently of the most important Affairs: who do not entertain men about a
felicity, to which they can never arrive; but such as speak modestly of
themselves, and neither want Courage nor address on all emergencies; that are
not in the least discomposed with the common accidents of life, but that stand
unshaken amidst all vicissitudes, and can with Moderation support both Good and
Adverse Fortune; In sum, those who are fit for action, not discouraged, or
meditating retreats upon every cross adventure: to this purpose the Orator: But
neither would I by this be thought to discountenance even this kind of
Erudition, which more than any other is the effect of Solitude, and very great
leisure, not to call it Pedantry; much less Bookish and Studious persons, who
would prove the most dear to Princes and Great men of all other Conversations,
had they such generous encouragements, as might sometimes invite them to leave
their beloved Recesses, as did those great Philosophers whom we have brought on
the Stage: But we bestow more now a days in painting a Scene, and the expense
of a ridiculous farce, than in rewarding of the Poet, or a good Historian,
whose Laurels no longer thrive and are verdant, then they are irriguous and
under showrs of Gold, and the constellations of Crowns, for which they give
immortality even to Crowns themselves: For what would there remain of so many
Pyramids and Obeliscs of Marble, so many Amphitheaters, Circs, Colosses, and
enormous Pomps, if Books and Book-men aere perenniores, did not preserve them
to posterity? If under Heaven then there be any thing Great, and that approches
Eternity, it is from their hands who have managed the Pen: It Is from their
labors (Ye Great Ones) that you seek to live, and are not forgotten as the dust
you lie mingled with: Never had we heard of Achilles but for poor Homer; never
of the Exploits of thousands more, but from the Books and Writings of Learned
men, who have it in their power, to give more luster to their Heroes, than their
Crowns, and Purple; and can with one dash of their pen, kill more dead, then a
stab, with a Stiletto.

There is no man alive that more affects a Country life then my self, no man it
may be, who has more experienced the delices of it: But even those without
action were intolerable: You will say it is not public: If it contribute and
tend to it, what wants it but the name and the sound? For he does not mean by
business to reside only in Cities or Courts; since without that of the Country,
there would neither be Court nor City: But if he would have this life spent
only in Theory and Fancy, Ecstasy and Abstractions, 'twere fitter for Bedlam,
and a potion of Helebor, then for sober men, whose lives and healths, wits and
understanding were given them for action, and not to sit with their arms a
cross, and converse with shadows; whilst the fates of Pythagoras, Archimedes
and Pliny, whose curiosity cost them their lives, may well be ranked amongst
those whom he is pleased to name the nobly senseless, as far indeed
transported beyond themselves, as they had transported themselves beyond the
world: But

It is after he has celebrated the Pedant for being enchanted at the story of
Pompey, that he again introduces the Country Gentleman, whose easy and
insignificant life is preferred before that of the happiest favorite; and can
be as well pleased with a few bawling Currs, or what he calls an happy chase,
as with the acquisition of the most useful Office in the State. But does he
call this solitude and recesse? Ep. 55.
It Is exceeding pretty what Seneca observes of Servillus Vatia, who, it seems,
had long retired himself to the most pleasant part of the Baiae: There it was
(says he) that this Gentleman passed his time, and had never been known but
from his famous solitude: No man eat, nor drank better: He had rare fish ponds
and Parks (I suppose he kept good Hawks, and excellent Dogs) in sum, he was
thought the only happy man; for arrive what would, as to change in the
Commonwealth, Vatia still enjoyed himself; and o Vatia (they used to say) tu
solus scis vivere: For my part (adds my Author) I never passed by his house,
but I cried Vatia hic situs est; Here lies Vatia; esteeming him as dead and
buried, whom others thought the only man alive: De brevitate vitae, c. 11. 12.
But he proceeds; There are a number (says he) who seem to have abandoned the
World, that are as full of business in their Villas, and Rural retirements, as
other men who live in Towns and Cities; and trouble themselves extremely in
their very solitude: Though there be no body with them, yet are they never in
Repose: Of these we must not say their life is idle, but an idle Occupation: Do
you fancy him retired that goes a madding after Medals and Curiosities, and
spends his time in raking a Tinkers Shop for a rusty piece of Copper? or that
is dieting and breathing his Jockies for the next Running-match? or that
consumes his time trifling amongst Barbers, razing and sprucing himself,
Powdering, Combing, and summoning a Council upon every Hair; raging like an
Hector at a slip of the Scissars, or a lock out of curl? and of which sort of
wretches there are some who had rather see the Commonwealth out of order, than
one of their hairs: Call you these Retired and at Rest, who are so eternally
inter pectinem speculumque occupati? or those who are always humming or
whistling of a Tune as they go about? These Persons (says Seneca) are not in
Repose, but impertinently active: If at any time they make a Feast, there is
nothing more pretty than to observe but the grave consultations about plaiting
of the Nappery, ordering the Plate and Glasses, and setting out the Services: O
how sollicitous shall you have them, that the Courses come up in time, that the
Fowl be skilfully carved, and the Sauces exquisitely made! and all this
forsooth, that men may say; Such a one knows how to treat, lives handsomely and
at his Ease, etc. when, God knows, all this while, they are of all other in the
most miserable anxiety: There were of these soft and retired Gentlemen, that
had their Officers to mind them when 'twas time to go to Supper, and abandoned
themselves so prodigiously to their ease, that they hardly knew when they were
hungry: I read of one of them, who when he was lifted out of his Bath and put
on his Cushion, asked his attendants, whether he sat or stood, and was so
buried in sloth, that he could not tell it without Witnesses: Such another we
have in Stobaeus that was wont to demand of his men, if he had washed, and
whether he had dined or no? 'Twere endless to proceed with the like instances
of retired Persons, and who seem to be so full of self-enjoyment, and yet whose
very pleasures are of the lowest and the sordid'st actions of our life: What
shall we then say of our lazy Gamesters, who sit long at the Cards, the Wine
and the smoke, without a grain of Sense from dinner to midnight? because they
are all of them slothful diversions, inactive, and opposed to Public
Employment; since those who are qualified with Business, and have any thing to
do in the world, cannot part with such portions of their time to so little
purpose: By all which we see, that Ease and Solitude presents us with some
pleasures that are not altogether so fit for our recreation, and as little
suitable to our reason and stoical indifferency; nor seldom less dangerous and
ridiculous in their objects than the most Public Employment: For I find that
one of the chief Prerogatives of our happyman (and whom by a contradiction to
his Argument, he thinks ill defined by being termed a little World) is by the
advantage of his recess to mould Ideas of a thousand Species, never yet in
being; and to use his own expression, produce more Monsters than Africa it
self, more Novelties than America; to fancy Building, Navies, Courts, Cities,
and Castles in the Air.

On the other side, do we think that men of Business never vacate to admire the
Works of Nature, because they possess so many Works of Art? I have sufficiently
showed how competent Philosophy is with Public Employment; and instanced in as
great Persons as ever the World produced; and yet I said nothing of Moses,
learned in all that Egypt knew; Acts 7. 22.
nor of Solomon, to whom God gave Wisdom and Understanding exceeding much; 1
Reg. 4. 29, 33.
that spoke of Trees and Plants; of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, and Reptiles; those
fruitful subjects of natural experience: And as to that of Astrology, and those
other parts of Mathematics which he mentions, we have derived to us more
Science from Princes, Chaldean, Arabian, and Egyptians, than from all the
World besides. The great Caesar was so skilful, that with admirable success he
reformed the Year, when to perfect that sublime knowledge, he was wont (even
when his Army lay in the Field) to spend so much of his time in studious
pernoctations. -- media inter praelia semper
Stellarum, Lucan.
Coelique plagis, superisque vacarit.
Alphonsus the tenth King of Spain was Author of those Tables which adorn his
memory to this day: And Charles the Second, Emperor of Germany, was both a
profound Astronomer and great Mathematician; Arts which have been so
conspicuous and lucky in Princes, and men of the most Public Employment; as if
those high and lofty Studies did indeed only appertain to the highest, and most
sublime of men.

But if the unmeasurable pursuit of Riches have plunged so many great Ones into
Vices, and frequently become their ruin; we may find more private Persons, who
neither Built, Feasted, nor Gam'd, as greedy and oppressive; defrauding even
their own bellies, and living in steeples, squalid Cottages and sordid Corners
to gratify an unsatiable avarice; and that have no other testimony to prove
they have lived long, besides their Ease, their avarice, and the number of
their Years: None to appearance more Wise and Religious than these Wretches,
whose Apology is commonly their declining of power, and contempt of worldly
vanities: The sole difference which seems to be between them, is, that the
great Rich-man disposes of his Estate in building some august Fabric or
Public Work, which cultivates, Art, and employs a world of poor men that earn
their bread; and that the other unprofitably hoards it up: Besides, that
Covetousness seldom goes unaccompanied with other secret and exterminating
Vices. But the wisest of men has said so much, and so well concerning this Evil
under the Sun, Eccles.
that I shall only need address you to his Book of Vanities: As for the
Recreative part of Solitude, which he again resolves here into Hunting,
Hawking, Angling, and the like: Would any man think it in earnest when he
undertakes to oppose them to an useful and active life? But even as to these
also, who is it more enjoy them than those that can best support them? whereas
they are Pleasures which for the most part undo private Persons, and draw
expenses along with them, to the ruin of some no inconsiderable Families.

For the rest which he mentions as sinful and of so ill report, I cannot
suppose that all Great men affect them, because I know of many who detest them;
nor that all private Persons use them not, because I know of too many which do.

The greatest Persons of Employment are frequently the simplest and plainest in
their Apparel, and enjoy that prerogative above the meaner sort, that they
make their Ease indeed their Mode, and can adopt it into Fashion without any
note of singularity: Herein therefore they are worthy of imitation; for I
suppose he will not rank the Gallants of the Anti-chambers and Hectors of the
Town amongst the Garbati and Men of Fashion in the sense of his Essay: For my
part, I take no more notice of these gay things, than of so many feathers and
painted Kixes that the giddy air tosses about; and therefore cannot so much as
consider them in a Paragraph. The same may I affirm of Food, as of Clothes: For
though great men keep nobler Tables (or at least should do) yet no man
constrains them to intemperance; and if they be persons of real employment
indeed, they will procure as good an appetite to their meat, as those who
Thrash, and do the most laborious exercise: And the affairs of many are so
methodical and regular, that there is nothing more admirable then their
excellent Economy; Romans 12. 13.
besides the honor of their hospitality, 1 Timothy 3. 2.
which I take to be an Evangelical and shining Virtue; Tit. 1. 8
not to praetermit the benefit which even a whole Country receives by liberal
Tables; 1 Pet. 4
for so the Grazier and the Farmer are made able to pay their Rents, assist the
Public and support their Families.

So that when he has done all, and run through all the topics of his promising
Frontispiece; turned it to all sides and lights, he is at last, I find, obliged
to acknowledge, that Public Employment and an active life is at least
necessary, nay preferrable even in his own estimation of it. For, if (as he
says) it be the object of our duty, it is undoubtedly to be preferred before
our choice; since the depravedness of our Nature, tenders that (for the most
part) amiss. We seldom elect the best.

He would have men in Employment, only he would have them drawn to it (like
Bears to the stake) or never to serve their Country, till it were sinking; as
if a Statesman or a Pilot could be made on an instant, and emerge a
Politician, a Secretary of State or a Soldier like Cincinnatus from the
Plough: But no man certainly is made an artificer so soon: Nemo repent says
the Proverb; and I suppose there is required as much dexterity, at least, to
the making of a Statesman, as to the making of a Shoe, and yet no man sets up
that mystery without a an Apprentiship: The truth is, and I confess, this
petulant and hasty pretending of men to places of Charge in the Commonwealth,
without a natural aptitude, a praevious and solid disposition to business is
the bane of States; Men should not immoderately press into employment; it is a
sacred thing, and concerns the well-being of so great a body, as nothing can be
more prejudicial to it than the ignorant experiments of State Emperics, and raw
Counselors; though I do not deny that some young persons are of early hopes,
and have in all Ages been admitted to no mean degrees of access; Augustus,
Tyberius and Nero entered very young into affairs, and Pompey we know Triumphed
betimes: Let men be early Great on Gods name, if men be early fit for it; they
shall have my vote, and 'twas wittily said of one of the Scipios (who was
another young Gentleman of early maturity) se sat annorum habiturum, si P. To.
voluerit, that he should soon be old enough, if the people pleased: and
accordingly the people thought fit to send him General into Spain, which he
reduced into a Roman Prov^nce by his valor and discretion, when so many older
men refused the charge for the difficulty of the enterprise, and the
miscarriage of their predecessors: Great men therefore should not like
overgrown Trees, too much shade the subnascent plants, and young Imps, who
would grow modestly under their influence; but receive, protect and encourage
them by inductive opportunities and favorable entrances to inform and produce
their good parts, preserving the more arduous difficulties to the Aged and more
Experienced. This noble and worthy Comity of Great men in place, Plutarch has
much commended in that excellent discourse of his, Anseni gerenda sit Repub.
But as I said, it became not every one to aspire; so I cannot but pronounce it
glorious to those, who are accomplished for it, and can be useful to their
generation in the most important affairs, and aleviation of the common burden:
But if all Wise persons who have qualified Geniu's, cannot attain to be (as it
were) Intelligences in these sublimer Orbs of public administration; let them
gratify themselves yet with this, that (as the Philosopher says) every
virtuous man is a Magistrate; and that Seneca, Zeno, Chrysippus and infinite
others, have done as much for the public by their Writings and Conversation
only, as the greatest Politicians of their times; and withal consider, how
difficult a Province he assumes, who does at all engage himself in public
business; since if he govern ill, he shall displease God, if well, the people:
At least call to mind that prudent answer of Antisthenes, who being demanded
quomodo ad Rempub. accedendum? how he should address himself to Public
Affairs; replied, as to the Fire; neither too near for fear of scorching, nor
yet too far off, lest he be starved with cold: And I confess the suffrage is so
Axiomatical with me, that I know no mediocrity I would sooner recommend to a
person whom I loved, whilst as to an absolute and final retreat, though it
appear indeed great in story, provided the resignation be not of compulsion, I
should in few cases approve the action; it is (as Seneca has it) Ex vivorum
numero exire antequam morieris, to die even before death, and as afterward he
adds, ultimum malorum: Counsel is with the gray-head; Job. 12. 12.
and for men whom Experience in public Affairs has ripn'd and consummated, to
withdraw aside, praesages ill: With reverence be it spoken; No man putting his
hand to that Plow, Luke 9. 62.
and looking back is fit for so high a Service.

I know whose advice it is; That since Governors of States, and men of Action,
Plutarch prac. de Rep. regend.
Favorites, and Prime Ministers cannot always secure themselves of Envy and
Competifion, they should so order Circumstances, as sometimes to hold the
People in kind of appetite for them; by letting them a little feel the want of
their influence and addresses, to solve and dispatch the weighty and knotty
affairs of State. For thus did the African Scipio retire into the Country to
alay his emulous delators, and some others have more voluntarily receded; but
frequently without success: For as Envy never makes Holy Day; so, nor does
distance of place protect men from her malignity; and therefore Seneca, De
Tranq. c. 3.
does some where describe with what flying colors Men of business (even in the
greatest infelicities of times, and when it may be there is a kind of necessity
of more caution) should manage their retreat from action. But in the mean time
let those who desire to take their turns, attend, in the name of God, till it
fairly invites them; I am not for this praepostrous rotation suggested in our
Essay; 'twas born to Oceana, and I hope shall never manage scepter, save in her
Romantic Commonwealth since, should great men foresee their Employments were
sure to determine in so short a space; the temptation to rapine, and injustice
(which he there instances in) would prove infinitely more prejudicial: Frequent
changes of Officers, are but like so many thirsty spunges, which affect only to
be filled, and invite to be squeezed; and therefore 'twas wittily insinuated by
the Apologue, That the Fox would not suffer the Hedgehog to chase away the
Flies, and Ticks that sucked him, lest when those were replete, more hungry
ones should succeed in their places. But the rest is closed with a florid
Aplogy for Ease (not to give it a less tender adjunst) in the specious
pretenses of Contemplation and Philosophy, opposed to those little indifferent
circumstances, which the vainer people, who yet converse with the world without
any considerable design, are obnoxious to; whilst there is no notice taken of
the vanity of some men's Contemplations, the dangers and temptation of Solitude,
which has no other occupation superior to that of Animals, but that it thinks
more, and acts less, and cannot in his estimate be wise or happy without being
morose and uncivil: Doubtless Action is the enamel of virtue; and if any
instance produced in that large Paragraph merit the consideration, it is when
it exerts it self in something profitable to others; since those who have
derived knowledge the most nicely, according to the Philosophy he so amply
pleads for, to degrade man of his most political capacity, ^Eth. c. 2.
(ranking him beneath Bees, Ants, and Pigeons, who affect not company more
passionately than man;) allow him Society as one of the main ingredients of his
definition: and it is plain immanity says Cicero to fly the congress and the
conversation of others, when even Timon was not able to endure himself alone;
no, though man had all that Nature could afford him to render him happy,
Society only denied him; quis tam esset ferreus? who could have the heart to
support it? Solitude alone would imbitter the fruits of all his satisfactions:
And verily Solitude is repugnant to Nature; and whilst we abandon the Society
of others, we many times converse with the worst of men, our selves. But
neither is the life and employment of our Sociable Creature taken up (as has
sufficiently been showed) in those empty impertinencies he reckons; nor as a
Christian in Ideas only, but in useful practice; and Wisdom is the result of
experience; experience of repeated acts.

Let us therefore rather celebrate Public Employment and an Active Life, which
renders us so nearly allied to Virtue, defines and maintains our Being,
supports Societys, preserves Kingdoms in peace, protect them in War; has
discovered new Worlds, planted the Gospel, increases Knowledge, cultivates
Arts, relieves the afflicted; and in sum, without which, the whole Universe it
self had been still but a rude and indigested Caos: Or if (to vie Landskips
with our Celador) you had rather see it represented in Picture: Behold here a
Sovereign sitting in his august Assembly of Parliament enacting wholesome Laws:
next him my Lord Chancellor and the rest of the reverend Judges and Magistrates
dispensing them for the good of the People: Figure to your self a Secretary of
State, making his dispatches and receiving intelligence; a Statesman
countermining some pernicious Plot against the commonwealth: Here a General
bravely Embattailing his Forces and vanquishing an Enemy: There a Colony
planting an Island, and a barbarous and solitary Nation reduced to Civility;
Cities, Houses, Forts, Ships building for Society, shelter, defense, and
Commerce. In another Table, the poor relieved and set at work, the naked clad,
the oppressed delivered, the Malefactor punished, the Labourer busied, and the
whole World employed for the benefit of Mankind: In a word, behold him in the
nearest resem^lance to his Almighty maker, always in action, and always doing
good.

On the reverse now, represent to your self, the goodliest piece of the
Creation, sitting on a Cushion picking his teeth, His Country-Gentleman taking
Tobacco, and sleeping after a gorgeous meal: There walks a Contemplator like a
Ghost in a Churchyard, or sits poring on a book whiles his family starves:
Here lies a Gallant at the foot of his pretty female, sighing and looking
babies in her eyes, whilst she is reading the last new Romance and laughs at
his folly: On yonder rock an Anchorite at his beads: There one picking daisies,
another playing at push-pin, and abroad the young Potcher with his dog and kite
breaking his neighbors hedges, or trampling over his corn for a Bird not worth
sixpence: This, sitts lowsing himself in the Sun, that, quivering in the cold:
Here one drinks poison, another hangs himself; for all these, and a thousand
more seem to prefer solitude and an inactive life as the most happy and
eligible state of it: And thus have you Land-skip for your Land-skip.

The result of all is, Solitude produces ignorance, renders us barbarous, feeds
revenge, disposes to envy, creates Witches, dispeoples the World, renders it a
desert, and would soon dissolve it: And if after all this yet, he admit not an
Active life to be by infinite degrees more noble; let the Gentleman whose first
Contempla^^ve piece he produces to establish his his Discourse, Seraphic Love.
confute him by his Example; since I am confident, there lives not a Person in
the World, whose moments are more employed then Mr. Boyles, and that more
confirms his contemplations by his actions and experience: And if it be
objected, that his employments are not public, I can assure him, there is
nothing more public, than the good he is always doing.

How happy in the mean time were it for this ingenious Adventure, could it
produce us more such examples; were they but such as himself; for I cannot
imagine, but that he who. Writes so well, must Act well; and that he who
declames against Public Employment in Essay, would refuse to Essay a Public
Employment that were worthy him. These Notices are not the result of inactive
contemplation only, but of a public, refined and generous spirit: Or if in
truth I be mistaken, I wish him store of Proselytes, and that we had more such
solitary Gentlemen that could render an account of their Retirements, and
whilst they argue against Conversation (which is the last of the Appanages he
disputes against) prove the sweetest Conversation in the World.

FINIS.

