An Exact and Faithful RELATION OF THE PROCESS Pursued by Dame Margaret
Areskine, Lady Castle-haven, Relict of the Deceased Sir James Foulis of
Collingtoun; against Sir James Foulis now of Collingtoun; before the Lords of
Council and Session.

WITH CERTAIN REMARKS Upon the Import and Extent of PROTESTATIONS For Remeed of
LAW in General: And in Particular upon the Protestation or Appeal offered by
the LADY.

EDINBVRGH, Printed at the Society of Stationers Printing-h^^^^ Harts-Close,
over against the Trane Church (...)

An Exact and Faithful RELATION OF THE PROCESS Pursued by Dame Margaret
Arsekine, Lady Castle-haven, Relict of the Deceased Sir James Foulis of
Collingtoun: Against Sir James Foulis now of Collingtoun; before the Lords of
Council and Session.
DAme Margaret Areskine Lady Castlehaven. having succumbed in a Process pursued
at her Instance, against Sir James Foulis of Collingtoun: She did Appeal and
Protest for Remeed of Law, against the Interloquitor of the Lords of Session:
And in prosecution thereof, has caused Print and publish a Petition to be
presented by her to the High Court of Parliament: In which she does not offer
any distinct Relation of the Process, Debate, or Decision; but satisfies her
self with general groundless Assertions of the Justice of her Cause, and of the
Iniquity of the Decision; whereby she pretends, All Faith in Contracts is
Violated, the Law which ought to protect Widows, wrested to their Ruin: And
fraud, and indirect Dealings, are not only encouraged, but owned to be the
design of Law: And which Decision, as it is pretended, Does impugn Law,
Equity, Justice, and Honesty.

The Lady has not thought fit to disperse or publish any part of the Process,
or Debate upon which the Interloquitor proceeded, For verifying of this great
Charge against the Supreme Ordinary Court of Justice in the Nation, whom our
Predecessors thought worthy to be the Depositars of the Securities of their
own, and our, Properties and Possessions; but she is pleased to lay the weight
of all upon her own Assertion: And albeit bold Calumnies do oft-times leave
some Impression; yet this being a matter of the highest Concern, to the
Interest and quiet of all, (not only those who have Process depending, but such
as may have them) It cannot be unacceptable, that Collingtoun should publish to
the World the whole Process and Debate upon which the Interloquitor of the
Lords of Session proceeded; which indeed had been the proper part of the Lady,
who makes the Complaint: By which means, either the Lady's Charge will be made
good, or otherwise the Justice of Collingtoun's Defenses, and the Integrity of
the Lords will be Vindicate, and the Nation satisfied and quieted in the
Evidence, that their Rights and Securities are safely lodged: And it is left to
the Judgment of all unbyassed persons, whether the former, or latter does
appear, upon perusal and consideration of the Process, which follows, with so
great Candor and Favor to the Lady, that no part of her Claim, or any Evidence
thereof produced is omitted; though several Decreets and Instructions produced
for Collingtoun be forborne; least the Process might thereby appear too prolix.

Copy of the Lady's Contract of Marriage.
AT Edinburgh the first day of June one thousand six hundred and sixty one
years: It is Appointed, Agreed, Contracted and Ended, betwixt the Honorable
Parties following, to wit, Sir James Foulis of Collingtoun Knight, one of the
Senators of the College of Justice, on the one part: And Dame Margaret
Areskine, Relict of Vmwhile Sir Joh. Mckenie of Tarbat, on the other part; in
Manner, Form, and Effect following: That is to say, the foresaids Parties Binds
and Obliges them to Solemnizat and Accomplish the Holy Band of Marriage each of
them with the other in face of Holy Kirk, with all Solemnities requisite;
betwixt the date hereof, and the (...) day of (...) next to come but longer
delay. In Contemplation of the which Marriage, the said Sir James Foulis Binds
and Obliges him, to Renounce, Quite-claim and Over-give: Likeas, he by their
Presents, Renounces, Quite-claims and Over-gives, all Right, Tittle and
Interest, which he jure mariti can have claim or pretend, in and to the said
Dame Margaret her Conjunct-Fee, and Liferent-Lands, Teynds, and others
belonging to her, wherever the samen lie within this Kingdom, declaring the
generality of this present Renounciation to be as sufficient, as if the said
haill Conjunct-Fee, or Liferent-Lands, Teynds, and others were insert and set
down here intill: Renouncing all Benefit of the Law, or other Benefit
whatsoever, either competent, or that may accress to him by this Contract, or
by the subsequent Marriage, or by any manner of way whatsoever, to her said
Conjunct-Fee, or Liferent-Lands, or any part thereof, for now and ever; in
Favors of her self to be used and disposed of at her pleasure. And by their
Presents, does take his hazard of what he may have otherwise by the said Dame
Margaret. And farther, The said Sir James Foulis by their Presents, Binds and
Obliges him, his Heirs, Executors and Successors, That in case it shall happen
him at any time, during the Marriage betwixt him and the said Dame Margaret, to
Conquesce and Acquire any sums of Money, Lands, or Heretages; or to Receive
payment of Sums of Money due to him, in that case to Employ the samen, And take
the Rights and Securities thereof in Favors of himself, and the said Dame
Margaret the longest Liver of them two, in Conjunct-fee and Life rent; and to
the Heirs-male to be Procreat betwixt them; Whilks failing, to the said Sir
James his other Heirs, who are appointed to succeed him in his other Lands and
Heretages. And in case their shall be no Heirs Male, but Female; The said Sir
James Binds and Obliges him and his forsaids, to provide them to the half of
the said Conquest; and the other half thereof to pertain and belong to the said
Sir James his other Heirs foresaids. Which Provision above-written, the said
Dame Margaret accepts, likeas it is hereby declared, That the samen is granted
and provided to her, ard Heirs foresaids to be Procreat of the said Marriage,
in full contentation and satisfaction of all other Conjunct-Fee, Terce, Third,
Right of Movables, Heretage, or any other Right whatsoever; except allennarly
the Manor, Place, and Dwelling House of Collingtoun, and Yairds thereof, which
are hereby appointed and allotted to the said Dame Margaret for a
Dwelling House during her Lifetime. Providing always she sufficiently Maintain
and Uphold the said House, and Houses in as good Condition, as they shall be
in, at the time of the said Sir James his Decease: And that she shall not
Directly, or Indirectly be her self, or any others in her Name, or at her
Direction, cut, or destroy any manner of growing Trees, or Planting about the
said House or Yairds, or within any part of the Bounds of Collingtoun, for no
pretext nor use whatsoever. And for the more Security, both the said Parties
are content and consent that their Presents be insert and Registrat in the Books
of Council and Session, or in the Court Books of any other competent Judge
within this Kingdom; to have the strength of an Decree of any of the said
Judges, and their Authority Interponed thereto, that executorials of Horning
upon an simple Charge of ten days and others competent, may be direct
hereupon: And for that effect Constituts -- Their Procurators, promitten de
Rato, etc. In witness whereof, both the said parties have Subscribed their
presents, (which are written be Alexander Keith, Servitor to Mr. Andrew Gilmour
Advocate) day, place and year of God above written. Before their Witnesses, Sir
William Murray of Dreghorne Master of His Majesty's Works, and Sir John Foulis
of Ravelstone Younger. Sic Subscribitur Ja. Foulis, M. Areskine, W. Moray
witness, Jo. Foulis witness.

Double of the Summonds, Dame Margaret Areskine against Sir James Foulis of
Collingtoun.
JAmes, etc. Forsuameikle as it is humbly meaned and showen to us by our Lovet
Dame Margaret Areskine Relict of the Deceased Sir James Foulis of Collingtoun,
late Justice Clerk, and one of the Senators of our College of Justice. That
where the said persuer therein designed Relict of the Deceased Sir John Mekenie
of Tarbat be her Letters of Assignation and Disposition Subscribed with her
Hand, of the date the last day of May 1661. years (for the Causes therein
specified) Sold, Assigned, Transferred and Disponed from her, her Airs and
Assigneys; to and in Favors of Mr. Adam Cunningham of Woodhall his Airs and
Assigns whatsomever: All and hail her Life-rent Right of the Lands, Teynds and
others after specified, to wit, Of all and sundry the Lands and Barrony of
Innerteil, therein comprehending the Maynes of Innerteil, Manor, Place,
Houses, Biggings, Yards, Orchards, Dowcat and pertinents thereof, Bridge, and
Lands of Bridgelands, called the Village of St. Katherines, with the Chapel of
St. Katherines, and Gift of Chapellanry of the samen, with the Houses about the
said Chapel, and special Pendicle of the said Lands, called St. Germans-Aiker;
together with all Edifices, Yards, Tofts, Crofts, Coals, Coalheughs, Lyme and
Lyme-quarrel, with the Mylne, Mylne-lands and Multurs of the samen, Salmond
Fishing, and other Fishings, as well in Salt as Fresh Waters, annexis,
connexis, parts, pendicles and pertinents whatsomever of all and sundry the
Lands and Barrony of Innerteil, lyand within the Sheriffdom of Fife as
principal: And also of all and sundry the Lands and Barrony of Glengarnock,
comprehending the special and particular Lands therein mentioned; and that in
special Warrandice and Security of the said Lands and Barony of Innerteil: And
sick like of all and hail the half Lands of over and nether Tyries; with
Houses, Biggings and Pertinents thereof, lyand within the: Regality of
Dalkeith, Constabulary of Kinghorne and Sheriffdom of Fife, wherein the said
Dame Margaret Areskine persuer was infest upon the 25 day of February 1645.
Years; and siclike of all and sundry the Teynd Shaves of all and hail the said
lands of Innerteil and Bridgelands of Innerteil with all and sundry parts,
pendicles and pertinents thereof, and of all and sundry the teynd sheaves of
all and haill the lands of Sea-field and the said half lands of Tyrie, with
their parts, pendicles, and pertinents above mentioned; And alse of all and
haill the teynd sheaves of all and sundry the lands of Balbartuon, mylnelands
thereof and pertinents of the samen; and of all and sundry the teynd sheaves of
all and haill the lands of Morislands with their pertinents all lying in the
said Parochin of easter Kinghorn, and shirefdome of Fife, and pertaining to the
parsonage of the said paroch Kirk, specified and contained in an Tack set be
the Earl of Kinghorn to the deceast Sir, George Areskin then of Innerteil, and
Dame Isabel Bruce his Spouse, and assigned be them to the said persuer,
together with the Fruits, Rents, Emoluments and duties of the samen, Males,
Ferms Kaynes, Customs, Casualities Tack-duties and other services and duties
due and payable to the said Dame Margaret Areskin for the said Lands, Stock
and Teynd thereof, and that during the second Marriage. With power to him to
Call Follow and Pursue therefore, Decreets and Sentences thereupon to recover,
and to remove and output Tennents therintil and to do all other things requisite
annent the premises; And thereby made and constitute the said Mr. Adam
Cunnigham her Cessioner and Assigney in and to the foresaids Rights and
Disposition of the samen: As the said Assignation and Disposition of the date
foresaid at more length proports Like as the said Mr, Adam Cunningham be his
letters of Translation of the dait the last day of May 1661 years for the
causes therein expressed) sold, assigned, transferred, and disponed to and in
favors of the deceast Mr. Alex. Foulis of Ratho, the foresaid Right and
Disposition of the Conjunct-Fee Lands, Teynds and others above wirttten made
and granted be the said persuer to him in manner above expressed; and surrogate
(...) Translation and Disposition of the date foresaid, at more length bears,
And sicklike, the said Deceased Mr. Alexander Foulis of Ratho be his back-band
subscribed with his Hand of the date, the last day of May 1661 years (Narrating
the foresaid Assignation granted be the said persuer to the said Mr. Adam
Cunningham and the foresaid Translation granted be the said Mr. Adam to the
said Deceased Mr. Alexander Foulis) Mentioning, that the said Vmwhile Mr.
Alexander Foulis, taking to consideration, that the said Assignation,
Translation and Disposition, and Right of Life-rent foresaid therein mentioned,
was made and granted to him, no ways for his own use, Utilitie, and Benefit,
but that the samen was only made use of in his Name, and the same borrowed
thereto, for the use, Utilitie, and Profit of the said Deceased Sir James
Foulis of Collingtoun, and the said persuer his Spouse during all the days of
their Lifetime jointly for the Intertainment and Aliment of their Family
allennerly, and upon their express Terms, that the samen, or any parts thereof
should not be liable to be affected directly or indirectly with the burding of
the said persons their Debts, bygone, present, or to come; and that none of
their Creditors should have any Action against the samen, or any part thereof:
Therefore he band and obleist him to denude himself of the said Life-rent
Right, and of all Right, Tittle and Interest which he either had, or could
have, claim or pretend thereto, or any part thereof: Likeas, the said Deceased
Mr. Alexander Foulis be the Tenor of the said Band per verba de eodem, did
denude himself and his Airs therein mentionat thereof; and Band and Obleist him
and his foresaids to Dispone, likeas he thereby Assigned. Transferred and
Disponed the said Life-rent Right, withal Right, Title and Interest, Claim of
Right, or Possession which he had, or could pretend thereto, To and in Favors
of the said deceast Sir James, and the said persuer in manner foresaid, with
Power to them to use and Dispone thereupon at their pleasure; for the use and
effect foresaid allennerly, and upon the express Provisions and Conditions
above written, and no other ways; And in case it should happen the said
Persevere to survive the said Deceased Sir James Foulis her Husband. It is
thereby declared, That in that Case the foresaid Right of Life-rent
abovewritten was only in trust and to her own proper use and behove; like as in
the forsaid case the said deceased Mr. Alexander Foulis band and obleist him
and his forsaids, to transfer the premises in favors of the said persewar,
like as he thereby transferred the samen in her Favors: As the said back band
of the date forsaid, insert and registrated in the Books of our Council and
Session upon the 17 of January. 1667 years more fully proports. And in like
manner be Contract of Marriage past betwixt the said deceased Sir James Foulis
of Collingtoun, and the said perswar on the ane and other parts, of the Date,
the first day of June and year of God foresaid 1661 years, in contemplation of
the Marriage then Contracted and thereafter solemnized, the said deceased Sir.
James Foulis band and obleist him, to Renounce, Quite-claim and overgive, like
as he thereby renounced quite claimed and overgave, all Right Title and
Interest which he Jure mariti could have claim or pretend in and to the said
persuer her conjunct-fie or lyfe-rent Lands, Teynds and others belonging to her
wherever the samen lie within this our Kingdom, Renouncing thereby all Benefit
of the Law, or other Benefit whatsomever whilks might accrue to him by the said
Contract or any manner of way whatsomever, to her said conjunct fie or Liferent
Lands or any part thereof for ever, In Favors of the said persuer, to be used
and disposed of at her pleasure, and did thereby take his hazard of what he
might have otherwise by the said persuar, And further the said deceased Sir
James boulis did thereby bind and obleis him his airs executors and successors,
that in case it should happen him at any time during the Marriage betwixt him
and the said persuer, To conqueis and acquire any sumes of money, lands or
heretages, or to receive payment of sumes of money due to him, In that case, to
employ the same and take the rights and securities thereof in favors of himself
and the said persewar the longest liver of them two in conjunct-fie or lifrent,
^ the said Vmwhile Sir James, his other Airs who are appointed to succeed him
in his other Lands and Heretages: As the said Contract of Marriage of the date
foresaid Insert and Registrat in the Books of Our Council and Session upon the
said 17 day of January 1667. years likewayes more fully proports. And true it
is, and of verity, that the said Vmwhile Sir James Foulis the said persewers
Husband during the time of the foresaid Marriage hes Conquest and Acquired, and
hes received payment of sums due to him, which will extend to the sum of two
hundredth and threescore thousand Merks, which by the foresaid Contract he was
obleist to employ and secure upon Lands and Heretages, and take the Rights and
Securities thereof, in Favors of himself and the said persewer, the longest
liver of them two: And by the foresaid Back-band the Mailles and Duties of the
said Lyferent Lands, provided to the said Persewer in manner foresaid,
extending yearly to the number of thirty six Chalders of Victual, was to be
Employed for the Maintenance of the said Deceast Sir James Foulis* and the said
persewer their Family: Nevertheless the said Vmwhile. Sir James Foulis hes not
Employed and Secured the said sum of two hundredth and threescore thousand Merks
Conquest and Acquired, and received by him as said is, and taken the Rights and
Securities thereof in Favors of himself and the said persewer and the longest
Liver of them two, in Conjunct-Fee and Lyfe-rent, as said is; nor yet did he
Employ the said threttie six Chalders of Victual for the Maintenance of his own
and the said persewers Family, but did actually uplift and Intromet with twenty
four Chalders of Victual of the said 36 Chalders of Victual, for the particular
years of God after specified, of the quantities, qualities and pryces after
rehearsed, viz 22 Chalders of Bear, and two Chalders of Meal yearly out of the
Lands and Barrony of Innerteil, and that for the Cropts and Years of God, 1661,
62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81,
82, 83, 84 85, 86, and 1687 years, each Boll of the said Victual, Meal and Bear
over head being worth six Pounds Money of this our Realm communibus annis of
the years above mentioned, conform to the Current pryces of such Victual grow
and in that part of the Country. And that the said persewer, during the said
space of twenty six years, did Maintain the said Deceist Sir James Foulis his
Family with all suitable Intertainment; and did pay the rent of his Lodging
wherein he Dwelled during the said spaces, and paid all Servants Fees. And
albeit, Sir James Foulis now of Collingtoun eldest lawful Son, and appeirand
Air to the said, Vmwhile Sir James Foulis his Father, and Executor nominate and
confirmed to him, at least Successor to him in his Lands and Heretages titulo
lucrativo post Contractum debitum, and universal Intromettor with his moveable
Airship Goods and Geir, and Charter Chist, ought and should secure the said
persewer in an Lyfe-rent Right during all the days of her Lyfe-time, of the
said Sum of two hundredth and threescore thousand Merks Conqueist, Acquired and
received by his said Father, as said is; and to make payment to her of the said
24 Chalders of Victual uplifted by his said Vmwhile Father out of her said Life
rent Lands; which should have been applied for the Maintenance of her Family as
said is: And that for the particular years of God and Cropts above expressed, of
the quantities, and qualities particularly above rehearsed, or liquidat pryces
thereof abovementioned, extending to the sum of fifty nine thosand, nine
hundredth and four Pounds Money foresaid, after the Form and Tenor of the
foresaid Contract of Marriage and other Writs above deduced in all points:
Nevertheless he wrongously refuses so to do without he be compelled. Our Will
is herefore, etc.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty day of February, and of our
Reign the 4th. year.
Information for Dame Margaret Areskine Lady Castle-haven, Against The Lord
Collingtoun.
THE deceist Lord Collingtoun being engaged in debts above the value of his
Estate, In the treaty of Marriage betwixt him and Dame Margaret Areskin, by
the advice of Lawyers, there was threttie Six Chalders of victual of the Lady's
jointure conveyed before the Marriage in the name of Ratho. for the mantenance
of the Family; And in the contract of Marriage Collingtoun did renounce his jus
mariti, that his Ladys Estate might not be subject to his Creditors; and their
being nothing to which he should provide her, all her interest in the contract
did depend upon this Clause, That incase he shall happen at any time during the
Marriage to conquesce and acquire, any sums of money, Lands or Heretages, or to
receive payment of sums of money due to him, in that case to employ the same,
and take the Rights and Securities thereof in favors of himself, and the said
Dame Margaret Areskin and the longest liver of them two in conjunctfie, And for
this hope of Conquesce, my Lady renounced the terce of heretages and third of
movables, competent to her by Law.

My Lady pursues this Lord Collingtoun as representing his Father, for the
lyfrent of the sums conquest and received by his Father during the Marriage And
condescends upon the particulars sums received by my Lord Collingtoun for 24
Chalders of Victual of the Lady's Jointure lands yearly, (besides what was
Employed for the use of the Family) and for Sallaries, Pensions, and otherwise.

It was alleged for the Defendar, 1. That it could not be subsumed that My
Lord Collingtoun had aquired Lands or Heretages during the Marriage; and that
sums employed for payment of Debts, or clearing a man's heretages from
Encumbrances, was never understood Conquesce, but only an accessory Right to
the Heretage. And therefore in the competition betwixt an Heir of Conquesce,
and an Heir of Line, where the Predecessor had a null defective Right, and
thereafter had aquired a valide and effectual Right to the same Lands, It was
not found Conquest to belong to the Heir of Provision, but to belong to the
General Heir, as accessory to the Heretage. 2. a Clause of Conquest, can never
be understood to bind up the Fiar, or denude him of the Faculty and Capacity to
employ, or dispose upon the Conquest at his pleasure; and therefore Clauses of
Conquesce Imports no more, but that ane Heir of Provision, or Relict shall
succeed, or lyfrent, what Conquesce remains undisposed upon at the Fiars
decease, 3. The last clause (or if I shall happen to receive any Sums due to
me) does relate to debts which was then due to Collingtoun, and particularly a
sum due by the Marquess of Huntly; and if that sum should be recovered, it was
to be lifrented by my Lady. But the Clause cannot be extended beyond sums due
to him at the Marriage, and all sums that should become due to him did fall
under the former clauses of Conquesce.

It was replied for my Lady, 1. The clause in her Favors, Is not only a Clause
of Conquesce, But to take off all debate, or Cavil that might arise anent the
Interpretation of Conquesce, this special Clause is subjoined, that whatever
sums my Lord Collingtoun should receive, Eo ipso, that he received the sums, he
became bound to employ them in lyfrent to my Lady, and this by the advice of
Lawyers, who could expect nothing from the Lord Collingtoun, but his Pensions
and Sallaries from the King, to which he had great pretensions; these sums as
soon as ever they came to be received, became subject to her Lyfrent; and
therefore my Lady has it in her Option, either to insist on the Clause of
Conquesce for all the sums of money that were employed in the redeeming of the
Estate of Collingtoun, or for the Lyfrent of the sums Lybelled as he received
them.

2. Clauses of Conquesce, are most ordinary and known securities, and it were
absurd and against the common Faith of Contracts of Marriage (which of all
others ought to be most Sacred) to render such obligations Elusorie, and at the
arbitriment of the party engaged, and debtor in these obleisments. And albeit
Heirs of Provision or Conquesce, as they are Creditors, so they do represent
and succeed; and as they can have no Action against their Predecessor, so they
are bound to have a regard; and the Law in some Cases has releived them from
the severity of their obleisment in favors of their own Successors, and has
allowed them a latitude to dispose, or employ their conquest to all necessary
and even rational uses; But a Wife is merely a Creditor, and therefore the
obleisment of Conquesce in her favors, ought to be more strictly and rigidly
observed then to Heirs. And yet the Law nor practique did never relax any
obleisment of Conquesce to tha^ degree; that the debtor in the obleisment
might prejudge the obleisment, and totally evacuat the same; and certainly it
were a plain defrauding of this obleisment, If my Lord Colligtoun did employ
the conquest of this Marriage, to relieve his Estate, of debts contracted in a
former. And if this Doctrine hold, if their had been Heirs of this Marriage,
they should not have had a sixpence, notwithstanding they are provided out of
the Conquesce, which would loose all the Faith and Security of Contracts.

3. Whatever latitude the Lords may take, where a Wife is otherwise provided,
and has only the Conquest as a General and accessory clause, yet where a wise
gets nothing but the Conquesce it were absurd totally to frustrat and defraud
Her.

4 In contemplation of this Conquesce, the Lady did renounce a third of the
Estate of Collingtoun, and it is inconsistent with the Reputation or Justice of
the Session to debar her from the Conquesce by sustaining the employment of the
Conquest for redeeming of that heretage whereof she had renounced her terce.

5. The other half of the Clause puts the debate of Conquesce out of Doors, and
founds the Ladies Right upon the precise receiving of money. And whereas it is
pretended that the Clause is only relative to sums due at the Marriage, and not
to sums that should become due during the Marriage,

It is answered, 1. This is no distinct Clause, but a separat view or part of
the former, viz. And in case he shall happen at any time during the Marriage to
conquesce, and acquire sums of Money, Lands, or Heretages, or to receive any
sums of money due to him viz During the Marriage, Which is understood to be
repeated, as well at the last, as at the first part of the clause; And if it
had been otherwise designed, it had been easy to have Expressed it thus
(presently belonging to him) And the word (due to him) was to exclude my Lady
from any interest that she might pretend to sums borrowed and received by him.
And it is evident that it is all but one Clause, because the obleisment to
Employ is subjoyned to both. And therefore the words (acquired during the
Marriage) must be understood to be repeated in relation to the sums received
due to him, as well as the sums, Lands, and Heretages, are to be employed to my
Lord and Lady in lyfrent and Children in fie. 2. In common Style when men
speak of sums belonging to them at the time, they do not say (received,) but
in case they shall uplift, or where the sums are doubtful, incase they shall
recover; and (Receive) is never used but either in relation to Donations, or
where money is offered, and the parties required to receive their Money. 3. It
cannot be condescended upon that any sums of Money were due to Collingtoun, but
an pretended Debt due by Huntley, which single Debt could never answer the
Clause (in case I shall receive sums) And certainly if this Debt had been
designed, it would have been expressed; for where there is only one particular
under consideration, no body uses to express that single thing under a
generality, when there is nothing else can be included. 4. If this Clause had
been meant of Huntley's Debt, why was the Lyfe-rent only granted, in case the
sum were received, for a man's uplifting and recovering his own was never
Conquesce; and therefore if this Clause had been meant to extend no farther
then Debts due to Collingtoun the time of the Marriage, the Lady would have
been provided to the Lyfe-rent of all Debts due to him without that condition
and quality (In case he should receive them.) But the truth is, my Lord
Collingtoun was a man of more ^ngenuity then to have shamed his Lady with
mentioning this Debt, which neither is nor ever was (...) is but of a few days
before the Sentence against the Marquess of Argyle: And it was then perfectly
understood, that Huntely was to be Donator to Argyles Forfeiture; in so far as
concerned Huntley's Estate; so that this Debt was for ever excluded. But
suppose there were no Forfeiture in the Case; the expyred Comprysings did
absolutely convey his Estate; and it was possessed be the Marquess of Argyle be
virtue of these Comprysings, and not be the Forfeiture, for this Debt was never
worth the regarding, much less to be the only subject of the separate Clause.
5. In this Sense, the Clause had been ridiculous and of no Security to my Lady;
for if her right to Lyfe-rent the sums due to Collingtoun did depend upon his
pleasure in uplifting and recovering these sums; then the obligment imports no
more, then that my Lady should Lyfe-rent what he pleased; for it could not be
expected that he would prejudge his Heirs by uplifting sums only to gratify his
Lady with a Lyferent: And these absurdities must convince, that this can never
be the genuine meaning of the Clause; but the design is plain, and the words
are adapted to Pensions and Sallaries which he should receive as due to him
during the Marriage: And it is a general Rule in the Interpretation of all
Contracts and Clauses, That, that Sense and Construction should be admitted,
whereby the Clause should not be superfluous, redundant, and ridiculous: And in
this Case, the Clause must either operate a Lyfe-rent of the sums Conquest, or
of all the sums received; or else all the Provisions in Favors of the Lady,
for which she renounced her Terce, and third part, was superfluous and elusory.
6. By the Clause in the Contract of Marriage, my Lord Collingtoun being obliged
to Employ, All sums of Money, Lands, or Heretages, that he should happen to
acquire, or sums of Money due to him, whereof he should receive payment during
the Marriage: Albeit the Lady might justly crave the Lyferent of all the sums
of Money that can be instructed my Lord Collingtoun received during the
Marriage, which is the express Terms in the Clause of the Contract, yet she
declares that she insists only upon the (...) 1. That what Debts my Lord
Collingtoun has paid due priot to the Marriage, with Sums of Money acquired
and received during the Marriage, that she should have the Lyfe-rent of the
same upon this ground; because if these Debts had not been paid, they would
have affected this Lord Collingtoun the Son; and he would have been liable for
the samen; so that in so far as the Son and Heir reaps Benefi^, by Employing
the sums his Father received during the Marriage, for payment of Debts prior to
the Marriage, for which otherwise he would have been liable, as representing
his Father, the Lady ought in so far to have right to the Lyfe-rent of the sums
with which the Lord Collingtoun paid the prior Debts 2. The Lord Collingtoun
did not only reap Benefit by his Fathers payment of prior Debts with sums of
Money that he received during the Marriage, but also the subject that he has
acquired by these sums he received during the Marriage, being extant at the
dissolution of the Marriage: The Lady by virtue of the foresaid Clause in her
Contract, must have Right to the Life rent of what was acquired during the
Marriage, and extant the time of the Husbands Decease; and therefore in making
the Computation of what the Lady should have Right to Lyfe-rent, the Lord
Collingtoun's condition, and the condition of the Estate is to be considered,
as it was the time of the entry into the Marriage, and as it was at the time of
the D^ssolution thereof; and in so far as the Estate is meliorat, and what the
Lord Collingtoun had more at the Dissolution of the Marriage, then he had the
time of the entering into the Marriage, that must be understood to have been
acquired during the Marriage, and the Lady must have the Lyfe-rent of the
samen; especially seeing in all such cases, where the Wife is provided to the
Lyfe-rent of what should be Conquest and Acquired during the Marriage: The
Lords are always in use to take Trial of the Husbands Condition, the time of
the entering into the Marriage, and of his Condition the time of the
Dissolution thereof; and what ever his Condition was better at that time, then
it was at the time of the entering into the Marriage, that is esteemed Conquesce
to give the Wife the Benefit of the Lyfe-rent of the samen, which is clear by
several Decisions, and particulary the 4th. of March 1623. Skeen contra
Robieson Where the Husband by his Contract of Marriage being oblidged to give a
Lyferent of the Conquesce during the Marriage to his Wife, and the Fie to the
Heirs of the Marriage: And he having acquired certain Lands and Fishings that
did hold of the Town of Aberdeen in his Sons Name; and the Relict having
pursued the Son, as representing his Father upon the passive titles, for the
lyfrent of the Lands and Fishings: And it being alleged that she could not
have the lyfrent of these Lands and Fishings because by ane Act of the Town of
Aberdeen which was confirmed by the Queen, the Lands and Fishings could not be
fewed nor lyfrented by a Woman; upon which the Lords found that albeit the
Relict could not lyfrent the Lands and Fishings, yet the Heir should give her
Damnum et interesse, because the Husband could not be allowed to make any
purchass that could prejudge the Wise of her lyfrent. And the 3d of July 1627.
The Lady Dumfermling contra the Earl her Son, Where by the contract of
Marriage, the Lady being provided to all Lands that should be conquest during
the Marriage, and her Husband having acquired certain Lands during the
Marriage, and taken the Rights in his Sons name, the Lords found that the Lady
had the right of the lyfrent of the same: albeit it was alleged that the price
of the Lands was not paid, but was resting the time of his Fathers decease,
and that the Son as representing him is liable for the same. And it is
subjoined that the like Decision was done the 11 of Januar. 1632. The Lady
Bonningtoun contra Hadden and the 27 of Jun. 1676 The Earl of Dumfermling
contra the Earl of Callander, where the Lords found that a general Clause of
Conquesce did extend to what the Husband had acquyred during the Marriage, more
then what he had the time of the contract of Marriage, and with the burden of
all his Debts contracted during the Marriage; that was esteemed Conquesce which
was free over and above the debt contracted during the Marriage. By which it is
evident that in so far as the Estate was meliorat, and in a better condition
the time of the dissolution of the Marriage, than it was the time of the
contract, that was to be esteemed Conquesce; and that no debts were to be
deduced, but these that were contracted during the Marriage. And as to the
Decisions adduced for the Lord Collingtoun the 26 of November. 1629 Where the
Lords found that Lands being acquired be the Husband from the Seller of the
Lands, and thereafter disponed in few again to the same seller for ane greater
few duty than was contained in the sellers priors Rights, The augmentation of
the few duty be the Husband could not be repute ane Conquesce, whereof the
Relict might Claim a lyfrent, as coming under the clause of Conquesce of the
contract, And in the case of James Wauchop contra the Lord of Niddrie, in the
year 1683* where the husband having right to the Lands prior to the Marriage,
and during the Marriage having acquired partial Rights, were not found to fall
under the clause of Conquesce.

It is answered that these Decisions do not meet this case; for as to that of
the Lady Dumfermling against her Son, It was in the case betwixt a Superior
and a Vassal, where a Superior having pursued a Reduction against his Vassal,
and the Vassals rights being found null for want of Confirmation, and the
Superior having given a new right to the Vassal for augmentation of the
few-duty; that was not found Conquesce, In respect there was no new
acquisition, the Superior having right to the Lands before the Marriage; and
his right to the property of the few being only declared after the Marriage, by
reduceing of the Vassals right; and therefore albeit the Superior gave a new
right to the Vassal, augmenting the few-duty, That augmentation was not repute
Conquesce, to give the Relict the benefit of the lyfrent thereof: And that this
was the case of that Decision, it is clear by the Decision the last of June
1629. Betwixt the same Persons. And as to the Case of Niddrie and his brother,
first the question there was, betwixt the Heir of Line, and the Heir of
Conquesce of the second Marriage, which does not meet in this case. Next the
partial rights acquired by the husband after the Marriage, was found not to
fall under the Clause of Conquesce, in respect that the Husband had belonging
to him of money, and other estate of great value, prior to the Marriage, of
which, any sums of money he depursed after the Marriage in acquiring rights to
the Lands, was the true product, and might be ascribed to the sums of money,
and other estate which belonged to him before the Marriage.

And as to the case of Cowan contra Young the 9th of February 1669, where a
Father having given a bond of Provision of 400 pound to a Daughter of the first
Marriage, was sustained, and found to affect the Heir of Conquesce of the
Second Marriage; And the 15 of July 1673 Robertson contra Robertson, where the
Lords found that a clause in a contract of Marriage providing the lyfrent of
the conquesce to the Wife, did not hinder the Husband to give competent
provisions to the Children; And Smith contra Muire, 23 December 1668. Where it
was found, that such a clause did not prejudge Creditors; but the Relict that
intrometted with the movables falling under the conquesce, was found liable
for the Debt; And in the case of Frazer contra Cumming, the 8 of December 1687.
Where the Lords found the Provision granted to the Children of the first
Marriage was to be deduced out of the conquesce in prejudice of the Relicts
lyfrent, as also that his debts ought to be deduced and 11000 pound that he had
reserved to himself be the contract of Marriage, and the superplus only to be
repute Conquesce.

It is answered, that the case of Cowan and Young, being betwixt a Child of the
first Marriage and the Heir of Conquesce in the second Marriage, it did not
meet the case of a lyfrenter; next it was only but a small provision granted be
a Father to his Child of the first Marriage, whom be the Law of Nature he is
oblidged to provide. As also in that Case the Heir of the second Marriage had a
special provision, and something also of the Conquesce, so that the Fathers
granting a moderate provision to a Child of the first Marriage, was not
understood a defrauding of the Children of the second Marriage. And the case of
Robertson contra Robertson, albeit the Lords found, that such clauses could not
exclude competent provisions to the Children of the same Marriage, which was
most Just, yet it is with this express quality, that there were competent
means, for a provision to the Mother remaining, and that the husband had done
nothing fraudfully in prejudice of that clause. And the case of Smith and Muir,
was betwixt a Relict and a Creditor, And it is not controverted but that a true
and Lawful debt contracted by the Husband during the Marriage, should deduce
off the Conquesce, And as to the Case of Frazer and Cumming it was thus, By
contract of Marriage betwixt Alexander and Christian Frazers, The Husband did
provide his Wife to ane certain yearly Annuitie in lyfrent, and likewayes to
the lyfrent of the clause of conquesce, reserving to himself certain tenements
of Lands and others extending to 11000 pounds; and all the question there was
in relation to the import of the Reservation as to the 11000 Pounds, if the
Husbands Debts should affect the 11000 pounds, or be deduced out of the
Conquesce. Upon which the Lords found that the import of the clause of the
Contract, is, that in the first place, There ought to be deduced out of the
Husbands Estate extant the time of his Decease, the Debts then due; and next
that the 11000 Pounds is to be deduced, and what remains only is to be repute
Conquesce. By which it is evident that the 11000 Pounds that belonged to the
Husband the time of the entering into the Marriage, was deduced in respect of
the express reservation. And albeit a Husband may grant a Provision to a Child
of the first Marriage, yet it will not follow, that he can do such Deeds in
defraud of the Relict, as may absolutely evacuat the Clause. As also in that
Case, the Relict had a special Lyfe-rent Provision, besides the Lyfe-rent of
the Conquesce. And that Decision is so far from making against the Lady, that
it makes expressly for her: In sua far as in that Case, the Lords ordained
Probation to be led for proving the Condition of the Husbands Estate the time
of entering into the Contract of Marriage; and what was the worth and value
thereof the time of the Dissolution of the Marriage: To the effect that in sua
far as the Husbands Estate was better the time of the Dissolution of the
Marriage, than the time of the Contract: The Relict might have the benefit of
the Lyferent thereof as Conquesce. And as to any other Decision alleged upon
for the Lord Collingtoun, they are either in the Case of a Competition betwixt
the Heirs of a first and second Marriage, or in the Case betwixt Heirs of
second Marriages and Creditors, which does not at all meet this Case.

And whereas it is alleged, that the Lady has aliunde, a sufficient Joyntute,
albeit she get nothing of the Lord Collingtoun, and so is not destitute of a
Provision.

It is answered, That albeit the Lady have a Jointure aliunde, yet seeing she
has nothing from the Lord Collingtoun, except the House and Yards of
Collingtoun, which is not worth the speaking of; yet that can be no Argument
why she should not have a Jointure off the Lord Collingtoun, be virtue of that
clause in her Contract of Marriage, his Father having received so great sums of
Money during the Marriage, partly out of the Lady's Jointure, and partly out
of his Pensions and Sallaries, by which he made his Estate so much in a better
condition the time of the Dissolution of the Marriage, than it was the time of
the Contract: And albeit the Lady get a large Jointure* yet the Lord
Collingtoun will not be destitute of a Provision, seeing he has gotten a large
Estate with his Lady.

In respect whereof, etc.

Additional Information for the Lady Castle-haven; against the Lord Collingtoun,
TO evince the Lady's Claim beyond exception; and in answer to all the
Practicks that have been, or can be obtruded: The Pursuer not only insists upon
the foresaid clause anent the Lord Collingtoun his receiving payment of sums of
Money due to him during the Marriage: But farther does press preceisly the
former clause of Conquesce, viz. That the Lord Collingtoun has Conquest and
acquired sums of Money during the Marriage: For seeing that it is undeniable,
that he has cleared and reconquest his own Estate, which before, the Marriage
was sunk in more Debt then it was w^rth; and that this could not be done
without his acquiring of sums of Money: It is evident that he has acquired
sums of Money, and that these acquisitions are really still extant* if not in
Specie; yet in their undeniable effects. If the Pursuer were only insisting
upon Collington's Conquescing and Acquiring of Lands and Heretages, and urging
that the Reconquescing of his Estate was a real Conquesce. The practick
touching the clearing of old Wodsets, and the purchasing of accessional Rights*
and finding these to be no new Conquesce of Lands, might be objected with some
show of reason; but the Case of these Practicks was only concerning Conquesce
of Lands, which is not the principal point now in Controversy: But the point
here urged is, That the Lord Collingtoun did purchase and acq^ire sums of
Money; and this is evidently made out both that he did acquire them, and that
they are yet truly extant; so that its impossible to frustrate the Pursuer of
the benefit of this head of the Conquesce, unless the Defender can as plainly
make it out, that the Lord Collingtoun did Reconquesce the Estate, by sums not
of his own acquiring, but by the Defenders Tocher and Means, which can never be
made out; seeing the Conquesce of the Estate does far exceed all the Portion the
Defender got with his Wife, and there is a great part of that yet unreceived.
Neither is it to any purpose to debate here, how far the Lord Collingtoun might
exhaust his Conquesce by contracting of Debt, or doing other Rational Deeds,
seeing that the Debt which the Lord Collingtoun left at his Death, is always
acknowledged, that it is to be deduced; and for other rational Deeds there is
none can be alleged, except the conveyi^g of his Estate to his Son and
appeirand Heir the Defender, which is no exhausting, but a transmitting of the
Conquer^^, (...) to perform his Fathers obligment. Its true, it is alleged
that the Lord Collingtoun's paying of his old Debts with the Moneys that he
acquired, were rational Deeds: But it is as true, that these Deeds does no
ways exhaust the Conquesce, but rather establish it: It being plainly
ridiculous for a man to allege, that his getting and applying sums of Money
for the payment of his Debt, and clearing of his Estate, and thereby making
himself Richer, should be an exhausting of Conquesce, since it is absolutely
the best evidence can be brought for it, and the best use that can be made of
it; so that all the practicks about the exhausting of rational Deeds are here
Impertinent, and prove nothing. Nor is there the least Injustice in what the
Defender alleges for a great Absurdity, viz. That the Heir Male of the
Marriage (if any had been) should by this means have carried away my Lord
Collingtouns Estate from his Son in the former Marriage: For not to insist upon
the good Estate, the Lord Collingtoun has got by his Marriage, what could be
more reasonable then that the Heir Male of the Marriage should have the Fee of
what was really acquired during the Marriage.

And there fore seeing this Obligment of Conquesce is made to the Pursuer in her
Contract of Marriage, and that its undeniable that the Lord Collingtoun did
Conquesce and Acquire sums of Money, which are yet most really extant in their
abiding effects: It is impossible the Lady can be deprived of her Lyferent
thereof, in sua far as the sums were truly acquired by him, and not brought
into the Family by the Defender aliunde.

Information for my Lord Collingtoun, against. The Lady Castle-haven Relict of
the deceast Lord Collingtoun his Father.
WHen the deceased Lord Collingtoun was Married to his last Lady in Anno. 1661
he was under considerable burden of Debt; and least my Ladies Jointure of 80
Chalders of Victual, by her former Husband might be affected by my Lords
Creditors, several conveyances thereof were made in trust and by the Contract
of Marriage my Lord did Renounce his Jus mariti to the said Jointure* and took
his hazard of what he might have otherwise by my Lady, and farther my Lord
bound and oblidged him, that in case it should happen him at any time during
the Marriage betwixt him and his said Lady, to conquesce and aquire any sums of
Money. Lands or Heretages, or to receive payment of sums of Money due to him;
in that case, to employ the samen in favors of himself and his future Spouse
in conjunct fie and lyfrent, and the Heirs male to be procreat betwixt them,
which failing to my Lord, his other Heirs who are appointed to succeed him in
his other Lands and Heretages

There is a process at the Ladies instance against this Lord Collingtoun as
representing his Father upon the passive Titles, libelling that " the defunct
did after the Marriage, conquesce and acquire the Sum of 260000 Merks, and
concluds that the defender should be decerned to employ the same for the
Pursuers Lyferent use: And urges that conclusion upon the clause of the
Contract of Marriage above mentioned, containing two separate and distinct
obligments: The one, To take the Lands, Heretages, and sums of Money to be
Conquesced during the Marriage: And the other, To Employ all sums of Money due
to him, whereof he should receive payment, during the Marriage, likewise to my
Lady 's Lyferent use; Whereby it does appear, that my Lady did not intend to
rest upon a clause of Conquest in the usual Style, but did farther provide for
her own security, by adjecting the posterior Clause, oblidging my Lord to
employ all sums of Money to be received during the Marriage, to her liferent
use, which was most Just and Reasonable, seeing my Lords condition at the time
did not suffer him to secure any present jointure, his Estate being affected
with many encumbrances, it was therefore highly reas nable that what ever sums
he should receive during the Marriage, should be secured for her liferent use.

It was answered for the Defender denying the passive Titles, (...) o^ these
Clauses contained in the contract of Marriage, unless the Pursuer will
condescend upon Lands, Heretages, sums of Money, Conquest during the Marriage,
and extant unconsumed at the Dissolution thereof: Or that the Defunct had
received sums of Money due to him the time of the contract of Marriage: for as
to the Clause of Conquesce, There has been no point in our Law more fully and
clearly determined, than the Import thereof both in relation to Heirs of
Provision and Relicts in Contracts of Marriage: for the various circumstances
of Children, or Relicts having the benefit of those Clauses, have prompted them
upon several Specialities, to endeavor the extensions of such Clauses in their
Favors, upon some pretenses of differences from the Cases formerly decided,
whereby upon consideration of the most important Decisions in that point, it
will appear that the Lords have scarce ever varied, since there were Practicks
upon Record, anent the import of Clauses of Conquesce, which they have ever
found to give Relicts, or Heirs of Provisions, the Benefit of what Conquest did
remain unconsumed at the death of the Husband, or Father; and that such Clauses
could not hinder the Acquirer from the full, free, and unaccountable
Administration of his own Estate during his Life, and to dispose of his own by
any just or rational Deed at his pleasure: providing that nothing were done
fraudulently for evacuating of such Clauses. And farther, The Deeds of the
Acquirer are not only sustained when the Conquesce is consumed, but even when
the Conquesce of Lands, Heretages, or sums of Money is extant at the
dissolution of the Matriage; the same is affected and burdened with all the
Debts of the Acquirer, not only for onerous, but also for gratuitous Causes;
there being always a just and rational consideration, such as the Provision of
Children with suitable Portions; and even a Provision of an eldest Son has
been frequently sustained as a paternal Deed; and if in any Case gratuitous
Debts or Deeds, of the Acquirer have been annulled, at the instance of Relicts,
or Children of a Marriage; the same has always been upon the head of Fraud, or
that there was no just cause for making such Deeds, and these Deeds are not
only sustained in favors of Creditors to affect the Conquesce, but they have
even been sustained as burdens upon the Conquesce, whereby Relicts or Heirs of
Provision have no Action against the Representatives of the Acquirer, to
Disburst the Conquest of these Debts: The Decisions in this matter are so
numerous, and the Cases so various, that it were tedious to relate them; but
the Defender did both in his Debate, and by a particular Note a part offer a
few of them to the Lords consideration, whereby it will appear, that the ground
of all is one, viz. That Conquesce is burdened with all rational Deeds of
Administration of the Acquirer.

As to the second Clause, whereby it is pretended, that, All sums of Money due
during the Marriage, and received by the Defunct, ought to be Employed for the
Pursuers Liferent use. It is answered, That the Lords are entreated to consider
the Clause as it stands in the Contract, which is very far from Importing that
Sense which is fixed upon it: For by the first Clause, the Conquesce during the
Marriage was designed to be secured in the ordinary Style of Conquesce: And by
the second all sums due to my Lord before the Marriage, were designed to be
secured to my Lady, and that which was in Prospect, was a Debt due upon the
Estate of Huntley; And my Lord had just ground to expect, that the same might
have been made effectual to him, who was then in great Favor, and had suffered
much for the King; and it was not sit to express the Debt particularly in the
Contract, least being propaled, it might have been affected by his Creditors;
and as this was the true Communing, so it is impossible the words of the Clause
can bear another Sense, which runs in these Terms, viz. He obliged himself in
case it should happen, him to purchase, or acquire sums of Money, Lands, or
Heretages, or to receive payment of Debts due to him, to employ, etc. Whereof
the construction of the last Clause is, in case he shall happen to receive
payment of sums due to him, where Sums due, must in propriety of Language
signify a Preterit, that the sums ^ ^^^turo, was in case it should happen him
to receive these sums: And the prospect of receiving of sums, must always
presuppose the sums due. And the first end of the Clause relating to Purchase
of sums thereafter, the natural Alternative subjoyned to that Provision, is
sums dew already, whereby all sums were secured to my Lady, whether due before,
or purchased after the Contract, with the legal burden of my Lords full and
free Administration during the Marriage. And whereas the words of the Clause
(as the Pursuer would construct them) run thus, In case it should happen my
Lord during the Marriage to receive payment of sums deue; even this
construction, though it be not natural, or suitable to the Clause, yet it
alters not the Case one hairs breadth: For in that construction the words
(during the Marriage) which signify Futurition, have not the least relation to
sums due, which are still in Preterito; but they do only relate to the receipt
of the Money: So the Clause does import, that if sums then due should be
received during the Marriage, they were to be Employed; but it is altogether
force against the natural construction to mention these words, During the
Marriage, In the first Clause, which can neither relate to the Receipt of the
Money: Because if that Money upon the Estate of Huntely should be received or
secured, though after the Dissolution of the Marriage, the Pursuer would have a
Liferent thereof by the Clause, which she could not claim, if the condition
run, In case during the Marriage the Money were rece ved: Neither is it
possible that the words, During the Marriage, can relate to sums due: For Sums
due during the Marriage, is Nonsense, Sums due, being Preterite, and during the
Marriage, being then Future; unless for my Ladies Convenience, she be allowed
to add a word or two, to make the Sense as she would have it; and that she
should be permitted to Interpret the Clause, in their Terms, viz Sums falling
due, or becoming due during the Marriage, For without the Addition of these
words, or other of the like Import, it is impossible in nature that ever the^e
words (...) by any construction that can be forced upon the Clause, as it
stands: And if such violence were put upon it, then it would still disagree
with what has been evidently communed, viz, That Huntleys Debt already due
should be Liferented, if received: For if only sums falling or becoming due
Thereafter, were to be employed, then there were no Obligation, as to these
which were already due; And it would be a wonderful streatch that could make
the same words signify both Preterite and Future.

Secundo, Suppose the words of the Clause should be strained (as the Pursuer
contends) to an Obligment of Employing all sums due during the Marriage; yet it
is not possible to extend the Importance of that Clause, farther than an
ordinary clause of Conquesce; and consequently the Husbands Obligation would
only be prestable with the burden of all rational Deeds: For the Clause of
Conquesce oblidges, to bestow, All sums of Money Conquest during the Marriage:
And the second Clause obliges (as is pretended) to Employ, All sums falling due
during the Marriage to be received by the Defunct; Which is all one Clause; for
all sums falling due during the Marriage, that the Defunct could receive, must
be sums Conquest during the Marriage; and consequently if the Obligment to
employ the Conquesce, cannot secure the Pursuer from the burden of all rational
Deeds, neither can the Oblidgment of employing sums falling due, which is the
same thing: And it is not the variation of the Style, or words, that will evert
the effect of such a train of Decisions; nor is it possible that the Defunct,
or any reasonable man would have agreed to such an extravagant Clause, whereby
all his Fortune was then wholly over-burdened, so he should have been
Incapacitate for ever to render it in a better condition for himself, or his
Heirs: For though in this Case there be eventually no Children of the Marriage,
which might probably have existed, my Lady being then little past 40. And being
as careful to provide for them, as her self; yet if they had existed, the
Defunct would have been Incapacitate that his eldest Son might succeed, which
in consequence would have drawn his Creditors upon him; that he could not have
had his person safe, when they found that he could not apply one sixpence for
their payment out of what he had, or could acquire.

It was replied, that the Pursuers Lybel is most Relevant, both upon the
Conquest, and subsequent Clause: And albeit, the Pursuer does not allege, that
any sums of Money, Lands, or Heretages, Conquest during the Marriage, are
extant, seeing the Defunct did apply these sums acquired, and falling due during
the Marriage, for payment of the Debts affecting the Estate and Lands of
Collingtoun. The Defunct being Locupletior factus, by applying these sums for
the Relief of his own Estate, which by the Conrract ought to have been employed
for the Pusuers Lyferent use, the Lady ought to have the benefit thereof, and
does not claim any Lyferent of sums spent and consumed; but where there is ane
existing benefit enriching the Defunct, she ought to have a lyfrent of the
Lands releived to which she restricts her lybel, and craves no more neither
upon the first nor second Clause of the Contract. 2. Conquesce in favors of
Wives or Children, is always understood in so far as the Husband is richer at
the Dissolution of the Marriage, than he was at the time of the Contract, And
the defunct being richer in the value of the hail Lands redeemed, my Lady ought
to have the lyfrent thereof. 3 Decisions in matters of Conquesce have varied
according to the circumstances of the cases Debated, and all of them have this
notable difference from the Pursuers Case, that in these Decisions, the Relict
had special suitable provisions, and the Conquests were only adjected as
general uncertain Clauses upon which the Relicts did not depend, But here
there is no special provision, except the House and Yeards of Collingtoun, and
all that was depended upon, was the clause of Conquesce which was advised by my
Lord Dirlingtoun, and eminent Lawyers, who thought fitter to take the defunct
obliged in the terms of the Contract than to take a ^ it cannot be imagined
that so eminent a Lawyer would advise a clause that would be absolutely
Elusory, though the defunct made his fortune during the Marriage, 4. There are
also several Decisions which fortify the pursuers Case, as particularely a
decision Skeen contra Robertson. 4 March 1624. where a band of Provision to a
Daughter was found to be liable to the Relicts lyfrent by her clause of
Conquesce. And in the same case, the Husband having acquired right to a Salmond
Fishing near Aberdeen, which by the custom of the place could not be bruiked by
a Woman, yet the relict by her Conquesce was found to have utilem actionem
against the heir for the value, And in the case of the Countess of Dumfermting
against her Son (Lands being conquest originally in the name of the eldest Son)
the Countess was found to have right, to Lyfrent these Lands though never in the
Person of the Father, The like (...) Where a Right originally acquired in the
name of a second Son, was also affected by the Relicts lyfrent, upon a clause
of Conquest. 50 The Decisions adduced in the Case of Children provided to
Conquesce, import nothing; because all Children do represent the Defunct, in
so far as they have benefit by him; whereas the Relicts are most favorable
Creditors, and the Decisions adduced in the case of Relicts are of no moment,
as that Lands conquesced, or burdened with the Debts due expressly for the
purchase thereof, nothing being reckoned but with deduction of Debts during the
Marriage. And in the case of the Lady Dumfermling against her Son 26. November.
1629. Where the Superior having acquired the property of Fews, and having
again fewed the same Land for greater Few duties, These additional Few duties
were not reckoned Conquesce, Because the Right of the Fews came to the Husband
by Virtue of Irritancies contained in the Fewars Charters, incurred before the
Marriage, and whereby no duty out of these Lands could be reckoned Conquesce
during the Marriage. 6. The Pursuer did not rest in a single clause of
Conquesce to which all the Decisions did relate, but did farther provide for
her Security by (...) to employ all Sums during the Marriage, which must at
least oblige the Defunct in so far as he and his Heirs were Lucrati by
employing these sums for the relief of his Estate, which clause must either
have that import, or none at all; For no body can imagine that the Pursuer
would consider that uncertain claim upon Huntlies Estate to be of any value,
and if nothing else had been considered, that would have been particularly
expressed: and it was most rational that the Defunct should grant such an
obligement, Because my Lady by the conveyance of her Jointure did secure 36.
Chalders Victual for the maintenance of the Family, which being sufficient for
maintenance, and all necessary expenses, it was most Just that what other sums
might be received by the Defunct, should be employed for the Ladies lyfrent
use, yet notwithstanding of the setlement at the Contract, It is offered to be
proven that my Lord by himself did intromet with 24. Chalders of the victual
allocat for the entertainment of the Family, by which means my Lady was
necessitat to take up her Jointure in the North, which she had disponed to her
Children at the time of the Contract, and to consume the same for the
Intertainment of the Defuncts Family. So that it cannot be thought an invidious
claim, that my Lady should desire her lyfrent, equivalent to the debts paid by
that part of the Jointure, which was allocat to the intertainement of the
Family.

It was duplied, that all the pretenses insisted upon Jointly or separatly have
no shadow of relevancy in them, and 1st, As to the first Alledgance viz. That
the Pursuer insists only for a lyfrent of what is extant Conquesce during the
Marriage, by relieving the Estate that was overburdened, and thereby was
Locupletior factus. It is answered, that as the lybel could not relevantly
conclude the employment of all sums purchased and received during the Marriage,
but with the burden of all rational Deeds So neither can it be sustained, as it
is now restricted, for the lyfrent of the Lands relieved, and in quantum the
Defunct was Lucratus; because Law does allow all Husbands a free and ^ull
Administration, and they (...) of Conquesce for what is consumed by that
administration, and as they might have wasted, and spent all unprofitably, so
much more might they apply the same for payment of debts, which is not only a
rational but a necessary deed, and if the Creditors had not found the Defunct
so just in his Inclinations, they would have compelled him thereto, either by
personal diligence, or by affecting his Estate; and the pretense of Locupletior
factus imports nothing, unless the Pursuer could subsume in the terms of the
obligment that the Defunct had been Locupletior factus in Lands, Heretages, or
sums of Money, which here cannot be alleged; for the Defunct was only
Locupletior factus, by payment of his urgent Debts, which is neither a
fraudulent administration, nor was he thereby enriched in the Particulars
enumerat in the clause of Conquesce; and consequently my Lady had no Interest
in that gain: for clauses of Conquesce are strictly interpret, and never
extended beyond the precise Words; therefore a wife having right to Conquesce of
Lands, has no right to sums acquired, and she who has right to Lands and sums,
has no right to Victual, Plenishing, Plate, Jewels, or movables of any sort,
So that if the Defunct at his decease had been worth 10000 pounds Sterling, in
other movables than sums of Money, the Pursuer could not have acclaimed any
interest therein, which may satisfy the Lords that there was not such an
anxious concern to make this Conquesce secure, when Goods and Geir and all
movables were omitted in the Clause, which are often provided as Conquesce, and
as the Defunct had power to have turned all his free Estate in such movables,
so much more could he pay his urgent Debts, and relieve his ancient Estate,
without providing the same to his Lady, and the Children of his second
Marriage, to the exclusion of his legal Heirs, 2. The releiving of the Lands of
Collingtoun* cannot in Law be reckoned a Conquesce of these Lands, because a
Conquesce Is a new few to which the Defunct neither did, nor could succeed, as
Heir to any of his Predecessors: and the Defender desires that the Pursuer
would condescend upon any former practick, where ever a Wife or Heirs of
provision did pretend that a Husband, or Father, could not pay his Debts in
prejudice of a Conquesce; so that if there be little decided in this, it is
because few or none have ever pretended to call it in Question; on the contrary
all that is found to approach to this Case, is a debate betwixt the Countess of
Dumfermling and her Son 26. November. 1629. And Fraser contra Fraser lately
decided. By the first of which Decisions, the Lords found That the Earl of
Dumfermling having acquired the right of property of certain fews during the
Marriage which he fewed out again for greater few-duties, that the Countess had
no interest in these additional Few duties by the clause of Conquesce. And
whereas it is pretended that the ground of this Decision was, because the Fews
were declared Null, upon irritancies before the Marriage, this alledgance, is
gratis dictum and without the least vestige of reason from the Decision, which
was upon just grounds; because the Earl having a Dominium Directum, any
improvement of that Dominium during the Marriage was not regarded as a
Conquesce. And the Lords had formerly great regard to this Decision, in the
case of the Lord of Niddrie against his Brother; where the Father having a
right upon the Lands of Lochtoure preceding the second Marriage, albeit the
same would have been ineffectual in competition with Rights acquired during the
second Marriage, yet the Lords found, that the posterior rights were presumed
to have been acquired for validating and completing the anterior Right, and
that they did accresce thereto, and the Son of the second Marriage had no
in-Interest therein as Conquesce And in the case of Fraser and Fraser, the
Husband at his Contract did put a valuation upon the Estate he had over and
above certain Ackers of Land, which he declared should not be estimate any
part of the Conquesce, yet the Relict having acclaimed a lyfrent of the
Conquesce during the Marriage, the following points were therein decided viz. 1
That the Father having immediately after the second Contract provided 6000
Merks, to his eldest Son, beside the forsaid capital of 11000 pounds, and his
Daughter to 5000. Merks, and allowed 1000 pounds for her Wedding Clothes, and
having paid a great part of these sums very shortly after the Contract, before
it was possible to have acquired so much money as could have paid the same,
yet the Lords found, that these sums so contracted, and paid, were not to be
taken off the capital of 11000 pound of his Estate before the Marriage, but the
whole capital foresaid behoved to be deduced before reckoning the Conquesce at
the Dissolution 2. In that case, they found that all Debts were to be deduced,
both those that were prior, and those that were posterior to the Marriage; as
appears by the debate immediately preceding the Interloquitor, which was done
upon deliberation by the whole Lords, and thereafter represented of new by two
several Bills, containing the whole favorable circumstances of the Case, and
particularly that the Relict had but a very mean provision besides the
Conquesce, upon which she could not live; all which appears by the forsaid
Decree, marked at the several debates and interloquitors; and what is now
pretended is far less favorable then any of these Cases.

To the second alleging, that Conquesce is always understood, in sua far as
the Husband was richer at the Dissolution then at the Contract of Marriage. It
is answered that the grounds abovementioned do fully satisfy this pretense,
for the estimation of the Husbands being Richer, must be made with relation to
these particulars whereof the Contract is provided to the Wife; and if the
Husband have provided a Wife to lyfrent the Conquest, Lands, and Heretages
only; it is not to be considered how far the Husband is become Richer in sums
of Money, Goods and Geir, whereof, the Wife has no clause of Conquesce, or if
the provision of Conquesce be of Lands, Heretages, and sums of Money, as in
this case, though the Husband had purchased a great Estate in Jewels, Plate,
Victual, Cattle, or any movables, that is not to be considered but only how
far he is become richer in Lands, Heretages, and sums Conquest which is not
pretended in this Case but only that he is richer by payment of his Debts, and
re^eiving of his Lands. And seeing my Lady did not take my Lord oblidged to
employ all Goods, Geir, and movables whatsomever, it is a demonstration that
she did not intend to tie him so closs as is now pretended, but left to his own
discretion whether he would enrich himself in these particulars provided for
her lifrent-use, or in others wherein she had no interest.

To the third, it is admired that the Lady should recur to Decisions to fortify
her pretense, for in all the Decisions for above sixty years there is no
variation, except in that pretended Decision adduced be the Pursuer Skeen
contra Robertson, which has not been seen by the Defender not being in Durie
nor any citted known Writter, and whereof the circumstances do not appear, and
all others do agree in this, that a Husband, or Father, may not only do all
onerous Deeds, but may give Liberalities and Gratuities even to Children, or to
the Heir where there is a rational Cause, much more may urgent Debts be paid,
whereto the Acquirer could be compelled.

And as to the only defense against all the Decisions, upon the singularity,
that the Pursuer had no special provision, and that by the advice of an eminent
Lawyer. It was thought fitter to take these general Clauses, then a provision
of 3000 Merks yearly, It is answered, this speciality makes no alteration, it
being impossible to find different Cases, so perfectly agreing, but some
circumstances will vary, but here the rule of the Lords Decisions is, that all
rational Deeds shall be sustained, and if this be such a circumstance, that it
renders the payment of the Debt in prejudice of the Conquesce, fraudulent, then
it is relevant but not otherways, and still there is to be a difference wade
betwixt first and second Contracts of Marriage, for if a man in his first
Contract of Marriage gave no special provision, but a clause of Conquesce,
whereby if the Husband should voluntarly evacuat the Conquesce, the Wife of his
youth, and Mother of his Children would become destitute and miserable, It were
infamous in him to evacuate such a Conquesce, except by inevitable Deeds; and
any voluntary Deed would in Justice be reckoned fraudulent; but in a second
contract where there is no portion, but a jointure that returns at dissolution,
the like favor is not due. For if the Relict have an honorable provision,
whether by the first or second Marriage, it imports not, yea there is nothing
more ordinary then that Heiresses do content themselves with the lifrent of
their own Heretages, and often times with less, yet in the case Robertson against
Robertson 15th July 1673. It is plead for the Rclict who was Wife of the first
Marriage, that she had only an clause of Conquesce, and no special provision,
yet a bond originally taken in the name of the eldest Son during the Marriage,
was sustained against her, unless there were not sufficient means for a
competency to her Aliunde, in which case the Lords found, the bond would be
fraudulent; and there is no question the Lady was very well advised in relation
to these Cases she desired advice in, as how to convoy her Jointure, which was
done to so good effect, that the Defunct with all the Influence and right of a
Husband, could never come to one sixpence of the North-Countrey Jointure; but
these Clauses were never advised by a Lawyer to have any special effect,
whereof the Lords may be satisfied by the Pursuers own Assertion, that 3000
Merks of Jointure was offered; and was there ever any Lawyer that would prefer
a general Clause of Conquesce to a special Provision, which has a preference as
to Movables, to all Creditors, and is usually the best secured real Debt; so
that the neglecting of a special Provision, is a demonstration that there was
no Liferent under prospect, and that the Clause of Conquesce was adjected of
mere Style and Formality. And Sir Andrew Gilmour who drew the Contract, would
never have agreed to so unreasonable Clauses as these in the Contract are,
according to the Pursners Interpretation, he being the Defuncts Brother in Law.

To the Fourth, There was nothing ever decided contrary to what is now pleaded:
for the Decision finding, That the Wife had Right to the value of a Fishing in
Aberdeen, which by the custom of the place could not be bruiked by a Woman, was
most ju^^, (...) like the Earl of Dumfermling Acquiring Lands in the Name of
his eldest Son, was justly found, To have done a fraudulent Deed to evacuate
the Conques^e, Yet betwixt the same Parties, it was also found, That the Earl
having first acquired a profitable Tack of the same Lands during the Marriage,
and afterward baving acquired the property, the Ladies Lyferent of the Lands
extended no farther, than to the Tack-Duty contained in the Tack first
acquired; On this ground, that the Lady was not provided to the Lyferent of
Tacks, albeit it might have seemed that the Tack was extinguished by the
Property: But still the Lords do restrict these Clauses as much as they can
bear.

As to the Fifth, Pretending to Answer the Decisions adduced, it is answered,
That the Decisions in case of Heirs of Conquesce, do by much more strong reason
cut off the conclusion of this Pursuers process. For Heirs of Conquesce, are
more favorable in relation to Conquesce than Relicts; as was expressly found in
the Case of the Lady Kilbocho, against the Lord; and Lady Rentoune against the
Lord, where Lands Conquest were burdened with annual-rents of a part of the
price resting, albeit in both the Lords declared they would have found
otherwise in the Case of Heirs of Conquesce, so that Heirs of Conquesce being
more favorable than Relicts, what ever does exclude their Interest in
Conquesce, must much more exclude the Relicts Interest, and the pretense that
Heirs of Conquesce do represent the Defunct, whereas Relicts are Creditors, is
of no moment, because in competition with Creditors, they are considered as
Heirs, but in respect of the Heirs of Line (which is the Case of all the
Decisions) they are most favorable Creditors.

To the Sixth, Founding upon the last Clause of the Contract anent sums due
during the Marriage, alleged to be insert for a farther Security than the
common Clause of Conquesce, which varies this Case from all these beside it. It
is answered, The Defender hopes he has already sufficiently cleared, that by
the construction of the words in the Contract, nothing is comprehended that
fell due after the Marriage. Et separatim, it is hoped that the Reasons already
adduced, why the import of that Clause (as the Pursuer would have it) signifies
no more than a common Clause of Conquesce, and consequently must be subject to
the said burdens, and be concluded with the same Decisions, and the force of
what has been said, is the more evident, that the Pursuer found her self
obliged to recede from the first conclusion of the Summonds, for Employing all
sums due, and received, without exception, and did restrict the same to the
sums employed for the Payment of Debt, and in quantum Lucratus; whereby it is
evident that Law does not sustain such an Obligment to employ All sums received
in the full Latitude of the Clause. And if it cannot be effectual as it stands
in the Style of words, we must then consider what is the Cause, why Law
restricts the effect of such Obligments, and we shall find the Cause to be the
same why Law restricts the effect of Conquesce, as being against the Interest
and meaning of Parties, the rights of Property and Commerce, and that such
Clauses are only Destinations. Again, if we consider the Syle of both Clauses;
Clauses of Conquesce are as peremptor to employ all sums Conquesced, as this is
alleged to be for sums during the Marriage. And seeing the last Clause cannot
be effectual in the full Latitude more than the first, what other estimate can
be made thereof, than the known Marches and Land Marks, by which the Lords have
bounded the effect of Conquesce. And as clauses of Conquesce do easily run in
relation to sums purchased and acquired; so suppose a clause of Conquesce
should run in these Terms, All sums Purchased, Acquired and received during the
Marriage; can it be supposed that the word (Received) should make an alteration
in the Case; or are not sums Acquired during the Marriage, Purchased? And are
not sums Purchased, Received during the Marriage? So the terms being
Convertible, they cannot vary the Decision. 2. Et separatim, though it had been
the express meaning of Parties, to have obliged the De^^n^^ to (...) to be
Received by him; yet such an Obligation could not have been effectual in Law:
Because a Husband by his Jus Mariti has right to all moveable sums falling
under Communion of Goods: And farther his right thereto is unaccountable, and
the Jus mariti of an Husband, it is so fixed and insured by Law, that inhaerit
Ossibus, and cannot possibly be renounced in favors of the Wife, by any deed
of the Husbands directly nor indirectly: Whereas by this clause as it is
interpreted, the Husband should be effectually denuded of his Jus mariti in
favors of his Wife, in so far as he would thereby be accountable to his Wife
for her lyfrent-use, for his intromission with moveable sums, which in Law do
belong to him unaccountably. And as it is not controverted that the Jus Mariti
does imply an unaccountable right in the Person of the Husband, so it has been
found on most Just grounds that this right is incommunicable to the Wife, in
the case of the Lady Pilton against Hay of Balhousie 2d. February. 1667. Where
a bond of 1000. Merks yearly being granted to a Wife to be disposed of as she
pleased, secluding the Husbands Jus Mariti; The Lords found that payment made
to the Husband, without the Wifs consent, did exoner the Debtor, and exclude
the Wifs executors: Which clears that a right could not be so qualified, but
that it behoved to be Simply transmitted to the Husband, or null. But for
farther evidence, that even the deed of the Husband himself cannot divest him
of his Right, It was sound 13, July 1678 that a Husband having renounced his
Jus mariti to a part of his Wifes Jointure in favors of his Wife, the right
thereof did return to the Husband, albeit he suffered his Wife to possess the
renunced Lands all her life time, yet the extant product of these Lands did
belong to him, and that he himself could not be excluded by the personal
objection of his own Renounciation. The like was found in the case of Hamilton
against the Lady Carberry. And, if the Husband could not by a Direct deed
renounce the unaccounntable management, much less can he do it by a general and
separate Clause, which would in consequence import a renounciation thereof to
his Wife, for the Jus mariti, consists not only in the Management, but it must
be unaccountable.

3, Et Separatim, the Defender cannot be liable In quantum Lucratus, upon this
Clause, though it could be effectual in Law, unless it were subsumed and offered
to be proven, that he was Lucratus, by applying sums of money received during
the Marriage to the payment of his Debts. For albeit it were instructed that
the Defunct did receive considerable sums of Money, and also that he paid
considerable sums due by him* yet that could not infer that these debts were
paid by sums of Money received during the Marriage, seeing the Defunct had
another Subject than Sums of Money, out of which he could have paid his Debts
viz 24. Chalders of Victual yearly as a part of the Pursuers Jointure, which in
the debate is acknowledged to have been allocat for the Defuncts free disposal
at his pleasure. Suppose then that the Defunct had consumed his Sallaries, and
Pensions, upon the charges and expenses of his Family, or upon other reasonable
and creditable occasions (as it is acknowledged he might have done freely and
unaccountably) and that he were Lucratus by applying the said 24. Chalders of
Victual for the payment of his Debt; he could not be said to be Lucratus by
sums of Money, but only by Bolls of Victual, for which, by the clause he is not
accountable; and if the Pursuer will assert that he is Lucratus by sums of
Money Asserenti incumbit probatio. And farther he had other subjects out of
which payments might be made, viz. The Lands of Collingtoun which were stocked,
as also he sold 100000. Merks worth of Lands, and there is nothing more
ordinary, than, for overburdened Heritours to obtain great eases, when they
have ready money to pay, whereby the said 100000. Merks may have paid 100000
pounds of debt, So that my Lady cannot be exonered upon a presumptive, but must
adduce a positive probation, that my Lord was Lucratus by sums of Money.

4 The Pursuer must not only prove, that the Defunct was once Lucratus by
payment of his Debt, but that the said Lucrum did remain with him, till the
dissolution of the Marriage. (...) purging any of the Debts, did upon a just
and reasonable cause, dispose of his releived Lands to his eldest Son by
Contract of Marriage, as is alleged, the Pursuer cannot claim any interest in
that purchass; But it appears evidently by the Contract, that the Defender was
then designed to suceced to his Father in these Lands, in so far as the very
Clause upon which the Pursuer founds her conquesce to be provided to her in
lyfrent, and the Bairns of the Marriage in fee, which failing to the Defuncts
other Heirs appointed to succeed him, in his other Lands and Estate; whereby it
appears, that as the Defender was the lineal Legal Successor of his Father, the
Pursuer did not then envy his succession to the Estate of Collingtoun, which by
her own clause of Conquesce, is designed his other Lands and Estate; so that
the Lands of Collingtoun can never be reckoned Conquesce; nor can the Pursuer
quarrel the convoying the right thereof to the Defender, seeing by her own
Contract, it is declared that his present Lands and Estate not contracted was
designed to descend to his Lineal Heirs which could not be, unless it had been
also Lawful to purge the same of Debts, being then burdened above the value,
and as it was arbitrary to the Defunct not to have made any Purchase, so he
might justly dispose of it: But that the Lords may be satisfied how Calumnious,
and groundless this great noise of Purchase is, they would be informed, that
the Defender being Married in Anno. 1670. Within a few years after the
Contract, it was not possible the Defunct could make any purchase before the
Defenders Marriage; Because all the Subject of his Estate was my Ladies
Jointure of 36. Chalders of Victual, 200 pounds Sterling of Sallary, and the
Lands of Collingtoun not then exceeding 3000 Merks; out of this, he had all the
necessary charges of his Family, Servants, Coach, and Horses to lay out, and
the Defender to intertain in his travels, and the Annual-rent of his weighty
debt to pay, after which deductions there will remain no place for Conquesce:
And after the Defender was Married, he lived in that entire Confidence with his
Father, that all the portion he received, which was known to be (...) by his
Father to him, was as much possessed and enjoyed by his Father as by himself,
never having heard of this pretense of Conquesce, and looking upon his Fathers
interest and his own, as the same, many sums affecting the Estate were paid by
him without so much as mention from whom the money was received, and there were
no Assignations taken to any Debt, but always Renounciations and Discharges;
so that if this Covetous pretense should hold foot, my Lady should lyfrent the
Defenders portion, which was four times greater then the Conquesce, it being
impossible to distinguish the one from the other.

In respect whereof, the Lords, are humbly entreated to give distinct
interloquitors upon the several grounds abovementioned, and particularly, 1
Anent the Extent and Import of the clause of Conquesce 2 Anent the Import of
the second clause, if it does relate to sums due or falling due after the
Marriage. 3 If the same could be of any greater force than a clause of
Conquesce though it did relate to sums due after the Marriage. 4 If by such a
construction the second clause would not be equivalent to a Renounciation of
the Jus mariti, as to these sums in favors of the Wife, and if such a
Renounciation can consist with Law and former Decisions. 5 If the Pursuers
probation of the payment of Debts, and the receiving of sums of Money, could
infer a sufficient evidente that these Debts were paid by the sums of Money,
seeing there were other Subjects out of which the Debts might have been paid. 6
If the Defunct can be reckoned Lucratus, seeing he did not Die in the fee of
these Lands releived, but was denuded thereof upon a most just and rational
account, sine fraud, which are all distinct grounds separatly proponed.

A List of the Decisions related to in the Lord Collingtoun's Information,
against the Lady Castle-haven.
THat the Husband has the absolute Administration and Managment of all Rents,
Annual-rents, and other Movables, belonging to his Wife during the Marriage;
notwithstanding any Renounciation of his Jus Mariti thereto, in Favors of the
Wife, is evident from these following Decisions, viz.

9 February 1667. Lady Collingtoun contra Lord Collingtoun.
The Lords found, that the Clause in my Lord Collingtoun's Contract, renouncing
his jus mariti in favors of his Lady, did not debar my Lord from the
management, and administration of the Rents destinate for maintenance of the
Family; and that albeit the administration and management had been expressly
renounced by him in the said Contract: The said renounciation had been contra
bonos mores, and so void and null in Law; and that the Husbands administration
being the Inherent Right and Privilege of the Husband as such, was absolute
and unaccountable, and could not be renounced in favors of the Wife.

13 July 1678. Nicolson contra Inglis.
The Lords found, that a Wife having in her Contract of Marriage reserved a
Power to dispose upon her Liferent without the Husbands consent, and the
Husband having renounced his jus mariti to what was so reserved: The said
renounciatidid recurre and accress to the Husband himself by the Marriage; and
after Decease of the Husband, allowed Compensation to the Heirs of the Husband,
against the Wife and her Assigney, upon the account of the Wises intromission
Stante Matrimonio, with the Rents so reserved, and whereof the jus mariti was
renounced, as said is.

2 February 1667. Executors of the Lady Pilton contra Hay of Balhousie.
The Lord of Balhousie having granted Bond to his Wifes Sister the Lady Pilton
for 1000 Merks yearly, to be employed by her for any use she pleased. without
her Husbands consent, and secluding his jus mariti; The Lords found, payment
made to the Husband sufficient to Assolie from a pursuit upon a Bond,
notwithstanding that by the Bond it self, the Husbands jus Mariti was excluded.

A list of Decisions anent the Import and extent of Clauses of Provision in
Contracts of Marriage, conceived in Favors of Heirs of Conquesce and
Provision, and Bairns of second Marriages; for clearing, that notwithstanding
such Provisions, and Obligments, the Husband, or Father, has the absolute
Power and Dominion and unaccountable Administration of the Conquesce.
THe Lords sound an gratuitous Bond granted by Thomas Cowan, to the Daughter of
his first Marriage, long after his second Contract of Marriage, whereby he was
obliged to provide all his subsequent Conquesce to the Heirs of that second
Marriage, to affect his Conquesce during the said second Marriage: 9 February
1669 Cowan contra Young.
Notwithstanding that the Daughter of the first Marriage, to whom the
gratuitous Bond was granted, was both foris-familiat, and aliunde sufficiently
provided before that time; and it appears by the debate, that as a Husband
might freely have gifted all his Conquest to Strangers, so he might likewayes
gift rational proportions thereof to his Children of former Marriages,
notwithstanding any such obligment in his second Contract.

The Lords found, that the Obligments and Provisions for Conquesce in Contracts
of Matriage, did not hinder the Contracters to dispone thereupon during their
Lifetime: 16 June 1676, Mitthel contra The Children of Thomas Little-john
And that all reasonable Deeds, albeit they were done or granted, without
equivalent onerous Causes, were effectual, notwithstanding of such Obligements
and Provisions of Conquesce; and that the Children in whose favors the said
Obligements of Conquesce were conceived, could not be heard to quarrel the same.

19 June Murray's contra Murray's.
The Lords found, that rational Provisions to Children of a prior Marriage;
could not be quarrelled upon the Clause of Conquesce in the Fathers second
Contract of Marriage: And (...) 7000 Merks granted to the eldest Son of the
first Marriage: Notwithstanding that the eldest Son, had succeeded to a
considerable Land Estate by his Father: And in that Decision the Lords
declared, that they would make the former Decision, Mitchel, contra, the
Children of Little-John, a Rule for the future.

The Lords found that old Niddry having applied considerable sums for acquiring
in new and preferrable Rights of the Lands of Lochtour, and for purging and
disburdening the Lands, of other Encumbrances and Debts: The sums so expended
during his second Marriage could not be repute as sums Conquest during that
Marriage; 19 February 1683. James Wanchop contra Lord of Niddrie.
in respect Niddry had a right to the said Lands of Lochtour, standing in his
Person, before that time: And found that James Wauchop as Heir of the second
Marriage could have no Interest in the said new acquired Rights, or for
repetition of the sums expended for acquiring the same, upon the Obligment in
his Mothers Contract of Marriage, for providing all the Conquesce to him: And
this demonstrates, that sums expended for disburdening a man's Prior Heretage,
of Debts and Encumbrances affecting the same, can never be repute Conquesce,
albeit thereby the Estate be nottourly meliorat and improven, and the yearly
Rent coming in to the man augmented.

A List of Decisions for clearing the import, and extent of Obligments and
Provisions of Conquest, conceived in Favors of Wives, as to their Liferents.
The Lords found, that albeit the Husband was obliged to provide the hail sums
acquired during the Marriage, in favors of his Wife in Liferent; yet a Bond
taken by a Husband payable to a Child of his former Marriage, 10 February 1629,
Oliphant contra Phinnit.
did not fall under the Obligment of Conquesce; and found, that Conquesce was
only to be understood of what was standing in the person of the Husband, and
undisposed of, the time of his Decease:

The Lords found, that a Husband having, Stante Matrimonio, acquired the
property of Lands, formerly holding of himself; 26 November 1629. Lady
Dumfermling contra Earl of Dumfermling.
and thereafter before his Decease, disponing the same to be like ways holden
of himself, for a double or triple Few-Duty; That neither the said Acquisition
nor Improvement, by tripling the Few-Duty, did fall under the Obligment of
Conquesce in the Wife's Contract of Marriage, albeit the same was acquired, and
improven in her time; In respect the Earl had a Right to these Lands Prior to
the Marriage, albeit the same was only a Right of Superiority.

15 July 1673. Robertson contra Robertson.
The Lords found, that an obligement for providing the Wife to all the
Conquesce, could not hinder the Father to grant provisions to his Children of a
former Marriage, and even to the eldest Son and appear and Heir.

Alexander Frazer having in his contract of Marriage with Christian Frazer his
second Wife, provided her to a mean Provision of the annual rent of 3400 Merks,
and to the lyfrent of the half of the Conquest that should be made during the
Marriage, and having for preventing any debate anent the Conquest insert in the
said contract, 8 December 1687 Frazer contra Frazer.
a particular inventar of his Estate, extending to 11000 pounds scots or
thereby. It happened there was a considerable Conquesce of 15 or 16000 pounds,
made during that Marriage, But Alexander Frazer the Husband, did exhaust and
spend all the said conquesce by gratuitous Donations to his eldest Son and
Daughter of the first Marriage, of 8000 pounds, Scots, and upwards, and did
expend the sum of other 8000 pounds, or thereby, that was likwayes acquired
during that Marriage, for payment of other Debts, for which he was engadged
Prior to his said second Contract.

Christian Frazer, having after the decease of the said Alexander, pursued his
Heir, for the half of the foresaid Conquesce: and it being debated, whether the
gratuit ous donations to the Children of the first Marriage, and the sums paid
out for Debts contracted and due by the Husband before his entering into the
second contract of Marriage with the Pursuer, should affect the Estate
belonging to the Husband before that Contract and the said gratuitous
Donations and Debts sua paid, should be sustained to exhaust the Conquesce, in
prejudice of the Relicts Lyfrent, who was so meanly provided. The Lords found
that the Heir of the Defunct, ought to have the 11000 pound to which the
Fathers Estate was estimate in the said second Contract, allowed and made free
to him, in the first place, and that the haill debts due by the Husband when he
died, whether contracted before, or after the second contract of Marriage,
ought to be paid, and affect the Conquesce in the Second place and that the
Relict could only have right to the half of the superplus of the Conquesce (if
any was) after the two Deductions abovewritten.

It is observable, that albeit there were two Bills given in craving the said
interloquitor to be rectified upon their grounds, 1 That a considerable part of
the 11000 pounds, to which the Husbands Estate was estimat, was exhausled by
payment of Debts due before the second Contract, and 2 That the 4000 pounds
gifted by the Defunct to his oun Heir of Line, who was obliged to Implement
the Fathers obligment anent the Wifes lyfrent, might at least be sustained as
Conquesce. Both bills were refused, and the first interloquitor adhered to; So
that the Husbands Estate which was once for the most part exhausted by the
foresaid gratuitous Donations, and antecedent Debts, as said is, immediately
after the second Marriage, and before any Conquesce could be made, was
Sustained to be made up, to the Heir out of the Subsequent Conquesce, without
allowing the Relict her lyfrent of the equal half thereof, conform to the
obligments of the Contract, albeit her other provisions were so mean and
inconsiderable, And the principal decree is produced marked with several
letters of the Alphabet, directing to the grounds therein pleaded, and
determined and herein repeated, and the sorsaid Decision was so solemn, that
the Lords declared to the Procurators on both sides Judicialy, that they would
observe the said Decision in all such cases thereafter.

20 December 1665. Lord of Kilbocho contra Lady Kilbocho.
The Lords ^o^nd, that a (...) was obliged to pay me annual-rents of the price
of Conquest Lands. notwithstanding that she was provided Simply and absolutely
to the Conquesce, and that the Heir was sufficiently able to have paid the
same. And by this Decision, as also by an other Decision betwixt the Earls of
Dumfermling and Callendar, The Practick alleged upon by the Pursuer in the
case of the Countess of Dumfermling in Anno. 1625 is fully answered, and elided.

THE INTERLOQUITOR, Edinburgh 29 January 1690.
THe Lords having advised the debate, Finds, that the clause of Conquesce
lybelled, did not hinder the deceased Lord Collingtoun to spend his yearly
revenue as he thought fit. And find, that the Lady, be virtue of the clauses in
the Contract; has right to the Lyfrent of all sums, which belonged to him the
time of his entering into the second Marriage, or the time of his decease. But
they find, that albeit it were clear that he had releived his old Lands and
Estate, of Debts, which affected the same, the time of his entering into the
second Marriage, by sums acquired during the second Marriage; Yet that the Lady
by no clause in the contract, has any right to pursue for the lyfrent of the
Lands releived by such sums. And that the Lord Collingtoun might have employed
the sums so acquired; for relieving his Estate of Debts affecting the same the
time of entering into his second Marriage, Notwithstanding of any clause in the
Contract.

Sic Subscribitur JAMES DALRYMPLE. I.P.D.

The Ladies Appeal and Protestation
I Dame Margaret Areskine Lady Castle haven, Considering that in the Process
pursued at my Instance before the Lords of Session, against Sir James Foulis
now of Collingtoun: The said Lords be their Interloquitor bearing date the 29
of January instant, Found that the Clause of Conquesce Lybelled, did not hinder
the Deceast Lord Collingtoun to spend his yearly Revenue as he thought fit: And
found that the Lady be virtue of the Clauses in the Contract, has right to the
Liferent of all sums which belonged to him the time of his entering into the
second Marriage, or the time of his Decease: But they found, that albeit it
were clear that he had relieved his old Lands, and Estate, of Debts which
affected the same the time of his entering into the second Marriage, by sums
acquired during the second Marriage; yet that the Lady by no Clause in the
Contract has any Right to pursue for the Liferent of the Lands relieved by such
sums; and that the Lord Collingtoun might have employed the sums so acquitted,
for relieving his Estate of Debts affecting the same, the time of entering into
his second Marriage, notwithstanding of any clause in the Contract: By which
Interloquitor I conceive my self prejudged; and that by the Claim of Right it
is provided, That any person so prejudged, may appeal for remeed of Law to an
higher Judicature, I do therefore by their presents. Appeal and protest from the
said Lords of Session, to the High Court of Parliament for remeed of Law as
said is, and entreats your Lordships to stop the said Interloquitor till it be
heard in Parliament Sic subscribitur

M. ARESKINE,

The Ladies Petition to the Parliament.
Unto His Grace His Majesty's high Commissioner, And to the Right Honorable
the Nobles, and Barrons, and Burgesses, Assembled in Parliament. Dame Margaret
Areskine, Lady Castle-haven: HUMBLY SHOWS,
THat the late Sir James Foulis of Collingtoun having long sought your
Petitioner in Marriage, did offer his House and Yards, and 3000: Merks be Year,
to me in Jointure: Which he consest was all he had. Your Petitioner having at
last consented to Marry, but did refuse to take the 3000 Merks: Since it was
clear that his Children in his first Marriage by his first Lady, should then
want altogether; Yet he said, though they should want he would secure me in
that. But when I told him, I would not deal so with his Children, but
Condescended to accept of his House and Yards, and the Life rent of all Sums of
Money, Bands, or Heretage, which he should Conquess or acquire, and of all sums
of Money due to him, which he shall happen to receive during the said Marriage.
And he obliges himself to Employ the same, and take the Rights thereof to
himself and Your Petitioner, the longest liver of us two in Liferent: Of this
he was so well pleased, that he desired it might be secured as my Lawyers
should desire, which was accordingly done in as express Terms as they thought
possible, upon this Marriage following. And what ever provision was made in the
Petitioners Favors, in that Contract, as to my own former Estate: Yet he
possessed and employed a considerable part of my Estate, to entertain his Sons
Family, and to pay his former Debt After his Decease, your Petitioner little
doubted of the Possession of what was so fairly Contracted; But being forced to
Suit it before the now Lords of Session. They by their Interloquitor of the
29th of January last, Did Find, That the clause of the Contract did not hinder
the Lord Collingtoun to Employ (...) ^^ms he acquired during the second
Marriage for payment of the Debt, before he entered in the second Marriage.
Though this be expressly contrary to the Tenor and Faith of the second
Contract, by which he is expressly bound to Employ all Sums he should Acquire,
so as your Petitioner might Life-rent them. But least the Iniquity designed
should not be clear enough, since no clause in the Contract could prejudge his
Creditors, or hinder them to affect these new Acquired Sums. The said Lords by
another Clause declared that if he Employed his Money to pay his Debt, and so
to relieve Lands formerly morgaged by him to Creditors yet that your Petitioner
by no means could pretend to the Rent of these Lands so redeemed by the Money,
which by the Faith of the Contract, was destinate for your Petitioner; by which
strange Sentence all Faith of Contracts is violated, and Law which should
protect Widows is wrested, to their Ruin and Fraud, and indirect Dealings is
not only Encouraged, but owned to be the Design of the Law; for whatever might
be pretended for employing the Money acquired during the Marriage, for
releiving his morgadged Estate, yet what can color the Fraud and Iniquity of
employing it so contrary to the Tenor and express Faith of the Contract, and
the Equity of the Conveyance, as to force the profit of that Money to descend
on the Lord Collingtoun's Son, in Defraud of his Wife, by whom he profited
considerably, and Consequently was as onerous, and Just a Creditor, as he had
or could have. This being so clearly to Impugn Law, Equity, Justice, and
Honesty, that none who knew the late Lord Collingtoun, thinks he designed so
foul a Fraud; nor could ever such an Interpretation of this Contract fall under
the Prospect of so Honest a Man. Albeit your Petitioners Lawyers did fully
Redargue all these Quibbles, which my Opposites Propond, and that all Lawyers
who were not Blinded with Personal concern, do look on this Sentence alike
opposite to Law, as to Equity, and the Interest of Mankind: Yet no Address to
the greatest part of these Judges would procure Redress or Delay to your
Petitioner, whereupon I was permitted (though with Difficulty) to appeal to His
Majesty, and his Parliament as the last Result and great Sanctuary of the
Injured, and Oppressed: That your Grace, and Lordships, who sits in the highest
Capacity of Law, should have Occasion to Vindicate the Kings Laws from the
stain of being a covering for Fraud, on Subtle, or Wrested Notions. And to
show the Nation that Faith, Truth, and Honesty, are what Law is appointed to
Sustain, and to let the People find the Judgment of the Nation, can discern
Equity from Fraud, and is the best and last Refuge to the Injured; Your
Petitioners Appeal in this Matter being given in the 31 January last, it could
not procure so much as Delay, but Decree was given out,

MAY IT THEREFORE PLEASE YOUR GRACE, and Lordships, to grant warrant to Cite
the Lord Collingtoun, or any others ye shall think fit, to Compeare before Your
GRACE and Lordships, on 24 Hours Warning, he being a Member of your Meeting;
and to call for the process, and Appeal, and to Judge therein as seems Good and
Just: And in this small Case, to show the Nation, what safety they have in
their own Representatives, when called by His Majesty's Sacred Authority, and
what differences there is by Judging according to Equity, and express meaning
of Parties, and Judging by Unthought of Subtilties. And Humbly BEGGS, That the
Tenor of the Contract be considered in the plain Sense, and just effect; And
Decern the Lord Collingtoun to pay the Petitioner, the Interest of what Money
his Father received during the Marriage, belonging to him, and that for all
Years since his Fathers Death, and in time coming, during the Petitioners Life;
And to remit to the Lords of Session to receive what probation Your Petitioner
shall adduce, for proving what Money his Father did receive belonging to him
during the Marriage, and that they may give therein Decree accordingly, And
Your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc.

IF the Members of Parliament, or any other persons shall be pleased to peruse
the above-written Process; they may have a much surer ground to found their
Judgment and Determination upon, in this Case, (which is important to the
Parties, but more in the preparative to the Kingdom) Than to rely upon the bare
assertion of either Party.

It is no new thing that Parties should be persuaded of the Iniquity of any
Sentence, which cuts them off, from their Hopes and Expectations; and that
Complaints and Murmurings should arise upon these Sentences, which always
were, and may be expected; and therefore, it was ever the care of our
Lawgivers, that neither the Judicatures, nor the Persons of our Judges should
be Vilified or Contemned, seeing they Represent the Kings Person, in the
Administration of Justice: Nor that the Judges should be allowed to abuse the
Authority that is committed to them, by doing Wrong or Unhonesty. Therefore
shortly after the Institution of the College of Justice, it is provided by the
68 Act. 5. Parl. Ja. 5. That the Lords of Session should be had in special
Honor, and that no Credit be had to any that Murmur against them: But they
shall be called before the King, and if they be found Culpable, they shall be
punished after the quality of their fault; and if they be found Clean and
Innocent; the Person complaining shall be punished with rigor, and never have
Credit with the King. again. This Statute and all others, in relation to the
Session are yet standing Laws, and are suitable and agreeable to that Article in
the Instrument of Government. Whereby it is provided, That it is the Right and
Privilege of the Subject, to protest for remeed of Law to the King and
Parliament, against Sentences pronounced by the Lords of Session. Which does
not Authorize every Protestation at the pleasure of the Party; but only in
these Cases, wherein Murmurs and Complaints were allowed by our Ancient Laws:
And if such Protestarions be now found Injurious, the Party protesting, is
punishable by the former standing Law, against unjust Murmurers and Complainers

No Protestation for remeed of Law having formerly occurred since the Claim of
Right, it is of the greatest importancy, that the extent and meaning of the
said Article of the Meeting of Estates be carefully and narrowly considered,
that no practice follow upon it, which might tend to render the proper^y and
possession of the Subject more Doubtful, Disquiet, and Unsecure, than formerly,
contrary to the clear design thereof; By which it was intended, That an
important right and privilege of the Subject should be asserted and declared.

In the first place then, the foresaid Declaration does not Warrant, nor
Authorize Appeals, but only Protestations for remeed of Law. On the contrary,
the same does clearly Import a Prohibition of Appeals, by the last Provision
thereof, That such Protestations shall not stop the Execution of the Sentences
of the Lords. Which is equivalent, as if the Meeting of Estates had expressly
discharged Appeals, seeing the plain Import of an Appeal, is to suspend all
effect of the Decision or Interloquitor of that Judge, from whom the party
Appeals; yet the Lady thought fit to present a Paper, Appealing from the Lords:
And in her Petition, she does not design the Paper presented by her a
Protestation, but an Appeal, which is repeated in three several places of that
Petition: Notwithstanding Appeals be expressly prohibited and the Lords of
Session Empowered, To decide utterly in civil Causes pursued before them,
without remeed of Appellation to King and Parliament, by the 62 Act. 14 Parl.
King Jam. 2. And the 39 Act. 5. Parl. Ja 5. And which Acts were not Intended to
be Abrogate or Rescinded by any Article in the Claim of Right.

2 It cannot be imagined that the Meeting of Estates, did intend that a party
might freely protest for remeed of Law in every ca^se, without any hazard or
inconvenience, In case that Prote^tation were found not to proceed on just g
ounds, for the said Article be ng no constitution of any new Right not formerly
competent to the Subjects, But an assertion and decalaration ^ be measured by
our ancient Laws, which did allow murmurings and complaints upon just grounds;
in the same cases Protestations are allowed by that Article, as if the Lords
should refuse to Minister Justice, or if they should not only be Judges, but
Solisters, partial Counselors, Assisters and Partakers with some of the
parties, and to take Geir and Profit; in these cases, as Murmurs and
Complaints were Lawful be the 26, act 5 par. Ja. 3. and 104 Act. Par. 7. Ja. 5.
So are Protestations for remeed of Law: Or if the Session being a limited
Judicatory, should proceed to decide in matters not falling under their
Jurisdiction, As in matters of State and Government, or Crimes; or sustain
themselves Judges in the first instance in adjudications of Prizes, or
Divorces. As likewayes, if the Lords should upon full debate decide, and
thereafter upon the same grounds formerly represented super iisdem deductis,
should retract that, and make a direct contrary Decision, whereby parties would
always be uncertain of their Rights. For if they might once retract their
Decision on the same grounds, they might do it again and again for ever; and
the great Inconveniency of this was discovered by our Predecessors many ages
ago, for eviting whereof by the foresaid 62 Act 14. Par. Ja. 2. All Causes
were appointed to be utterly decided by the Lords of Session, but any remeed by
appellation to King or Parliament, because if appeals were once allowed, it
were impossible to bound the Parliament, or terminate any Decision; for the
Parliament has always power to rescind any Law that could limite them, and
make contrary Decisions on the same grounds as often as they pleased, without any
Imaginable remeed. In all these cases abovementioned, Complaints and
Protestations are lawful, but still with the Caution and Limitation mentioned
in out ancient Laws and Acts of Parliament. viz, That if Murmurs, Complaints,
or Protestations be interposed without Just and Legal Grounds authorized by the
Law, the Presenters thereof are severely punishable; which is most necessary
for preserving the Honor and Respect of the Supreme ordinary Judicature, which
bears (...)

As this is plain reason upon the one hand, so let the Consequence be
considered on the other: For if such Protestations were allowed to be offered
at the pleasure of any Party, they would necessarily come to proceed of course,
and none who have ^he Disadvantage by the Decision, will fail to offer a
Protestation, which does not cost one Farthing of Charge; and whereby there may
remain an hope and expectation, that one day, they may have that Sentence
reversed; for few men can be so just and equal in their own Concerns, as to be
easily convinced of the Justice of a Decision, which cuts off their Claim, or
makes them liable to great Burdens or Debts: And that after great loss of
Labor, Time and Money; and of those that can be convinced, there are many who
will not have the Ingenuity to forbear interposing any Protestation, that may
support the Interest of their Cause, right or wrong.

3 Suppose then this Inevitable Consequence, that every decree did contain in
the Bosom of it, a protestation for rescinding thereof by the King in
Parliament; with what assurance or quiet, could any man enjoy his fortune,
which at any time had been called in question, or might become debatable in any
time by past, or to come? How should any man know to regulate himself in the
expense of his Living, the education or provision of his Children, or in the
Management of any of his Affairs? For suppose the usual ways of Inhibition,
Arreistment, or other Diligence upon the grounds of any process had been used,
and that the Judge ordinary had annulled all upon payment, or other ground of
Law, yet the interposing Protestation would so fetter that party who was once
under diligence, that to the end of the World, he could not dispose upon any
part of his Estate heretable or moveable, that was at any time under Diligence;
because, if that Sentence of the Lords, by which the diligence was found
extinct, should come to be reduced, the diligence would revive. And all
Acquirers for whatever cause, become liable to restitution, and though it came
never to be reversed, yet the possibility thereof would so ^ burdened, nor
dispose of any part of his Estate for payment of his other Debts.

4. It is the aim and Intention of the Law of all Nations, Vt aliquis tandem
sit finis litium: And therefore every Nation has their several forms of
Process, to which every party must comply: And very often, it falls out in
every Nation, that those who have really and truly material Justice on their
part, do justly succumb in their Cause for neglect of these Forms; for whom the
Law provides no remedy, but only gives them warning of their danger, and tells
them, Vigilantibus, non dormientibus, jura subveniunt; Other Cases again are so
dubious, that upon full debate, the Judges and Learned Lawyers of every Nation,
are divided in their Opinions; so that the Decisions of most Important Causes
are often carried but by one or two Votes, (though it was far otherwise in this
Case) Yet it is generally thought every where, more secure, to rest in the
Decision of the most doubtful Case, than to leave parties unsettled in their
Rights and possessions: And oft-times it happens, that through the disadvantage
of Indistinct and unclear representation of Cases, the same Judge may determine
otherwise, then he would have done, if the Case had been fully and clearly
represented: And frequently points are mentioned in Debates so overly, that
they are neither noticed nor regarded by the opposite Advocats, nor the Lords
at deciding; and yet being once mentioned, they would be competent in a Review,
where being Illustrate, they might appear more important, than all that was
debated, or under consideration at the time of the Decision; and so might be a
ground to annul what was done most justly upon the grounds urged, and under
Consideration, whereby the Justice and Integrity of the Lords might be
tarnished by the Faults and Omissions of Parties or Procurators. And if by
Protestations such doubtful Cases were brought in without limitation, to be
debated before a different Judicatory proceeding by different forms, and in a
distinct view and in another light; it were impossible for ^ a debate, o^ what
might be t^^ con^equences o^ a contrary Decision, to hundreds of Third parties,
who had no Interest or concern the time of the first Sentence. Nor can any
person foresee all that might follow upon such a sudden alteration, as to allow
unlimited Protestations in any Case; only this much is plain, that the evident
evil Consequences are so many, as would render every man uncertain in his
enjoyments; not knowing at what time, some one of these Consequences might
reach him, which would at one blow, strick at the root of all the quiet and
secure Enjoyments and Possessions of the Liedges.

But to return from these more remote Considerations anent the import of
unlimited Protestations in general, to the particular Case in hand, suppose
that Protestations were in every Case allowed; yet it seems highly
unreasonable, that the same should be admitted otherwise, than in terms of
respect to the Lords, and in moderation; or that Parties should be admitted to
affix such injurious and reflecting Characters upon their Decisions, as the
Petition contains, as if any Decision of the Lords should be so grossly absurd,
As to violate the Faith of all Contracts, and to wrest Law to the ruin and
defraud of Widows; and not only to encourage indirect Dealings, but to own the
design of Law to be such, and to deliver a Decision that equally impugns Law,
Equity and Honesty. These expressions all contained in the Petition are so
harsh and rude, that if they were allowed at a Parties pleasure, it would
deprive the Lords of the benefit of that Credit, Respect, and Honor, which is
due to them by many former Laws, several times reiterate in every Reign, since
the Institution of the College of Justice; and which were thought necessary in
the former and present Ages, not so much for regard to the Persons of the
Judges, as to the Interest and Security of the People, that these to whom the
final determination of all civil Causes, in the ordinary Administration Justice
was committed, might not be overawed, by the Influence and Humor of any
person ^ until upon legal Trial, they were Convicted to have done Wrong or
Vnhonesty, as the Law bears

And as this method is not allowable in any Case, so for clearing the Injury
and Injustice thereof in this; the same is desired either to be considered, as
it is stated in the Process above mentioned: Or if any person be unwilling to
bestow so much labor, let it be considered in a more general view, what
rational probability can arise from the Circumstances of the Judges and
Parties, that they should be guilty of such gross Iniquity, in prejudice of the
Lady Castle-haven? As the Petition proports.

Collingtoun had no near Interest, or contingency by Relation, or otherwise,
to any person on the Bench, or in the State; and that which in all former times
has created Fears and Jealousies of corruption and Iniquity, has either been
personal Interest with, or by the Party, or Court Influence: On the other hand,
the Lady Castle-haven wanted not a Relation either upon the Bench, or in the
State; and particularly she is in that near degree of Consanguinity with the
sole Secretary of State, now His Majesty's High Commissioner, that in Law she
is reckoned in the place of a Parent to him: And though that Noble person is
endued with more Integrity, Honor and Justice, than in the least to design, or
countenance the over-awing of the Bench: Yet the Lords nether were, nor could
be Ignorant, that her Interest was sufficiently regarded, and that she did not
want a just Support and Countenance of her Friends and Relations; withal not
above one or two of the Lords were Personally known to the King, or could be
supposed to have their Advancement in Places, without the Influence of the
Secretary; and it would appear, they had very carly forgot their gratitude, if
they could in so few Weeks after their Advancement, be guilty of such gross
Iniquity to the near Relation of so eminent a Person, by whom they were so
lately Obliged. And though they could have forgot their Gratitude, and also the
Oath of God that lay upon them, and all without ^ they did so far neglect their
Interest, as to Disoblige a person, whose Favor might be so useful, in
supporting them, or promoving their farther Interest? Besides, were they
Ignorant that there were many envious Beholders, to observe their Halting,
especially in the beginning of their Administration: And what was to entice
them to all this gross Iniquity? Let the World but consider, if the Decision
had run on the other side, and that Collingtoun had Interposed a Protestation.
What Influence might these general considerations have obtained in the minds of
these who are only fit or willing to receive a general view? But the Decision
in this case, did carry so little presumption of any bias or corruption, that
it gave a general satisfaction; and nothing could have more reasonably vindicat
the reputation of the Integrity and Justice of the Lords in the eyes of all
indifferent Persons, it being thereby evident, they could not be influenced by
any interest or by-end; And it is not questioned, but the great Persons who
have Relation to the Lady will find it their Interest and Credit to support the
Lords, in determining according to their Consciences, and that they will look
upon it as a great Honor to them, That during their influence, The Judges of
the Land were not overawed or afraid by the Interest of any party, to determine
according to the Law and their Judgments, as it is recorded of one of the
greatest of our Kings, that the Lords having in his own presence, Determined
Against his interest, He rejoiced in the Integrity of his Judges, neglecting
his loss.

And whereas the Petition asserts, that the Ladies Lawyers did redargue all the
quibbles of her opposites to the Conviction of all Lawyers, who were not
blinded with personal Concern, for proving this also, there is still the same
Authority, The Ladies assertion. And that which she is pleased to call
Quibbles, is a continued train of uniform Decisions, in the cases of clauses of
Conquesce to Wives and Children, for the space of above sixty years, By all
which, the Lords have followed one constant Rule, That such Clauses do not
hinder a Husband or Father to use a ^ during his Life, albeit these should
wholly exhaust the Conquesce at his Death, As appears by the Abbreviat of
Decisions above mentioned, whereof many more of the like Import could have been
produced. And it is strange, that all Lawyers not blinded with personal
Concern, should be so much convinced of my Ladies Right, seeing the Lords were
so unanimous in a different Opinion, and that their personal Interest for
Collingtoun, could not justly be suspected. And the Lady, in all the freedom
she takes with them does not brand them with Ignorance, that they did not
understand her Case; nor does she pretend, that it was not fully and maturely
considered (the same being debated in Presentia three entire days; and after
Informations, another day spent in Advising) only the Judges were So prone to
Iniquity, that surpassing the example of all others, they practiced unjustice
for unjustice sake, without the least bait or allurement to engage them to it.

And lastly all the Iniquity that my Lady Complains of, Is this, That
Collingtoun succeeded to his Fathers Estate, which was relieved by his
purchass, during the Marriage whereof she Craves the Liferent.

It were improper and tedious, to repeat the satisfying answers in this place,
which are fully contained in the informations abovementioned. Only if the
Lady's own Petition be ducly considered, it may furnish no small evidence,
that this was no such Iniquity, as is contended. For, 1 The Petition bears That
the deceased Collingtoun offered a Jointure of 3000 merks yearly, which was all
he had, but she did refuse to accept of that, because thereby the Children of
the first Marriage would altogether want, and therefore she did only take a
general clause of Conquesce in the terms foresaid. Can any thing then be more
clear, than this acknowledgement, that it was the design of Parties, that the
Heirs of the Lord Collingtoun should succeed to his Estate of Collingtoun? And
the very terms of the Contract, beside the present acknowledgment bears, that
the Conquesce during the Marriage, should belong to (...) which failing to
Colingtouns other Heirs, who are to succeed to his other Estate. So that still
it was in prospect, that the Heirs of the first Marriage, should succeed to the
Estate of Collingtoun, And that the Lady would not deal so with them, as to
prejudge them of that Succession, even during her life. This being once
acknowledged, how can it be controverted that by the design of the communing
and contract, the Defunct was allowed to relieve these Lands, that his Son
might succeed? Seeing it is imported and acknowledged by every step of the
Ladies process, her Summonds, and all the Debate on either hand, That
Collingtouns debt at the time of his Marriage, did exceed the value of his
whole Estate, So that it was impossible that his Son could succeed to any part
of the Estate, unless the debt were paid. And if the Lady had that Justice and
Affection to the Children, as she expresses in her Petition, that she would not
hinder them to succeed, wherein did this bounty consi^t? Unless the Defunct had
been allowed to relieve his Estate, Without which their succession thereto,
(which the Lady he^self designed) was utterly impossible; And if any farther
evidence were needful, let this be considered, that the Lady takes the Lifrent
of the House and Yeards by her Contract, which she does possess, and she
refuses a Jointure of 3000 merks out of that Estate in special, or by a general
obligement, which would have been a Debt affecting the Defuncts Heirs; why was
all this done, and a clause of Conquesce accepted in place thereof, if there
had been any project for binding up the Defunct from releiving, his own Estate?
Did ever any Lawyer lay a clause of Conquesce in whatsoever terms conceived, in
the Balance with a Special Obligement to a Wife? The one being the Most, and
the other the Le^st effectual of all obligem^nts.

2 Collingtoun did not succeed to his Fathers small Estate, which the Lady's
Petition owns to be but 3000 merks yearly, nor was it releived by his Fathers
means, but by his Ladies Portion, which was very considerable, and all that his
Fa her could contribute for relief thereof, was not valuable; This ^ Estate in
Anno. ^^^^. A^ which time, his Father had only enjoyed his Sallary, as a Lord
of the Session, and a part of his Ladies Jointure, for a few years, which was
no Fond to Enrich and Enable him to pay any Considerable Debt, after deduction
of the expenses of the Family, and the Education of his Children, upon whom he
bestowed liberally. And it will not be pretended that Collingtoun could be
liable for any deed of his Fathers, by misapplication of Conquesce or
otherwise, after he was provided and secured to the Estate by his contract of
Marriage. And if the Defuncts Conquesce were but generally known* there would
not be ground to make so great a strugle about the Liferent of it. But the true
rise of the Difficulty is in this, that Collingtoun never heard or understood
any thing of the Ladies claim, during his Fathers Life, and thereby was not
upon his Guard to provide against it, or to keep his proper acquisition by his
Lady, separate from his Fathers Interest; but having lived in a perfect and
entire Confidence and friendship with his Father, and suffered his Lady's
portion to be applied, for the payment of his Fathers Debt at his pleasure,
without taking assignation to one shilling of what was paid, yea without so
much as mentioning, from whom the Money was received, the difficulty of
clearing what was paid by his own Money, makes him the more concerned to
Defend, and the Lady more earnest to pursue, she hoping by the process, to have
reached not only the Liferent of her Husbands Conquest, but likewayes of this
Collingtouns Portion with his Lady, which is far from the Kindness, and Just
Inclinations, expressed in the Lady's Petition, to have been communed at the
Contract of Marriage, in favors of the Defuncts Heirs and Children.

FINIS.

