An Exact ACCOUNT OF THE Present Posture of Affairs IN DUBLIN.
AS ALSO The Condition of the English and Irish Army. WITH The Particulars
relating to James-Town and Sligoe.
Licensed November the 19th. 1689. J. F.

Chester, the 16th. of November, 1689. SIR,
I Have here sent you an Account of the Affairs of Ireland, as we have received
it from Sir John Davis and others. Sir John made his Escape from Dablin in a
Wherry, and got to the Camp at Dundalk; he left Dublin on Sunday was fortnight,
and arrived here from the Camp on Tuesday last: He gives a very lamentable
account of the Condition that our Friends in Dublin are in, he says, that two
days before he made his Escape, about fourteen Persons were committed to Prison
for High Treason, for Conspiring the Death of the late King James, and had
notice given them, that they would be proceeded against the first of the Term,
which begins in Dublin November 6th. He does not doubt but they will be found
Guilty, right or wrong, and be executed. Among those that were committed for
this pretended Treason, were Capt. Fitz gera^^. Dr. King, Mr. Tho. Crow, Mr.
Robert (...) by, Counselor Edward Winkfield, Counselor Coughlan, Mr. Hector
Vaughan, Mr. Handcock, Senior, and Counselor William Handcock, with others;
many more were imprisoned besides these, as Counselor Witchett, and most of
the Citizens of note, but not committed under the same Circumstances. In short,
he does relate such dreadful things of what the poor Protestants have endured
of late in Dublin, that would make your Heart bleed to hear. Several of them
are dead, as Sir John Castleton, Dr. Mercer, Mr. Samuel Helsham, Bookseller,
Mr. Tho. Palmer, Scrivener, Lord Li^bou^n's Agent.

Last Night arrived here from Dublin Abraham Fuller the Quaker, with one Woman
and four Seamen, in a small Vessel of 14 Tuns, he left Dublin on Wedne^day the
13th. Instant, and gives us a much better Account of things there; he says,
that most of the Protestants are released on Bail, except Capt. Fitzgerald,
Dr. King, Counselor Coughlan, Mr. John Weaver, Mr. Hector Vaughan, etc.
Likewise that most of the Gentlemen in the County of Westmeath are set at
Liberty; but that Mass is publicly celebrated in Christ-Church, St. Patrick's
Church, and the College of Dublin, and in most of the Churches in the Country;
that the Lord Dover, with the Marquess of Albeville, was arrived before he came
away. Fuller says, that upon his arrival, the Irish were greatly dejected, in
regard he had not brought with him any Assistance of men, Arms, Ammunition, or
any thing else, which they with great impatience expected from France. The Lord
Dover gives out, that they lost a Ship laden with Arms and Ammunition, and that
the Ship he was in narrowly escaped our Men of War, being pursued by some of
them. Fuller likewise contradicts what has been reported amongst us here, of
any other Shipping being got into Ireland from France, but that the Lord Dover
came in.

We were not without some apprehensions, that Fuller might be come over upon
some in Design, and so to relate things otherwise than they were, but we have
had him carefully examined before Sir George St. George, and cannot find any
ground to suspect him. He further says, that before the late King James broke
up his Camp, they had a great Mortality among them, and that they lost many of
their Horse for want of Forage and above 10000 of their Men dye^, insomuch,
that he heard several of the^r Officers declare, that if they had fought, as
the Irish Officers would have done (but were opposed by the French) they could
not have lost so many, though they had been beaten; that they have brought a
very Pestilential Fever with them to Dublin, and to other places where they are
marched, of which many do daily dye.

The Account they have in Dublin of James Town and Sligoe is very different
from what our People from the Camp have given out, but indeed I do not find any
of them can give an Account of the matter, for it was very uncertainly reported
in the Camp when they came away. The Account that Fuller gives from Dublin, is,
that Col. Sarsfield having a detached Party of 4000 men from the Irish Camp,
was joined by a Party of the Connaught Forces, consisting of 3000 more; that
they marched straight to James Town, in which was a Garrison of abour 100 of
our men, who having notice of their approach, quitted the place, and got safe
10 Sligoe, to which place Sarsfield likewise came, and out men there behaved
themselves so well, as to get off with very inconsiderable loss. But the most
certain Account we have, is by a Letter from one Mr. Murry, to Mr. Robert Shaw,
dated at Ballyshannon, Nov. 4. who mentions nothing of these particulars, but
that they are all very well at Sligoe, and likewise in all those parts.

The Reports we have had about our Army, are in a great measure false; I have
spoke with several who came from thence, that say, we have not lost above 1500
men by Sickness, that several are sickly, but in a good posture of Recovery,
our Army being gone into their Winter Quarters. Our Dutch and French Soldiers
are very well, the Country agreeing extremely well with them, few or none of
them being sick.

Our Army is very well furnished with all sorts of Provisions from our Ships,
and from the North; Forage is somewhat scarce for our Horse, but that is
supplied by the great plenty of Grass every where, and a sufficient stock of
Oats, which our Ships constantly furnish.

Fuller says, that Salt is sold in Dublin at 9 l. the Hogshead, and they
generally Report, that they have very little Ammunition. The late King expects
another Invasion from England to land in Munster, he still continues in Dublin.
This is what at present offers from

Your Humble Servant, etc.

London: Printed for Roger Smit^ ^n Fleet Street. 1689.


