An Exact and Particular ACCOUNT Of the Defeat given to the Rebels in the
County of Cork, by the Lord Justice Cox, and Coll. Hastings, with 2000 of the
Army and Militia? And of the Lord Lisburn's cutting off a Party of the French
and Irish Horse, near Lanesborough Pass. 2. July. 1691.
In a Letter from Dublin, June the 25.
Licensed,

July the 1st. 1691. J. F.



ACcording to my promise in my last, of the 23d, I herewith send you the
Perticulars of the late Actions of the Lord Justice Cox, and Coll. Hastings, in
the County of Cork; with the late Action of Dean Sing, and what other Material
Actions has happened since the taking the Forts of the English Town of Athlone.

Cork June 21st. Mr Justice Cox, Governor of the County of Cork, went to
Innikean on Wednesday last, and carried with him one of their Majesty's
Engineers, by whose advice he caused part of the Town to be Fortified, and
placed a Garrison of the Militia, as well in the Town, as in the Castle, which
being done, he went to view Dunmanaway., which he found totally Demollished;
and from thence detatcht a party of 250 of the Militia, under the command of
Colonel Townsend to Bantry, where on Sunday last, they took a considerable
prey of Cattle, and abundance of Plunder, Killed above 100 of the Rebels, and
took several Arms, without any loss, except 4 Horses, which were Shot. --
Colonel Hastings Governor of Cork, has Siezed upon Drumanneen a very
considerable Post, near the Black-Water, which is now Garrisoned by a good
number, both of the Army and Militia, and is about a Mile distant from
Ballyelough.

The Garrison at Fermoy on the 18th. made an Incursipn into the Borders of the
County of Lymerick, took 120 large Cows, and some Arms, and Killed some of the
Rebels. -- Yesterday Colonel Hastings, with 200 of the Army, Horse and
Dragoons, and 500 Militia Dragoons went to Ballynagooly with intent to join 3
or 400 more of the Army and Militia that were there abouts, and at Drumaneenn,
and together to make an Incursion into the Enemies Quarters, and it happned so,
that Major Culliford with 120 of Colonel Mathews's Dragoons, and 500 Militia
went the Evening before to New Market; in pursuit of 2 Troops of Carrolls
Dragoons, which he overtook, cut in pieces, took 30 of their Horses, and a prey
of 200 Cows, which Encouraged him to go 67 Miles further to Slevelogher. But
the Rebels having lald an Ambush of 6 or 700 Men, at his return fell upon him,
and though he had the goog luck to kill an Officer and 60 of the Enemy, yet
being overpowered by their numbers he was forced to retreat, and upon
Examination, we find about 70 Men missing, whereof we since find 13 are
Prisoners, 43 got to the Castle of Drumagh, near Glanturk (which they maintain
and have there the 30 Horses, which they took from the Enemy,) (...) we hope
the other 14 Men are safe, and will speedily return. -- Coll. Hastings, upon
the News thereof, Marched to favor their Retreat, and come time enough to kill
an Officer, and 50 of the Rebels. -- This Morning Colonel Hastings Marched
from Ballinagooly, to relieve the aforesaid Castle, he had with him 1003 Men:
So we doubt not to have a good account of the Enemy before he returns.

Kildare, June 23d. Dr. Sing, our Dean, marched the other day at the Head of
Capt. Baggot's D^^^oons, and joined with Capt. White, and Capt. (...) near the
Bogg, at Edenaerry whe^^ (...) Partys of Rebels, the Horse being posted, the
Foot from the News, went into the Bogg on the^ side, those of Kilmege from
theirs (...) Kathangan, by agreement they were all at their Posts by the Break
of Day: The Wicklow Men, commanded by Lieut. Hamiltn, and Ensign Hawkshead,
happened first to fall upon them, in number about 60, whom they attackt and
made fly, in their flight they divided into several Parties, and Hamilton
having before put his Men into three Divisions, each of them met with a Party
of the Rogues. Hamilton at first firing killed 13 on the spot, and then in the
Pursuit, drove them on Capt. Chabenor's Horse, who gave them a warm reception,
and beat them back into the Bogg, killing 3, where Hamilton received them
again, and killed 5 more, they then scoured to that side of the Bogg where Dean
Sing, and Capt. Baggot's Dragoons were, thinking it open, but the Dragoons
soon dismounted, which caused the Rebels to make off again into the Bogg, but
met with one Corporal Howard, and 20 of Hamilton's Party, who soon killed 8
more, (4 of them with his own hand) the Rebels made all possible haste to get
from these warm Salutations, and the Corporal still pursued them toward
Clonbullock, where they met with one Mr. James Purefoy, with half a dozen Horse
from Ballylaoken, who killed 3 more. The remainder of the Party thus broke, and
shattered, got into the thick Woods, into which our Men followed them, but
could not find them: In all these Actions, every Man showed his diligence and
readiness, especially Dean Sing, Lieutenant Hamilton, and his Ensign Hawkshead.

From the Camp at Athlone, on the Brinks of the Shannon.
The Lord Lisburn, being ordered by the Gener^^ for Lanesborough; he marched
from the Camp on Tuesday Night, with 2000 detatched Foot, and 500 Horse and
Dragoons; and in the way, near that place, his advanced Parties met with a
detached Party of the Enemy, consisting of above 100 of their best Horse,
Commanded by a French Lieutenant Colonel. Our Men attacked them, but on the
first Firing they fled, and, notwithstanding all that the French Officer could
do, they could not be persuaded to ralley, our Men being well Horsed, pursuing
them close, many of them, for haste, rode into the River, and were Drowned;
several others our Men killed in the pursuit as well as at their first Firing.

London, Printed by W. Bonny, in Little-Britain, 1691.


