AN EXACT ACCOUNT Of the Whole PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE Right Reverend Father in
GOD, HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON, Before the Lord CHANCELLOR, And the other
Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXVIII.

THE KING'S ECCLESIASTICAL Commission.
JAMES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Most Reverend Father in God, Our
Right Trusty and Right Wellbeloved Councellor, William Lord ArchBishop of
Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan. And to Our Right Trusty
and Right Well=beloved Councellor, George Lord Jefferyes, Lord Chancellor of
England. And to our Right Trusty, and Right Well=beloved Cousin and Councellor,
Lawrence Earl of Rochester, Lord High Treasurer of England. And to Our Right
Trusty, and Right Well=beloved Cousin and Councellor Robert Earl of Sunderland,
President of Our Council, and Our Principal Secretary of State. And to the
Right Reverend Father in God, Our Right Trusty and Well=beloved Councellor,
Nathanael Lord Bishop of Duresme, And to the Right Reverend Father in God, Our
Right Trusty and Well=beloved Thomas Lord Bishop of Rochester. And to Our Right
Trusty and Well=beloved Councellor, Sir Edward Herbert knight. Lord Chief Justice
of the Pleas, before Us to be holden, Assigned, Greeting. We for diverse good
weighty and necessary Causes and Considerations, Us hereunto especially moving,
of Our mere Motion and certain knowledge, by force and virtue of our Supreme
Authority and Prerogative Royal, do Assign, Name, and Authorize by these Our
Letters-Patent, under the Great Seal of England, You the said Lord Arch=Bishop
of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor of England, Lord High Treasurer of England,
Lord President of Our Council, Lord Bishop of Duresme, Lord Bishop of
Rochester, and Our Chief Justice aforesaid, or any Three or more of you,
whereof You the said Lord Chancellor to be one, from time to time, and at all
times during Our pleasure, to Exercise, Use, Occupy and Execute under Us all
manner of jurisdictions, privileges, and preheminencies in any=wise touching
or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, within this Our
Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, and to visit, reform, redress, order,
correct and amend all such abuses, offenses, contempts, and enormities
whatsoever, which by the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Laws of this our Realm can
or may lawfully be reformed, redressed, corrected, restrained, or amended, to
the pleasure of Almighty God, and increase of virtue, and the conservation of
the peace and unity of this Realm. And we do hereby give and grant unto you, or
any Three or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one, thus by us named, assigned, authorized, and appointed,
by force of our supreme authority and prerogative Royal, full power and
authority, from time to time, and at all times during our pleasure, under us to
exercise, use and execute all the premises, according to the tenor and effect
of these our Letters Patent, any matter or cause to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding. And we do by these Presents give full power and authority unto
you, or any Three or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one, by all lawful ways or means from time to time hereafter
during our pleasure, to enquire of all offenses, contempts, transgressions, and
misdemeanors done and committed, and hereafter done and to be committed,
contrary to the Ecclesiastical Laws of this our Realm, in any County, City,
Borough, or other place or places exempt or not exempted, within this our Realm
of England, and Dominion of Wales; and of all and every Offender or Offenders
therein, and them, and every of them to order, correct, reform, and punish, by
censure of the Church. And also we do give and grant full power and authority
unto you, or any Three or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said
Lord Chancellor to be one, in like manner as is aforesaid, from time to time,
and at all times during our pleasure, to enquire of, search out, and call
before you all and every Ecclesiastical person or persons, of what degree or
dignity soever, as shall offend in any of the particulars before mentioned, and
them, and every of them to correct, and punish for such their misbehaviours and
misdemeanors, by suspending or depriving them from all promotions
Ecclesiastical, and from all functions in the Church, and to inflict such other
punishments or censures upon them, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of this
Realm. And further we do give full power and authority unto you, or any Three
or more of you as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be
one, by virtue hereof, and in like manner and form as is aforesaid, to enquire,
hear, determine, and punish all Incest, Adulteries, Fornications, Outrages,
Misbehaviours, and disorders in Marriage, and all other grievances, great
crimes or offenses which are punishable, or reformable by the Ecclesiastical
Laws of this our Realm, committed or done, or hereafter to be committed or
done, in any place exempt or not exempt, within this our Realm, according to
the tenor of the Ecclesiastical Laws in that behalf: Granting you, or any Three
or more of you as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be
one, full power and authority to order and award such punishment to every such
offender, by censures of the Church, or other lawful ways, as is aforesaid; and
further we do give full power and authority unto you, or any Three or more of
you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, all and
every Offender and Offenders in any of the premises, and also all such, as by
you, or any Three or more of you as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one, shall seem to be suspected persons in any of the
premises, and them to examine, touching every or any of the premises which you
shall object against them; and to proceed against them, and every of them as
the nature and quality of the offense, or suspicion in that behalf shall
require. And also to call all such Witnesses, or any other person or persons
that can inform you concerning any of the premises, as you, or any Three or
more of you as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one,
and them, and every of them, to examine upon their corporal oaths, for the
better trial and opening of the truth of the premises, or any part thereof. And
if you, or any Three or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one, shall find any person or persons whatsoever obstinate or
disobedient in their appearance before you, or any Three or more of you as is
aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, at your calling and
commandment, or else not in obeying, or in not accomplishing your orders,
decrees, and commandments, or any thing touching the premises or any part
thereof, or any other branch or clause contained in this Commission, that then
you, or any Three or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one, shall have full power and authority to punish the same
person and persons so offending, by Excommunication, Suspension, Deprivation,
or other Censures Ecclesiastical; and when any person shall be convented or
prosecuted before you as aforesaid, for any of the causes above expressed, at
the instance and suit of any person prosecuting the offense in that behalf,
that then you, or any Three or more of you as is aforesaid, whereof you the
said Lord Chancellor to be one, shall have full power and authority to award
such costs and expenses of the Suit, as well to and against the party, as shall
prefer or prosecute the said offense, as to and against any party or parties
that shall be convented according as their Causes shall require, and to you in
Justice shall be thought reasonable. And further our will and pleasure is, that
you assume our well=beloved Subject William Bridgman Esquire, one of the Clerks
of our Council, or his sufficient Deputy or Deputies in that behalf to be your
Register, whom we do by these presents depute to that effect, for the
Registring of all your Acts, Decrees, and Proceedings, by virtue of this our
Commission; and that in like manner, you, or any Three or more of you, whereof
you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, by your discretions shall appoint one
or more Messenger or Messengers, or other Officer or Officers necessary and
convenient to attend upon you for any service in this behalf. Our will and
express commandment also is, That there shall be two paper Books invented and
made, the one to remain with the said Register, or his sufficient Deputy or
Deputies, the other with such person, and in such places as you the said
Commissioners, or any Three or more of you, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one, shall in your discretions think most fit and meet; in
both which Books shall be fairly entered all the Acts, Decrees, and Proceedings
made or to be made, by virtue of this our Commission. And whereas our
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and diverse Cathedral and Collegiate,
Churches, Colleges, Grammar Schools, and other Ecclesiastical Incorporations,
have been erected, founded, and endowed by several of our Royal Progenitors,
Kings and Queens of this Realm, and some others by their charity and bounty of
some of their Subjects, as well within our Universities as other parts and
places, the Ordinances, Rules and Statutes whereof are either imbesled, lost,
corrupted, or altogether imperfect. We do therefore give full power and
authority to you, or any Five or more of you, of whom we will you the
forenamed] the Lord Chancellor always to be one, to cause and command in our
Name, all and singular the Ordinances, Rules and Statutes of our said
Universities, and all and every Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, Colleges,
Grammar Schools, and other Ecclesiastical Incorporations, together with their
several Letters=Patents, and other Writings, touching or in any wise concerning
their several Erections and Foundations, to be brought and exhibited before
you, or any Five and more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one; willing, commanding, and authorizing of you, or any Five
or more of you, as aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one,
upon the exhibitting, and upon diligent and deliberate view, search, and
examination of the said Statutes, Rules, and Ordinances, LettersPatents and
Writings as is aforesaid, the same to correct, amend, and alter; and also where
no Statutes are extant, in all or any of the aforesaid Cases, to devise and set
down such good Orders and Statutes as you, or any Five or more of you, whereof
you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, shall think meet and convenient, to be
by us confirmed, ratified, allowed, and set forth, for the better order and
rule of the said Universities, Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, Colleges,
and Grammar Schools, erections, and foundations, and the Possessions and
Revenues of the same, and as may best tend to the honor of Almighty God,
increase of Virtue, Learning, and Unity in the said places, and the public
Weal and Tranquillity of this our Realm. Moreover, our Will, Pleasure, and
Commandment is, that you our said Commissioners, and every of you, shall
diligently and faithfully execute this our Commission, and every part and
branch thereof, in manner and form aforesaid, and according to the true meaning
thereof, notwithstanding any appellation, provocation, privilege, or exemption
in that behalf, to be had, made, pretended, or alleged by any person or
persons resident or dwelling in any place or places exempt, or not exempt,
within this our Realm; any Law, Statutes, Proclamations, or Grants,
Privileges, or Ordinances, which he, or may seem contrary to the Premises
notwithstanding. And for the better credit, and more manifest notice of your so
doing, in the Execution of this our Commission, our pleasure and commandment
is, that to your Letters missive, Processes, Decrees, Orders, and Judgments,
for or by you, or any Three or more of you, as is aforesaid, to be awarded,
sent forth, had, made, decreed, given or pronounced, at such certain public
places as shall be appointed by you, or any Three or more of you, as is
aforesaid, for the due Execution of this our Commission, you, or some Three or
more of you as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one,
shall cause to be put and fixed a Seal, Engraven with a Rose and Crown, and the
Letter J. and figure 2 before, and the Letter R. after the same, with a ring or
circumference about the same Seal, containing as follows, Sigillum
Commissionariorum Regiae Majestatis ad Causas Ecclesiasticas. Finally, We will
and command all and singular other our Ministers and Subjects in all and every
place and places, exempt and not exempt, within our Realm of England, and
Dominion of Wales, upon any knowledge or request from you, or any Three or more
of you as is aforesaid, to them, or any of them, given or made, to be aiding,
helping and assisting unto you, and to your commandments, in and for the due
executing your Precepts, Letters, and other Processes, requisite in and for the
due Executing of this our Commission, as they, and every of them tender our
pleasure, and will answer the contrary at their utmost perils. In Witness, etc.

The KINGS's LETTER.
Dated Monday, June the 14th, 1686. Delivered at Fulham on Thursday, being the
17th of the same June in the Afternoon, by Mr. Atterbury the Messenger.

JAMES R:
RIGHT Reverend Father in God, We greet you well.
Whereas We have been Informed, and are fully Satisfied, that Dr. John Sharp,
Rector of the Parish Church of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County of
Middlesex, and in your Diocese, notwithstanding Our late Letter to the most
Reverend Fathers in God the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and Our
Directions concerning Preachers, given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 15 th of
March, 1685. in the Second Year of Our Reign; yet he, the said Dr. John Sharp,
in Contempt of the said Orders, has in some of the Sermons he has since
preached, presumed to make unbecoming Reflections, and to utter such
Expressions as were not fit or proper for him; endeavoring thereby to beget in
the Minds of his Hearers an Evil Opinion of Us and Our Government, by
insinuating Fears and Iealousies to dispose them to Discontent, and to lead
them into Disobedience and Rebellion. These are therefore to require and
command you immediately upon Receipt hereof, forthwith to Suspend him from
further Preaching in any Parish Church or Chapel in your Diocese, until he has
given Us Satisfaction, and Our further Pleasure be known herein. And for so
doing this shall be your Warrant: And so We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Windsor, the 14th Day of June, 1686. in the Second Year
of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command. Sunderland.


The Bishop of London's Answer.
Sent by Dr. Sharp to the Earl of Sunderland, then at Hampton Court, upon
Friday June 18. who could have no Answer. To the Right Honorable, the Earl of
Sunderland, Lord President, etc.

My Lord,
I Always have, and shall count it my Duty to obey the King in whatever
Commands He lays upon me, that I can perform with a safe Conscience: But in
this, I humbly conceive, I am obliged to proceed according to Law; and
therefore it is impossible for me to comply; because, though His Majesty commands
me only to execute His Pleasure, yet in the Capacity I am, to do it, I must Act
as a Judge; and your Lordship knows no Judge Condemns any Man before he has
Knowledge of the Cause, and has Cited the Party. However, I sent to Mr. Dean,
and acquainted him with His Majesty's Displeasure, whom I find so ready to give
all Reasonable Satisfaction, that I have thought fit to make him the Bearer of
this Answer, from him that will never be unfaithful to the King, nor otherwise
than

MY LORD, Your Lordships most Humble Servant, H. London.


On Sunday after Dr. Sharp carried a Petition to Windsor, which was not
admitted to be read. Which is as follows.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Petition of John Sharp, Clerk

Shows,

THat nothing is so afflictive to Your Petitioner, as his Unhappiness to have
Incurred Your Majesty's Displeasure, which he is so sensible of, that ever
since Your Majesty was pleased to give notice of it, he has forborne all
Public Exercise of his Function, and still continues so to do.

Your Petitioner can with great Sincerity affirm, that ever since he has been
a Preacher, he has faithfully endeavored to do the best Service he could in
his Place and Station, as well to the late King, Your Royal Brother, as your
Majesty, both by Preaching and otherwise.

And so far he has always been from venting any thing in the Pulpit tending to
Schism or Faction, or any way to the Disturbance of Your Majesty's Government,
that he has upon all occasions in his Sermons, to the utmost of his Power, set
himself against all sorts of Doctrines and Principles that look that way: And
this he is so well assured of, that he cannot but apprehend that his Sermons
have been very much misrepresented to Your Majesty.

But if in any Sermon of his, any Words or Expressions have unwarily slipped from
him, that have been capable of such Constructions, as to give Your Majesty
Cause of Offense, as he solemnly professes he had no ill Intention in those
Words or Expressions, so he is very sorry for them, and resolves for the future
to be so careful in the Discharge of his Duty, that Your Majesty shall have
Reason to believe him to be Your most Faithful Subject.

And therefore he earnestly Prays, that Your Majesty out of Your Royal Grace
and Clemency, would be pleased to lay aside the Displeasure You have conceived
against Your Humble Petitioner, and restore him to that Favor which the rest
of the Clergy enjoy under Your Majesty's Gracious Government.

So shall Your Petitioner ever Pray, etc.

THE Proceedings, etc.
UPon Tuesday Aug. 3. the Commissioners opened their Commission, and
immediately sealed a Citation to Atterbury the Messenger, who upon Wednesday
morning brought it to the Bishop of London at Fulham, for him to appear before
the Commissioners, on Monday the 9 th. of the same Month, and left a Copy of
it. Which is as follows.

The CITATION.
By His Majesty's Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes.

YOU and either of You, are hereby required to Cite and Summon the Right
Reverend Father in God, Henry Lord Bishop of London, to appear Personally
before Us, in the Council Chamger at Whitehall, upon the 9th. day of this
Instant, at ten of the Clock in the Morning, to Answer to such Matters, as on
His Majesty's behalf shall then and there be objected against him. And of the
due Execution hereof, you are to certify us at the day and time aforesaid:

Given under Our Seal the third day of August. 1680. To Thomas Atterbury, and
Thomas Eddows, or either of them. Monday, Aug. 9. 1686. At the Council Chamber
at Whitehall. The Ld. Chancellor. The Ld. Treasurer. The Ld. President. The
Ld. Bp. of Duresme. The Ld. Bp. of Rochester. The Ld. Chapter Just. Herbert.



The Lord Bishop of London appeared, and the Lord Chancellor spoke to him as
follows.

Ld. Chapter My Lord, you are not Ignorant, I suppose, of the King's Letter which
was sent to the Clergy; My Lord of Canterbury has Communicated to you. You are
here Charged not to have observed his Majesty's Commands in the Case of Dr.
Sharp, whom you were ordered to Suspend, for going against the Orders of that
Letter.


B. L. My Lord, I am much surpised at what your Lordship tells me, and hope I
have not disobeyed the King's Commands. Your Lordship cannot believe I did this
without Advice, and if my Counsel have misled me, I hope my own Ignorance of
the Law will plead so far in my Favor, as to render my Fault (if any) very
Excusable.


L. Chapter My Lord, you know Ignorantia Iuris non Excusat.


B. L. But if I have not offended willingly, it may palliate at least.


L. Chapter My Lord, we are not here to discourse, but to Examine why you did not
obey.


B. L. I humbly beg a Copy of the Commission, and a Copy of my Charge.


L. Chapter Does your Lordship think my Lords are not very well satisfied upon what
account they sit, and that they have power to judge your Lordship? A Copy is a
thing never done; should we grant you a Copy, all that come before us would
have the like, for we must do equal Justice to all. Besides, it is to be had at
every Coffee-House.


B. L. My Lord, this is a New Commission, I cannot tell how to inform my self
whether any thing that relates particularly to my Case, may not be found there.
It is a Matter of high Concern. Besides, I am here under such Circumstances, as
ought to make me very Cautious. I am a Peer, I am a Bishop: I hope your
Lordships will take all into Consideration, and at least give me leave to read
the Commission.


L. Chapter You need not doubt but your Quality, Station, and Family will be
considered by their Lordships; but if you insist upon seeing the Commission,
you must withdraw.


After a small respite of withdrawing, the Bishop and the Commissioners were
called in again.

L. Chapter Their Lordships have considered of what your Lordship desired, and are
of Opinion, that you shall neither have a Copy of, nor see the Commission;
neither will they give a Copy of the Charge. The Commission is upon Record.


B. L. My Lord, I must submit; but it will be hard to carry my Charge in my
head: I may mistake.


L. Chapter It is a short Question, you may easily remember it: Why did you not
obey the King's Commands?


B. L. It is a short Question; but may require a long Answer. I must beg time
to advise with Counsel, and to have them plead.


L. Chapter God forbid else. But what time does your Lordship desire?


B. L. Your Lordship knows better than I, that it is the deadest time of the
year, every body is out of Town with their Tenants in the Country, about their
private Affairs.


L. Chapter My Lord, the Town is never so empty, but there will be Counsel enough,
unless you can be satisfied with none but those that are abroad. But what time
would you have?


B. L. Considering the time, and that there is not one Civilian in the Commons,
I hope you will give me till toward the Term.


L. Chapter My Lord, 'twill never be; you cannot expect so long a delay.


B. L. I know not whether there be any Appeal from this Court. If therefore I
am to stand or fall at this Blow, your Lordships will in Justice allow me the
longer time to be fully prepared.


L. Chapter Does you^ Lordship expect that this Court will tell you whether there
lies an Appeal from it or no?


B. L. I did not ask the Question, only supposed it.


L. Chapter What Answer at present occurs to encounter your Reasons for longer
time, is, that the King's Affairs will not suffer long time. But since you
propose no less time, I will propose: what think you of a Week?


B. L. I can do nothing in a Weeks time.


L. Chapter Not to trouble your Lordship, and the Company, to withdraw again, I
will ask my Lords whether it be not a sufficient time? He asked them one by
one, and they all agreed in the Affirmative.


B. L. I must submit; but I hope your Lordships will not be surpised, if I am
forced to desire longer time when I wait upon you again?


L. Chapter Their Lordships will not Capitulate.


B. L. My Lord, I only leave it with you, and hope there will be some
Consideration of my Family's, and my own sufferings, and constant Loyalty, that
it would not be an easy matter for me to be thought to question the King's
Commands, where I can obey them.


Their Lordships adjourned till Monday, Aug. 16. 1686.

Aug. 16. 1686. The Bishop of L. appeared.

L. Chapter My Lord, are you ready to give an Answer to the Question?


B. L. My Lord, I do assure you I have employed my time as well as possibly I
could; but find that, for the Reasons I formerly mentioned, it was too short
for me to prepare my self.


L. Chapter Has your Lordship nothing else to offer?


B. L. I do humbly offer this as my Request, that your Lordships would give me
longer time: For I writ to several Considerable Counsel out of Town, none of
which are come up; and those few that are here, the thing is so new to them,
that they could not thoroughly consider matters in so short a time.


L. Chapter What time would you have?


B. L. I will not be unreasonable: a ^or^night.


L. Chapter Be pleased to withdraw.

After this, the Bishop was called in again.


L. Chapter My Lord, we have considered of your Request, and their Lordships are
resolved to give no time for pleading to their Jurisdiction: They are well
appriz'd by what Authority they sit here. If your Lordship has been told that
any Court will admit of a Plea to their Jurisdiction, they have deceived you;
therefore if that be your meaning, they will allow no time.


B. L. That is not all; I am not fully instructed for an Answer to the
Question: I know not yet in what manner to Answer.


L. Chapter We do not insist upon Forms and Manners, if your Lordship want nothing
that is material.


B. L. I am sorry I did not so clearly express my self: I want time to prepare
for a material Answer.


L. Chapter My Lord, I come hither on purpose for this business, and every body
knows at this time where my Health obliges me to be.


B. L. I protest I have no design to trifle with you, for I am really not
ready, and must therefore beg more time, if it may be allowed.


L. Chapter Well, my Lords are willing to grant you a Fornight, you will therefore
be pleased to be here on Tuesday come fortnight, at Eleven in the Morning.


Here it must be observed, that the Bishop did in this time send his Proctor to
their Register for a Copy of what Orders and other Minutes they had set down
concerning his business, but it was refused, though his Counsel told him, it
never was denied in any Court.

Tuesday Aug. 31. 1686.

L. Chapter My Lord, are you ready to give an Answer to the Question?


B. L. My Lords, I have taken the best care I could in so short a time, to be
ready with an Answer to your Lordships Question; though I must confess it was a
very great surprise to me, to find my (...) attacqu'd with so quick and sudden
a return by a Citation, in a matter concerning that Letter which the whole
World can bear me witness, I have been this whole Summer endeavoring with all
the Power and Skill I had, to enforce to the strict observation of my Clergy.
But before I can offer an Answer to the Question, I beg your Lordships leave to
offer my Plea to your Jurisdiction, for I am told it is a Right every one has
to make use of, when he finds it for his Advantage. I would not hazard being so
impertinent, as to offer any thing upon my own Head; your Lordships gave me
time to advise with Counsel, and they that are learned in the Laws of the Land,
advise me to plead to your Jurisdiction, and will be ready to argue it.


L. Chapter My Lord, I told you before, my Lords would hear nothing to their
Jurisdiction; and therefore if you have any thing to say to the Question, be
pleased to let us know it.


B. L. My Lords, I shall offer nothing that is undutiful to the King, or
disrespectful to your Lordships, and I beseech you to correct and pardon me, if
unwittingly any thing should fall from me that is liable to Censure. I am far
from disowning any part of the King's Supremacy, I acknowledge it, and am so
bound to do in its just Extent over all Persons, and in all Causes; what I have
to offer in Plea to your Jurisdiction is, That I conceive this Commission you
act by is not good, as being contrary to an Act of Parliament, upon which Point
I beg my Counsel may argue.


L. Chapter Your Lordship knows my Lords minds in this matter.


B. L. If then your Lordships overruled me, I must beg leave to protest to my
Right in this or any other Plea that may be for my advantage.


The Bishop of London's Plea which he would have given in, if the Lords
Commissioners would have suffered it to be argued.

I Henry Bishop of London do declare and acknowledge, that the Kings Majesty is
the only Supreme Head and Governor of this Realm, and all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Causes as
Temporal. Nevertheless, I the said Bishop by Protestation not acknowledging any
just or legal Authority in your Lordships (otherwise than as by Law I am bound)
to question or censure me in any matter or thing Ecclesiastical whatsoever, Do
offer and show to your Lordships, That at the Parliament of King Charles I. of
blessed Memory, late King of England, holden on the 3. day of November, in the
sixteenth Year of his Reign, a certain Act and Statute was made, Entitled, [A
Repeal of the branch of a Statute Primo Elizabethae concerning Commissioners
for Causes Ecclesiastical] setting forth, That in the Parliament holden in the
First Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, there was an Act made and
established, Entitled, [An Act restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction
over the State Ecclesiastical and Spiritual.] And abolishing all Foreign Power
repugnant to the same. In which Act, among other things, there is contained one
Clause, Branch, Article, or Sentence, whereby it was Enacted to this effect,
namely, That the said late Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, Kings or
Queens of this Realm, should have full Power and Authority, by virtue of that
Act, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, to assign, name, and
authorize, when, and as often as her Highness, her Heirs or Successors should
think meet and convenient, and for such and so long time as should please her
Highness, her Heirs or Successors, such person or persons, being natural born
Subjects to her Highness, her Heirs or Successors, as her Majesty, her Heirs or
Successors should think meet, to exercise, use, occupy, and execute under her
Highness, her Heirs and Successors, all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges,
and Preheminences in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within these her Realms of England and Ireland, or
any other her Highnesses Dominions and Countries, and to visit, reform,
redress, order, correct, and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses,
Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities whatsoever, which by any manner of
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction, can or may
lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or amended to
the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of virtue, and the conservation of
the Peace and Unity of this Realm. And that such person or persons so to be
named, assigned, and appointed by her Highness, her Heirs or Successors after
the said Letters Patents to him or them made and delivered as aforesaid, should
have full Power and Authority by virtue of that Act and of the said Letters
Patents under her Highness, her Heirs or Successors, to exercise, use, and
execute all the Premises according to the Tenor and Effect of ^he said Letters
Patents, any matter or cause to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And
setting forth likewise, that, by the color of some words in the foresaid
branch of the said Act, whereby Commissioners are authorized to execute their
Commission, according to the Tenor and effect of the Kings Letters Patents, and
by Letters Patents grounded thereupon; the said Commissioners have, to the
great and unsufferable wrong and oppression of the King's Subjects, used to
Fine and Imprison them, and to exercise other Authority not belonging to
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, restored by that Act; and diverse other great
mischiefs and inconveniences have also ensued to the King's Subjects by
occasion of the said branch; and Commissions issued thereupon, and the
Executions thereof; and therefore for the repressing and preventing of the
aforesaid abuses, mischiefs, and inconveniences in time to come, It was by the
said Act made at the said Parliament, of the said King Charles the First,
Enacted, that the aforesaid Branch, Clause, Article, or Sentence contained in
the said Act of Primo Elizabethae, and every Word, Matter, and Thing contained
in that Branch, Clause, Article, or Sentence, should from thenceforward be
repealed, annul'd, revoak'd, annihilated, and utterly made void for ever; any
thing in the said Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And it was
thereby also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Arch Bishop, Bishop,
nor Vicar General, nor any Ordinary whatsoever, nor any other Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or Minister of Justice, nor any other Person or
Persons whatsoever, Executing Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority, or
Jurisdiction, by any Grant, License, or Commission of the King's Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, or by any Power or Authority derived from the King, his
Heirs or Successors, or otherwise, should from and after the first day of
August, in the year of our Lord 1641, award, impose, or inflict any Pain,
Penalty, Fine, Amerciament, or Imprisonment, or other Corporal Punishment upon
any of the King's Subjects, for any Contempt, Misdemeanor, Crime, Offense,
Matter or Thing whatsoever, belonging to Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Cognizance
or Jurisdiction, or shall ex Officio, or at the instance or promotion of any
other Person whatsoever, urge, enforce, tender, give, or minister unto any
Churchwarden, Sides-Man, or other Person whatsoever, any Corporal Oath,
whereby he or she shall or may be charged or obliged to make any presentment of
any Crime or Offense, or to confess, or accuse himself or her self of any
Crime, Offense, Delinquency, or Misdemeanor, or any other neglect, matter, or
thing, whereby, or by reason whereof he or she shall or may be liable or
exposed to any Censure or Punishment whatsoever; upon pain and Penalty that
every Person that shall offend contrary to this Statute, shall forfeit and pay
treble damages to every Person thereby-grieved, and the sum of 1001. to him or
them who shall first demand and sue for the same; which said treble damages,
and sum of a 1001. shall and may be demanded and received, and urged by action
of Debt, Bill, or Plaint in any Court of Record, wherein no Privilege, Essoyn,
Protection, or Wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed to the Defendant. And
it was thereby further Enacted, That every Person who should once be convicted
of any Act or Offense prohibited by that Statute, should for such Act or
Offense be from and after such Conviction, utterly disabled to be or continue
in any Office or Employment in any Court of Justice whatsoever, or to exercise
or execute any Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction by force of any Commission, or
Letters Patent of the King, his Heirs or Successors. And it was thereby also
Enacted, That from and after the first day of August, no new Court should be
erected, ordained, or appointed, within this Realm of England, or Dominion of
Wales, which should or might have the like Power, Jurisdiction, or Authority as
the said High Commission-Court then had, or pretended to have; but that all and
every such Letters Patent, Commissions and Grants made or to be made by his
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, and all Powers and Authorities granted
thereby; and all Acts, Sentences, and Decrees, to be made by virtue or color
thereof, should be utterly void and of none effect; which said Act of
Parliament, made at the said Parliament of the said King Charles the First, I
the said Bishop of London do Plead, and Object to and against your Lordships
Jurisdiction, and pray your Lordships Judgment, whether your Lordships will
think it fit, or ought to proceed any further herein against me the said Bishop
of London.

B. L. I have another thing to beg your Lordships Advice and Judgment in. I
have Right as a Bishop, by the most Authentic and Universal Ecclesiastical
Laws, to be Tried first before my Metropolitan, Precedent to any other Court
whatsoever.


L. Chapter This is still to the Jurisdiction.


B. L. It is so, I confess; but yet so as to have a more particular relation to
my Case.


L. Chapter Their Lordships are fully satisfied of their Authority in this Point.
Besides your Lordship knows, there have been Presidents for this.


B. L. I only challenge the right of Law, and shall plead to it by Counsel if
you please.


L. Chapter My Lord, if you have any thing to say to the question, you may be
pleased to give your Answer.


B. L. If I am overruled in this, I must beg your Lordships Patience in one
Plea more; your Lordships in this Commission, after the general words, are
directed to proceed according to the Tenor of the Letters Patents, which say,
that you shall first Proceed against all Persons offending, for matters done or
to be done, by Censures and other lawful ways; in the next place, you are to
enquire of, and search out, and call before you, all Ecclesiastical Persons of
what Degree or Dignity soever, as shall offend, and them and every of them to
punish, etc. by Suspending, etc. Now I conceive, in the Capacity I am, you are
only warranted to Try me for Offenses after the Date of the Commission.


L. Chapter There are general Words which give Authority sufficient to look back.


B. L. But, My Lord, in matters of severity, the most favorable interpretation
is to be given; and I know your Lordships will rather foregoe the extending the
Jurisdiction to such.


L. Chapter Is this all your Lordship has to offer?


B. L. If I may not Plead to any of these Points, I desire to put in my Answer.


L. Chapter Your Lordship be pleased to withdraw.


B. L. I desire to leave my Answer.


L. Chapter Be pleased to lay it down here, and withdraw.


Here the Answer was given in.

After a little while the Bishop was called in again.

L. Chapter My Lord, their Lordships have considered of your several Pleas, and are
fully satisfied of their Jurisdiction and their Authority to Judge your
Lordship; and therefore they desire to know, what you have to say in Answer to
the Question?


B. L. I desire my Answer in Writing may be first Read.


L. Chapter Read it.


Mr. Bridgman Read the Answer; which was this.

TO the Question that was proposed to me by your Lordships, viz. Why did you
not obey the King's Command, in his Letter concerning the Suspending Doctor
Sharp? I, Henry Bishop of London, do answer, that immediately upon receipt of
his Majesty's Letter from my Lord President, the Tenor whereof follows. viz.

[RIGHT Reverend Father in God, We greet you well. Whereas We have been
Informed, and are fully Satisfied; that Dr. John Sharp, Rector of the Parish
Church of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, and in your
Diocese, notwithstanding Our late Letter to the most Reverend Fathers in God
the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and Our Directions concerning
Preachers, given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 15th of March, 1685. in the
Second Year of Our Reign; yet he, the said Dr. John Sharp, in Contempt of the
said Orders, has in some of the Sermons he has since preached, presumed to
make unbecoming Reflections, and to utter such Expressions as were not fit or
proper for him; endeavoring thereby to beget in the Minds of his Hearers an
Evil Opinion of Us and Our Government by insinuating Fears and Iealousies to
dispose them to Discontent, and to lead them into Disobedience and Rebellion.
These are therefore to require and command you immediately upon Receipt hereof,
forthwith to Suspend him from further Preaching in any Parish Church or Chapel
in your Diocese, until he has given Us Satisfaction, and Our further Pleasure
be known herein. And for so doing this shall be your Warrant: And so We bid you
heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Windsor, the 14 th Day of June, 1686. in the Second Year
of Our Reign.]

I took the best Advice I could get, concerning of Doctor Sharp, and was
Informed, that the Letter being directed to me, as Bishop of London, to Suspend
a Person under my Jurisdiction, I was therein to act as a Judge, it being a
Judicial Act; and that no Person could by Law be Punished by Suspension, before
he was called, or without being admitted to make his Defense. I thought it
therefore my Duty, forthwith humbly to represent so much to my Lord President,
that so I might receive his Majesty's further Pleasure in that Matter:
Nevertheless, that I might obey his Majesty's Commands as far as by Law I
could, I did then send for Doctor Sharp, and acquainted him with his Majesty's
Displeasure, and the occasion of it, by showing him his Majesty's Letter: But
he having never been called to answer any such Matter, or make his Defense, and
protesting his Innocence, and likewise declaring himself most ready to give his
Majesty full Satisfaction therein, in order thereto I advised him to forbear
Preaching, till he had applied himself to his Majesty, and at his request, I
made him the Bearer of my Letter to my Lord President, waiting for his
Majesty's further Orders to proceed against him Iudicially, in case he should
not at that time give his Majesty the Satisfaction required: And the said
Doctor Sharp has not since Preached within my Diocese.

Henry London.

L. Chapter Has your Lordship any more to say?


B. L. My Lords, what I shall say my self will be very short, only a little
farther to explain my meaning in this Answer. The words of his Majesty's Letter
are liable to two Constructions.

The first is a Legal and strict Sense of the word [ Suspend] I must have
Suspended Doctor Sharp, ab officio, because Preaching alone does not come under
that Censure. In this Sense it was that I understood the King's Letter, and was
Advised by my Counsel that it was a Judicial Act, and by Consequence could not
be complied with, unless I had first Cited the Party, and heard the Cause; and
in this I should have committed a fault. It is most excusable upon these two
accounts: By all the Practice and Rules of Ecclesiastical Laws, the charge of
Malice or Wilfulness is taken off from the Party, in case he has this to say
for himself, that what he did, was Iuris Peritorum Consilio quibus cum in hac
part Communicavimus. Now I consulted with the most proper Person Sir Tho.
Exton my Chancellor, with whose Advice I wrote my Answer. But in the next
place, it is the constant Rule in all the Books, that in case the Prince write
to a Judge and this Judge thinks he cannot lawfully obey the Command, he is to
rescribere and reclamare, and in so doing, tantum ab-est ut Principi deserviat
quod is maxim serviat. And the Rule goes further, that in case the Prince be
not satisfied with the Answer, the Judge is not to apprehend a charge of
Contempt for his refusal, but has a right to except Iussio Secunda by the
Prince's Rescript, because in common Equity, no man in such a case is to be
Judged obstinate before a second refusal. I had no Rescript, but am-taken up at
the first rebound.

The other sense this word [ Suspend] might be taken in, was at large for [
Silensing.] In this I confess I did not apprehend it, because my Counsel turned
my thoughts another way. But to show that I was resolved to pay all the Duty I
could to the King's Letter, which I am advised by my Counsel, was as strong
Admonition as could be given, considering the Purport of the Letter; and
besides, I advised him not to preach, till he had endeavored to know His
Majesty's further pleasure; which advice from a Judge, the Learned in the Laws
tell me, is tantamount to an Admonition, and that if he had not submitted to
it, I could have censured him for his disobedience; so that if this last was
his Majesty's meaning, I have in effect obeyed the Letter, which is all I shall
say at present, and beg my Counsel may be heard to clear the matter in point of
Law.


L. Chapter Withdraw.


After a short space the Bishop was called in again.

L. Chapter Call in my Lord of London's Counsel. (which was Dr. Oldish, Dr. Hedges,
Dr. Brice, and Dr. Newton.)


Dr. Oldish. My Lords, the Question before your Lordships is, whether the
Bishop of London has been disobedient to his Majesty's Command? Concerning
which, it must be considered,


1 st. What was Commanded. 2. What he has done in Obedience to it. 3. What
Judgment ought to have been given by him.
It is apparent by the Letter, that the King did not take Cognizance of the
Cause; for the Words are, being informed that Dr. Sharp, etc. So that it could
not be an absolute Suspension; for that supposes a Proof of the Crime charged
upon him. Then let us consider the Words themselves, That you suspend him from
preaching.

Now, my Lords, we have not such a thing in our Law; so that the meaning must
be only silencing of him. Where there is an Absolute Suspension, there ought to
have been a Citation, Form of Proceedings, Judgment, and Decree. To Act
otherwise, is contrary to the Law of God, of Nature, and of all Nations, in all
Ages, and was never known in the World.

L. Chapter Doctor, I am loath to interrupt you, but I must tell you, this is an
unnecessary Harangue; We know that it was not an absolute Suspension. But the
Question is, whether the Bishop could Suspend him from preaching.


Dr. Oldish. Then, my Lord, I have gained that Point. If it were only a
silencing of him, the Question is whether the Bishop did not Execute the King's
Commands? I think he did it, and in such a Method as is observed in our Courts.
When any Eminent Person is accused, the Judge sends to him by a Letter, and if
he appears, and Complies with the Judges Order, the Law is satisfied. Iudicium
Redditur in invitos non in Volentes. The Bishop did send for Dr. Sharp, showed
him the King's Letter, advised him not to preach till his Majesty had received
satisfaction, in which he promised to observe his Lordships Command, and has
not preached to this day, so that his Majesty's Command was in effect fulfilled.

My Lords, there are the like Proceedings in the Common Law; For if an Attorney
takes a Man's word for his appearance, and he does appear, it is the same thing
as if he had been arrested, and there he has no Action against the Attorney.


L. Chapter Cujus contrarium est Lex. There lies an Action of escape against the
Attorney.


Dr. Hedges. My Lords, the matter of Fact has been stated. And the Question is,
whether the Bishop has been disobedient to the King's Command? It appears that
he has not, because upon Receipt of His Majesty's Letter, he required the
Doctor not to preach, and he has obeyed him. That which the King Commanded,
viz. To Suspend him, the Bishop could not do, the Act of Suspension is a
Judicial Act; the King writes to him as a Bishop, to Suspend as a Bishop and a
Judge, which could not be done before a hearing of the Cause. If a Prince sends
to a Person that is not a Judge, but only a Ministerial Officer, that Officer
is to execute his Commands; But when the King Commands a Judge, he Commands him
to Act as a Judge. This is no light matter which the Dr. is accused of, it is
for preaching Sedition and Rebellion, which requires severe Censure: And if the
Bishop as a Judge had Suspended him, he had began at the wrong end, for this
had been Judgment before Process: In this case there ought to have been a
Citation. Our Books give many instances, which would be too tedious to your
Lordships. I will give this one. The Emperor proceeding against the King of
Sicily, upon Information that he had received; and giving him no Citation; the
King appealed to the Pope, who declared the proceedings to be void, and that it
was against the Law of Nature, which is above all Positive Laws, to pass
Sentence before Citation. This is the method of procceedings in all Courts, and
I humbly conceive it is, and will be the method of this Court; for otherwise
the Bishop needed not to have been Cited before you. The Bishop has done what
was his Duty; He was bound to return his Reasons to the King why he could not
do that which was commanded, and to expect his farther Pleasure; which was done.

I affirm, if a Prince or a Pope Commands that which is not lawful, it is the
Duty of a Judge rescribere, which is all he can do.


Dr. Brise. The Question is ut Supra, a Citation is Iure Gentium, and can never
be taken away by any positive Command or Law whatsoever.

The Bishop has obeyed the King so far, in that he did Rescribere, etc.
expecting his Majesty's further Pleasure. If the Bishop could have Suspended
him, it must have been in foro; but in regard 'twas only Silencing him which
was required, it might be done in a private Chamber.

The Advice of the Bishop, is in some Sense an Admonition, which is a Judicial
Act, and this was given by the Bishop, and obeyed by the Doctor.


Dr. Newton. My Lords, the Question is ut Supra, The Bishop has not been
disobedient, as in Nature no Man can be required to do that which is
impossible, so no Man can be obliged to do an unlawful Act, id non fit, quod
non Legitime fit: This Rule obliges all Men in the World, in all Places, and at
all Times.

The Charge against the Doctor is of a very high Nature, and he desired to be
heard before he was Condemned. My Lords, the Bishops are Custodes Canonum, and
therefore must not break them themselves. I affirm, that the Bishop was fo far
from being disobedient, that he was obedient to the King. For when he did
Rescribere, and heard not the further Pleasure of the King returned: He ought
to conclude, that the King was satisfied with what he had written, according to
his Duty, and that the King had altered his Commands. A Citation as your
Lordships have heard, is according to all Laws in all Places: In all Judicial
Acts, there is something to be done according to Law, and somewhat according to
the Discretion of the Judge. And for that Reason as well as others, the
Offender ought to be Cited to appear before him. That which was in the Bishop's
Power to do, that he has done, and it was in effect what the King commanded to
be done.


L. Chapter Has your Lordship any more to say?


B. L. I have but little more to say. I suppose my Counsel have satisfied your
Lordships, that in the severest Construction, Malice or wilful Disobedience
could not be imputed to me. But as my Lord Chancellor has now explained it to
Doctor Oldish, that the King's meaning was only to [ Silence] they have made
plain to your Lordships, that I have effectually obeyed his Majesty's Commands;
and if in any Circumstance I have been wanting, I am ready to make reparation
by performing that likewise, and to beg his Majesty's Pardon.


L. Chapter Withdraw.


After an hour and better stay, the Bishop was called in again, and appointed
to attend their Lordships on Monday following, in the Morning, being the 6th.
of September.

B. L. My Lord, before I go, I would beg the Minutes may be read, for fear of
any mistake.


L. Chapter Their Lordships will do you no injury, nor take advantage.


B. L. It is not out of distrust of your Lordships; but since you proceed in a
summary way, and ex tempore, there may happen some slip of a Pen, that may more
easily be corrected now than afterward.


L. Chapter My Lord, I know no Minutes they keep.


Monday Sept. 6. 1686.

After waiting near two hours, Mr. Bridgman was at last sent out, who in less
than half an hour brought the Sentence under Seal. Then the Bishop was called
in.

L. Chapter Their Lordships have considered of what your Lordship said last day,
and what your Counsel urged, and have proceeded to Sentence.


B. L. Will you give me leave to say something?


L. Chapter No, my Lord; you must first hear the Sentence read.


Then Mr. Bridgman, their Lordships Register, was ordered to read the Sentence
to the Bishop, as follows.

The SUSPENSION.
By his Majesty's Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes.

WHereas Henry Lord Bishop of London has been Convened before us, for his
Disobedience and other his Contempts mentioned in the Proceedings of this
Cause, And the said Lord Bishop of London being fully heard hereupon, We have
thought fit, after mature Consideration of the Matter, to proceed to this our
definitive Sentence, Declaring, Decreeing, and Pronouncing, that the said Lord
Bishop shall for the said Disobedience and Contempts be suspended during his
Majesty's pleasure. And accordingly we do by these Presents Suspend him, the
said Henry Lord Bishop of London, peremptorily admonishing and requiring him
hereby to obtain from the Function and Execution of his Episcopal Office, and
from all Episcopal and other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, during the said
Suspension, under pain of deprivation, and removal from his Bishopric.

Given under our Seal the 6th. of September. 1686. This is a True Copy.

William Bridgman, Register.



L. Chapter Withdraw, Gentlemen.


B. L. Have your Lordships any further service to command me?


L. Chapter No.


The Bishop would have spoken before the Sentence was read, to have
recapitulated the heads of his Case, and to have offered full proof of his
compliance in silensing Dr. Sharp; and to have desired, since their Lordships
had hitherto been his Accusers and Judges, they would at last, according to the
usual Custom, have been his Counsel, and ordered their Advocate to lay down the
nature of the Crime, the Law it offended, and the Law it was to be punished by,
that he might have given in his Exceptions. But no speaking was allowed 'till
the Sentence was read, and it had been a folly to speak afterward.

FINIS.

