An Exact ACCOUNT OF Major General Kirkes Safe Arrival and Relieving of
Londonderry.
With all the Particulars Relating to this Glorious ACTION.
Licensed, August 1689.

Inch-Island in Lough-Swilly, July 26. 1689. SIR,
THERE is ju^t now come an Account from Ballyshannon, That the Forces of
Enniskilling being on their way to Ballyshannon, to join the rest of the
Protestants there, in Order to March to the Relief of Derry, was vigorously
attaqued (by the Duke of Berwick and 5000 Horse and Foot, who on purpose was
drawn there with his choice Men to Oppose their intended Conjunction with the
Men of Ballyshannon) was received with that Bravery and Resolution, maintaining
a very Regular and Bloody Fight for some hours, until their Powder being spent,
they fell in upon the Irish Army with the Butt-end of their Muskets; who, not
being able to withstand their Extraordinary Courage, were totally routed,
having taken diverse Prisoners, and all their Baggage and Carriages, remaining
sole Masters of the Field: We have great Reason to believe there were diverse
Officers of Note killed, the Soldiers having stripped the slain, found two
hundred Scarlet laced Coats; so that having defeated this Considerable Party,
they are now in a Capacity to march and join the Forces at Lough-Swilly, for
there lies nothing now betwixt them and the rest of the Protestant Army, so
that we do not Question, but our next from thence will give us an Account of
their Relieving of Derry.

I am Yours, etc.


London, August 5. 1689.
YEsterday Morning Mr. Bales the Messenger, formerly sent Express to
Major General Kirk, returned, and brings Advice,

That the Defeat of the Duke of Berwick, and Coll. Sarsfield aforementioned,
being brought to the Camp before Derry, put them in a mighty Disorder and
Confusion, which was not only aggravated by the nearness of Relief with the
Major General, and his daily Expectations of Reinforcements from England; but
more imminently from their apprehensions of Coll. Gustavus Hamilton, and the
Enniskilling Men's prosecuting their Victory, and marching direct against them,
for Relief of Londonderry; and either to attacque the Rear of their Camp, or
march more compass Northerly, and join the Major General, who was now gone with
all his Forces and Ships out of the Lough of Derry, and joined Coll. Steward,
and the Protestants that were come to him in Lough Swilley on the Isle of Inch.

On which Considerations they called a Council of War, and for preventing the
Mischiefs feared, resolved, there being no Enemy in Derry Lough, to command off
all the Guns and Forces that lay on each side that River, and make a united
Strength on the other side of Derry, ready to oppose the Danger that threatened
them; which they did accordingly: Of all which the Major General having Advice,
and daily expecting the Forces from Enniskilling, and more from England, and
Derry in distress for Provisions, made use of the opportunity, and the Wind
favoring, with such Ships, Ammunition, and Provisions as he thought necessary,
in the Night returned back into Derry Lough, and forcing the Booms that lay
across the River, without the loss of one Man, having no opposition bur from
Kilmore Castle, and from thence but Two Guns, came up to the City Walls, and
put in a plentiful Relief of Ammunition and Provisions, which was joyfully
received, and a Message returned from the Garrison, That they knew not what
Orders the Major General might have, but as to Men they wanted none, but could
spare him five or six thousand; to assist him in prosecuting His Majesty's
Interest, and the Defense of the Country; withal, desiring him not to Land any
Men, for that it might occasion some Divisions amongst them, they now knowing
one another extreme well, and in an extraordinary Unity and Obedience to their
present Commanders, reciprocally resolving to live and die with one another in
his Majesty's Service, and in Defense of the Place; and as they had entirely
suffered together, desired they might rejoice together, not doubting but God by
their hands would accomplish their Deliverance.


FINIS.
London: ^rinte^ for J. Wilson, at Charing Cross. 1689.


