ENCOURAGEMENT FOR Seamen and Mariners.

In Two Parts.

Being a proposed Method for the more speedy and effectual furnishing their
Majesty's Royal Navy with able Seamen and Mariners.

And for saving those immense Sums of Money, yearly expended in attending the
Sea-press.

In order to prevent those many Mischiefs and Abuses daily committed (by
disorderly Press-masters) both at Sea and Land, to the great Prejudice of their
Majesty's, and Injury of the Subject.

By GEORGE EVERETT, Shipwright.

London, Printed in the Year, MDCXCV.

TO THE Right Honorable THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal, AND COMMONS of
England, Assembled in Parliament.
With Submission,
IN humble Respect to his Majesty's most gracious Speech, I do most humbly
offer these following Proposals, for the encouraging of Seamen, in order to
furnish their Majesty's Royal Navy on all Occasions: Wherein is briefly set
forth the great Hardships and Sufferings of those employed in Sea-Service,
together with proper Remedies to prevent the same; whereby their Majesty's, and
the Public, may save those immense Sums of Money yearly expended on such
Occasions; the Seamen be happy and easy in such Service; the Merchants enjoy a
free Trade, without Interruption; the whole Nation be happy under the present
Influence of a War, many Grievances attending thereon be redressed, Vice
punished, Virtue promoted, our Enemies terrified, and our selves encouraged, by
the Blessing of the Almighty, to prosecute this so great and glorious
Undertaking, and thereby regain our former Honor of being Master of the
British Seas, to the Glory of their Majesty's, the Peace and Happiness of the
whole Nation: Most humbly begging your Honors to pardon this my Undertaking,
to pass by my Errors with Patience, and to correct all that is amiss with
Prudence, and to consider my former Proposals, humbly offered for the saving
100000l. per Annum in building and repairing the Royal Navy; which by his
Majesty's Order of the 22d of March last, was referred to the Right Honorable
the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, and at the writing hereof is yet
lying under their Lordships Consideration. All which (out of a hearty and
zealous Inclination of serving their Majesty's and the Public) I do most
humbly recommend to your Honors Consideration (as the only Physicians under
God, from whom a Redress of all our Grievances are desired and expected) in
Hopes of your favorable Acceptance and Encouragement thereof, for the Service
of their Majesty's, the Benefit of the Subject, and the Good and Welfare of the
whole Nation, most humbly praying that a Committee may be appointed to examine
and consider the same; and that I may be admitted to give Reasons, and answer
to all Objections. I humbly submit my self,

Your Honors most faithful and obedient Servant, GEO. EVERETT.

PROPOSALS* Consisting of two Parts, Most humbly offered for the Encouragement
of Seamen, and for supplying their Majesty's Royal Navy with able Seamen and
Mariners on all Occasions.
Part the First.
FOrasmuch as it is altogether needless to give an Account of the particular
Charge of the Nation in impressing of Seamen for their Majesty's Service, that
being already performed by others; and it being well known that after all the
Charge and Trouble therein, many of the most able and fittest for Sea-Service
do lie lurking and concealed, taking an Opportunity to make a Voyage or two to
Newcastle, or otherwise, as theysee most convenient for their own Advantage, to
the great Hindrance of their Majesty's Service, the Discouragement of others
belonging to the Fleet, and great Prejudice of many, who being unfit for
Sea-Service, are forced to supply in such Case:

Proposal 1.
For Remedy thereof (upon the especial Approbation of the Honorable Admiral
Russel, and several other eminent Persons of known Experience in Maritime
Affairs) it is humbly proposed, That in every Seaport-Town (according to the
Greatness thereof) an Office and Officers (being Persons of known Integrity and
good Repute) may be erected and settled, for taking and keeping a Register of
Seamen and Mariners: And to that end the Churchwardens and Overseers of the
Poor of every Parish within ten Miles of any Seacoast* or navigable River,
within this Kingdom, shall within fourteen Days after Notice given (by
Proclamation) be sworn duly to enquire and take a List of all Seamen and
Mariners, inhabiting and residing within their respective Parishes, being
between the Age of 16 and 60, whether at home or abroad, and shall deliver the
same under their Hands to the Sheriff of the County to which they do belong;
which said Sheriff shall within twelve Days after the Receipt thereof, transmit
a Copy of the same to the next Port-Office, where the same shall be carefully
entered Alphabetically, for every Parish and County distinctly, in a Book or
Books for that purpose to be provided.

This cannot be accounted any great Trouble, there being in every Parish four
or six such Officers at least, who dividing themselves, with their Beadle, who
is generally acquainted with all the Parishioners, may perform the same
effectually in one Day.

Neither can it be accounted troublesome to the Sheriffs, it being not expected
to be more than once a Year at most; and may, by their Directions, be performed
by their Servants: And, being a National Concern, ought to have a National
Assistance, which will partly be effected by such Officers changing Places
every Year.

Prop. 2.
And that all Masters of Ships and other Vessels using the Sea, or trading from
Port to Port Coast-wise, (except such Vessels as are or shall be employed in
the home Trade of Fishery for supplying the several Markets of this Kingdom)
shall, at the Beginning of their Voyage, and before they depart the first Port,
give into that Port-Office a true List of the Names of all Seamen and Mariners
retained to serve on Board their said Ships or Vessels, together with their
Age, and what outward Marks may be found, as also their Place of Residence or
Habitation, if any such they have: which being performed, the said Masters (if
not restrained by Imbargo or other Order) may with their Company have Liberty
to proceed on their intended Voyage, both out and home, without Danger of being
impressed, one of the said Officers first giving a Certificate under his Hand
and Seal, as a Protection for the Use of each Seaman thereunto belonging, being
between the Age of 16 and 60 Years, as aforesaid; and also a Duplicate thereof
to the Master, for which he shall pay unto the said Officer, if a Coaster, 2s.
and 6d. and if a Trader to foreign Parts, 5s. per Head for every Person therein
nominated; which said Moneys may be allowed for and toward the Maintenance and
Encouragement of such Officers.

By the aforesaid Means it may be possible to obtain a full Register of all the
Seamen of England, and thereby know who is in Service and who is not, whereby
the Royal Navy, upon all Occasions, may be ready manned with able Seamen, and
no Hiding Place left for Deserters or others: And the Head-Money proposed will
be gladly paid to avoid those great Perils and Losses which too often happen,
to the great Prejudice of their Majesty's, and all others concerned at Sea, by
means of the Sea-Press.

Prop. 3.
And upon Return of the said Ship or Vessel to her Port of Delivery or
Unlading, that then the said Master thereof shall be further obliged (if
belonging to a Ship or Vessel using the Coast-Trade) within four Days, or if a
Merchant-Ship trading to foreign Parts, within ten Days or more (as may be
thought convenient) to pay such his Ship's Company in the Presence of one of
the aforesaid Officers at a Place and Day prefixed. And if it happen that any
Change or Alteration has been made amongst the said Company during the said
Voyage, that then the said Master do give an Account to the said Officer, who
may be empowered to make Inquiry therein; and whosoever of the said Company,
shipped outward or homeward, appears not in Person to receive his Wages at
such Time and Place prefixed (without some lawful Cause or Let showed to the
contrary, being such as may be allowed by the Directors of such Office, or
Officers) shall lose and forgo his whole Wages, one half to the Use of their
Majesty's, and the other to the Chest of Chatham, or otherwise, as may be
thought convenient.

And the said Officers (being empowered to make Inquiry as aforesaid) will
cause Masters to be more cautious how they do imprison and pack their Seamen
off in foreign Countries; an Abuse too much practiced, even to the Ruin of many
Families, which brings much Poverty on the Nation, especially about Rivers and
Sea-port-Towns.

Prop. 4.
And if it should happen that any of the said Ships or Vessels should deliver
or unlade at any other Port within this Kingdom, that then the Officer of such
Port may, by the Master's Duplicate, (he being obliged to produce the same, or
otherwise by a Copy of the Register from the other first Officer) be enabled to
proceed in all Respects as aforesaid.

For Convenience a Copy of all Registers may be transmitted from all Ports to
Yarmouth and Portsmouth, for the ready Dispatch of all such Affairs; but more
especially to the Port-Office of London.

Prop. 5.
And that every Officer, in his respective Place, (at the Time of paying such
Seamen as aforesaid) shall then cause all such as are fit for their Majesty's
Service to be forthwith sent on board some Ship belonging to the Fleet, as
Occasion shall require; the Charge thereof to be paid by their Majesty's: And
all such as are so sent on board their Majesty's Ships shall have equal Benefit
with those Seamen who do or shall enter themselves as Volunteers.

By such Means there will be a constant supplying of the Royal Navy with able
Seamen: And by this Means such who use to steal a Voyage or two, will
unavoidably be brought into their Majesty's Service without Prejudice to any;
which will be an Encouragement to others belonging to the Fleet, and will
prevent the pressing of Tradesmen from their Business.

Prop. 6.
And as every Merchant-Ship or Vessel has a Carpenter or two belonging unto
it, who for great Wages go voluntarily to Sea, their Majesty's Ships may by the
Means aforesaid, be plentifully supplied with able Shipwrights, the most
experienced and fittest for Sea-Service.

Prop. 7.
And at the End of every Year the said Officers shall present their Majesty's
with a general List of all Seamen and Shipwrights so sent on board of every
particular Ship; and, if thought convenient, shall have an additional Allowance
from their Majesty's of two Shillings and Sixpence per Head, as an
Encouragement and Maintenance for such their Service.

Prop. 8.
And whatsoever Officer or Ship-master offends herein, contrary to the true
Intent and Meaning thereof, shall forfeit Pounds to the Use of their Majesty's,
Pounds whereof may be allowed to the Informer.

This Charge cannot be accounted great, for by this Means the prodigious
Expense of hiring Smacks and Ketches to attend the Press will determine; and
1000 Men and Boys commonly employed therein may be at liberty to serve their
Majesty's on board the Fleet, besides the Charge allowed and expended by
Captains and Lieutenants on such Occasions.

And the Seamen and Shipwrights belonging to Merchants Ships, being so secured
for their Majesty's Service, may enjoy the Benefit of selling and disposing
what they have as an Adventure on board their respective Ships, together with
the Happiness of receiving their Wages, and providing themselves with Apparel,
and other Necessaries fit for Sea-Service, and be sent on board the Fleet like
Men, who otherwise, after a long and tedious Voyage, without Recruit or Money,
are forced on board their Majesty's Ships in a poor and ragged Condition, which
is one main Occasion of Sickness and Distempers on board the Fleet; and for
such Reasons many refuse to go to Sea, and others forsake their Ships in
foreign Nations.

And by such Means as aforesaid Merchants Ships at Sea, and under Convoy, may
be secure from the Rage and ill Usage of some Commanders; who, if denied their
unreasonable Demands for Light or Convoy-Money, do often cause the Seamen to be
impressed, whereby such Ships or Vessels are too often disabled, and the Ship
and Goods, with the small and helpless Number of Men left on board, do often
miscarry or perish at Sea; whereby the Merchants lose their Goods, their
Majesty's lose their Customs, the Subjects lose their Lives, the Owners their
Ship or Vessel, and many become Widows and Fatherless thereby; which brings
great Complaints and Poverty throughout the Nation.

PROPOSALS.
Part the Second.
Prop. 1.
;AND as the Honor and Glory of the English Nation does so much depend upon the
Strength and good Conduct of the Royal Navy, so it may be highly necessary, at
such time when the Common Enemy is so potent and powerful, that all due
Encouragement be given to Seamen and Mariners. And to that end it is most
humbly proposed, That no Offices belonging to the Fleet be bought or sold, but
that every Person may be preferred according to his Deserts and Merits.

Prop. 2.
That the said Seamen be allowed their full Share of all Prizes that shall be
taken, and that some Law be passed to prevent Imbezlements therein; and that
those Persons, in what Station soever, that shall endeavor to defraud them of
such Parts and Shares as have by Custom, or may hereafter be allowed, shall
(being convicted thereof) forfeit his said Office or Employment.

Prop. 3.
That if any Seamen be dismembered in their Majesty's Service, such Smart-Money
as has been formerly allowed may be advanced, and be forthwith duly paid. And
further, that there may be an additional Allowance made for all such Pensioners
as shall be dismembered in their Majesty's Service.

Prop. 4.
That if any Seamen be killed in their Majesty's Service, that the Bounty-Money
generally allowed on such Occasions be forthwith paid to those who shall
produce a just Right to receive the same.

Prop. 5.
That all Profaneness, which having by long Custom gotten the Ascendant on
board the Fleet, be forthwith suppressed and abolished, and all Offenders
(being Officers) may be displaced, and others receive such Punishment as may be
appointed by Authority of Parliament.

Prop. 6.
And that no Seaman or Mariner that has served twelve Months in any of their
Majesty's Ships, shall be turned over to serve on board any other of their
Majesty's Ships before he be paid all Wages due to that time.

Prop. 7.
That when and so often as their Majesty's (by their Royal Proclamation) shall
require the Service of such Seamen on board the Royal Navy by such a Day or
Time prefixed, that all able Seamen who shall in obedience thereunto
voluntarily enter themselves, by applying to the next Port-Officer or Officers,
shall be allowed, during the whole Voyage, 28s. per Month, according to the
Course of the Navy; and that so often as any of their Majesty's Ships shall
arrive into any Harbor to lay up for any time, that then the Seamen and
Mariners thereunto belonging shall be forthwith discharged; and that all Wages
to them then due for such Service be fully paid, not in Tickets, but in Money:
And if the Voyage be long, that then their Wives or Friends, having a lawful
Power to receive the same, may be paid six Months Wages out of every nine
Months that such Ship shall be abroad.

Prop. 8.
That all such Seamen now belonging to the Royal Navy as shall be continued on
board the Fleet at such time as the Service of others shall be required by
Proclamation as aforesaid, may have and receive the full Benefit of such as
shall then enter themselves as Volunteers.

Prop. 8.
That there be one Clerk at the Navy-Office to attend all accidental Business
that may happen touching the Premises, and that he be allowed by their
Majesty's l. per annum, to answer and receive Money for all such Persons as
shall employ him on such Occasion; and that he may be allowed 6d. or 12d. per
Pound, as shall be thought fit, for all such Money as he shall so receive: and
the said Clerk making Default therein, to be displaced, and suffer such Fine or
other Punishment as the Parliament shall think fit.

By such Payments as aforesaid Seamen may be enabled to provide for themselves
and Families, and to pay their Debts, which is one Means to make Money plenty
throughout the Nation, and will encourage them, when occasion shall require,
freely and gladly to enter themselves into their Majesty's Service, without the
Charge of being pressed or continued in Pay for the whole Year. And being
certain of such Provision made for the Maintenance of themselves and Families,
it will make them bold and daring, not being afraid to look Death in the very
Face of their Enemies.

It is to be observed, that for want of such Payment as aforesaid, the Seamen
are greatly injured and discouraged; first especially when instead of Money
they are put off with Tickets, whilst many of them and their Families wanting
Food and Raiment, are compelled to sell such Tickets at one third parr, and
sometimes one half Loss; so that thereby the Seamens Pay is very small and
insignificant, who after having exposed themselves to the greatest Dangers, are
so cut off, being but as Slaves and Drudges to the common Ticket-Buyers and
their Upholders, who for supplying them so with Money do carry away the
greatest part of their Labor, when many of their poor Families are ready to
perish. Secondly, The paying such their Wages on board the Fleet at such time
as they are ready to sail, is very injurious both to Seamen and others; for by
such Means they have not the Opportunity to serve themselves or Families, but
are obliged to buy all their Necessaries on board the Common Higlers or
Boomboats, (and they not many) who, making it their Business to attend the
Fleet, do, by their Extortion, bring away the greatest part of the Seamens
Wages. So that a great part of the Treasure of the Nation, which ought to be
divided amongst all, falls into the Hands of a few private Persons; whereas, if
such Payment were to be made on shore, as aforesaid, they may have the Benefit
to buy all they want at the best Hand, to pay their Debts and relieve their
Families. And by this Means all such Money would, as from a Fountain,
pleasantly distill it self into so many Silver Streams, until it returns again
to its first Rise: which would be a great Encouragement to Seamen and all other
their Majesty's good Subjects, who being now obliged to give them and their
Families Credit, are forced to sit down by Loss, which is one great Cause of
the Decay and Detriment of Trade.

If it should be objected, that paying the Seamen their Wages on shore (upon
the Discharge of their Service as aforesaid) will cause them to desert their
Majesty's Service, it is humbly answered, that there being in England a
sufficient Number to serve both their Majesty's Royal Navy and Merchants Ships
at one time, as by sufficient Testimony did appear this last Summer, it is
impossible to believe the Royal Fleet should ever want Seamen, if good Payment
was to be made, and Encouragement given as aforesaid, for these Reasons
following. First, They being in such Service are more secure from the Enemy
than in Merchants Ships. Secondly, Being allowed thirteen Months to the Year,
without After-claps, or paying Damages, which (in Merchants Ships) often cuts
off one Months Pay in three. Thirdly, If a Ship of their Majesty's happen to be
lost, the Seamens Wages stand good. Fourthly, Being out of all Danger of being
impressed, during the whole Voyage; by Means whereof in Merchants Ships they
often lose both their Wages and Adventure. Fifthly, Having a Prospect in making
Advantage by taking of Prizes. Sixthly, If Loss of Members happen, Smart-Money
is allowed, with a yearly Pension during Life. Seventhly, If killed in Fight, a
considerable Bounty-Gift is bestowed on their Families, according to the
Greatness thereof; when Seamen in Merchants Ships, running all Risques as
aforesaid, fall far short of these so great Advantages.

Prop. 9.
Furthermore it is proposed, that if any Difference should happen within the
Term of the said Voyage between the Master of such Merchant's Ship or Vessel,
and any of the Seamen belonging thereunto, for or by reason of any Wages due,
or Goods damaged by Leekage of the Ship or Vessel, such Differences may be
determined by such Officer as aforesaid, who may be empowered to call to his
Assistance two, three or more honest and indifferent Men, being sufficient
Housekeepers, who may have Power to hear and determine all such Differences as
aforesaid, which would be of great Advantage to poor Seamen; who, by reason of
Poverty and the Press, being not in a Capacity to maintain or attend a Suit of
Law, are often ruined and undone.

If it should be objected that this may prove prejudicial to the Government, it
is humbly answered, That the Seamen in general, by such Injuries, and for such
Reasons as aforesaid, are not in a Capacity to go to Law; so that where nothing
is, nothing can be expected.

So that by thus civilly impressing of some, and paying and encouraging of
others as aforesaid, it may be presumed their Majesty's Royal Navy may at all
times be readily and plentifully provided with the most able Seamen and
Mariners on all Occasions, and all extraordinary Charge of impressing and
maintaining them on board the Fleet the Winter-Season (which by Captain St. Lo
was computed at 504000l. for one Winter-Season, besides 60000l. expended for
Conduct, Bounty, and Impress-Money) avoided, and saved, as well now as in
former times. And to this all the Seamen and faithful People of England will
say, Amen.

If any Objection should be made, that in manning the Royal Navy according to
the Methods of this second Proposition, their Majesty's Affairs may be
prolonged or prejudiced thereby, then it is humbly proposed, that a Recourse
may be had to the aforesaid Register, as follows.

Prop. 10.
That the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty calling to
the Port-Officers of London for a general List of all Seamen in each County
(taken as aforesaid) may direct their Warrants to the several Sheriffs of the
Counties aforesaid, requiring them to direct their Precepts to the several
Constables of each Parish as aforesaid, who with the Assistance of the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor shall forthwith (to the utmost of their
Power) cause such and so many as are required (by an equal Quota) to appear
before the next Port-Officer who shall dispose of them on board their Majesty's
Ships, as shall be most meet and convenient for their Majesty's Service: And
such as press Men to be allowed but 24s. per Month. And what Seamen soever
shall abscond from their Habitation, or usual Place of Being, at such time as
the Service of their Majesty's shall require them on board the Fleet, shall
suffer Imprisonment, or as the Parliament shall think fit. And that the
Port-Officer do then forthwith pay unto the said Constables, for traveling and
other necessary Charges, the Sum of 2s. 6d. per Head, for every Person by them
delivered or produced as aforesaid; and that the said Port-Officer be allowed
the same (with other necessary Charges for sending such on board the Fleet) out
of their Majesty's Treasury.

By what has been proposed I hope it will appear, that the impressing of
Seamen and others by Sea-Officers may be wholly laid aside, which has hitherto
been very chargeable to their Majesty's, and injurious to the Subjects, as is
briefly summed up as follows.

1. That several Vessels employed in that Service, after having laid twelve or
fourteen Days in the River of Thames on that occasion, have by the ill
Management of some Lieutenants thereunto belonging, been sent on board their
Majesty's Ships with twenty or thirty Men at one time, who being not fit or
useful in such Service, have been often discharged and turned ashore, by which
Means their Majesty's Treasure has been vainly expended; and many Landmen and
Tradesmen have been often carried from their Habitations to the Downs,
Portsmouth and Plymouth, to their great Charge and Prejudice.

2. That the impressing and detaining Seamen in their Majesty's Service on such
hard Terms as before specified, causes many to desert their Majesty's Service,
who by such Means come to an untimely Exit. And many Seamen there be, who
having Families, will rather expose themselves to such vile and shameful Ends,
than leave their Families to perish for want of Food and Raiment.

3. Many other Inconveniences there be attending the present Discipline of the
Navy, as paying the Fleet at Portsmouth, etc. whereby their Majesty's Affairs
are often retarded, and the Seamen whose Wives or Friends are very populous
about the River of Thames, do, by traveling and attending at such remote
Parts, often expend more than they receive, whereby many Families are ruined
and undone: And many others there be, who for want of Money are obliged to take
up all they want upon Trust, paying one Shilling for the Value of nine Pence,
losing thereby 25l. per Cent. and by selling their Tickets, as aforesaid, they
generally lose 30, 40, or 50l. per Cent. so that by a modest Computation their
whole Loss amounts to 60l. per Cent. out of their small Wages.

4. The turning of Seamen over from one Ship to another, after having been in
such Service one, two, or three Years without Money, produces the same Effect
as the former.

5. For the aforesaid Reasons the Seamen, their Wives and Friends, are at a
great Charge and Trouble by petitioning and attending the Admiralty and
Navy-Board, (on such Occasions) who spend great part of their Time in hearing
and examining these and such like Grievances.

6. Whereas if Seamen were paid and encouraged as aforesaid, these Mischiefs
and Disorders, with many others, occasioned by several indirect Practices of
the Clerks of the Navy, etc. would soon cease and be abolished.

7. And for promoting the same it is further proposed, That a suitable Fund of
Money be raised and set apart for such Uses and Purposes: And if the same
should fail, or fall short of what is intended, that then they may be supplied
with such Funds as shall be appropriated to pay Merchant-Dealers and Tradesmen,
who being under no Compulsion in making Agreement for their Commodities, are in
a Capacity to help themselves.

8. And if a Sufficiency of Money cannot be raised as aforesaid, that then it
may be borrowed; and suppose at 10l. per Cent. per Annum, yet will be of so
great Use in answering these Ends, that its presumed their Majesty's will
thereby save 200000l. per Annum, or more: but if the late ingenious Proposals
to supply their Majesty's with Money at 3l. per Cent. per Annum, be put into
practice, the Advantages accruing to their Majesty's by this proposed Method
will be much greater, and the Doubts and Objections that may arise touching the
Insufficiency of making such orderly Payments as aforesaid, will be removed.

9. Thus by preferring Frugality, and abolishing Extravagancy, their Majesty's,
with the usual Funds generally raised and allowed for such Occasions, will soon
be in a Capacity of paying and providing with ready Money all things useful and
necessary for carrying on the War; and the Enemy taking notice of our Industry
and Abilities, the usual Forerunners of great Actions, will be thereby
discouraged, as they are certain Presages of their approaching Downfall.

10. And that by such Means the general Trade of the Nation will be better
supplied at home, and secured abroad; and the Subjects thereby enabled and
encouraged to give Supplies to carry on the War, and their Majesty's thereby be
the better supported to prosecute and continue the same.

11. Thus having, as I humbly conceive, proposed a sure and certain Method to
prevent those Evils occasioned by the Sea-press, which (if put in practice) I
dare affirm, will be a useful Instrument to vanquish and overcome all our
Enemies both Foreign and Domestic; it being observable, that since my former
Proposals made for performing of Shipwrights Work, the impressing of Workmen
for that Service has been little practiced.

In all that has been most humbly offered I have studied Brevity more than
Curiosity, my Design being to serve my Country rather than to show my Skill in
Learning; and therefore do present the same, not as the Labor of my spare
Minutes, but as the Fruit of a labourious Brain, that has and will be always
ready to serve their Majesty's and the Government upon all Occasions. I shall
only offer these following Queries, most humbly praying they may be considered.

1. Whether the Nation under the present Circumstances of a War, can long
continue a suitable Supply of Money to carry on the same, under the pernicious
Effects of Extravagancy?

2. Whether Money raised in Parliament with Care, collected with Trouble, and
paid with Tears, requires not the most serious Thoughts and Endeavors of all
its Disposers, for converting the same, in all Circumstances, to the most
useful and advantageous Purposes?

3. Whether the King exposing his Royal Person in so many Dangers abroad, for
promoting the Happiness and Well-being of the Nation, does not expect the due
Assistance of all other his Officers and Subjects, indispensibly to use their
utmost Endeavors for the full accomplishing his Royal Purposes?

4. Whether the saving those immense Sums of Money, as aforesaid, will not
settle the Minds of their Majesty's good Subjects, and stop the Mouths of the
most disloyal and restless Spirits, who raise Animosities amongst us, and
instill wicked Notions into the Minds of their Majesty's Subjects, representing
the Government as under an unsettled Condition, and groaning under Oppression,
by reason of great Taxes, and a lingering and expensive War, and a want of
Trade, and raising their Expectations of a speedy Change, who finding their
Hopes defeated by an unanimous Resolution of rooting out the Evils occasioning
the same, can have no future Pretense to such calumniating Reflections on the
Government for bringing to pass their evil Purposes?

5. Whether the buying and selling of public Places be not an undoubted Inlet
to bring their Majesty's Enemies into such Stations, being of dangerous
Consequence to the Government?

6. Whether it will not be for their Majesty's and the Nation's Interest to
advance Persons to Places of Trust according to their Merits, and not permit
those to be discountenanced, and to labor under Difficulties, who expose
Frauds and Extravagancies, and propose proper Remedies for the Cure of those
Evils? and whether the brow-beating and discouraging those who endeavor to
make such Discoveries, is not an effectual Means to prevent all others from
appearing in such like Cases? Much more might be added, which for Brevity sake
is omitted. I shall humbly conclude with the following Admonition of King Henry
the IVth, who upon his Deathbed spoke to his Son as follows; So long as
Englishmen have Wealth, so long shall thou have Obedience from them; but when
they are poor, they are then ready for Commotions and Rebellions: from which,
and all other Evils, good Lord deliver us both now and for evermore.

FINIS.

