I Appoint Dorman Newman, Citizen and Stationer of London, to Print my
Depositions concerning the Plot, and none else.

April 30. 1679. Edmund Everard.

THE DEPOSITIONS AND EXAMINATIONS OF Mr. Edmund Everard (Who was Four years
close Prisoner in the TOWER of LONDON) Concerning the Horrid Popish Plot
AGAINST The LIFE of His SACRED MAJESTY, the GOVERNMENT, and the Protestant
Religion.

With the Names of several persons in England, Ireland, France, and elsewhere,
concerned in the Conspiracy.

Part whereof was five years since made known to persons herein specified; and
again tendered to the Honorable Committee of Lords sitting in Parliament at
Westminster, upon Oath; and now tendered to the Honorable House of Commons.

LONDON: Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey.

M DC LXXIX.

This Information of the Plot was five years since given by me to persons
herein specified, but was suppressed; and was again now of late tendered anew
to the Committee of the Lords sitting in Parliament at Westminster, upon Oath,
the 21st of December, 1678. And is now tendered by me to the Commons.
WHILE I was employed as Agent at the French Court for the English Militia's
Concerns, one of the Officers brought me at Paris to the acquaintance of my
Lady Anne Gourdon, Sister to the now Marquess of Huntley in Scotland. She after
about a years frequentation, communicated unto me certain important secrets
concerning a Popish Plot against England.

She Is a Lady of vast correspondence with the Popish Clergy and Nobility almost
through all Europe; living ordinarily as a free person in Nunneries, and was
then in a Convent at Paris.

At a time I surprised her with two of the chief Scotch Seminarists of Paris,
in a deep and dark discourse of the English Affairs; and as soon as my Lady
made them understand that I was one of her privatest Friends, and Catholickly
affected (it being fit she should imagine this) they begun to speak plain
enough, to let me perceive that their discourse tended to some sudden design
for the subversion of the English Government and Governor, and the setting up
of Popery here in England.

But on some day of the Month of November, 1673, I enquired of my Lady what
those mysterious discourses meaned she had with the Scotch Priest? She after
long importunities and protestations, revealed unto me that which follows.

I. That there was now a grand Design on foot in England, for the settling of
the Catholic Faith there publicly.

II. That there was also a project against the Parliament that made such a stir
(as she spoke) and was their obstacle, either totally to dissolve it, or to sow
some divisions betwixt the King and It; where his Majesty also should find
potent Adversaries of the Romish Nobility, who would cut out work for him.

III. That there was a very considerable party in England, who labored to make
the Duke of York King, but that the Scots indeed were more for the Duke of
Monmouths being such, if means could be made to bring him over to it, wherein
she conceived I might be an useful Instrument, having been employed under him.
But said I, What do they mean to do with the King himself? She answered,

I. That the now King of England would be made away, and dispatched after his
Father, so that he would not be shortly in a case to annoy any body.

Then I asked her by what means they thought to bring such matters about? and
who were the leading-men in the contrivance, and who the Under-agents to carry
it on? She said, That all that was too much for me to know at the first time;
besides, that it was then too late at night; but that at my return within three
days (for avoiding of suspicion) I should be fully satisfied. But I insisted,
That these were grand affairs whereof she spoke, for which consequently she
needed to have more than common grounds. She replied, that I ought not to doubt
but that she had the best correspondency in England, Scotland, and France, as
having on the one part Madam de Gourdon her Aunt, one of the chief Ladies with
the Duchess of Orleance, which was taken to be of the fittest for Intelligence
and Intrigues at the French Court; and on the other side, that she received
Letters almost every week from the eminentest Churchmen on this and that side
of the sea, as also from some of the greatest Nobility of England and Scotland,
namely, from her Brother the Marquess of Huntley, my Lord Oxenford of Scotland,
Mr. Maitland (somewhat concerned, as she said, in the Secretaryship of Ministry
of State of Scotland) and from the Earl of Roches Chancellor there; but she
afterward run out into some of his Love commerce with her; so that I leave to
others to infer from the premises to which, either to Love, or the Plot-part,
or all of this his Letter-Correspondency must be referred. And to confirm
further the credit I must yield to her words, she drew forth a Bag full of
Letters, a matter of a Bushel full, and showed some more in a Cabinet, saying,
Are these all about trifles, think you? She further produced a picture in
mignature of the said Chancellor, and went about to read one of his Letters (of
a large and ill-shaped Character methought), but withheld, referring me till
the forementioned three days term. I in fine, asked how she could avoid
suspicion, if so many Letters were directed to her in her own name? She told me
she had taken a good care for that, because her Correspondents writ to her
under several names by which they called her, and part of her Letters were
directed to Mr. Conne a Scotch-man, living at Paris as Agent for the Pope,
others were addressed to Mr. Dallison her Scotch Physician there, some to
Father Joseph, Prior of the English Benedictines at Paris, who was her
Confessor.

II. Now in the interval, having before been recommended by Dr. Brien, Dr.
Molony Priests, and others, to Colonel Richard Talbot, and to his Brother Peter
(the pretended Archbishop of Dublin) for a person that carried on business
after the formalities of the Court of France, and the Colonel himself having
made some trial of me; he on a time desired me to be assistant to his Brother
the Bishop, not long since come out of England: The Bishop desired I should go
and complement on his behalf, the Marshal Bellefond (Grand Steward to the King
of France), and know when he might be introduced by him to the Kings Audience
about the business whereof he treated with the Marshal himself while he was in
England as Ambassador (in or about the year 1670.)

The Marshal being then at Court, kept at Versaile, the Bishop would have one
Mr. Moore, a Priest and Philosophy-Professor at Paris, to accompany us thither
on the next day, having lain that night at Versaile; and the Bishop striving to
make us all merry on the good Catholic Causes success, I took that opportunity
to enquire, whether he thought it not fit to communicate unto me the Heads and
Grounds of this affair wherein he was pleased to make me his Speaker and
Introducer at Court, lest, said I, any occasion might happen for me to second
it. The business that I am to represent to the King of France is this:

Articles against the Talbots.
I. It is a business, said he, which mightily concerns the welfare of the
Catholics in England, and of those in Ireland especially.

II. That he was to propose ways to the King of France, whereby to relieve them
in their present extremities and persecutions, and for to undertake their
protection; and some of his ways was to Arm some Irish, and to secure some
Seaport Town in Ireland for the French.

III. He said that he had a special good Warrant and Commission for this his
Negotiation from some of the greatest persons in England.

IV. That he was to solicit his Christian Majesty for a Pension, or the Arrears
payable to himself. The next morning I went to the Kings Rising to acquaint the
Marshal Bellefond, that the Archbishop Talbot was in Town to wait on His
Majesty and Him; he wished me to introduce him: The Marshal knew him at first
sight, and embraced him, and acquainted the King with his coming; His Majesty
receiving him with great civility, led him into a private Room, where Mr. Moore
and I following them, he beck'ned to Mr. Moore that had the paper, to advance:
But I from the doorward saw the Bishop present a Letter to the King, and other
papers, which I think were sealed. I overheard he spoke in Italian at first
entrance, their Conference lasted about half an hour; and though that King is
somewhat of a Grave, and somewhat Morose temper, yet he often smiled, as at
Propositions that pleased him.

But at our coming out from Court, I enquired of the Bishop of the good success
of his Negotiation, which I told him seemed to be of other or more matters then
he acquainted me with. No, said he, it is but of the same matter I spoke to you
of last night; whereof he said, I should know more, seeing he must come to
Court again and again about it, though the King (continued he) promised all
possible satisfaction and hopes of a good issue. So, not to increase suspicion
by further inquiries, I urged him no more, but departed from him for that time
to Paris. Yet note, that Mr. Moore did also generally touch unto me the Matters
of the aforesaid Articles and Plot, having heard it from the said Bishop, Peter
Talbot, and his papers.

And further observe, That one Mr. Conne a Scotch-man (who was formerly the
Popes Nuncio, and then his Agent at Paris) had almost every day private
Conferences with both the Talbots, and went betwixt them, their Nuncio, then
being at Paris; and that the Talbots and this Conne came often to my Lady Anne
Huntleys, though my Lady had also another pretext to see Conne. The very same
night I did communicate all that past in this Peter Talbot's Negotiation to Sir
Robert Welsh, as I had done before that other Plot of Lady Huntleys, both
fearing lest this grand secret might dye with me, I having many Enemies daily
threatening me then at Paris; and for that this Sir Robert was a man that still
made much profession of his Actings, Sufferings, and Loyalty for the King of
England, in such former discoveries; but Sir Roberts truer Character I found
out too late.

However Sir Robert most unfaithfully forthwith discovered all to Colonel
Talbot, both that of my Lady Huntleys, and the Talbots business; and that I
intended speedily to go for England to accuse both him and his brother Peter;
the Colonel feigning to keep his bed, desires to speak with me at his own
Lodging. The Circumstances of the message with the Premises weighed, I took
one or two along with me to his very* Chamber door on another pretext; he
presently desired to know when I intended for England, and when I had seen Sir
Robert Welsh. But by this much, forthwith perceiving I was betrayed; I
pretended another occasion of that voyage; for which besides I seemed not to be
very earnest, if either in Paris, or with the now Duchess of York (then at
Paris) he would procure me some fit employment of Secretary, or Usher. And at
first he went about to persuade me from coming over into England at all. Then
began to threaten me manfully; and if he heard I did otherwise than I said, in
stealing away for England on such occasions against them and the Catholics,
they would infallibly procure I should be forthwith committed to the Tower of
London or the Gatehouse, at my arrival; which accordingly happened according to
his spightful prophecy, about seven days after I arrived at London.

That seeing the effect of his threatenings fall out so punctually, and not
doubting thereupon, but that he, with Sir Robert Welsh, and Correspondents
here, were the secret Contrivers of my four years close imprisonment in the
Tower (though a very remote surprise was put in by them for pretext) therefore
I said I was afraid to charge them much, and but warily, whilst I was in the
Tower, fearing to fare the worse by the means of any secret friend of theirs.

EVIDENCES.
THE aforesaid Sir Robert Welsh his Evidence, now in London, may first confirm
the truth of this my Information; for he being now in London, can witness that
I disclosed to him all the said Treasons about five years since, in or about
the Month of November 1673; so that it cannot be imagined that this my
Information is some new matter fitted for the times against Papists; nor that
it is some odious new-coined slander, according to the humor and device of
some dissenting parties (as Papists cavil), seeing that by four or five
witnesses hereafter mentioned, who are none of my Friends, it undeniably
appears that I discovered this said Plot many years before these times were
thought of; nay, and in such a time when I never had seen England, or knew any
person there, either by Letters or otherwise (except such Officers of the Army
that were then in France).

I. I did not know but that Sir Robert Welsh or some other had hinted these
matters to some Minister of State.

II. I began to discover some of these matters to Sir John Robinson at the
beginning of my imprisonment; but whether it was through any defect of my
delivery, or that he took such Relations for a devised starting from the only
point he would have me confess against the Duke of Monmouth, against whom I
never conceived the least harm; but whatever it was for, Sir John made light of
my Narration concerning the Lady Huntley and the said Talbots business, which I
am sure I began to relate to him, at the least in substance; but how far he
suffered me to proceed, I cannot now well remember, both for that there is above
four years since, and for the hard usages wherewith he still troubled my mind
(whereof neither His Majesty nor the Duke of Monmouth knew their continuance so
long) as my Lord of Northampton told me.

III. And since my enlargement at the very beginning of this Parliament, I yet
went to the Tower to desire Sir John to second me for the discovering of the
said matters; but he at my first speaking rejected my proposal, referring me to
the Secretaries. And truly I would as heartily have applied my self to the
Secretaries as to any, but that I feared, lest of some errors which might be
found in my carrying on this business, they would be more likely to charge me
therewith, as parties for the King and Laws, than any other chief
Parliament-members, who would be more fit to intercede for me, and more at
leisure to sue out a pardon for me, if need were.

IV. In fine, Col. Justin Maccarty, being then at Paris when these matters were
vented out of Sir Robert, of my accusing the Lady Huntley and the Talbots, he,
I say, with some of his Officers, can testify that such a Report came out
then, some years since, if they would speak truth.

V. Nay, and one Capt. Barret, with several other Officers that were beyond
seas, told me about a fortnight ago, that the report went amongst the Irish,
That the Talbots were committed upon my Information, though I never spoke of
them these four years till now; but that by a fore-boding guilt they knew
perfectly, and heard I had grounds enough wherewith to accuse them; so that the
Irish Catholics here did threaten me, alleging me to be an abettor of Mr.
Oate's Informations against them, which he neither needs, nor did I ever see
him but in public, before I gave in this Information; nor Bedlow. Besides,
that it appears I made the discovery of the Plot, and the aforesaid matters,
before they, had I not had some of the Trojan Prophetesses ill fortune; yet in
time I hope I shall be able to recollect more of the particulars of the matters
and persons herein mentioned.

EDMUND EVERARD.
Jurat. coram me 4 April 1679. WILLIAM WALLER.

The Information of Mr. EDMOND EVERARD, taken upon OATH before Sir WILLIAM
WALLER, one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex,
and City and Liberties of Westminster, this Fourth of APRIL 1679.
THE true Contrivers of my Imprisonment were the Talbots and Lady Huntley, who
for discovering of their Plotings, threatened me in express words, That if ever
I came over into England, on that Design, I would be secured in the Tower or
Gate House; or if I remained in France, they would get me laid fast enough:
They put these Threatenings into Execution, for though both they and I were
seemingly reconciled, yet they made such a Search for me in Paris, that I was
faign to change Lodgings very often into remote and by-places; and when I was
on my Journey for England, one or two of my own servants, whom I dismissed at
Paris, seeing me take Coach privately, carried them word of it, and for some
pretense or other they sent one Mr. Perrig, who was their acquaintance and
Huntley's chief friend, in post to apprehend me; whereof Sir Edward Hungerford,
of this Honorable House, can testify from a Friend of his, who heard the same
from Perrig's mouth (that is now dead.) And it is to be remarked, that he could
not pursue or apprehend a stranger in France, but in a concern against the King
of that Country; who rather gives protection to strangers that are pursued on
any other Account. Before the Talbots fell out with me, and when I first
determined in my own mind to come over privately into England, I inquired of
one of the Talbot's servants (who was my Countreyman) where one might take
cheap and friendly Lodgings in London, till one were in fit Equipage (I having
never been in England before) he directed me to one Kenedy's House at the Pall
Mall, or to another Countreyman's House of his in St. Martin's Lane, at the
Sign of the Patrick; the first night and hour I came to that House I told them
my* Name and Employment from the Duke of Monmouth, and that it was fit I should
go and wait on him immediately, lest he should take it ill; and desned my
Landlord to send for some Link-boy that knew his Grace's House, where I
repaired forthwith; but not finding his Grace at home, I acquainted some of the
servants of my Arrival* to notify to his Grace: The next day I came, he also
was abroad earlier than ordinary, on some Riding or Recreation Account: I But
unto Gentlemen of his Chamber, Mr. Champins and St. Giles, I told I would
gladly come to kiss his Grace's hand, and confer about Business, in whatever
company he were in; so that Captain Watson and Mr. Vernon were not present, who
were my Enemies on private Accounts, and would move his Grace doubtlesly
against me, not to grant me my Request; which partly was some Arrears or an
Employment.

The next day I being ill, was let blood and kept my Chamber a day or two: I
think the Sunday morning I went to visit Lieutenant Colonel Trelany, who
meeting accidently a day or two before, I came to re-visit on this Sunday
morning, who at my first sight found more than ordinarily disturbed, and
courteously desired to know my Lodgings, and whether I had seen the Duke? I
told him of the sorry Dwelling I had taken up for a little time, and that I
would gladly see his Grace without the side enemies and with him: He desired me
to accompany him to Whitehall Chapel, where I might at the least be seen of
his Grace. (Thither we went) But the Colonel desiring me to stay about the
Chapel Door, thronged in with great haste, without coming out to me
afterward: In the mean time hearing of Organs and Children singing in
Surplusses, as I had seen and heard in the French Kings Chapel, where I
perceived some of the English Nobility come as freely as here; I did not know
what to think, whether I had not been too forward in speaking of any
Discoveries against that Religion which might be perhaps of late changed in
England: for that I had not heard or seen such things in the French Church at
Charenton, where I only took my Idea of Protestanism; but this erroneous state
of things (that I now know to be indifferent) did however make me pause in my
Discoveries; but whilst in these thoughts, Captain Watson stepped out of the
Chapel, who looking on me a-squint, went down the Privy Stairs in one end, and
the other Watson his Nephew, speaking a word or two to me more coldly than
ordinarily, went out through the Guard Hall, to the other Stairs, and presently
follows in the King's company the Duke of Monmouth; who eying me only, past by:
at all which passages of indifferency from former friends I was astonished. But
I was in Scarlet Breeches and Stockings, so that I could be easily discerned
and dogged to my Lodgings; where I went presently from Chapel.

Within two days after two men brought a Paper to my said Lodging, signed by
the Secretary whereupon he said he must needs speak with me: I inquired for
what? but they could not or would not tell me; but it seems by their
expressions to my Landlord, they were with him the day before to inquire for
me: and they could tell that I had been last Sunday at Morning Prayers at
Whitehall, and there also seen the same Night amongst others: After
break-fasting peaceably, I went with them to Whitehall, not thinking this any
Commitment Business. I told my Landlord I thought I would be back within an
hour. The Secretary at my arrival, inquiring of my Name, told me he would go
and speak with the King about me; which I know not whether he did so, or no:
but returning soon after spoke not one word to me, but going into his Clerk, he
sent out the same Messengers, who called me into the Stone Gallery; who said
they had Orders to carry me to the Tower, but for what they could not tell me.

Sir John Robinson after my Arrival entertained me to Dinner, which continued
in the company of his Lady and Solicitor, in a free and cheerful manner in
Discourse of the French Customs, and of his Son, whom I knew at Paris.

After Dinner, and having had a Nap with his Chaplain, who came in, Sir John
inquired of me, Whether I were not a Roman Catholic? I told them I had been
such, but not one of late; and whether I was in Orders? I told them never*
inquiring whether I knew for what I was committed? I told them no, no; No more
do I, said Sir John, but in the general; afterward he sent for one Captain
Cresset, the then Gentleman Jailer, he read unto me a Paper, he called his
Warrant, which being but in general words, and giving me no Copy of it, made no
such impression upon me, as now to remember the Contents; for I thought it was
but some Tower formality, wherewith others were served as well as I: for Sir
John never explained nor insisted upon it, no more did I, but followed Captain
Cresset to my appointed Lodging; which was convenient enough, as also the Diet:
so that at the beginning I being not locked up neither day nor night, for a
Month or thereabouts, and giving my self to reading an English Chronicle that
belonged to my Landlord, I unconcernedly expected a speedy enlargement, after
the Duke of Monmouth should come to hear of my Imprisonment; unto whom I
desired Sir John to give notice of it; but I had no return.

After some Months, Sir John sent for me, and said he had Order to examine me;
he inquired, What and whom I verily thought were the Causes of my Imprisonment?
I told him that the Lady Anne Gourdon, alias Huntley, with Peter Talbot,
Titular Bilhop of Dublin, were assuredly the Causes of it; and might well
contrive by other Instruments some false Accusation against me, for to weaken
the testimony I was to give against them of their plotting against England: for
that the said Lady had informed me of a Design the English Catholics had
against the King's Person, his Government, and Religion; and that she had
correspondency with her Brother the Marquess of Huntley, my Lord of Rothes, my
Lord of Oxenford of Scotland, and other Catholics and Priests, this side and
beyond Seas: That the said Peter Talbot, before I brought him to the French
King's presence, told me, That he was to treat with that King from soine very
great Person or Persons in England, for to raise men in Ireland for the French
King, and that I had declared these things in France to one Sir Robert Welsh,
who desired me to acquaint the Duke of Ormond therewith. So Sir John being in
haste to go to Whitehall, took these Heads in his Table Book, and said he would
acquaint them above with it; but bid me not to mention the Duke of Ormond at
all, for he was a goodman. I bring him in only by occasion, said I. Next day
Sir John sent for me, and desiring to know what other things I could say, I
began to particularize the forementioned relations of the Plot; but he broke me
off of that, saying, That these were but trifles, and that we cared not in
England what Priests and Women beyond Seas, could devise; and that he took such
Stories from me but as starting-holes from the only point he had to urge
against me. That unless I would confess other matters against the Duke of
Monmouth, he would rack me next day, and afterward hang me. I said, He might
do what he pleased, but that I neither knew or could confess any such Design:
And so I was sent back to my Lodging, but my forwardness to speak ever
afterward of any Plot against England was well abated, by this Storm. I
desired my Keepers Wife and Child, here present to pray for me, for that I was
to be racked the next day. I asked my Keeper, What a Rack was? An Instrument,
said he, to stretch the Body and Limbs out of all joints, sometimes full of
Needles; and that it was called the Daughter of some Duke. I do not now
remember which. But this Family being weak persons, were themselves frightened
at this sad and terrible threatenings; alleging, That none was ever carried to
be executed out of their house.

Sometime afterward I was sent for to be examined, to Whitehall, before the
Secretary, my Lord of Bath, of Newport, and some others, I never saw before:
They inquired, Whether I had been employed under the Duke of Monmouth? And
whether I knew some other persons, I do not now remember my self? with such
other Questions; out of which I could not yet know certainly the Cause of my
Commitment; for no body appeared against me, as I think, at that time, one only
at the second time: So they in a general manner urged me still to confess, to
confess, what evil Design I had in coming to England: I said still, I had none,
nor could I confess any: And so was sent back to the Tower. Some Weeks or
Months afterward I was sent for to Whiteball again, where one Dallison, who was
formerly in France entertained by me for writing, appeared. He there said, That
I there in France threatened some persons here in England, and that he thought
that it was the Duke of Monmouth, because of non-payment of Arrears. I told
him, That that was a bad inference, that because I threatened some body, it must
be therefore the Duke of Monmouth, who had never any ground so to do; for that
he had signed an Order for payment of me; and spoke to Captain Watson and
Doctor Goase for it: Though I never was yet paid.

But the pretext or ground from which they took the occasion of this slanderous
Allogisme, was from the matters of some private quarrels, which one Mr. Hampton
and the Lady Anne Gourdon would have me vindicate against some of their Rivals;
which I complimentally was still wont to promise them I would do, the better to
insinuate my self into their secrets, concerning the Plot and other matters.

The Lady Gourdon would have the Earl of Rothes his Lady to be made away, she
being a Presbiterian, begot (as she said) a great obstacle to the Roman
Catholic Religion's progress in Scotland, and her own Rival, etc.

Mrs. Wingfield, alias Hampton, a Benchers Wife of the Temple, then also in
Paris, went also about to all English Gentlemen there to avenge her quarrels
against her Husband, who as they say (not without some good cause) has cast her
off: She applied her self to me, who not approving of those violent means, I
obtained for her a Letter of Recommendation for Justice to be done to her, from
the French King to the King of England; signed by Secretary Pompone, directed
to Secretary Arlington in England: This was in 73, but she not finding any good
by this Letter, she went on to propose to me her old ways; so seeing her
incorrigible, fearing she would fall into worse hands, and hoping to get back
the money I had lent to her and laid out for her; I kept in with her till she
could get money to pay me: but finding no hopes of either the one or the other,
I bid this Dallison my Man, to take her in hand, to pretend to close to her
Designs, till I could get my money. I directed him to her Lodgings, but he told
me that Sir Robert Welsh and himself knew her well enough: And that he would
get me one Johnson a Student in Physic, who would act his part in the Comedy
better than any. I told them I would share with them both of what was due to me
by this Woman, and what besides they could get from her: She proffered to give
some Hundreds of Pounds, then in the hands of Monsieur de Basti in London, and
her Daughter besides in Marriage, to any that would kill her Husband by the
Sword, Poison, etc. But finding she could not perform the payment of a far less
sum due to me, and that to receive into my company persons of so wicked
principles in Religion and Moralities, was scandalous; I cast them all off in
Paris. She some Weeks before came over unknown to me into England, but the next
day after my Arrival here, I met her accidentally, and she brought me to her
Lodging; having now cast of Dallison. Also he there in Paris met with the
Talbots every night, and with Sir Robert Welsh; amongst them it was contrived
that Dallison should come over into England, and turn these petit matters
wherein I seemed to comply with these Ladies, as if I intended them against the
Duke of Monmouth, for not payment of Arrears, etc. and by this means they
thought to blast my Discovery of the Plot against them, when I came into
England; and that I would be certainly secured when I arrived there: and they
had the assurance to threaten me therewith to my face. Their threats came
punctually to pass, for I was secured according to their Contrivance within a
few days after I was in London.

Now when Sir John and the Secretary did so often press me, What might give
grounds to this Slander of some Design against the Duke of Monmouth, I have
related these matters abovesaid, unto them concerning these Women's Proposals,
which I conceived to be the only ground and pretext of that Slander, they made
me sign it, I think; which taking but for a formality of no great importance, I
did do; and though I did but out of a complemental policy hearken to these
Women's designs, I could not be at quiet there at the Tower with Sir John and
others, till I had said, That I had a real intention to serve these Women in
the premises; though Mr. Hawkins the Tower Chaplain, and Mr. Robinson the
Tower Gentleman Jailer, may witness that I told them and others, That I dallied
with these Ladies only. But whatever Sir John or the Secretary can make of
this or any other lie, the Popish plotters sent into their hands, to slander
my Evidence, cannot be material to the purpose, and I will be ready to answer
it. And though Sir John's ill usage and threats of Racking of me, and hearing
that he was wont to give an account of me to the Duke of York (the Talbot's
Master) though I say, these things did discourage me to speak further of the
Plot whilst I was in the Tower, either to Sir John or the Secretary, yet after
I had been abroad a while, during the last Parliaments Sitting, I went to him
to the Tower, entreating him to second me in the discovering of the said
Matters aforesaid, for the good of the Government; John Bagot his Man I think
was in hearing; but he with a Check rejected me: which discouraged me so, as
almost never to speak any more of the Matter. Till a Lord of the Parliament, to
whom I discovered the whole, by the means of a Friend, had received me again to
make the Discovery, as I have done on the Twenty fourth of December last before
the Committee of Lords upon Oath, Three Months ago before this Information I
now do give into the Commons.

Jurat.

FINIS.

