AN Exact Account Of the daily PROCEEDINGS Of the Commissioners of OYER and
TERMINER AT YORK, Against the late Horrid and Bloody CONSPIRATORS, With the
particulars of what has lately occurred in ENGLAND.
York Jan. 8.
UPon Tuesday last late at night, His Majesty's Judges and Justices of Oyer and
Terminer arrived here in safety, and were received with much respect, and Large
Expectation.

Upon Wednesday (being Twelfth-day) they attended their devo^^ons.

Yesterday, was taken up in reading of his Majesty's several Com^^ssions; for
the County and City of York; and in preparing of the ^^r and Inquest with a
charge, suitable to the Occasion.

This morning early, were Arraigned Seventeen several Prisoners; Ten whereof
appeared, upon clear Evidence, to have been Actually in Arms at Farnley-Wood,
and accordingly thereupon, were convicted all of High Treason, by one and the
same Jury.

The Court still sitting; the other Seven were Indicted, as Abetters,
Consulters, and Complotters of High Treason: Five whereof were returned Guilty,
by the Second Jury; so that this day (being the first day of Proceeding) has
produced Fifteen Convicts for High Treason, and others, Primae Magnitudinis,
are still behind, to come upon the Stage.

As for the Fifteen this day convicted; there is not one but Captain Oats (in
whom we find the greatest appearance of Regret) that is either of any
countenance, or note; but Young Fellows, Stupendiously, and desperately
resolved for Treasonable purposes: Aiming at nothing less than the deplorable
Overthrow of King and Kingdom. This is the brief of what has past hitherto, the
particulars more at large, I doubt not but you will receive from other hands.

York, Jan. 8.
This day were Arraigned and Tried seventeen Prisoners, whereof fifteen were
found Guilty; and among the rest one Corney a preaching Anabaptist, who from
the Text, Faithful and true are those which follow the Lamb, inferred the
lawfulness of the design, so it were carried on for love of the Cause, and not
for by ends.

The fact was excellently opened, and as fully proved. The design came from the
Bishopric in March last; and an Intelligence was settled betwixt the
disaffected, there, and in Yorkshire; and also at Ipswich in Suffolk, and other
Counties: an Oath of secrecy taken, and Agents employed to London and the West
of England, for assistance.

In June; Two Agitators were sent from Scotland, to reconcile the Sectaries,
and these were entertained at one Oldroyd's house at Dewsbury, known by the
name of the Devil of Dewsbury; (since fled) and afterward diverse meetings were
appointed at a place called Stank-house in this County. Whereupon Marshden and
Palmer were sent to London, as Agitators to the Secret Committee; and at their
return, brought orders to rise the 12 of October, with assurance that the
insurrection should be General; and White Hall attempted. Nottingham,
Gloucester, and Newcastle were to be seized for Passes, over Tine, Trent, and
Severn: and Boston in Lincolnshire, for a Port to receive succors, and
Ammunition from Holland, and other Foreign parts. York they aimed at, to make
sure of this County; but of Hull they despaired (as VValters affirmed in his
Testimony; who to say the truth dealt very sincerely.) All the Gentry were to
be secured, and persons were dispacht, abroad for Assistance, Officers and
Soldiers listed all over England, to oppose Subsidies, Excize, etc. To
Re-establish a Gospel Magistracy and Ministry; and to restore the
Long-Parliament; as the only Basis they could build upon: And lastly, to curb
the Clergy, the Gentry and Lawyers. This is the sum of the whole matter.

It has been no small advantage to the Public, that the design has been so
openly, and so clearly manifested; the Trial of these Prisoners, even in the
confession of their own party having been fair and Favorable to a high degree:
to the wonderful satisfaction of the County, and to the Honor of his Sacred
Majesty: whose mercy to these Offenders for what they have formerly done, is
not more eminent, then his Princely Moderation and Justice at present;
notwithstanding the provocation of their Repeated Transgressions.

York, Jan. 9.
His Majesty's Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer came hither late upon Tuesday
nigh last: and were very honorably received by the High Sheriff Sir Roger
Langley, and Colonel Frecheville (the Governor of this Garrison,) who, both
of them, with the respective Horse of the City, and some Country-Troops,
Conducted them through the Town.

On Wednesday, they rested, and worshipped God at the Cathedral: In the
afternoon, the Kings Council put their business in Order, and digested their
Instructions.

On Thursday, (after Sermon in the Minster) the commission was opened, in a
very full and cheerful appearance of the country, the Grand Jury sworn, and the
charge given. After Dinner, the commission was opened, and read in the City;
but having no one business there, they adjourned till Tuesday; and returned to
the castle: where the Grand Jury gave in a bill of Indictment, against Ralph
Oats, (commonly called Captain Oats) and sixteen more in custody.

The Kings council thought fit to proceed against Oats, and nine of them who
were actually in the insurrection at Farnley-VVood, and the evidence being the
same against all of them, one Jury was charged with them.

The Kings witnesses made it appear in evidence, to the clear satisfaction of
all men, that there was a great Plot laid in the County Palatine of Durham, for
settling of a Gospel-Magistracy, and a Gospel Ministry. To which end, the design
was molded (for reconciling dissenting parties) to set on foot the Long
Parliament; and this carried on by an Oath of secrecy.

This plot was by Agitators conveyed into this county among other parts, where
the conspirators appointed several days for the Execution: but at last pitched
upon the 12. of October. At which time, the ten prisoners (among others) met
armed at Farnley-Wood, in Hostile manner with a Trumpet: This being fully
proved, and no shadow of defense made, the Jury found them all guilty. One
Walters and young Oats behaved themselves well in their Evidence.

With the seven other prisoners, a second Jury was charged, who were in, only
at preachings and plottings, in order to the intended General rising, which
being proved against five of them, by several Witnesses, and most of their
concurrent confessions: the Jury found them five guilty, but acquitted two of
the seven, against whom there was but one witness, and that only of words
spoken by them.

This morning, the Judges, and Justices are going to the castle to proceed in
their work.

York, Jan. 9. 1663.
On Thursday the seventh instant the Judges read their commissions, at the
Castle, for the County; (and Empannelled a Jury, and swore witnesses to give in
evidence) and at the Common Hall, for the City: The Kings Council made three
degrees of Offenders.

1 Those that engaged, and met in arms. 2. Such as knew and assented to the
Treason. 3. Such as knew) though they did not assent) and revealed it not.
The Grand Jury for the county, began with the first sort of Offenders; who
yesterday, were arraigned, and tried, Sergeant Wild laid home, and open, first
the wickedness of the design to pull down Magistrates, and Ministers; to
subvert all Order, under the specious pretense of setting up a
Gospel-magistracy, and ministry, taking off the Hearth-money, etc. Secondly, he
said the plot was first hatched in the Bishopric, from thence came into this
County, was here nourished; and then travailed into Nottingham-shire,
Lanca-shire, London, and other parts, Nottingham should have been Garrisoned;
York surprised; and Boston secured. Thirdly, He undertook to bring the guilt of
this plot home to the prisoners at the bar; and so Errington, Walters, and
Greathead, were called to prove the nature, and Generality of the design.

Errington spoke to the first contrivance in Durham, and to several meetings he
had with several persons for the contriving, and carrying it on; Walters, to
several discourses he had with Dr. Richardson about it; and the Declaration of
the cause of their rising, and correspondencies elsewhere; Greathead, and one
more, to several meetings at Leeds; the Spawe; and other places, with
Richardson, Captain Atkinson, and other Agents, from London and other parts.

Three or four witnesses were then sworn to charge the prisoners at the bar,
with their Actual meeting in Arms, for the Executing of this Plot; and two
Witnesses, at least, proved every one of the prisoners (except the two who were
acquitted) to have been at Farnley-Wood, in Arms; between one and two in the
morning, the 12. of October last; which was the day agreed upon for the rising.

Captain Oats excepted against the witnesses as Participes criminis, but that
was overruled.

York, January, 9.
Since his late Majesty of Blessed Memory was here, there has not been seen
such an Appearance of Persons of Quality in this Town, as now upon this
occasion: Nor had ever any People fairer Play for their lives, than these
Conspirators.

There were Yesterday brought to the Bar these Prisoners following; Thomas
Oats a Captain, Samuel Ellis (his Trumpetter) John Ellis, John Nettleton,
Senior, John Nettleton, Junior, Robert Scott, William Tolson, John Fossard,
Robert Oldroyd, Josuah Askwith, alias Sporling, Peregrine Corney, William
Towers, John Redshaw, John Sowden, John Smith, William Ash, John Errington, and
Charles Carre.

Two Juries for Life and Death being empannel'd, (and Persons of eminent
quality) the Prisoners excepted only against One; and put themselves upon
their Trial. Whereupon, the Evidence being opened and the Court enform'd; Major
Walters of Cundell was called to the Bar; who made an ingenuous Discourse of
the whole Progress of the Design, reporting how it had for two years been
carried on by a Private Committee, that sat at London, that he had the first
knowledge of it from Doctor Richardson of Rippon; that in July last, they had
12000 Horse in readiness in England; that they had designed a Declaration to
unite all the Sectaries; and that they had proposed Lambert or Ludlow for their
Head: and that the Rising was to begin in Ireland; to follow in England, and
then in Scotland. Walters declared likewise, who were to command in the West
Riding, who in the East Riding, and who in the North Riding of this County; who
in Nottinghamshire, Lancashire and Bishopric; and what Numbers; who were their
Agents; where their Meetings; and what Places and Passes they were to Surprise.
After which relation, the first Ten were set to the Bar; and there by Three
Witnesses, Josuah Crowder, Timothy Crowder and Young Oats; they were proved to
have been all actually in Arms on the Twelfth of October last in Farnley Wood:
upon which the Jury went out, and presently returned them Guilty. Then were the
Other Eight set to the Bar; Five of which were cast. Against Carre there was no
Evidence given. Towers and Redshaw were acquitted upon the Point of single
Witnesses.

York, Jan. 11th.
Upon Saturday last, the Judges sat late, the Prisoners being grown more
troublesome in excepting to the Jurors; especially Cotton and Denham (Two of the
Three that were that day cast, the third was one Atkins) It was observed, that
when any Gentlemen were called with their Additions; as Knight, Esquire, etc.
they would commonly except; till at last, the Clerk was ordered to leave out
the Titles, and then they left challenging. They behaved themselves with a most
notorious insolence, Cotton protesting, That he valued his Life no more than
the Judge did his Handkerchief: and Denham brake out also into Horrible
Extravagancies.

It was particularly proved by Walters and others, against Denham: that he was
engaged in an Agreement to seiz the Horses and Arms of the Lord Falconbridg,
and of the Lord Fairfax of Gilling: and that they had designed to secure the
Prisoners they took in Skipton-Castle.

York, January 13.
On Monday last was tried James Newton Mason, Henry Watson and Richard Wilson:
the Two later found Guilty. Tuesday, Carr was called, who confessed himself
Guilty, and was set by. Ralph Rymer was then called and indicted singly; he
pleaded Not guilty, and made a large and impertinent Defense, excepted against
Seven and thirty Jurors, but was at length found Guilty: and to conclude the
work of this Gaol Delivery, there was called to the Bar John Smurfet, Ralph
Wade and John Wade, and indicted upon Misprision, though the Evidence were
sufficient to have made them Guilty of Treason, yet they to mix Mercy with
Justice, as if by an united consent of Judges, Council and Jury, passed them by
as Not Guilty, gave them the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; ordered them to
find Sureties, and so be discharged. There are yet a great many of the Rebels
in the Gaol, and the Judges are now at the Castle giving Judgment.

Persons Condemned.
Tho: Oats, Sam. Ellis, John Nettleton sen. John Nettleton jun. Rob. Sco^,
Will. Tolson, John Foster, Robert Oldroyd, Josuah Askwith alias Sparling,
Peregrine Corney, John S^wden, John Smith, Will. Ash, John Errington, Reb.
Atkins, Will. Cotton, Geo. Denham, Hen. Watson, Richard Wilson, Ralph Rymer.
Charles Karr reprieved.

Persons Acquitted.
William Towers, Robert Redshaw, Rob. Cook, James Newton, Sam. Ward, Will.
Sparling, John Smurfit, Ralph Wade, John Wade. A True Copy of the Court-Roll.

London, January 12.
From Barbadees came lately an Express from the Lord Willoughby, which gives an
assurance of the Settlement of that Island, at the most for their own advantage
and His Majesty's service. Four complete Regiments are now formed for its
defense, One of Horse and Three of Foot; of which that which bears the colors
and Name of His Majesty, consists of 2400 effective, besides which His Majesty
is sending an addition of 12 Pieces of Ordinance to strengthen the place. This
being so well secured, his Lordship is going to Santa Lucia to settle a
Plantation there, and from the^^^ to render that place also serviceable to the
Crown and Interest of England.

On. Jan. 15. Sir Richard Fanshaw takes leave at Court, and next week goes away
as Lord Ambassador for Spain. Sir John Lawson convoys him, and from thence goes
out with the Ships, which (with those sent out lately under Cap. Smith,) make
11. Sail to Algiers to reduce those Pirates to reason.

My former told you Colonel Muddiford was appointed Governor of Jamaica; this,
that His Majesty for the better encouragement of all such as desire to go
thither, has granted to all persons of what persuasion soever, free Liberty of
Conscience, and as much Land gratis as they shall be able to stock.

Sir William Petties New invented Vessel is now at Portsmouth, and has by her
enduring the Sea, answered the grand Objection made against her, That in rough
weather there was no security in such a Bottom.

Jan. 4. as I am informed, Mr. John Davys was taken from the Tower, and carried
aboard for Tangier.

The Duchess of York has been sick, and is perfectly recovered of the Meazels.

DUBLIN, Printed for Sam. Dancer in Castle-street, A. D. 1663.


