AN EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE TRIAL BETWEEN Sr. WILLIAM PRITCHARD, Knight. And Alderman
of the City of London, Plaintiff, AND THOMAS PAPILLON, Esquire Defendant; In an
Action upon the Case At the Sessions of Nisi prius holden for the Court of
King's Bench at the Guild Hall in the City of London, on Thursday the 6th of
November, 1684. In Michaelmas Term, in the 36th Year of the Reign of King
Charles the Second. Before Sir GEORGE JEFFERIES, Knight. and Baronet, then Lord
Chief Justice of the said Court of King's Bench.

To which is added, The MATTER of FACT relating to ELECTION of SHERIFFS, as it
was printed in the Year 1682.

LONDON, Printed and sold by Richard Janeway in Queens-head-Court in
Paternoster Row. MDCLXXXIX.

Pasche xxxvito Car. Secundi Reg. London ss.
WIlhelmus Pritchard Miles nuper Major Civit. praedict. quaerit de Thoma
Papillon in Custod. Marem, etc. pro eo videlicet quod cum duodecimo die
Februaris Anno nostri Domini Caroli Secundi nunc Regis Angliae, etc. tricessimo
quinto ipsem idem Wilhelmus Pritchard ac antea and abinde pro separat. menses
ex tunc prox. sequend. extitit. Major Civitat' London praedict. in Officium
Majoratus illius debito modo elect. prefect. and jurat. ac secundum
Consuetudinem Civitat. London praedict. a tempore cujus contrar. memoria
hominum non existit in eadem usitat. and approbat. Officium suum Majoratus
illius indies intendere debuit pro assiduam diligent. ipsius Wilhelmus in
regimine Civitat. illius pro ipsum secundum debitum Officii sui praedict.
exequend. and performand. ad honorem and dignitat. ad Officium illud spectant.
and pertinen. praedictus tamen Thomas existens unus de Commitat. Civitat.
praedict. and sub regimine dicti Wilhelmi virtute Officii sui praedicti
praemissor. non ignarus sed machinans and false, ac malitiose, invidens felici
statui ipsius Wilhelmi in Officio suo praedict. necnon ipsum Wilhelmum in
executionem Officii illius minus just inquietare and disturbare praedicto
duodecimo die Februarii Anno tricesimo quinto superdicto idem Thomas Papillon
pro vexatione praefat. Wilhelmo adhibend. (eodem Thoma ad tunc non habente
aliquam legitimam vel probabilem Causam Actionis versus ipsum Wilhelmum) false
and malitiose prosequunt fuit extra cur dicti Domini Reg. coram ipso Rege
nunchit. scilicet apud Westmon. in Com. Middlesex adtunc and adhuc tent'
existem quoddam Breve ipsius Dom. Reg. de alias Capias versus ipsum Wilhelmum
per nomen Wilhelmi Pritchard Militis adtunc Coronator Civitat' London praed.
direct' per quod quidem Breve idem Dominus Rex nunc eidem tunc Coronatori
praecepit quod capet ipsum Wilhelmum Pritchard si invent' foret in Civitat'
London praed. and ea salvo custodiret, ita quod herent Corpus ejus coram Domino
Rege apud Westminster. die cur' prox. post quindenum Pasche ex tunc prox. sequend. ac
respondend. praefat' Thomae Papillon pre nomen Thomae Papillon Armiger de
placito trangres. and quod idem tunc Coronator haberet ibi tunc breve illud. Et
praedictus Thomas Papillon ex ulteriori nequitia and malitia sua praecogitat'
versus ipsum Wilhelmum postea and ante retorn' Brevis praedicti scilicet
vicesimo quarto die Aprilis Anno tricesimo superdicto apud London praed.
videlicet in Parochia Sanctae Mildredae Virginis in Pulletria in Warda de
Cheap. London praedicum Breve de alis Capias cuidem Johanni Brom Gent. adtunc
Coronator Civit' London praed. existem deliberavit exequend. ac adtunc and
ibidem apud Wilhelmum adtunc Major' Civitat' London praed. ut praefert' existem
praetextu Brevis illius pro Corpus suum capi and arrestari ac in Prisona sub
Custod. ejusdem tunc Coronator per spatium sex horarum ex tunc prox. sequem
detineri malitiose and minus just procuravit in vituperator' derogation' and
vilipendium praedici Wilhelmi and Officii Majoratus ipsius Wilhelmus praed.
necnon ad damnum prejudicium and gravamen ipsius Wilhelmi manifest' ubi revera
and de facto praedictus Thomas Papillon praedico tempore captionis arrestionis
and detentionis ipsius Wilhelmus in Prisona sit ut praefert' fact' non habuit
aliquam justam vel probabilem causam Actionis versus ipsum Wilhelmum in
Premisis praed. unde idem Wilhelmus dic' quod ipse deteriorat' est and damnum
habet ad valent' december mill librarum and inde produc' sertam, etc.

Die Jovis 6o November. Anno Dom. 1684. Mich. Ter. 36o Car. 2o. B. R. At the
Session of Nisi prius for the City of London, held at Guild Hall.
Pritchard versus Papillon.
London ss.
SIR William Pritchard, late Lord Mayor of the City of London, having in Easter
Term last brought an Action upon the Case, for falsely, maliciously, and
without probable Cause, procured him to be arrested and imprisoned in his
Mayoralty, against Thomas Papillon, Esquire The Defendant pleaded not Guilty, and
thereupon Issue being joined, it came this day to be tried before the Lord
Chief Justice Jeffreys; and the Jury sworn to try this Cause were these,
Bartholomew Ferryman, Thomas Blackmore, Thomas Symonds, William Whatton, John
Green, Thomas Amy, Jospeh Baggs, Daniel Chandler, John Reynalds, John Allen,
Joseph Caine, and William Withers, jun.


Mr. Mundy. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of this Jury, Sir
William Pritchard, Knight, late Lord Mayor of the City of London, is Plaintiff,
and Thomas Papillon, Esquire is the Defendant: And this, Gent. is in a special
Action upon the Case, wherein the Plaintiff does declare, That whereas the 12th
of Februaery in the 35th Year of this King, and before and after for several
Months then next ensuing, he was Mayor of the City of London, being duly
elected and sworn into the Office of Mayoralty of the said City, and according
to the Custom of the said City time out of mind, he ought daily to attend the
said Office in the diligent Government of the said City, according to the Duty
of his said Office, which he was to execute to the Honor and Dignity belonging
thereunto; That the Defendant, Thomas Papillon, being one of the Commonalty of
the said City, and under the Government of the Plaintiff, by virtue of his
Office aforesaid, not being ignorant of the Premises, but contriving, and
falsely, and maliciously envying the happy Estate of the Plaintiff in his said
Office; as also unjustly to disturb the Plaintiff in the Execution of his said
Office, the said 12th day of February in the 35th Year aforesaid, the Defendant
for vexation to the Plaintiff, not having any lawful or probable Cause of
Action against the Plaintiff, falsely and maliciously did prosecute the King's
Writ of alias Capias out of the Court of King's Bench against the Plaintiff, by
the Name of Sir William Pritchard, Knight, directed to the then Coroner of the
City of London; by which Writ it was commanded the said Coroner to take the
Plaintiff, if found within the said City, and safely keep him, so as to have
his Body before that Court at Westminster upon Wednesday next, after 15 days of
Easter then next following, to answer the now Defendant in a Plea of Trespass:
And that the Defendant of his further Malice against the Plaintiff, afterward
and before the return of the Writ, to wit, upon the 24th day of April in the
35th Year aforesaid, at London, to wit, in the Parish of St. Mildred the
Virgin, in the Poultry, in the Ward of Cheap, London, delivered the said Writ
of alias Capias to one John Brom, Gent. then being Coroner of the said City,
to be executed; and then and there the Plaintiff, then being Mayor of the said
City, by virtue of that Writ, maliciously and unjustly did procure to be taken,
and arrested, and detained in Prison under the Custody of the said Coroner for
the space of six hours, to the Disgrace and Scandal of the Plaintiff and his
said Office, as also to the manifest Damage, Prejudice, and Grievance of the
Plaintiff: Whereas in Truth and in Fact the Defendant at the time of the
taking, arresting, and detaining of the Plaintiff in Prison, as aforesaid, had
not any just or probable Cause of Action against the Plaintiff in the Premises,
whereby the Plaintiff says he is injured, and which he lays to his Damage 10000
l. To this the Defendant has pleaded Not Guilty. If we that are of Counsel for
the Plaintiff shall prove this matter unto you, Gentlemen, that we have laid in
the Declaration that has been opened unto you, you are to find for the
Plaintiff, and I hope will repair him in Damages for this Affront and Injury.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I
am of Counsel in this Case for the Plaintiff; and this Action is brought,
Gentlemen, to vindicate the Honor of the Chair from such Affronts as these,
which in no Age, till of late days, our Times of Faction and Confusion, it ever
met with; That by a Person that is a Citizen of London, and one of the
Commonalty, that ought to have paid Submission to the Lord Moyor as his Chief
Magistrate, and was bound so to do by his Oath as a Freeman should, without
Cause of Suit, arrest the Lord Mayor of the City. That there was no probable
Cause, is evident by his not proceeding in the Action that he had thus brought.
But, Gentlemen, we shall show you in the course of our Evidence, that there lay
a further Malice in this Case, and that there was a Design in it against the
Government. For we shall give you Evidence that this Design was laid to carry
on the great Plot against the Lives of the King and his Brother, and for the
Subversion of the Government. For they contrived it so, that they would
imprison the Mayor, and then, thought they, the Loyal Citizens will interpose
to rescue him, and then the Party should rise to assist the Officer, he having
the Countenance of Authority, and being in the Execution of the King's Writ
(especially if it be considered then who was Coroner) and so a public
Commotion would be made, a general Mutiny, and that would be a fit Opportunity
in the Confusion of the City, wanting its Chief Governor, of doing what they
designed. Gentlemen, we shall prove all that is laid in the Declaration; and
likewise that the End of this Business was to have had a Commotion for the
accomplishing their great Conspiracy as has been opened. That Sir William
Pritchard was arrested in his Mayoralty, I suppose, will be agreed, or else we
shall prove it.


Mr. Ward. Yes, yes, we agree it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then we will go on and prove the manner of it. Swear Mr. Gorges,
and Mr. Keeling, (which was done.) Mr. Keeling, pray will you tell my Lord, and
the Jury, were you made a special Bailiff to arrest Sir William Pritchard when
he was Lord Mayor, and what did you do upon it? tell all you know of it, and
what was designed by it.


Keeling. My Lord, all that I do know of it is this: It was upon the 24th day
of April, I have the Warrant here to show, I met with Mr. Goodenough at Mr.
Russel's the Cook in Ironmonger-Lane, and several others were there; and I went
away a little while and came again: While I was gone from them, they put my
Name into the Warrant, and upon that Warrant I did arrest Sir William
Pritchard, who was then Lord Mayor, at the Suit of Mr. Thomas Papillon, I
suppose this is the Gentleman (pointing to the Defendant) I had no Order for it
from Mr. Papillon, nor ever spoke with him about it; but I had Order from the
Coroner, who upon the arresting of him took my Lord Mayor into his Custody.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Where was my Lord Mayor then?


Keeling. At Grocers-Hall.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Was that the place he kept his Mayoralty in?


Keeling. Yes, it was so.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What was he doing when you arrested him?


Keeling. There was some Disturbance upon it among the Officers and People
there. The Coroner came up to him and said, Sir, I have a Writ against you, I
pray you would please to give an Appearance at the Suit of Mr. Thomas Papillon,
and another at the Suit of Mr. John Dubois, and some words there past between
him and the Coroner; and my Lord Mayor refusing to give any Appearance, the
Coroner Mr. Brom bid us execute our Warrants, upon which I came up to my Lord
Mayor and touched him upon the Shoulder, and said, I arrest you at the Suit of
Thomas Papillon, Esquire and one Ferdinando Burley arrested him again at the Suit
of Mr. John Dubois.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis What did you do with him when you had arrested him?


Keeling. The Coroner dismissed us, and as I take it, carried him home to his
House.


Mr. At. Genesis What Instructions had you what to do in case he made any
Resistance, and did not submit to the Arrest?


Keeling. I know of no Instructions about any such thing.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Who was by, pray, when Orders were given you to arrest my Lord
Mayor?


Keeling. Both the Goodenoughs.


Mr. At. Genesis He, in the Proclamation you mean, and his Brother?


Keeling. Yes, Richard and Francis Goodenough.


Mr. Soll. Genesis And who else, pray?


Keeling. Several that I did not know.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you remember any Body besides the Goodenoughs in particular?


Keeling. There was one a Tallow-Chandler, and a great many that I did not know.


Mr. Sol. Genesis How many do you think there were? and where was it?


Keeling. I believe there were about thirty or forty, and it was at Russel's
the Cooks in Ironmonger-lane.


Mr. At. Genesis Did they all come along with you to Grocers-Hall to arrest my
Lord Mayor?


Keeling. No, my Lord, they did not.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did any of them, and which pray?


Keeling. Sir, I will tell you who did come to my Lord Mayor's. There was the
Coroner, Francis Goodenough, Ferdinando Burley, and my self: And after my Lord
was arrested, the Coroner bid us be gone, and he would look after my Lord Mayor.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Whither did you go after that?


Keeling. I went to Sir Harry Tulse's directly.


Mr. At. Genesis Did not you expect an Opposition? and had you not some discourse
what you should do in case there was an Opposition?


Keeling. No, I cannot tell any thing of that.


Mr. At. Genesis You say, there was a Meeting, or Consult, at Russell's of forty
People; Had you not there some Consultation what was to be done if my Lord
Mayor did not obey the Arrest?


Keeling. I do not remember any thing about that at that time.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there at any other time before? or did you hear any of those
People discourse the Goodenoughs, or any of them, what they would have done in
case they were resisted?


Keeling. I do not remember any Discourse of any such thing, before or after?


L. Chapter Just. Pray, Mr. Keeling, let me ask you a Question or two. Were you
ever employed by the Coroner to be a special Bailiff to arrest any Body before
this time you speak of, that you arrested Sir William Pritchard?


Keeling. No, my Lord, I never was.


L. Chapter Just. Then, pray recollect your self, who were at that Meeting, when as
you say, your Name was put into the Warrant for this Arrest?


Keeling. My Lord, when I went away for a little while, I left these Persons
particularly that I did name, the two Goodenoughs, and one Burton, I think, and
one Crompton, and that Tallow-Chandler; there were to the number of thirty or
forty that I did not know their Names.


L. Chapter Just. But, pray, how came you to be employed in this Service then? Were
you a Tradesman in Town then?


Keeling. Yes, in Wapping.


L. Chapter Just. Good now, how came you to be employed in arresting my Lord Mayor
more than any other of those thirty or forty that you say were there then?


Keeling. I went there among them, but did not know then that I should be
concerned in this Business; and I went away a little while, and when I came
back, they told me, that my Name was put into the Warrant.


L. Chapter Just. Pray tell us the whole Story, How you that were a Tradesman at
Wapping, should come to be employed as a Bailiff to the Coroner of London to
arrest my Lord Mayor, there must be some particular End in it?


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Keeling, tell the Court and the Jury the whole Story, and
what it was that brought you into this.


Keeling. My Lord, Mr. Goodenough told me I must be concerned.


L. Chapter Just. Ay, prethy tell us what Goodenough desired you to be concerned in?


Keeling. Upon my coming back to the Company that was at Russell's, Mr. Richard
Goodenough told me, I must be concerned in the Business of arresting my then
Lord Mayor, Sir William Pritchard: Said I to him, Mr. Goodenough, this is
foreign and remote to my Business, to be concerned in such a Matter as this, it
will seem very strange for me to do it. He pressed it upon me to do it; and, says
he, if you will not do it, you will be a Man looked ill upon, and it will be
taken strangely from that Party; he meant, I suppose, the Discontented Party,
the Faction, or what you please to call it, that were not contented with the
administration of the Government in the City at that time; and he urged it upon
me with a great-many Arguments. I opposed it with much vigor a good while, but
at last he prevailed upon me to go along with the Coroner; and Frank Goodenough
his Brother said he would go with me, and he did so; and we came and arrested
my Lord Mayor, as I told you before.


L. C. Just. Where did Mr. Goodenough press you to be concerned in this
Business, as you say?


Keeling. At Mr. Russell's a Cooks in Ironmonger-lane.


L. Chapter Just. How came you thither?


Keeling. He sent me a Letter to meet him there. He was at me before to be
concerned in it, but I did not comply with him in it. Mr. Richard Goodenough it
was, and Mr. Ashurst, I think it was Alderman Cornish's Son-in-Law was by.


L. Chapter Just. Was Nelthrop there?


Keeling. No, my Lord, he was not there, but they did not proceed then, because
my Lord and his Brethren were gone out of Town to wait upon the King, I think;
And this was six weeks or two months before this Meeting at Russell's.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray, Mr. Keeling, recollect your self. Had you any discourse
with Goodenough, or any body else, what the Consequence of such an Arrest would
be?


Keeling. They told me, my Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, had made an ill
Return to the Mandamus's that were served upon them for the swearing of Mr.
Papillon and Mr. Dubois Sheriffs, and therefore Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois had
good Cause of Action against them; and Goodenough said, he had order from them
to Arrest my Lord Mayor upon an Action, and desired me to be concerned.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But pray remember what you said before Mr. Keeling, Why should
the discontented Party, as you call them, be concerned, and be Angry with you
if you did not arrest my Lord Mayor?


Keeling. The particular Argument that he used with me to persuade me to it,
was this, That I having a Trade and Dealing among that sort of People, they
would think ill of me I did not do it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But why should the Party be angry with you, if you were not a
Bailiff, to Arrest my Lord Mayor at the Suit of Mr. Papillon.


Keeling. I did not know the Reason of their Anger, he might have something in
his Head that he did not reveal to me. But that was the Argument he used, The
Party would think ill of me.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. If you have done with this Witness, I would ask him a
Question. You say, Sir, that Goodenough told you, the Discontented Party would
be angry with you if you did not do it? Upon your Oath, was the Discontented
Party named?


Keeling. No, Sir, but that Party of which Mr. Goodenough and I then was, and
they were the Discontented Party, I think, for they were so discontented, that
they would have killed the King and the Duke.


Mr. At. Genesis That is an Answer, I hope, to your Question, Mr. Sergeant.


L. Chapter Just. I think, when he names the Goodenoughs to be of the Party, nobody
questions but they were discontented.


Mr. Sol. Genesis He has explained well enough sure what he meant by the
Discontented Party, those that were so discontented that they would have killed
the King and the Duke. Those were the Promoters of this Action, and Mr. Keeling
must engage in it, or they would be displeased. Now, my Lord, we shall call
Sir. Henry. Tulse, and Sir Robert Jefferies, to show what the Coroner did.


Keeling. I arrested Sir Harry Tulse afterward.


Then Sir Harry Tulse was called.

Mr. Ward. My Lord, we desire Sir Harry Tulse may not be sworn, we have an
exception to his Testimony.


L. Chapter Just. What is your Objection?


Mr. Ward. We are informed, he and the rest of the Court of Aldermen have
joined their Purses to carry on this Suit, and then, with Submission, he is not
a good Witness.


L. Chapter Just. Ask him that Question upon a Voyer dire.


Then he was sworn upon a Voyer dire.

Mr. Williams. Pray Sir, is there any Order of the Court of Aldermen to lay out
Money for this Cause out of their Joint Purses, or the Public City Stock?


Sir H. Tulse. Not that we know of.


Mr. Williams. Pray Sir, do you know whether Sir William Pritchard laid out
Money in it, or who else does?


Sir H. Tulse. I cannot give a Positive Answer to that, who lays out Money
upon it, nor do I know of any such Order as you speak of.


Mr. Ward. Sir Harry Tulse, though you know of no such formal Order of the Court
of Aldermen, yet is there not some direction by the Court of Aldermen about
Expending Moneys in a joint way?


Sir H. Tulse. I assure you, Sir, I know nothing of it.


L. Chapter Just. Come, he has given a full Answer to your Question, swear him.


Which was done.

Mr. Holt. Sir Harry Tulse, now you are sworn, Pray, will you give an account
of what happened about this Matter within your knowledge: Pray tell the whole
Story.


Sir H. Tulse. My Lord, about four of the Clock in the Afternoon, this
Gentleman, and two more, came to me to my own House, and he did arrest me (I
mean, Mr. Keeling, that was sworn here before me) at the Suit of Mr. Papillon;
and another of them did arrest me at the Suit of Mr. Duboys: Said I to them, I
do not know that I owe them, or either of them, a Farthing. But, what must I
do? He told me, It was only to give an Appearance. Said I, Gentlemen, I shall
consider of that. Then, says he, you must go to my Lord Mayor: Why, where is
he, said I? said he, He is in the Custody of the Coroner at his House. Where,
said I? He is gone to Skinners-Hall, said he. This is well, said I. So I called
for my Man to bring my Cloak. Then they told me, If I pleased, they would take
my word till to morrow morning, if I would promise to appear. I told them they
might do as they pleased. So they left me; and I went first to my Lord Mayor's
House, but found him not there; so I went down to Skinners-Hall, and there I
found my Lord Mayor all alone, and no Alderman, only the Officers. I asked his
Lordship how he came there? He told me, he was arrested by the Coroner. I asked
him how long he had been detained? and, he said, but a little time: And indeed
I think it could not be long, for I met his Coach coming back from
Skinners-Hall when I went. After that he was detained there till about Eleven
of the Clock, or thereabouts. This is all I know of it.


L. Chapter Just. What became of the Government of the City all that Time?


Sir H. Tulse. There was presently a great Noise all about the City concerning
my Lord Mayor's being arrested, and abundance of People were gathered together
about the Door, but there came a Company of Soldiers of the Trained Bands, and
they kept all quiet. There were great apprehensions of an Uproar. I saw nothing
of hurt done tho. And I asked Mr. Brom the Coroner, who was by, Am I a
Prisoner too, for I was arrested to day by a Warrant pretended to be from you?
Says he, I have a Writ against you, and now you are here, I cannot let you go
till you have given an Appearance. So I took my self to be detained there with
my Lord Mayor in Custody, and staid as long as he staid, and went away with him.


Mr. Recorder. Swear Mr. Wells, the Common Crier, and Sir John Peake.


Mr. Wells was sworn.

Mr. Recorder. Mr. Common Cyrer, were you at my Lord Mayor's House when this
Hubbub was made? pray tell my Lord and the Jury what you know of it.


Mr. Wells. Yes, I was there.


Mr. Holt. Then tell what past.


Mr. Wells. I was not in the Hall where my Lord Mayor was, but in another Room
by: and the Officers came running in to me, and told me, I must come to my Lord
Mayor quickly, for he was arrested by some People. When I came, I found there
were none of the Sheriffs Officers that used to arrest People; but the Room was
full of other Persons. My Lord Mayor bid me take the Sword and go along with
him, for the Sword Bearer was not just then at hand. I asked his Lordship
whither he was going? The Coroner said, he was his Prisoner, and must go along
with him to his House. My Lord Mayor bid me presently send out the Officers to
summon a Lieutenancy, which I did. I desired the Coroner and his Men to be
gone, said I, cannot you let my Lord alone, and go about your Business? No, he
said, except my Lord would give an Appearance, he must go along with him. I
then asked him whither my Lord must go? He said he had no place but his own
House to carry him to, and thither we went; where when we came, my Lord was put
up into a little Room by himself, where were none but my self, and the Coroner,
as I remember. My Lord Mayor bid me go and see for Sir James Edwards and Sir
Harry Tulse, and my Lord Mayor that now is, and so I went, but I found they
were arrested too before I came.


L. Chapter Just. How did my Lord go away from thence?


Mr. Wells. In his Coach.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you by when he went away? and who was there?


Mr. Wells. Mr. Brom the Coroner was not there when my Lord Mayor went away,
but there was Goodenough.


L. Chapter Just. Ay, he was in trusty hands upon my word.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis The Soldiers prevented the Design, and so they let him go
again.


Mr. Recorder. Swear Sir John Peak. (which was done.) Sir John, what can you
say to this Business?


Sir J. Peake. My Lord, I had order from the Lieutenancy to raise my Regiment
upon the news of my Lord Mayor's being arrested, which I did in a very little
time, and came with my Soldiers to Skinners-Hall, where I heard my Lord Mayor
was, and prevented any Stir, as it was feared there would have been. But Mr.
Keeling, I believe can tell something more of the Design than he has spoken;
for I remember at the Trial of the Traitors at the Old Baily, he did say, that
after my Lord Mayor was arrested, they did intend something, but their Hearts
misgave them when the Regiment was up.


Lord Chief Just. That is nothing to this Cause, what he said there, now he
remembers nothing of it. Have you done, Gentlemen, or will you call any more
Witnesses?


Mr. At. Genesis We rest it here, my Lord, till we hear what they say to it.


L. Chapter Just. Come then, what have you to say that are for the Desendant?


Mr. Serj. Maynard. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
I am of Counsel in this Case with the Defendant, Mr. Papillon. I see,
Gentlemen, it is a Cause of great Expectation, and by that means they would
make it greater by far than indeed it is in it self. But, I suppose, you who
are upon your Oaths to try this Issue, will duly weigh and consider what it
really is. Gentlemen, the Record tells you what it is, an Action upon the Case,
wherein the Plaintiff declares that the Defendant did arrest him, being then
Lord Mayor, without any probable Cause, and out of Malice. Now as to that,
Gentlemen, I conceive and think I may appeal to my Lord Chief Justice in it for
Direction in point of Law, that my Lord Mayor, if he do mistake in his Office,
and do not do that which belongs to him to do, he is as much subject to the
Process of Law and Actions, as any private Person in the City of London. If he
does any Man an Injury, or does that which is not right in his Office by which
another Person is grieved, he is liable to the Prosecution of any particular
Subject the King has that is so grieved by him. Then they allege that this
particular Action and Arrest thereupon was prosecuted and done out of Malice,
and without probable Cause. Now what have they proved of that? They prove the
thing done, that he was arrested at the Defendant's Suit, and that he was kept
in Custody six hours. But if we can give you any account of a probable Cause
for it, that is sufficient to justify as from this Action. Gentlemen, the
Question that you are to try is not, Whether this Man or that Man were duly
chosen into such an Office, but whether there were any probable Cause for the
Defendant to contest about the Choice. And herein the Case will fall out to be
thus. There was a difference in the City of London, as is very well known to
every body, about the Choice of Sheriffs for the City, wherein the Defendant
was one of the Competitors; there were upon the Nomination and Election in the
Hall, a great many more Voices or Suffrages for one than for the other, which
was certified to the Court of Aldermen and Lord Mayor, as is usual; but some
Contest being, a Poll was demanded and granted, and upon that Poll my Lord
Mayor was pleased to declare the Election on one side against Mr. Papillon, who
yet was apprehended by the first Choice to be one that had most Suffrages. But
several Meetings there were, and several Common-Halls assembled, so that it was
a contested matter, and as I said, there had been a Report made on the
Defendant's behalf. We insist not upon the Right of Election, that has been
otherwise determined. But when he is put in Nomination by the Electors in the
City, and has many Suffrages, and he conceives himself rightly chosen, and they
that are the Managers of the Election give such an account, that in their
Judgment he was chosen; that surely was a probable Cause for him to proceed
upon it. And if there be but a probable Cause to bring this to a Question, no
doubt he might very well take the course the Defendant took. Here is no Arrest
without legal Process; nay, their own Witnesses say there was an offer to take
an Appearance without putting it on so far as an Arrest: If my Lord Mayor would
have but given an Appearance, there had been an end, but he did not think fit
to do that, and so the Process of Law was executed upon him. Then here is the
Case in short: A Man thinks himself rightly and duly chosen into an Office, and
has probable reason so to think, for the Judges of the Election think so too,
and deliver that as their Opinion; so that tho he is mistaken, as the Event
proves, yet he is not alone in his Mistake, nor without ground of his
Apprehension; then if it be, (under favor) such a Man has no other Proceedings
to take in the World for settling this matter, but to appeal to your Lordship,
and that great Court where your Lordship sits, to have a Writ to command the
Mayor, or other proper Officer to swear such a Man into the Office, or show
good cause why he does not. If the Mayor upon the Receipt of the Writ thinks
fit to obey it, and swears the Man, all is well: If not, he must make a Return
of the Writ, with the Cause why the Command of the Writ is not obeyed. Now the
Suggestion of the Writ is, that he was duly chosen into such an Office, and
therefore he had a fair way to put this matter to an end; if he would have
returned he was chosen, or not chosen, there had been an end of the business,
which he ought (under favor) to have done in Obedience to the King's Writ.
What then follows upon his not doing so? the Party that is grieved hereby has
no other course to take but to bring his Action against the Mayor for it. This
course the Defendant took, by taking out a Writ against the Plaintiff: and what
was the Effect of that Writ? It is indeed charged here by the Counsel on the
other side, that there was a Design of a discontented Party in it, and I know
not what, and a great deal of stir made, that a Coroner of the City of London
should arrest my Lord Mayor. It may be it was not so reverently done; but yet
if he thought he had good Cause of Action against him, he might do it lawfully.
Does this prove to you, that this was maliciously and unreasonably done. Malice
must be to the Person; Zeal and Earnestness to have Right done to a Man's self
or another, in a legal Course of Justice, is not Malice, nor will make the
Prosecution of the Action unreasonable and groundless. Have they proved to you,
Gentlemen, any particular Discontent and Malice that was between the Plaintiff
and Defendant? No truly, I think, by all the Proof that has been offered, the
quite contrary does appear. The Defendant took out a Mandamus, directed to the
Plaintiff, which was not duly returned: What then does he do next? Does he most
violently arrest him? that, with Submission, he might do, and no Offense in
Law: No, but he does not do it, but only desired from time to time, as we shall
prove anon, that he would but give an Appearance, that would have put a
Conclusion to this Dispute. There is no Appearance given: whereupon he is
arrested and detained in Custody six hours. If a Man be once in the Officers
Hands taken upon legal Process, how long soever the Officer keeps him, is not
at all to be laid upon the Person that brings the Suit, that is to be looked
after by the Officer himself. Whatsoever was the Usage in that matter we are
not to answer for (tho it is plain an Appearance would have done all presently)
we shall prove we gave order to use all Deference and Respect in the World. And
besides (tho I could not speak it to invalidate any of the Evidence given about
the Right of Election one way or other, yet) there being a Return of the
Defendant's Election by the Sheriffs to the Court of Aldermen; but they being
of another Opinion, gave Order, that those that thought themselves aggrieved
should take their Remedy at Law: Which Order we have pursued in that regular
course that the Law has prescribed. And I hope it will never come to that, that
a Man (tho mistaken) conceiving himself to have a Right of Action, and suing
out the King's Writ, shall suffer for so doing, unless particular Malice be
made to appear. Here is a great Noise of Damage, and Disrepute, and Disgrace to
the Plaintiff and his Office, and he has been pleased to reckon his own Damages
at 10000 l. We say he has sustained no Damage by any thing we have done, but we
are quite not guilty of this unreasonable and malicious Prosecution laid to our
Charge. And that we are not guilty, the matter that has been opened, we think
will sufficiently declare. For if there were a Contest about the Election, and
the Sheriffs returned it as their Opinion that the Defendant was chosen, tho
they and he too were mistaken, yet that might give a probable Ground for his
pursuing the course he did take, and the very Court of Aldermen and the Lord
Mayor bidding them take their Course at Law, we sure shall not be punished for
it. We did not prosecute our Question in any malicious way, but in that Course
that the Law allows, by taking out the King's Writ; and we hope the Law will
protect us for it.


Mr. Williams. Will your Lordship be pleased to spare me a Word on the same
side with Mr. Sergeant Maynard. I am of Counsel, Gentlemen, with Mr. Papillon
the Defendant in this Action. We do not insist upon it, nor now offer any
thing-to assert our Election; We did apprehend we were Elected, but that is
ruled against us, and we rested satisfied with it. But we come here now before
you upon this Question; Whether we had any probable Cause of Action, upon which
we might take out this Process mentioned in the Declaration, which is a Capias
upon a Latitat. And we do insist upon it, that this Action of the Plantiffs
must fall upon the Issue joined, if we can satisfy you, and show that is was
not malicious, and without probable Cause. And though our Cause of Action
against the Plantiff falls out in the Event not to be a good and sufficient
Cause; yet if it were probable, it will evade this Action, and that is all we
labor for. They do not attempt to prove, at leastwise I have not heard any
thing of it, that there was any express Malice, any thing either said or done
by the Defendant, more than the causing him to be arrested upon this Writ. It
is very well known, it was in the City of London a very much controverted
Question, Whether Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Dubois, or Sir Dudley North, and Mr.
Box, were chosen Sheriffs of London? I would not run over the History of it, it
is but too well known and remembered the Divisions that were in the City about
it. Some were so much dissatisfied with the swearing Sir Dudley North, and Mr.
Rich Sheriffs, as thinking them not duly Elected, that they would have the
Court of King's Bench moved, for the Writ of Mandamus to swear Mr. Papillon,
and Mr. Dubois. This Mandamus was moved for, and granted; and to this Writ the
Mayor and Aldermen, to whom it was directed, made a Return that we were not
Elected Sheriff of London; which Return was apprehended to be false; and really
to try the Truth of this Return, was the Action brought against the Plantiff. A
Man that is injured by a False Return, has indeed no other way to right
himself, but by bringing an Action against them that made it. Upon this Action
brought, I hope you are satisfied, Gentlemen, from the Evidence that has been
already given the Defendant, proceeded regularly and orderly, in a decent
manner, applying himself to get an Appearance to his Action. And we shall prove
he did so; For, first, he took out a Latitat against my Lord Mayor, and by the
Attorney gave him notice of it, and desired an Appearance; so that the Question
in dispute might come to some determination. But he was not pleased to give us
an Apperance to that Writ; so we took out a Capias, gave him notice of it, and
desired an Appearance, but could have no Appearance; whereupon we took out an
an alias Capias, which is the Writ mentioned in the Declaration; and the
Coroner who has been named, was then told, he should be called upon to make
some return to his Writ; which he acquainted my Lord Mayor with, and desired
him to give an Appearance; which he refusing to do, the Officer was constrained
to arrest him, to execute the King's Writ; and you hear how he treated him,
with all the respect, and carried him to his own House, where he staid some
hours and then went away. All this time were we satisfied with what was done,
we expected no more than an appearance, which at last was given. Upon that
Appearance we did declare, in the beginning of Hilary or Easter Term (83.) But
it fell out, that in Easter Term (83) there was an Information for a Riot upon
Midsommer-day before, about this contested Election, came to be tried. And that
coming to Trial, 10 Maii, and being found to be a Riot, and the Sheriffs sworn
to be duly elected; thereupon we were abundantly satisfied that we were
mistaken, and under misapprehensions, and that our Cause of Action would not
hold, and we did discontinue it. Indeed, if we had prosecuted our Action after
that, it would have been more like an Angry and a Silly Prosecution, and the
whole have had a worse Construction, than the thing in it self would bear. But
when we found the Opinion of the Court to be against us about our Election, we
immediately discontiued our Action. Gentlemen, we shall prove these to have
been our Proceedings, and that, I hope, will satisfy you we are not guilty
according as we have pleaded.


Mr. Ward. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I am of
Counsel on the same side for the Defendant, and desire to be heard one word as
to some Things that have been said on the other side in this Cause. There have
been some Questions asked that do very much reflect upon the Defendant, and
which I would take out of this Cause. I shall take notice, first, what the
Questions were, and then give them that regard and answer which they deserve.
That which is urged, Gentlemen, by way of Crimination in this Case against the
Defendant, and an unjust as well as foreign Reflection (not at all concerning
the Cause) is, as if the Defendant were acquainted with the Insurrection and
Conspiracy that was intended against the King's Life, and for subversion of the
Government, and procured the Plaintiff, then Lord Mayor, to be arrested, to
further and promote that Insurrection. But as that was insinnated only for
Reflection's-sake, so I hope you, Gentlemen, will be pleased to take notice,
that not one word of any such thing is proved at all, that the Defendant ever
knew of any intended Insurrection, nor that this was done with any such Design:
For even their first Witness, Keeling, from whose being employed by the Coroner
in the Execution of the Writ upon Sir William Pritchard the Plaintiff, they
would argue that somewhat else was designed in it, does give a positive denial
of any such thing now upon his Testimony here. And Mr. Papillon the Defendant
never knew him in his Life, nor employed him in this Business, nor ordered that
he should be employed in it, nor ever saw him; but the Coroner gave him his
Warrant to execute. If therefore Keeling and Goodenough were concerned in any
ill Business, and have taken upon them to do that which they ought not to have
done, that does not signify any thing in this Case, nor ought to turn to the
Defendant's prejudice. Nor if any thing were done by the Officers that were to
execute this Process, that were a Misfesance, or a Male-execution of their
Office, that ought not to be imputed as a Fault in the Defendant. But for this
Matter now before you, the Case will depend upon this Point chiefly, Whether
the now Defendant had a reasonable Cause, or probable Ground, to bring an
Action against the Plaintiff at the time when it was brought, and this Arrest
made: For there is many a Man that, at the Commencement of his Action, does
conceive in himself he has a good probable Cause of Action against another Man,
that in the Event of Things finds he was mistaken, and has no such Cause; and
thereupon desists the Prosecution of it. Therefore the Probability of the Cause
at the time-when this Fact was done, is the Question you now are to try. For we
are not now considering, whether that probable Cause did continue and prove a
good Cause; the Event of this Matter has proved it quite otherwise. Indeed, the
Original Question of this whole Cause was, Who were only Elected Sheriffs? And
that at the time of such Election made, a great number of Votes passed for the
Defendant, is, I think, very notorious, both upon the lifting up of Hands, and
upon the Poll. These things we shall offer to you, and shall make it out that
these gave occasion to the Defendant to contest the Election, and consequently
to the bringing of the Action that the Plaintiff was thus arrested upon. If
then there were such things as these that we have opened, which gave a color
to controvert the Right, and the Defendant pursued the Method prescribed by the
Law to bring it to a Determination; and there was no particular disrespect or
incivility offered to my Lord Mayor, then sure there was no reason to bring
this Action against us. And that there was no indecent behavior used toward
the Plaintiff, does appear from the Evidence that has been given of the whole
Transaction. All that was desired of my Lord Mayor, was but an Appearance. For
this was indeed an Action that did not require Bail, but an Appearance; though,
I must needs say, I never knew any one so averse to give an Appearance to an
Action as the Plaintiff was; for after a Latitat and Capias taken out, and
being frequently acquainted with it, and at length upon application after the
taking out of the Alias Capias, and many Attendances, with all the deference
and respect imaginable, both to his Person and Office, not so much as a bare
Appearance could be obtained. Upon the opening of the Declaration, and the
Cause, you have been told of the great Dangers that were in the Case, as to the
infringement of Public Peace, and the Government, which has been very much
aggravated on the other Side. But had the reasonable Request of the Defendant
by his Attorney, or the Officer, so often repeated, been but complied with, it
had been but sending to any Attorney, and ordering an Appearance; and then, I
hope, the Peace of the Kingdom had been in no Peril from such a Design as this
Arrest. Which I would not have mentioned, nor should have taken to be at all
concerned in the Issue now before you to be tried, but that I find them to be
taken into the Question, when I hope you will consider they are no way material
to the Point in Controversy. Now, Gentlemen, in our Defense against this Suit
of the Plaintiffs, we shall call our Witnesses to prove what we have opened.
And our Defense will be in these Steps: First, To show the inducement to our
Action against the Plaintiff, which will show there was a probable Cause.
Secondly, Give an Account of the reverent Carriage and Behavior toward the
Plaintiff in the prosecution; how with reiterated Applications it was only
desired that the Plaintiff would give an Appearance, which he was not pleased
to do; and that thereupon, with great civility, the King's Writ was executed,
as indeed I see no Proof to the contrary. For neither the Coroner, nor those
other People that gave their Assistance to him, were at all rude in their
Carriage to my Lord Mayor; but as soon as the Arrest was made, they were all
turned off, and the Coroner staid alone with my Lord, and went with him, in his
Lordship's own Coach, to the Skinners-Hall, which was the Coroner's House.
Neither was there any thing ill done after all this was past: For upon the
Plaintiffs appearance, the now Defendant declared in his Action, and intended
to pursue it; but it happened that afterward, in a short time, these things
suffered some debate in a Trial that was here about a Riot at this Election,
where the Question of the Right and Election, was determined on the other side,
which gave the Plaintiff in that Action, the Defendant in this, satisfaction
that he was in a mistake, and so he thought fit to discontinue that Action, and
proceeded no further --


L. Chapter Just. No, Mr. Ward, that was not the Question determined then.


Mr. Ward. My Lord, I humbly conceive the Issue of that Cause did determine
that Question --


L. Chapter Just. No, no, I tell you it was not the Question.


Mr. Ward. I must submit it to your Lordship. --


L. Chapter Justice. I perceive you do not understand the Question that was then,
nor the Question that is now. You have made a Long Speech here, and nothing at
all to the purpose; you do not understand what you are about; I tell you it was
no such Question.


Mr. Ward. My Lord, I was only giving an Account of what we should prove as to
the fairness of our Proceedings --


L. Chapter Just. But I must interrupt you, and tell you, all you have said
signifies nothing. And as to what you mention of the Trial for the Riot; I say,
if there be any Election to an Office at any time that is controverted or
doubtful, you have Forms and Methods of Law to determine the Controversy --


Mr. Ward. And we say, with submission my Lord, we have only pursued such Form
and Method.


L. Chapter Just. You are not try Rights by Club-Law, by Riots, by Noise, and by
Tumults. Therefore you are mistaken, to say, that was the Question upon the
Trial of the Riot. No it was not the Question; but the Defendants there were
tried for a notorious Offense, and disorderly tumultuous Assembly, an Assembly
that had like to have set us together by the Ears. Therefore you must not talk
after that rate. If you will speak, apply to the Business in hand. Do not make
such excursions, ad captandum Populum, with your Flourishes, for that is all
that is designed by your long Harangues. But I must not suffer it, I will have
none of your Enamel, nor your Garniture. The Business of the Court is, and by
the Grace of God it shall always be my Business, and so it should be the
Counsels too, Senare jus illaesum. But I see you do not understand the
Question, and that makes you ramble so much in your Discourse.


Mr. Ward. My Lord, I desire always to do my Duty; and do it as well as I can.
I know very well, and hope to apply it to this Case, that in a Question of
Right, there are Forms and Methods of Law to be pursued, and I would defend my
Client from this Action, by proving he did pursue that Method; and when he
apprehended he had been before mistaken, he desisted from what he had begun --


L. Chapter Just. I tell you, I perceive you do not understand the Question.


Mr. Ward. If your Lordship will give me leave to explain my self, I hope I
shall satisfy your Lordship.


L. Chapter Just. Indeed, Mr. Ward, you do not understand the Question at all, but
lanch out into an Ocean of Discourse that is wholly Wide from the Mark. I see
you do not understand it.


Mr. Ward. Will your Lordship please to hear me --


L. Chapter Just. Ay, if you would speak to the purpose; but I cannot sit here all
night to hear you make florid Speeches about matters that are foreign to the
Point before us. Come to the Question Man; I see you do not understand what you
are about.


Mr. Ward. My Lord --


L. Chapter Just. Nay, be as angry as you will, Mr. Ward, I do tell you again, all
you have said is nothing to the purpose, and you do not understand the business.


Then there was a little Hiss begun.

L. Chapter Just. Who is that? What in the Name of God! I hope we are now past that
time of day, that Humming and Hissing shall be used in Courts of Justice: but I
would fain know that Fellow that dare to Hum or Hiss while I sit here; I Will
assure him, be he who he will, I Will lay him by the Heels, and make an Example
of him. Indeed, I knew the time when Causes were to be carried according as the
Mobile Hissi'd or Humm'd; and, I do not question but they have as good a Will
to it now. Come, Mr. Ward, pray let us have none of your Fragrancies, and Fine
Rhetorical Flowers, to take the People with.


Mr. Ward. My Lord, I do not do any such thing; but if your Lorship would
please to hear me, I would explain my self, I hope, to your Lordship's
Satisfaction, and the satisfaction of the Gentlemen of the Jury.


L. Chapter Just. Hear you? why, I did not interrupt you, Man, till you came to
lanch out into extravagant things that did not at all concern the Cause. Keep
close to the Question we come here to try, and I will hear you as long as you
will. The single Question is here, Whether there were a probable Cause for your
Arresting the Planting, or not?


Mr. Ward. My Lord, we did apprehend, I say, that we had a probable Cause; but
when we found our mistake, we discontinued our Action, paid Costs, and have a
Receipt for them. This was it I was saying --


L. Chapter Just. Say what you can, in God's Name, that will conduce to the Point
in hand, but do not make the People believe as though the Right of Sheriffs, or
not Sheriffs, were determined upon the Trial of a Riot.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. There are these things that are proper to be considered in
this Question. Whether the Cause were probable, or not probable? and if not
probable, whether malicious or not?


L. Chapter Just. True, Brother, if People will but understand their Business, it
is reduced to a narrow Compass; but if they will not understand what it is they
come about, they will ramble from the Point, and who can help it? But we must
keep to what is before us.


Mr. Williams. We shall make it out, that nothing was done but very civilly.


L. Chapter Just. You must make it out that nothing was done but what you had
Probable Cause at least for.


Mr. Williams. We will, my Lord, apply our selves to that which your Lordship
directs. Call Mr. Brom, Mr. Courthope and Mr. Cornish.


Mr. Brom sworn.

Mr. Ward. Mr. Brom, are you sworn?


Mr. Brom. Yes, Sir.


Mr. Ward. Have you the Writs here? the Latitat and the Capias?


Mr. Brom. Truly, Sir, I have not, I did not bring them with me, they are at
home at my house; If you please I will fetch them.


Mr. Ward. Pray, can you tell, Sir, when the first Writ was returnable?


Mr. Brom. In Hillary Term.


Mr. Ward. When you had that Writ brought to you, Sir, what did you say to my
Lord Mayor about it?


Mr. Brom. I went to my Lord Mayor with Mr. Goodenough, and desired my Lord
that he would appear to it, as Mr. Goodenough told me he had desired of him
himself before. But, he said, he would give no Appearance. If I would take him
up upon the Writ, I might do as I pleased, and he would consider and do as he
should think fit, but he would not give any Appearance. I told him, I had Writs
against several of the Aldermen upon the same Account, and that I would wait
upon them also; and I did so, and desired them to appear, and offered to take
an Appearance from them, and gave my Lord Mayor and them time to consider of
it, and came again: but they told me, they had considered of it, and would give
no Appearance.


Mr. Williams. When was this, Sir?


Mr. Brom. In the beginning of Hillary Term, to the best of my remembrance.


Mr. Williams. What time did you give my Lord Mayor to consider of it?


Mr. Brom. About a week, or some nine or ten days time, as I remember.


Mr. Ward. Where was it that you had that Answer, that he had Considered of it,
and would give no Appearance?


Mr. Brom. It was at the Court of Aldermen.


Mr. Williams. Were the Writs brought again to you?


Mr. Brom. There was not time to make a Return then, and so they let all alone
till a little before the beginning of Easter Term, and then, one day, Mr.
Goodenough the Attorney brought me the Writs again, and threatened to complain to
the Court of me, and acquaint them, that I had neglected the Execution of the
King's Writs, two of them.


Mr. Ward. Upon your Oath, Sir, did he threaten you, that if you did not make a
Return of the Writ, he would complain?


Mr. Brom. He said, I had exposed him to the Complaint of his Client; and if I
did not do it, he would complain to the Court of me: if I would make a Return
as I ought to do, well and good, if not --


Mr. Williams. If not, what then? Did he use any other threatenings, pray Sir,
but that he would complain to the Court?


Mr. Brom. He did threaten to complain of me.


Mr. At. Genesis You say, Sir, he threatened you; what answer did you make to him?


Mr. Brom. I did not use to execute Writs my self, I told him: thereupon he
did propose two Persons to me, Mr. Keeling, and one Mr. Burleigh; For he told
me the Sheriffs Officers would not do it.


Mr. At. Genesis 'Pray 'Sir, did you endeavor to get any of the Sheriffs
Officers to do it?


Mr. Brom. He told me he could not get any of them to do it.


Mr. Ward. Mr. Brom, what did you do after he had proposed those two Persons
to you?


Mr. Brom. After I had given those Warrants to the Officers he had named, I
told him, I was willing to go once more to my Lord Mayor, to see if I could get
an appearance of him without Arresting him; so I waited on him at his House at
Grocers-Hall, but found him then at Dinner; so I went away, and came again
about Four a Clock, and I first spoke to Mr. Gibson, and entreated him to let
my Lord Mayor know, that I desired to speak with his Lordship, at his leisure:
Afterward when I came up to my Lord Mayor, he asked me what was my business? I
told him the Writs were renewed, at the Suit of Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois,
and I was pressed to make a Return; and I desired his Lordship that he would be
pleased to give an appearance. He told me he was ready to submit to the KING's
Writ, but would not give an appearance; thereupon the Officers named in the
Warrant, by my command did Arrest him.


Mr. Ward. How often did you wait upon my Lord Mayor for an appearance upon
both the Writs, before he was Arrested?


Mr. Brom. Several times, I cannot exactly tell how often.


Mr. Williams. Had you directions, if he would please to give an appearance, to
take an appearance, and not to Arrest him?


Mr. Brom. I had directions to take an appearance, if he would give it.


Mr. At. Genesis From whom had you that direction, Mr. Brom?


Mr. Brom. From the Attorney Goodenough.


Ld. Chapter Just. Now, Mr. Brom, let me ask you a question or two; how long had
you been Coroner before?


Mr. Brom. About two Years before, or thereabouts.


Ld. Chapter Just. Had you ever made any Warrants upon Writs of Capias before?


Mr. Brom. Yes, my Lord, several.


Ld. Chapter Just. Who did you use to make your Warrants to, to be executed?


Mr. Brom. I never keep my Warrants, they that execute them have them.


Ld. Chapter Just. But answer me, To whom did you make them?


Mr. Brom. To one of the Sheriffs Officers commonly.


Ld. Chapter Just. Then I ask you upon your Oath, did you before this time ever
make any Warrants to any other Person, till such time as you made these
Warrants to Arrest Sir William Pritchard?


Mr. Brom. I have made several to the Sheriffs Officers, that I cannot
remember now particularly.


Ld. Chapter Just. But mind my question, man, and answer me directly, for I expect
you should answer me positively to it. Have you ever at any time made any
Warrants to any other but the Sheriffs Officers till this time?


Mr. Brom. I cannot remember that I have.


Ld. Chapter Just. How then came you at Russel's house to discourse with Mr.
Goodenough, about who would be fit to execute the Writ, when you used to employ
the Sheriffs Officers, and there were so many of them?


Mr. Brom. He told me he could get no one of them to execute it.


Ld. Chapter Just. But there must be something more in it than ordinary, that you
and Goodenough, and all those other People should come to meet about such a
thing as this, to discourse and consider who should be fit to be put into a
Warrant to make an Arrest upon a Capias, when before that time you used to make
it to those that are versed in those matters.


Mr. Brom. When the Attorney came with a Writ, and desired a Warrant upon it,
it is usual to take whom he nominates, and make him the Officer to execute it.


Ld. Chapter Just. Then give me, if you can, any one special Instance wherein you
have taken the direction of the Attorney, whose name to put into the Warrant.


Mr. Brom. Yes, my Lord, I can.


Ld. Chapter Just. Do then, let us hear it, when was that?


Mr. Brom. I did it in the Case of His Royal Highness against Mr. Pilkington:
Mr Swift came for a Warrant, and directed me whom to put into it.


Ld. Chapter Just. What directions did he give you?


Mr. Brom. He gave me the names in writing.


Ld. Chapter Just. Where is Keeling?


Keeling. Here, my Lord.


Ld. Chapter Just. What was the meaning of that word that was used by you, that the
party would be angry if you did not Arrest my Lord Mayor; for that is it which
makes me so inquisitive into this matter, how these People came to be employed.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Ay, 'pray 'consider with your self, and recollect, Mr. Keeling;
when you were first mentioned to be a special Bailiff to Arrest my Lord Mayor,
you say you opposed it: How then came you to be drawn in, and engaged to do it?


Keeling. I will tell you, my Lord.


Ld. Chapter Just. Ay, and tell us what number of People were there.


Keeling. There were about Thirty or Forty.


Ld. Chapter Just. Was Brom among them?


Keeling. He was there some part of the time.


Ld. Chapter Just. Well, what was the reason that you should be engaged about this
thing?


Keeling. I went away a while, and came again: Mr. Brom came in, and I was
away an hour and an half, as I remember, or some considerable time. Mr. Brom
cannot forget that when I came again, I found my name inserted in the Warrant,
as a Bailiff to the Coroner, to Arrest Sir William Pritchard, then Lord Mayor.
I disputed it, as being never concerned in any such thing before, and was very
unwilling to be employed in the affair. Says Mr. Goodenough to me thereupon,
you will disoblige the party in case you do not do it.


Ld. Chapter Just. Was Mr. Brom in the company when Goodenough said so to you?


Keeling. I know not that truly, but he was before in the company.


Ld. Chapter Just. How many were then in the Room?


Keeling. About Twenty, or more, as near as I can remember.


Ld. Chapter Just. You Brom, did you ever when you received a Writ to Arrest a
man, and were to give a Warrant upon it, call a Consult of Twenty or Thirty,
how to do it, before this time?


M. Brom. I did not do it now.


Ld. Chapter Just. No, no, a-lack-a-day, thou were as innocent in all this matter
as a sucking Child.


Mr. Williams. Was Mr. Papillon in the company, Mr. Keeling?


Keeling. No, he was not.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Mr. Brom, 'pray 'answer me; When you had my Lord Mayor in
your Custody, how came you to discharge him our of Custody?


Mr. Brom. I was taken into Custody my self.


Mr. Ward. Did my Lord Mayor give any Appearance?


Mr. Brom. I was Committed to the Compter my self.


Mr. Williams. Were you by when it was agreed that my Lord would give an
Appearance?


Mr. Brom. I believe not; it was afterward as I have heard.


Ld. Chapter Just. A-lack-a-day, it went strangely against Mr. Brome's Stomach, all
this did. I know it very well, he had no mind to it at all.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Mr. Keeling, did you hear any discourse between the Twenty or
Thirty that were in that company about this business?


Keeling. I cannot say who in particular discoursed of it, or what was said.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Was it discoursed of in the whole company?


Keeling. There was some discourse about it in the company.


Ld. Chapter Just. You Brom, were you ever acquainted with Keeling before?


Mr. Brom. I had the misfortune, my Lord, to be concerned with him about some
Coal Works.


Ld. Chapter Just. Did you know that Mr. Burleigh before, that was the other
Bailiff.


Mr. Brom. I knew him by sight, I had no great acquaintance with him.


Ld. Chapter Just. 'Pray 'where lived Keeling?


Mr. Brom. At East Smith-field.


Ld. Chapter Just. And where lived Burleigh?


Mr. Brom. Truly, my Lord, I know not, I think at the other end of the Town.


Ld. Chapter Just. But prithee, how came you to join these two People together in
this business; the one from Wapping, the other from Westminster?


Mr. Brom. Where the Sheriffs were concerned, as they were in this matter, and
therefore it came to me, I thought it not so proper to pitch upon the
Sheriffs-Officers, nor would they do it, as he told me; and especially it being
to Arrest my Lord Mayor, I did not think proper to employ any one that lived in
the City.


Ld. Chapter Just. But there were abundance of People that were not Citizens that
were nearer at hand, and nearer together, and fitter for such a purpose than a
Tradesman ferch'd out of the East, and I know not who out of the West, to
Arrest a man: There must be some other meaning in it.


Mr. Brom. I gave them the nomination, as I used to do in like cases.


Ld. Chapter Just. Upon your Oath, Sir, was it you or the Attorney that named these
persons?


Mr. Brom. He told me he could get none of the Sheriffs Officers to do it, and
I did not think it indeed proper for any of them.


Ld. Chapter Just. And why, good Sir?


Mr. Brom. I did think so, truly, my Lord.


Ld. Chapter Just. Why? Why? What reason had you for it?


Mr. Brom. It was reasonable, as I apprehend, my Lord, for me to think so, it
being in a matter wherein the Sheriffs were so much concerned.


Mr. Soll. Genesis But did you propose it, or any one else in the company, upon
your Oath? And who was it?


Mr. Brom. The Attorney named them.


Mr. Com. Serj. It seems here were a great many persons met at Russel's about
this business, I desire, my Lord, that Mr. Brom may name as many of them as he
can that were there.


Ld. Chapter Just. Ay, as near as you can, name the twenty or thirty persons that
were there; for you living in the City, and having an acquaintance among that
sort of People, must needs know most of them.


Mr. Brom. Why, my Lord, there were both the Goodenoughs, and Mr. Nelthorp,
and who in particular else, I cannot well remember.


Ld. Chapter Just. Yes, yes, I am sure you can tell more of them.


Mr. Brom. My Lord, I cannot swear that I remember any other in particular.


Mr. Com. Serj. It seems he has named some of those that are in the
Proclamation; 'pray 'Sir, do you remember any others were there that were in
the Proclamation?


Mr. Brom. I do not remember any other of those in the Proclamation were there.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Can you remember any that were not in the Proclamation?


Mr. Brom. There were several People that I knew by sight, but I cannot
remember their names.


Ld. Chapter Just. Nay, nay, 'pray 'open your Eyes a little, and recollect your
memory, and tell us who were there, I know you can do it.


Mr. Brom. My Lord, there were many Citizens that I knew by sight, but had no
particular acquaintance with them.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Did you know any of the company besides the Goodenoughs, and
Keeling, and Nelthorp.


Mr. Brom. I had a little acquaintance with him.


Mr. Soll. Genesis How come you to remember him so particularly?


Mr. Brom. I verily believe he was there.


Mr. Record. Was Mr. West there?


Mr. Brom. I cannot positively say whether he was or not.


Mr. Williams. Swear Mr. Cornish then. (Which was done.)


Ld. Chapter Just. You Brom, was Mr. Cornish there?


Mr. Brom. Not that I know of.


Mr. Attor. Genesis It is strange we cannot learn who those persons were that met
there.


Ld. Chapter Just. Oh these fellows have strange memories for their purposes. Well,
what do you call him for?


Mr. Ward. My Lord, we call Mr. Cornish to give an Account what he knows of
this matter, what directions were given by the Plaintiff to his Attorney, how
he should carry on this matter.


Mr. Cornish. My Lord, That which I particularly remember, I shall fully and
very faithfully declare: I was with Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Dubois at my House.
The occasion of their coming thither I knew not, nor did expect either of them
there; I my self came from Guild Hall, either from a Court of Aldermen; or from
a Committee, and when I came home, I found them there. We had not been many
Minutes together, but in comes Mr. Goodenough the Attorney, and he applied
himself particularly to Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois, to receive their Orders
what he should do, for he said the time was almost spent, and he had addressed
himself from time to time to my Lord Mayor, and some of the Aldermen to get
them to appear, but they would not. They told him then they had given him what
Orders they had to give him already; that it was fit the matter should be
brought to some Trial or Issue, that there might be an end of it. He pressed
them then earnestly to know what he should do: Said they, you are to desire an
appearance to the Action, and if he will give it, take it, and remember my Lord
Mayor is the Chief Magistrate of the City, and 'pray 'carry it with all respect
and regard imaginable to him.


Mr. Williams. You say, Sir, they bid him to take an appearance, if he could
get it.


Mr. Cornish. Yes, and they declared, That their design was only to bring it to
an Issue to be Tried, and they would not insist upon any thing but an
appearance, if it might be had.


Ld. Chapter Just. Wonderful Careful and Civil they were, no doubt of it.


Mr. Cornish. This is the Truth, and the whole of the Truth, that I know of,
relating to this matter.


Ld. Chapter Just. Mr. Cornish, you speak of some of the Aldermen, that he said he
had been with, What Aldermen were those?


Mr. Cornish. There were several of them, that he said he had Writs against.


Ld. Chapter Just. You were an Alderman then, 'pray 'had he any Writ against you?


Mr. Cornish. I know not whether he had or no.


Ld. Chapter Just. But he did not require an appearance of you, I suppose.


Mr. Cornish. If he had, I must have taken notice of it to defend my self as
well as I could.


Ld. Chapter Just. Ay, no question but you would, but were you asked for an
appearance or no?


Mr. Cornish. I was told I should be sued among the rest.


Ld. Chapter Just. But was there any Writ shown to you?


Mr. Cornish. No, my Lord.


Ld. Chapter Just. Then 'pray 'let me ask you a question or two. Did you ever know
any man before bring an Action, or Sue to be Sheriff of London: You have been
Sheriff your self we know.


Mr. Cornish. This was a matter that had been much disputed in the City, and a
question had been depending upon it whether the Right was in my Lord Mayor, or
in the Sheriffs.


Ld. Chapter Just. But the question of Right between my Lord Mayor and Sheriffs,
what was that to Mr. Papillon? Did you ever know a man bring an Action, or Sue
to be Sheriff?


Mr. Cornish. Truly he that experienceth the trouble of it, will, I believe,
never be desirous of it.


Ld. Chapter Just. But that is no answer to my question, answer me directly: Did
you ever know any such thing before?


Mr. Cornish. I never did hear of any such, that I know of.


Ld. Chapter Just. How then came Mr. Papillon so officiously to desire it?


Mr. Cornish. I cannot answer; what his Reasons were I know not.


Mr. Williams. It was an Action to determine the Question that was at that time
so much litigated in the City of London.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Cornish, 'pray 'will you answer me one thing; Were you never
in no Company, wherein it was agreed this Suit should be brought and carried on
in their names?


Mr. Cornish. Mr. Attor. Genesis I never meddled nor managed it.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you never here it was so agreed?


Mr. Cornish. It is known to Thousands, as much as I know of it; the matter was
disputed of in all Companies in the City.


Mr. At. Genesis But you do not answer to my question, were you ever in any
Company when it was agreed that so it should be?


Mr. Cornish. Sir, I tell you as well as I can, the matter that was to be
disputed by that Action, was the general discourse of all Societies of men,
whatever, in the City at that time.


Ld. Chapter Just. It is a strange thing, that one cannot get a direct answer from
these People to any thing one asks them: I desire to know one thing of you, Mr.
Cornish; You have known Mr. Papillon the Defendant before this time.


Mr. Cornish. Yes, my Lord, I have known him several years.


Ld. Chapter Just. Was he ever chosen Sheriff of London before?


Mr. Cornish. Yes, my Lord, I suppose he was.


Ld. Chapter Just. How chance he did not hold then?


Mr. Cornish. I have heard he Fined, as was common and usual, when Persons
occasions would not permit them to attend the Service of the Place.


Ld. Chapter Just. He did so, it is known to thousands, as you say, that he did.
Now 'pray' let me ask you another question; was Mr. Bethel ever chosen Sheriff
before that time you and he were Sheriffs together?


Mr. Cornish. I do not know that he was chosen before.


Ld. Chapter Just. How is that?


Mr. Cornish. My Lord, I do not understand what the question is, or else I know
nothing of it.


Ld. Chapter Just. How, did you never hear of that before? For, Mr. Cornish, I do
not speak of a thing that no body knows; alas thousands, and ten thousands of
people know that too.


Mr. Cornish. My Lord, upon my Oath, I do not know that ever he was.


Ld. Chapter Just. Did you ever hear it?


Mr. Cornish. I do not know that ever I did.


Ld. Chapter Just. Did you never hear that Mr. Bethel swore himself off, as they
call it; you know what I mean.


Mr. Cornish. I do not remember any thing of it.


Ld. Chapter Just. Nay, nay, it is to the matter, I assure you, Mr. Cornish,
whatever you think of it. I ask you then another question that lies something
nearer your memory: Upon your Oath, when you two were Elected upon
Midsummer-day, was not that Election vacated, and you chosen again within a
Week, or some little time after? And was it not because you had not taken the
Sacrament, and the Corporation-Oath?


Mr. Cornish. My Lord, I do remember there was a second Election.


Ld. Chapter Just. And we remember it too well enough.


Mr. Cornish. That was so lately, that any Citizen of London, or any one that
lived here may remember the Passages of those Times.


Ld. Chapter Just. And you have as much cause to remember it as any man, I assure
you, for several reasons that I know.


Mr. Cornish. My Lord, I think I have reason to remember it.


Ld. Chapter Just. Least you should forget it, I will enlighten you, and refresh
your Memory a little, I ask you again, upon your Oath, Was not your first
Election set aside, because you had not taken the Oaths and the Sacrament?


Mr. Cornish. There were two Elections, my Lord, I say I do remember.


Ld. Chapter Just. Sir, do not prevaricate with me; I expect a positive answer; Was
not that the reason, upon your Oath?


Mr. Cornish. I cannot say that was the positive reason.


Ld. Chapter Just. Then I ask you, upon your Oath; had you taken the Oaths and the
Sacrament as the Law requires?


Mr. Cornish. My Lord, Mr. Bethel, was a stranger to me, I did not know him
before that time.


Ld. Chapter Just. Gentlemen, Men must not think to dance in a Net, and blind all
the World. As to my one self, I know these things very well, without any of
their assistance, and I only ask these things by the bye, to let the world be
satisfied what sort of men these are, that pretend to Saintship, and yet, you
see, one can hardly get one word of truth out of them: Let the Law, in GOD's
Name, take place, and let every man prosecute his Legal Actions; but when under
the Umbrage and Countenance of Law, men shall desire to put themselves into
Offices, and Places of Trust, on purpose to disturb the Government. Do you
think the Government will ever suffer it self to be snivelled at, and
overthrown by a Company of such Whining Fellows. Let them hiss and hum, and
make a noise, and a-do as they will; thanks be to God, it is not that time of
day now: Such things have past too much uncontrolled in the Body of this City
heretofore. What, Gentlemen, are you baffling the Law with such pretenses as
these nowadays, and do you think to sham People into Offices: No, I tell you,
Villainy was the foundation of it, and Knavery the superstructure; and it is
high time it should be told out, since I hear people begin to doubt of it as a
question.


Mr. Ward. Where is Mr. Sergeant, Swear him. Which was done.


Ld. Chapter Just. Do not I know, as sure as I sit in this Place, that Bethel did
once before Swear himself off; and that there were two Elections of these two
very men that year, and that one of the Reasons was, because they had not taken
the Oaths and the Sacrament according to Law; nor would they ever have done it,
we know them, neither Bethel, nor that very fellow that stands there, Cornish,
neither, till they found it would contribute to the Design of Subverting the
Government; then these Rascals could qualify themselves for an Office, only to
put the Kingdom into a Flame.


Mr. Cornish. When the City chose me, I had good reason for what I did.


Ld. Chapter Just. Reason; I tell you, the City was in great happiness and quiet,
ever since the late times of Rebellion and Confusion; every one knew his Duty
to his Superiors, and did it cheerfully and conscientiously, till such time as
a couple of busy fellows came to get into the public Offices. Let the whole
party go away with that in their Teeth, and chew upon it if they will.


Mr. Williams. Mr. Sergeant, will you please to tell my Lord and the Jury, what
directions you heard the Defendant, Mr. Papillon, give about the Plaintiff, how
they should treat him.


Mr. Sergeant. My Lord, I was in the Counting House at Mr. Alderman Cornish's
house, when Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois were there; I went into the^ Parlour to
them, and Goodenough coming in, they fell into a discourse about this Action,
that was brought by them against Sir William Pritchard, then Lord Mayor, and
some of the Aldermen; And Goodenough gave them an account how far he had
proceeded in it; he said, he could not get any of them to give an appearance,
and the time was near spent, and he desired to know of them what he should do.
Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Dubois both, did declare to him over and over again, that
it was their mind only to have the matter brought to a fair Trial; and they
charged him to look to it to do nothing but what was Legal, and carry it with
all respect imaginable to my Lord Mayor, as the Chief Magistrate of the City;
that he should by all means get an appearance from him if he could, and get the
Coroner, who was an Officer of the City, to go with him, and carry all things
fairly and decently.


Mr. At. Genesis Who gave these directions, Sir, do you say?


Mr. Sergeant, Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Dubois, both of them did.


Mr. Ward. Now my Lord we shall show that we proceeded so far in the Action, as
to declare, but afterward apprehending our selves to be under a mistake, we
discontinued our Action.


Mr. Williams. And the costs upon the discontinuance were received by my Lord
Mayors Attorney. Here is the Declaration as it was filed.


Ld. Chapter Just. Ay, it may be there was a Declaration filed, but not regularly.


Mr. Williams. My Lord Mayor after appeared.


Ld. Chapter Just. How does that appear in Evidence? For the Coroner, says he
himself was in Custody, and knows no more of the matter afterward.


Mr. Williams. I believe your Lordship does remember there were many motions
made in Court about this matter, on the one side and the other, and at length
in Court it was comprimised, and my Lord Mayor promised to give an appearance.


Ld. Chapter Just. Prove what you can; prove the appearance entered, and declaration
received.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I only offer this as an Evidence of an appearance.


Ld. Chapter Just. A Record, I know, is a good and fair Evidence, show that if you
can.


Mr. Ward. It is not usual to declare till the Defendant appears.


Ld. Chapter Just. A Declaration may well be upon an appearance, but because it
cannot be good without an appearance, therefore it cannot be a sufficient
Evidence of it.


Mr. Ward. We will prove the Costs of the discontinuance paid and accepted.
Swear Mr. Baker. (Which was done). What do you know, Sir, of any Costs that
were taxed and paid for a discontinuance in this Case?


Mr. Baker. My Lord, Mr. Aston told me he appeared for Sir William Pritchard,
then Lord Mayor, and had a Declaration from the now Defendants Attorney: So I
entered up a Discontinuance, and paid the Costs, and have Mr. Aston's Receipt
for them.


Ld. Chapter Just. He says well. Go on then.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, it is a thing that has frequently happened, that after
a man has brought an Action against another, he finds he was mistaken, and has
no cause of Action, and thereupon relinquisheth his Suit: But sure that will
not make him liable to a Suit.


Ld. Chapter Just. Well, 'pray' go on with your Evidence.


Mr. Ward. My Lord, we are not now offering to try the right of Election, though
that really was the Foundation of the Action that we brought, but we
apprehended that question to be determined, and we acquiesced in it when that
Trial was over. Now, my Lord, we shall show that apprehending our selves really
chosen, we did in a due course of Law, Sue forth our Mandamus, directed to the
Plaintiff and the Aldermen; and there is a Return made. I pray these may be
read.


The Mandamus and Return were read.

Mr. Williams. Then that which we shall next show, is the grounds and reasons
why we thought this Return was false, and thereupon brought our Action. We
shall show that at a Common -Hall, held for the Election of Sheriffs, the
Defendant was in nomination, and had a great number of Hands and Voices for
him. 'Pray' call Mr. Gilbert Nelson, Mr. William Wightman, and Mr. Leonard
Robinson.


Who all appeared and were Sworn.

Mr. Ward. Mr. Nelson, 'pray' were you at the Common -Hall for Election of
Sheriffs, in the Year 1682.


Mr. Nelson. I was at the Common -Hall in June, 1682. on Midsummer-day.


Mr. Williams. 'Pray' Sir, will you tell us who were then in nomination, and
how they did proceed.


Mr. Nelson. There were in nomination for Sheriffs, he that is now Sir Dudley
North, then Mr. North, Mr. Box, Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Dubois.


Mr. Ward. 'Pray' Sir who had the majority of Hands?


Mr. Nelson. I did see the Poll-Books after they were cast up.


Mr. Williams. But did you observe the holding up of the Hands?


Mr. Nelson. Upon the holding up of the Hands, the Election was by the Sheriffs
given to Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Dubois.


Mr. Williams. But 'pray' Sir, upon your view, and in your judgment, were there
many Hands for Mr. Papillon?


Mr. Nelson. I guess there were the most Hands for him, and Mr. Dubois.


Mr. Ward. What say you then to the summing up of the Poll-Book that you spoke
of.


Mr. Nelson. I did see the Books after they were cast up.


Mr. Ward. Was there a great number for Mr. Papillon?


Mr. Nelson. Yes, there was the greatest.


Mr. Com. Serj. What Books do you mean, Mr Nelson?


Mr. Nelson. The Books in the Sheriffs Custody, Sir.


Mr. Com. Serj. But did you see my Books?


Mr. Nelson. That was upon the second Poll.


Mr. Ward. Then which is Mr. Wightman?


Mr. Wightman. Here I am, Sir.


Mr. Ward. Were you present at this Common -Hall? Did you see this Election?


Mr. Wightman. I can say nothing to the Election.


Mr. Williams. Were you at the Common -Hall on Midsummer-day, 1682?


Mr. Wightman. I cannot say that, Sir.


Mr. Ward. Then what is it you can say to this matter in question? Did you take
any Poll?


Mr. Wightman. I did take the Poll in one of the Books.


Mr. Williams. Was there any number for Mr. Papillon?


Mr. Wightman. There were 2400 and odd, for Papillon and Dubois.


Mr. Thompson. Who were in nomination, Sir? Who were the persons Poll'd for?


Mr. Wightman. Sir Dudley North, Mr. Papillon, Mr. Dubois, and Mr. Box.


Mr. Ward. What say you, Mr. Robinson, were you at this Common -Hall in 1682?


Mr. Robinson, Yes, I was.


Mr. Williams. Who were named to be Sheriffs then?


Mr. Robinson. Mr. North, now Sir Dudley North, Mr. Ralph Box, Mr. Thomas
Papillon, and Mr. John Dubois, they four.


Mr. Williams. What number had Mr. Papillon for him?


Mr. Robinson. I never saw the Poll.


Mr. Ward. But upon the view in the Hall, in your opinion, did you look upon it
as a doubtful case which was Elected.


Mr. Robinson. By the Hands, I judged the majority was much more for Mr.
Papillon, and Mr. Dubois, than for the other two.


Mr. Williams. So you think in your Judgment.


Mr. Robinson. Upon my Oath, that was my opinion.


Mr. Williams. Well, my Lord, we must rest it here unless they give us further
occasion.


Mr. Attor. Genesis You say the majority was for Papillon and Dubois: 'Pray' was
the Election declared at that time by the Mayor and Aldermen, or was there a
Poll demanded?


Mr. Robinson. Mr. Attorney, first the question was put for the persons; then
the Sheriffs declared their opinion, and a Poll was demanded, and a Poll was
granted, and the Sheriffs went with the Common-Serjeant up to the Court of
Aldermen, and acquainted them with it, and then they all came down again, and
declared that there should be a Poll.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Who were Sheriffs then, 'pray' Sir?


Mr. Robinson. Mr. Alderman Pilkington, and Mr. Samuel Shute; and in the
Evening after the Poll was closed, the Books were numbered up, the Sheriffs came
down upon the Hustings and declared the numbers, and then as I remember, the
number declared for Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Dubois, was above 2000. and the
number declared for the other two, was some Hundreds under 2000.


Mr. Ward. My Lord we leave it here.


Ld. Chapter Just. Will you that are for the Plaintiff, say any thing more to it?


Mr. Attor. Genesis Yes, my Lord, we have more Evidence to give in answer to what
they have brought here. My Lord, that which they would excuse themselves by,
is, that there was a probable Cause; but that will fail them, if it be but
observed what does appear upon their own Evidence. It is true, where a man has
a probable right, he may Sue. But this matter here contended for, was never
such a right as a man may to sue for. No man can ever show that for the
Shrevalty, an Office of Burden, an Office of Hazard, and an Office of Charge
and Expense, any man did ever sue; so little ground of reason had they to bring
this Action for this Office. And then for their Title to the Office, that will
appear but very weak. They pretend that my Lord Mayor and Aldermen could not
try the right who was Elected truly and rightfully; and they bring this Action
to try it; and then they produce some of the men that held up their Hands, and
in their Opinions, Gentlemen, they say, the Election fell upon Rapillen and
Dubois. But, Gentlemen, that my Lord will tell you is nothing at all of Title,
but a Poll was demanded, and by that it must be decided. Then one of their
VVitnesses tells you a story of what the Sheriffs did upon the Poll: But all
that is nothing too. For we tell you, and shall prove it, that those Sheriffs
did in a riotous manner, assume, and take upon themselves the Supreme
Government of the City, and would have excluded my Lord Mayor from it. But all
their proceedings, and all that they call a Poll, was void, and can make no
Title to any thing at all. It was a bare dispute of a factious Party, to
subvert the Orderly Government of the City. There was no probability of Title
or Right could be gained by it. For the Chief Magistrate of the City, for the
time being, ever did direct the Poll, and all the Proceedings upon Election of
Officers. And when he did so in this Case, we shall prove to you there was not
any considerable number (that is, not twenty men) to give any pretense of Title
to this Gentleman that thus sued for this Office. But indeed in that most
riotous assembly one of them that ever was, they do pretend to be Elected: But
we shall show that for that riotous assembly they were convicted here as
Rioters upon an Information, and fined to the King for it. And I could tell
them of a like Case of an illegal Title, a man goes by a false Oath to get a
Possession of goods, takes out a Capias, and with others, getting into a House
to arrest the Party, he then carries away all the Goods, and upon this
possession would set up a pretense of Title: But upon an Information for a
Riot, he was severely punished for it. Mr. Papillon, if hehad thought he had
had a good Title or Cause to bring this Action, he would have employed better
Instruments to have proceeded in it. The Attorney he makes use of, who is it
but Mr. Goodenough? one who did not live within the City, nor had any thing to
do in it, till brought into Office as the great Instrument of Mr. Bethel in his
Actions, and a great Plotter in the late horrid and dreadful Conspiracy. And
this Cause, how is it managed? Not by any Counsel of worthy Men of the Robe, or
grave Citizens; but by a Cabal of thirty or forty Rioters, most of them in the
Proclamation, proscribed as Traitors, and run away from Justice upon the
Discovery of the Plot. All this speaks Malice, and the worst of Malice; the
thing it self speaks it to pretend a Title with so little or no ground. For you
plainly observe, there is no Title but this riotous Assembly to ground their
pretenses upon. In the Prosecution of this Action, there was no Order,
whatsoever they pretend, for to take an Appearance; I mean by those that really
were at the bottom of the Design. For the forty Men at the Consult at Russel's,
did not meet to be sure to give Order for an Appearance. No, they had other
work to do. An Appearance would not do their work: For, as Mr. Keeling at large
could explain it, they took all Opportunities to rise and make a Mutiny, and
take advantage of the Mobile and disturbances to bring about their mainPlot.
They did not care five-pence for the Appearance: But when the Soldiers were up,
then the Plot was spolied, and then my Lord Mayor may go home if he will.
Gentlemen, we shall prove what I have opened to you, though I am persuaded not
one of you but know it as well as I.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Show the Records of the Conviction of the Riot.


L. C. J. Hold Mr. Solicitor, I tell you before Hand, that as I stopped them
from urging the Trial for the Rior, as any Determination of the Right of
Election, or as any ways tending to the Question now before us; So I must not
let you neither enter into that matter. The business of the Indictment,
Conviction and Sentence upon the Rioters makes nothing either to the Right of
Election, or this Right of Action. And therefore, as I said to Mr. Ward, it was
nothing to the Purpose to mention it on that side: So it is to no Purpose, I
must tell you, to mention it on the other side. For it was no Determination of
the Point of Right one way or other. And he could not give it in Evidence, that
that was a Litigation of the Matter in Dispute, and upon the Decision of that
Indictment, (till which he apprehended he had a Right) he found it was against
him, and so desisted. No, the Right I say was not at all effected by that Trial
one way or other. For admitting they had a Right, or you had a Right; yet the
gaining your Right must not be attempted in a wrongful manner; but they had a
lawful Way to come by their Right; and if they pursued that, well and good; if
not, then they must take what comes of it.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, that Right was insisted on by them as the probable
ground of their Action, and that we say was no Right.


L. C. J. Therefore it is to no Purpose to urge it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But, my Lord, with Submission, our Answer to their Title is that
there was no Color of Pretense, and this Conviction proves it.


L. C. J. No, Mr. Solicitor, that is not any Evidence one way or other.


Mr. Sol. Genesis If your Lordship please, it destroys their very Title, which is
the Number of the Poll.


L. C. J. Lord! the thing is as plain, Gentlemen, as any thing can be. You or
they may have a good Title, and yet do a thing that is unlawful to bring the
Title into Possession. But then the punishing you for that unlawful Act, is not
an Evidence either against or for the Title, nor does determine it for you, or
against you.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, we submit to your Lordship's Directions in it. But then
this we say to it; the Question now is reduced to this Point: Whether there
were any probable Cause for the Defendant's Suit against the Plaintiff? They
have insisted upon it that there was, from two grounds. They call Witnesses,
who declare they were of Opinion, that the Defendant had the Right of Election
by the holding up of the Hands. That is one of the probable Causes of their
Suit. Now that is clearly gone by this single Point, whether the Election was
determined upon that holding up of the Hands, or they went to a Poll to decide
it? If they went to a Poll, then it is clear the Right of Election was not
determined; and he could have no Right to be Sheriff upon the holding up of the
Hands. Then they went a little further, and offered in Evidence the Sheriff's
Poll-books, or the Numbers taken out of them; wherein they say, the Majority
was for Mr. Papillon; and so thereupon, say they, we brought our Action. Now,
to that Objection it is proper for us, with Submission, my Lord, to answer it,
that that can be no manner of Cause of Action in the World; because, say we,
that was no Part of the Election at all, nor was it at all to govern the
Question of Right one way nor other; 'twas a Number of Names taken out of the
regular Course upon Elections by Persons that had no legal Authority; nor was
it such a Method, as was a Foundation to ground any Opinion upon one way or
other; much less, such a one as would be a Cause of Action. These are all the
grounds they went upon. The first, by their own showing, was no ground at all;
for there was no Determination of the Right upon the View, but a Poll was
agreed upon: The other, we shall call Witnesses to prove was irregular, and so
not legal. Swear Mr. Town Clerk.


[Which was done.

Mr. At. Genesis 'Pray' Sir, will you give my Lord and the Jury an Account, who
is to govern the Poll upon the Election of Sheriffs, or other Officers at the
Common Hall?


Mr. Town Clerk. My Lord, I never knew a Poll about Sheriffs till about five or
six years ago, and that was the first Poll that ever I knew, and it was between
Mr. Jenks and Sir Simon Lewis; and indeed, it was the first that ever I did
read of in any time within the City of London. I think, I have seen the Entry
of all the Elections of Sheriffs, that are extant in our Books in all times;
and I think, I did never see in any of those Entries one Poll that was ever
taken for Sheriffs; it is only mentioned, Such an one elected by the Mayor by
Prerogative; and such an one, by the Commonalty. Among other Books of the
City's, there is an old Book, that is called by the Name of Liber Albus, which
speaking of the Constitution of the Common Hall for Election of Sheriffs, says,
First of all the Mayor shall choose one of the Sheriffs for London and
Middlesex, for whom he will answer; and then the Commonalty shall choose another
to join with him, for whom they will answer. And if there arise any Difference
between them, who is elected, or not elected, it shall be determined in the
same manner, as it is in the Common Council. This is all the Notice, that I
find in any of the City-Books that looks like a deciding the Election, when
disputed by a Poll. Now in another Chapter of that Book where the
Common Council is mentioned; it is said, If there be any Division of Opinions
in the Common Council, the Common-Serjeant and the Town Clerk, shall examine
every Man severally, what their Opinion is, which is by way of Poll at this day
when we had a Common Council. But till that time that the Poll was between Mr.
Jenks and Sir Simon Lewis, I never knew any Poll for Sheriffs, and that Poll
was taken immediately by telling one and the other. For my Lord Mayor and
Aldermen as soon as ever they come upon the Hustings, make Proclamation to have
the Liveries attend for such Elections; and then withdraw and leave the
Sheriffs and the Common Sergeant.


Mr. At. Genesis Sir, the Course is very well known I suppose, to the Gentlemen
of the Jury. But 'pray' did any Persons Poll at my Lord Mayors Books for Dubois
and Papillon?


Mr. Town Clerk. Not that I know. As to this Poll, my Lord Mayor caused the
Common Hall to be Adjourned to such a time; and after that-sent for the Common
Sergeant, and my self, and required us to go get Books, to take the Poll for
Mr. Box, Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois; as for Sir Dudley North he was not to be
Poll'd for, he being Chosen before, by the Prerogative of the Lord Mayor, and
my Lord Mayor and Aldermen declared him fully Elected, and upon that he was
called out by public Proclamation upon the Hustings, to come and take the
Office upon him, as is usual in such Cases. But we had directions to provide
Books to take the Poll for Mr. Box, Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois; and we did so,
and took the Poll for these three Gentlemen, and upon closing of the Poll, we
all of us sealed up our Books, and delivered them to my Lord Mayor; and at a
Common Hall afterward, he did declare Mr. Box to be Chosen the other Sheriff,
to be joined with Sir Dudley North: The Poll was, as it always ought to be, by
the direction of my Lord Mayor; and the Sheriffs are but Officers, and not the
Judges and Managers of the Poll, without my Lord Mayor's direction.


L. C. J. What say you to it, Gentlemen? Have you any more Evidence?


Mr. S. Maynard. My Lord, and Gentlemen, Here has been much said in this Cause
that is nothing to the purpose. As particularly, that which the Plaintiffs
Council did last insist upon, who took the Poll, and who had right to take the
Poll or not, is not any thing to this Question: This Action is not at all
concerned in that matter. For whatsoever the dispute was, and which soever had
the right, (and because it was a dispute, some it may be could not Poll at the
one, and others would not Poll at the other) yet the lifting up of two thousand
Hands, might make him think that he was Chosen Sheriff; and there lies the
Cause of his Action, his apprehension of a Right: Your Lordship did Object this
to us, Who ever before brought such an Action as ours, and did sue to be
Sheriff of London, a Place of Charge and Trouble? --


L. C. J. No, I did not make it as any Objection. I asked your Witness,
Cornish, that Question indeed, for some Reasons that I know.


Mr. S. Maynard. That may be Objected indeed to the Prudence of my Client, Mr.
Papillon, to desire such an Office: But that proves nothing of Malice in him
against the Plaintiff; for if he were never so unwise as to desire it, if he
had a Right to it, or thought he had, it is not a malicious thing in the Eye of
the Law, for him to take his Legal Course for it; and then the Objection that
is made of the Instruments that were used. Our Attorney Goodenough is in a
Plot: What is that to us? There is not the least suspicion upon us. He is a bad
Man: But that does not make all his Clients bad. But the Question now before
you is, First, Whether there were any probability of a Cause of Action.
Secondly, if there were not a probable Cause; yet whether that Action was
grounded upon Malice? What Malice I pray is there in this, against my Lord
Mayor, to desire an Appearance of him, when it is conceived, though upon
mistake, that there is Cause of Action against him? We did not press him to
give us Bail to our Action, or threaten else to arrest him: No, it was a decent
rather than an irreverent Application to him. If then there be not both
concurring, want of Title, or probable Cause and Malice too, this Action of the
Plaintiffs is without ground. No Man that has any Sense, if he knows he has a
clear Title against him, will bring an Action; but though it should be clear
against him, yet if he do bring an Action, but not vexatiously and maliciously,
that cannot subject him to an Action; that would frighten Men from bringing
Actions upon doubtful matters, which certainly is Lawful for any Man to do. Now
what Malice is proved in the Defendant against the Plaintiff, the Jury here are
Judges of. If we were Criminal in the manner of our Proceedings, they might
come before your Lordship in another way; but sure this is not the way; and if
it should be Actionable, and we likewise subject to be punished as a Criminal,
then we should suffer twice for the same fault. Now, Gentlemen, upon this
Action we are not to be fined; but they, if they can, are to show what damages
the Plaintiff sustained by our Action; and if what we have said do not satisfy
you, that we had probable Reason for what we did, then you upon your Oaths, are
to give him what damages you in your Consciences think he has received by it.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, if your Lordship please, I would ask one question of
Mr. Town Clerk, as to the Right of managing the Election. Sir, You have
observed many Common Halls for Elections.


Mr. Town Clerk. Yes, Sir, I have for this twelve years.


Mr. Williams. Did the Common Hall ever go to a Poll upon an Election, before
this time, that you know of?


Mr. Town Clerk. Never but once for the Election of Sheriffs, I say.


Mr. Williams. I speak, Sir, of any sort of Poll; for I suppose you do not
call the holding up of Hands, a Poll.


Mr. Town Clerk. Mr. Jenks's Poll was the First that ever I knew for Sheriffs.


Mr. Williams. Well, Sir, Was that managed by the Sheriffs, or by my Lord
Mayor, or by you, and the Common Sergeant; or who was it by?


Mr. Town Clerk. Sir, The Mayor and Aldermen withdraw, and leave the Sheriffs
to view the Election by the Hands; and the Common Sergeant propounds the
Question, So many of you as will have, etc. --


Mr. Williams. By whose direction does he propound the Question, 'Pray'?


Mr. Town Clerk. By the direction of the Common Hall, I take it.


Mr. Williams. But if a Question do arise upon an Election, so that it cannot
be decided by the view, but they go to a Poll, Who is to manage that Poll?


Mr. Town Clerk. The Officers of the City, by direction of the Lord Mayor.


Mr. Williams. That Poll you speak of, for Lewis and Jenks, Was that managed
by any body, but by the Sheriffs?


Mr. Town Clerk. It was managed by the Sheriffs and the Common Sergeant, in the
accustomed manner.


Mr. Williams. How! in the accustomed manner, when you say that was the first
that ever you knew?


Mr. Town Clerk. It was so for Sheriffs; but there have been Polls for other
Officers.


L. C. J. Why, Mr. Williams, every body knows that well enough, that the
Sheriffs are concerned in the management of the Election or the Poll, as all
the rest of the Officers of the City are, under my Lord Mayor; and the Common
Sergeant consults with the Sheriffs Officers and People about him, upon the
view.


Mr. Williams. 'Pray' Sir, do you remember the Election of Mr. Bethel, and Mr.
Cornish.


Mr. Town Clerk. Yes, Sir, There was a Poll there too, that was the Year after.


Mr. Williams. Who managed that Poll?


Mr. Town Clerk. The Sheriffs, and the Common Sergeant, and I, did agree to
take it thus in two Books, whereof one was with the one Sheriff, and the other
with the other Sheriff, at the two ends of the Hall.


Mr. Williams. That was taken in Writing, Sir, Was it not?


Mr. Town Clerk. Yes, Sir, That other of Jenks was only by telling.


Mr. Williams. Were you concerned in taking that Poll?


Mr. Town Clerk. I did assist at it one day.


Mr. Williams. Who ordered you to take the Poll that day?


Mr. Town Clerk. Truly, I did concern my self as little as I could in those
things: What Report was made to the Court of Aldermen, I cannot tell; but one
day coming into the Hall, I had no Mind to concern my self in it; but some
Gentlemen, did pray me to go up to the Poll; and I did go up.


Mr. Williams, Sir, Upon your Oath, Did the Sheriffs direct you to take it?


Mr. Town Clerk. I really think they did not.


Mr. Williams. Did my Lord Mayor direct you?


Mr. Town Clerk. No, Sir.


Mr. Williams. Did the Sheriffs manage it?


Mr. Common-Serj. I did it by Sir Robert Clayton's Order, who was then Lord
Mayor.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, all that we say to it is this, We are not now proving
our Right upon which we brought our Action, that we submit unto, it is against
us, we must agree it: But be the Right one way, or other; yet we might from a
supposed Right, have a probable Cause of Action. It seems to be a doubtful
business, by all that Mr. Town Clerk has said, who has the Right, for all he
knows of, the Constitution is from Liber Albus, and that is somewhat dark. You,
Gentlemen, hear what is said; the thing was a Question of five or six days, and
a puzzling one it seems, and therefore we might be misled into an apprehension,
that what the Sheriffs did was right, and so notat all concern our selves with
what my Lord Mayor did. --


L. C. J. Mr. Williams you talk of that you do not understand; for my Lord
Mayor was not there at that time of Jenks's Poll: I was Common Sergeant my
self, and I know the Sheriffs have nothing to do with it.


Mr. Williams. It should seem by Mr. Town Clerk to be doubtful, sometimes one,
and sometimes another, did direct the taking of the Poll.


L. C. J. But you are out still: But for all that, this is nothing to your
Right of Action, one way or other.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I must lay it here, it was a doubtful thing, and we
brought our Action to try the Right; but afterward conceiving we were out, and
had no Right, we discontinued and desisted.


L. C. J. It was so far from being their Right, that I desire you to call me
any one Witness, that can say, before Jenks's time, there was ever a Poll for
Sheriffs, or such a thing thought of.


Mr. Williams. We were under an apprehension of a Right in them.


L. C. J. There could be no color for any such apprehension in the World.


Mr. Williams. We must submit it to your Lordship's directions.


Mr. At. Genesis So do we.


Mr. S. Maynard. Whether this Action brought by us, was malicious.


Mr. Ward. My Lord, Mr. Attorney does challenge the Defendant, to show that
his Action was brought by advice of Counsel; we shall show it was with good
Authority of Counsel. Mr. Baker, can you tell whether it was by any Advice, and
whose?


Mr. Baker. It was by the Advice of Mr. Thompson, Mr. Pollixfen and Mr.
Wallop, as I have heard.


Mr. At. Genesis But you hear what Keeling says, there was a Party that were at a
Consult about it, and that were concerned in it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, We have done on both sides, I think, and submit to your
Lordship's direction in it.


L. C. J. Will any of you say any thing more?


Mr. Williams. No, my Lord, we have done, we leave it upon this Evidence to
your Lordship and the Jury.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, We have no more to say for the Plaintiff.


L. C. J. Then, Gentlemen of the Jury, as my Brother Maynard said in the
beginning of his Defense in this Cause; so I say now to you, to set all things
strait and right; God forbid, that any heat or transport of the times, should
bring us into that Condition, but that every Subject of the Kings that has a
right of bringing an Action at Law against another, should have free Liberty so
to do. And the Courts of Justice are now, and I hope always will be so open,
that every one that would take a Remedy prescribed by the Law for a wrong done
him, may be received to bring his Action, which is a Legal Remedy.

And I am to tell you, Gentlemen, that much has been said in this Case, (which
I perceive is by the Concourse of People a Cause of great Expectation as my
Brother likewise said) which is not at all to the Case. I am sorry truly at
this time of Day, that we should stand in need of such Causes as these, to
settle and keep People in their due bounds and limits. But though many things
have been said in the Case that are quite besides the natural Question; yet,
they having being made Dependancies upon that Question, and because it seems to
be a Case of such Expectation, I think it will become me in the Place wherein I
am, to say something to you, and according to the best of my Understanding,
tell you what I apprehend to be the legal Part of it, stripped of what has no
Relation at all to it. And if I shall omit any thing that is material on the
one side or the other, here are Gentlemen that are Learned in the Law, who are
of Council both for the Plaintiff and the Defendant; and I shall not think my
self under any sort of Prejudice in the World, if they take the liberty, as
they may freely do, to interrupt me and enmind me of what I forget, or wherein
I may mistake.

For, Gentlemen, I assure you for my own Part, I would not have the Law made
subservient to any Purpose, but the exact Rule of Justice. I would to the best
of my Understanding in all Cases servare jus illaesum, preserve the Law and the
Right of every Man inviolable. I would have the Law of the Land to be the
measure of my own and all other Men's Actions. And I hope no Man can justly (I
am sure I do not know they can) complain of any Breach or Invasion that is made
in the Courts of Justice, either upon Law or Right. But all those that have the
Administration of Justice committed to them by the Government, do behave
themselves with all Equity and Impartiality toward all the King's Subjects;
And the Law has as full and free a Course, and Justice does every where take
place as much as can be desired by any honest and good Man.

Gentlemen, in this Case that you now are to try, I must first of all tell you,
that this Business of the Right of Election one way and the other, has been
too much insisted on on both sides. And I speak it, because though I my self in
my own Mind know what of it is true, and what not; yet I conceive it not so
proper to be mentioned in this Case, it being no legal Evidence to the Point in
Question. Now it is a Duty incumbent upon you to observe; and upon the Court to
suffer nothing to be urged so as to have any weight with you, but what is legal
Evidence. That you are only to mind, Gentlemen. So that if I mention to you any
Point of Fact that has not been given in Evidence, as having a true Relation
to this Issue, you are not to mind what I say to you about it. On the other
side, I must likewise acquaint you, if there be any difficulty in Point of Law
in the Case; you are to observe the Directions of the Court, who will be always
ready to assist and direct you in it. Or the Gentlemen, that are of Council on
the one side, or the other may have the Matter found; specially, if they think
there is Fact enough to be found to ground a Question upon.

Therefore, Gentlemen, for the Customs of the City of London; as to the manner
of Elections, or who has the right to manage them, they are not at all
material to this Business; and if they were, there is never a one of you but
know it as well as we or any Body does. I my self had the Honor to serve the
City of London in the Places of Common-Serjeant and Recorder several Years: So
long ago, that not above one or two that sit upon the Bench in the Court of
Aldermen have been longer conversant in Guild Hall, or know the Customs of
London in those matters better than I do.

It is notoriously known to all that have had any Dealing in London, or been
acquainted with any thing there, that till within these six or seven Years last
past, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and the Common Hall used to go
a-birding for Sheriffs, (you very well know what the Phrase means) and perhaps
it was not once in ten times, that those that were chosen Sheriffs, held; but
generally every Year there were I know not how many Elections upon sining off,
or swearing, or some reason or other; so that now and then, there was but one
Sheriff chosen for a great while together; and now and then never a one from
Midsummer day till near Michaelmas. And the way was, to consider such a one
has most Money in his Pocket; Oh! then put him up for Sheriff: And then, if he
went off, then another would be found out. And there was one old Deputy Savage,
that used to keep a black Book, that would furnish Names for I know not how
many Elections. And who should be Sheriff, so as to divide into Parties, and
Poll was never a Question, before such time as Mr. Jenks that they speak of
came to be put up, and there the Dispute began; then the Faction began to
appear.

Now if any Man offers to tell me, I apprehended always it was the Sheriffs
Right to manage the Poll; I would ask him how that can be a Right that never
was done before; let them show me any one Instance of a Poll for Sheriffs
before that time. No, it was notoriously known when the Polls began, Persons
did not think the Shrevalty such an Office, that it was so earnestly to be
coveted and desired. Polls indeed used to be heretofore for the Bridge-Masters
Places, that are Places of Profit and Advantage; and so for Ale-conners and the
like, those have been often in your time and mine, Gentlemen, we may very well
remember them. But this Office of Sheriff, People were not heretofore so
ambitious of as to poll for it; but the City was glad if they could get any
worthy and fit Person to accept of it.

And for the management of the Election, we all can tell the manner of it as
well as any thing in the World. After my Lord Mayor and the Aldermen were gone
off the Hustings and retired to this Place, the Common-Serjeant staying there
with the Sheriffs, used to make a Speech to the Common Hall, a Rehearsal of
what had been before said by the Recorder; and then received the Nomination of
such Persons as were to be put to the Question for Election from the
Common Hall. And upon the putting of the Question, every Man held up his Hand
for those that he desired should be chosen; and if it could be decided by view
of the Hands, well and good; and the Common Sergeant consulting with the
Sheriffs and those about him, declared their Opinion, that the Election fell so
and so on the one side or on the other; but if doubtful, or a Poll demanded by
any one; then they used to acquaint my Lord Mayor what was done in the
Common Hall; and thereupon, they gave Order for declaring the Election, or
granting the Poll, and used to come down to the Hustings for that Purpose; and
no one ever thought, that either the Common Sergeant or the Sheriffs, or any
Body else but my Lord Mayor had the Power of those Courts. For the Common Hall
was always summoned by Precept from the Lord Mayor, and when the Business was
done, or was to be put off to another day, the Common-Cryer by Command from the
Lord Mayor makes Proclamation, You good Men of the Livery, etc. may depart for
this time, and give your Attendance here again such a Day, or upon further
Summons. No Body ever talked of summoning a Common Hall by any Body but my Lord
Mayor. He did it by Virtue of his Office, and he dissolved it, or adjourned it
by Virtue of his Office. All this is as notoriously known to all Men that know
any thing of London, as the Faces of you of the Jury are to the People here, or
to one another. And this never came to be a Question, till the Business of the
Poll between Sir Simon Lewis and Jenks came about, which you have heard of. Mr.
Papillon himself when he was chosen Sheriff before, and fined for it, was
chosen in this manner and no other.


Mr. Cornish, he comes and gives Evidence that the Common-Serjeant was reckoned
to be the Man that managed the Choice by Command and Direction of the Sheriffs.
And some of those Gentlemen, that have been produced on the Defendant's side;
they say, they have looked upon it as the Sheriffs Business. But alas-a-day it
belongs to neither of them, they are but Officers to the Lord Mayor. The
Common-Serjeant's Business is but to put the Question into the Mouth of the
Common-Cryer. In so much, that when I my self was Common-Serjeant, as I used to
pass by the Shops in London, they used to cry there goes, So many of you as
would have. It was as plain a Road of things, that every Body knew it before
these things untowardly have come to be imbrangled by our Factions and
Divisions, and the heat of some busy Fellows. Here are a great many ancient
Citizens, that I see that know, and so do you all, Gentlemen, that this is
true. So that all the Discourse of this Matter is but Flourish and Garniture,
and does not affect this Case at all one way or other.

Another thing, Gentlemen, has been mightily talked of, and urged and insisted
upon both by Plaintiff and Defendant; and that is the Defendant's Right, or not
Right of Election to the Office of Sheriff, and that the Majority was on his
side, say his Council: On the other side, say the Plaintiff's Council. And for
the settling that Right, he brought his Action against the Plaintiff; but it
being determined upon the Conviction for the Riot. There is no such thing,
Gentlemen, as that it was therein determined: That cannot be a Determination of
any Right at all. For though I may have a Right to an Office, or any such thing;
yet I must pursue a legal Method to attain to that Right, and not go irregular
Ways to work.

As if I have a Right to come into your House, because you have not paid me
your Rent, (to make my thoughts and meaning intelligible to you by a familiar
Instance, which will thew what I intend) I must not make a Riot, and turn you
by Violence out of Possession. For I have a legal Course to come by my Right;
to wit, by bringing an Action and evicting you. But if any Man attempt to get a
Right in an unjust manner, and he be punished for it by an Indictment or
Information, that, I say, does not determine the Question of Right one way or
other.

To come then to the Issue, that here you are to try the Point of this Action
before us, resolves it self into a narrow compass, and is only this in short,
which you are to enquire of, Whether or no the Plaintiff was arrested by the
Defendant without probable Cause, and maliciously?

Now matters of Malice, are things that remain in a Man's Heart, and it is
impossible for me to discover whether another Man has a Malice against me; if
I do not see it in his Actions. Malice being a thing that is internal, is not
else discernable.

Therefore you must consider the Circumstances that do attend this Action of
the Defendant, and if so be they are malicious, then you are to find for the
Plaintiff: But if they for the Defendant, have offered to you any Circumstances
that can prove or convince you, that he had any probability of a Cause of
Action, and that not attended with a malicious Prosecution of that probable
Cause, then the Issue is with the Defendant.

This is the Right Question, and the Law of this Action; and the Fact to make
it out one way or other is now in Judgment before you, upon the Evidence that
has been given on both sides.

Now, in point of Law, I am to tell you, and that you must observe, That though
I have a probable conjectural Cause of Action against another Man; yet if to
obtain my End in that, I prosecute him maliciously, with a design to ruin him,
or to put an Indignity upon him, or the Character he bears in the Public, or
put a hardship or difficulty upon him (I mean hardship and difficulty in point
of time) when it is probable the Remedy may be had at another time, and the
same thing done with less injury, and less trouble; then an Action will lie
against me, for bringing my Action in such a manner; though it be true, that I
had a conjectural cause of Action against him.

As in the Case that was here in this Court the other day, of Mr. Swinnock
against the Sergeant, that came to him and told him in his Ear, that he had an
Action against him, and this was upon the Exchange; thereupon Mr. Swinnock
brings his Action for this against this Man, for whispering this in his Ear: If
he had proved any malicious intention to disgrace him, no doubt the Action
would have lien. For though there might be a Cause of Action against Swinnock;
yet if that be maliciously pursued to get him arrested, and held to bail, where
no bail is required by Law; or with an intent to disgrace him upon the
Exchange, when it might have been done elsewhere, or at another time, this
irregular malicious Proceeding will bear an Action. The pursuing malicious
ways, to obtain a Right, makes a Man obnoxious to the Action of the Party so
prosecuted. I desire to express my self by Words, that may declare my meaning
as plainly as can be: And I hope I do so.

Then, Gentlemen, taking it thus as the Counsel for the Plaintiff say, to show
that the Defendant had no probable Cause of Action against the Plaintiff; they
endeavor to answer what is alleged on the other side, as their probable
Cause. And therefore, that we must consider first what is said by the Defendant.

They tell you, here was an Election for Sheriffs of London at Guild Hall,
where those Persons that they have nominated, were Candidates, and put in
nomination for that Office. And upon that nomination, as say those three
Witnesses; we were the Persons that had the Majority of Voices, and thereupon
we apprehended our selves Chosen, which gave us the right of Action: So the
Defendant say they shows some probability of a Cause of Action; and if he
have not pursued it with Malice, but in a regular way, the Probability of the
Cause does take off from the Malice, that else the very bringing of an Action
without Cause, would imply in it self. And they say true, for I must repeat it
again, If I have prima facie, a probable Cause, and pursue it legally, no
Action will lie against me for it.

But then say they on the other side for the Plaintiff, That is no probable
Cause; for you could from those Transactions have no such Apprehensions of a
Right; for that is not the measure of a Right of Election, or a Rule to guess
who is elected by: For there being no decision of the Election upon the holding
up of the Hands, and a Poll being demanded, whereas the usual method is to have
by the Lord Mayors Order and Direction, the Poll taken by such as he shall
appoint; you went another way to work, you go your ways and take Books to your
selves, and come not to the fair determination of the Question: And they bring
Mr. Town Clerk to prove. You have heard what the Evidence is, and you are
Judges of it.

Now take it that this were in the Case of an Office of Profit; as suppose it
were a Question between me and John a Styles, for the place of Bridge-master,
for the purpose, and a Poll is demanded, and granted; if they that have no
Authority shall go after the Court is adjourned by him that has Power, and take
a number of Names in the way of a Poll by themselves, and upon that come and
say, I. S. has four and twenty hundred, and I have but so many; that sure is
not any probable Cause, nor a Right; for you have gone here out of the known
and usual method of such Matters, and depend upon that which can give no
foundation of Right at all. This is the Answer that is given to that by the
Council for the Plaintiff.

You may have fifty thousand Names for you after that rate, and yet not be
Elected, nor have probable Cause of any such apprehension. We all remember Sir
Samuel Sterling's Case, which was upon the denial of a Poll for a Place of
Profit, that is to say, the Bridge-Master's Place: But this is upon a wrong
Poll.

Suppose there had been a Poll granted (as there was) in this Case, and upon
that Poll thus managed, Sir Dudley North and Mr. Box had had the majority but
by a very few, and there had been an Action brought in such a Case; here was a
probable Cause as good as in this Case, as it now stands, because some of them
might happen not to have legal Suffrages; yet the taking the Poll by Persons of
their own heads, after the Court was adjourned, avoids all; so that that would
have signified nothing. You are to consider of this Answer of theirs.

Then the great thing, Gentlemen; that you are to observe, is this: To bring an
Action alone, will scarce amount to a proof of Malice; therefore Malice being
in this Issue a great point of Fact, you must weigh the Evidence whether the
Circumstances do show it, that there was Malice in Mr. Papillon. If the
Circumstances are enough to amount to a proof of Malice, you then are to find
for the Plaintiff; and you are the Judges what Damages it is fit to give him
for that Injury: He has laid Ten thousand pounds; but you must do what you that
are Judges of it think fit in it.

Come, Gentlemen, it is best to be plain; and no Man needs to be thought
wanting of an Apprehension, what is the meaning of all these things. It is
commonly and universally known to all Mankind,

First, That no Man ever did pursue such an Action as this is, to be Sheriff,
till these unhappy Times wherein we are, and wherein we have lost that Quiet
and Felicity, which I pray God we may be restored unto: And though it is true,
a Man may lawfully sue for such an Office, and it is no Offense; yet it looks
somewhat extraordinary, and that a Man has a mind to do something unusual in
the Place; it is for some strange purpose or other, especially when a Man has
Fined for the Office once before, as we all know Mr. Papillon did.

Again, It is as notoriously known, That for several years last past, the
Government has been beset: And that which is a baser thing than ever was
thought of, or acted in the highest times of Villainy in these Kingdoms, (I
mean those of the late Rebellion) the very Methods of Justice have been
corrupted, and all to serve the main Design of subverting the Government.

Gentlemen, This is so black a Wickedness, that no honest Man that has any
sense of Loyalty, Religion, or common Justice, but must tremble at the very
thoughts of it: When we see such Fellows as are obnoxious to the Government,
known Dissenters from the Established Worship, and that never thought of
conforming to the Government, or the Laws Civil or Ecclesiastical, or complying
with the Church, but only to capacitate them to destroy it; nay, when Men that
are taken notice of to be common Reproaches to the Government under which they
live, shall get into Office to make Ignoramus Juries, and to enable People to
commit and be guilty of all the Falsities and Basenesses, that Humane Nature is
capable of; no Man living, that has any Ingenuity or Goodness in him, but must
cry out against it.

When Men begin to take Oaths to sanctify Villainy, and enter into Clans and
Clubs, and Cabals, to destroy the most Merciful of Kings, and to disturb,
distract, and overthrow the best of Governments, What shall we say? And all
this you, all of you, Gentlemen, know to be true. Was it not more safe to
commit Treason in the City, than to sit upon a Bench of Justice to bring the
Traitors to Judgment? Was it not more safe to conspire the Death of the King
and his Brother, than to give the least Frown or Look of Displeasure against
one of these snivelling Saints? Did not we know that Men were sanctified to be
Jurymen, to enquire of Conspiracies against the King's Life and Government,
that before that time were never thought sit to be trusted with the common
Discourses or Society of honest Men?

When Men were thought fittest for Offices of such high Trust, according to
their being thought capable of, and well-intended to the overthrow of the
Government: Do not we all know this to be as true, as that the Sun shines at
Noonday? When Traitors at the Bar were in less danger of being convicted of
their Treasons, than the Judges were of their Lives?


Mr. Papillon knows all this to be true eminently. When packed Juries were
grown to that height, that though seven or eight Witnesses came and swore
positive downright Treason, the Traitor could not be by these Men so much as
thought fit to be accused by an Indictment; to that stupidity in Villainy were
things brought by these Fellows: Nay, so far were the Proceedings in Courts of
Justice tainted, that in no common Action whatsoever that came here to be
Tried, but cropp'd Hair, and a demure Look were the best signs of a good
Evidence; and the business of an Oath signified nothing, provided the Party
were to be prop'd up, and the Faction to receive an advantage by it.

For God's sake, Gentlemen, let any Man but seriously consider and believe that
there is a GOD in Heaven, and a dreadful Day of Judgment, when every one of us
must answer for every Thought of our Hearts, every Word of our Mouths, and
every Action of our Lives; and then tell me what horrid Impieties these are,
such as any ordinary ingenuous Person would blush and tremble at.

And I would have Mr. Cornish to consider, whether ever till that time of
famous, or rather infamous Memory, that he and his Fellow-Sheriff Mr. Bethel
came into that Office, there were ever in London such things as Tavern-Returns
of Juries, or Clans and Cabals how to pack Fellows together for such wicked
Purposes as these.

Do not most of you here know this? And does not every one of your Hearts and
Consciences agree with me in it; how far unlike the Proceedings of those times,
in reference to Juries, were from what they anciently were? I have had the
Honor to practice in this Place among you in my Profession, when without any
disturbance or mixture of Faction and Sedition, we were all quiet, and every
one knew his Duty; and Justice was done in this place so regularly, that it was
grown to a common Proverb, if there were any Cause of any difficulty, they
would use to say to one another, Come, we will be so fair with you, as to try
it by a London -Jury. So far was it then from being thought, that in the City
of London, Justice should be corrupted, that the Ordinary Juries of London were
thought the best Judges, and most impartial of any in the Kingdom. I appeal to
all the Practicers of those times that hear me, if what I say be not true.

But when once they had begun to pick and cull the Men that should be returned
for a Purpose, and got this Factious Fellow out of one corner, and that
pragmatical, prick-ear'd, snivelling, whining Rascal, out of another corner, to
prop up the Cause, and serve a Turn; then truly Peoples Causes were Tried
according to the demureness of the Looks on the one side or the other, not the
Justice of the Cause.

Gentlemen, I take my self bound to tell you of these things, and I wish I had
no reason for it; and especially in this Case I should not do it, it being a
private Action between Man and Man, were it not for the Ingredients that are in
the Case, and that any Man that has any sense may perceive.

Now then for this Case before you, Gentlemen, I desire if possible to be
satisfied in one thing or two: My Lord Mayor of London, it is true, is not, nor
no Person whatsoever, be he of never so great Quality, is exempt from the Law:
If he owe any man any thing, he is bound to answer it to him, as much as any
the meanest Citizen of London, or poorest Subject the King has: But is he to be
arrested just at such a time, because he is Chief Governor of the City, and
the Action will sound the greater? And the Court of Aldermen, are they to be
arrested, because they are his Ministers, and necessary subservient Assistants
to him in his Government, in such a time as this was, when the Government both
in the City and elsewhere, was surrounded with Difficulties, and in great
danger on all sides? What occasion was there for such haste and speed in this
Action to be done just then? Would Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois have starved, if
this Action had been suspended for a while? Sir William Pritchard would have
been as answerable to this, or any man's Action, when the year of his Office
had been out: But it carries Vengeance and Malice in the very face of it; it
speaks, that therefore they would do it, because he was then Lord Mayor, the
chief Person in the City for the time; and thereby they should affront the
Government, in Arresting and Imprisoning the King's Lieutenant, in one of the
highest Places both of Trust and Honor. And this would be sure to make a great
noise, and the Triumph of the Action would make their Party then to be
uppermost, having got the chief Governor of the City in their own Clutches.

Nay, and because they would be sure their Malice and Revenge should take
place, they take the very Scoundrels of the Party to be employed in this great
Work. For before that time, the Coroner (as he tells you himself) used to make
his Warrants to the Officers, that usually are versed in that Business; but
here he must have the Direction of the Attorney, and who is that but
Goodenough, a Man we have all heard enough of; and then Burley and Keeling must
be employed; and by whose Advice, but by the Goodenough's and Nelthorp's? And
all these Rascals, who now stand attainted of Treason, must be fetched in to
consult about a sit Man to make an Arrest. And there, they pitch upon this Man
Keeling for one, who was one of the principal Conspirators in that damnable,
hellish Plot against the King's Life, and that of his Royal Brother; but by the
Blessing and Providence of Almighty God, was made use of as a great Instrument
of preserving those precious Lives, and with them our Government and Religion,
and all that is dear to us, which by that Conspiracy was undermined; and I wish
we had not Reason to say, and think the Conspiracy still to be going on. But I
hope in God, the Government, as established both in Church and State, will
always be able to prevail, maugre all Designs, and those that are engaged in
them for its Destruction.

Now Keeling tells you he scrupled the Employment; No, said he, I desired not
to have my Name put in, because I was never concerned in any such thing before,
and my Business was of another sort. But then, Mr. Goodenough (and Mr. Brom
the Coroner no doubt had a Hand in it, though now he has a very treacherous
Memory, and has forgot all that was done) comes and tells him, you must concern
your self, and do this thing; for you have a Trade with the Party, and it will
be ill taken if you do not do it. And being asked whom he meant by the Party?
He tells you, the discontented Party, and he explains their discontent to be
such, that they would have killed the King and the Duke. Now how far he was
engaged with that Party is pretty well known; and therefore, if he boggled at
such a thing as this, which that Party it seems was engaged in, they would
suspect him; and so, for the Party's sake he was drawn in.

But then, when this thing is done; 'Pray', Gentlemen, do but consider what the
Consequences might have been, and which, perhaps (nay upon what has happened to
be discovered, since doubtless) they did design in it. But God be thanked those
Consequences were prevented, and they themselves have Cause to be thankful to
God Almighty for it. For here all the Magistrates of the City, that had any
Care for the good Government of it, were to be taken up; and then, here was a
Body without a Head, a Town full of Faction without any Government; and if the
heady Rabble had been once up, without those that had Authority to restrain
them, where then had been your Liberties or Properties, Gentlemen, or any
Man's; Nay, theirs that were engaged in this Design, if they had any, for those
were things much talked of by them? In what danger had you, and all you had,
for Life, Estate, Relations, and every thing been? But it pleased God in his
infinite Mercy to shower down upon us, and upon this City and the Government in
a mighty Preservation, putting it into the Hearts of some in Power, to bring
the City -Militia some of them together, and prevent this Mischief; or else,
God knows, this whole City might have been by this time once more in Ashes, and
most of the King's Subjects wallowing in their own and one another's Blood. And
their Party too would have felt the sad Effects of it, no doubt, as well as
others. So that the Consequence of it was to destroy the Government, and that
appears by the Parties being engaged in it; it could not be to gain a Right, to
make this Hubbub, and ado to arrest the Magistrates of the City; and then take
Advantage for some other wicked Purpose.

Another Point of Circumstance, that is considerable in this Case is, the
particular Persons that were to be sued. The Mandamus, that was directed to the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen; and there is a Return made, not by this, or that, or
the other Man, but in the Name of them all, the whole Court. How comes it then
to pass, that my Lord Mayor, Sir Henry Tulse, and those other Gentlemen, must
be sued and arrested; but I warrant you Mr. Cornish, or his Party, were not to
be meddled with: No, he had so much Zeal for Justice, and to do the Defendant
Right, that if he should have been called upon to appear, he would not have
stood out an Arrest; so just a Man he is, and such a Lover of Right without all
doubt; but he was in no danger I dare say, they loved one another too well to
sue one another. That I say, Gentlemen, is another Circumstance, that carries
Malice in it. For I must tell you, these things cannot be smothered, they are
as apparent as the Light: And though it falls to my turn in this Cause, to enmind
you of them; yet, they are as well known to you all, as the Passages in your
own Families.

No, Gentlemen, there was not a Pursuit of Right in the Case; it was a designed
Piece of Villainy, on Purpose to affront the Government; nay, to destroy it,
and set us all together by the Ears. And if he were ten thousand times Mr.
Papillon, I would and must tell him so; and if it were not for some such
devilish End and Purpose, he would never have been so greedy of an Office, he
had before declined and fined for; and which he was only called to by a
turbulent, seditious, factious Party, that had further aims in it. Otherwise, I
know Mr. Papillon's Humor so well, that I am confident, he would much rather
have been contented to sit in his Counting House, than in Guild Hall in a
scarlet Gown. Alack a day, I know Mr. Papillon knows how to spend his time to
better Advantage to himself.

Ay, but say the Council for the Defendant, we did go on very tenderly and
civilly, and respectfully; for there met at Mr. Cornish's House, who I pray?
Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Dubois, and Goodenough, the prime Attorney in this Cause:
And there, forsooth, they tell Goodenough, be sure you do nothing, but what is
exactly according to Law; and be sure, you carry it very civilly and
respectfully to my Lord Mayor, good Mr. Goodenough. Alack-a-day, how wonderful
pious, and considerate these People are! If Mr. Cornish had gone to my Lord
Mayor, as it was his Duty to do, being then an Alderman, (we know it full well)
and said to my Lord Mayor, there were such Persons at my House talking of such
a matter, and I come to advertize you of it, and desire you would consider of
it, he had shown his Piety and his Zeal, and Love for Justice, much more in
that than in admitting such Cabals in his House. But we know very well, as well
as if we were in them, that they must go Hand in Hand in all these seditions
and factious Businesses.

It is plain, Gentlemen, what the Design was from the Beginning to the End,
nothing but to cause a Tumult and Confusion in the City, in Order to put that
damned hellish Conspiracy for the destruction of the King and his Brother, and
every Man that was honest and loyal in Execution. This is certainly known to
you all; and that there should be such a Parcel of People untowardly linked
together in this matter, not one man of which that they can pretend to be in
anywise a Well-wisher to the Government, or to any that have any share in it:
No, they are all Persons that are obnoxious to the Government that had any hand
in it; but none of them Church of -England-men, or Friends to her Established
Worship; notorious Dissenters, or profligate Atheistical Villains that herd
together.

This, Gentlemen, is plain English, and necessary to be used upon all these
Occasions: So that it remains now upon your Consciences, whether upon all these
Circumstances that have been mentioned, you think the bare obtaining of a Right
in a Legal Course, or some worse thing was designed.

We all know Mr. Papillon to be a wealthy Man, an able Merchant; one that had
rather have minded his Affairs abroad, or at the Exchange, than the expensive,
troublesome Office of Sheriff of London; but, that something was to be done to
wreak a damned malice and Revenge upon the Government. And sure, he must think,
as his Party it seems did, that they would not be sufficient to subvert the
Government, unless he could get into that Office.

This I tell him openly, and let him or his Party make their Remarks upon it as
they please. But you are to Judge whether these things be a sufficient Evidence
of malice, to support the Plaintiffs Action.

There was questionless a Devilish Malice fixed in his Heart and Mind, and he
wanted an opportunity to effect it; and he thought it for his own security to
be best to take this Course, and nothing else was in it. For abundance of
People have a Mind to do mischief, but want opportunity and safe ways to do it
in: And, Oh they rejoice, if they hit upon a project, that shall carry a
specious pretense and color of Law, for then they think they are safe enough.

As in Case, I have a Mind to do any particular Man an injury in his reputation
and business; the business must not be done downright, by going to every Body,
and saying, such an one is Poor, or a Beggar, and do not trust him; but I must
cunningly and slily insinuate it, I am sorry for such a Man, I believe he is an
honest Man, but however he owes Money; and under this sort of Sniveling,
Canting, Whining, sly rate, do any Man an injury whatsoever: and yet forsooth
he shall have no advantage against me for it: I shall strike a Dart into the
very Heart of that Man's Credit, and yet he have no Remedy.

So if I have a Mind to talk against the Government, I will not do it aloud,
and speak what I mean openly; but I will Whine, and Snivel, and Cant, and make
People believe I have dreadful Apprehensions of what is designing, and yet not
bring my self in any danger; for I will keep within bounds all the while,
though I do more mischief than if I dealt fairly and above-board. Alack-a day
(as Mr. Pilkington said) I am for the Preservation of the Liberty and
Properties of the Subject, and I am for the Law; but I find the City is
strangely run down in their Rights and Privileges, and there are very Arbitrary
Proceedings. And I am a Citizen, and have taken my Oath to preserve the
Privileges of the City, and I will rather submit to the inconvenience of a
troublesome Office, than let all run thus: and immediately he sets himself
Cock-a-hoop, as if there were no one that took care of the City besides
himself, and he were such a Patriot that there were none like him: And he and
Mr. Bethel and Mr. Cornish forsooth, are the only Men of the times, the only
good Men; Men that are for the Liberties and Properties of the Subject, and the
Rights of the City: Whereas these are the only Men that have made an Invasion
upon them, and done what they could to destroy them; and God knows, we might
all of us have enjoyed very quietly every Man his own, if these contesting
Rioters, and busy Factious Fellows had not come among us. Every Honest Man, I
tell you, knows this to be true.

Gentlemen, as to the business concerning the damages, that if you find for the
Plaintiff, is left to your Judgments to consider of, and give what you shall
think fit, upon such an Occasion. It is very true, it is not so easy a matter
to ascertain particular damages in such a Case; nor is it in an ordinary way,
so easy to prove, that because Sir William Pritchard was in Prison but five or
six hours there, he could suffer so much damage as comes to ten thousand
pounds. As in the Case of a Person of great Quality and Honor, it is not easy
to prove his particular damage; nor in the Case of any of you, that are
wealthy, able, sufficient Citizens, to say you are a Bankrupt, when we all know
it is impossible to be true, and so no particular damage does ensue, that can
be proved; yet however, if the thing for which the Action is brought were
designed with Malice, though the ill design be not effected, that is no thanks
to the Party, nor is to weigh with you, but the malicious design must govern
you.

Now, here I have taken notice to you, that the Malice of this design here, was
not against Sir William Pritchard as such a particular Man, but against my Lord
Mayor, that this Clan that met at Russell's was an overflowing of that Gall or
Malice that was in his Heart.

If Mr. Papillon had brought an Action upon a Bond only, certainly it had been
nothing but what he might very well do; or if he had pretended to sue for a bad
Debt, that if he had staid would have been lost, it had been something: But you
see what it was, and it is as apparent why it was, in that Mr. Goodenough said
to Keeling, threatening him with the displeasure of the Party, if he did not do
it; and Mr. Goodenough and Mr. Brom were such Strangers to one another, that
he must threaten Brom to complain of him, if he did not execute his Writs
presently. Do they think all Mankind are so dull or blind, as not to see
through such thin Artificial stuff as this?

Gentlemen, this is the matter, The Government is a thing that is infinitely
concerned in the Case, that makes it so popular a Cause: The Government of the
City, the Honor of your Chief Magistrate, and indeed the Honor of the King,
whose Substitute he was, is concerned, and that puts a weight upon your Inquiry
into the damages of this Case. You are to consider you give damages to the
Plaintiff, not as Sir William Pritchard, but as Lord Mayor: And your severity
in this Case, will deter all People from entering into Clans and Cabals to make
disturbances, and affront the Government.

It is a thousand times better to keep within their own bounds, mind their
Callings and Employments, and concern themselves with their own Affairs, and
leave the administration of the Public to them to whom it belongs, and is
entrusted with. And according as we say in the Law, Maxim; so say I to Mr.
Papillon and all the Party, Ad Consilium ne accedas anicquam voceris. And do
not be scared with imaginary dangers, and groundless Jealousies, into
tumultuous and disorderly Courses. You had much better keep in your
Counting House, I tell you again, and mind your Merchandice. Nay, and I do not
doubt but you would much rather have done so, if there had not been some
further fetch in it. It was not, I dare say, out of a frank, generous humor to
oblige the City, that Mr. Papillon would have spent his time and money in the
Office of Sheriff; no, I know he had better ways to employ both.

It was not the Generous mind of Mr. Bethel, that called him on to be Sheriff
of London, to entitle him to spend his money; but on purpose to be one of the
first that should turn all things upside down in the City, and disturb the
Government: And they that succeeded him, carried on the Project, and they that
would have been in, but could not, had a mind no doubt to follow so Worshipful
an Example as he laid before them.


Then the Jury withdrew to consider of their Verdict, and after half an hours
stay, returned, and found for the Plaintiff, and assessed Damages to Ten
Thousand Pounds, and Costs to four Marks.

L. C. J. Gentlemen, You seem to be Persons that have some Sense upon you, and
consideration for the Government, and I think have given a good Verdict, and
are to be greatly commended for it.


FINIS.
The Matters of Fact in ELECTION of SHERIFFS, in the Year, 1682. Faithfully
reported, and the Miscarriages of Sir JOHN MOORE, then LORD MAYOR, and some
other Persons in this Matter, briefly declared.
THE open and bold Invasion made upon the Liberties and Franchises of the City,
and that attended with a Contempt of the Laws of the Land, as well as the
ancient Customs and Usages of the Corporation, does not only serve to justify
our complaining of the Rape committed upon the Rights and Privileges of the
Freemen of London; but invites us to detect and lay open the unreasonable, as
well as illegal ways and methods, that have been taken for the overthrow of
whatsoever we enjoy, either by Law, Prescription, or Charter. For as the
electing of Sheriffs is granted by Charters, and confirmed by diverse Laws to
the Citizens of London; so the conducting the Election, and declaring upon whom
the choice through the majority of Votes does fall, has time out of mind
appertained unto, and been claimed by the Sheriffs. And though the Common Hall be
not properly a Court, save for the punishing my Lord Mayor and Aldermen, when
they transgress against the Duties of their Places, and the Trusts reposed in
them; yet not only the Right of electing Sheriffs is in that Assembly and
Convention; but the Power of appointing the manner in which they will have the
Election managed, does entirely reside in the Members, who constitute that
great Convocation: Yea, so far is my Lord Mayor from having, either a Negative
upon the Hall, or a Right to prescribe unto the Citizens whom they shall choose,
that he has not so much as Power and Authority to take the Suffrages of the
Electors, or to adjourn or dissolve the Hall, without the leave and consent of
the greater Number of the Freemen, then and there present. And as all this
has been declared, and irrefragably demonstrated in several Papers already
published; so it has been affirmed under the Hands of as good Lawyers as are
in England; and particularly of those Gentleman whom the City have thought
worthy to be entrusted in the defending their Charter against the Quo Warranto,
put in for the seizure of it.

But in defiance of all that has been said, such is the easiness of my Lord
Mayor (to say no worse) that he has suffered himself to be prevailed upon to
despise Law, violate Charters, and act in direct opposition to the Duty of his
Place; and all this, for the gratifying of those, who have not only commenced a
Suit for the subversion of the Corporation; but openly professed, that they
seek the Destruction of its best and most honorable Members. And as the
recounting the chief Heads of the matter of Fact is indispensably necessary for
the Information of the present, as well as future Ages; so the bare rehearsal
of those things, will fill the World with Amazement, as well as proclaim the
Guilt of some Persons, both to this and following Generations.

And that which offers it self first to our notice, is the Accession of some
Ministers to my Lord Mayor, to procure him to drink to Mr. North, which his
Lordship without the least Consideration of that Gentleman's fitness for the
Place, or any attendance to the Design in subserviency whereunto that motion
was made unto him; First, tamely complied with, and afterward performed,
notwithstanding the consequences which would thereupon ensue, were faithfully
represented unto him.

The next step which his Lordship took in Pursuance of the like Advice, was to
run counter, not only to ancient usage, but to an Act of Common Council 7 Car.
1. in sending for Mr. North and making him seal a Bond to hold Sheriff for the
Year ensuing, before he was so much as named or proposed to the Common Hall,
that was not till Midsummer-day, which was some weeks after my Lord Mayor had
caused him under the for feiture of 1000 l. to undertake to serve.

The third Advance made by Sir John Moore against the Duty of his Place, and
the Customs of the Corporation, was his altering the Form of the Precepts for
the summoning the Common Hall against the 24th. of June. And it is remarkable,
that whereas not only by the Charters, the Citizens are to meet to choose
annually from among themselves Sheriffs; but that all former Precepts run in a
strain, importing their being to assemble to elect Sheriffs; the present Mayor
did by an unpresidented and arbitrary Power, summon them to convene, to confirm
one Sheriff whom he had drank unto, and to choose another.

Nor could his Lordship stop his Irregularities here; but both after a
Declaration, upon whom the Election had fallen through the majority of Hands,
and after the Poll which had been demanded, and wherein himself had acquiesced,
was peaceably and fairly carrying on, he came attended with a Company of Men,
whereof many were not Freemen, diverse were armed with Swords, and several were
known Papists; and not only interrupted the Poll, but contrary to Law and
Right, assumed to himself a Power of adjourning the Hall.

And having thus far embarked in sinistrous and unjustifiable ways, his next
Proceeding was partly by himself; and partly by Citizens, whom he countenanced
to misinform his Majesty, and contrary both to Truth and his own Knowledge, to
abuse the King, in causing him to believe, that diverse peaceable Persons had
been guilty of a Riot; upon which misreport, as the two present Sheriffs were
committed to the Tower; so, the principal blame of it must be imputed to his
Lordship. And as it is the first instance on the File of History, of Persons
being indicted of a Riot, when lawfully assembled together, and quietly
proceeding in that which they met about: So, I question whether our Law Books
furnish one Example of the Council-boards committing two Officers, whose Place
and Duty it was to manage the Poll, and govern the Assembly, not only without
the hearing of any to speak in their behalf; but in a Case, the Cognizance
whereof belongs to the Courts of Common Law.

But his Lordship's Illegalities hitherto had been both ascribed to the
ascendancy which some had gotten over him, and had been easily pardoned, had
they terminated here, but it seems he was too far engaged to retreat; and
therefore, his next Step was to take upon him, contrary to Sense and common
Reason, as well as Law, to adjourn the Common Hall, July 5th. not only by a
Gentleman, who being no Freeman, could not be substituted his Lordship's
Deputy, or locum tenens; but by Words signifying only a desire that they would
adjourn, which did not import the adjourning of them; but left it to
themselves, whether they would do so, yea, or not. And accordingly the Hall,
without whose Consent they cannot be adjourned nor dissolved by any, till they
have finished the business about which they are assembled, not only refused to
be adjourned, but required the Sheriffs to go on with the Poll. Which as it was
managed with all Prudence, and not shut up till after more than usual and due
Proclamation; yet his Lordship would not rest satisfied with what was then done
(merely, as is to be supposed, because the Election fell upon Mr. Papillon and
Mr. Dubois) and therefore obtained an Order from the King for a new Hall. For
missing what he had designed, in getting the present Sheriffs turned out by a
Convention, intended to have been made up of one Party of Men (which would have
been called a Common Hall) had not other Citizens upon smelling the Project
assembled without Warning, he had no other Retreat left; but to apply to his
Majesty for an Order to begin again. And though we have nothing to say concerning
his Majesty's Order, save that the printing it for C. R. by which, Persons upon
the first view are apt to think they meant Charles Rex, did not express that
Veneration for Majesty as is fit; yet, we must take the liberty to charge my
Lord Mayor, That after he had so often interrupted the Election, and broken in
upon the freedom of the City's choice, he did at last labor, and as much as in
him lay, compass the dissolving and cancelling of an Election that had been
duly made.

To this we may add his Lordship's refusing to hear diverse Citizens speak, when
the Hall first assembled on Friday morning, and he was upon the Hustings, though
it be his Duty to hear every man that has any thing to offer, and it be their
Right and Privilege to say whatsoever they will, provided it be agreeable to
the matter before them, and within the bounds and compass of Law.

Nor can there be a greater Evidence of the unreasonableness both of the
Faction whom his Lordship has espoused in this whole matter, and of his
Indiscretion in heading such a violent sort of men, than their refusing to
suffer an Act of Parliament to be read, though often proposed so to be; and this,
after the whole Hall had hearkened to the reading of His Majesty's Order, with
the greatest Respect, and profoundest Silence imaginable.

And in the next place, how can my Lord Mayor answer either to God or his own
Conscience, in keeping so many thousands together from nine in the morning,
till past six in the evening, when diverse contracted sickness, and some lost
their lives, by reason of the excessive heat, without coming to a resolve in
himself, whether he would acquiesce in the Election that was declared on
Wednesday before, or whether he would insist either upon a new Poll, or plead
his having chosen one Sheriff by drinking to him, and that all which he would
allow the Commons, was to elect another.

However, as we may understand the capacity of the man, by his having his Gown
many times on, to come down upon the Hustings, and pretend to adjourn the Hall,
and as often off, as willing to rest contented in the choice of Mr. Papillon,
and Mr. Dubois, which the Sheriffs had declared two days before, with all the
wonted solemnity; so his sending for Sir G. Jeffreys, and Mr. Saunders, known
Enemies to the City Rights, and professedly for the overthrow of the Charter,
to advise him, and his submitting to their Opinions, which they durst not
subscribe, against the Judgment, as well as the irrefragable Reasons of the
Recorder, Mr. Pollixfen, and Mr. Williams, who signified their readiness to put
their hands to what they said, are things which he will not be able to account
for, either before a Parliament, or at the Bars in Westminster Hall.

And what will the world think of his taking his last resolution from a Letter
which he received from a Minister of State, seeing as it is an high offense
against the Statute of Westminster, 3 Ed. 1. to interpose in, or disturb the
Election of any Officers; so it is a high offense against the trust reposed in
him, and the integrity of a Lord Mayor of London, to take any other measures,
than what are agreeable to the safety and welfare of the City.

And though we want a name whereby to call his Lordship's retracting his word,
after he had consented to the having the Poll go on anew, for two to be chosen
out of the Four who had been named; yet we question not but to see a Judicature
in England, that will both know by what Title to style it, and to call him to
an account for renouncing all Faith, as well as Justice. For it is observable,
that he had not only agreed on Friday night, to have the Poll proceed for the
Election of Two out of Four, but he renewed his agreement as to that
particular, to diverse worthy Citizens, on Saturday morning. But what shall be
said of a man who upon the coming of Sir L. J. receded from his Word, as well
as from Law and City-Custom. Yea, it is no small aggravation of his Crime, that
he reassumed the pretense of his having chosen one Sheriff by virtue of his
Prerogative, after he had heard the Secretary affirm, that they must take that
course, though rueret Coelum, all things should run into confusion And should
his Lordship's memory fail him, either as to the Polls being demanded for all
Four, or as to his granting it, there are several Persons who are able to
remember it, and whose words are beyond all suspicion of falsehood.

The next thing whereof we may justly accuse my Lord Mayor, is his usurping the
managing of the Poll, not only against Law and Usage, but when the Common Hall
had devolved it upon, and lodged it in the Sheriffs. For such was the modesty
of those worthy Gentlemen, that they would not undertake it, tho Custom would
have justified them in doing so, till they had consulted the Hall, and been
empowered by them, as those in whom the Authority does reside over all Affairs
which come before them. Here is an Arbitrary Power with a witness, not only to
claim what his Ancestors never did, and which constant usage directly gainsays,
but to do it in opposition to the Vote of three parts in Four of the Hall, who
entrusted the Sheriffs with the taking the Suffrages, and declaring the
Election.

And as he who engages once in illegal courses, knows not where he shall stop,
so his Lordship having advanced thus far without fear in himself, or Law to
countenance him, proceeded farther in taking the boldness to declare Mr. N.
Sheriff, not only without his being confirmed, but when 2414. Citizens had
expressly declared and polled against his Confirmation.

Nay, as if this had not been the height of Extravagancy, his Lordship pretends
to declare Mr. Box Sheriff, tho he had not 1400 Hands; whereas Mr. Papillon,
and Mr. Dubois had upwards of 2400 in the Sheriffs Books, besides some hundreds
that polled for them in those that were styled his Lordships. So that he has
robbed the Freemen of the Right of choosing both the Sheriffs; and instead of
proposing only one to them, whom they may confirm or not, as they see good, he
has by an arbitrary, and illegal power, assumed unto himself the imposing two
upon them, against their Will and Consent.

It were needless to recount all my Lord Mayor's Miscarriages in this Affair;
such as not only his denying diverse worthy Citizens who were for Mr. Papillon
and Mr. Dubois, access unto him, when his house was free and open to those of
the contrary party; but the suffering several of the best quality to be
affronted and assaulted, if not in his very presence, at least within his
gates. And as if it had not been contrary to the duty of his Office as well as
the Wisdom of a Man, to give up himself implicitly to the Government and
Conduct of Sir L. J. he not only permitted that Person to be present, at his
discourse with several Freemen, that came to him about the Privileges and
Franchises of the City; but he connived at and allowed that Minister, in
checking and rebuking some Gentlemen, who had the courage in his hearing, to
claim their Rights.

Surely, as his Lordship has taken no notice of what befell Sir Samuel
Sterling, and Sir Edward Bromfield, for Offenses not near so heinous as those
he is guilty of, so he never read of one Sir Nicholas Brember Lord Mayor of
London, that was condemned to be hanged in Richard Knighten.
the 2d's time, and with much ado upon the King's intercession, had the favor
to be beheaded; and this for neglecting the duty of his Place, and acting
conformably to the dictates of Court Ministers, particularly for undertaking at
the pleasure of the King, to be Mayor without the consent, and against the will
of the Citizens. And as this may instruct Sir John Moore what he may in due
time expect; seeing the imposing such Officers as Sheriffs upon the City, not
only without the concurrence, but against the Declaration of the Freemen, is a
much greater Crime than the serving Mayor at the Command of the King, without
their consent; so it may forewarn Mr. North and Mr. Box what is likely to
befall them, if they take upon them the Office of Sheriffs against the Will of
the Citizens. For if King Richard's requiring Sir Nicholas Brember to hold
Mayor without being duly Elected, could not save his Head from the Block, much
less can Sir John Moore calling these Gentlemen forth to the Office of
Sheriffs, protect them from the Punishment to which by the Law they shall be
found liable for so doing. And as they will be bold Men that will undertake the
Office of Sheriffs upon the bare Authority of my Lord Mayor's word; so I know
not how the present Sheriffs can resign the Gaols, etc. unto such persons who
pretend to the Office of Sheriffs by no better Right.

Nay, I will be bold to say, That should my Lord Mayor and the Court of
Aldermen have the confidence to swear Mr. North and Mr. Box, on Michaelmas Eve,
that the Common Hall may Vote them out, and choose others in their Room on
Michaelmas-day.

But it is pleasant to observe how this pretended Election of North and Box for
Sheriffs, against the ensuing Year, works already with the Papists and our
Masquerade Protestants: for they not only begin to talk of blasting the belief
of the Popish Plot, but of Hanging Protestants by Wholesale. And whereas Mr.
Duncomb was contented a few days ago, with the Lives of 9 or 10; nothing less
will now serve them, than the destroying of Scores, if not Hundreds, and this
within the compass of London and Middlesex.

However, this we have to rely upon, that whereas Mr. North had only 107 hands,
and Mr. Box 1353 in all the Books, Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois had upwards of
2700 Hands a piece, reckoning in my Lord Mayor's Books with those of the
Sheriffs, and were Proclaimed to be duly Elected by the proper Officers.

And as we cannot think that the King will connive at so unjust a thing, and
which so directly subverts all the Laws, by which he has sworn to Govern; so
we are assured that the Judges in his Majesty's Courts, will esteem no
punishments severe enough, as well for them that shall act as Sheriffs by no
better Warrant, as for him that has taken upon him to declare them for such,
against all Law, as well as President.

And as my Lord Mayor may be already sensible, how his Fellow-Citizens resent
his late illegal carriage and behavior toward them, by the many Actions
entered against him, to which they have demanded appearance, so he will find,
that all that is hitherto done in order to right themselves, and chastise his
usurpation upon their Franchises, is but like a few drops before a strom, in
comparison of what he must afterward look for.

Nor must Sir J. E. and Sir W. P. etc. think to escape being called to an
account, not only for abetting the Mayor in all these Invasions upon the
Privileges of the City, but for exciting him unto, and hurrying him upon them.
And as it is evident what esteem they have of his Lordship, by using him as a
Tool to do such unjustifiable and enormous things; which, were they themselves
in the Chair, they would neither have the boldness nor indiscretion to attempt;
so their thus managing a Person whom they style their Friend, as well as one to
whom they are bound by their Oaths to give safe and good Advice, renders them
Offenders against Truth, Justice, and the Rules of Friendship, as well as
against the Rights of the Corporation, and their own Oath.

And as for other Officers, they ought to reckon themselves accountable, as for
other misdemeanors in this Affair, so for disobeying their Masters in refusing
to pronounce and proclaim what the Common Hall, whose servants they are,
required and commanded them to do. And should the Commons of London quietly
digest, and overlook the disobedience and obstinacy of these Fellows whom they
have raised and made, I will say that they have not only forgotten their
Authority, but that they deserve to be ridden and trampled upon by their
meanest Officers.

P. S. The after Proceedings of making Sir Pet. Rich Sheriff, with the method
used in Swaring him, and Sir D. North, into that Office; the Hustings in
Guild Hall being guarded by a Company of the City Trained Bands under the
Command of Lieutenant-Collonel Quiney. This, and much more of that Days
Transactions is too notorious to be forgotten, or that it needs at large to be
again related. Yet the Reader may remember from this illegal Election issued
the Death of those excellent Persons, the Lord Russel, Col. Sidney, etc. and
the designed Ruin of that worthy Citizen Tho. Papillon, Esquire

FINIS.

