Loyalty and Fidelity, Rejected and Opressed.

Or the CASE of George Everett SHIPWRIGHT, Truly Stated; Most humbly Offered to
the Commons of ENGLAND, Assembled in PARLIAMENT Wherein is Briefly set Forth,
His Zealous endeavors for Promoting the Service of the Public with the
Obstructions and Illegal proceedings of some Persons employed in the
Administration of Public Affairs. And the true Reason of those False
Aspersions and Scandalous Reflections, Laid on him by, The Euemy's of the
GOVERNMENT.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. School/9.

TO THE HONORABLE the Knights, CITIZENS AND BURGESSES, Assembled in
Parliament, The Case of George Everett, Shipwright, Truly Stated, and most
Humbly offered, to the Consideration of this August and Honorable Assembly.
Most worthy Senators.
HAVING made Observations of great abuses and Enormities, committed in his
Majesty's Navall-yards; I did in March 1692/3. make proposalls to the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, for saving 100000. Pounds Per Annum in building
and repairing the Royal Navy; with a proposed Method to raise Money to carry
on that Service; which might have been Effected by procureing 3286. Pound Per
Mensem Which said Proposal appearing to be both Practicable and profitable to
his Majesty, and the Kingdom, was then approved of by the Right Honorable the
Earl of Orford, and Several Eminent members of this honorable House, and was
Certified so to be, under the Hands of the Lord Berkley, Sir, Ralph Delavall,
the Earl of Danby; the Lord Mayor of London, and Several other preceding and
Succeding Mayors and Aldermen of the said City, and Several other Eminent
Persons, together with the Master, Wardens and Assistants, of the Company of
Shipwrights of London, Copies thereof were laid before their Lordships and
aft^r often attendance being admitted a hearing at their Board the 8 day of
Fabruary 1694 (the Commissioners of the Navy then present) the said Proposal
was rejected; which being presented to his Majesty, in Council, the 1 st. of
March, his Majesty did then refer the same to the aforesaid Lords of the
Admiralty, which being laid before them the 26 of the said Month, their
Lordships (after often attendance) did on the 24 th. of April, acquaint me that
they had referred the same to the Commissioners of the Navy. The Proposer
attending their Honors, on the Twenty-seventh of April did lay before them a
Copy of the said Certificates with Several Heads in order to demonstrate his
said proposal, but finding by their dilatory proceedings, that they were not
Enclinable to Espouse the same; did on the 14 of May, offer to their Honors by
many Witnesses, to prove that by the Idle and Extravagant Practices; Committed
in the said Yards 100000. Poun Per Annum, was wasted and Destroyed: but the
said Commissioners instead of taking Notice thereof; did defer me from time to
time* But with much difficulty they appointed to hear me the 23 of June, when
apearing with 12 Witnesses: viz. Master Shipwrights, who were ready to Testify
what was alleged, there was but two of them with my self admitted, and heard,
and that in a clamarousmanner Their Honors threatening and Browbeating them,
the whole time which was near, three Hours, and then by degrees departed out of
the Room, Leaving us there without order of withdrawing or further attending.
And on the 27 th. of June their Honors did make a Large report to the Lords of
the Admiralty full of Reflections, prevarications, and Manifest Falsehoods;
wherein they set forth that they have not Heard of any of the said
Miscarriages. After which I attending the Lords of the Admiralty, did lay
before them several Schemes in order to Confirm and demonstrate the said
proposals. and did Produce many Witnesses to provetheforesaid Enormities and
abuses, but was often deferred and disappointed, and in July 94. I was twice
advised by Mr. Southern the then Secretary, of the Admiralty, that their
Lordships would make a Report to the Council Board, the 12 th. of the said
Month, which I signified to her late Majesty and many Lords of the Council who
did encourage the same, yet no Report was made thereof until the 29 th. of
January Following, whereby I incurred their Lordships displeasure as the
Author, of that disapointment; and that between the appointed and real time of
delivering the said Report, I often Prayed the Lords of the Admiralty to grant
me a Copy of the Navy-boards Report, which I could not obtain, but at Length
was admitted to hear part of the same read? which I observed to be as before
Represented; I gave their Lordships an answer there eunto in Writing, and did
also move their Lordships, to hear Evidence to prove my allegations, in order
to refute the said Report, and discover the said Enormitys committed in the
said Yards, and after several delays and Disapointments, my request, upon the
motion of Collonell Austin deceased, was allowed, and a time appointed to hear
them; viz. the 30 th. of October, 1694. Pursuant whereunto I did attend with
Several Articles, containing great abuses, and Enormities Committed in the said
Yards, with 12 Persons, most of them Master-shipwrights, to prove the same, and
being called in about 11 of the Clock, Capt. Priestman being only present with
the Secretary, did tell me that there was no Board, and he Believed that the
rest of the Members had forgot my Business, and did then Direct me to attend
with the Witnesses at 4 in the Afternoon; in answer to which I presented his
Lordship with Several depositions ready drawn, Praying his Lordship to consider
the Charge and Trouble I had been at in Getting so many men together, most
humbly Praying that they might then be examined, and their Affidavits taken;
which his Lordship refused. But attending according to order the said Witnesses
being Examined, did testify my Allegations, and did offer to confirm the same
upon Oath, but were not admitted; their Lordships then ordering Mr. Burchett
one of their Clarks to Examine them over again in another Room, which he did in
a Threatening manner; not Suffering them to Subscribe their Names thereunto:
and then apearing again before their Lordships, they directed me to get them
Sworn before a Justice, of the Peace, and bring the Depositions to them.
Pursuant thereunto on the 27 th. of November, I did return them the Depositions
of 17 men (true Copies thereof being ready to be Produced) wherein was proved
under 150. Heads, many great abuses and Enormitys Committed in his Majestys
Yards; and by reason the Act for Stamped Paper was not then well understood, I
was at the Charge and trouble to have them Thrice Sworn, which cost me above
10 Pound and that on the 29 th. of January aforesaid, which was two Months
after, a Report was made thereof to his Majesty, wherein their Lordships set
forth, that they had heard the Proposer and Several Persons produced by him,
and had the advice and report of the Navy-Board; but did not think fit to alter
the Oeconomie of the Navy; but did agree with the proposer for The paying the
Workmen with ready Money, being the Basis of my Proposal, might Hapily been
Effected, with Procuring as Proposed 3285. Pounds Per Mensem which their
Lordships did report, would Certainly give dispatch to the Service and Save the
King's Treasure which is a full Demonstration of the Certainty thereof, and of
their Lordshpis Omission in not putting the same in Execution.
Paying the Workmen of the Yards with ready Money, wishing that the State of
affairs would admit thereof; which would Certainly give Dispatch to his
Majesty's Service, and Save his Treasure, though not near so great a Sum, as the
Proposer Imagined. All which his Majesty on the 31. of January, was Pleased
further to refer to the Lords of his most Honorable Privy Council, appointed
a Committee of Trade and Plantations; before whom, on the 1 of April, the
report of the Navy-Board, was proved to be False and Prejudicial to his
Majestys Service; and that Several other Illegal Practcies were so fully
proved before their Lordships, against Several Officers belonging to the said
Yards then present, that the President of the Council did declare, that Plain
matter of Fact was fully proved against them; And that most Honorable Board
did also declare that it was high time to make a Reformation in his Majestys
Yards, and that they would appoint a time to Consider of the means. But the
proposer Considering that Nothing could conduce so much to an Effectual cure as
the laying the Wound more open, did on the 6 th. of April lay before their
Lordships Several aditionall Articles relating thereunto, which their Lordships
did gratefully receive; giveing the proposer Encouragement beyond Expectation;
but on the discovery of the Plot (as I remember) their Lordships time then not
permitting to Examine the same, that matter was referred to the Lords of the
Admiralty, where the said abuses were so fully and plainly proved, that one of
their Lordships did Solemnly protest that things were come to such a pass, that
he did Believe it was Impossible for an Honest man to be amongst them. And
after I had proved what I had offered, (the whole matter being Several days
under Examination, which is Briefly drawn up in five Sheets of Paper ready to
be produced) Their Lordships did in September 95 make another report to the
Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, appointed a Committee as
aforesaid, wherein they Set forth that they had heard the Proposer, and other
evidence, and that they had dismissed Several offenders, and signed ordres to
prevent the like abuses for the Future. But I never heard of more then one
Person viz. the Master Boatmaker of Portsmouth, that was dismissed amongst them
all. After this the Lords of the Council appointed a Committee as aforesaid
the 3 d. of Febuary 9 did send for me and at my appearance did tell me that it
did appear to them, that I had done the Nation a Sigual Piece of Service; and
that I should be well rewarded for the same; directing the Clark of the
Council then attending, to draw up their Report to the King, highly in my
Favor; and that most Honorable Board did then also move his Grace the Duke of
Shrewsbury, to recommend me to his Majesty for a reward; whereby his Majesty by
an order of the 2 d. of February, 95. was Graciously pleased to direct the
Lords of the Admiralty to put me in some Employment in the Navy, or give me a
Suitable reward and Bounty for my good Service, Care and Pains: which after
Three Years attendance to my Damage, in Expense of time and Money 500. Pounds,
I was disdainfully put off with 100. Pound without correcting those abuses, and
Extravagant Practices. And although the Proposer and his proposalls were so
Slighted and rejected by the Admiralty and Navy-board, yet I do affirm (that
which no Unbyassed Person can deny) that the said Sum of 100000. Pounds Per
Annum, might be now saved in building and repairing the Royal Navy, and that
without any Damage to the Oeconomie, as they call it, if a Reformation should
be made agreeable to what has been Proposed, and suitable Persons Employed in
the Management thereof. To which I add that 300000. Pounds Per Annum, might be
Saved in the Navall affairs, if that Service were well Managed.

2 That in the Year 95. I Printed and delivered Proposals to the Parliament,
for supplying the Royal Navy with able Seamen and Mariners upon all occasions,
and Preventing many abuses committed by disorderly Pressmasters, both by Sea
and Land, together with the saving Several Immence Sums of Money, Yearly
Expended in Impress, Conduct and Bounty Money, with the Charge occsioned by
employing Pressmacks, and keeping Seamen in pay the Winter Season, and
secureing the Public Trade of the Kingdom in time of War, as also preventing
Several Hardships imposed on Seamen, and Mariners, to the ruin of many
Thousands of them and their Families, as is Set forth at Large in the said
Proposal.

3 After this being informed of great Embezelments made of his Majesty's
Navall-stores, and being Encouraged by his Majestys Royal Proclamation of
August 93. I obtained Warrants of the Commissioners of the Navy in the Year 95,
to Seize such stores; and although their Honors told me that they had Granted
Several* Warrants but had not any returns made thereof; yet I made such
discoveries, that one of the Commissioners at the Board told me he Believed all
the Merchants-Ships, were fitted with the King's Stores, and at Harwich I
Seized several Parcells of the King's Navall-Stores; Perticularly one great
parcel of New cordage to the Value of 65 Pounds, which upon a Trial ill
Managed a verdict, about two Years after, was given against the King, and that
my self and others (for seizing the same) were abused as thieves and robbers,
and our vessel hired by the Commissioners of the Navy, was Seized by an
Officer of the Custom-house, to the Great Prejudice of the owner, as also of my
self and others: yet it is most notoriously evident, that the said Goods were
really Embezeled Stores, as the Lords of the Admiralty did confess, and I can
plainly make appear, with the whole proceedings of that Voyage, and the
refractory proceedings of Several of his Majesty's officers belonging to that
Place, with their rejecting and contemning his Majestys Royal Proclamation, as
also the Warrants granted by the Right honorable the Earl of Romney, and the
Commissioners of the Navy. A Complaint at large has been laid before the said
Commissioners and the Lords of the Admiralty, and Several Affidavits made
thereupon without the least Redress: and the said Commissioners of the Navy, to
stop my further Progress in that matter, have not only denied their Warrants to
Search, but did also refuse to pay the Thirds Pursuant to his Majesty's said
Proclamation; until the Offenders were convicted: and to put a full stop to
such discoverys, they have often declared, that the said Proclamation was
against the Law, and have Threatened me at their Board for asserting his
Majesty's Perogative in granting the same. And by their Employing their
Solicitor Mr. Whitaker, to Prosecute the Offenders, as by many Letters I have
in my custody it is manifest they did, many offenses were Stifled, and Several
others, viz. 12 Bills preferred and found at Hickses-hall in July 95. with
others Indicted at other times and in other Countys, were never prosecuted,
whereby that Service was obstructed; forasmuch as there could be no conviction,
without a prosecution, nor no rewards before Conviction; with many other
Obstructions too many here to Enumerate. And Complaints thereof being made to
the Admiralty and Navy Boards, they referred the matter to him the said
Whitaker* to give advice what to do therein.

3 And being credibly informed of a Nuisance occasioned by Water in his Majestys
Double-dock at Portsmouth, about September 96. I made a Proposal* the
Commissioners of the Navy, to clear the same, and was referred to the Surveyor
of the Navy (as the Proper Person Concerned in such Affairs) who told me they
had Engines already to do that; but if I would clear the Double-Dock at
Chatham, I should do the King a Signal piece of Service and be well Rewarded;
whereupon on the 7 th. of October, I laid a Proposal before their Board to
clear that Nuisance; upon which their Honors directed me to go to Chatham, and
discourse the Officers of the Yard about it; which accordingly I did, and made
Observations of the condition of the Dock, whereby I Observed, that by reason
of a Large continual Spring the one half of the Dock was rendered useless, but
I having before accused some of their Officers of some Illegal practices that
were fully proved against them at the Admiralty-Board, they told me that Sir.
Samuel Moreland, and others had attempted to do the same, putting the Nation to
a great Charge, to no Effect, and seemed to be regardless whether the said
Nuisance were removed or not; But having considered the whole matter, I made a
tender to the Navy-Board the 2 d. of November to remove the said Nuisance for a
certain Sum of Money to be paid when the work was completely finished, and not
before, giving, Several reasons of the Convenience that would attend the
removeing the same; but my offers for some pretended reasons were rejected, and
the Nuisance continnued, and my self put off with 40. s. for my Charge and
trouble in going thither.

4 About two Years since I made proposals to the King to save one Quarter part
of what was expended in Transporting his Majesty's Subjects, prisoners at War;
His Majesty in council the 11 th. of March 96/7 was Graciously Pleased to
refer the same to the Commissioners Employed on that Service who (to obstruct
the King's Service) did on the 5 th. of April make a false Report to his
Majesty which being referred to a Committee of Council, they the said
Commissioners did Falsely justify the same; whereby the said Proposal was
rejected, notwithstanding the Proposer offered to give what Security they were
pleased to demand.

5 That on the 2 d. of May, 97. I made a proposal to the Lords of the Admiralty
for saving one full half part of what was Expended on that Service, offering
suficient Security, for the due performance thereof, and being by their
Lordships directed to attend the said Commissioners, which I often did, they,
after five-weeks attendance, made another report full of Prevarications, and
Falsehoods, whereupon I prayed a hearing at their Lordships-Board, but could not
obtain it, whereby the 2 d. Proposal was rejected to the great prejudice of his
Majestys Service.

In February 97. I presented his Majesty in Council with a Proposal for the
re-building White Hall, out of the Imbezelments of prizes and prize goods and
did also propose to Clear the Ruins thereof for 1000. Pound (but could never
get the same Read.)

At the First Sitting of the last Sessions of Parliament, I made proposalls to
the right Honorable the Lords of his Majestys Treasury for raising 4500000.
Pounds Per Annum, for the Public Service, which might beraised without any
Sensible Burden to the Subjects, which is remaining under their Lordships
consideration.

And in April last, my self, with a Friend, made discoverys to the
Commissioners of the Customs of 39. Hogsheads of French Wines, which were
Imported in one of the King's Ships, which after she was unrigged at Plymouth,
was suddenly refitted, and made a Voyage to Breast in France, where the said
Wines were Laded, and upon her Arrival again at Plymouth (to defraud the King
of the French-dutys) the Capt. got one of his men to Swear they were Spanish
Wines Loaded at St. Sebastians, and the same was so entered, and part thereof
delivered there, the rest brought into the port of London, (this expedition
cost the King near 1000. Pound) and in regard the Witnesses who were to prove
the same were under the check of the Capt. I desired the Commissioners to send
a Summons, to a person that we would Name, to testify the same, but they
refused so to do; but to carry on the discovery, my Friend obliged himself to
make good the man's Wages, if the Capt. did prick him Run. Whereupon the Person
made an Affidavit, and 30 Hogsheads were Seized, and put into the Kings
Warehouse, and afterward the Commissioners compounded with the Capt. for 279
Pounds, which they received; and after three Months attendance they Flowting us
for attending for a noone Wayters Place, (Instead of a Moiety which the Law
allows us) they gave us but 32. Pound 12. s. We also gave them an account of
another Capt. that had embezeled some prize goods, to the Value of 5000. Pound,
and delivered Merchants goods at unseasonable Hours, at Deal, Chatham, and the
Hope; whereby his Majesty was defrauded of the Dutys, to prove which we were at
the charge to produce Witnesses and Affidavits, but they took no notice
thereof; neither would they return the affidavits although we often desierd it.

8 And whereas by one Act of Parliament made Anno quarto et quinto of his
Present Majesty and the late Queen; Entitled an Act for continuing the Acts
for prohibiting all Trade and Comerce with France, and for Encouragement of
privateers; It was enacted that all prize Ships and goods, should be preserved
entire and free from Embezlements and not be Pillaged in any case whatsoever;
with Directions for Selling the same, and applying the proceed there of for the
Use of his Majesty, and the encouragement of Seamen. And hearing by daily
Complaints how the said Act was Violated by Several Commanders of his Majestys
Ships, who not regarding the said Law, did frequently Sell such Ships and goods
by Wholesale, as also great part. of the Cargo and Furniture of others, to the
great Prejudice of his Majesty and Seamen, who thereby were deprived of their
Shares and proportions allowed by the said Act. And in order such Commanders
should make Restitution, (about 12 Months since) I certified the same to the
Commissioners for Prizes, who Promised to give me a reward if I could make it
appear; which accordingly I did, and two Ships, upon the Evidence that I
producd, were condemned in the Admiralty Court the 10 th. of March last, but
the said Commissioners sending for the Capt. that sold them, he produced an
account upon Oath in the Nature of Debtor, and Creditor, and in the Balance
remains Debtor to the King about 30. Pounds. At my next attendance the
Commissioners showed me the account, and told me I was a pretty man to trouble
them with such Storys; ading that the Capt. had given them an account upon
Oath, telling me that I might take the same into another Room and peruse it,
and return it again to them, which acordingly I did, acquainting them that the
said Ships were worth Ten times more then the Capt. represented them; as I was
ready to prove, which (on behalf of the Seamen) I have since proved in the high
Court of Admiralty, but they gave me a Slight answer, telling me there was 30
Pounds coming to the King; advising me to go to him for a Gratuity; Several
other great Embezlements of Prize goods and Furniture of prize Ships I laid
before them; desiring their Honors to order the King's Proctor to sue for his
Majesty, which they refused, but at Length they did send their Solicitor with
me to give him directions to prosecute the offenders; whereupon one of them was
arrested at the King's Suit, and Bail given but when I attended the Proctor to
give my assistance in the Premises. He told me that unless I would defray the
charge, he would not proceed any further, whereby those Embezlements to the
value of 10000* Pound were wholely lost, without any Recompense for my charge,
and trouble. These and Several other great Embezlements, abuses and enormitys
relating thereunto, I laid before the right Honorable the Lords of his
Majestys Treasury the 20 th. of January last, their Lordships then directing me
to prove the Allegations thereof, which by substantial Evidence I could do if
I were at liberty.

9 In December last I laid before the Lords of the Admiralty a Moddell of an
Invention for the Effectual weighing of great Anchors, in any Weather, far
beyond any contrivance for that Service, (which by Demonstrable proof I can
readyly make appear) which having past their Lordships approbation, with the
Commissioners of the Navy then present, is now remaining, by their Lordships
order, at their Office under consideration.

10 And whereas by one other Act passed the last Sessions of Parliament
entitled an Act for the better Preventing the Imbezlements of his Majestys
Stores of War etc. It is enacted that it shall not be Lawful after the 24 th.
of June School. for any Persons, not being Contractors with his Majesty's
Commissioners, to make any Stores of War, or Navall Persons with the Kings
mark, on the Penalty of 200. Pound, and that all persons in whose Custody any
such Stores shall be found so marked, not being employed in his Majesty's
Service, being indicted and Convicted, for concealing or having such goods in
their Custody, possession, or keeping, shall forfeit such goods, and the sum
of 200. Pound; unless upon Trial Certificates shall be produced, under the
Hands of three Commssioners to show the cause and reason of such Goods coming
to their Possession; and that if any action be brought against any Person
Seizing or discovering the same, he shall not be damnified thereby, unless the
Person in whose Custody such Goods were found, did produce and Show such
Certificate as aforesaid before such Suit or Prosecution was commenced.

11 And having since the 20 th. of August last (being encouraged by the said
Act) made Several discoverys of Navall Stores, marked with the King's Mark* I
did, with one John Sartain, Indict Several offenders at Hickses-Hall the
beginning of September, and before we received Notice for trial, the said John
Sartain did apply himself to the Lord's of the Admiralty, who promised him
great encouragement, telling him that they would direct the Commissioners of
the Navy to take his discoverys* and prosecute the Offenders, but his reward
should come from them. And upon his attending the said Commissioners they
directed him to give them an account of all discoverys, which accordingly he
did; and their Honors gave him their Warrants, directed to his Majestys Peace
Officers, to bring the Offenders before them or some other Justices of the
Peace, to answer the Premises. Pursuant thereunto Several offenders were
carried before them, and Discharged by them, without taking any Cognizance of
the Fact; which being notified to other Justices they refused to meddle
therein. And when the Persons Indicted were to be tried, Mr. Whitaker
Solicitor to the Admiralty and Navy-Board (being directed by them to prosecute
the Several Offenders) did advise us that the Indictments we had laid were not
good in Law; and that he had prepared others which were prefered and found by
the Grand Jury, and the former quasht; and when those causes came to be tried,
the Court was of Opinion, that they had not Power by the said Act to try the
same? whereby the Offenders were acquitted. After which I desired they might be
indicted in the Crown office, but Mr. Whitaker alleged that was not a proper
place, adding that the said Act was defective, and that he would take care it
should be amended the next Sessions of Parliament, and that in the mean time he
would Indict them at Hickses-hall for Trespasses and Misdemeanors and after
they were convicted he would sue for the Penalty in one of his Majesty's Courts
at Westminster. But being urgent to carry on the Prosecutions I attended him
before the last Sessions of the Peace, and then he told me he would Prosecute
all those, within the Iuridiction of the Old-Bayly, in that Court, at their
next Sessions, and the others at the Assizes; he being advised by the Kings
Council that the Quarter Sessions was not a Proper place, directing me to give
him a List of all discoverys above 20 s. Value, adding that the Smaller matters
should be refered to the Commissioners of the Navy, for that the Prosecuting,
such would be looked upon in Court as Vexatious and oppressive to the Subject.
Pursuant thereunto I did forthwith carry a List of all such discoverys, but he
not being to be found; I did the next day send the same by John Sartain who
delivered it to Mr. Whitaker, and then Mr. Whitaker told him that the Old-Bayly
was not a proper place to sue in, but he would prosecute them Above this Term,
directing the said Sartain then to attend him. But Instead thereof, an order
was procured from (...) King for our Prosecution. And by Virtue of the
recorders Warrant we were both taken up and Committed, for Procuring Warrants
from the Commissioners of the Navy, on pretense of detecting abuses Committed
in Embezleing Naval-Stores, and Instead of bringing the Offenders to Justice,
have Compounded with them to Stifle the Offense, and not Prosecuted them
according to Law.

12. In Answer to which, I do aver, that since the year 95 I have not procured
any Warrant from the Commissioners of the Navy, or any other Person, to search
for Embezled Stores; neither been privy to any Warrant produced or granted, or
pretended to be granted by the Commissioners of the Navy for that purpose;
neither have directly nor indirectly compounded with any Person in whose
Custody any such Stores have been found, not to prosecute them; neither been
privy to the taking any Sum or Sums of Money to stifle any Prosecution, but
if any small Sum of Money was received; it was as a Corroborating Evidence of
the Offenders guilt; or to allow them some small time to produce (as they
pretended) such Certificates as the said Act directs; and being, as aforesaid,
advised by Mr. Whitaker that the said Act was defective, I have declined making
any further Discoverys since the 19 th. of October last; and for the same, with
the foregoing Reasons, not having yet the benefit of the Assizes, have not yet
convicted any Offender; neither has any Person been yet Convicted by virtue of
the said Act. So that if any such Prosecutions has been deferred it was by a
Contrivance of the Admiralty and Navy Boards, and their Solicitor, or through the
deficiency of the said Court who re^^^^ ^^^fused to Try the same; whereby it is
manifest, that for my Integrety in promoting the Public Interest, I have
offended many of the Public Enemies, who being incensed against me, have a
long time been contriving my Ruin; often threatening my Life, with other
terrible and shameful Punishments, themselves and their Agents boasting of
their security by their great Interest and Friendship at Court.

13. On the 11 th. of January last I presented to this Honorable House, a
Paper Entitled A word in Season, containing a general Account of some Public
Grievances, with particulars relating to the Imbezeling of Prizes and
Prize-goods, with some proceedings of the Commissioners for Prizes, which I
intended to unfold to this Honorable House, (which I conceive was the only
motive that moved my Adversaries to bring on this Prosecution against me) but
having on the 3 d. of January gave notice by Letter to Mr. Lowndes, that I
could make Discovery of Prizes and Prize-goods Imbezeled to the value of 100000
l. and more, and the Lords of the Treasury being pleased to give notice by the
Gazett of the 12 th. that they would give all due Encouragement provided I
could make out the same, I did on the 20 th. of the said Month lay before their
Lordships 20 Articles relating thereunto, the greatest of which might by this
time been proved if I had not been restrained of my Liberty; but by reason of
my Confinement some of them has been presented to this House by other hands,
and my self thereby partly circumvented in my design; so that for Indeavoring
to serve my King and Country, I have not only spent my Time and Substance, but
have also Purchased many powerful Adversaries, who to stop me in prosecuting
the Public Interest, have and do contrive all ways and means to work my
overthrow, which is no other then the real effects of Prejudice, for under
those specious pretenses before recited, they have prevailed with his Majesty
to grant his order for my Prosecution, which being effected I was Committed the
21 th. of January, and in the Post-Boy of the 24 th. exposed as if I had been
the greatest Criminal in the whole Kingdom; and to prevent me from carrying on
my Prosecutions, the Dice are turned upon me, and the Offenders, by a secret
Combination, are become my Prosecuters, which I humbly conceive is contrary to
the Constitution of this Government, forasmuch as I have Endeavored, as much
as in me lay, to prosecute the Offenders, by exhibiting Informations and
perferring Indictments against them as before recited, for which I conceive I
ought to have the priority in Prosecuting, and then if they or any other Person
can charge me of doing any Unlawful act either in Perjudice to the King or
Subject, that then they may proceed against me according to the utmost Severity
of the Law. But being supprized and carried before Sir John Houbland, who would
not accept of any but City Bail, which I having no Acquaintance there could not
produce, I was Committed as aforesaid the 21 st. of January, and on the 26 th.
Summoned on the Penalty of 100 l. to make my Personal appearance at the
Kings-Bench-Bar (on the 30 th) to Answer an Information in the Crown against me
for certain Trespasses, Contempts and Misdemeanors. Being Informed the 15 th.
Instant, that no Information was then Filled against me, and being charged with
so black a Crime, my Friends were afraid to come near me, some of them being
threatened with the same Fate if they do assist me, so that being deprived of
Friends and bare of Money by reason of my several Services for the Public
Good; Being Ignorant in the Law and without Advice am now remaining in a
Deplorable Condition, not knowing how to defend my self against this violent
Prosecution. And the said John Sartaine is Bound by Recullisans to appear at
the Old Bailey the next Sessions of the Peace, and is also Summoned on the
Penalty of 100 l. to answer an Information at the King's Bench Bar for the
aforesaid pretended Offense, and my self Confined a Prisoner in the City liable
to the same Penalty for not appearing at the Kings-Banch-Bar according to
Summons.

14. The Premises thus truly stated, manifest it is, that the Villifiing and
abusing me, as a Rogue of the greatest Rank, for doing the Duty of a Faithful
Subject, for putting the Laws in Execution, is (as I humbly conceive) a
Reflection upon the Judicious proceedings of the Lawmakers; forasmuch as the
same Reason that induced them to make such Laws, encouraged me to put the same
in Execution, and whereas I am charged for stifling Prosecutions, I do most
humbly take leave to acquaint (...) Honors that after the expense of 30 l. in
Prosecuting a Captain the last Mickahnus Term for Embezeling a Prize-Ship and
Goods to the value of 80000 l. after two motions to defer the same, and two
appointments for the Trial, the last of which was the last day but one of their
sitting out of Term, although the Cause was called, and the Jury ready to be
sworn, I was then disappointed by reason that one of my Counsel (after he had
taken his Fees) departed the Court; true it is the Lord Chief Barron, to his
everlasting Praise, did as much as in him lay to bring the Cause to Trial,
which being about Nine of the Clock in the Evening, did declare that he would
be contented to hear it that Night or the next Morning or Afternoon, adding
that there should be no Complaint against him; so that if any neglect has been
in carring on any Prosecutions I humbly conceive it ought not to be laid to my
Charge.

15. And forasmuch as it is the undoubted Right of this Honorable House to
enquire into and Redress Public grievances, so I humbly conceive that every
Subject has the Privilege to lay such grievances before them, provided it be
done with decency and respect; and finding (by dear-bought Experience) that no
Redress was to be obtained elsewhere, I did (with most humble Submission)
present to this Honorable House, in hopes of their Honors Protection, the
aforesaid Paper Entitled, A word in Season, wherein is set forth, under
several heads, many Public and unparaleld grievances committed during the late
War, which I shall be ready to prove whenever this Honorable House will be
pleased to hear the same, whereby it will Evidently appear what Persons has
been employed in the Administration of Public Affairs, and how far I have
Endeavored to promote the Public Interest; Most humbly praying your Honors
to consider the strength of my Powerful Adversaries, and vouchsafe to shield me
under the Protection of this Honorable House, until some method may be found
for carring on those Prosecutions which (it is said) I have Compounded and
Stifled; not that I fear the Law, but being (for my Integrity and Diligence)
surrounded with many potent Enemies, who, if it be possible, will turn the true
Course of the Law to my prejudice, which if I can but obtain the favor of
being heard before a Commitee of this Honorable House, I doubt not to make my
Innocence appear and gain Repute thereby; which to effect, having little
Acquaintance with the Honorable Members of this House and being under
Confinement, I do most humbly pray that this my Case may obtain the effect of a
Petition and that a Commite may be appointed to examine the Allegations
thereof, otherwise no Person can be in safety that does apeare against Public
Offenders, who if their Mersenary, Corrupt and Illegal Practices be
countenanced and continued, then it consequently follows that the generality of
Mankind will endeavor to Imitate them, whereby the design of all that is Good
will be defeated, and this once so Flourishing a Kingdom, become the most
miserable, without hopes of Recovery.

16. To which I most humbly add that, at my first appearance upon the public
Stage, I did not design any Advantage to my self, but that the Nation being
engaged in an expensive War, might by frugallity the better carry on the same,
I being then in a thriving Condition, although since reduced, by carring on my
several services. In all which if it should appear to this most Honorable
House, that the detecting and discovering Public grievances and the making
proposals and tenders to save the Public Treasure, and to serve the Public as
I have done, is now become so great a Crime, that then I (who conceived
otherwise) may for this time obtain a Pardon for my simple Integrity, and that
some Law may be passed to make the same Criminal for the future, to the end
other well-meaning Persons may avoid the like unhappy Fate.

17. Thus having briefly laid before this Honorable House my Case, with a
summary of my Proceedings, I do most humbly submit the same to the
Consideration of this most August and Honorable Assembly, to whom (as the
Fountain of Justice) I do most humbly make my Appeal in this Exigency, and that
God Allmighty may Bless you in all your Counsels and Consultations, and that
they may Center in the Redressing the Public Grievances and Calamities of this
Kingdom, is and shall be the Prayer of

Your Honors most Obedient, though Envied and Afflicted, Servant, George Everett.
Poultry Counter the 15 th. of February, School.
FINIS.

