Discourses ON THE PRESENT STATE OF THE Protestant Princes OF EUROPE: Exhorting
them to an UNION and LEAGUE amongst themselves, AGAINST ALL Opposite Interest,
From the Great Endeavors of the Court of France and Rome to Influence all
Roman Catholic Princes, against the Protestant States and Religion; and the
Advantage that our Divisions give to their Party; Wherein the General Scope of
this Horrid Popish Plot Is laid down, and presented to PUBLIC VIEW.

By EDMUND EVERARD Esquire.

Kept four years close Prisoner in the Tower by the Contrivance of some English
Subjects plotting against us in France, whom he five years since discovered;
and was lately justified and released by his Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the King's Arms in the Poultrey, 1679.

May the First, 1679.

I have appointed Dorman Newman Citizen and Stationer of London to print this
Treatise.

EDMUND EVERARD.

ESSAYS of Politic Discourses ON THE PRESENT STATE OF THE Protestant Princes
OF EUROPE: Exhorting them to an Union and League amongst themselves, against
all opposite Interests.
PART I.
THe Ancient and Modern Histories furnish us successively with very good
Examples, that the greatest part of the Monarchies, Kingdoms, Commonwealths,
which have heretofore flourished with great Glory, and have afterward for the
most part been entirely demolished, fell into that miserable destruction by two
defaults, especially.

First, by degenerating and totally abandoning their pristine virtues, and a
soft negligence in not applying themselves to those means which might have
re-established them in the practice of the same virtues as the principle whence
their former puissance was to be derived, and from the practice whereof they
might be in a condition to preserve it.

And secondly, by internal Divisions, which Ambition, Jealousy, Avarice or
Vain glory fomented by the Artifices of their Enemies, have frequently produced
amongst Princes, or the Directors of their flourishing Estates.

Now then, since these pernicious courses have caused the ruin of all the
greatest Puissances of the World; I conceive that no man will be so imprudent,
as not to be of accord with me in this point; That it is the wisdom of those in
whose hand God has trusted the direction of any sovereign and lawful power,
diligently with all their care and might to avoid falling into such accidents.

And I also believe, that every wise man will likewise agree; That they more
especially have the strongest Reasons to keep themselves most exactly on their
guard, who cannot be ignorant by many pressing experiences, that they have on
their necks very many both secret and public, armed, subtle, powerful and
active enemies, who are perpetually in motion to take advantages of all
favorable conjunctures to procure their ruin, which they endeavor with very
great care, and by all sorts of means to procure and foment.

This foundation being laid; let us briefly examine whether in the modern
conduct of the Protestant States in Europe, they have strictly guided
themselves in every thing which may be called the Interest of their
Preservation, according to such Rules as are sufficient, not only to contribute
to their maintenance in their Estate, but to procure unto them the most
considerable Augmentations therein; or whether a good part of them have not
rather been visibly engaged by the Modern Artifices of their natural enemies,
into such paths as are capable not only to enervate their principal Forces, but
by consequence to draw them on, like the aforesaid States into an entire
destruction.

No man can deny, as it seems to me, that God's blessing was abundantly powered
out on the labors of those great Persons, whom his Providence was pleased to
make use of in the last Age for the advancement of the work of Reformation and
extirpating out of the Christian communion, all the abuses and Idolatrous
errors, which the Spirit of darkness, by the Ministry of the Papacy had
established throughout the whole extent of the Western Church. By this success
it came to pass that two Parties were formed; which in what concerns Spirituals
and Temporals, divided all this part of Europe, which composes the said Church.

Now being the First Fruits of this Reformation were such as suddenly stopped
the progress of the Papacy, and broke the greatest part of the measures which
the Bishops of Rome had taken up, successively since the Reign of the Parricide
Phocas, to establish a despotick and universal Monarchy over all Christendom,
as well in Temporals as Spirituals. This Truth being perfectly well known by
the Sea of Rome, it were extreme folly to doubt of the true Resentments which
those Bishops have against the Protestants, and especially against the Kingdoms
and States that protect and profess this Faith; so that it ought to be the more
observed, that since the providence of God gave this overthrow to the Papal
Tyranny, this Beast which has horns like those of the Lamb, is in a condition
to speak with the power of the first Beast; that is to say, the Bishop of Rome,
with the Title of Servant of Servants, which they craftily affect to assume,
have so well ordered their Conduct, that they have thereby been enabled no less
than the ancient Caesar's by sword and fire, (as Greg. 7. Urb. 2. Paschall 2.
Boniface the Eighth did) to attempt to make themselves to be acknowledged for
despotick and universal Monarchs of Christendom, as well over Temporals as
Spirituals.

And to prove in a few words, and in an uncontrolable manner, what we have
propounded we may conclude for certain, as to temporal concerns; that since the
Reign of Charles the Bald, the Roman Bishops after many Debates and cruel Wars,
which they caused to be raised on all hands against the Emperors of the West,
have not only been dispensed with from being named; or approved by the Emperors
themselves, as the ancient custom was; but having by succession of time and a
thousand unjust ways, so highly advanced themselves above them, that these
Monarchs have been forced afterward, as History assures us, until Charles the
Fifth inclusively, not only to acknowledge the Roman Bishops for their
Superiors; but unless they would incur their Indignation (which usually was
followed with their ruin) to abase themselves unto that abjectness of spirit,
as to go and kiss their feet, in all humble prostration, or as they mounted to
or lighted from their Horses; and the most part of them durst not take upon
them to be Emperors, till after their Approbation or Coronation by their or
their Legates hands.

The chief Monarchs of all Christendom being reduced to this pass; is it not
true, that the Bishops of Rome, who hold it for a Maxim, never to let go their
Pretentions, and to make every thing that falls out for their advantage, a
Prescription, have really usurped and effectually enjoyed the Superiority over
the Principal Temporal Dominion of Christendom? And this is so true, that
before the holy work of Reformation this petty Priest has been seen insolently
many times to take the Imperial Crown from the Father after he had trod one of
the most Illustrious Emperors as a Basilisk under his feet, to transfer it to
his Son; or if indeed the Emperor's Children were more careful to observe the
Law of God in this point, than that of this man of sin, and would not recede
from the respect and obedience due unto their Father, then to transfer it to
the first ambitious person, who could be found of a seditious humor, his
presumption being risen to that Insolency, that he made not more difficulty in
the quality of a Supreme Dispenser both of the Imperial, and all other Crowns
of Christendom, than to dispose of them of an inferior order, albeit they were
Hereditary for the most part, in favor of whom he pleased: of this Navarre
affords us a living example, which abides entire unto this day. Passing by (to
avoid prolixity) the Subsidies and burdensome Homages which have been
established on the Kingdoms of England, Poland, Hungary, Naples and Arragon, as
well as what they have endeavored to execute on all the other States of
Christendom; this may suffice (as seems to me) to make all these States to see
the Interest they have unanimously to oppose the progress of the Papacy, so as
to prove what I have above propounded, what these proud Bishops have attempted
upon the Temporal Dominion of all Christendom until the time aforesaid.

To prove what progress the same Bishops have made in their Usurpations upon
the Spiritual Power, it is sufficient to read their own Decretals, and what
they have been able to cause to be decreed in the greater part of the last
Councils, and to know the Doctrine which all the Sophisters of the Vatican do
openly teach and Preach more or less, according to the Places where they
reside, and which is universally received (save in the Estates of the Republic
of Venice) in all the extent of Italy, and in the Monarchy of Spain, and has
taken but too pernicious roots in all other States where the Magistrate is of
the Roman Communion.

And the Protestant States flatter themselves extremely, if they be persuaded;
That by the Progress which the work of Reformation has made in Europe, and the
infeebling which in its process it has caused in the Papal Power, this Enemy
is so far weakened; that he is not to be feared any more: for it is so far from
being so, that it is the more dangerous, as well for its formidable Power
wherein it still appears, having in some degree abated its Politic Severity,
as not judging it necessary any longer since the checks that have befallen it
by the advancement of the Reformation, or Imprudence of some of its Bishops; so
also for that the Court of Rome is now more than ever rectified in its refined
Policy, to be able by imperceptible and secret ways to recover its self to its
first glorious Luster. And being Rome cannot attain thereto but by the total
ruin of its natural Enemies, which consist (as I have showed above according
to my supposition) in the Protestant Party, it is not to be admired if after
this shock, they have stirred every Stone to bring about the destruction of
that party, and that so long as there are any Roman Bishops, Rome still labors
it with all its forces, and all its diligence.

For this reason, when the Imperial House of Austria was in condition by its
great Inheritances, which successively fell to it in the two last Ages, by its
immense Indian Treasures, by its greatness and dignity of the first and most
considerable Monarchy of Christendom, and by its numerous and formidable Armies
to push on the Progress of its great and vast Designs of an Universal Monarchy:
The Court of Rome was subtle and happy enough to persuade it that it could not
attain thereto, but by taking on it the quality of its principal Protector, and
in being the cruel Executioner of the establishment of its Authority, and all
its freques. France, Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, and the Princes of the
Low Countries know what Rivers of blood have flowed from this pretense; and all
Europe knows the enfeeblement which this Illustrious House has brought on it
self by being surprised by Maxims so little enlivened by the spirit of true
Christianity, and of so little Discretion and Judgment.

For this same Reason also Rome after it had served it self of the Puissance
and Forces of this Imperial House so far as to have reduced it to an
extenuation and feebleness capable to draw on its total destruction, if the
providence of God by the generous Succors of its Allies had not prevented;
knowing otherwise that this House was not any longer in condition to serve and
advance its Projects, but in the quality of a suffering Party, and that its
diminution seemed to give place to his most Christian Majesty by the formidable
power of his Forces, and his numerous Treasures to pursue with success the
career of the Universal Monarchy. Rome I say, which hold for a Maxim from the
time of its first progress, to spend the Forces of the most puissant for its
own Elevation, has been also crafty and fortunate enough to persuade this
Monarch against all the Rules of a Judicious Policy, that he could not attain
his great and vast Designs, but by attempting at the same time (as the House of
Austria had before done, the ruin of the States and Protestant Religion in
Holland, and by taking contrived measures without the privity of His Majesty of
Great Britain, with many of his Subjects, to re-establish the Romish Religion
in England, and also to ruin the Protestant Religion in Germany, and all his
own Dominions.

And to speak the truth, this last enterprise, which by this principle has
been in a great part managed by the Emissaries of the Court of Rome, has been
so subtly conducted, that it may be said nothing hindered his Majesty the most
Christian King for many days, but that by the surprise of Amsterdam, after that
of Utrich and Naerden, he might have made himself in less than four Months,
absolute Prince of the principal part of the Seventeen Provinces of the
Low Countries, and thereby to have become in one Campania, the absolute Arbiter
of all Christendom both at Sea and Land: And those who more specially
understand the error of Estate, which this Monarch has made on this occasion,
may know somewhat of the true Reason of that great Traverse of State in
particular, which for my part I attribute to a formal Protection of the King of
Kings, who in his Supreme Councils had doubtless ordained otherwise, of that
affair, and understand that if his Majesty after he had surprised Utrich and
Naerden, had sent only 500 Horse to Amsterdam; it was probable that the
Magistrate and Burgesses of that Town in the Consternation into which the
Rapidity of his Conquests had put them, would have delivered up the Keys and
Gates thereof purely and simply into the hands of the Conqueror. Yea, I am
assured from good hands, the major part had concluded to send him them without
staying for Summons, had not a Doctor of Physic in their Company threatened to
call and mutiny the Common People against them, and so compelled them to change
their Resolves. Now they who know the Treasures and Sea-Forces of this single
Town, may thence deduce solid proofs of the consequences, that would thereupon
have followed.

By this only blow, and the manner after which the Ministers of France had
begun thereupon to behave themselves in the States of the Palatinate, Cleve,
the Marquisatte, and all the Protestant States in Europe; all they who love
their Faith and their Liberties may see the fatal point, whereby they were
about to be deprived of both; for the most part, and all this, by the Ministry
of the Emissaries of the Court of Rome, and by their own neglecting too much
the solid means of their Conservation.

Awake thou who slumberest, that thou be not surprised with Sleep, which will
draw on thee Ruin and Desolation. Making a serious reflection on the active
conduct of the Roman party, for the extension and maintenance of their Faith,
and the soft effeminateness and indifferency wherewith the Protestant party are
accustomed to act in the propagation and support of theirs; I think I may say,
that the former may be justly compared to an Army not only numerous, but very
well disciplined, provided of very good Leaders of excellent counsel, who
marching in the Field make their Scouts to advance carefully on their right and
left, to make all sorts of Discoveries, who when encamped retrench themselves
always very well, who cause every night their Rounds and Guards to be made very
regularly, and who as persons accomplished in worldly wisdom know subtly to
foment in their Enemies Camp perpetual Divisions amongst their Chieftains, and
cause an infinite number of crafty, subtle and faithful Spies to slide in
amongst them, who render a most exact account of all their motions and
condition.

On the contrary, I think that the Protestant party, may be compared to an Army
very numerous indeed, and provided of excellent Commanders, who want neither
Experience nor Courage, but who are by some unhappy Jealousies, fomented for
the greatest part by the Artifices of the contrary party, divided amongst
themselves, and so reduced to that misery, that this Army which is capable by
the Excellency of its Captains, and nature of its Forces to fall upon what part
it could desire, of the Enemies Army, having abandoned all use of Retrenchment,
and of Corpse de Guard to secure its safety, and also neglected all the means
whereby it might be informed of the motions of the Enemies Camp; so great
disorder is thereupon ensued, that the Army of the Enemy does often, to their
shame, beat up their Quarters, and make them actually fall into confusions,
unworthy the honor and courage of the Heroic Commanders, which the providence
of God has established in the Head of their Army.

Every Kingdom divided against it self, comes to destruction, says the Savior
of our Souls: In truth this is a Lesson of which all the Protestant States
ought very carefully to make their advantage, and on the account of their
Glory, their Faith, and their Interest think a little more seriously then
hitherto they have done, for the last half Age, of the means to procure their
Union as the fundamental point of their preservation.

The providence of God, which is miraculous in all the cares it takes for the
conservation of his Children, has established a natural opposition betwixt the
two principal Puissances of Christendom, which same are the two principal
Balwark^ of the Roman Communion in this part of the World, (...) so great are
the depths of Satan, that this crafty and sub^^^ spirit knows to suggest never
failing means to this Roman Court to make this Division (which were capable to
bring about us entire ruin, if the Protestant States knew how to use their
advantages) turn to its profit; so that whatsoever opposition or disunion has
hitherto happened, betwixt these two States, Rome knows the secret thereof
effectually to make an advantage as it designs.

For in the first place is it not by the effect of this opposition, that Rome,
as the great Rohan observes, does preserve its temporal Authority entire in a
great part of Italy, which would be in a pitiful (...) of these Monarchs after
he had defeated his Concurrent, had free Elbow-Room in that pleasant part of
Europe?

In the second place, during the sitting of the Council of Trent, the Cardinal
of Lorrain being the chief mouth of France, and so qualified became the head of
that party of the Fathers, who in this Council insisted on a real and actual
Reformation to be made in the Church; Rome was too clear sighted not to
perceive that this single Proposition carries in it the means to undermine at
one blow all the Foundations of its Monarchick Designs, as manifestly did
appear in that troublesome conjuncture; for at that time more than half
Christendom had shoke off the yoke of its tyranny, and had openly embraced the
Reformation with little difference in the less or more, and the other half
extremely disposed to receive it; nevertheless in this extremity, Rome know to
manage her Interest with so great dexterity by means of the jealousy which
raged betwixt these two Houses, that having promised Philip the Second, the
Destruction or Conquest of France, and to the Cardinal of Lorrain to make the
Crown of France fall into their House, the League which should have destroyed
France being signed thereupon, by this diabolical expedient, Rome made not only
all the Pretensions of the Council illusory, which it disposed of afterward
how it pleased; but by the opposition it raised by Philip the Second, and the
House of Lorrain to Henry the Third, and Henry the Fourth; Rome brought the
business so about that it was impossible for the later to Reign in France
without embracing its Communion, and by that means Rome continues there
triumphant unto this day, and the Protestants have been and are still most
severely dealt with.

Thirdly, it is not an effect of the Jealousy that reigns betwixt these two
Houses, that Rome has had opportunity to inspire them so strongly to contend
mutually in making out whether of them were more zealous of the Worship of the
Roman Faith; so that contrary to all the most essential Rights of their States
and Crowns, the former to preserve himself in the quality of the Catholic
King, has suffered the new Emissaries of the Papacy in less than one Age to
invade many very good Inheritances; so that the Church at this day enjoys near
a third part of the Temporal Estate through the whole extent of that Monarchy,
and the other to maintain the Quality of the most Christian King, though he
has seen two of his most Illustrious Predecessors assissinated by their
Parricides or Ministers in a very short time, and the Laws of his Kingdom are
repugnant to such Establishments; yet nevertheless has and does still every
day tolerate the same, so far that the Cities of France may be seen as well
provided of Fortresses and Colonies of the Papacy under the names of Covents,
Religious Houses, Colleges and Abbeys, as those of Spain and Italy, which may
be called the Triumph of the Papal Policy, it being infallibly certain that in
process of time, if God redress it not, The Successors of these Monarchies must
by all the Rules of a Judicious Policy, together with their Subjects, become
the Miserable Slaves of the Despotick Monarchy of the Papacy?

In the fourth place, Spain being no longer in a condition to patronize the
Emissaries of the Court of Rome with a real Establishment in Amsterdam, nor in
the remaining extent of the whole United Provinces, nor durst any more
enterprise any thing openly against England, nor the Protestants of Germany,
has not Rome now served it self of the opposition which reigns betwixt these
Houses, sacrificing impudently that of Austria at this blow, to the violation
of all sorts of Treaties, to make his most Christian Majesty to attempt in our
days in this particular, what all the Forces of the House of Austria could not
do heretofore, and well it was that God was pleased to blow upon all these
Designs; for otherwise the States of the United Provinces had not been the only
miserable, but all European Christians must have changed Face as to the Liberty
of their Faith and Estates in a very little space of time?

In the fifth place, as Rome has the Art to subtilize all the advantages that
it can draw from all Conjunctures, and as it embraces nothing more readily in
all its Projects, than any Design to destroy the Protestant Party, from their
Heads, to the meanest member of them, that the poor Protestants of High Hungary
might not escape this general Persecution; was it not an effect of the
opposition which rages betwixt those Houses, that Rome, being about to draw a
cruel storm over the Protestants, the Emissaries of the Papacy had the craft to
make his most Christian Majesty to understand, that there being none but his
Imperial Majesty, who could vigorously traverse his Designs on Holland; it was
his Interest to give him Business in his own State, and that this could not be
done by any probability otherwise, than by somenting the Revolt on the Coast of
High Hungary, therefore he must of necessity purchase the Heads of the
Protestants in that Country to his part? Now at the same time that these
Emissaries caused this Doctrine to be solicited in the Court of France, and by
their solicitation obtained Money and Treaties in France, and insinuated
themselves into High Hungary; the Brethren of the same Emissaries, who are as
puissant in the Imperial Court, as the former in the Court of France, by
Intelligence and Conspiracy with the former, had the dexterity without notice
it may be precisely given thereof at first to his Imperial Majesty, to cause it
to be determined at the Court of Vienna, that cruel Persecutions should be
raised against those miserable People; we must not wonder then, that those poor
People, Members of our Faith, persecuted on one hand, and flattered on the
other, are fallen into the trap set for them by the Court of Rome with so great
dexterity, and that thereupon we have seen the Protestant Body in that Country
in this last conjuncture, agitated with such furious Convulsions.

In the sixth place, the Tripple League of England, Sweden, and the United
Provinces, having made Peace between France and Spain in the Year 1668. because
by the continuance of this League the Protestant Party might have made
themselves really the Figure in the Number of the true Arbiters of the worldly
Powers, is it not by an effect of the same opposition, that Rome in this last
Conjuncture, making use of the Ambitions, Forces, and management of the
Ministers of France, knew by its charms cast upon England and Sweden, to
dissolve this Gordian Knot of Peace, and force out of the hands of the
Protestant Party the advantage to them so glorious, and which might have been
so profitable to the Repose and Tranquillity of all Christendom?

And that Posterity may not be ignorant of the Success of these Managements in
this Point, was it not in the seventh place by the infallible consequences of
the aforesaid Breach, that for a Praeludium to all the Advantages which this
Mother of Tares might hope from this dissolution which we have seen; she knew
to arm England against the Republic of the United Provinces with so much cruel
obstinacy, that at the same time, when this last was hurried by the Land-flood
of one of her Ministers passionate or corrupted, and was to sustain on the
Continent all the Forces of France, and its Allies, after an unhappy Invasion
upon 46 or 47 Places, the former joins all its Sea-Forces with those of France,
and gave fiercely in one Expedition three cruel Battles to this later, capable
to have wrought its total Destruction, if in this conjuncture God had openly
declared himself for their Protection?

For the eighth consideration, is it not from the natural consequences of the
said management, that we now see since the last Campania, the three Puissent
Protestants of the North have entered into the entanglement of a War, which
cannot but prove fatal to one of those three Potentates; and so to the general
Protestant Body, which we may say is to know very well by a dexterity worthy of
their Principal, to make their Enemies destroy one another, a Policy which a
thousand Experiments one following the other have taught us very vell to know,
that Rome does possess in greatest excellency, and whereuuto without doubt she
ows her Elevation?

But if the Court of Rome from such an opposition as ought in all Appearance,
to be fatal unto it (if the Protestant Party knew to make use of it) has
notwithstanding the dexterity to draw from thence such real Advantages for the
advancement and maintenance of its greatness, and is by the same means arrived
at a Power to draw to its self such considerable ones, as it has already or
would have attained had the Invasion of the United Provinces succeeded; then
the Protestants themselves ought not to doubt (if for their sins God should
ever permit the effective Union of these two Puissances, whether by some Treaty
advantageous to both, as the division of some Protestant Estates may be, or
naturally by right or Succession which may happen in the greatest part) that in
such case Rome will know to take its Advantage and infallible Measures, if God
hinder not to destroy at once the Protestant Party in Europe: And from thus
much I think every man who is but a little clear sighted, and makes reflection
seriously on the Conduct of the Papal Court, must needs be put out of doubt
concerning this matter.

Rome besides has found out an infallible means by the disposal of its Purple
without being at a penny charge, to acquire the suffrage and protection of the
greater part of all the Ministers of State to the most Crowned Heads of their
Communion; for as they are commonly men of mean Birth, so, If they were of the
most Illustrious, a Cardinal's Cap by the corruption of blindness of these last
Ages, is so great a glory to a Family, that there are very few who to procure
this vanity to their House in causing it to be conferred on a Son, Brother, or
Nephew, would not submit and render themselves slaves to this Court as much as
the most passionate of all their Monks, and as those Ministers are for the most
part persons corrupted with the Affairs of the World, and who know perfectly
the weaknesses of their Princes; it is no wonder if they know and will take
exactly the favorable moments to persuade them what they please, so that Rome
has infallibly all the satisfaction it desires by the Counterpoise of the
Principles of these Interests to cast all the Princes of its Communion when it
pleases; and it is by these Maxims which cannot rise but from the bottomless
pit, that we see the Protestants so cruelly persecuted in many places of
Christendom, as in France, Hungary and Savoy; and hence it was that our
Grandfathers saw or suffered in the execrable day of Saint Bartholomew in
France, with the Massacre; that have been made in Bohemia, Hungary, and the Low
Countries, Ireland the Valley of Piedmond, the Valtoline, without setting in
the Particulars of this reckoning what the Ancient Hussites, Vandois and
Albingois have suffered in their times on the same account in diverse Places in
Europe.

And it will infallibly come to pass, that unless the Protestant States, with
regard of what I give them to know, do restifie their conduct at the moment
they least suspect, and when they have consumed their principal Forces by their
Wars and Divisions amongst themselves, or perhaps by maintaining the Interests
of some power of the Roman Communion, and when they confide in the Faith of
some Treaties; this Roman Dame (by her Managers reuniting all the Forces of her
Communion) will feed them with a dish of her cooking, to their total
destruction, which is the principal Butt of all her Applications and all her
Labors, the Sallies and Retreats of all her Guards, which she sends out into
all Parts, in the mean time all this while till a blow come, the whole
Protestant Camp sleep all in perfect rest, or at most, they are but half awake,
or perhaps busy themselves to cooperate by the destruction of its own Members
unto its own ruin, as they of the Republic of the United Provinces in the
conjuncture of the Siege of Rochelle, and England in the last place against
that Republic, have furnished us with two capital and lamentable Examples.

But if England and Holland on the foresaid occasions have provided us of
unhappy proofs of what I above propounded, what has the Swede done in an
almost equal case? for what had the Swede more to desire than to preserve
peaceably the glorious Conquests which the Great Gustavus had made in Germany,
and Chartos Gustavus had made in Poland and Denmark but to see himself at the
same time, by his confederation with England and Holland, to be one of the
Principal, who was in a condition to regulate the Bounds and Frontiers of all
the Powers of Christendom. All which advantages this Crown had naturally
preserved to it self, if acting as a true Member of the Empire, it had put it
self in a posture, as their Electoral Highnesses of Brandenburg, Saxony, and
the Palatinate, to oppose it self with the Head and other Members against the
Enemy, who did invade it with all his force; it being certain, that by one
advance of this nature, the Swede had infallibly brought about three things
which had been very profitable and glorious for him.

1. He had taken away all lawful pretense from the Emperor and Empire, whereon
they could assail his Estate in Germany.

2. He had raised no occasion to the King of Denmark to put him in condition to
recover his Estates, which the Swede had possessed in the Reign of his late
Majesty of Denmark his Father.

3. If France had not flattered himself into a persuasion, or rather had not
been assured by his managery and tampering with some corrupt Ministers of that
Crown, that the Swede was engaged in his Interests, he durst never have
attempted what he enterprized upon the Empire; and thereby this War, whereof
God knows when we shall see an end, had probably been immediately concluded
after his Irruption into Holland was defeated; which would have given an
infallible means to the Swede and England, to reassume their true Interest, to
renew much more strongly than ever the Tripple League, and so to become again
the Pillars of Peace in Europe, from which the one and the other are very far
removed, if God provide not a remedy; the Swede for his part seeing himself in
this unhappy condition about to loose, it may be, in a very little time, (by
suffering himself to be seized by the Current of France, and carried away to
the management of the Papal Emissaries) all the Conquests which the great
Gustavus had gloriously made, for having opposed with all its Forces the
Establishment of its Tyranny.

Let it not displease the Swedish Ministers of State, that were of the opinion
to declare themselves against the Empire, to understand that there was a very
great difference of the time of great Gustavus from this. That Heroic Monarch
leagued himself with France for the advancement of his Progress in Germany,
because he entered into it in the quality of a Restorer of the Protestant and
German Liberty, and when France at the same time declared for sustaining the
same Liberty.

But in this juncture the Swede himself was an Essential Member of the Empire;
and whereas France formerly employed his Arms to sustain that Liberty he in
this juncture imploys them to oppress the same. It is hence evident, that the
Swede joining himself unto his own true Interest, ought in common, with the
rest of the Empire, Head and Members, to have opposed all his Forces against
this Puissance; and so much the more, because he might see by what France had
endeavored to execute against Holland, and their Electoral Highnesses of the
Palatinate of the Rhine and Brandenburg, what he was himself to expect of
France, if they had prospered in their first Invasion, and in all his vast
Designs against the Empire.

But if the Swede, to secure all in case that France, by the sequel of the War,
had lost its Establishments in Alsatia (which is the point that seemed to have
produced this Declaration against his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg) had
desired any president and particular Stipulation of his Imperial Majesty and
his Allies, it is very probable that in the beginning of the War, when all
sorts of Events were dubious, his Imperial Majesty and his Allies, would have
given that Crown all the satisfactions and securities which it could reasonably
desire in that point: and that which may justify this against all Objections,
is, that it was very remarkable and manifest, that his Electoral Highness and
his Allies, did not, till the very last Extremity, take those strong
Resolutions of opposing his Enterprise: So that it is certain, that if the
Swede, by his Invasion of the Estates of Brandenburg, had not drawn on him the
Storm which at present overwhelms him, he had till now, according to all
appearances, been in the peaceable possession of all his Estates and
Establishments through the whole Extent of the Empire.

But whatever have been the Counter-marches of Holland, and England, and
Sweden, on the said occasions, it being impossible to hinder what is already
done, I believe it becomes the generosity and prudence of Protestant Princes,
to strip themselves from all prejudices which might divide them, and apply
themselves seriously to all the means that may unite them, as the fundamental
point of their preservation; and which may render vain all the deceits their
common enemies can project or take in hand for their destruction: and so much
the more, because they ought formally to conclude it for a positive Truth, that
the Court of Rome, which by the principle of its Interest, neglects nothing
that may procure their destruction, directs indifferently in certain Cases, the
State-Councils of the Monarchies of its Communion, though otherwise cruelly
divided by their particular Interests, or will find an infallible secret to
delude their deliberations, when they find them contrary to their Interests and
Intentions.

And to prove this truth in an uncontrollable manner, I will make it good,
without departing from this Age, by four positive and cogent Examples upon this
Subject.

Example 1. France neglects nothing in the conjuncture of the last Troubles of
Bohemia, to persuade his Electoral Highness the Elector Palatine of the Rhine,
to attempt the Conquest of that Realm, engaging himself for that purpose, to
furnish him with all sorts of real Assistances and Succors, which in that
Conjuncture, by all sorts of Circmstances, appeared to be the true Interest of
France, without all contradiction; notwithstanding, when the Prince was engaged
in the Affair, because the matter of Religion was concerned therein, Rome knew
so well to manage the Councils of France, by the means of Spanish Pistols, that
France did not only fail of all those points in this matter, but by an
imparallel'd treachery, (the Palatine House being oppressed in the consequences
through the evil Suits of that War) made a private League with the House of
Bavaria, of the Roman Communion, who had invaded the state of the former, and
in consequence thereof, France was the capital and principle cause, which
hindered that his Serene Highness, the Elector Palatine of the Rhine, has not
been fully re-established in all the Estates and Dignities of his House.

Example 2. A fatal experience, as I have elsewhere observed, has been but
too apparent in the most Illustrious House of Austria, which in the surrender
of Rochel, has felt that fatal point which has broken all its Forces, when in
its greatest state of glory, and reduced it to such an abasement, as was
capable to have drawn on it a total destruction, if two thirds of Europe had
not generously confederated with all their Forces, in this last conjuncture to
sustain it. The great Spinola who past by Rochel in the time of the Siege,
foreseeing the Surrender of this place, [by the means he foolishly suggested
of shutting them out from the Sea] if it were not readily relieved, and
therewith the losses that thereupon would follow to the prejudice of this
House, insisted like a man of worth, at the Council Table at Madrid, pressed it
with all his Judgment and Experience, to cause that place to be relieved; his
Reasons were strong, and the greater part of the Ministers of the Council were
convinced; nevertheless, because the Affairs of Religion were concerned, or
rather a point of the Roman Mummery and Bigottery, one single word of the
Pope's Nuntio overbore all, and caused Rochel to be abandoned on that account,
and with it the most essential Interests of this Imperial House, were
sacrificed at the only appearance of a Papal Emissary.

Example 3. The three United Grisons were oppressed by the House of Austria,
this Commonwealth put themselves under the Protection of France, who for some
time, by the help it sent by the Marquess of Coevres, and the Duke of Rohan
acted with vigor enough for their Protection, so much the more, for that the
latter in a few Months did such things in the Valley of Valtolline, as
surpassed all imagination, and have immortalized his memory. But because Rome
by a principle of its Interest made it self a party to the Event of this War,
as gave in this conjuncture most real proofs of its Authority in these Courts;
France made its Treaty so with the House of Austria, without concerning the
Grisons therein, for excluding the exercise of the Reformed Religion from the
Valleys of Borneo, the Valtoline, and County of Chavanes, that these two Powers
were reconciled upon this point in effect to force that Republic to pass it by
Articles before provided by the Pope's Nuntio; which caused the Grisons, seeing
themselves betrayed by the French, through timerousness, corruption, or
otherwise, to make a second Treaty with the House of Austria with very
burdensome Clauses, as to the concern of these Exercises, whereof I shall speak
hereafter in the Sequel of this Discourse.

Example 4. In the Year 1672, when the Arms of France were in so high a point
of prosperity, that all Europe looked on the Republic of the United Provinces
as an Estate almost undone; his most Serene Electoral Highness, the Duke of
Brandenburg, who judged profoundly of all consequences which were to be
expected from the ambitious Enterprises of France, if no opposition were made
to the Current of these prosperities, acquired to himself both the glory of
being the first Prince of Christendom who generously drew his Sword for the
protection of this distressed State, and did also by his most vigorous
Representations at the Court of Vienna, cause his Imperial Majesty (rising out
of his unhappy Lethargy, whereinto some corrupted Counselors had plunged him)
to resolve to arm vigorously, and League with his said Electoral Highness, for
the maintenance and protection of this Republic. In consequence of this
determination, his Electoral Highness being advanced to the Bank of the Rhine
with a considerable Army, the Count Montecuculi commanding an Imperial Army,
marched therewith to that end, and were in prospect of doing together some
considerable thing in favor of that Commonwealth. France allarmed with the
march of these two German Armies, sent away Marshal Turenne with a Body of an
Army, who might observe the motions of these two; but by the diverse Marches and
Counter-marches which these two Armies made, and specially that of Brandenburg,
sometimes making as if he would pass the Rhine in many places, and sometimes as
if he would fall on the Allies of France on the other side the Rhine; the Army
of Turenne was so beaten out, that in the end of the Campania it was in a
manner wholly dissipated, and was indeed in so pitious an Estate, that it is
certain, that all what Turenne could have done in that conjuncture, was only
to bring himself into a condition to defend himself against one of these
Armies; but if their conjunction had really followed upon a public confidence
and appointment, Turenne's destruction had been notoriously inevitable: and his
Electoral Highness of Brandenburg, who knew how easy it was to destroy
Turenne, and the consequences which might ensue, made all these things to be
vigorously represented at the Court and Council of Vienna; this Representation
took effect, and thereupon positive Orders were expedited and sent to
Montecuculli to join with his Electoral Highness, and in conjunction without
delay to fight Turenne; which by that single success would have dissolved all
the secret and manifest contrivances of France, and by this blow alone have
withdrawn the whole Empire and Holland from oppression. But for the interest of
the Roman Court the matter was carried quite otherwise; His Majesty of Great
Britain suffered himself to be persuaded in this Juncture to consent, by an
express Declaration which he reported himself to his Parliament, to give
liberty of the Exercise of Religion in favor of the Non-conformists of his
Realms; which was not done so much, as we may easily conceive, to favor the
Conventicles of some particular Puritans or Anabaptists, as under this name to
indulge somewhat with the Roman Catholics. Now as this Countermarch of
England was one of the First Fruits which the Court of Rome had promised it
self from the ruin and destruction of the United Provinces, we must not be
surprised, if that Court have, and then did actually move every stone to make
this destruction solidly real: but as that which capitally opposed this design,
consisted in the success of his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg's Success in
his undertakings against Turenne, (the destruction of that Army being
sufficient to re-establish the Republic of the United Provinces, and its
re-establishment to overturn all the Progresses of the Church of Rome in
England) it was here that the Jesuit took up his Rest to break off that blow,
in which he succeeded too well, against the Universal Interest of all Europe;
for Montecuculi, instead of receiving an Order to join with the Army of
Brandenburg, and to fight Turenne, received one quite contrary, which formally
forbad him both the one and the other; and as nothing is comparable to the
Impudence of these venerable Fathers for pushing forward this affair to their
end, their first endeavors were by different attempts to make his Electoral
Highness of Brandenburg to suspect the sincere Intentions of his Imperial
Majesty; which was so much the more easy for them to do, because his Electoral
Highness of Brandenburg had received formal Letters from the Court at Vienna,
which related unto him precisely the very Order which his Imperial Majesty had
sent to Montecuculi to join and fight; and his Electoral Highness having
thereupon summoned Montecuculi to execute the Order, Montecuculi, who knew he
had received an Order quite contrary, and had no knowledge of the former, could
do no less than refuse both the one and the other of his Electoral Highness's
Proposition; nor could his Electoral Highness otherwise than doubt of his
Imperial Majesty's sincere Intentions upon this refusal: and at the same time
that they practiced to inject these Suspicions into the mind of his Electoral
Highness, the same Emissaries neglected nothing that might bring Montecuculi to
suspect the sincere Intentions of his Electoral Highness; which Suspicions were
but too much impressed upon him for his part: so that it was not to be wondered
at, if his Electoral Highness did at last suffer himself to be persuaded, as
these Emissaries had insinuated by a third hand, that the House of Austria did
privately carry on a particular Treaty with that of France; which seemed so
much the more likely, because his Electoral Highness saw daily the miserable
condition of Turenne's Army to increase, and yet Montecuculi to continue in his
obstinate refusal to fight it. But as all this was nothing but
misunderstanding, so yet notwithstanding these Emissaries had the means to
employ his Serene Highness the Duke of Newburg to busy himself mightily to
manage a particular Peace for his Electoral Highness with France; which this
Prince in suspicion and despite of the Imperial Conduct, suffered himself to
be drawn to accept, with so much the more reason, because on the part of
Holland, it was pretended they had not performed all they were engaged to; and
as for the Empires Interest, he should preserve his entire Liberty if France
should attack it. Now by the whole sincere Warp of this History here related,
we may see how rash a thing it is to judge of the Actions of a great Prince; it
being certain, that in this Juncture, all Europe found themselves extremely
divided about what they were to judge of the proceedings of his Electoral
Highness. But as this Prince for his own Honor would have his Imperial Majesty
well to know, that he had a just resentment of the proceedings of Montecuculi;
so this General was greatly surpised at his return to Vienna, that his Master
demanded so rigorous an account of his Conduct, and the Reasons why he had not
joined the Army of Brandenburg, and fought Turenne, after he sent him precisely
an express Order: but if Montecuculi was surprised with this demand, his
Imperial Majesty was no less, to see what his wise General replied for his
entire discharge, a precise Order of his Majesty in very good form, which
forbad him all conjunction with Brandenburg, and fighting with Turenne; and for
certain, this General had then need of all the Justice of his Cause, and of the
knowledge his Master had of his fidelity, to extricate himself from this
troublesome Affair.

I know very well that this Intrigue was one of those Engines which we never
could have well penetrated, had not the Author thereof voluntarily given us the
Key. I know that it is from this foundation that one of the most unhappy of
this Court has been formally accused to be* the Principal of this Cheat; but
to speak truth, he was not culpable at all in this Affair, but to those
Emissaries of the Court of Rome in this Court, in combination with those of
France upon the aforesaid principles; the chief of whom found means to
intercept the said Original Order, so as to transmit by the same dispatch, a
false Order, but very well counterfeit both in the Sign and Seal, and that by
those people who have not begun now first of all to contrive such surprises; it
being certain that High Hungary had not been so often in flames, had it not
been that these Emistaries had held so great credit and relation in the said
Court.

His Imperial Majesty, his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg, and the Count
Montecuculi, know if I speak true, in every particular which has come to their
notice, in this Affair. I know that scarce one of these three, or perhaps none
of them, yet know well the Original, nor the Principles of these secret Engines
which have been set at work in this Conjuncture; and what I know thereof is not
from them, but from a place where no particular of this whole Negotiation is
unknown, nor of the Principles that animated it; it being most certain, that if
the Catholic Account had not been found in England, France could not have
brought about this Cheat so easily; but upon the feasibleness of this last
Principle, the venerable Society having voluntarily taken on them to act all
the principal Seenes of this Tragi-Comedy, they applied themselves with so much
greater ardour thereunto, because, besides that they expected thence to prosper
in their Capital Design, they hoped also by that success to find some means to
blemish in some sort the Reputation and Glory of a Prince, who in the latter
part of this Age has been the principal mortification of the Court of Rome.

By the four rehearsed Examples, to which I could join many Modern ones, (if
some Respects hindered not) the Protestant Princes of Europe may see what the
Emissaries of the Court of Rome can do in the Courts of their Communion,
whenever the Interest of Religious matters are concerned: And since these
Emissaries have been, and are, as History convinces us, in full possession of
the power of promoting the greatest part of the Wars which for many Ages past
have from time to time molested Christendom; and that all these Wars, as well
as the present, have been kindled by them only in prospect to some particulars
conducing to dilate the Papal Dominion, and to work the destruction of the
Powers and People who are naturally opposite to such Projects and Designs, I
leave it to all the Protestant Princes of Europe to judge if their safety can
be solidly established in their Leagues and Confederations with the Princes of
the Roman Communion, as it may be undoubtably effected by their Leagues and
Consederations amongst themselves, if the matter be practicable: and all these
are so many Arguments to prove the necessity they have to reconcile, without
delay and loss of time, all the different Interests which divide them.

I know, by the Engagements that have been made since the last year against the
Swede it will be very difficult to reconcile this Affair; so much the more,
because it is without doubt the Interest of the Empire to expulse out of all
the extent of its Territories all foreign Powers, amongst whom the Swede is
unhappily comprised under his prejudice, with so much the more Justice, in that
by his unhappy Conduct he has imprudently drawn the storm on his own head;
nevertheless, I dare say, speaking as a Protestant, and pretending to speak to
Protestants, that I believe all the Protestant States of Germany ought to yield
somewhat to the memory of the great Gustavus; that Hero of our Faith did so
great things to sustain the Protestant Communion throughout the whole extent of
the Empire, etc.

Here I have omitted the Apology for the Swede, which this Author pursues
heartily and largely from his 65 to his 84 page, wherein he excuses the King by
his Minority, corruption of his Council, and power of his Uncle Count Magnus de
la Guardie.

But Page 67, he would have Restitution to be made to the Dane and Brandenburg;
that is, Wismar and Schonen to the one, and Stetin to the other. As for
Brunswick and Osnaburg, he pretends they had no ancient quarrels with the
Swedes, but have particular reasons to favor him; and that they are heroically
generous, and would sacrifice some part of their Estates for the Public Peace.

Page 69, he says, that whilst France retains a sooting in Alsatia, the Swede
ought also to be retained in the Empire to balance; and that Denmark,
Brandenburg, and Brunswick united, cannot avail so much as the Swede. And Page
70, that he will at least enjoy Deux-Ponts; and therefore ought not to be so
much provoked by extreme rigor, by reason of his Alliances with the Palatine
and French Families.

Page 71 and 72, he represents the danger of the Families of Austria, Newburg,
and Bavaria, united by League or Marriage; the Palatinate Family, for default
of Heirs, to fall to Newburg, and the Austrian to the same, or Lorain; who by
Combination with the Ecclesiastics and other Romans, may endanger the
Protestants, divided and watched by Rome.

Page 75, He Apologizes for his Apology, and would have it to be understood
upon supposition the Swede should change his Conduct, forsake France, and
adhere to the Empire: So Page 76 and 77 Brandenburg's Arms may assist against
France with the Dane and Brunswick also, and all together make a diversion,
hasten Peace, recover Flanders.

Page 78 and 79, Otherwise whilst Sweden adheres to France, Peace cannot be
attained without restitution to Sweden.

And Page 82 and 83, Sweden expelled from Germany will be better able to
prolong the War in Denmark, and so draw succors out of Germany to the
weakening of their forces against France.

Page 83. The Hollander will not willingly suffer the Dane to be sole Master of
the Sound, nor the English if the Hollander were content.

Page 84. He says, the Swede ought the rather to make the desired
satisfaction, because the first breach of the Articles of Munster were made by
the Enterprise of France upon Treves, Colmar, Schelstead, and all the Banks of
the Rhine, etc. to the violation of that Peace.

Ibid. He proceeds; Now this Peace betwixt the Protestant Princes of the North
may be made for ought I can see to hinder it; and being England and Holland
have accorded their differences, all the Protestant Powers may make also a
Politic Union for the preservation of every one of them in particular, which
Union as to the Protestant States, which are Members or Vassals of the Empire
under which I comprehend also the two Northern Crowns, may be established, as I
conceive, on these Conditions.

First, for the maintenance of the Interests of the Empire, and his Imperial
Majesty.

Secondly, for their own particular preservation, and that of their Allies, and
in the matter of the second Article they may make a Politic Union with
Reservation for the Interests of the first with his Majesty of Great Britain,
and the United Provinces for their particular preservation, and principally for
the preservation of the Protestant Religion in all places wherever it should be
assailed or oppressed by the Artifices of the Court of Rome, or Princes of that
Communion.

And as to some ancient grudges upon some Pretensions betwixt some Protestant
States in the Empire, which are yet to be regulated, it should be ordered that
every one should continue in his Rights, and that no armed hostility should be
practiced betwixt these States, but they should rather endeavor to clear and
avoid their differences by the moderation of their Friends, Allies, and
Confederates.

For this being established in this manner, his Imperial Majesty and the whole
Empire could not but well approve, that a Body so considerable should
unanimously agree for the first Article of their Confederation to sustain one
another Interests against all; and it would naturally follow upon this
agreement, that as the Republic of Venice has very judiciously taken for its
particular Interest the general of all Italy; the Protestants of Germany taking
for their principal Interest that of the Empire in general; this would
necessarily follow thereupon, that the Emperor and Empire would be politically
obliged to take for their Interest the preservation of the Protestant States,
which would by consequence draw on very favorable successes to the advantage
of the Protestant Body through the whole extent of the Empire and elsewhere:
and the Emperor and Empire ought so much the more cleave to this Interest; for
that it is certain, that if this great blow were once given, the Emperor and
Empire needed no more to fear the practices or secret workings of France with
the Electors and private Princes of the Empire of the Roman Communion, nor of
all their armed attempts on that part; and this being not established, the
Emperor and Empire shall be in a perpetual condition to fear every thing as
they both have at present, if the principal Princes of the Protestant Body in
the Empire had not generally joined their Forces to those of his Imperial
Majesty; and the Empire in that juncture, when France by its formidable Armies
and public and secret Leagues with the greater part of the Princes and
Electors of Roman Communion in Germany, thought to extend his Victorious
progress to the Danube or beyond, which without the assistance of the
Protestants he had doubtless executed too well.

Being then an Union of this nature can produce such good effects, by all these
Reasons according to the small Intelligence I have, I conclude afresh, that if
the Northern Peace be a thing possible, and the Union of the Protestant States
in the form and under the clauses and reservations aforesaid; in as much as to
establish the repose and glory of the Empire on the side of France, no more is
required than to force the French Army to repass the Rhine; whoever counsels
the Emperor and Empire, and all its Allies, according to the pressing
solicitation of a certain party to treat with France in the Estate things now
stand, should do the same thing with a Physician, who seeing his Patient
assailed with a mortal disease, if not fundamentally cured, should
notwithstanding advise him to take no other than palliative Remedies.

And one of the first truths which ought to be considered, is, that all the
Arms of the Emperor and Empire, Spain, Holland, and their Allies, have not
hitherto taken one single piece of ground of the Ancient Patrimony of France,
and that France brought its Arms actually into Campania, and in the places of
the Empire, Flanders, Brabant, Haynalt, Luxemburg, Limburg, Lorain and
Burgoigne, and has actually advanced its Conquests in some of these Provinces.

Now to make an honorable and sure Peace, it is necessary to employ solid means
for the Expulsion of the French Armies from the said Countries, and to force
them to submit to such a Peace which may work the security and satisfaction of
all the said Estates, and this satisfaction and assurance, if it must be such
as I have declared, it must herein essentially consist.

First, as to the Empire, that he willingly reduce himself to the Fortress of
Brissac, unless his Imperial Majesty shall choose rather to consent that this
place, if it be conquered from France, should be absolutely demolished, or
together with its dependences given to some Prince of the Protestant Communion;
for in this second case it cannot but be altogether safe and wholesome to expel
all the French out of the Dominions of the Empire, the same is to be concluded
of the Bishopric in the Country of Metz.

Secondly, as to what concerns Spain, France should be content to reduce it
self to the State of the Pirenean Peace.

Thirdly, that to recompense Holland for Mastrick, which this Republic is
obliged to concede unto Spain to save shipwreck, and for satisfaction for the
damage of the unjust War which France had made on them, Dunkirk or some other
place of equal value shall be given them.

And in the fourth place, that his Highness of Lorain shall be fully
established in his Dukedoms of Lorain and Bar.

I must be excused from speaking of what remains to be speculated in favor of
other Confederate States, because I have no good nor precise cognizance thereof.

But to come to a Peace both sure and honorable, there are preliminaries
without which it is certain our end cannot be attained, and when it does
succeed, all that cannot be called solid and sure.

To attain to the one and assure the other, we must proceed to means to
establish in France what would so settled make France to contain it self
modestly in its just bounds, without unreasonable interposing and attempting on
its Neighbors.

The one and only means to reduce France to this point, is to reestablish, as I
have said above, the Civil and Protestant Liberty throughout the whole extent
of that Estate, the one of the said establishments being notoriously
inseparable from the other, and that all the Confederate States should stiffly
stand, not to hearken to any Propositions of Peace, till this double
Establishment were made, and that for the securing it, the Protestant Party
should be possessed of some of the strong and maritime places they formerly had.

Neither ought any person to imagine that I am herein carried only with passion
for my Religion: for I absolutely affirm, that withont a real execution of the
said two Articles, nor solid Peace can be made with France, and that it is the
only means to stop at once the ambitious Sallies of the Monarch of that Nation
by a total incapacity, whereof this establishment only can be a possible
execution.

And that the Reader may more sensibly apprehend this Truth, I entreat him to
read with a little consideration before he proceeds any farther, my particular
observations of the effects which followed in Europe upon the fatal Surrender
of Rochel; the reading of that alone will make him understand that which we are
about, and the solidity of my precedent Proposition.

But notwithstanding all the unhappy mischiefs successively befallen the House
of Austria by this only error of State on its part, for not having employed all
its Forces to hinder this surrender, it will for all that perhaps not be easy
for that Illustrious House (such is the Zeal it unhappily reserves still for
the Interests of a Court which has caused all its misfortunes) to be persuaded
to favor the Establishment of the Protestant Party in the Kingdom of France;
to help nature herein, I believe it is necessary for their content by way of
prelude thereto, unanimously and in a public way to demand a Session of the
States General of France, to effect the establishment of the Common Liberty,
which will be unanimously embraced by the three Orders of that Estate, and in
the consequent explication of the means of Security for its maintenance, it
will not be absolutely impossible to attain our purpose of the second part of
my Proposal.

Now all the Confederate States with the House of Austria and that Illustrious
House, are more than positively concluded of this point, in this present
Conjuncture not to hearken to any Peace, but in doing what heretofore the Kings
of England and Dukes of Burgundy practiced in common with the Kings of France
and States General of his Realm; for this Imperial House and all its Allies
have more than sufficiently proved by what succeeded upon the Pirenean Peace,
that no security can be re-established by any Treaties made with the present
Ministers of that Realm by the most solemn Oaths and straitest ties of
Consanguinity, which were not strong enough to hinder the violation of that
Peace; there is therefore a necessity to reduce him thereto, in the manner
aforesaid and no other way, which will infallibly draw after it such
consequences as will be wholly for the advantage of the said Confederation, and
the Protestant Party in France.

These Propositions are too advantageous to the House of Austria for them to
reject them; and it is certain, that if all the aforesaid States, act in
Combination and with a perfect Union to procure all these benefits, they will
be able fully to attain them, and bring all France perhaps into a mutiny to
make their Monarch consent thereto.

But as it would not be just that the Protestant States should act in the
foresaid Union to bring about all these benefits for the Illustrious House of
Austria and all the People of France, and forget themselves, but that at the
same time they should procure for those of their Body all the advantages that
so favorable a Conjunction could procure; I am bold to say, that all those
States by the Principles of their Faith, of their Interests, and of their
Glory, should bring them to an Unanimous Resolution to labor in this
Conjuncture two things in favor of the Electoral House Palatine of the Rhine,
with a pure and truly politic respect unto the said Confederation, and other
particular Managements.

The first is to procure to this Illustrious House a Justice that speaks
sufficiently for it self, it being certain that the same Reasons which caused
it to lose part of its Establishments, ought to cause a Restitution thereof to
be made unto it in this Conjuncture, and if the League of the Protestant States
were solidly made, and they would act with necessary vigor, they would without
doubt be in an Estate to do all things that were just and reasonable in this
point.

The second is, not to neglect by pressing Instances to urge his Palatine
Highness Prince Robert to a suitable Marriage, which might give hopes of
Successors to this Illustrious House, least (by an unpardonable neglect) the
Estates and Electoral Dignity may fall into the hands of a Prince of the Roman
Communion.

And these are two Capital Points whereunto all the said Protestant States, as
well they who have openly armed themselves, as those who have been content to
supply their several Quota's to the Arms of the Circles, as being all naturally
interessed in the Cause, ought to apply themselves, as to a point which
capitally concerns them all, and whose consequents if not prevented must needs
be fatal to the whole. But as there is no Rule so general that admits of no
exception, it may be gathered from all that I have written above, that
notwithstanding my Scruples against Confederations made with Princes of the
Roman Communion; I am far from blaming those Protestant States, who in this
last Conjuncture embraced the Interests of the House of Austria, I am persuaded
they could not dispense therewith, without betraying their true Interest, it
being certain that since the Providence of God has suffered the Houses of
Austria and Bourbon to ascend in Europe, its necessary that all the Protestant
States should since then be Confederated, and should put themselves into a
condition to balance these two, that whenever the one should invade the
Estates of the other his Corrival, he might not be able to subdue all the rest
to his blind obedience; and as it is manifest that France at the present, is
the unjust Aggressor, and by the principles of a devouring ambition alone,
without any Right, but that of his own Honor or bienseance, would raise to
himself the Title of the Conqueror, by invading the Sovereign Dominions of his
Neighbors, the Empire, Austria, Holland, and Lorrain, it may be truly said,
that all the Protestant Princes who have listed themselves with the opposite
Parties, by all the Rules of a judicious and strict Policy have ranged
themselves without contradiction in the Line of their true Interests.

First of all it ought to be considered, that in the Modern Irruptions which
the Arms of France made into Holland four years since, by the manner whereby
France attempted it, and management precedent to it, or which followed on the
Enterprise; the Monarch of this Nation has plainly taken off his Mask, and
made us visibly to know that he ought to be considered in this Conjuncture, not
only in the same Character of Conquerours of former Ages toward all Estates
who had the unhappiness to have Dominions adjacent to their Frontiers, but that
he ought also formally to be looked on as the declared Protector of the
Tyrannick Designs of the Papacy, and so the premeditated and positive Enemy and
Destroyer (if the matter had been possible for him) of all the States and
People whose Faith is naturally opposite to that Tyranny.

The second thing is, that the Imperial House of Austria forced by the threats
of its utter ruin, having in this occasion now Leagued and Confederated its
politic Interests with the greater part of the Protestant States of Europe, to
oppose it self by a joint endeavor and force to the ambitious Designs of
France; it is for the Honor of all these States to cause this Imperial House
in this Conjuncture to acknowledge that Justice, Reason, and Equity has been
the Base, the solid and unmovable Foundation whereon they have laid all their
motions; and that it is also in the Protestant, that all the oppressed Powers
of Christendom may find the Bulwark of their Security.

For Considerations of this force serve to confirm the respects of Interests
and Glory which establish the Justice of these motions of all the Protestant
States in favor of the House of Austria in a solid manner: and these motions
are so much more glorious for these Princes, and they may draw from thence so
much the more happy Events, because the Houses of Austria and Bourbon by what
has happened in Times past and present, cannot hinder it, but must needs
thereupon make reflections sufficient to open their eyes and make them know in
the conclusion:

In the first place their Imprudence in regulating their Councils and Sallies
by the passions of the Emissaries of the Roman Communion. Secondly, the
temerity and danger of attempting the ruin of any Protestant People, Prince,
or Estate. Thirdly, what the United Forces of this Party are naturally capable
to execute. And fourthly, the Honor, Candor, and Constancy of that Party;
when they are concerned to oppose unjust Enterprises, or to maintain the part
of Equity and Justice.

Reflections of this nature ought in consequence teach these two Houses, the
regard, esteem, and respect which they ought to have and reserve for a Body so
Puissant and Illustrious, as is by God's grace that of the said Protestant
Powers, and the people whereof they consist, and if this Party were always so
managed, as to insinuate into these two Houses, the Doctrine of these four
particulars, we should certainly not see those who are Natives and Inhabitants
of the Estates of those two Potentates ( France and Hungary) handled any more
in the manner they now are, nor would these two Families, whatever
Solicitations should be made on the behalf of Rome, attempt with so much
injustice as they have both done at diverse times, the ruin of the Principal
Members of this Communion.

But if in this present Conjuncture all the Protestant States (except England
and Sweden) have followed their true Interest; I persist affirming that the
same Interest engages them Capitally to rectify the Conduct of England and
Sweden; so as to neglect nothing to gain unto them these two Crowns, in
prospect of using all possible endeavors to effect an Union of all the
aforesaid Protestant States; that when by many happy Successes, the Arms of his
Imperial Majesty, the Empire, and all the Confederate States have reduced
France to that abatement that their said Interest can require, and in almost in
the manner which I have above unfolded; all these States may be in a condition
to nail the Wheel, and to produce an Universal Peace in Christendom with all
the advantages and solemnities aforesaid, both for their own particular and
general Interests, and for their particular of their Brethren through the whole
extent of the Empire, and without it, which by the said Union they may be
capable to effect (if God permit) without any Impediment from any Power; and
without this Union, it may be, some Nuncio or Emissary of Rome may possibly at
a moment, when they think least of it, secretly manage some Marriage betwixt
these Families, so as to reconcile their principal differences, and they not be
in an Estate to oppose them, nor to gather the Fruits which they might have
justly expected.

And I insist so much the more on this that the Protestant States should put
themselves in such a condition as I have said above; because it being certain
that the Emissaries of Rome have been the Instruments of the underworkings
which have raised this War, and of the League of France with the Electors of
Colen and Bavaria, the Bishops of Strasburg and Munster, and the Princes of
Newburg and Hanover, and of the measures taken for the destruction of the
Protestant Party in Europe, as is too well proved; we must not doubt, but that
Rome will make all its uttermost possible endeavors to procure it self the
honor of making peace. But that all Europe may know how far the Morality of
the Protestant Faith is distant from the black and earthly malice of the
Papacy; I think it belongs to the Reputation of the Protestant States without
any mixture with the Nuncio or any Emissary of the Court of Rome, to procure to
themselves the glory of establishing an Universal Peace in Christendom to the
satisfaction of all honest men, which by the foresaid Union they will find at
one blow to be in their power to effect, if by their private Interests and
Jealousies they bury not the Talent which God has put naturally in their
hands, not only for obtaining so great a present good, but also for
coustituting themselves for ever the infallible Guardians and Preservers
thereof; which is the Capital point at which all these States ought to aim, as
which will give them the inestimable Character of the Supreme Arbiters of all
the Potentates of Christendom and invincible Bulwarks of their Security.

And if I may be allowed to continue to unfold my apprehensions as ingenuously
as I have begun as to what I believe will be consequence of a Success of such
force, for the good and advantage of the Protestant Body through the extent of
the Empire, and by relation to them in several other places; I conceive that
all the aforesaid Protestant States having laid down their Arms, ought
seriously to apply themselves to solid means to obtain of his Imperial Majesty
a modification of the Article touching the Bishop of Osnaburg, in such manner
as this Bishopric may be successively enjoyed by the Successors of his
Highness of Osnaburg, without any mixture of Roman Catholics, it being certain
that as his Imperial Majesty is very full of a generous benignity, he seeing
with what vigor this Illustrious House has acted in this conjuncture; for his
Interests he will certainly be very easily persuaded to testify toward that
House his Imperial resentment and acknowledgement, I doubt not but that a
matter of this nature will be entangled with many difficulties; but the said
Union completely made or to the greater part, will be a Rock to all the Slights
and Machinatious of the Roman Court, against which they shall effectually split
and miscarry.

But if an Article of this force may, and as I believe it would also, be very
easy for the said States to cause to be inserted in the same Instrument of
Peace which shall be made, some little Negotiations which are necessary to
pacify and lay asleep all matter of Jealousy and discontent betwixt the two
Protestant Communions tolerated in Europe, so as to deliver them both from
some sensible displeasures.

For Example, in some Imperial Cities of the Protestant Body, to the shame of
the Princes of that Communion, the Pastors of the Lutheran Congregation are
obliged to wear, with a kind of Ignominy, a Bonnet like the Jews; it seemed to
me a just thing to dispense with them in this for the future, and leave them to
their liberty; there being no reason to constrain them to the like Infamy, this
being only an unnecessary mark of the animosity which reigned heretofore
amongst the Princes of different Communion, which ought upon all Principles of
a judicious policy be entirely suppressed and abolished throughout all the
extent of the Empire.

In other places in many Imperial Cities, where the Magistracy is of the
Communion of Ausburg, it is ridiculous to see that whilst the Jews have there,
all liberty in the exercise of their Religion; the Reformed are forced with
great inconvenience to walk to the exercises of their Devotion without the Wall
of the City, who agree with Lutherans in all the principal Doctrines of the
Christian Faith, and are, together with them, the common Butt of all the
Impressions of the Papal malice, which neglects nothing which might foment
their division, and thereby to walk on to solid means of their destruction:
Wherefore I conceive, that the States of the Protestant Communion, though of
different belief in certain points ought unanimously to endeavor to cause an
Article to be inserted in the said instrument of Peace, which might for the
future redress such Incongruities which whilst they continue, can be only seeds
of Divisions which both their proper Interest and their Charity oblige them to
suppress continually in the Protestant Body.

But as all that appears in Christian Faith is commonly animated with the
Spirit of Charity, which engages us not only to adhere to what is our peculiar,
but to what respects our Brethrens interest, especially theirs, whom we cannot
be ignorant to be actually in tribulation: I think the aforesaid Protestant
States should do a very heroic Act, if by their mediation, the interests of
their poor Brethren might be regulated in such manner, that at least the
Emissaries of Rome might not have so ample matter, whereupon to raise
persecution against them.

For Example, now for a whole Age, Europe has heard no discourse but of the
disorders which from Time to Time have risen in high Hungary, Silesia, and
other the Hereditary Countries of the House of Austria: I commend not those of
the Protestant Body of that Kingdom who for their private Interests or Ambition
may be the cause of these revolts and seditions in those Countries; but if a
great part of those disorders arise from the discontents which the want of
means to attend their spiritual Exercises do cause, which without doubt is
almost the only cause, I conceive it were a work very pleasing to be able by
humble Representations to his Imperial Majesty to cause him to establish an
Order which might for the future banish from that Country all matter of
discontent, which I judge to be very feasible.

For if his Imperial Majesty shall consider the merits of all the Successors
whom all the said Protestant State should leave behind them; so that for
Politic Reasons which engage him to prevent such disorders, he would make an
establishment for the future, that so often as in any Country, or in any
particular place, Protestants should be found to a certain number, and should
desire to have a free exercise of their Religion, they should be qualified to
procure it without other Obligation, then that of signifying by a simple act
their number and desire to the Magistrate of the place; I conceive that by such
an expedient his Imperial Majesty might cut up the root of all those unhappy
Revolts which engage him to extraordinary Expenses, and of the perpetual cares
and alarms, and other practices, which the Court of Rom's Emissaries furnish
and trouble him with to redress these mischiefs, which are more proper to cast
those Countries into flames then to establish their Repose, as fatal experience
of a whole Age cannot but have too well taught him.

And as the Peace which shall intervene will infallibly be an Universal Peace
to all Christendom, and so different Interests which concern its Tranquillity
may therein be regarded, following still my intent, which is to respect the
extent and advantage of the Protestant Faith, I must say that it will be of
great Importance for the said Protestant States to obtain of his Catholic
Majesty a Modification of the Instrument of the last Peace, which France made
with the Republic of the Grisons, as touching the matter of the Reformed
Religion in Chaveine and the Valtoline, for the Inhabitants of both parts of
that Religion who are in the said places though their Magistrates are for the
greatest part reformed, are obliged by a corruption inserted in the Treaty of
Peace to walk at least three or four Leagues on the Lord's days to attend their
Exercises of Devotion: It is most certain that it is a considerable interest of
his Majesty to consent to the Modification of this Article, if he would
preserve the Amity of this Republic; and of this I have very precise
knowledge; for if the Abbot of St. Roman, Ambassador for his most Christian
Majesty in Switzerland in the Propositions he made to some of the Republic,
had been advised to let fall a word, that the King his Master would consent to
a free Exercise of the Reformed Religion in those places; I know that the
League of that Republic with the House of Austria had been in danger to be
dissolved: for thus I judge that this represented and maintained in such manner
as it may by the Plenipotentiaries of the Protestant States, it will not be
absolutely impossible to annul this Article, which will be of extraordinary
consideration for the good of the Protestant Faith in that Quarter; many good
Souls which profess that Religion, though they reside in Italy, ardently desire
this Consolation, and this I can say of my certain knowledge.

But we have insisted long enough upon some Accessaries, let us go to the
Principal; it is so common with very many Protestants of all Orders who enjoy
peaceably according to their wish all conveniences temporal and spiritual, not
to be able to dispose themselves by the Principles of Charity to compassionate
the miseries and afflictions of their oppressed Brethren, that it is for this
Reason that I have applied my self to make them know whereunto they are engaged
in this particular for their temporal Interest.

But if in the first Point I have prospered somewhat to make known the
connection and indissoluble bond of Interests which the Providence of God has
established betwixt the subsistence of the Politic Interests of all the
Potentates of Christendom, and of the Protestants more especially with the
re-establishment of the Protestant Party in France, by the sincere Rehearsal
which I am about succinctly to make of the miseries wherein that Body of our
Brethren in that Kingdom are plunged; I would show the Protestant States for my
second Head whereto their Pity, their Charity and their Glory ought to engage
them.

To make known sincerely the Estate of the Protestant Body in France; I will
not amuse my self in expounding what is publicly known to the greatest part of
understanding persons who have traveled through that Realm, or who have taken
the pains to get some Information thereof; I will content my self only to
observe that the Emissaries of the Court of Rome having successively insinuated
into the spirits of the Monarchs of this Nation, that they could not think of
advancing their Progress abroad till after they were solidly assured of all at
home, and that therefore it was necessary for them wholly to exterminate the
Protestant Party out of their Kingdom; this Counsel has so strongly prevailed
in the Councils of these Monarks, that since Cardinal Richelieux Ministry,
nothing has been omitted to make it fully succeed.

For this purpose all the Bishops in every Diocese have had order to give
Instructions to all the Parish Priests, to hold an actual eye on all solid
means to proceed unto this destruction; and the Governors, Counselors and
Intendents of the Provinces, as well as all the Officers of Justice have had
like order to concur with the Solicitations of those Bishops; wherefore we need
not admire at the Tribulation which these poor miserables do suffer; for it is
from these fomentations that we see daily in all parts of that Kingdom;
Children rebel against their Parents, Wives against their Husbands, Vassals and
Subjects against their Lords, Household Servants against their Masters, for what
ever injury or violence is committed in these sorts of Rebellions, he that
embraces the Religion of his Prince has always reason on his side, and he
that persists in the Protestant Faith has always wrong.

So that as it is very hard in a House to regulate every thing so well that
there should not naturally arrive some accident betwixt the said Parties, these
Emissaries never loose any occasion directly or indirectly to bring about such
Contests to kindle the fire more strongly, and thence the heat more fiercely,
and if this succeeds, to insinuate their Poison.

Hereby it may appear what bitter potions the most happy and wise of the
Reformed in Popish Dominions are forced to swallow.

More than two thirds of their Temples have been demolished within these ten
years: more than half their Colleges suppressed.

No Protestant can have the least place in the Offices nor Troops of the King's
Household; and if in the common Troops persons of the highest merit rise to the
place of a Lieutenant Colonel, it is rarely seen that they pass farther: What
has befallen the Marshall Schomberg, is not an Argument to prove, that the
French Protestants that deserve well may rise thither; he is at present that
Phoenix which appears but once in an Age.

But if any Protestant be so unhappy as to have any Suit against any Roman
Catholic, he may assure himself, how little dubious soever his Cause is, his
Affair is lost.

If two Protestants have any Suits, he that Apostotizeth is sure to carry it
against him that persists in his Faith, who shall never fail to loose his Cause.

But all this abovesaid is nothing at all to that which was provided for them,
if the Invasion of Holland had succeeded, for warrant whereof I can allege one
of the most Heroic Princes of all Europe, who read himself the Declaration
ready provided, and who thereupon was struck with an Horror, and spoke
immediately with liberty his thoughts upon that point to considerable Persons;
but the ill success of that Irruption and some other Respects have caused that
Monster for the present to be laid up in due darkness.

First of all the King declared himself by this goodly Declaration, Tutor of
all the Infant Pupils of Protestant Fathers, and so condemned all those poor
unhappy Creatures to be sacrificed to the adoration of Idols.

In the second place all the Temples and Colleges of all the Royal or
Episcopal Cities or places belonging to Catholic Lords were suppressed
throughout all France.

In regard that by the Edict of Nantes every Lord having right of Fee-simple,
might have at his House the Exercise of Religion more or less extended
according to the nature of his Fee; by this Declaration it was expounded not to
extend to any places but those, which at the time of that Edict did belong to
Protestant Lords; now for that many Lords had since changed their Religion, and
the greater part of the Lands had by a natural vicissitude of things changed
Masters, thence it would have followed that no exercise of Religion in those
Fees would have been preserved in that Kingdom, though it be those only that,
so many as they be, have in the furious overthrows of Protestant Temples made
the Exercises of Religion to subsist abroad in the Country.

In the fourth place, all the Chambers of the Edict or Miparties, were by this
Infamous Declaration suppressed, and all the Miparti^^ Mayoralties which were
established in former times in favor of those of the R. Religion.

And to complete their misery by the same Declaration; all Children born in
Marriages, not blessed by the Priests of the Roman Communion after the
publication of that Declaration, were declared incapable to succeed their
Fathers and their Mothers in their Goods and Possessions.

Note that by a former Declaration all the Protestants in France, who had
received a blessing on their Marriage by the hands of a Priest of the Roman
Communion with Abjuration, in case they returned to communicate in the
Exercises of the Protestant Religion wherein they were born, were declared
Relapsed, and their Goods Confiscate.

I forbear to set down here some other Articles not so considerable as the
former, which yet were no less unjust nor malicious; the reading of the
preceding seem sufficient to me, whereby the more sound Party of the
Protestants of Europe may examine (as I do with all my heart entreat them) the
pernicious fare which the Papal Council had prepared for the Protestants of
Holland, at that very time, wherein they pretended to make them submit unto the
Dominion, Protection, or Discretion of France, and that England and Sweden in
particular may see the surprise, which the Court of Rome by the Channel of
France's Ministers had provided for them, and the Iniquity of the Cause they
have put themselves into a condition of protecting, in authorizing the
Irruptions, Burnings, and ambitious Enterprises of France on the Low Country
Provinces, and the Empire.

And all these States, and all the People of their Dominions being instructed
in their Interests, which engaged them to sustain the cause of the
Re-establishment of Liberty in France, both Temporal and Spiritual, which as to
the second Head consists in the common cause of their Brethren in this Estate;
all these Benefits cannot be effected but by a positive Union of their good
will and Forces; I leave them to consider whether I had ground to insinuate
this with all my power, praying the good God with all the ardour of my soul
that he would inspire into this Illustrious Body Sentiments and Resolutions of
Piety and Glory, such as a Cause so solid, so just, and so holy requires. I
finish the first part of my Discourse, reserving my self to press home this
matter more strongly, assaying in good earnest to open the eyes of the
Protestant Body in Europe, to make them sensibly apprehend what they are to
expect from their Enemies, and what they are in condition to do by the Forces,
which God's providence has put in their hand, not only to deliver themselves
from all these Judicious Apprehensions, but also to become the indisputable
Arbiters of the Fortunes of their Friends and Enemies.

PART II. The Error of Estate made by many Potentates in the Business of the
Reduction of Rochelle; the Consequences whereof have been the cause of most
considerable Conversions of Estate, Wars and Disorders of Europe, which we have
seen since that time.
CArdinal of Richelieu, who without doubt was the greatest Person and Minister
of State that France has of many years produced, or which it may be it shall
have hereafter for a long time, was he who first laid the Axe, to the foot and
roots of the Imperial Family of Austria, and having in an admirable manner
pierced into the knowledge of that wherein the true Interest of France might
consist, to raise the glory of its Kings to the highest degree of all
greatness; he knew also to adhere only to essential Maxims, whence so glorious
a Work ought to be commenced: And this is so true, that we may positively
conclude as a most certain thing, that whatever Mazarin has executed since,
and whatever Messieurs Le Tellier, Colbert, Louvois, and de Pompone have since
performed in our days for the Grandeur and exaltation of their Monarch, are no
other than the fruits of the Heroic Labors of that great Minister, and the
Execution of the Memoires and secret Instructions of his Ministry; it being
certain that so far as they have not departed therefrom, their Glory and
Success have been inseperably united to the greater part of their Expeditions,
and so far as they have departed from them, their Enterprises have many times
been attended with loss of Glory to their Master; these are things which we
observe sometimes by the way, whilst we confine our selves to the pursuit of
our Observations and Remarks upon some Errors of Estate in the Ministry of
France; but our design at present is to begin to observe for our private
satisfaction that Point alone for the Reduction of Rochelle, a Capital quid pro
quo of Estate of the most part of the Potentates of Europe, who might have
hindered it; if they on that occasion had known their true Interest, and the
excellent Conduct of that great Minister at the same time.

And first of all we will apply our selves only to observe what is but too well
known, I mean the misadventures, which have successively fallen out in Europe,
to the prejudice of the most powerful Estates therein, by this Reduction only,
and those greater which are ready to befall them, if some part of them redress
it not.

The Siege of Rochelle being settled about it, the Town was but weakly relieved
by the English, so that we may affirm that their last expedition which seemed
to be set out for that purpose after the death of Buckingham, was rather a
succor of show and appearance than reality, if it might not be said rather
that the good King then could not do all he would for their Relief, Holland
blind to their enemies own true Interest upon this occasion lent their Maritime
Forces to advance this Reduction.

Spain who ought more than any other Potentate to have known and apprehended
the consequences thereof, thought it better to give credence to its pretended
Council of Conscience, then to great Spinola, who having personally visited
Rochelle in the conjunctures of the Siege, and perceived the Infallibility of
its Reduction, unless speedily relieved (for it was he that gave that advice to
the Cardinal to shut it out from the Sea, the Infallible means of its
Reduction, and repented thereof too late) he prophesied punctually at the
Council at Madrid, all the misadventures which befell them, and followed upon
this Reduction, to the prejudice of the greatness of the Austrian Family.

All the Roman Catholic Party of France made it so strong a Point of Religion
to contribute what lay in them to this Reduction, that we may say of them as
sometimes the deceased and very wise Marshal of Bassompiere; They were great
fools who gave themselves no repose until by the sacrifice of their goods,
blood and lives they had effected it.

Let us now examine apart in a few words that which consequently did happen
upon this Error of Estate to the Imperial House of Austria, to Holland and
France it self; I speak of State Affairs, and also by the consequences thereof
to the greater part of the rest of Europe.

For England we need only take a small taste of the Travels and Addresses of the
late Monsieur President de Thou, Ambassador of France in England; to
understand that upon the King of England's failing to succor Rochelle, was the
foundation whereon that insinuation was advanced into the spirits of the People
of that Kingdom, that his late Majesty of Great Britain had in secret by the
persuasion of Henrietta de Bourbon his Wife, embraced the Roman Religion, and
that his designs tended to nothing more then to procure the destruction of the
Protestant Religion in England as well as in France, if it could possibly be
done; which supposition though doubtlesly false against that pious and learned
Prince, yet it was ocasioned by that unhappy slackness of supplies for the
relief of Rochelle: we may say that it was upon this foundation that France, by
the means of the said Lord Thou, gave life to the universal revolt of all
England, and to that unfortunate Catastrophe which all Europe have beheld with
horror and astonishment; and this is the very truth, that the departed
Monsieur de Thou, who was not a Person that would speak untruth, did affirm
before his death to several of his Confidents, of which some are yet alive,
that he protested that he died with sore regret, that he had intermedled with
that unfortunate Affair.

As for the most Illustrious Family of Austria, in examining what has befallen
it on these two Heads, since that fatal Reddition.

First, with respect to the Imperialists, the King of Denmark, the Elector of
Saxony, the Elector Palatine of the Rhine, the Princes of Transylvania, and all
their Confederates being humbled or destroyed; we may truly say it was in a
condition to do what it could reasonably desire in Germany; but by the
Consequence of that Reduction, France was in condition to send its Aids abroad,
and to make Alliances, and having in consequence thereof subscribed to the
Swedish League, it is easy to see what, after the Great Gustavus did set foot
in the Empire, did happen through the whole extent thereof to the prejudice of
this Illustrious House till the Peace of Munster and Osnaburg.

The eight Electorate, Brisac and Philipsburg, with all the Conquests of the
Swede in the Empire, and the enfeebling the Body of the German Church for the
Recompenses made to the Elector of Brandenburg and Prince of Meckleburg, are
the living Monuments of the failures on that side.

For Spain we may say, that till the Reduction of Rochelle it was not always
triumphant, but it had thitherto supported the weight of its greatness with
glory; and was in an Estate to make all them to fear it, who did not love it;
till then Flanders, Italy, and Germany beheld a numerous Armies on their side;
the Sea also beheld their Nval Forces of some consideration, and the Frontiers
of the Pirennes with the two Seas were their only Neighbors and Frontiers
through all the extent of Spain, and all that Isthmos acknowledged their Laws
from the Pirennes to Hercules pillars and farther; till then they preserved to
their advantage Friends and Pensioners secretly in all the Courts of Europe,
France it self not excepted, but as if all that glory had been buried in the
reduction of Rochelle, it may be truly said that whosoever shall examine the
ruins of the greatness of Spain, with their miscarriages in the greatest part
of their Designs almost perpetual since the reduction of this petty Carthage,
so that the astonishing dismembrings which this Puissance has suffered, and
the hard Treaties which it has been forced to subscribe will evince that its
glory seems to be interred in the ruins of the fortifications of this Town;
for whether it were through its Military Expeditions, or the Conduct of its
Ministers, or the little care it has had to keep its intelligence amongst its
Enemies, and after with its Allies, as well as the facility wherewith the
Ministers of France after Richelieu, pierced into the most secret deliberations
of the Council of Madrid; it is most true that after the Error of Estate on
their part, this Puissance did flutter only with one wing, which gave courage
together with other accidents of a different nature; to the Catalonians,
Portugese and Neopolitans, and likewise to the Messinese of late to enterprise
by incitation and puissant Succors of France, what they have hitherto
attempted; it being most certain that without vigorous Succors from its
Allies, it would be at present exposed to an entire invasion of the most
considerable part of its Estate, as well in the old as in the new World.

For Holland, the Case is so hot and fresh in the miseries which have befallen
them within these four years by their Error of Estate in the conjuncture of
that Siege, that certainly it is needless for me to make a long discourse to
evince this truth; for I believe there is not any man of perfect understanding,
who knows not readily, and is not well persuaded, that if Rochelle in the time
that his most Christian Majesty did attempt to subject Holland, had been in the
hands of the Protestants of France, in such manner as it was before, and as it
probably might have been if this Republic had not furnished out its Sea Forces
to make this Reduction, his most Christian Majesty had never dared to
enterprise an Expedition of that nature, and that for two unanswerable Reasons.
The first because Rochelle by its subsistence gave life to two millions of
Reformed Christian Souls which are yet in France, whatever the Jesuits please
to say, that there are but 1500000, France having in its bowels so considerable
a number of Protestants, would never have determined to have undertaken the
destruction of a Protestant Republic, which by its situation so favorable as
it had to Rochelle, was in condition to put France it self into disorder.

Secondly, they would have found themselves without a possibility or force to
have attempted this enterprise; for the Liberty of France (I mean that of
Estate) being in force and its prime (as without doubt it would have been to
this time, had Rochelle been unsubdued) the Ministers of France and their
Monarch would have been more cautious than to have attempted it: if then this
foundation be truly laid, as I shall prove it more largely hereafter, my
Masters the Estates of the United Provinces, who are persons that commonly
understand strictly to take the account of their interest, may calculate, after
they have set on one side the profits which they received from France for
Vessels which they lent or sold them to advance this Reduction, and have set on
the other side the loss which by the late Expedition of his most Christian
Majesty against them they have sustained, that which arises of gain or loss at
the foot of the account in this Commerce of theirs, and the quid pro quo of
Estate in this Juncture shall be plain.

As for France considered in it self, I speak of its State in its three
Estates, we may admire in this point the wonderful light of the deceased
Monsieur Marshal de Bassompiere, which I quoted above; for it is a truth no
more disputed, but generally known of all persons of worth and intelligence in
France of the Roman Communion; That the Liberty of all France was buried in the
reduction and demolition of the fortifications of the Town of Rochelle: It was
this City that sustained the dying liberty of France since the Reign of Lewis
the Eleventh, and which was in a condition to re-establish it, and with its
liberty to uphold also the liberty of all Europe, both in their Religious and
Civil Concerns. If the aforesaid Powers as well as France it self, ignorant of
their true interest, had not by their connivance or by their Succors brought
about the aforesaid Reduction; for to what purpose serves it for the Gentry of
France to see their Monarch triumph over all his Neighboury Princes; if this
only tend to increase the number of Slaves under his Dominion, or rather to
give them the sensible and tormenting displeasure to see the Forces and Power
of some Estates broken in pieces, who by their Subsistence and Ayds might have
had time and place to have helped them in some favorable conjuncture to break
the chains and shake off the yoke which oppresses them; whereas if no Power be
in a condition to make Head against their Prince, who shall be able to lend
them assistance to free them from their oppressions.

But that it may not be thought that I advance a strange notion, in that I
would build the safety of a whole Realm, and also of the greatest part of
Europe on the simple surrender of one Town, which has been entitled with the
name of a Rebel, we must examine it: And to penetrate into the bottom of this
matter, I consider, that in the Estate the King of France's Authority now is
there can be no other then the re-establishment of one of the three means which
I shall after expound, or some equivalent, which can hinder these Kings
absolutely to dispose of the Lives and Goods of their Subjects, and that
thereby they may not be able by the formidable multitude of people of all
degrees which are in France, their Industry, Courage and Martial Activity, to
hold all their Neighbors in perpetual and well grounded alarms; I would be
understood to speak of the means which France has had or may have in it self
to maintain or establish its liberty.

The first of these means is as ancient an Institution as the Office and name
of a King in France; for it has been since the time the ancient Franks did
conquer the Gauls; that is the Election of a Palatine or Major of the Palace,
who was the Consul and Head of the People, and the true Protector of the
Liberty of his Country, who had Power to deal as an Arbitrator betwixt the King
and his People, and to regulate and decide all their differences, and in truth
the ancient Kings of France were no other to speak properly than the chief
Captains General of their Realm, and in the Palatine resided the Principal
charges of the Estate; as the Chancellor, Constable and Admiral, and it is
very true that in this manner the Authority was very well parted betwixt the
King and his People, who were represented as for this last regard by the
Palatine: but Hugh Capet knowing very well by the consequence of what he and
Pepin had done, that the same Palatines might one day act the very same against
their Successors, he with dexterity suppressed the Office of the Palatine, and
annexed it unto the Royalty: see here the manner wherein appears the first
means whereby the liberty of Estate in France has subsisted during the two
first Races of its Kings, suppressed and abolished by a Palatine himself, in
whose Person the third Race of those very Kings did commence, whose Successors
have reigned in a continued Succession unto this day.

But as Hugh Capet could not come to this Crown but with the satisfaction of
all the Principal Members, and especially those of his own degree; this was the
cause that the evil consequences which would have arisen from the Office of
Palatine were not perceived nor redressed, as the interest of State without
doubt required; and that he might take away all resentments thereof; Hugh Capet
being too subtle and refined a Politician to leave any suspicion in his peoples
minds, he made use of this contrivance to substitute the Sessions of the States
General of the Kingdom under the name of Parliaments, of which we find very
little mention during the Reign of the Kings of the two first Races: for in as
much as the Deputies of the three Estates compose this Assembly, it may seem at
first view that Hugh Capet had not suppressed the Office of Palatine for other
purpose then to diffuse all the Authority of this Eminent Charge upon the
particular Members of the said Assembly; but these good souls did not reflect
that the Office of Palatine was perpetual, and that the Session of the
Parliament was only then held when the King had a fancy to assemble them;
albeit it is true that the States General of France, if they were in possession
would understand it otherwise, notwithstanding by the consequence we may
understand, how dangerous it is to change under what pretense soever the
Fundamental Laws of Estate, let the appearances be never so specious that the
same advantage is retained, it being certain that they who have the courage or
dexterity to modulize or conquer Sovereign Estates know better than any other
by what Maxims their Successors may be enabled to maintain themselves therein;
for when the French first conquered the Gauls they chose a King out of the
number of their Generals, they also wisely devised as I touched above, all that
might hinder their Kings from ever becoming Tyrants. Now in the Estates
Generals or Parliaments consisted the second means whereby the public Liberty
in France did subsist, so long as their Sessions were frequent; but in process
of time Lewis the Ninth having reunited the greatest part of the particular
Principalities which were in France unto the Crown, Charles the Eighth having
accomplished that great Work by his Marriage with Anne the Heiress of the
Dukedom of Britain, these Princes believing and finding themselves above all
accidents, the assembling of the Estates General of the Kingdom has been so
long discontinued, that at length all use of it has been as it were quite
lost; and thereby the second means of maintaining the liberty of France through
the whole extent thereof is vanished and dissipated as the former, then the
public liberty was in a pitiful Estate until such time as the Reformation
began to get footing in France: for as the Reformation of Luther was doubtless
the means of saving the German liberty, so the Reformation of Calvin in France
did not help a little to revive the dying liberty of that Estate.

Now by the following cruel and bloody persecutions wherewith the reformed were
thereupon pursued in France, the Head of that Party being enclosed in Rochelle,
and from thence giving life to the rest of the Party through the whole Extent
of France, it may be truly said that Rochelle in the defect of Palatines and
General Assemblies with the rest of its Party did little less in France then
what a pit or excellent Cistern of pure water does in a dry and parched place,
in the times of greatest heat, for the use of water being of an indispensable
necessity for the service of life, and these dry places in the most ardent heat
being destitute of Fountains or Rivers, as in the defect of these natural means
we think our selves happy in the comfort of Cisterns, though they be means
extraordinary, so of the like nature was the subsistence of the Protestant
Party in France: for the Palatines and Sessions of the States General in France
by their total or tacit suppression, being not able to sustain any longer the
liberty of the State; Rochelle and its Partisans as an extraordinary means so
long as it subsisted, did in one manner or other maintain this accidental
Liberty, which has entirely disappeared since the reddition thereof, so that
at this day all France is wholly fallen into a domination purely despotick, and
to speak the truth being a Body sick of ill humors which subsisted by one only
sort of nourishment, and wholly excluded from it, its death by consequent is
inevitable.

As to the tacit interest which the greater part of other Powers of Europe
might have had to oppose themselves against this rendition with as much vigor
as Spain, England, Holland and France it self ought to have done, if they had
followed their true Interest, for this they need only in the first place see
into what Estate all the Potentates of Europe would have been reduced, if the
irruption into Holland had succeeded, and if the Sovereign Lord of all things
had not taken away their light and spirit from the Ministers of France, after
they had taken Utrich and Narden, to make themselves Masters of the Town of
Amsterdam, which might have been done for some days more easily than the
Commonwealth of the United Provinces could by means of this place alone
preserved have recovered unto it self in a small time the possession of the
greatest part of their conquered Estate.

In the second place we must examine what by the loss of the Liberty of the
People of France, this Monarch disposing absolutely as I have said before of
the wealth and industry of all his Subjects is able to do and execute against
all his Neighbors, with relation thereto against all the Potentates of
Christendom, and by this Reflection all the Powers concerned to deliver
themselves from such apprehensions may see how much it imports them to redress
such an Evil; as this cannot be done without bringing about an Establishment of
the liberty of Estate in France, and that re-establishment cannot probably be
effected without restoring life to the Protestant Party of France, and being
that Party cannot re-establish it self without Puissant Foreign Aid, all these
Powers interessed in this re-establishment may see, that if so terrible a quid
pro quo of Estate have been rendered them for suffering the Protestant Party to
be subdued by the Rendition of the Town of Rochelle, they shall make it
altogether irreparable, if before they dissolve their Confederacy and put off
their Arms, they hearken to any Propositions of Peace until they have by
Succors and real encouragements brought about so desirable a re-establishment;
for without this Foundation neither Peace nor Precautions can be found, which
may possibly deliver the Christian World from the apprehension of changing as
to the greatest part of it, the State and face, both temporal and spiritual,
wherewith I conclude my small Observations concerning the aforesaid Error of
State.

Though in these Observations nothing was said of the Lords, Bishops and Clergy
of France, nor of their great and absolute Master the Pope, yet it will be very
easy from the Principles here laid down compared with the Attempts this King
of France has made for reforming his Subjects into a neutral Religion
contained in the following Articles, to evince that the Pope and Clergy both of
France and other Neighbor Countries, as much as they hate the Calvinists can
hope for no other than a mongril and precarious Religion, Discipline and
arbitrary maintenance and tolleration from the Kings of France, if once the
Reformed Religion were expelled out of his Dominions, besides that if any one
King of France should at any time change his Faith, or this King pursue his
intended Reformation and reunion, their utter ruin must thereon necessarily
ensue.

And it was for this reason the present Pope did herein imitate the wise
Counsel of his Predecessors, and did enter the League with this present
Emperor, the King of Spain, and other Catholic and Protestant Princes against
the Kings of France and Sweden to procure the liberty of France, as he did with
the King of France against Charles the Fifth, Emperor and King of Spain for
the liberty of Germany, remembering how unkindly his Catholic Majesty detained
his Holiness in captivity, and what Reformations he designed and had certainly
made, had his design taken effect in Germany, a Body though greater yet not so
united as this of France.

The Articles of a New French Reformed Religion, follow.

1. A Confession of Faith shall be drawn up in general terms, which shall
comprehend the Faith professed by both Religions without touching at all upon
these Points in which they are not agreed. 2. There shall be no Disputes about
controverted persuasions, and the Preachers shall be forbidden to preach pro or
con, and the reading of the School-Divines shall be prohibited in the Schools.
3. There shall be a Patriarch created, who shall depend on the King alone, who
shall not be married nor the Bishops. 4. The Patriarch shall dispense with
vows and degrees of Consanguinity, and shall be Head of all the Clergy. 5. The
Archbishops and Bishops shall be chosen by the Clergy of their Respective
Diocesses, who shall name three Venerable and Learned Persons of the Age of
thirty years at least, of which the King shall choose one. 6. In like manner
Benefices shall not be any more resigned, but they shall be all in the King's
nomination, except the Rectors and Parish Priests, who shall be chosen by their
Chapters, together with the Parish Priests, and those of the Cathedrals or
chief encorporated Churches of each City where they inhabit, the Bishop or his
Vicar being President, and the Prebendaries shall be fitted with learned and
pious men of the Age of thirty years at least, whereof some shall be Preachers
and Professors of Divinity, to the intent that they may instruct the Youth;
others shall visit the Diocese and have inspection over their manners, their
Revenues shall be distributed according to the first intention. 7. There shall
be an University established in every Bishopric, which shall be furnished with
the best learned Professors that can be found, which may be composed partly of
the Clergy and Canons, and shall be only a School. 8. A Seminary shall also be
established in every Bishopric on the same Foundation, to instruct those that
are Candidates of the Priesthood, if it be not found more, convenient to employ
the Canons therein according to their first Institution. 9. The Parochial
Priests alone of all the Clergy may marry, and shall not be received without
first undergoing a Severe Examination of their Capacity and shall be obliged to
make a Sermon or Exhortation of half an hour at least every Lords day. 10. The
Ministers shall be provided of Cures in the places of their Residence, and
where they cannot be provided they shall part the Service with the Curates of
the Place, and shall be in the mean time provided on the place with wages as
formerly, and some of them shall also be employed in the Universities and
Schools of Divinity, according to their Abilities, and to take away all doubts
from the Scrupulous, they shall be obliged to assist every Lord's day in the
Service of the Parish, and to communicate on yearly Festivals by the hands of
such as shall be in Orders. 11. The one half of the Cloisters shall be
suppressed, and none of the Female Sex shall be suffered to make a Vow, unless
they be above thirty years of Age. 12. The Liturgy shall be reformed, and put
into an Intelligible Language, whereunto extraordinary Prayers may be added
according to occasion, and the Curates and Preachers may also make prayers of
their own Invention in the beginning and at the end of their Exhortations. The
Vespers or Evening Prayers shall be composed of Hymns and Psalms in French, and
some part only of ancient use shall be retained in another Language. 13. A good
part also of the less needful Ceremonies shall be reformed as Torches at
Funerals, part of the Canonizations, Procession and Pilgrimages, and the
Postures of the Priest at the Altar, and the Spirits of the People shall be
taken off as much as can be from the Exterior of Religion. 14. Images shall be
taken out of Churches. 15. The Communion shall be delivered to the People on
their knees before the Host in both kinds. 16. Confession shall be made before
the Communion, and the Communion shall be administered only on the Lord's days.
17. Every one shall be obliged to Communicate once every year in his own Parish
Church, on pain of Excommunication the first and second time, and Banishment
the third. 18. No man shall be obliged to fall on his knees before the Host,
save only at the Communion. 19. Confession shall not be so frequent, and none
other save the Curates and Ancient Preachers shall take Confessions. 20.
Baptism and the Eucharist shall be the greater Sacraments, Confirmation shall
be a consequent of Baptism, or an Examen in order to the Communion, and shall
be administered by the Canons or Parochial Priests; the extreme, Unction shall
be a Sacrament, Orders and Marriage shall be administered by those who have
right to Confess, Penance shall be a necessary Work, which the Bishops,
Curates, and Confessors shall appoint unto Sinners according to the greatness
of their Crimes, and when the Scandal is public the Penance shall also be
public, but with Moderation and Discretion. 21. The Festivals shall continue,
but shall not be observed with the same exactness as the Lord's day. 22. Lent
and the Fasting-days shall be observed, but there may be exception made of all
the Lord's days in Lent, the Saturdays of all the year and all the Vigils. 23.
The Saints shall be honored, but without invoking them directly, and all
Prayers shall be directed to God alone. 24. Pardons and Indulgences shall be
reformed, and endeavors shall be used to instruct the People as much as
possible to make them apprehend that they ought to ground the Remission of
their sins on the blood of Christ.
All this and what else they can agree on shall be approved by an Assembly
General, which shall be composed of the most learned Divines of the one and the
other Religion, and they shall prepare the Confession which is spoken of above.

But herein is the difficulty, that the greater part of the Catholics fancy
that is too loose, and they of the Reformed Religion think it too little, and
are afraid they shall be deceived in what is promised them.

These Articles were testified and made notoriously known through all France by
those to whom they were addressed, by him who was sent by the King to solicit
the Reunion, a Reformade of the King's Guards, Bacary by name, and Nephew (as
he says) of the deceased Mr. Gauches Minister at Charenton. His Warrant from
the King was in these Words.

The Bearer of this Paper having order to make some Propositions on my part to
the Ministers of the Pretended Reformed Religion, they may Confide in
whatsoever he shall say unto them, and persuade them that it is not my intent
to do any thing against the Edicts and Declarations I have made at Ath. June
18. 1671.

LEWIS.

His Certificate all written in Marshal Turenne's own hand, has these Words.

You may give entire Credit to him, who shows you this Paper, and to what he
says, having order from the King to tell you, that he will perform all the
things which he shall promise you, and that this comes in the behalf of his
Majesty.

TURENNE.

The Bearer of this Paper tells the Ministers to whom he applies himself, that
4^ Bishops have promised the King, that for the advantage of the Reunion they
will cut off the Adoration of Images, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Prayers
for the Dead, that they will establish the Service in the Vulgar Tongue,
Communion in both kinds, and that for the real presence, the Divines on both
Sides shall accord thereon, and that if the Pope oppose himself, he shall be
removed, and a Patriarch established in France. These are the Reformado's own
Words.

FINIS.

