An Exact and Faithful Account of the late BLOODY FIGHT BETWEEN Captain
Hastings Commander of the Sapphire. Captain SHOWEL, Commander of the JAMES
Galley, AND JONAS RAIL, Captain of the Half Moon of Algier; a Ship of 32 Guns,
and 246 Men, with the Particulars of the Engagement, sent from on Board the
James Galley, lying in Tangier Road, September the 22d. 1681.
SEptember the 9th. about ten in the Morning, we saw a Ship S. W. by W, about
five Leagues from us, we immediately chased, the Wind was then at E.N.E, and
N.E. by E, where it continued all day, he steered S. by W; at eight this
Evening we were within Call, he hailed us in several Languages, we answered, we
did belong to the King of France, he told us, they were the Half Moon of
Algier, and had been from thence about ten weeks, we asked for Salle-Men, and
told him we suspected he was of Salle, and commaded his Boat on Board (all
which he denied) in such like discourse we held him, until we were along his
Larboard side, which was the weather side, I resolving to board him thwart the
Harse, by reason there went such a Sea, that I was confident of bringing his
Bolt sprit and Foremast by the Board, but he suspecting my design, put his
Helm a-port, and made his Starboard side the weather-side: I fired all my guns
into him: the Sapphire being a quarter of a mile a Stern of us, took the
advantage, and before the Turk could trim his Sails, run him on Board the
Starboard side abaft the Fore-Chains, it was then half an hour past 8: I
endeavored to be thwart his Harse, and twice missed, the third time I laid him
on Board, that his Boltsprit was amongst our Main-Shrouds, but with the way we
had brought his Ship a little about, and our Fore-Braces being (...), could not
back our Head-Sails, that we shot ^^^er of him in little more than a quarter of
an hour; (...) after the Sapphire was clear of the Algerine, and fell a (...)en,
which was occasioned by the loss of her Boltsprit and Foremast, it was then
three quarters past nine: I ^hen having the Algerine to deal withal alone, with
all ^is Masts standing, Stearing away before the Wind, re^olved to be thwart
his Harse, for my guns being but six ^^^nders, it was not to be hoped they could
do much good in shooting down their Masts: soon after ten, with (...) his Sails
full, I sheared thwart his Harse, he broke two of my Main-Shrouds, also our
Main-Chains, and two of our Mizon-Shrouds and Mizon-Chains, and our Gunnel down
to the Deck, but broke his Boltsprit, Head, Cutwater, Knee, and Cheeks of his
Head, so that he had a smooth Stern quite below the waters edge, we lay thwart
his Harse about half an Hour, and then being entangled with his Rigging, we
fell along his Side, with our Head to his Stern, where we lay about half an
Hour, in which time the Rigging broke, and he got off from us, but I again laid
him on Board, on the Starboard Bow, where we lay to keep him from securing his
Masts, which I expected would fall every moment, for the Knees of his Head
being gone, the Collar of his Main Stay came on the Deck, so that both Main and
Foremast were equally in danger, and at a quarter after one his Foremast came
by the Board and soon after his Main and Mizon Masts, I laid my Sails aback,
and called to them, they answered, they yielded the Ship, we immeditely went to
work to secure our Masts, and mend our Boat that it might swim which was not
done before day light, at which time we went on Board and took Possession, it
was the Half Moon of Algier, carried 32 Guns, and came out of Algier with 246
men, whereof 39 were Christians, of which 20 Engglish, they had taken a small
English Vessel bound for Bermudoes, with 20 English men, which they took on
Board, and sunk the Vessel. The Captains Name was Jonas Rail, a Turk, the
Lieutenant an English Renegado, which I caused to be hanged at my Yard Arm; the
damage we received, was 18 men killed, and 32 men wounded, and both Main and
Foremast spoiled. We took him 45 Leagues S. W. by W. half W. from Cape
Spartel: There were killed on Board the Half Moon 93 Turks and Moors, and most
of the Living wounded; the Turks positively inform me, that there is but, two
better Ships in Algier, which are Canaries and the White-Horse.

LONDON, Printed for E. L. by John Gain, and are to be Sold by Mrs. Andrews in
Lambs-Chappel, 1681.


