AN EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE King of Sweden's DANGEROUS SICKNESS; With a True
RELATION By what Means the Constant Report of HIS DEATH Has been Occasioned.

LICENSED, May 16. 1679.

LONDON, Printed for Gabriel Kunholt, Bookbinder to His Highness Prince Rupert.
1679

AN EXTRACT OF A LETTER Sent the 11th of April last past to one of the King of
France's Ministers, by a French Officer from Liungby, the King of Sweden's
Camp, at the time of His Majesty's Sickness.
My Lord,
I Cannot forbear to inform you by this Opportunity, of the King of Swedens
entire Recovery of His dangerous Sickness, which did put both the Physicians
and the whole Army into a despair; And I do not doubt, but that I shall give
you some Satisfaction, by informing you, of the particul^r Circumstances, and
of the Pious Discourses, and Kind Expressions, which this Prince made during
the heat of His Sickness; For when he found himself at first ill on the 20th of
March last past, he strove to conceal it for several days, as much as
possibly he might, by booting him, as he daily uses to do, viewing his Camp,
and keeping of His Council, until the 23d of the said Month; when he found
himself so ill, that he was forced to take his Bed, and to declare, that he had
a violent Fever, with an exceeding heat and oppression of the heart; And
finding the Fever increasing, and the time of Death approaching, he called for
his Chief Minister, made his Confession, and received the Holy Sacrament with
great Devotion, he having always lived an exemplary Life of Piety and Virtue.
Whereupon His Majesty sent for his Ministers of State, and placed the Chiefest
of them upon the side of his Bed, and told them, That whereas he perceived
himself at the point of leaving the World, he would not fail to give them His
thanks, for all the Care and Troubles, which they had taken for Him, and
charged them with several things very tenderly relating to the Queen Mother,
which I could not fully understand, being spoken in the Swedish Language, and
something low; And seeing the Chiefest Officers of His whole Army round about
His Bedside, he gave them thanks in a most obliging manner for the saithful
Services which they had done Him, and His Country; He remembered very well the
many Dangers they had run in all Encounters and Battles that had been fought,
and that next to God, He attributed to their Valor the good Issue of them all.
Next to them He gave His hearty Thanks to all the Officers of His Household, and
Menial Servants, and enlarged Himself very much upon the great troubles He had
for not being in a condition to Reward them according to their Merits; He
hoped, that God would do it, being the True Rewarder of all honest Actions: He
desired their pardon, if He had offended them, and bid them consider, that He
was a Man like themselves, and had His Failings like others; but He could
assure them, that He never did offend any of them wittingly, or with a set
intention.

And whereas His Troubles and Pains increased more and more, His Majesty
supported them with as much Courage as any could do; Yet, at last, He could not
forbear to tell us, that stood about Him, that He must needs confess, That all
what He had suffered all the time of the War, did never come near to that which
He did suffer for the present; and that the Enemy which now Attacked Him, did
use Him more Cruelly, than all the others that He had had against Him for many
years together.

He Prayed to God to have Mercy on His Soul, and with many earnest Repetitions
recommended unto Him His Kingdom and Country, which could not but be very
unhappy by His death, without Gods particular Favor and Protection; bewailing
very much, that He should leave the same in such a distracted War; but yet
comforting Himself withal, That all those that were about Him, knew very well
how He was drawn into the War, and in His Minority too, when He could not apply
such Remedies, as were necessary for to turn it another way.

And whereas He spoke all this with such tender expressions, that all the
Spectators could not forbear to bur^t out in Tears, He said to them, Pray why
do you grieve so much? I am not to be so much lamented, for I find in my self
an Assurance, that I am a Child of Heaven, and of the everlasting God; I never
did any body harm, nor any hurt to my Conscience, and I have kept my Words very
punctually to my Allies, and my Engagement to my Subjects; whom I have Loved
very tenderly, and have freely exposed my Life for their welfare; And, although
you may have after Me a Wiser King, yet never will you have any one that shall
love you more than I have done.

And the usual hour for His daily Public Prayer approaching, He desired His
Chaplain to be called for, who, in regard of His Majesty's weakness,
endeavored to shorten the Prayers, but the King told him, That it was not the
Time to do it so, for He never needed his and others Prayers more than at that
instant; But, no sooner were they ended, but that He spoke of Death with a
great deal of courage, and every one feared He should wrong himself by talking
so much; We endeavored to get away, but He no sooner perceived it, but He
called us back, and desired that He might not be buried in any great State or
Pomp, reminding them of His plain way of living, and as He never affected any
Pride in His Lifetime, so He desired to be Buried as He had Lived, seeing the
present time could not afford any unnecessary Charges; wherewith He gave us His
Hand to kiss, and took his leave with many tender expressions.

Some hours after, his Majesty was taken with a great Sweat, whereby the pains,
of the heart diminished, and after a sweet sleep of Fourteen hours together,
his violent Fever turned into a Tertian Ague, the Fits whereof lessened from
day to day, till this very day, when he had no Fit at all, so that we judge his
Majesty free from all danger, and Sweden delivered from very dangerous troubles
and disorders, which would necessarily have followed upon the death of such a
Prince.

I cannot represent unto you all the fine expressions, which His Majesty used
all this time, only I must tell you in few words, that we all, that stood
about his Bed side, did admire it, and must needs confess, that we have
observed, that within two or three months he has improved mightily, and has
got all the Parts of a Great Prince.

And I leave it to you to judge, what strange alterations his death would have
produced, and what a joy we all must have, who have seen him in this apparent
danger, and in the very Agony.

A TRUE RELATION By what means the constant REPORT OF HIS DEATH Has been
occasioned.
OVT of this Relation it is clearly to be seen, that the King of Sweden has
been dangerously ill; and whereas nothing could be more acceptable, as well as
profitable to the enemies of Sweden, then such news, many of the Country
people of Schonen, and especially the Snaphanes, snatched thereof an
opportunity to be the first to inform the Danes of his Majesty's death, in
expectation of very great Rewards, And since it happened, that one of the
several dead Corpse of some Great Officers, that had been killed during this
War, and set by in the Parish Church of Liungby, which lies very close to the
King's Camp, was according to the usual custom in that Country, with great
pomp, sent up to Stockholme for its burial, and attended through the Swedish
Camp with several Troops of Horse and Foot, the said Country people and
Snaphanes, fully took it for a solemnity of His Majesty's own Funeral, and
hastened to both the Danish Garrisons at Landscroon, and Helsenburgh, with the
news thereof; and for the greater appearance of its real Truth, it happened
that a Danish Officer was about the same time sent by the King of Denmark
toward Christianstadt, to inform the King of Sweden of the Cessation of Arms,
concluded at Nimeguen, and to proceed further toward Norway* and there to give
also the same information thereof.

But whereas the said Officer was only provided with a Passport of the Swedish
Ambassadors at Nimeguen, to this effect, and brought no Letters at all along
with him from them to the KING, nor any particular information of the
Conditions of the said Cessation; it was neither found con^^^^nt, nor an act of
Prudence, to suffer an Officer of the Enemy to pass under that pretension,
through the Swedish Territories, Army, and strong Holds to Norway, but it was
ordered that he should return for Helsingburg, and with a Swedish Passport to
go from thence by Sea, as the usual and safer way for Norway; which the said
Officer, as well as the rest of the Danish Partisans took for a Mystery and
Product of the death of the King of Sweden, and reported it accordingly.

FINIS.

