A PANEGYRIC TO Charles the Second, PRESENTED TO HIS MAJESTY The XXXIII. of
APRIL, being the Day OF HIS CORONATION. MDCLXI.

By JOHN EVELYN, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for John Crook, and are to be sold at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

A PANEGYRIC TO CHARLES the II. PRESENTED TO HIS MAJESTY On the Day of His
INAUGURATION, April 23. MDCLXI.
I Have decreed with my self (O best and greatest of Kings!) to publish the
just resentiments of a heart, perfectly touched with the Joy and Universal
Acclamations of your People, for your this days Exaltation and glorious
investiture. And truly, it was of custom used to good and gracious Princes,
upon lesser occasions, to pronounce and celebrate their merits with Elogies and
Panegyrics; but if ever they were due, it is to your Majesty this Day; because
as your Virtues are superior to all that pass^d before you; so is the
Conjuncture, and the steps by which you are happily ascended to it, Miraculous,
and altogether stupendous: So that what the former Ages might produce to
deprecate their fears, or flatter the Inclinations of a Tyrant, we offer
spontaneously, and by Instinct, without Artifice to your Serene Majesty, our
just and rightful Sovereign. And if in these expressions of it, and the forms
we use, it were possible to exceed, and so offend your Modesty; herein only
(great Sir) do we not fear to disobey you; since it is not in your power to
deny us our rejoicing, nor indeed in ours, to moderate. Permit us therefore (O
best of Kings) to follow our genius, and to consecrate your Name, and this
days exaltation to that posterity which you alone have preserved, and which
had certainly seen its period, but for your happy Restoration; so that your
Majesty does not so much accept a benefit from, as give it to your Subjects.
For though the fullness of this Days joy, be like the seven years of plenty;
yet, is that bread far more sweet, which is eaten with remembrance of the past
Famine (too bitter, alas! to be forgotten on the sudden) especially, when it
may serve to illustrate our present felicity, and conduce to your Majesty's
glory: For so the skillful Artist, studious of making a surprising piece, or
representing some irradiated Deity, deepens the shadows sometimes with the
darkest touches, and approaching to horror it self, thereby to render his
lights the more refulgent, and striking in the eyes of the Spectator.

Let us then call to mind (and yet for ever cursed be the memory of it) those
dismal clouds, which lately orespread us, when we served the lusts of those
immane Usurpets, greedy of power, that themselves might be under none; Cruel,
that they might murder the Innocent without cause; Rich, with the public
poverty; strong, by putting the sword into the hands of furies, and prosperous
by unheard of perfidie. Armies, Battails, Impeaching, Imprisonment, Arraining,
Condemning, Proscribing, Plundring. Gibbets and Executions were the eloquent
expressions of our miseries: There was no language then heard but of Perjury,
Delusion, Hypocrsie, Heresy, Taxes, Excises, Sequestration, Decimation, and a
thousand like barbarities: In sum, the solitudes were filled with noble
Exiles, the Cities with rapacious Theives, the Temples with Sacrilegious
Villains; They had the spoils of Provinces, the robbing of Churches, the goods
of the slain, the Stock of Pupils, the plunder of Loyal Subjects; no Testament,
no State secure, and nothing escaped their cruelty and insatiable avarice. For
if it be sweet in prosperity, to consider of the past adventures, if tempests
commend the Haven; War, Peace; and our last sharp sickness, our present Health
and Vigor; why should it not delight your Majesty to hear of the miseries we
have suffered; since they reinforce your own felicity, and the benefits which
we receive by it? where then should I begin but with thy Calamities, O
unfortunate England! who had only the privilege of being miserable, when all
the World were happy: But I will not go too far in repeating the sorrows which
are vanished, or uncover the buried memory of the evils past; least whilst we
strive to represent the vices of others, we seem to contaminate your Sacred
purple, or alloy our present rejoicing; since that only is sign of a perfect
and consummate felicity, when even the very remembrance of evils past, is quite
forgotten.

Miraculous Reverse! O marvel greater then Man's Counsel! who will believe that
which his eyes do see? what before a twenty years confusion had destroyed;
behold a few months have restored: But the wonder does yet so much more
astonish, that the grief was not so universal for having suffered under such a
Tyranny, as for having been so long deprived of so excellent a Prince: No more
then do we henceforth accuse our past miseries; All things are by your presence
repaired, and so reflourish; as if they even rejoiced they had once been
destroyed, Auctior tuis facta beneficiis. So as not only a Diadem binds your
sacred Temples this day; but you have even crowned all your Subjects too; so
has your auspicious presence gilded all things; our Churches, Tribunals,
Theaters, Palaces, lift up their heads again; the very fields do laugh and
exalt. O happy, and blessed spring! not so glorious yet with the pride and
enamel of his flowers, the golden corn, and the gemms of the pregnant Vine, as
with those Lillies and Roses which bloom and flourish in your Chaplet this day,
to which not only these, but even all the productions of nature seem to bend,
and pay their homage.

And let it be a new year, a new Era, to all the future Generations, as it is
the beginning of this, and of that immense, Platonic Revolution; for what could
arrive more justly, more stupendous, were even the eight sphere it self now
hurled about? For no sooner came our CHARLES on shore, but every Man was in the
Haven where he would be; the storm Universally ceased, and every one ran forth
to see our Palladium, tanquam coelo delapsum: Virgins, Children, Women,
trembling old Men, venerating the very ship that wafted our Jason and his
Heroes, ravished with the sight, yet hardly believing for astonishment; the
greatness of the miracle, oppressing our senses, and endangering our very
faith. Credetne hoc olim ventura posteritas?


I would praise you Great Prince, but having begun; where shall I make an end?
since there remains not a Topic through all that kind, but one might write
Decads of it, without offending the truth, were it as secure of your modesty;
since I am as well to consider what your ears can suffer, as what is owing to
your Virtues: On what heads shall I extend then my discourse? your Birth,
Country, Form, Education, Manners* Studies, Friends, Honors and Fortune run
through all the partitions of the Demonstrative: An Orator could have nothing
more to wish for, nor your Majesty to render you more accomplished.

Shall I consider then your Majesty as you were a Son to that glorious Father
before his Apotheosis? As you were your self a Confessor after it; As you are
now this day in your Zenith and exaltation; and as we Augure you will by Gods
blessing prove to your Subjects hereafter: For even through all these does our
prospect lead us; Nor may it be objected that what shall be spoken of your
Majesty, can be applied to any other; since the Fortune and Events of the rest
of Princes, have been so differing from yours; as seeming to have been
conducted by Men alone, and second Causes; yours only by God, and as it were by
Miracle.

I begin then with your early Piety to that Kingly Martyr whose Sacred dictates
did institute your tender years, and whose sufferings were so much alleviated
by your Majesty's early proficiency in all that might presage a hopeful and
glorious Successor: For so did you run through all his Vicissitudes, during
that implacable war, which sought nothing more then to defeat you of all
opportunities of a Princely education, as fearing your future Virtues; because
they knew the stock from whence you sprung, was not to be destroyed by wounding
the body, so long as such a Branch remained. Duris at ilex tonsa bipennibus
Nigrae feraci frondis in Algido,
Per damna, per caedes, ab ipso
Ducit opes, animumque ferro.


Whilst he Reigned and Governed, you learned only to obey; Living your own
Princely Impress; ICHDIEN.
as knowing it would best instruct you one day how to Command, and which we now
see accomplished: These then are the effects, when Princes are the Sons of
Nobles; since only such know best to support the weight, who use to bear
betimes, and by degrees; not those who rashly pull it on their shoulders;
because they take it with less violence, less ambition, less jealousy: None so
secure a Prince, as he that is so born.

But no sooner did that blessed Martyr expire, then our redivive Phoenix
appeared; rising from those Sacred Ashes Testator and Heir; Father and yet Son;
Another, and yet the same; introsuming as it were his Spirit, as he breathed it
out, when singing his own Epicedium and Genethliack together, he seemed
prodigal of his own life to have it redouble'd in your felicity: Thus, Rex
nunquam moritur. O admirable conduct of the Divine Providence, to immortalize
the image of a just Monatch: Ipsa quidem, sed non eadem, quia and ipsa, nec
ipsa est. Since that may as truly be applied to your Majesty, which was once to
the wisest of Kings: Mortuus est Pater ejus, and quasi non mortuus, similem
enim reliquit sibi post se.

But with how much prudence, is serenity attributed amongst the titles of
Princes, and the beams of the sun to irradiate their Crowns; That the Scepter
bears a Flower; since as that glorious planet produces, so does it also wither
them; and there is nothing lasting, save their virtues, which are indeed their
essential parts, and only immortal; For even yet did the clouds intercept our
day with the continuance of so dismal a storm, as it obnubilated all those
hopes of ours. It is an infinite adventure, if in a Princes Family (once
overcast) it ever grow fair weather again, but by a singular and extraordinary
providence. I mention this to increase the wonder, and reinforce your felicity.
Empires pass, Kingdoms are translated, and dominions cease: The Cecropides of
old, the Arsacides, the Theban, Corinthian, Syracusian, and sundry more lasted
not to the fourth Age without strange and prodigious tragedies; but why go we
so far back, when a few Centuries present us with so many fresh Revolutions?
How many nests has the Roman Eagle changed? Bulgarian, Saracen, Latin; In the
Comneni, Isaaci, Paleologi, etc. even till it dashed it self in pieces against
the Oetoman rock. What mutations have been in the house of Arragon? How many
Riders has the Parthenopean horse unsaddl'd and flung? How many Sicily? What
changes have been in Italy, What in France, and indeed through all Europe by
Vandals, Saxons, Danes, Normans, by external invasion, internal Faction, Envy,
Ambition, treachery and violence? The Consulate degenerated into Oligarchy,
which occasioned the Aventine sedition; Democraty into Ochlocraty under the
Tribunes and wicked Gracchi; and Monarchy it self, (the very best of
Governments) into Tyranny.

Indeed your sacred Majesty was cast out of your Kingdoms, but could never be
thrown out of our hearts; There, you had a secure seat; and the Prince that is
enthroned there, is safe* in all mutations: Keep there Sir, and you are
inexpugnable, immovable. And how should it otherwise be? A Prince of your
virtue could not miscarry, that being truly verified of Your Majesty, as well
in your perfections, as your person, Certe, videtis quem elegit Dominus in
Regem, quoniam non sit similis illi in omni populo. Nature designed your
Majesty a King, Fortune makes others; nor are you more your peoples by birth,
and a glorious series of Progenitors, then by your merits: This appeared in all
those digits of your darkest Eclipse; The defect was ours, not your Majesty's.
For the Sun is always shining, though men always see him not; and since the
too great splendour, and prosperity did confound us, it pleased God to interpose
those clouds, till we should be better able to behold you with more reverence
and security; For then it was that you prepared your self for this weighty
government, and gave us those presages of your Virtue, by what you did, for
your people, and what you suffered for them; signalizing your Courage, your
Fortitude, Constancy, Piety, Prudence and Temperance upon all occasions. Your
Travels and Adventures are as far beyond those of Ulysses, as you exceed him in
Dominions; Si quis enim velit percensere Caesaris res, totum profecto terrarum
orbem enumeret: For he must go very far that would sum up your perfections:
Your skill in the customs of Nations, the situations of Kingdoms, the
Advantages of places, the temper of the Climates; so as the Ages to come shall
tell with delight, where you fought valiantly, where you suffered gallantly,
Quis sudores tuos hauserit campus, quae refectiones tuas arbores, quae somnum
saxa praetexerint, quod denique tectum magnus hospes impleveris, and all those
sacred Vestigia of yours: Thus what was once applied to Trajan, becomes due to
your Majesty, and I my self am witness both abroad, and at home, of what I
pronounce, having now beheld you in both fortunes with love and admiration; But
this is not half, and to stop at single perfections, were to give jealousy to
the rest yetuntouched, and should I but succinctly number them all, were not to
weave a Panegyric, but an Inventory.

But amongst all your Virtues none was more eminent then your constancy to your
religion, which no shocks of Fortune, no assaults of sophisters, events and
success of adversaries, or offers of specious Friends could shake; so great a
thing it was that you did persevere, so much greater quod non timuisti ne
perseverare non posses.

But whilst Armies on earth fought for the Usurper, the Hosts of Heaven fought
in their courses for your Majesty; Spain.
dashing your greatest enemy upon that Rock, which afforded your shelter, till
that Tyranny was over past: And how welcome to Us was that blessed day qui
tyrannum abstu lit pessimum, Principem dedit optimum! He lived by storming
others, dyed in one himself, and post Nubila, Phoebus. Yet did not that quite
dissolve our fears, till that other head of Hydra was cut off, that despicable
Rump which succeeded, not by the sword, or any humane address, least we should
sacrifice to our own Nets; but by the immediate hand of heaven, without noise,
without Arms, or stratageme, the same of your virtues, more then the sense of
our own misery, universally turning the hearts even of your very Enemies; and
then that Northern Star began the dawning of this day, till your nearer
approach did guild our Horizon, brighter then the rays of the Eastern sun,
from whose spicy coast, like a true Phoenix you were to come; For so at the
sight of that Royal Bird was the memory of Sesostris, of Amasis and Ptolomy
ever fortunate, and so was yours to us; -- Tum rusticus ergo
Suspicit observans volucrem; nam creditur annus
Ille salutaris --
the happy presages of our glorious Return, stupendous indeed and almost
indicible: For no sooner did your Argo hoise fail, that the Eagles themselves
fled not swifter, then the report of your approach from ten thousand mouths of
brass, echoing from ship to ship, and shore to shore, with their thundering
voices, out done yet with the shouts and acclamations of your glad people, when
our shaken Republique rushed at once into your princely Arms for safety and
Asylum, not by the occult power of Destiny, or blind revolution, but the
extraordinary hand of Providence, whose paths are in the great Waters, and
whose footsteps are no^ known: O novum atque inauditum ad principatum iter, who
that shall write Annals, or Verses can ever forget that day? not dectepit age,
not the sick, not the tender Sex were kept back from resolving to behold that
miraculous entry of yours; The very little children pointed to you, the
striplings and young men exsulted, the Ancient men stood amazed, and those who
were under the empire of a cruel disease, leaped out of their beds, to have the
sight of you, that were the safety of the People, returning with cure and
refreshment: Others protested, they had even now lived long enough, and were
ready to expire with joy, and the transports of their spirits; as satisfied
that this Ball could not present them with an other object worthy their
admiration; others wished now to live more then ever, that they might still
enjoy their desired object; and women forgetting the pains of childbirth,
brought forth with joy, because they gave Citizens to their Prince, and
Soldiers now to their lavvful Emperor.

Your Majesty must needs remember, nor is the found yet out of your sacred
ears, when the houses of this your August Metropolis were covered with the loud
and cheerful spectators, because the earth was too narrow to contain them; the
ways and the trees were filled with the shouting of your people, LONG LIVE
KING CHARLES THE II. tamque aequaliter ab omnibus ex adventu tuo laetitia
percepta est, quam omnibus venisti. For when the wise Arbiter of things began
to look down upon us, all things conspired to make us happy; our Deliverance by
your Majesty as by another Moses, leading us out of that Egyptian bondage; or
by a nearer resemblance that of the Babylonish captivity, if not yet far
greater; since God did there only turn the heart of a Prince to let a nation
go: Here, the hearts of a whole Nation, to invite a banished Prince to come,
when no other visible power interposed. Let others boast then of their
miracles; we can produce such, as no age, no people under heaven can show; God
moving the hearts of his most implacable Enemies in a moment as it were, and
those who had been before inhumanely thirsty after your blood, now ready to
sacrifice their own for your safety; Digna res memoratu! ibat sub ducibus
vexillisque Regiis, hostis aliquando Regius, and signa contra quae steterat
sequebatur. But I suffer with too much Plenty, and what eloquence is able to
express the triumph of that your never to be forgotten Entry, unless it be
the renewing of it this day? For then were we as those who dream, and can yet
hardly be persuaded, that we are truly awake: Dies ille aeternis seculis
monumentisque mandandus, A day never to be forgotten in all our Generations,
but to be consecrated to posterity, transmitted to future Ages, and inserted
into Monuments more lasting then Brass. Away then with these Wooden and
temporary Arches, to be taken down by the People at pleasure; erect Marble
ones, lasting as the Pyramids, and immovable as the mountains themselves, and
when they fail, let the memory of it still remain engraven in our Hearts,
Books, Records, novissimo ^aud peritura die.

And yet not this altogether, because we have received a Prince, but such a
Prince, whose state and fortune in all this blessed change, we so much admire
not, as his mind; For that is truly felicity, not to possess great things, but
to be thought worthy of them: And indeed Great Sir, necessity constrains me,
and the laws of Panegyric, to verify it in your Praises, by running over at
least those other Appellations, which both your virtue has given to your
Majesty, and your Fortune acquired. For he is really no King who possesses not
(like you) a Kingly mind, be his other advantages what they may: If the
Republic belong then to Caesar, Caesar belongs much more to the Republic; and
of this you have given proof.

For no sooner were we possessed of your sacred Majesty, but you suddenly
gave form to our confused Chaos: We presently saw when you had taken the reigns
into your sacred hands, and began to fit at Stern, our deviating and giddy
course grow steady, and the fluctuating Republic at drist ready to put into a
secure Port.

You began your Entry with an act of general Clemency, and to make good the
advice of your Martyred Father, and the best Religion, forgave you bitterest
Enemies; and not only barely forgiving, but by an excess of charity, doing
honor to some, ut nemo sibi victus te* victore videatur. This was plainly
Godlike: For so rare a thing we find it, that Princes think themselves obliged;
or if they think it, that they love it; that your example will reproach all who
went before you: As you promised, so you performed it, punctually, and with
advantage. Nor indeed do you desire any thing should be permitted your Majesty,
but what is indulged your Vassals, subjecting even your self to those Laws by
which you oblige your Subjects; For as it is a great felicity to be able to do
what one will; so is it much more glorious, to will only what is just and
honorable. All other Princes before your Majesty spoke as much; you only have
performed it; nor is there a Tittle of your engagements, which even your very
enemies diffide of, much less your Friends suspect: They enjoy, and these
hope; because those were to be conciliated by present effects, these are secure
by past promises; and none that receives them of your Majesty reckons from the
time they enjoy it, but the period of your promise; because it proceeds (they
know) from a Princely and candid mind; and if it seem long in acquiring, it is
not (I persuade my self) be cause you are difficult, much less unmindful; but
that the benefit may be more acceptable, and the sense of it more permanent;
since too sudden felicity astonishes, and sometimes renders the Recipient
ungrateful, whilst your favors are not fugitive but certain. It was only for
Your Majesty to be completely happy, when you began to be so; and yet your
subjects had as much as they could well support; since you have made it your
only business to sublevate the needy, and give them as it were a new Fate,
your piety not more appearing in pardoning your Enemies, and receiving the
Penitent, then your justice in restoring the Oppressed: For how many are since
your return, returned to their own Homes, to their Wives, Children, Offices,
and Pattimonies? Addiditque Dominus omnia quae fuerant Iobi duplicia; some of
them with immense advantages; and of this the languishing Church of England is
a most eminent instance; That she, which was first and most afflicted, should
be first and chiefly refreshed.

You have taken away the affluence to the Committees, Sequestrators,
Conventicles, and unjust Slaughter-houses, and converted their z^al to the
Temples, the Courts, and the just Tribunals: Magnanimity is returned again to
the Nobility, Modesty to the People, Obedience to Subjects, Charity to
Neighbors, Piety to Children, Fidelity to Servants, and Reverence to
Religion; In sum, You are the Restorer of Your Country.

The laws that were lately quiescent, and even trampled under foot, your
Majesty has revived; and been yet so prudent in reforming, that even those
which your Enemies made upon good deliberation, you permit to stand, showing
your self rather to have been displeased with the Authors, then the Things.

As to Discipline (after the sacrifice due for that innocent blood of your
glorious Father) you are not only careful to rejectvice your self; but are
severe to discountenance it in others; and that yet so sweetly, as you seem
rather to persuade then compel; and to cure without a corrosive.

The Army is disbanded, and the Navy paid off without Tumult; because you are
trusted without suspicion, and are more secure in the public love and
affection of your people then in men of Iron, the locks and Bars of Tyrants
Palaces: And truly Sir, there is no protection to innocence, which is a fort
inexpugnable: In vain therefore do Princes confide in any other; for Arms
invite Arms, Terror, suspicion. To this only do you trust, and the few which
you maintain about your person, is rather for state, then fear. Quid enim istis
opus est, quum fir missimo fis muro Civici amoris obtectus? Here is then the
firm Keeper of our Liberties indeed, whom the Armies love for his own sake, and
whom no servile flattery adores; but a simple, and sincere devotion; and verily
such a Prince as Your Majesty, deserves to have friends, Prompt, steady and
faithful; such as You have, and which Virtue rather then Fortune procures. Of
this I obtest the fidelity of Your own inviolable Party, distinguished formerly
by the invidious name of Cavalier, though significant and glorious; but I
provoke the World to produce me an example of parallel Loyalty: What Prince
under heaven, after so many losses, and all imaginable calamities, can boast of
such a party? The Grecians forsook their Leaders upon every slight disaster;
the very Romans were not steady of old, but followed the fortune of the Common
Victor. The German and the French will happily stick to their Prince in
distress, as far as the Plate, the Tapistry, or some such superfluous moveable
may abide the pawn; But where shall we find a Subject that has persisted like
Your Majesty's, to the loss of Liberty, Estate, and life it self, when yet
all seemed to be determined against them; so as even their enemies were at last
vanquished with their constancy, and their very Tormentors wearied with their
insuperable Patience; nor can they in all that tract of Time, hardly brag of
having made one signal Proselyte in twenty Years that this difference
continued; and that because the obedience of your Majesty's Subjects, is
engraffed into their Religion and Institution, as well as into the adoration of
Your Virtues.

I would not therefore that Your Name should be painted upon Banners, or Carved
in stone, sed Monumentis aeternae laudis; and Your Majesty did well foresee,
and consult it, when you furnish^d a Subject for our Panegyrics, and our
Histories, which should outlast those frail materials. The Statues of Caesar,
Brutus and Camillus were set up indeed because they chased their enemies from
the Walls of a proud City; You have done it from a whole Kingdom; not (as
they) by blood and slaughter, but by your prudence and Counsels: Nor is it
lightly to be passed over, that your Majesty was preserved in that Royal Oak,
to whom a Civical Crown should so justly become due.

But I now arrive to the Laws you have made, and the excellent things which
your Majesty has done since you came amongst Your people. Truly, there is
hardly an hour to be reckoned wherein your Majesty has not done some signal
benefit. I have already touched a few of them, as what concerned the most, I
would I could say the rest; for you have obliged your very Enemies, You have
bought them; since never was there, till now, so prodigious a sum paid, a
sum hardly in Nature, to verify a Word only; and which the zeal of Your
good Subjects (had you taken the advantage of the fervor which I but now
mentioned, at Your wonderful Reception) might easily have absolved You of; had
You paid them in kind, and as they were wont to keep faith with your Majesty.
I provoke the World again to furnish an instance of a like generositie,
unless he climb up to heaven for it. How black then must that ingratitude
needs appear, which should after all this, dare to rebel; Or, for the future
once murmur at Your Government? Since it was no necessity that compelled You,
but an excesle of your good nature, and your charity.

Your Majesty has abolished the Court of Wards; I cannot say we have freed our
selves in desiring it, if it were possible to hope for so indulgent a Father as
Your Majesty is to Your Country, in those that shall succeed You.

The Compositions You have likewise eased us of, if that could be esteemed a
burden, to serve so excellent a Prince, who receives nothing of his Subjects
but what he returns again in the Noblest and worthiest Hospitality, that any
Potentate in earth can produce; Thus what the Rivers pay to the Ocean, it
returns again in showers to replenish them. But You Majesty would dissipate
even the very shadows, which give us umbrage; and rather part with your own
just right, then those few of your Subjects which it concerned, should think
themselves aggreiv'd, though by a mistake even of their duty.

But I should first have mentioned your settlement of the Church, His Majesty's
Declaration.
and Your bringing back the Ark of God: Your Majesty's wife composure of our
Frailties, and tenderness as well in the Religious as the Secular; whilst yet
You continue fervent to maintain what is decent, and what is settled by Law. But
what language is capable to express this Article? Let those who wait at the
Altar, and to which you have restored the daily sacrifice, supply the defect of
this period, and celebrate your piety.

Nor has yet Your zeal to the Church, lessened that which is due to the
Commonwealth; witness your industry in erecting a Council of Trade, by which
alone you have sufficiently verified that expression of your Majesty's in your
Declaration from Breda, That You would propose some useful things for the
public emolument of the Nation, which should render it opulent, splendid and
flourishing; making good your pretense to the universal Sovereignty by Your
Princely care, as well as by your birth and undoubted Title.

You have Restored, Adorned, and Repaired our Courts of Judicature, turning the
Shambles where your Subjects were lately butchered, into a Tribunal, where they
may now expect due Justice; and have furnish^d the Supreme seat there with a
Chancelour of ancient candor, rare experience; just, prudent, learned and
faithful; in sum, one, whose merits beget universal esteem, and is amongst
the greatest indications of your Majesty's skill in persons, as well as in
their Talents and perfections to serve you. Thus you have gratified the long
robe, so as now again, Te propter colimus leges, animosque ferarum
Exuimus -- And there is hope we may again be civilized.


For you are (we hear) publishing Sumptuary Laws to repress the wantonness
and excess of Apparel, as you have already testified your abhorrency of
Duelling, that infamous and dishonorable gallantry: In fine, you have
established so many excellent constitutions, that you seem to leave nothing for
us to desire, or your Successor to add either in the Ethicall or Political. --
Similem quae pertulit aetas
Consilio, vel Mart virum? --


O happy Greece for Eloquence, that have celebrated the fortune of thy Heroes
trifling Adventures! who shall set forth and immortalize theglory of our
illustrious Prince, and advance Great CHARLES to the skies? You had Poets
indeed that sung the fate of an unfortunate Lady, the theft of a simple fleece;
what would thou have done, had the glorious Actions of such a King been
spread before thee, who has not robbed with Armies, depopulated Cities, or
violated the Rights of Hospitality; but restored a broken Nation, repaired a
ruined Church, reformed, and reestablished our ancient Laws; in sum, who has
at once rendered us perfectly happy? What then have we to do with Augustus, or
Titus, with Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus, Theodosius or even Constantine himself?
There is not in any, there is not in all these Subjects more worthy of praise,
and to which your Majesty; O best of Princes, ought at all to render.

We are told Periculosae rem aleae esse, de iis scribere quibus sis obstrictus;
because it is so difficult to observe a mediocrity, where our affections are
engaged: But your Majesty is as secure from flattery, as your Virtues are above
its reach; and to write thus of ill Princes, were both a shame and a
punishment: For this the Senate condemned the History of Cremutius to the
flames; and Spartianus told Dioclesian boldly, how hard it would be to write
their Commentaries, except it were to record their Impudence, Murders,
Injustice, and the (for most part) fatal periods of Tyrants; which if any
esteem a glory, you envy not, whilst your Majesty is resolved to secure your
own by your virtue and your Justice; so as no age to come shall possibly find
an aemulator, or produce an equal. -- Fuerint aliis haec forte decora,
Nulla potest Laus esse tibi quae crimina purget.


But I shall never have done with your obligations of the public; and the
measure which is assigned me, would be too narrow but to mention briefly those
your private and interior perfections which crown your Majesty's Person, and
dazzle our eyes more then the bright purple which this day invests you. To give
instance in some; you are an excellent Master to your Domestics. Their Lives,
Conversations and Merits as well as Names, and Faces, are known to your Majesty
as the Companions of Caesar were: Honor is safe under your Banner, and the
Court so well regulated, that there is no need of Censors to inspect Men's
Manners; vita principis pro censura est. He who knows that every body eyes,
speaks and writes of him, cannot in prudence, or think, or act things unworthy
and abject: You Sir direct all your objects and motions so, as may recommend
you to posterity; and even burn with desires of immortality, so as Histories
may relate the Truth without fear or adulation.

How happy then those Servants of yours, whose fidelity and Industry is known
to your Majesty, not from the interpretation and reports of others, but your
own experience! So as you Reward as well with Judgment, as Bounry; and verily
that is true Beneficence to place your Recompense as well equally, as freely:
Most other Virtues are competent to the rest of Men; Beneficence only to a
Prince, as his most Essential property, and the noblest ingredient of his
Elogy. Hence that great Saint, as well as Courtier and Prelate has directed, Si
quis Principem laudare vellet, nihil illi adeo decorum adscriberet quam
Magnificentiam; and Critics observe, S. Chrysostom.
that where the wise King Solomon says, Multi colunt personam Principis, the
Hebrew version reads it, personam Benefici, as importing both; and in that of
his Who was greater then Solomon, Qui dominantur eorum Benefici vecantur, the
Chaldy turns, Principes vocantur, as if by a convertible figure, He could not
be a Prince who were not Beneficent; nor he that is truly Beneficent, unworthy
of that Title. I remember it is somewhere said of Saul that he Reigned but two
years; because he was so long it seems good to his people, and reigned in their
hearts; For as the Sun himself should not be the Sun, if he did not shine; no
more should a Prince be worthy of his dignity, if he unjustly Eclipsed his
influence, or abused his Magnificency. But as we said, this virtue is added to
your Maje^^ies also; who know so well to adjust its Definition by your constant
practice, rendering it (as indeed it ought) productive of your will for
glorious and honest ends only; But I now proceed with the rest.

There is such a Majesty in your Countenance, such Lenity in your Eyes, gravity
in your speech, as that for your graceful presence that may be truly affirmed
of you what was once applied to a great Prince resembling you, Iam firmitas,
Iam proceritas corporis, jam honor Capitis and dignitas oris, ad hoc aetatis
indeflexa maturitas, nonne l^nge lateque principem ostentant? since even all
these assemble in your Majesty's personage; Nor has fortune changed you after
all your Travels and Adventures abroad; but brought you back to us not so much
as tinged in the percolations through which you have been forced to run, like
the Fountain Arethusa through the River Alpheus without commixture of their
waters. None having more constantly retained his virtue then your Majesty, nor
guarded it with more caution.

And now in all this height of glory, you receive all Men with so much
humility, that the difference of your change seems to be only this; that you
are now beloved of more, and love more, treating every man, as if every man
were your proper care, and as becomes the Father of so great a Family;
Sometimes you are pleased to lay more aside the beams of Majesty, that you may
descend to do mutual offices of Friendship; as considering that these Virtues
were not concredited to you by God, for your self only, but for others also: In
short, you are so perfect a Prince, that those who come after you, will fear to
be compared to you, Experti quam sit oner^sum succedere bono Principi; since to
possess your Virtues, they must support your sufferings; nor can every head
know how to sustain the weight of such a Crown as yours, where the thorns have
so long perplexed the Lillies and the Roses of it.

I might here mention Your Heroic and masculine Spirit in dangers, and yet Your
foresight of them; Your tenderness to compassionate, Your Constancy in
suffering, Your Modesty in Prosperity, Equality in Adversity, and that
sweetness of access which attracts both love and veneration from all that
converse with You; but these have already adorned your Character by that
excellent Hand who did lately describe it. Col. Tuke.


You are frequent at Councels, Patient in hearing, pertinent in answering,
judicious in Determining, and so skillful in the several Languages, that You
many times transact by Your self, what others do by Interpreters; affecting
rather expedition in Your affairs, then insignificant State, which these
acquired parts of Your Majesty's do yet augment so much the more.

You are curious of brave and Laudable things; You love shipping, Buildings,
Gardens (having exceeded Cyrus already in Your Plantations) Piscinas, Statues,
Pictures, Intaglias, Music: You have already amass^d very many rare collections
of all kinds, and there is nothing worthy and great which can escape Your
research.

Nor must I here forget the honor You have done our Society at Greshham
College by Your curious enquiris about the Lodestone, and other particulars
which concern Philosophy; sin^^ it is not to be doubted butt hat so Magnanimous
a Prince, will still proceed to encourage that Illustrious Assembly; and which
will celebrate and eternize Your memory to the future Ages, beyond Your
Majesty's Predecessors, and indeed all the Monarchs on the Earth, when for You
is reserved the being Founder of some thing that may improve practical and
Experimental knowledge, beyond all that has been hitherto attempted, for the
Augmentation of Science, and universal good of Mankind, and which alone will
consummate Your Fame and render it immortal.

What shall I superadd to all these? That You rise early, that You are always
employed, that You love Hunting, Riding, swimming, manly Robust and Princely
Exercises, not so much for delight, as health and relaxation. Et vitae pars
nulla perit.

O best Idea of Princes, sit to me yet one moment, that I may add this last
touch to Your fair Table; nor wonder that I should attempt so bold an
enterprise; since he that would take the height of Olympus, must stand below in
the plain: Subjects can best describe their Princes Virtues; Princes best know
their Subjects, and therefore most fit to rule them. And long may You live to
rule us great Sir. We wish that all you do, or may do, be p^opitious to you, to
us, to the public; or in a wo^d, to your Majesty alone, in which both we and
the public are mutually conce^n^d. Time was (and too long alas it was!) that
what was fortunate to the Tyrant, was unhappy to your Subjects: now they a^e
common to both and reciprocal; nor can we more be happy without you, then you
without us; and truly all Princes have known, that they are seldom beloved of
God, who are hated of their People; nor can they be long secure. Vox Populi,
vox Dei est. But you have seen the Effects of our Prayers against an Usurper;
here now, O Heaven our Vows for a just Prince. Not for peace, not for Riches,
not Honors, or new conquests do we supplicate; but for all these in one, The
Safety of CHARLES. You alone snatched him out of those cruel hands, now
preserve him from them: Render him fortunate to us, to our Children, sueceeding
Generations: give him a late Successor, and when You do it, let it be such a
one as himself.

Let your Majesty now proceed in his Triumph, and hear the Acclamations of his
people; what can they more express who are ready to pave the very streets with
their bodies, in testimony of their zeal? behold all about You, the
Gratulating old Fathers, the exulting Youths, the glad mothers; And why should
it not be so? Here Is no goods publicated, none restrained or mulcted of their
Liberty, none diminished of dignity, none molested, or exiled; all are again
returned ito their houses, Relations and Properties, and which is yet more then
all, to their ancient innocenie and mutual charity.

If the Philosopher in the Ethics enquiring whether the felicity of the sun,
do any whit concern the happiness of the defunct progenitor, after much
reasoning have determined that the honor only which his son acquires by
worthy and great actions, does certainly refresh his Ghost: What a day of
Jubilee, is this then to Your blessed Father! Not the odor of those flowers did
so recreate the dead Archemorus, which the Nymphs were yearly wont to strew
upon his watery Sepulcher, as this days Inauguration of Yours, does even seem
to revive the Ashes of that sacred Martyr.

Should some one from the clouds that had looked down on the sad face of
things, when our Temples lay in dust, our Palaces in desolation, and the Altars
demolished; when these City Gates were dashed to pieces, Gibbets and
Executions erected in every Street, and all things turned into universal
silence and solitude, behold now the change of this days glorious scean; that
we see the Churches in repair, the sacred Assemblies opened, our Cities
re-edified, the Markets full of People, our Palaces richly furnished, and the
Streets proud with the burden of their Triumphal Arches, and the shouts of a
rejoicing multitude: How would he wonder and stand amazed, at the Prodigy, and
leap down from his lofty station, though already so near to heaven, to join
with us in earth, participate of our felicity, and ravished with the Ecstasie,
cry out aloud now with Us

Set open the Temple-Gates, let the Prisoners go free, the Altars smoke
perfumes, bring forth the Precious things, strovv the Ways with Flovvers, let
the Fountains run Wine, Crown the Gobblets, bring Chapplets of Palms and
Lavvrells, the Bells ring, the Trumpets sound, the Cannon roar, O happy
Descent, and strange Reverse! I have seens Englands Restorer, Great CHARLES the
II. RETURNED, REVENG^D, BELOVED, CROWN^D, RE-ESTABLISHD. Terrasque Astraea
R^visit.


And O that it were now in my power to speak some great thing, worthy this
great day; I should put all the flowers of Orators and Raptures of Poets into
one lofty and high Expression, and yet not Reach what I would say to Your
Majesty: For never since there was a City, or Kingdom, did a Day appear more
glorious to England, never since it was a Nation, and in which there either
was, or ought to be so universal a Jubilation: Not that Your Triumphal
Charriots do drag the miserable Captives, but are accompanied by freed
Citizens; perfidre is now vanquished, popular fury chayn'd, cruelty tam^d,
luxury restrained, these lie under the spondells of Your Wheels, where
Empire, Faith, Love, and Justice Ride Triumphant, and nothing can be added to
Your Majesty's glory but its perpetuity. But whence, alas! should I have this
confidence, after so many Elogies and Panegyricks of great and Eloquent men,
who consecrate the memory of this days happiness; and (were the subject,
like that of all other things) would have left me nothing more to add, unless
he who was sometimes wont to employ his pen for Your Majesty being absent,
should now be silent that you are present, and inflame me with a kind of new
Enthusiasme: I find my self then compelled out of a greatful sense of my duty
for the public benefit, and if your Majesty forbid not, or withdraw your
influence, who shall hinder, that even my slender voice should not strive to be
heard, in such an univresall consort, wherein every body has a part, every one
a share?

Permit me therefore (O best of Kings) to present, and lay these my vows at
your sacred feet, to exsult, and to Rejoice with the Rest of your Loyal
Subjects; not as I desire, but as I am able, and as I would do it to God, and
as he best loves it, Sentiendo copiosius, quam loquendo.


DIXI.

