An Exact ACCOUNT OF THE Raising the Siege OF Londonderry: And the Deplorable
Condition the TOWN was in, till happily Relieved by Major General KIRK.
Licensed, August 9. 1689. J. F.

A Gentleman, who left Londonderry on Sunday the Fourth Instant, arrived in
London on Thursday the Eighth Instant, brings this Account, Viz.

That the Irish Army seeing that Londonderry was Relie^ed, and that they were
not able to hinder Succors going in, being in ^^ead of the English Army
arriving, King James, by Advice of his Council, thought fit to Command the
Forces from before the place, to make what Strength he can to resist them,
believing himself not safe without a great Army to protect him; which Forces,
as they retired, caused the Fort of Kulmore to be blown up, and the Gunner to
be hanged, because he did not prevent the Ships going up to the Town of Derry,
and the Red and Green Castles upon the River to be demolished; and likewise
burnt the Towns of Carrick-Fergus, Colraine, Belfast, Ralpho, Strabane,
Donegall, and Antrim, with the whole Countries adjacent, even the very Grass
and Corn, driving all the Cattle before them; The Garrison Sallied out upon the
Rere, and cut off several Straglers, taking their Baggage; and had they had
some Horse, they would have given a very good Account of the Irish Forces.

The Noble Col. Walker having received the seasonable Relief, sent to
Major General Kirk to Complement him, giving him great Thanks, for that they
had endured the utmost Extremity, as having eaten all that was eatable; and at
last their Allowance was half a pound of Tallow fried with a piece of Hide, and
a pint of Meal a Day, there being some hundreds that had perished for want of
Food, and the Garrison reduced to 4000 Fighting Men, who invited Major General
Kirk to Land, and Encamp themselves on the place where the Irish Camp was. The
Men in the Swallow's Longboat cut the wooden part of the Boom, and the Ship
broke the Iron part thereof, but the Wind slacking, were forced to tow her up,
Captain Browning behaving himself wonderful well; but there being four Pieces
of Cannon, and 2000 Small-shot plied them hard upon the Shore, unfortunately
the Commander and seven Men more were killed. The Major General now desires
some Horse and Dragoons, that he may take the Field, and when he is joined with
the Enniskilling and Ballyshannon Forces, he will be not only able to secure
that part of the Country, but even to come up to Dublin Walls.

The Enniskilling Forces have done Wonders, having not only beat all the Irish
Forces, whenever sent against them, but preserved the Country entire for
several Miles, and by that means has protected several Thousands of the
English Protestants, which otherwise must have certainly perished.

We have likewise Advice from Dublin, That one Thompson, a Ship-Carpenter of
Liverpool, bought a Wherry, and pretended to go try her at Sea, went over to
Dublin on the first of August, and gave King James an Account of a great Army
coming out of England: To which the King replied, That he always believed it,
though he was persuaded by his Council to the contrary.

We likewise hear, that several of their Officers have laid down their
Commissions; and particularly Sir Gregory Burn, Sir Luke Dowdall, and Mr.
Warren of Cardaffe, being Captains of the Royal Regiment, in hopes to save
their Estates; and many more of them would do the like, there having been a
whole Regiment mutinied, laid down their Arms, saying, they would not fight
against the English, as having never lived so well, as under the English
Government, and that now the Proverb was fulfilled, That the Irish should weep
over the English- men's Graves. God grant we may live in Unity, and enjoy one
another in the Bond of Peace.

FINIS.
London: Printed for R. Wood, in Fleet Street. 1689.


