AN Exact Account OF THE TRIALS Of the several Persons ARRAIGNED At the
Sessions House in the Old-Bailey For LONDON and MIDDLESEX.

Beginning on Wednesday, December. 11. 1678. and ending the 12th of the same
Month.

Licensed, December. 18th. 1678. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by G. Hills, and are to be sold by L. Curtiss in Goat-Court
upon Ludgate Hill. 1678.

At the General Sessions of the Peace, Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, and
Jail-deliver of Nevvgate, holden for the City of London and County of
Middlesex, December. 11th. Anno Regni Caroli Secundi Regis 30. Annoque Dom. 1678.
THe Lord Mayor and three other Justices being sat, two Commissions were read,
one of Oyer and Terminer, and the other of Jail-deliver of Newgate; and after
that the usual Proclamation for the attendance of those who had any thing to do
there was made:

The Jurors for London, that had been Impannell'd and Summoned, were called to
appear, and the Defaulters Recorded; and the like for the County of Middlesex.

The Clerk Arraigned some of the Prisoners on London-side, whose Names and
Offenses were as follows.

ARRAIGNMENTS.
1. Susan Banster, alias Green, Indicted for stealing of Goods to the value of
13 l. To the Indictment she pleaded Guilty. She was one that had been Convicted
before of Felony, and was to be Transported; but as she was going, committed
this Theft.

2. Stephen Arrowsmith Indicted, for that he, the 7th. of July last, did ravish
and abuse one Elizabeth Hopkins, an Infant, of the age of eight years, against
the form of the Statute in that case. To the Indictment he pleaded Not Guilty,
and put himself on the Country.

3. John Baltee Indicted, for that he, the 3. December. 1678. at the Parish of St.
Bennet Fink, did steal a Silver Tankard of the value of 5 l. from one Thomas
Browning. He pleaded Not Guilty, and put himself upon the Country.

4. James Bateman Indicted, for that he, the 25th. of Novem. 1678. did steal a
Silver Tankard of 5 l. value, from one Nicholas Jackson. He pleaded Not Guilty,
and put himself on the Country.

5. Hanna Henman Indicted, for that she, the 12th. November. 1678. at the Parish
of St. Edmund the King in Lumbard-street, did steal from Thomas Rutty seventeen
yards of Venetian Silk, of 7 l. value. She pleaded Not Guilty, and put her self
upon the Country.

6. William Shakesby Indicted, for that he, the 4th. of November. 1678. at the
Parish of St. Sepulchers, did steal and drive away five Bullocks, color black,
of the value each of them 5 l. and one Bullock color Brindle, of 5 l. value,
of the Goods of William Lord Petre. He confessed himself Guilty of that and all
other Offenses within the benefit of Clergy.

Then the Clerk for Middlesex Arraigned some of the Prisoners in that County,
viz.

1. Samuel Thompson Indicted, for that he the 4th. November. 1678. did steal a
Silver Cup, of the value of 20 s from Thomas Halstead. He pleaded Not Guilty,
and put himself upon the Country.

2. Mary Read Indicted, for that she, the 22. November. 1678. did steal a Gold
Ring of the value of 7 s. from Stephen Higgins. She pleaded Not Guilty, and put
her self upon the Country.

3. Margaret Wood, alias Alexander, Indicted, for that she the 7th. October.
1678. did steal from one Robert Lambert a Silver Cup, of the value of 9 s. She
pleaded Not Guilty, and put her self upon the Country.

4. Mary Hipkins and Jane Baly Indicted, for stealing some Linen of 30 s.
value, from Thomas Burdekin, 21 Nov. 1678. They both pleaded Not Guilty, and
put themselves upon the Country.

5. John Leak of White-chappel Indicted, for that he the 16th. November. 1678.
did steal two Pieces of Broad-cloth from one William Mackham, off the Tenters
in Goodmans Fields, etc. He pleaded Not Guilty, and put himself upon the
Country.

6. Thomas Napton of Shoreditch Indicted, for that he, the 3 d. December. 1678.
40 yards of Broad-cloath, of the value of 16 s. per yard, did steal from one
Ralph Walford; and 20 yards more from one Anthrobus. To which he pleaded Not
Guilty, and put himself upon the Country.

7. Anne Moundsel of Holborn Indicted, for that she the 4th. Nov. 1678. a Stuff
Gown and Peticoat, and some Linen of small value, did steal from Mary Brasier.
To this she pleaded Not Guilty, and put her self upon the Country.

8. Margaret Smith Indicted, for that she, the 17th. October. 1678. did steal six
yards of Silk of a small value, two Silver Caudle Cups 3 l. 10 s. one Silver
Salt cellar 30 s. one Silver Porringer 10 s. four Silver Spoons 1 l. 4 s. a
Livery Gown 3 l. a Chamlet Cloak 30 s. and 15 l. in Money, from one Messinger.
She pleaded Not Guilty, and put her self on the Country.

9. John Johnson and Thomas Johnson Indicted, for taking away 950 l. weight of
Lead from off the Parish Church of Stepney, being thereto fastened. To this
Trespass they pleaded Not Guilty, and put themselves upon the Country.

Then the Grand Jury for London, coming in to bring in their Bills, were sworn
anew, to enquire upon the New Commissions. Which being done, the Clerk for
London Arraigned another Prisoner, viz.

10. Joseph Brown, for that he, the 16th. Novem. 1678. at All-Hallows by the
Wall, 100 yards of black Worsted Crape, of the value of 8 l. of the Goods of
Richard Croke, did steal; which he confessed himself guilty of, and of all
other offenses within benefit of Clergy.

The Prisoners for London were called to the Bar to look to their Challenges,
and the Petty-Jury were sworn, whose names follow: Franous Kenton, James
Lapley, William Hewel, Samuel Williams, William Salter, Richard Ketch, Nicholas
Ridley, William Standen, Ralph Cook, William Whitwell, Joash Ba^eman, and
Anthony Foster.

These 12 being numbered, Proclamation in the usual form was made for
Information against the Prisoners at the Bar, and for Prosecution from those,
who by Recognizance were obliged to it: And those who were Impannelled for the
Jury, but were not sworn, were dismissed.

Then the Jury were charged to enquire of John Baltee, upon the Indictment
before mentioned, whether Guilty or Not Guilty of stealing the Tankard of
Thomas Browning.

To prove the Charge, one Elizabeth Web gave this Evidence, That the Prisoner
at the Bar brought the Tankard to her house, and told her, he would either Pawn
it, or sell it: And being asked whose it was, he said, It was not his own, but
a Gentleman's hard by, who had sent him with it to Pawn or Sell. She looking
upon the Tankard, saw the Name of the Owner, and the Sign where he lived,
engraven upon it, to whom she sent immediately to know whether he had given the
Prisoner Order to Sell it or Pawn it: and kept the Prisoner till he came, which
when he did, he owned the Tankard, but denied the Prisoner had it with his
Consent, and so they carried him before the Justice.

Browning the Owner of the Tankard deposed that he was a Cook, living behind
the Exchange, that the Prisoner, the third of December last, came in there with
some other Persons to drink, and stole the Tankard, and confessed the Matter
before Sir William Turner.

Sir William Turner's Clerk witnessed his Confession before Sir William, and
that he said, he was a poor fellow and in distress, and so took it to relieve
his Wants.

The Prisoner being asked what he could now say to it, denied that he took it
out of the house; but said that a Man, whose name he could not tell, gave it
him to pawn: he confessed his being at that House that day; but was innocent of
Stealing the Tankard. But not being able to prove his affirmation, it was left
to the Jury to give what Credit they would to them.

The next that was tried, was Hannah Henman for stealing Silk from Mr. Rutty a
Mercer in Lumbard-Street.

The Witnesses were Neighbors, who deposed that the Prisoner with another
Woman, went into Mr. Rutty's Shop, and there snatched up the Silk and went
away. They followed them, and laying hold on the Prisoner, the other slipped from
them and ran for it; but they found the Silk about her; upon which they carried
her before the Magistrate, who Committed her. She being asked what defense she
could make, said the other Woman told her she had bought it, and gave it her to
carry away; but could not produce the Woman, nor would tell the Name. Whereupon
the Judge directed the Jury to find it according to so plain an Evidence; but
because the man had his Goods again, left the Value to their Consideration.

The Jury then without coming from the Bar, agreed of their Verdict, which they
gave in thus.

That, John Baltee was guilty of the Felony he was indicted for. And

That Hannah Henman was guilty of the Felony she was indicted for; but they
found the Value to be but 9 s.

After which they were discharged, and to appear at Three aclock (...) in their
Gowns.

Then the Prisoners of Middlesex-side, were called to the Bar, and bid to make
their Challenges if they pleased. The Jury then were Sworn, whose Names were,
John Cane, James Sutton, James Harper, William Rider, William Hardy, Charles
Pickering, William Thomson, Thomas Phelps, Stephen Lawrence, Thomas Cox, George
Calcott, and John Burt.

Proclamation for Information, and Prosecution being made as before, they went
on to the Trials of the Prisoners. And the first was Samuel Thomson, indicted
for stealing a Silver Cup from Halstead, and Thomas Halstead the Owner of the
Cup gave this Testimony against him.

That there came a Boy and the Prisoner together, and were walking up and down
the Street, and he sent the Boy into the Shop where no body was; the Boy takes
the Cup which was in the Shop, and coming to the Door gives it to the Prisoner.
And one that was coming by, seeing the Boy give the Man something, Cried out,
upon which the Master of the House came forth, and being told what was done,
run after them and took the Prisoner with the Cup, but the Boy was lost in a
Crowd or Twenty Boys more. That the distance of the Place where he was taken,
from the House whence the Cup was Stolen, was about twice the Length of the
Court. That he did not carry the Cup openly, but hid it under his Coat.

To this, the Prisoner said, he was coming by there, and the Boy (whose name he
could not tell, nor had he ever seen him before,) gave it him, saying he had
taken it up by the Dust Cart, and that was all he could say for himself. Being
asked what Profession he was of, he answered a Shoemaker. Upon which weak
defense the Judge told the Jury, they were to consider of the Fact and the
Value, the Party having his Cup again.

The next with whom the Jury was charged was

Mary Read, for Mr. Higgins's Ring, against whom Stephen Higgins deposed thus.

That the Prisoner had been a Customer to the Shop for near a Twelve Month, and
used to come with a high Crowned Hat covered with an Oyld Case like a Country
Market Woman, and would ask for Rings of Just such a Value, and would have them
no more nor no less. She said she lived at Holloway, and came almost every week
to the Shop; but yet she never bought above two in all, she only would cheapen,
and he lost a great many, which he believed she stole from him. The Saturday
before this Ring was gone, she came to buy a hollow Ring, which she had, and
paid for, all but nine pence, and then be lost a Ring. Upon Thursday following
when she came, having a suspicion of her, he resolved to lay wait for her. She
came and asked for a Ring of such a Value: He reached down a Box, in which
there were Rings upon every Bin, and laid it before her, she pitched upon one,
which being weighed, she said was too heavy. He, to give her an Opportunity,
turned his Back, and she took hold on it, and put one into her Bosom. When he
turned about he presently missed the Ring, and affirming the Box was full,
taxed her with it; but she denied it, and offered to be Searched. A Gentlewoman
who was by, and had seen her put it in her Bosom, told her so, and she offering
to undress her Self, they carried her into the Kitchen, and there opening her
Bosom the Ring dropped upon the Bricks in the Floor. And he said it was the
Fifth Ring she had Stole from him.

The Woman testified her seeing the Prisoner put her hand to her Bosom, and
that she heard it fall upon the Bricks, but did not see it fall. The Value or
the Ring was Sworn to be Seven Shillings.

The Prisoner with a great deal of whining denied the thing, and that it was
but a Trick of the Goldsmiths to make her pay for Rings he had lost. But the
Court told the Jury, the Witnesses Oaths were to outway her bare Allegations,
and left the Matter to them, for the Value.

Then was tried John Leake, for the Cloth of William Mackham, stolen off the
Tenters, against whom the Witnesses gave this Evidence.

Mackham Swore that he lost two and Twenty Yards of Cloth off his Tenters, part
of which was found in the hands of Susan Reynolds, who said she had it from the
Prisoner Leake, and other parts of it were found at the Dyers. He knew it to be
his Cloth, and it was of a Popinjay Green Color.

Susan Reynolds attested that he brought the Cloth to her, and desired her to
lay it up for him till he called for it. That she knew him, because he had been
with her Brother six or seven times at her house. That he told her he took up
the Cloth to carry to Sea with him, and he found it in Good-mans Fields, he
desired her to lay up part, which was found in her house, and to carry part of
it for him to the Dyers.

The Prisoner, who was a Lusty Fellow and an able Seaman, said ^^^^ing, but
that he found it, and being asked why he did not Cry it, he said he did not
understand the way of it, but could give no Evidence that he found it.
Therefore it was left to the Jury.

Thomas Napton was the next Prisoner, who was indicted for stealing Cloth from
Walford, and Anthrobus, against whom this was the proof.

Ralph Walford testified that the Prisoner was a Polisher of Looking-Glasses,
and wrought and lodged in a place adjoining to the Room where their Cloth lay.
One morning about five of the Clock he comes to Walfords house, and said that
he had been Robbed, that they had bound his feet with a Neckcloth, and his hands
behind him with a Linen Stockin, and that after they were gone, he unloosed
himself, and unbound his feet, and rising, looked what Cloth was gone, and went
to the other man Anthrobus, and brought him to see what was lost; and there
were found missing 2 Cloths of Walfords worth 8 s. odd Money, and a long
Merchants Cloth of Anthrobus worth 9 s. odd Money; that he let the Thieves in
upon their knocking, thinking they had been the Persons belonging to the
Warehouse; that he was not entrusted with the Custody of the Cloth, but
permitting him to have a Key to it, and passage through it, they thought their
Cloth securer for his lying there. That he would take a thousand Oaths, the
Cloth was there that night. That he confessed he made no Outcry when he was
before Sir William Turner.

Anthrobus swore he made such a like story to him, and said it was his weakness
that he did not cry out; that his Wife was gone out that morning by Three a
clock to washing, as she was indeed, and that the Thieves came about Four, and
he came to them about Five; That he said, he himself had lost nothing unless 3
or 4 s. of his Wives, and his Kettle, which Kettle he had lent to his own Son
in Law, 2 days before.

The Son in Law to Walford speaks to the same effect, that he said they nubled
him about the Head, and bid him go to bed, you old Dog, and then bound him;
that being told by Walfords wife, it was more like to be Evenings Work to take
away the Cloth, than Mornings, he replied, for ought he knew it might be so,
for he was out in the Evening, but when he came in, he did not miss any of the
Cloth, because he knew not what was there. And afterward said, he blessed be God
he got no hurt, but they did beat their Pistols about his head; and before had
said, he was almost killed. And the same Evidence the Woman gave. And upon
these Circumstances, they suspected the Prisoner.

He denied the Felony, and told the story in Court himself; and being asked
whether they could not have found Rope, or any more likely thing to bind him
with, than the Stock in and Neckcloth, he said there was Rope enough, but it
was not in the Room he lay in, but in the Warehouse: he confessed he said it
might be the Evenings work, because he had been forth, and did not see what the
Thieves carried away. That it was his weakness he did not pursue them, and for
fear he durst not (though he could have done it) unbind himself till they were
gone. That he appealed to the very Prosecutors, he had behaved himself
honestly, wrought hard for his living, and was never taxed with the wronging
any man of the worth of a Farthing. Which was acknowledged by the Witnesses.

Hereupon the Court left it to the Jury, whether upon these Circumstances the
Prisoner was guilty or not.

Jane Baley, and Mary Hipkins, were next tried for stealing linen from Mr.
Burdekin.

Mr. Burdekin swore that he lost the goods out of his house where his Family is
constantly in Seacoal-Lane. That his Maid could tell how.

She deposed, That she went out of her Masters house to fetch home a Child from
School, and by a hole broken in the Window laid the key there, after she had
locked the door; and she supposes the door was opened by some that took the
key out of the window, for she found it open when she returned, and that it was
about four or five in the evening: and her Mistress told her, the little Dog
barking very much, made some that were above-stairs come down, who found the
door open, but no body there; and about half an hour after they missed the
things in the Indictment. That the reason of their accusing these Women was,
because one of the Shirts was offered to be pawned by Jane Baley at Cow-cross;
and she being examined, said, she bought it of Mary Hipkins; whom also they
took upon suspicion, but she would confess nothing to them.

Jane Baley the Prisoner said, That the other Prisoner Hipkins sold it her at a
house called the Two Brewers, for 4 s. and being afterward in want of money,
would have pawned it. She could not produce any person that see her buy it, but
she brought one Mary Burket to testify, that Hipkins had said to her in her
hearing, If she did not like her bargain, she would give her the money again
upon her complaint it was too dear. And upon other discourse, Hipkins also was
heard by her to say, That had it not been for a whiffling little Cur, she would
have done her work better than she did.

All which the other Prisoner Hipkins denied, but had not the good hap to bring
Evidence to disprove it, but had offered the Prosecutor a Bond for Composition.
Upon which the Court left them both to the Jury.

Anne Mounsdel was the next, who was accused for stealing the Goods of Mary
Brasier, and thus it was proved.

Mary Brasier testified, That the Prisoner was by her permitted to lodge in her
Room for 6d. a week; and one day pretending to send her out of a false Errand,
with a feigned Letter into the Strand, to a person whom she could never find,
and in the mean time robbed her of a Gown and some Linen, and had got them
quite away, if the Landlady of the house in which they both lodged had not
stopped her, and taken her.

Eleanor Hasset, the Landlady, related her part of the Story thus, That the
Prisoner got her Daughter to write her a Letter, upon promise of a Reward: That
the Child told her, She suspected the Prisoner was a Thief, and that she her
self thought so too; and thereupon watched her, and saw her put on the Gown,
after she had sent the Woman out, and was going away with the Linen in her Lap.
She went after her, and fetched her back, though she ran from her twice, and
had her before the Justice, who committed her.

The Prisoner denied the Letter, or that she sent her out on her Errand; and
said, That the Woman had lent her the Gown, and the Linen she was to have
mended. But against the Positive Oaths of two Witnesses, her bare word the
Court thought not a sufficient Counter-proof; however they left it to the Jury.

The next was Margaret Smith, for robbing one Messenger of some Sarsnet, and
Plate, and Goods, to a very great value, and Money. Messenger, the Party
robbed, deposed, That she lodged in his house, and in the time of
Southwark-Fair last desired him, and his Wife and Kinswoman, to go with her to
the Fair, where she would make them merry, and left her Maid at home; who when
they were all gone, got the Apprentice to go for a Peck of Oysters, and in the
mean time stole away the other things, all but the Silk. When they came home
again, she asked for her Maid; and being told she was not within, she cried
out, I pray God I be not robbed; and so going to look, they found they were
indeed robbed, and so she pretended she was too. The next morning she would
have gone out, but the Kinswoman would not let her go alone, because she had
some jealousy of her; and so went with her up and down where she pretended to
go see for her Maid, and to see among the Brokers Shops for the Goods: At last,
when she was in a House at Houndsditch, she slipped from her, and was not seen,
till a Friend of hers coming to Messengers house, undertook to find her out,
and met with her. She led them another dance, by pretending to go and receive
money, which she would fain have been permitted to do alone; but the Kinswoman
telling her, she would not leave her, she continued with them, and brought them
to a Pewterers shop, where being sat down to drink, the young Woman pulled off
her shoe to ease her foot, and the Prisoner took advantage of it, and ran away;
but being overtaken, was committed to Prison. And as to the Silk, she had it on
now at her Trial, which was left at the time of the Robbery.

The Prisoner denied any hand in the Robbery, and said, that she run away,
because being not very rich, she was afraid of a Prison, which they threatued
her with. That for the Silk, she did think it had been a Piece she had sent by
her Maid to be Died, but could not prove it; nay had, after she came from the
Fair, acknowledged to the Kinswoman, it was none of hers, but the Maids.

The Court examined her about her Quality and Estate. She said, She had a
Brother, a Gentleman in the Country, allowed her 20 l. a year, with which, and
working to the Exchange, making about her acquaintance with one John Spittle,
now in Newgate for Felony, she could give no good account of it, which rendered
them suspicious of her. However, not finding any thing sufficient to prove her
guilty of the Robbery, except as Accessory, they so directed the Jury, and that
as to the Silk, of which there was manifest proof, they should consider the
value, being Died Silk.

With the Charge of these Prisoners the Jury went out, and had an Officer sworn
to keep them.

Then the Clerk for London Arraigned another Prisoner.

The Clerk for Middlesex Arraigned these following.

Edward Preston of Hamwel Indicted, for that he, the 6th. of October. 1678. did
steal a Mare, color black, of the price of 3 l. from one Edward Mullet; to
which he pleaded Not Guilty, and put himself upon the Country.

Anne Harris Indicted, for that she, the 17th. September. 1678, did steal Goods
of 10 s. value from John Jones. She pleaded Not Guilty, and put her self upon
the Country.

Richard Symel and Margaret Hutton Indicted; he, for that, the 2d. of August
1678. he did steal from Elizabeth Horner Goods to the value of 10 l. and she as
Accessory. Both pleaded Not Guilty, and put themselves upon the Country.

Then the Middlesex Jury returned, and being agreed of their Verdict, the
Foreman gave it in thus:

That Samuel Thompson was guilty of the Felony, but the Goods were but to the
value of 10 d..

That Mary Read was guilty, but the Goods were but of the value of 10 d.

That John Leak is guilty of stenling the Cloth off the Tenters.

That Thomas Napton is not guilty of stealing the Cloth of Mackham and
Anthrobus, nor did sly for it.

That Jane Bailey is not guilty, nor did fly for it.

That Mary Hipkins is guilty of the Felony, but the Goods were but of the value
of 10 d.

That Anne Mounsdel is guilty of the Felony whereof she was Indicted.

That Margaret Smith is guilty of stealing the piece of Silk, which was but of
the value of 10 d. as to the rest not guilty; whereupon the Court ordered an
Indictment to be drawn up against her, as Accessory to the other Felony, of
which there was strong suspicion.

The Verdict being Recorded, the Court Adjourned till 3 a Clock in the
Afternoon.

Post Merid. eodem Die.
After Proclamation for attendance, the London Jury were called, and the
Prisoners to their Challenges; which being none, the Jury were sworn as before:
And Proclamation for information and Prosecution being made, they were charged
to enquire of these Prisoners. First,

One White, of the Towre-Ward, was Indicted for Burglary; and acquitted.

The next that was tried was James Jackson, for stealing the Tankard from
Nicholas Jackson, who deposed thus;

That he did believe that to be the man who came into his house, and called for
a Tankard of Ale and a Toste, which when he had eaten and drank up, he called
for another; which while I went to draw, the Prisoner clapped down a Pewter
Tankard instead of the Silver, and goes away. That he was a Victualler, at the
Sign of the Cheshire-Cheese in Thames Street. That he went to sell it to a
Goldsmiths, who upon examination found that it was his.

Which the Goldsmiths attested. But the Prisoner denied that ever he was in his
house; and said, That he had bought the Tankard five years ago, of one whom he
did not know by name, nor could find, in the Minories. The Owner swore it was
his Tankard, and that he was in his house that day. And the Court left it as a
plain case to the Jury.

The third they were charged with, was Stephen Arrowsmith for the Rape
committed on Elizabeth Hopkins. To prove which, a Girl of between 9 and 10
years of Age, gave this Testimony without being Sworn.

That she saw in a Room, the Prisoner lying a top of the little Girl, but what
they did she knew not, but the Girls Petticoats were up, nor did she cry out.

The Girl that was ravished, being between 8 and 9, testified that he had had
to do with her for half a year together every Sunday, that she was hindered from
crying the first time, by his stopping her mouth, and that he gave her money
afterward; and she never discovered it, till some of her friends observing her
to go as if she were very sore, examined her, and by telling her she would be
in danger of hanging in Hell, got her to confess, that the Prisoner was her
fathers Prentice.

One Mrs. Cowel did testify that upon observing her going, and other
Circumstances, she did resolve to examine her, and made her confess, which she
did, and being searched, was found shamefully abused, and sent to the Doctors
to cure.

The like was attested by one Mrs. Sherwin, and by a Midwife, who said, she had
got a very foul disease by it.

The Prisoner with a great many tears denied the Fact, and desired some
Witnesses might be called. Among whom there was a maid that lived at the
Doctors where the Girl was for Cure, who testified that the Girl upon Taxing
her, why she did conceal it, said, she took Pleasure in it, and that upon
Examination there were no Symptoms on the Prisoner, as the Doctor said, of any
such disease as the Girl had, which was indeed the Pox; which was also attested
by one Mrs. Rawlins: and the Prisoner protesting his Innocence, alleged that
they offered a Composition.

All which notwithstanding, the Court with great detestation and abhorrence of
so Horrid and Vile an Offense, told him the Matter was so plain against him,
that he must have as great impudence to deny it, as he had wickedness to Commit
it; that her consent would not save him, for the Statute provides, that a Child
under 10 years of age, should not be abused with, or without her Consent. That
the First Violence whereby he stopped her Crying, made the Rape, had it been a
Woman above 10; that if the Parents were so wicked, as to offer a Composition,
yet that made not him innocent.

The Jury not seeming satisfied with the Evidence, the Lord Chief Justice
Scroggs and others were of opinion, that the Girl that was Ravished, might give
in her Testimony upon Oath; but it was forborne for the present, and left to the
Jury. Who were sent together to consider of their Charge, with an Officer sworn
to keep them according to Law.

In the mean time, the Clerk for Middlesex arraigned Mary Hutchins of Fulham,
indicted for that she, the 3 d. of October. 1678, did steal some Plate and Linen,
from one, to which she pleaded not guilty, and puts her self upon the
Country.

Elisabeth Gates for stealing a Cup of 14. s. Value from one Dennis King, the
14 of Novem. 1678. She pleads not guilty, and put her self upon the Country.

After a considerable space of time the Jury returned, and having answered to
their Names as called, agreed that the Foreman should speak for them, and gave
in this Verdict.

That James Jackson was guilty of stealing Nicholas Jackson's Tankard. And they
offered this further.

That Stephen Arrowsmith was not guilty of the Rape: which Verdict Mr.
Recorder, not conceiving it to be according to their Evidence, would not take
from them without further deliberation, and labored to fatisfie them of the
Manifestness of the Proof. One of the Jury being an Apothecary, said it was his
opinion, that a Child of those years could not be Ravished. Which the Court
told him was to Elude the Statute, that having provided a Punishment, had done
it in vain, if there were no offense, and so he did tax the Wisdom of a whole
Parliament; Which ought not to be. Others of the Jury, because the Girls were
not sworn, doubted of the sufficiency of their Testimony, and they had nothing
but hearsay from the other Witnesses. But the Court told them, in regard such
Offenders never call others to be by while they commit such actions, they could
expect no other Testimony than from the Party injured, which they had, and with
it of an eye Witness, both whom they forbore to Swear, because of the
tenderness of their Age; but if they insisted upon it, they should be Sworn.

Upon this the Jury went out again, and while they were deliberating,
information was given to the Court, that they had the two Children with them,
which was against the Law. Whereupon the Officer appointed to keep them, was
sent for, and it being sworn against him, that he had admitted them in, he was
sent to Newgate, though he alleged another Officer brought them to him as from
the Court, but that Officer swore the contrary, and therefore the other was
detained in Custody. The Jury being sent for about this matter, when they came,
said, they sent not for the Children, nor desired to have them: and the Court
to give further satisfaction, swore the Children, having examined them, whether
they understood the nature of an Oath, and the danger of Perjury, which they
gave a Rational account of. And the Jury went away again.

That Stephen Arrowsmith was guilty of the Rape, and they were discharged till
the next morning at Ten of the clock: it being late, the Court was Adjourned
till Seven.

Wednesday the 12. of Dec. 1678. Nine of the Clock.
Proclamation was first made for Attendance.

Then the Clerk of Middlesex called for John Worsley, who was indicted for
seducing the Kings Subjects from their Obedience, and from the Protestant
Religion. But when he was brought up, the Court thought fit to defer his
Arraignment and Trial till the next week.

He then Arraigned

Nathaniel Russell and John Watson, indicted, for that he the said Russell, 18.
Nov. 1678. did voluntarily, and of malice forethought, with a Rapier give to
William Midley a mortal wound on his Breast, of which he died, and that the
said Watson was by, aiding, abetting, comforting, and maintaining. To which
indictment both pleaded not Guilty, and put themselves upon the Country.

Then the Prisoners were called to their challenges, and the Middlesex Jury
sworn; the usual Proclamation made, and the Prisoners thus charged upon them in
Order.

Mary Hutchins indicted for stealing a Sivler Cup and Linen, against whom the
Evidence was,

That she was a Servant in the Persons house about a week, from whom the Cup
was stolen. That she being gone one morning out of the house, they missed
several things. She being suspected for them, and that she was run away,
Pursuit was made after her by a young man, who overtook her, and found the
things about her; that he charged a Constable with her, and had all the things
again.

The Prisoner could not deny her taking the Particulars, but the Owner having
them again, the Value was left to the Jury.

Edward Preston, indicted for stealing a Mare from Edward Mullet.

Mullet himself deposed, that the Prisoner was his Servant, and took the Mare
out of his Ground, and carried her to Tame, and there sold her for 30 s. and
about 3 Weeks since he was taken.

The Person that took him, deposed, that he confessed the taking of the Mare
out of the Ground, and selling her.

The Prisoner said he took the Mare, to go for a Dragooner, that when he came
to Tame, the Troop he thought to go in, was gone; and he being ashamed to carry
the Mare back again, and in his distress for money, sold her, but the man had
the Mare again. Upon which confession the Court left it to the Jury.

Elisabeth Gates was tried for stealing a Silver Cup, of 14 s Value, from one
Dennise King.

Who deposed, that she had confessed the Stealing to her, and that a little
Girl had seen her in the house that day, but she went away, and on Thursday
after was seen, and known by the Girl, Apprehended upon Suspicion, and before
the Justice confessed it.

The Prisoner did not deny being at the Woman's house, but now denied the taking
of the Cup from thence, and that ever she confessed it. Upon which the Jury
were directed to consider of the Evidence, and the Value.

Then Richard Symell Indicted for stealing the goods of Elisabeth Horner, and
Margaret Husen, as accessory, after were tried.

Broccas a Constable, deposed, that he took him, and before the Justice he
confessed he took the things out of a Trunk and Box, and sold them to the
Prisoner Hutton, in whose house we found them.

Symel the Prisoner, for himself said, He indeed did take them, but he thought
they had been his Wives, for they were in her Lodging, who was then newly come
from Service; and he thought he might make bold with them, being hers, and sold
them to the other Prisoners.

Hutton confessed she bought them of the other man, but denied that she knew
them to be stolen Goods, or used to be such; that he told her they were his own,
and not his Wives.

Anne Harris was the next, who was Indicted for stealing the Goods of John
Jones.

Against whom Jane Harris, the Wife of John Harris, swore, that she lost Goods
of a considerable value, and that the Prisoner was taken in Southwark selling
part of them.

The Woman to whom she offered them to sale attested it, and that she told her
she had bought them.

The Prisoner her self says, she bought them of a man, but his name she could
not tell, nor where he lived. So the Court left her to the Jury.

One Wood was Indicted for stealing a Silver Cup of 9 s. value, of Robert
Lambert, and was acquitted.

Thomas and John Johnson Indicted for the unlawful taking the Lead off from
Stepney-Church; the Evidence was this:

Knight, a Head-borough, was with his Watch going the round, saw a Ladder
standing on the side of the Church, and enquiring of the Clerk and the Sexton
whether it were there by their Order, found it was not; and therefore taking
away the Ladder, got up another way to the top of the Leads. But at the side of
the wall, they found three parcels of Lead rolled up, and which was thrown
down. When they came up, they found these two men there; being asked what they
did there at that time, all they would answer, was, It was their fortune to be
there. But going onward, they found some more parcels of Lead, which they
acknowledged they had cut up with a knife; the whole was about 950 l. weight,
but none was removed away. They said the Ladder was theirs, which was
afterward found to be another man's, and not lent by him neither.

The Prisoners said; They heard a noise on the top of the Church, and went up
to see what was the matter; but before they could get down, the Watch had taken
away the Ladder: and they denied the taking away of the Lead. The Court loft it
to the Jury upon the Evidence.

Nathaniel Russel and John Watson Indicted, for the murder of William Midgley,
against whom it was thus proved:

Dorothy Midgley, Sister to the Person slain, deposed, that Watson, who was a
Bailiff, came with Russel to arrest her for a debt of 3 l. which she owed an
Aunt of hers. And coming into the room, her Brother stood before, and was
stabbed by one of them immediately; that she thinks it was Russel stabbed him:
That he lived till Thursday, and then died; and that he gave them no ill
language.

Elizabeth Symmonds, who was then in the Room, testified, That the Boy did not
give them any provocation; That he had a piece of a Curtain Rod, which she did
not see him lift up against them.

Rebeccah Niccols, who also was by, swore, That Watson, when he came in, run
him down into a Chair, and the other run him through. That Russel came in with
his Sword drawn, and they were heard from without to swear, they would kill any
one that opposed them. Stephens, a Surgeon, proved, that he died of the
wound.

Russel the Prisoner, in his defense, said, That the Plaintiff in the Action
calling them up stairs, told them, they must look to themselves, for there was
a Young man intended to kill them. That upon their coming in, the Young man
made at them with a bright thing, like a Spit or a Sword; and in his own
defense, be retreating back, does not know how the Boy was wounded.

Watson for himself said, That being ordered by the Plaintiff to Arrest Dorothy
Midgley, when he came to the door, he heard the Boy say, I will run my Spit in
some of your guts; but putting him aside, he Arrested his Prisoner, and heard
some body cry out, I am killed; upon which he run to him, and opening his
breast, there he found a great wound, and gave him some Brandy to drink, and
covered him with a warm Napkin. That the Defendant Midgley came to him, and cut
him over the face with a Pot, and asked him what he staid there for, he had
been the death of her Mother and her Brother. That about five years ago he had
arrested her Mother, and she died in Execution; but he denied any hand in this
Murder.

The Plaintiff in the Action said, She did employ Watson to Arrest Dorothy
Midgley, and that he went straight forward to her, her Brother being by; and
that a Fellow came in and wounded the Boy, and run out again before he could
cry out he was wounded: but who he was she knew not; but she did not see nor
hear the Boy make resistance, or give any provocation. That it was only a
piece of a Curtain Rod the Boy had in his hand, but neither struck stroke with
it, nor run at them.

Then the Writ and Warrant to justify the Arrest were read, whereby upon the
Return it was found, that they had returned a Rescous by the Party that was
killed, which the Court told Watson was a great Evidence against him. Whereupon
directing the Jury, they were told, that there being no provocation, the Law
implied the malice to make it murder. But how far the persons accused were
guilty, was left to them to consider upon the Evidence.

Then the Jury withdrew to consider of their Charge.

The Clerk for London Arraigned these Prisoners.

William Lucas Indicted, for that he, December. 2. last, did steal a Tankard of 6
l. value; confessed the Indictment, and himself to be guilty of that offense,
and all within Clergy.

John Macarty, for stealing the same Tankard, pleaded Not Guilty, and put
himself upon the Country.

George Cletheroe Indicted, for stealing some Linen from one John Delavier, he
pleaded Not Guilty, and put himself upon the Country.

Ralph Leech Indicted, for that he, the 9th. of October. 1678. did steal from
Henry Wood nine pair of Silk Stockings. He pleaded Not Guilty, and put himself
upon the Country.

A Lieutenant and some Soldiers were Indicted for misdemeanor committed by
them, in endeavoring in a riotous manner to take away a Prisoner, the 16th. of
November last, out of the Custody of one Newton, a Sergeant in London. They all
confessed themselves guilty of the offense, and submitted to the Mercy of the
Court.

Whereupon Mr. Lane, Comptroller of the Chamber of London, being of Counsel for
the King, opened the Cause, to give the Court satisfaction in the matter: That
one Sparks being Arrested by Newton, told the Officer, he ought not to be
Arrested, because he was a Soldier. The Officer told him, he had some reason to
doubt it, because he had not on the Kings Clothing; but he should have the
liberty to send to such of his Officers as he thought sit. Upon which he sent a
Porter to the Sergeant of the Company of Granadiers, who not being met with,
the Note was delivered to the Lieutenant; which when he had read, with great
Passion and Swearing he demands to know the Officers name, and cursing himself,
said, If he could meet with him, he would cut off his ears. He then gets his
Company together, acquaints them with the business, leaves the main body of the
Company in Cheapside, over against Woodstreet, selects a dozen out of them, and
coming down Woodstreet with Muskets, and Daggers in them, and with Oaths and
Arms would have stormed the Counter, demanding the Prisoner. It was with great
difficulty that they persuaded him he was not in the Counter, but in a House
near by. Thither he goes cursing and swearing he would pull the House down,
fire the House; and make that Rogue the Officer an Example for daring to Arrest
a Soldier. The Sergeant told him, Sir, I am not thoroughly satisfied he is a
Soldier, and desired to see the Muster-Roll: But he would not vouchsafe to let
him have that favor; take him away he would, and did, in triumph to the
Offenders, and to the terror of all Civil Justice. The Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen being acquainted with the matter, order Mr. Recorder and the two
Sheriffs to wait on the Lord General the Duke of Monmouth, to let him know the
whole business, and to desire him to deliver up the Offenders to be punished.
His Grace did immediately concur to it; and having Casheer'd them from the
King's Service, has sent them hither, where, said he, we hope they will be
satisfied now, as we are all well assured that, by the blessing of God, and the
care and courage of our Magistrates, Soldiers, though they may and ought to
assist, yet they shall never be permitted to be Arbiters and Comptrollers of
Public Justice.

The Lieutenant would have excused and palliated the matter; but the Council
having Affidavits, and Viva voce to prove his Accusation, and it having been
examined before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, they were committed to
the Gaol in order to their Judgment.

Then the Jury for Middlesex returned with their Verdict, which the Foreman
gave in thus:

That Mary Hutchins is guilty, but the Goods were but to the value of 10 d.

That Edward Preston is guilty of stealing the Mare.

That Elizabeth Gates is not guilty.

That Richard Symel is guilty, but the Goods were but to the value of 10 d.
Whereupon Margaret Hutton, Indicted as Accessory, was discharged.

That Anne Harris is Guilty, but the goods were but to the Value of 10 d.

That Margaret Wood is not guilty of the Felony, etc. And

That Thomas and John Johnson, are guilty of the Trespass, in taking away the
Lead from Stepney Church.

That Nathaniel Russel, is guilty of Murder, in killing William Midgley. And

That John Watson is not guilty of that Felony, and Murder.

An Officer of the Court, gave information upon Oath, that a Soldier leaning
over the Bail Dock was spoke to come down, but refusing, was pulled by him,
whereupon he laid his hand to his Sword, and swore if he had him out, he would
kill him: upon which information, the Court committed him to the Goal.

The Clerk for London called the Prisoners to their Challenges, Swore the Jury,
and made Proclamation for Information and Prosecution, in usual Form. The first
Prisoner tried was,

Ralph Leech, Indicted for stealing the Silk Stockins to the Value of 4 l. 10
s. Against whom, one

Summer deposed, that he knew the Prisoner very well, and that the first of
Octo. last, he saw him steal from Mr. Woods Shop 9 Pair of Silk Stockins. That
he is a Workman to the Shop, as he is to other Hosiers Shops; where coming in a
morning betimes, he had Opportunity to look over the Silk Stockins, and
sometimes would buy. That this day looking over two Boards of Hose, he would
now and then put a pair in his Breeches, till he had put in 9 Pair. Another
Person being by, he desired him to go for a Constable. Then the Prisoner
offering to go away, he stayed him, and asked him how many Pair he had bought,
he answered, None. But, said he, I must speak with you Mr. Leech, and having
him up stairs, told him he had something more then was his own, he was in such
haste to be gone, and urging him with it, he did desire him to be merciful to
him, or his Wife and Children were ruined, and pulled out the Stockins 9 Pair
in all, which when he was carried before Sir John Frederick, were produced
against him, and he confessed it, saying, The Devil owed him a Shame.

The other Witness affirmed the same, and had seen something before, which he
did not like, but durst not venture upon him, because he was a great man in the
Trade; and would have ruined him.

The Prisoner who was an old Man, with a very gray head, by Trade a Silk
Stockin Trimmer, and of a plentiful Fortune, had nothing to say for himself,
but that he took them for money they owed him, which poor excuse was not
accepted by the Court, but they directed the Jury to find him Guilty, upon so
plain an Evidence.

Then Richard Bradshaw was Indicted for High Treason, in clipping the Kings
Coin. To prove which, one

Brauthwayt, a Linen Draper in Newgate Street, gave Evidence, that the
Prisoner was his Apprentice, and that he heard he had given a neighbors boy,
one John Jolliffe, some pieces of Silver, which being brought to me, he did
acknowledge he had clipped them with a pair of Scissors, that were in Court.
That he did use to trust him, with receiving, and paying Money for him, but
never knew any ill of him, nor found much clipped money among his Cash. That he
had taken him Apprentice without money.

Another Witness swore that he confessed it before Sir William Turner. And a
Goldsmiths Boy showed some Ingots, which he had from that Jolliffe, who said he
had them from the Prisoner, but he was not to be found.

The Prisoner now had nothing to say for himself, but that he had the Silver
from that Jolliffe. Upon which he was left to the Jury.

The next was John Macarty, for stealing a Silver Tankard, out of a house
behind the Exchange.

The Boy of the House testified that he, with William Lucas, who confessed the
Felony, came to his Masters house, who is a Cook; and while the Boy went down
for a Pot of drink they called for, they strep'd into the Kitchen where the
Tankard was, and taking it thence, away they went, before he came up again.
That the Tankard was there before he went down to draw the drink. That they
came in friendly together, and went both away. That they had the Tankard again
by means of a Woman, with whom Lucas left it to keep till he came out of
Prison, where he was, being taken that night by the Watch.

The Woman testified the delivery of it by Lucas, but she saw not the other Man.

The Prisoner, for himself, said he was pushed and jossed by the other man
Lucas, whom he had never seen before in his life, and that upon their Fighting,
the other invited him to drink, and when the Boy was gone down to draw the
drink, Lucas went into the Kitchen, and came out again, and called him out to
go away with him, which he did, having no business there. The credit of which
story, upon the Boys positive Testimony, was left to the Jury.

Then Hannah Downs was tried, for stealing 4 l. in money, from Thomas Goddard
in the Vintry. The Evidence was,

That she being a poor Girl, was by them taken up, and upon recommendation, by
a Letter from a Quaker, entertained in the house where she lived about two
Months, and then was bound Apprentice to the Woman: that the man leaving of his
Britches, in which was the Key of the Warehouse, where the money was, she had
taken it, and taken away about 4 l. at several times; as she confessed that she
run away to Rochester, and there was taken, and before the Justice confessed
the thing.

The Prisoner said, she run away because they abused her, and beat her, and
pinched her in her Victuals, but denied she stole any Money, or that she did
confess it. Which was submitted to the Jury.

The next was George Hunt, for stealing Brass Buckles, and some small things.
But it appeared upon the Evidence, a Prosecution out of Malice, because of an
Action of slander, by the Prisoner commenced against the Prosecutor. And there
being no color for the Accusation, the Court directed the Jury to find the
Prisoner not Guilty.

The last for London was George Clethoroe, Indicted for stealing the goods of
John Delavier.

One Burbeck deposed, that about six of the clock in the Evening, the Prisoner
came into the house, and going out, he saw him; and asked him what he did
there; but received no answer. That he cried stop Thief, and upon that Outcry
he ran, but was overtaken. That the Linen which he is Indicted for, was taken
out of the house, and dropped 4 or 5 houses from that house.

Another man Witnessed, that upon the cry of Stop Thief, he made toward the
Prisoner, who to save himself, cried Stop Thief too, and when the Witness came
up to him, Struck him; but he was Apprehended, notwithstanding his resistance.
And one that saw the Linen in that place, and took it up, attested it.

The Prisoner denied being in the house, and said, that he was pursuing one
that came out thence: but the first man affirmed positively that he was there,
and that his Wife three days after his Commitment came to entreat him not to
prosecute him.

The Jury, after a short recess, did give in this Verdict of the Prisoners
under their charge.

That Ralph Leech was guilty of the Felony he was Indicted for.

That Nicholas Bradshaw was guilty of High Treason.

That John Mackarty was guilty of stealing the Tankard.

That Hannah Downs was guilty of the Felony to the value of 9 s.

That George Hunt was not guilty of the Felony he stands Indicted for: And the
Court taking notice of the malicious prosecution, gave him leave to take a Copy
of the Indictment.

That George Clethero was guilty, but the Goods were but to the value of 10 d.

Then the Court Adjourned till 3 of the Clock in the afternoon.

Post Meridiem eodem die.

Proclamation of Attendance being made, the Lord Chief Baron called for the
Granadiers, who were in custody, and told Mr. Recorder, That he being, by the
custom of the Court,, to give Sentence upon Offenders there, the Judges did
give him their advice, That the Peace of the Kingdom was so nearly concerned in
this Cause, that it deserved an exemplary Punishment; and the lowest Fine they
would counsel him to set, was 200 l. upon the Lieutenant, 50 l. upon the
Sergeant, and 20 l. a piece upon the Common Soldiers. Which was by Mr. Recorder
Sentenced accordingly, with this Reproof.

YOu that are the Prisoners at the Bar, the Court and the Government are
sensible of the great affront by you put upon the Authority of the Nation in
general, and this City in particular, and what danger you might have brought
your selves into: For you gave such a Provocation, at such a time, within the
very heart of the City of London, that might have proved the occasion not only
of bloodshed to others, but utter ruin to your selves. The Court, I say, and
the Government, and your own General being sensible of this, and satisfied of
your Guilt, have brought you hither, where being under the Power of Justice,
you ought to receive the Sentence of Justice for your great Offense; and
because your Crime is great, such must be your Judgment. For though you are
Soldiers, Gentlemen, and ought to have all due encouragement, yet you must not
think, by the Authority of your Arms, to control the Authority of the Civil
Magistrate. And because the Lieutenant should have known better his duty, and
taught it to them under his care, his Fine must be the greatest, because his
Knowledge was, or should have been so, and deserves the highest resentment. The
Sergeant, who should have also known better, must recive a Punishment according
to his Degree. And the Common Soldiers, though under their Command, yet being
great Offenders, must receive an exemplary Punishment. And I do in the name of
the Court, and the Court does Order, That the Lieutenant pay for a Fine 200 l.
the Sergeant for his Fine 50 l. and each Common Soldier 20 l. to the King; and
that they be Committed till they pay these several Fines.


Then the Clerk for Middlesex Arraigned

Thomazine Davies, alias Sparks, alias Bailey, Indicted, for that she, the 8th.
of December. 1678. an Indian Gown, and other things, to the value of 4 l. and 18
s. of money, did steal from Lewis Gastring. To which she pleaded Not guilty,
and put her self upon the Country.

William Baker Indicted, for having two Wives, against the form of the Statute.
Pleaded Guilty.

Judith Smith Indicted, for that she, the 29th. of October. did steal some Linen
of a small value from John Smith. She pleaded Not guilty, and put her self upon
the Country.

James Furner of White-chappel Indicted, for that he, the 12th. of November.
1678. did steal a Mare, color brown, from one (...) He pleaded Not guilty, and
put himself upon the Country.

James Smith Indicted, for that he, the last of October. 1678. did steal three
Hogs, color white, of the value of, every one of them 35 s. from Leonard
Sanders. He pleaded Not guilty, and put himself upon the Country.

William Brayn Indicted, for that he, the 6th. of September. 1678. did steal one
Gelding, color brown, from Ambros Galloway. He pleaded Not guilty, and put
himself upon the Country.

Matthew Momford Indicted, for that he, the 23 d. of November. 1678. being a
Soldier in the Company of John Drew Esquire. a Captain in the Service of the King,
there was a certain discourse had between him and one Thomas Topping, and one
James Sanders, concerning our Sovereign Lord the King, and the Religion in the
Kingdom established; he the said Matthew Momford said he was a Papist: Upon
which the said Topping and Sanders told him, he was not fit to be a Soldier
then in the Kings Service. He replied, I hope to see you all burned, and to be
at the burning of you. To this Indictment for a Contempt and Misdemeanor he
pleaded Not guilty, and put himself upon the Country.

Then the Prisoners were called to look to their Challenges, the Jury sworn,
and Proclamation being made for Information and Prosecution, as before, they
were charged to enquire, First, of

William Brayn, for stealing a Gelding from Ambros Galloway; against whom

One testified his knowledge, that it was Ambros Galloways Horse; and another,
that he bought it of the Prisoner. But Ambros himself, being a Quaker, would
not, for Conscience Sake, as he said, swear, and so could give no testimony
about his losing him. Upon which the Court directed the Jury to find the
Prisoner Not guilty for want of Evidence, and committed the Quaker, as a
concealer of Felony, for refusing an Oath to Witness for the King.

Thomazine Davies, for stealing an Indian Gown and other goods, to the value of
4 l. and 18 s. in Money, from Lewis Gastring.

Mary Gastring, the Wife of Lewis, swore, That going out to a Neighbors house,
she then lost those goods, and found them with the Prisoner at the Bar; that
the things were in several Boxes and Trunks, but none broken open.

Walter Turner deposed, That on Sunday 8th. December. 1678. in the afternoon,
walking in the Alley where this house was, he did that Mrs. Gastring coming
out, and complaining of her loss, he told her what he had seen, and overtaking
the Prisoner, upon pursuit these things were found with her.

The Prisoner said that another woman, with whom she was drinking a pot of
drink, gave them her, and desired her to carry them for her to such a place;
which she was going to do with the things in her Apron, but not telling the
woman's name, nor producing any Witness to prove it, the Court left it to the
Jury.

Then Judith Smith was tried, for stealing the Goods of John Smith. Against
whom,

John Smith, deposed that he had lost the Goods, in the Indictment, that she
confessed the selling of some part to the Brokers, and named many particulars,
that he could not say, they were taken all at one time, but being his Servant,
she had opportunity to convey them away as she pleased, and that he did not
miss them, till a fortnight after the time she confessed of taking them.

The Prisoner for her self only said, that her Master charged her with more
than she had. Upon which confession of part, and the things being taken at
several times, and not all, the day laid in the Indictment, The Court left the
value to the Jury.

James Turner for a Mare, color Brown. Upon whose trial, it appearing that he
had been Auterfoits acquit, the Jury were discharged of him.

James Smith was next, for stealing three white Hogs from Leonard Sanders, who
deposed,

That he, the last of October, i. e. Allholland Eve, lost two great Hogs, and a
little one, worth 5 l. that he pursued them by the Track, but at last lost his
intelligence.

Another Witness swore, that he met the Prisoner Smith in the morning of that
day, when he said, he was going to buy Calves, and after, met him driving three
Hogs, a little one, and two great ones, which he said he drove for another, not
for himself. Sanders not seeing the Hogs in Smiths possession, nor the other
Witness not minding them, could tell the marks, and therefore the Court asked
the Prisoner, whose Hoggs they were that he drove that day, he denied he ever
had any, or saw any. Which Evidence being uncertain as to the particulars
charged, the Court left to the discretion of the Jury.

Matthew Momford, for his contempt and misdemeanor, in speaking the Words.

One of the Witnesses swore, that the Prisoner being at his house to drink,
upon some discourse said, he had been a Papist seven years: then said he, you
are not fit to stand Sentinel where the King passes, for you may kill him as
he goes by you. Then in a fume he replied, I hope to see you burned, and be at
the Burning of you.

The other said, that Momford said he was a Staffordshire man: then said the
other, you must be a Papist, for all the Momfords in Staffordshire are Papists,
he replied so was he. Then you are not fit to be a Soldier; he in a passion
cried out, he hoped to see us all burnt, and be at the burnig of us. They both
said he was in drink, with which the Prisoner would have excused the matter,
but the Court told him it was no excuse, but an aggravation. And left him to
the Jury.

The last was John Spittle, for stealing the goods of Humphrey Wych. Against
whom

Wych gave Evidence that he lost such goods as are charged in the Indictment,
and found them in the Custody of the Prisoner, and that the value was 7 s. And
one Bayley deposed, that being a neighbor of Mr. Wych, and sitting in his
Shop, he saw two Women and a Man, standing at Wych his door, first one woman
went in, then both, and went away, and the man went in, and coming out with
something under his Coat, he went and followed him, telling him what he had was
not his own, and called to the man of the house, who coming out owned the
things.

The Prisoner said he found them at the door, but the Constable upon his Oath
testified that he confessed at his taking, that he had them out of the Drawer.
The Court left it to the Jury, who after a little recess being agreed of their
Verdict concerning these Prisoners, brought it in thus.

That Thomazine Davies, is guilty to the value of 10 d.

That Judith Smith, is guilty to the value of 10 d.

That William Brain, is not guilty.

That James Smith, is not guilty.

That Matthew Momford, is guilty.

That John Spittle, is guilty to the value of 8 s.

The Petit Juries for London and Middlesex were discharged.

Then the Court proceeded to Judgment upon the Prisoners, according their
Convictions.

Those to whom the benefit of Clergy, as Men; and the punishment of Branding,
as Women, was allowed, were.

In all 8. in London.
Joseph Brown, William Shakesby, John Baltee, Thomas Jackson, William Lucas,
John Macarty, Hannah Kinman, and Hannah Downs,
In Middlesex.
William Baker, and Anne Mounsdell.
Ralph Leech for respect to his age, the Court took time to consider after a
very severe check, and having craved the benefit of his Clergy.

John Spittle, who desired transportation, was set aside for it.

John Pain, who had confessed himself guilty of Felony upon his Arraignment,
for marrying a second Wife, the first being alive, did desire the benefit of
his Majesty's late Gracious Act of Pardon. Which the Court upon perusal of the
Act thought fit to grant 1 him, but told him that he ought to make a recompense
to the parties injured, which were both his Wives, for Poena potest dirimi,
culpa perennis erit.

The Persons ti'd up by the Executioner for judgment of Death, were these Six.

Susan Banster, for stealing goods of 13 l. value, and who had been sentenced
to be transported before.

Stephen Arrowsmith, for a Rape committed upon Elisabeth Hopkins, an Infant of
8 years of Age.

Nicholas Bradshaw, for high Treason, in clipping the Coin of this Kingdom.

John Leak, for stealing Cloth off of the Tenters, contrary to the Statute in
that case provided.

Edward Preston, for stealing of a Mare. Which by Statute also is deprived of
benefit of Clergy. And,

Nathaniel Russell, for the Murder of William Midgley.

These Persons being severally called to the Bar, and told of their
Convictions, were demanded of, what they could say to arrest the judgment of
Death: they could allege nothing, and therefore

Proclamation being made for Silence, while judgment was in giving, the
Recorder spoke to them thus.

YOu that are the Prisoners at the Bar have been severally Indicted of several
Offenses, and upon your Trials, you have had the benefit of the best of Laws,
because you have had the liberty of making your defense to the several
Accusations whereof you have been accused. You have been fully heard, and by
Persons of known integrity, who have been Triers of the Fact, and Contrymen
of your own, sworn to do you Right; you have been Convicted of the several
Offenses wherewith you stand Charged, and nothing remains, save only for the
Court to do that Duty which the Law requires of them, to give Judgment upon
those Verdicts by which you stand Convicted.

This is a Duty incumbent on the Court, though a sad one; and I must confess, I
cannot but be much troubled to see Youth arrived to that height of Debauchery,
notwithstanding the frequent Examples that are found in this Place. So that I
must say, and I tremble to think I am obliged to say, That the frequent
Examples of this Place seem rather to be Examples to some to outdo the
Villainies that are punished here, than to deter them from the commission of
them.

When I see some among you there, that now seem mighty full of grief, and sense
of the deplorable condition you have brought your selves into; who have had
Mercy shown them here, and yet continue to offend so gracious a King; when
nothing will work upon you, but you will persist in so vile an habit of
wickedness; it seems to me, that absolutely necessary Judgment be speedily
executed upon you, there being so small hopes of Reformation. I speak this to
let the World know, Mercy is not to be shown to such, as after forgiveness sin
yet worse.

And in as much as you have received fair and full Trials, upon which you have
been Convicted, you have by your own vile carriages forfeited that Life, which
you might else have happily enjoyed; and shortened that, which by your own
industry you might have preserved and lengthened, to the comfort of your selves
and Friends, and the good of your Generation. And now it remains only for you
to take care of that little, very little time that is left you, to improve it
to the utmost, for the advantage of your immortal Souls. For having by your
great wickedness and public affronts to the Justice of the Nation forfeited
your lives, it will be needful for you to employ the minute of breathing time
to prepare for Eternity. For though the Law do inflict the punishment of death
on you here, you have God in Heaven, and a blessed Savior and Redeemer, to
whom, upon Confession and Repentance, you may with hopes apply your selves for
mercy in the World to come.

And it will be the duty of every good Christian, not only to take care, that
being warned by your Examples, they avoid the mischiefs you have run into, but
also to join their Prayers, and all the assistance they can contribute, to the
saving of your Souls, who by your Crimes have thus destroyed your Bodies.

Some of your Offenses are of a more vile, more black, and more dangerous
nature than others; one of you stands Convicted of that most horrid Crime,
Murder, blood which cries out to Almighty God for vengeance; Murder, I cannot
but say, without any provocation; which is not only an offense against the Law
of God, but even against Nature, for one man to destroy another without a
provocation. If there were no such thing as a God in Heaven, or Justice upon
Earth, Nature it self teaches a man not to be barbarous to his own likeness.
Therefore it will become thee to use all the tears thou can shed, to wash
away the blood thou have spilt, and that will not be enough to take off thy
guilt; for nothing but the precious blood of our dear and blessed Lord and
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, can save a man that is guilty of so great and
horrible a wickedness as shedding innocent blood.

And for the rest, their offenses have been such, as by the Law are to be
punished with death. It will become you to betake your selves to Repentance;
and I expect it from him whose proper business it is, that he give you all the
assistance he can to promote so good a work, by helping you to spend your
little time well, in order to a happy Eternity. This I have spoken in charity
to your Souls. I do therefore in the name of the Court pronounce this Judgment
upon you all, save only the Youth that is convicted for clipping the Kings
Coin, That you shall go from hence to the place from whence you came, and from
thence to the place of Execution, where you shall severally be hanged by your
necks till you be dead; and Jehovah the Lord of Heaven and Earth have mercy
upon your Souls.


Then he applied himself to the Young Man for Treason, thus:

YOu the Prisoner at the Bar, have likewise been Arraigned and Tried for an
Offense, that by the Law is made High Treason, the Clipping of the Kings Coin.
I am sorry, heartily sorry, and very much lament to see a Youth, in whom there
seems to be so much modesty, far from persuading any one to believe, that any
manner of Villainy should lurk underneath so promising and so good a Face, come
under the guilt of so great an Offense. But the truth of it is, the Apprentices
of London have got such a Trade of abusing their Masters by Clipping, and such
tricks, which they are encouraged to by a pack of Goldsmiths Men, who are fit
for their purpose, that if some of them be not made Examples, it will be the
ruin of many. It is a disease that will run through the whole Flock. And I am
sorry to see you the first sad lamentable instance of that Justice, which must
pass against Offenders of that kind, whose modesty should have prevailed upon
you, not only to look like a virtuous Boy, but so to have acted.

But in as much as thou have offended the Law, it will become thee also, if
thou have offended thy Master or any body else, to make them what reparation
thou can, by making confession of the offense, and discovering the Parties
that were concerned with thee, whoever they are. For there can be no better
means for Salvation in the next World, nor hopes of Mercy in this World, than
by confessing thy Crimes, and telling the Accomplices, and it is my advice, Tell
all thou know. But I must declare the Judgment of the Law, which is this,
and the Court does award it,

That you are to go from hence to the place from whence you came, and from
thence be drawn on a Hurdle to the place of Execution, where you shall be
hanged by the neck till you be dead, and the Lord have mercy upon your Soul.


Then Susan Banster being asked what she could say in delay of Execution, she
desired to be Transported.

Then the Prisoners Convict for Petty Larceny, who were these, George
Cletheroe, Samuel Thompson, Mary Read, Mary Hipkins, Margaret Smith, Mary
Hutchins, Richard Symell, Thomazine Davies, Judith Smith, and Anne Harris, in
all, Ten: whose Sentence was delivered thus:

YOu the Prisoners at the Bar, I have observed in the time that I have attended
here, that your Pick-pockets, Shop-lifters, and you other Artists, which I am
not so well acquainted with, which fill up this place, throng it most with
Women, and generally such as she there, Mary Hipkins, with whom no admonitions
will prevail. They are such, whose happiness is placed in being thought able to
teach others to be cunning in their wickedness, and their Pride is to be
thought more sly than the rest: A parcel of Sluts, who make it their continual
study to know how far they may steal, and yet save their necks from the Halter,
and are as perfect in that, as if they had never been doing any thing else. But
take notice of it, you that will take no warning, I pass my word for it, if
ever I catch you here again, I will take care you shall not easily escape.

And the rest of those Women, that have the impudence to smoke Tobacco, and
gussle in Alehouses; pretend to buy Hoods and Scarfs, only to have an
opportunity to steal them, turning Thieves to maintain your luxury and pride:
So far shall you be from any hope of mercy, if we meet with you here for the
future, that you shall be sure to have the very rigor of the Law inflicted on
you. And I charge him that puts the Sentence in Execution, to do it
effectually, and particularly to take care of Mrs. Hipkins, scourge her
soundly; and the other Woman that used to steal Gold Rings in a Country Dress;
and since they may have a mind to it this cold weather, let them be well heated.

Your Sentence is this, That you be carried from hence to the place from whence
you came, and from thence be dragged ti'd to a Carts-tail through the streets,
your Bodies being stripped from the Girdle upwards, and be Whipped till your Bodies
bleed.


John Leak, who was found guilty of stealing Cloth* off the Tenters, and
received Sentence of death for it, according to the Act in that case, which
also gives the Court power to Transport the Party, if they see fit, was by the
Court Reprieved in order to Transportation, being an able Seaman, and one that
had done the King good service at Sea.

The Prisoners Fined for Trespass and Misdemeanor, were Matthew Momford, Thomas
Johnson, and John Johnson.

To Matthew Momford, who was the Soldier that had spoken such bad words, Mr.
Recorder gave this Admonition:

YOu the Prisoner at the Bar, see now the great Inconvenience that comes upon
the debauchery of some People; you that seem to have no Religion in the World
but when you are drunk. But you must not think, drunk or sober, to revile the
Protestant Religion, and go unpunished for it. Let the times be thought never
so dangerous, yet I hope it will be always seen, that the Magistrates of this
City and Kingdom dare tell all Mankind, They do and will own the Protestant
Religion, and dare curb the proudest He, who shall presume to transgress our
Laws, or offer to reproach our Religion. And all the Priests and Jesuits they
have shall never blow up any man to that height of Impudence, as to dare do
any thing in contempt of the Government, or affront to our Religion, but we
will be sure to take down his pride, and make him know that he shall be subject
to Justice. And so shall you find, who when you were drunk, could brag you were
a Papist, and hoped to see Protestants burnt. You are an excellent man no doubt
at a Faggot. Your contempt is very great, and the Court is very sensible of it;
and that all the World may take notice how sensible they are, and of their
resolution, that such Offenders shall not go unpunished; and that you may see,
it shall not be a sufficient excuse to say, You were drunk when you did it, and
pretend to repent of it now you are sober, and to turn Protestant again, We do
think fit to lay a Fine of 100 l. upon you, and commit you in Execution till
such time as you pay it; and upon your Enlargement, you are to find Sureties
for the Good Behavior for seven years.


To Thomas and John Johnson, who stole the Lead off the top of Stepney-Church,
he spoke thus:

YOu are Brethren in iniquity, Simeon and Levi. I find you are not Churchmen
the right way. But you are mightily beholding to the Constable, so much, that I
think you ought to own it to him as long as you live; for if he had given you
but half an hours time longer, you had been in a fair way to have been hanged.
Your zeal for Religion is so great, as to carry you to the top of the Church.
It is but a Trespass, it is true, but I assure you one of the rankest that ever
I heard of, it is Cozen-German to Felony. If that be your way of going to
Church, it is fit you should be taken notice of. Are you not ashamed to have
offered at the commission of such an offense, in a Place whereto, if you were
men that had any regard to a future state, you would pay a great reverence,
because good men meet there to pray against such offenses, not to commit them,
as you did. The offense being so great, and the Trespass so rank, the
Punishment must bear some proportion to it, which is this, The Court does set a
Fine upon you of 20 l. apiece, and commit you till you pay it to the Common
Gaol of Newgate; and you are to find Sureties for the Good Behavior before you
be discharged.


The Calling over the Gaol was left till the end of the Sessions.

Then the Court was adjourned till Tuesday morning next, being December. 17. at
seven of the clock.

FINIS.

