POMONA, OR AN APPENDIX CONCERNING FRUIT TREES, In relation to CIDER, The
Making, and several ways of Ordering it.

VIRG. Eclog. ix. -- Carpent tua Poma nepotes.


LONDON, Printed by John Martyn and James Allestry, Printers to the Royal
Society. MDCLXX.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of SOUTHAMPTON, Lord HIGH TREASURER OF
ENGLAND, etc.
My Lord,
IF great Examples did not support it, the dignity and greatness of your Person
would soon have given cheque to this presumption: But since Emperors and Kings
have not only gratefully accepted Works of this nature, but honored them
likewise with their own sacred hands, that Name of yours, (which ought indeed
never to appear but on Instruments of State and fronts of Marble, consecrating
your Wisdom and Virtues to Eternity) will be no way lessened by giving
Patronage to these appendant Rusticities. It is from the Protection and
Cherishment of such as your Lordship is, that these Endeavors of ours may hope
one day to succeed and be prosperous. The noblest and most useful Structures
have laid their Foundations in the Earth: if that prove firm here (and firm I
pronounce it to be, if your Lordship favor it) We shall go on and flourish. I
speak now in relation to the Royal Society, not my self, who am but a Servant
of it only, and a Pioner in the Works. But be its fate what it will, Your
Lordship, who is a Builder, and a lover of all Magnificences, cannot be
displeased at these agreeable Accessories of Planting, and of Gard'ning. But,
my Lord, I pretend by it yet some farther service to the State than that of
merely profit, if in contributing to your divertisement I provide for the
Public health, which is so precious and necessary to it in your excellent
Person. Vouchsafe POMONA your Lordships hand to kiss, and the humble Presenter
of these Papers the honor of being esteemed,

My Lord, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant I. EVELYN.

POMONA, Or An APPENDIX Concerning FRUIT TREES, In relation to CIDER: The
Making, and several ways of Ordering it.
THE PREFACE.
SAt Quercus was the Proverb; (...): in eos, qui relicto victu sordido, ad
elegantiorem lautioremque digrediuntur.
and it is now time to walk out of the Woods into the Fields a little, and to
consider what Advancement may be there likewise made by the planting of
FRUIT TREES. For after the Earth is duly cultivated, and pregnant with a Crop
of Grain; it is only by the Furniture of such Trees as bear Fruit, that it
becomes capable of any farther Improvement. If then by discovering how this may
best be effected I can but raise a worthy emulation in our Countrymen; this
addition of noble Ornament, as well as of Wealth and Pleasure, Food and Wine,
may (I presume) obtain some grateful admittance amongst all Promoters of
Industry.

But before I proceed, I must, and do ingenuously acknowledge, that I present
my Reader here with very little of my own, save the pains of collecting and
digesting a few dispersed Notes (but such as are to me exceedingly precious)
which I have received; some from worthy, and most experienced Especially, from
the most excellently learned Dr. Beale of Teavil in Somersetshire, a Member of
the Royal Society.
Friends of mine; and others, from the well-furnish'd Registers, and Cimelia of
the ROYAL SOCIETY. Especially, those Aphorisms, and Treatises relating to the
History of Cider, which by express commands they have been pleased to enjoin I
should publish with my Sylva.

It is little more than an Age, since Hops (rather a Medical, than Alimental
Vegetable) transmuted our wholesome Ale into Beer; which doubtless much altered
our Constitutions: That one Ingredient (by some not unworthily suspected)
preserving Drink indeed, and so by custom made agreeable; yet repaying the
pleasure with tormenting Diseases, and a shorter life, may deservedly abate our
fondness to it; especially, if with this be considered likewise, the casualties
in planting it, as seldom succeeding more than once in three years; yet
requiring constant charge and culture; Besides that it is none of the least
devourers of young Timber.

And what if a like care, or indeed one quarter of it, were (for the future)
converted to the propagation of Fruit Trees, in all parts of this Nation, as it
is already in some, for the benefit of Cider? (one Shire alone within twenty
miles compass, making no less, yearly, than Fifty thousand Hogsheads) the
commutation would (I persuade my self) rob us of no great Advantage; but
present us with one of the most delicious and wholesome Beverages in the World.

It was by the plain Industry of one Harris (a Fruiterer to King Henry the
Eighth) that the Fields, and Environs of about thirty Towns, in Kent only, were
planted with Fruit, to the universal benefit, and general Improvement of that
County to this day; as by the noble example of my Lord Scudamor, and of some
other publick-spirited Gentlemen in those parts, all Herefordshire is become,
in a manner; but one entire Orchard; And when his Majesty shall once be
pleased, to command the Planting but of some Acres, for the best Cider-fruit,
at every of his Royal Mansions, amongst other of his most laudable
Magnificences; Noblemen, wealthy Purchasers, and Citizens will (doubtless)
follow the Example, till the preference of Cider, wholesome, and more natural
Drinks, do quite vanquish Hopps, and banish all other Drogues of that nature.

But this Improvement (say some) would be generally obstructed by the Tenant,
and High-shoon-men, who are all for the present profit; their expectations
seldom holding out above a year or two at most.

To this it is answered; That therefore should the Lord of the Manor not only
encourage the Work by his own Example, and by the Applause of such Tenants as
can be courted to delight in these kinds of Improvements; but should also
oblige them by Covenants to plant certain Proportions of them, and to preserve
them being planted.

To fortify this profitable Design, It were farther to be desired, that (if
already there be not effectual provision for it, which wants only due execution
and quickening) an Act of Parliament might be procured for the Setting but of
two or three Trees in every Acre of Land that shall hereafter be enclosed,
under the Forfeiture of Sixpence per Tree, for some public and charitable
Work, to be levied on the Defaulters. To what an innumerable multitude would
this, in few years, insensibly mount; affording infinite proportions, and
variety of Fruit throughout the Nation, which now takes a Potion for a
refreshment, and drinks its very Bread-corn!

I have seen a Calculation of twenty Fruit Trees to every Five- pounds of
yearly Rent; forty to Ten; sixty to Fifteen; eighty to Twenty; and so according
to the proportion. Had all our Commons, and Waste-lands one Fruit-tree but at
every hundred foot distance, planted, and fenced at the public charge, for the
benefit of the Poor, (whatever might die and miscarry) enough would escape able
to maintain a Stock, which would afford them a most incredible relief. And the
Hedg-rows, and the Champion-grounds, Land-divisions, Mounds, and Head-lands
(where the Plough not coming, it is ever abandoned to Weeds and Briars) would
add yet considerably to these Advantages, without detriment to any man.

As touching the Species, if much have been said to the preference of the
Red-strake before other Cider-Apples, this is to be added; That as the best
Vines, of richest liquor, and greatest burden, do not spend much in wood and
unprofitable branches; so nor does this Tree: for though other Cider may seem
more pleasant (since we decline to give Judgment of what is unknown to us) we
yet attain our purpose, if This shall appear best to reward the Planter, of any
in present practice; especially, for the generality; because it will fit the
most parts which are addicted to these Liquors, but miss of the right kinds,
and prove the most secure from external injuries and Invaders.

But not to refine any farther upon the rare effects of Cider, which is above
all the most eminent, soberly to exhilerate the Spirits of us Hypocondriacal
Islanders, and by a specific quality to chase away that unsociable Spleen,
without excess; we must not forget that the very Blossom of the Fruit perfumes,
and purifies the Ambient Air, which (as Dr Beal well observes in his
Hereford-shire Orchards) is conceived conduces so much to the constant Health
and Longaevity, for which that Country has been always celebrated, fencing
their Habitations and sweet Recesses from Winds, and Winter-invasions, the heat
of the Sun, and his unsufferable darts: Hereford sh. Orch. p. 8.
And if (says he) we may acknowledge grateful trifles, for that they harbor a
constant Aviary of sweet Singers, which are here retained without the charge of
Italian wires: To which I cannot but add his following option, That if at any
time we are in danger of being hindered from Trade in Foreign Countries, our
English indignation may scorn to feed at their Tables, to drink of their
Liquors, or otherwise to borrow or buy of Them, or of any their Confederates,
so long as our Native Soil does supply us with such excellent Necessaries.

Nor do we produce these Instances to redeem the Liquor from the superstition,
prejudice, and opinions of those Men who so much magnify the juice of the
Grape above it: But we will here add some Experiments from undeniable success
(in spite of Vintners, and Bauds to men's Palats) were they sufficient to
convince us, and reclaim the vitiated; or that it were possible to dispute of
the pleasantness, riches, and praecedency of Drinks and Diets, and so to
provide for fit, competent, and impartial Judges; when by Nature, Nation, or
Climate (as well as by Custom and Education) we differ in those Extremes.

Most parts of Africa and Asia prefer Coffee before our Noblest Liquors; India,
the Roots and Plants before our best Cooked Venison; Almost all the World crude
water, before our Country Ale and Beer; and we English being generally more for
insipid, luscious, or gross Diet, than for the spicy, poignant, oily, and
highly relished, (witness our universal hatred of Oils, French-wine, or Rhenish
without Sugar; our doting on Currants, Figgs, Plum-pottage, Pies, Pudding,
Cake, etc.) renders yet the difficulty more arduous. But to make good the
Experiment

About thirty years since one M. Tailor (a person well known in Hereford-shire)
challenged a London-Vintner (finding him in the Country) That he would produce
a Cider which should excel his best Spanish or French-wine: The Wager being
deposited, He brings in a good Redstrake to a private House: On that Scene, all
the Vintner could call to be Judges pronounce against his Wine; Nor would any
man there drink French-wine (without the help of Sugar) nor endure Sack for a
full draught; and to those who were not accustomed to either, the more racy
Canaries were no more agreeable than Malaga, too luscious for the repetition.
But this Wager being lost, our Vintner renews his Chartel, upon these express
terms, of Competent and Indifferent Arbitrators: The Gentleman agrees to the
Articles; and thus again after mutual engagements i^ must be debated who were
Competent Judges, and absolutely Indifferent. M. Tailor proposes Three, whereof
the odd Number should by Vote determine: They must be of the fittest Ages too,
or rather the fittest of all Ages, and such as were inured neither to Cider nor
any Wine; and so it was agreed. The Judges convene; viz. A Youth of ten years
old, a Man of thirty, and a Third of sixty; and by All these also our Vintner
lost the Battle. But this is not enough; It Is assayed again by Nine Judges, the
Ternary thrice over; and there it is lost also: To this we could add another,
even of the Cider of Ledbury (which is not yet the best of Herefordshire)
which, when an experienced London-Vintner had tasted, he wished had been
Poison; for that if it were known where he dwelt, it would utterly undo his
Trade. And here I will conclude; for I think never was fairer Duel; nor can
more be reasonably pretended to vindicate this Blessing of God, and our Native
Liquor from their contempt, and to engage our Propagators of it.

To sum up all: Tot veneficiis placere cogitur, and miramur noxium esse Vinum?
Plin. As it is most ingeniously cited by Dr Charleton, in his excellent
Discourse of the Adulterations of Wine, entered into the Register of the Royal
Society; and (with those other most useful Pieces subjoined) worthy to be
published, etc. See Regist To Society, Number. 2. 17. December. 28 Ian. 1662. page
67. 116. etc.
If Health be more precious than Opinion, I wish our Admirers of Wines, to the
prejudice of G^der, beheld but the Cheat themselves; the Sophistications,
Transformations, Transmutations, Adulterations, Bastardizings, Brewings,
Trickings, not to say, even Arsenical Compassings of this Sophisticated God
they adore; and that they had as true an Inspection into those Arcana Lucifera,
which the Priests of his Temples (our Vintners in their Taverns) do practice;
and then let them drink freely that will; (...): -- Give me good Cider.

It is noted in our Aphorisms how much this Beverage was esteemed by His late
Majesty, and Court, and there referred to all the Gentry of the invironing
Country, (no strangers to the best VVines) when for several Summers in the City
of Hereford (so encompassed with store of it, and brought thither without
charge, or extraordinary subductions) it was sold for sixpence the
VVine-Quart, not for the scarcity, but the excellency of it: And for the
Red-strake, that it has been seen there hundreds of times (with vehement and
engaged competition) compared with the Cider of other the most celebrated
Fruit, when after a while of vapor, no man stood for any other Liquor in
comparison.

But it is from these Instances (may some say) when the World shall have
multiplied Cider-Trees, that it will be time enough to give Instructions for
the right Pressing and Preserving of the Liquor. The Objection is fair: But
there are already more Persons better furnished with Fruit, than with
Directions how to use it as they should; when in plentiful years so much Cider
is impaired by the ignorant handling, and becomes dead and sour, that many even
surfeit with the Blessing; it being rarely seen in most Countries, that any
remains good, to supply the defects of another year; and the Royal Society
would prevent all this hazard by this free Anticipation. And yet when all this
is said, we undertake not to divine what excellent Cider other soils may bear;
nor do we positively extol the Red-strake farther then the bounds and confines
of Herefordshire, for the Experiments we have produced; but because there are
doubtless many such soils sparsedly throughout this Nation; why should it not
incite our Industry to its almost effort, and the commendable emulation of
endeavoring to raise a yet kindlier Cider-fruit if it be possible, and which
may prove in it self as good, and as agreeable to the Soil where we plant it?
And certainly, much of this may fairly be expected, from the Trials, Culture,
and Propagation of Kernel-Fruits of innumerable sorts, and from hopeful
VVildings, and the peculiarity of Grounds.

It now remains, that I should make some Apology for my self, to extenuate the
tumultuary Method of the ensuing Periods. Indeed it was not intended for a
queint or elaborate piece of Art; nor is it the design of the Royal Society to
accumulate Repetitions when they can be avoided; and therefore in an Argument
so much beaten as is that of dressing the Seminary, Planting, and modes of
Graffing, it has been with Industry avoided; such rude, and imperfect draughts
being far better in their esteem (and according to my Lord Bacon's) than such
as are adorned with more pomp, and ostentous circumstances, for a pretense to
Perfection. The Time may come when the richness, and fullness of their
Collections may worthily invite some more Industrious Person to accomplish that
History of Agriculture, of which these Pieces (like the limbs of Hippolitus)
are but scattered parts: And it is their greatest ambition for the Public
Good, to provide such Materials, as may serve to Raise, and Beautify that most
desirable Structure.

EVELYN.

POMONA.
CHAP. I.
Of the Seminary.
WE had not the least intention to enlarge upon this Title, after we had well
reflected on the many and accurate Directions which are already published, as
well in our French-Gardiner, as in sundry other Treatises of that nature, Dr.
Beale of Yeavil in Somersetshire.
had not a most worthy Member of the Royal Society (to whom we have infinite
Obligations) furnished us with some things very particular and remarkable, in
order to the improvement of our Seminaries, Stocks, etc. which are indeed the
very Basis and Foundation of Cider-Orchards. It is from those precious papers
of his, and of some others (whose Observations also have richly contributed to
this Enterprise) that we shall chiefly entertain our Planter in most of the
following Periods.

Whosoever expects from the kernel of a rich or peculiar Apple or Pear to raise
Fruit of the same kind, is likely to find many obstructions and
disappointments: For the Wilding, (Crab or Pear) Pomus Sylvestris, being at the
best the natural product of the soundest kernel in the firmest land, and
therefore the gust of the Fruit more strongly austere, fierce, and sharp, and
also the Fruit less and more woody; and the pleasanter or plumper and larger
Apple being the effect of some inteneration, which inclines to a kind of
rebatement of the natural strength of the Tree; the best choice of kernels for
Stocks indefinitely, (and on which we may graff what we please) should be from
the soundest Wilding. For,

A kernel taken from any graffed-Apple, as Pepin, Pear-main, etc. does most
naturally propend to the wildness of the Stock on which 'twas inserted, as
being the natural mother of the kernel, which is the very heart of the Apple;
and also from a more deep and secret Reason, to be hereafter unfolded.

Apples and Pears requiring rather a vulgar and ordinary Field-land, than a
rich Garden-mould, (as has been often seen to succeed by frequent Observations)
it has been found that kernels sowed in a very high compost, and rank earth,
have produced (large indeed) but insipid Fruit, hastily rotting on the Trees,
before all the parts of it were mature. Vid. Aphor. 33.

And sometimes when they seemed in outward figure to bear the shape of graffed
Apples, from whence the kernels came, yet the gust did utterly deceive, wanting
that vivacity and pungent agreeableness.

If the kernels of natural Apples (or of ungraffed Trees) should produce the
same, or some other variety of Apples, (as sometimes it succeeds) yet would
this care be seldom operae pretium, and at best but a work of Chance, the
disappointment falling out so often through the fickleness of the Soil: Or
admit that the most proper and constant, yet would the very dews and rain, by
various and mutable Seasons, and even by the Air it self, (which operates
beyond vulgar perception, in the very changes as well of the mould, as of the
seeds and fruit) create almost infinite alterations: And the choice having been
in all places (apparently for some thousands of years) by propagating the most
delicate of Fruits by the Graffs, it is almost a desperate task to attempt the
raising of the like, or better Fruit from the rudiments of the Kernel.

Yet since our design of relieving the want of Wine, by a Succedaneum of Cider,
(as lately improved) is a kind of Modern Invention, We may encourage and
commend their patience and diligence who endeavor to raise several kinds of
Wildings for the trial of that excellent Liquor; especially since by late
experience we have found, that Wildings are the more proper Cider-Fruits; some
of them growing more speedily, bearing sooner, more constantly, and in greater
abundance in leaner Land, much fuller of juice, and that more masculine, and of
a more Winy vigor.

Thus the famous Red-strake of Hereford-shire is a pure Wilding, and within the
memory of some now living surnamed the Scudamores Crab, and then not much known
save in the Neighborhood, etc. Yet now it would be difficult to show that
Red-strake which grew from a kernel in that whole Tract, all being since become
graffed Trees. Thus it is also believed, That the Bromsbury Crab (which carries
the fame in some parts of Gloucestershire) and many of the White Musts, and
Green Musts, are originally Savages; as now in Somersetshire they have a
generous Cider made of promiscuous kernels, or ungraffed Trees, which fills
their confidence that no other Cider does exceed it; and it is indeed strong,
and of a generous vigor.

Nor dare we positively deny, but that even the best of our Table-fruit came
also originally from the kernel: For it is truly noted by my L. Bacon, That the
Fruit does generally obey the Graff, and yields very little to the Stock; yet
some little it does.

The famous Bezy de Hery, an excellent Musky Pear, was brought into the best
Orchards of France from a Forest in Bretainy, where it grew wild, and was but
of late taken notice of.

But now to the deep Reason we lately threatened: We have by an Experiment found
some near affinity between the Kernel of the Apple and the heart or interior
of the Stock: For I saw (says Dr. Beale) an old rotten Kernel-Tree bearing a
delicate Summer-fruit, yielding store of smooth Cider, ('it is called the
French-Kernel-Tree, and is also a Dwarf, as is the Red-strake;) and examining
diverse Kernels, many years successively, of that hollow and decayed Tree, I
found them always very small of growth, and empty, mere skins of Kernels, not
unlike to the emasculated Scrotum of an Eunuch; another younger Tree, issuing
from the sounder part of a Root of the same old Tree, had full and entire
Kernels.

And from some such Observation might the production of Berberies, etc. without
Stones, be happily attempted; an Instrument fitted to take out the marrow or
pith of the Branches* (as the same Dr Beale performed it;) for from the
numerical Bush of that Fruit he found some Branches produce Berberies that had
no stones, others which had; and in searching for the cause of the effect,
perceived, that the pith or heart was taken from the radicat, or main Branches,
as the other was full of pith, and consequently the fruit in perfection; of all
which (he writes me word) he made several trials on other fruit, but left the
place before he could see the event. But he adds;

These many years (almost twenty) I have yearly tried Kernels in Beds of clean
Earth, Pots, and Pans, and by the very leaves (as they appeared in first
springing for one month) I could discern how far my Essays had civilized 'em:
The Wilder had shorter, stiffer, brown, or fox-colour'd leaves, The more
ingenuous had more tender, more spreading leaves; and approaching the lighter
verdure of the Berbery leaf when it first appears. He adds,

Some Apples are called Rose-Apples, Rosemary-Apples, Gillyflower-Apples,
Orange-Apples, with several other adjuncts, denominating them, from what Reason
I know not. But if we intended to try such infusions upon the Kernels (as
should endeavor to alter their kinds) we should not approve of the bedabbling
them with such infusions, (for over- moisture would rather enervate than
strengthen them) but rather prepare the Earth the year before, with such
insuccations, and then hinder it from producing any Weeds, till ready for the
Kernels, and then in dewy times, and more frequently when our Climate were
surcharged with rain, cover the Beds and Pots with the small leaves of
Rosemary, Gillyflowers, or other oderiferous Blossoms, and repeat it often, to
the end the dews may meteorize, and emit their finer Spirits, etc. Or if any
shall please to be so liberal of their Salts and Calcinations of peculiar
Virtues (though possibly the Essay may endanger their seeds) yet the mixture of
such Salts finely reduced and strewed discreetly on their Beds, may be a more
probable means, than those Liquid Infusions which have hitherto been so
confidently boasted. For thus also we are in this Age of ours provided of more
vigorous Ingredients for trials than were known to the Ancients. Finally,

From what has been deduced from the Wilding of several parts, it may
manifestly appear, how much more congeneal some soil is than other, to yield
the best Cider-fruit from the Kernel; and the hazzle ground, or quicker mould,
much better than the more obstinate clay or ranker earth: In hot
Gravelly-Grounds, where almost no sort of Fruit will grow, Pears will thrive;
and a Friend of mine assures me, of One that clave a Rock, and filling it with
a little good Earth, planted a Pear Tree therein, which prosper'd exceedingly:
I add this, that none may go hence without encouragement.

CHAP. II.
Of Stocks.
THe former thus established, after all humors and varieties have been
sufficiently wearied, we shall find the Wilding to be the hardiest and most
proper Stock for the most delicate Fruit: This confirmed by Varro, lib. 1. cap.
40. In quamcunque arborem inseras, etc. and it is with reason: However they do
in Herefordshire, both in practice, and opinion, limit this Rule; and to
preserve the gust of any delicate Apple (as of the Pear-main, Quince-Apple,
Stockin, etc.) rather graff upon a Gennet-Moyle or Cydoddin-Stock, (as there
called) than a Crab-stock; but then indeed they conclude the Tree lasts not so
long; and it is observed, That Apples are better tasted from a clean, light
land, etc. than from stiffer clay, or the more pinguid and luxurious soil,
whence we may expect some assistance from the civility of the Stock, which is a
king of prepared Soil, or foundation to the Graff; even as our very
Transplantations into better ground is likewise a kind of Graffing.

Thus in like manner our Master Varro, loco citato concerning Pears; Si in
Pyrum Sylvaticam etc. The Wild-stock does enliven the dull and phlegmatic
Apple, and the Stock of a Gennet-Moyle sweeten and improve an Apple that seems
over-tart, as the Pome-roy, or some Greening, etc. or may rather seem to abate
at least some Apple over-tart and severe.

Your Crab-stock would be planted about October, at thirty two Foot distance,
and not graffed till the third Spring after, or at least not before the second.

But if your design be for Orchard only, and where they are to abide, an
interval of sixteen Foot shall suffice for the Dwarfish kind, or in the Grounds
where the Red-strake, or other Fruit Trees are of small bulk, provided the
ground be yearly turned up with the Spade, and the distance quadrupled where
the Plough has privilege; this being the most expedite for such as have no
Nursery ground.

CHAP. III.
Of Graffs and Insitions.
MAke choice of your Graffs from a constant and well-bearing Branch.

And as the Stock has a more verdant rind, and is capable to yield more plenty
of juice, so let the Graff have more Eyes or Buds: Ordinarily three or four
Eyes are sufficient to give issue to the Sap; but as well in Apples, and Pears,
as in Vines, those Graffs or Cions are preferred in which the buds are not too
far asunder, or distant from the foot thereof: and such a number of buds
usually determining the length of the Graff, there may diverse Cions be made of
one Branch, where you cannot procure plenty of them for severals.

As to the success of graffing* the main point is, to join the inward rind of
the Cion to the inward rind of the Stock, so that the sap of the One, may there
meet with the sap of the Other, and these parts should be joined closely, but
not too forceably; that being the best and most infallible way, by which most
of the quick and juicy parts are mutually united, especially toward the bottom.

If the Stock be so big as to endanger the pinching of your Graff, when the
wedge is drawn out of the cleft, let the inner side of the Graff, which is
within the wood of the Stock, be left the thicker, that so the woody part of
the Cion may bear the stress, and the sappy part be preserved from bruising.
Some by an happy-hand, do with good success Graff without cleaving the Stock at
all, only by Incisions in the Rind, as the Industrious Mr. Austin teaches us:
But since this is not for every Rustic hand, nor seems to fortify so strongly
against impetuous Winds, before the Union be secure, there had need be some
extraordinary defense.

Choose the streightest and smoothest part of the Stock for the place where you
intend to graff: if the Stock be all knotty (which some esteem no impediment)
or crooked, rectify it with the fittest posture of the Graff.

For a Graff covet not a Cions too slender; for the Sun and Wind will sooner
enforce it to wither: Yet are we to distinguish, that for Inoculation, we take
the Bud from a sprig of the last years sh^ot; and most allow that the Cions
should also have some of the former with it, that it may be the stronger to
graff, and abide to be put close into the Stock, which is thought to advance it
in bearing.

In Hereford-shire they do frequently choose a Graff of several years growth;
and for the graffing of such large Stocks as are taken out of the Woods or
Nurseries, and fitted into rows for Orchards, they choose not the Graffs so
small as in other Countries they require them; which has, it seems, occasioned
some complaint from them that understand not the Reason of the first branch of
this Note. Once for all, the stumpy Graff will be found much superior to the
slender one, and make a much nobler and larger Shoot. This upon experience.

Graff your Cions on that side of the Stock where it may receive the least hurt
from the South-west Wind, it being the most common, and most violent that blows
in Summer; so as the wind may blow it to the Stock, not from it: And when the
Zephyres of the Spring are stirring, choose that Season before all others for
this work.

Some there are who talk of removing the Stock about Christmas, and then also
graff it; which there be that glory they can succesfully do even by the fire
side, and so not be forced to expect a two or three years rooting of the Stock;
But in this Adventure it is advisable to plunge the Graff three or four inches
deep in the Stock. Lastly,

Be careful that the Rain get not into the clefts of your young graffed Stocks:
Yet it has been noted, That many old Trees (quite decayed with an inward
hollowness) have born as full burdens, and constantly, as the very soundest,
and the Fruit found to be more delicate than usually the same kind from a
perfect and more entire Stock.

Except some former case requires it, leave not your Graffs above four, five,
or (at most) six inches of length above the Stock; for by the length it draws
more feebly, and is more exposed to the shocks of the Wind, or hurt by the
Birds; and you shall frequently perceive the summities and tops of such young
Graffs to be mortified and die.

The Genet-moyle is commonly propagated by cutting off the Branch a little
below a Burr-knot, and setting it without any more Ceremony; but if they be
also graffed first as they grow on the Tree, and when they have covered the
head, cut off below the Burr, and set, it is far better: In this separation cut
a little beneath the Burr, and peel off, or prick the Bark, almost to the knot:
Thus also if the Branch have more knots than one, you may graff, and cut off
yearly, till within half a foot of the very stem, which you may graff likewise,
and so let stand.

Now for encouragement in transporting Graffs at great distance, we find that
with little care (their tops uncut and unbruis'd) they will hold good, and may
support the transportation by Sea or Land from October or November to the very
end of March: See Sir H. Plat's Offers, Paragr. 75. To which may be added, That
if the Graff receives no hurt by lying in the Stock exposed to all rain, dews,
and severities of Winter frosts from December to Spring, (as has been
experimentally noted); then (by a stronger presumption) in oyled, or rather
waxen Leather, it may undoubtedly escape. Some prescribe, That the ends shall
be stuck in a Turnip: and many excellent Graffers (Gentlemen some of very good
credit) have assured us, That the Graffs which seemed withered, and fit to be
cast away, have proved the best when tried. Thus in honest Barnaby Googes noble
Heresbachius you will find it commended to gather your Cions in the wane of the
Moon, at least ten days before you graff them; and Constantine gives this
reason for it, That the Graff a little withered, and thirsty, may be the better
received of the Stock: I know some who keep them in Earth, from the end of
October, till the Spring, and will hardly use them before. There are also other
inducements for this practice, as Simon Harwood, page 4. has showed us; but
none beyond our own experience, who have known Graffs gathered in December
thrive and do perfectly well.

The best expedient to convey Graffs is to stick the cut-ends in Clay,
envelop'd with a clout to preserve it from falling off; and to wrap the other
part of the Twigs in dry Hay or straw-bands, which will secure them both from
the Winds, Galling, and other injuries in Transportation: Nay, I have known
them sent many hundred Miles from beyond the Seas accommodated to an ordinary
Letter, and though somewhat short, and with very few Buds, yet with excellent
success; and if this course were more universally considered, we might be
furnished with many great Curiosities with little difficulty or charge.

CHAP. IV.
Of Variety and Improvements.
IF any man would have variety of unexpected and unknown Apples and Pears, for
the improvement of Cider, or Palate-fruit, there is more hope from Kernels
raised in the Nursery (as has already been directed) than from such trials of
graffings as we have yet seen in present use.

But if we would recover the patience, and the sedulity of the Ancient (of
which some brief account will follow) or listen to some unusual Proposals, then
may we undertake for some variety by Insitions.

To delude none with Promises, we do much rather recommend the diligence of
enquiring from all Countries the best Graffs of such Fruits as are already
found excellent for the purpose we design: As from the Turgovians for that Pear
of which Dr. Pell gives so good and weighty informations; and of which I had
presented me some Graffs, together with a taste of the most superlative Perry
the World certainly produces; both which were brought near 800 Miles, without
suffering the least diminution of Excellency, by my Worthy Friend Mr. Hake a
Member of the R. Society, in the year 1666, and tasting as high, and as rich as
ever to the present year I am writing this Paragraph.

But as some sorts are to be enquired after for the Palate and the Table, so
it is now our main business to search after such as are excellent for their
Liquor, either as more pleasant, more winy, or more lasting; of which sort the
Bosbury bare-land-Pear excels. The Red-strake, Bromebury-Crab, and that other
much celebrated Wilding called the Oaken-pin, as the best for Cider; though for
sufficient reasons we do yet prefer the Red-strake* to oblige the emulation of
other Countries, 'till they find out a Fruit which shall excel it, and which
we do most heartily wish.

But to pursue the diligence of the Ancients, we direct the eye to a general
expedient for all kind of varieties imaginable, and which we hold far better
than to present the World with a List of the particulars either known, or
experimented: For who indeed but a Fool will dare to tell Wonders in this
severe Age, and upon an Argument which is so environed with Imposture in most
Writers old or new? Much less pretend to Experiments which may fail to succeed
by default of an unhappy occasion, when the conclusion must be Penes Authorem
sit fides!

And truly men receive no small discouragement from the ugly affronts of
Clowns, and less cultivated persons, who laugh and scorn at every thing which
is above their understanding: For example; I knew a man (writes Dr. Beale to
me) and he a most diligent Planter and Graffer, who for thirty or forty years
made innumerable Essays to produce some change of an Apple by Graffing: It
seems he was ambitious to leave his Name on such a Fruit, if he could have
obtained it; but always failed; for he perpetually made his Trials upon
Crab-stocks, or such (at least) as did not greatly differ from the kind; and he
ever found that the Graff would praedominate. And how infinitely such Men
having lost their own aims, will despise better Advice, we leave to observation.

However, let us add, That where nothing is more facile than to raise new kinds
of Apples (in infinitum) from Kernels: Yet in that Apple-Country (so much
addicted to Orchards) we could never encounter more than two or three persons
that did believe it: But in other places we meet with many that, on the other
side, repute Wildings, or (as they call them) Kernel-fruit, at all adventure,
and without choice, to be the very best of Cider-fruit, and to make the most
noble Liquor. So much does the common judgment differ in several Countries,
though at no considerable distance, even in matters of visible Fact, and
epidemical experience.

It has been soberly affirmed, that by graffing any White Apple upon an Elm, it
changes the Apple, and particularly to a red color: I have a Direction where
we may be eyewitnesses of the proof; whatever the Truth of it be, we are not
over-hastily to erect Hercules's Pillars; but rather to encourage the
Experiment.

To gratify yet the Ingenious, instruct others, and emancipate us all from
these bastinado Clowns, we are furnished with many Arguments and proofs to
assure a good success, at least for variety and change, if not for infinite
choice: Two or three ancient References being duly praemis'd; namely, First,

1. That it is in vain to expect change of Apples from Graffing upon differing
Stocks of Crabs or Apples.

2. In vain also are we to look for a kind Tree from a very much differing
Stock; as an altered Pear to grow kindly on a Crab or Apple-stock, and contra.
There go about indeed some jugglings, but we disdain to name them.

It is one thing to find the kindest Stock for the Improvement of any Fruit; as
the Crab-stock for the delicate Apple, the Wild or Black-Cherry-Stock, for the
graffs of the fairest Cherries; the largest Vine, (whose root makes best shift
for relief) to accept the Graff of the more delicate Vine; the White Pear-Plum
Stock, for the Abricot, etc. And another thing it is to seek the Stock which
begets the wonder, variety, and that same transcendent and particular
excellency we inquire after: For this must be at more remote distance; and we
offer from the Ancients to show, how it may be at any distance whatsoever: But
the whole expedient seems to be hinted by Sir H. Plat, page 72. where he
affirms, that If two Trees grow together, that be apt to be graffed one into
another, then let one branch into another, workmanly joining Sap to Sap. This
our Gardiners call Graffing by Approach, and is explicated at large by
Columella.

But in this express Rule he is too narrow for our purpose, and far short of
old experience; as we find in Parag. 63. where he affirms, We may not graff a
contrary Fruit thereon. Against this we urge; That any contrary Fruit may be
adventured, and any Fruit upon any fruitless Stock growing in propinquity in
the same Nursery; as it is not only affirmed, but seriously undertaken, and
experimentally proved by the sober Columella, in several of his Treatises; Turn
to the eleventh Chapter of his fifth Book, (Stephens Edition:) Sed cum antiqui
negaverint posse omne genus surculorum in omnem Arborem inseri, and illam quasi
finitionem, qua nos paulo ante usi sumus, veluti quandam legem sanxerint, eos
tantum surculos posse coalescere, qui sint cortice, ac libro, and fructu
consimiles iis arboribus quibus inseruntur, existimavimus errorem hujus
opinionis discutiendum, tradendamque posteris rationem, qua possit omne genus
surculi omni generi Arboris inseri. And the example follows in a Graff of an
Olive into a Fig-stock by Approach (as we call it,) which he also repeats in
the twenty seventh Chapter of his Book De Arboribus, without altering a
syllable. But possibly in this check at the Ancient he might aim at old Varro,
whom we find threatening no less than Thunderbolts and Blasts to those who
should attempt these strange Marriages, and did not sort the Graff with the
Tree; consult lib. 1. cap. 40. And yet you may see this Art assumed by
Columella for his own invention (1500 years since) to be no news to Varro 200
years older; where he goes on, Est altera species ex arbore in arborem
inserendi nuper animadversa in arboribus propinquis, etc. Though here again we
may question our Masters nuper animadversa too; since before he was born Cato
relates it as usual to Graff Vines in the manner by them prescribed, cap. 41.
Tertia insitio est: Terebra vitem quam inseres, etc. Which by the way makes us
admire how the witty Walchius in his Discourse De vitibus fructuariis, page
265. could recount the graffing of Vines amongst the wonders of Modern
Inventions.

But it seems Varro and his Contemporaries did extend the practice beyond Cato;
and Columella proceeded further than Varro, even to all sorts of Trees, however
differing in nature, quality, bark, or season: And then Palladius assumes the
result, and gives us the particulars of the success in his Poem, De
Insitionibus. And to these four as in chief (no fantastical or counterfeit
persons) we refer the Industrious.

But be pleased to take this note also: As soon as your Graff has attained to
a second, or at farthest a third years growth, take it off the Stock, and then
graff it upon a Stock of a more natural kind: For in our own Trials we have
found a graff prosper the second year exceeding well; yet the third the whole
growth at once blasted quite to the very Stock, as if Varro's Augurs had said
the word.

To this add, the making use of such Stocks as in this Experiment may
contribute some special aid to several kinds of humane Infirmities: As suppose
the Birch Tree for the Stone, the Elm for Fevers, etc. For it is evident, that
by such Insitions, the Branch may convert the Sap of the Root even of another
species into its own nature, and alter all its properties; though in some they
dominere, as the Branch of the Apple in the Rhamnus, or Mezerea, acquires a
Purgative quality. And by these means why may not the Fruit by effectual
Marriages be rendered Cordial, Astringent, Purgative, Sudorific, Soporiferous,
and even Deliterious and Mortal: But this we only hint.

Moreover, To graff rather the Wilding, or Crab, than the Pepin, because the
Wilding is the more natural; and Nature does more delight in progress, than to
be Retrograde and go backwards.

I should also expect far more advance from a more pungent sap, than from
Insipid; as generally we see the best and vigorous juices to salute our Palats
with a more agreeable piquancy and tartness; for so we find the relish of the
Stocking-Apple, Golden Pepin, Pearmain, Eliot, Harvy, and all (both Russetings
and Greenings) to be more poignant than of others.

And here we note from Palladius, That the Ancients had the success which we
all, and particularly Sir H. Plat, does so frequently deny, as in the
particular of graffing the Apple on the Pear, and contra. Let us hear him de
Pomo. The Graffed-Crab its bushy Head does rear,
Much Meliorating the inserted Pear:
Its self to leave its Wildness does invite,
And in a Nobler issue to delight.
Insita proceris pergit concrescere ramis,
Et sociam mutat malus amica Pyrum:
Seque feros sylvis hortatur linquere mores,
Et partu gaudet nobiliore frui.
Pallad. de Insitionib. lib. 14.

But possibly Palladius assumed this Poetical expression, upon presumption,
that no man in his days durst degrade the most excellent Quince to support the
Cyon of another Fruit, which then must be of less esteem, but we by our luxury
have found the success.

And we have good argument to believe; That Virgil, and Columella, in several
of their wonderful Relations of these kinds of mixture, (which but for the
prolixity we might now recite) did not so far affect Wonders as to desert the
truth.

You may also observe, That as well the French Gardener, and our Modern
Planters, have found the same benefit from the Stock of the Quince, as old
Palladius did, it seems, acknowledge; yet (as he conceived) more hospitable
still with its own kindred, and that Though the Quince-stock admit all other
Fruit,
Its Cyon with no other stock will suit:
Scorning the Bark of Foreign Trees, does know
Such lovely Fruit on no mean stem can grow:
But the Quince-Graff, to the Quince-stock is joined,
Contented only to improve its kind.
Cum praestet cunctis se fulva cydonia pomis,
Alterius nullo creditur hospitio.
Roboris externi librum aspernata superbit,
Scit tantum nullo crescere posse decus:
Sed propriis pandens cognata cubilia ramis,
Stat, contenta suum nobilitare bonum.
Pallad. de Malo Cydonio.

Lastly, We did by unexpected chance find the facility of graffing the very
youngest Stocks, even of one years growth, by the Root: At a second removal of
the Stocks (being then of two years growth) we observed some Roots so fast
closed together into one, as not to be divorced: Hereupon we concluded, If
casualty, or negligence, chance of spade, or oppression of neighborhood did
this, by Art it might be done more effectually, and possibly to some desirable
purpose; for that then the stock was more apt to receive a mastering
Impression; and any Garden Plant whatsoever might by this process interchange
and mingle their Roots. But this can extend no farther than the Stock may
prevail with the Graff.

And thus we have presented our diligent Ciderist with what Observations and
Arguments of Encouragement, grounded on frequent Experience, we have received
from our most ingenious Correspondents, especially the Learned and truly Candid
Dr Beale, in whose Person we have so long entertained you: and to these we
could add sundry others, were it not now time (whiles we discourse of
possibilities) to conclude with something certain, and to speak of what we have.

For the kinds then of Cider-Apples in being; Gloucestershire affects the
Bromsbury Crab; It affords a smart, winy Liquor, and is peculiarly hardy, but
not so proper for a cold and late-bearing Climate, it being not ripe in hot
Land till the end of Autumn, nor fit to be ground for Cider till Christmas,
lying so long in heaps and preparation.

It is in the same Shire that they likewise much esteem of the white and red
Must-Apple, the sweetest as well as sowrest Pepin, and the Harvy-Apple, which
(being boiled) some prefer to the very best of all Ciders; though from any
experience we have yet seen, we cannot recommend it, and it will want more
particular and infallible Directions before we can be reconciled to the
Adventure, which we have observed so frequently to miscarry.

But about London, and the more Southern Tracts, the Pepin, and especially the
Golden, is esteemed for the making of the most delicious of that Liquor, most
wholesome, and most restorative; and indeed it may (in my poor judgment)
challenge those perfections with very good reason.

By others the Pearmain alone is thought to come in competition with the best;
but, say they, the Cider is for the most part found of the weakest, unless
encouraged with some agreeable Pepin to inspirit it; whereas this is to be
taken according to the constitution of the Fruit; for even Pepins do differ as
much from Pepins in Taste and Liquor, as the Kind, and the Soil dispose them;
nay, though of the same Species; so as the Cider of the Pearmain (though
likewise very different) does not seldom exceed it in that briskness which
others attribute to the Pepin, which is for the most part more smooth and less
poinant: I conceive a good way of extracting the Spirits of these Fruits, might
prove a likely Criterion to ground our judgments on in all these niceties;
whilst by the way, we may note, that of all Apples, that bear one general Name,
the Pepin seems the most to differ; and the Cider from the genuine Cider-Fruit,
keeps nearest to the same strength and relish.

Some commend the Fox-Whelp; and the Gennet-Moyle was once preferred to the
very Red-strake, and before the Bromsbury-Crab; but upon more mature
consideration, the very Critics themselves now Recant, as being too effeminate
and soft for a judicious Palate.

The Red-strake then amongst these accurate Tasters has obtained the absolute
praeeminence of all other Cider-fruit, especially in Hereford-shire, See Aph.
42, 45, 37.
as being the richest and most vinous Liquor, and now with the more earnestness
commended to our practice, for its celerity in becoming an Orchard, being
ordinarily as full of Fruit at ten years growth as other Trees are at twenty;
the Pepin or Pearmain at thirty: And lastly, from that no contemptible quality,
That though the smiles of it entice even on the Tree, as being indeed better
than most other Table-fruits whilst hanging, yet it needs no Priapus for
Protector, since (as beautiful as it is) it has no such temptation to the Taste,
'till it be either baked, or converted into Cider. The same may be affirmed
also of the Broms-bery-Crab, Bareland-Pear, and many other Wildings, who are no
less at their Self-defence; yet the Gennet-Moyle at due maturity, has both a
gentle, and agreeable relish; their unagreeableness to the Palate (as
elsewhere noted) proceeding only from the separation the juice makes from the
Pulp, which even Children do remedy by contusing them on their sharpened Elbows;
which (if thoroughly weighed) seems to dispute, if not overthrow some Hypotheses
of Fermentation.

In sum, The Red-strake will at three years graffing give you fair hopes, and
last almost an hundred years; if from sundry men's Experience of more than 60
years, we may divine, and that it agree with the Soil. And the Gennet-Moyles
hasten to an Orchard for Cider without trouble of Art or Graffing: See C.
Taylor's Discourse of Cider.
But note, That this Tree is very apt to contract a bur-knot near its Trunk,
where it begins to divide; and being cut off under that boss, commonly grows
(if so set) and becomes speedily a Tree, except it encounter an extraordinary
dry Summer the first year to give it check. And though the knack of graffing be
so obvious, yet this more appearing facility does so please the lazy Clowns,
that in some places they neither have nor desire any other Orchards; and how
this humor prevails you may perceive by the hasty progress of our Kentish
Codlin in most parts of England. But this hasty growth and maturity of the Tree
is by another Instance confirmed to us from that worthy Gent. Mr. Blount of
Orleton, who writes me word, that some of the rejected Spray, or Prunings of
the Gennet-Moyle, taken by chance to rice a Plot of Pease (though stuck into
the Earth but at April) put forth root, grew, blossomed, and bore Apples the
same year.

But to advance again our Red-strake, even above the Pepin, and the rest
(besides the celerity of the improvement and constant burden) consider we the
most incredible product, since we may expect from each Apple more than double
the quantity; so as in the same Orchard, under the same culture, thirty
Red-strake Trees shall at ten years graffing yield more Cider than a hundred of
those Pepins, and surmount them in proportion during their period at least
sixty or seventy years: So that granting the Cider of the Golden-Pepin should
excel, (which with some is precarious) yet it is in no wise proper for a
Cider-Orchard, according to our general design, not by half so soon bearing,
nor so constantly, nor in that quantity, nor fullness or security.

Concerning Perry, the Horse-Pear and Bare-land-Pear are reputed of the best,
as bearing almost their weight of spriteful and vinous Liquor. Aph. 43.
The Experienced prefer the tawny or ruddy sort, Aph. 34.
as the color of all other most proper for Perry: They will grow in
common-fields, gravelly, wild, and stony ground, to that largeness* as one only
Tree has been usually known to make three or four Hogsheads: That of Bosbury,
and some others, are so tart and harsh that there is nothing more safe from
plunder, when even a Swine will not take them in his mouth. But thus likewise
would the abundance preserve these Fruits, as we see it does in Normandy.

CHAP. V.
Of the Place and Order.
WE do seriously prefer a very wild Orchard, as mainly intended for the public
utility, and to our purpose of obliging the People, as with a speedy Plantation
yielding store for Cider: Upon this it is that we do so frequently inculcate,
how well they thrive upon Arable, whilst the continuing it so accelerates the
growth in almost half the time: And if the Arable can be so levelled (as
commonly we see it for Barly-land) then without detriment it may assume the
Ornament of Cyrus, and flourish in the Quincunx.

If it be shallow Land, or must be raised with high Ridges, then it is necessary
to have more regard of planting on the tops of those eminencies, and to excuse
the unavoydable breach of the decussis, as my Lord Verulam excuses the defect
of our humane Phansies in the Constellations, which obey the Omnipotent order
rather than ours: Add to this the rigor of the Royal Society, which approves
more of plainness and usefulness, than of niceness and curiosity; whiles many
putting themselves to the vast charge of levelling their grounds, oftentimes
make them but the worse; since where the places are full of ghastly
inequalities, there may be planted some sorts of Cider-fruit, which is apt by
the great burden to be pressed down to the ground, and there (whiles it hides
Irregularities) to bear much better, and abundantly beyond belief; for so have
been seen many such recumbent Pear Trees bear each of them two, three, yea,
even to six or more Hogsheads yearly.

And for this Cider, whiles we prefer some sorts of Wildings which do not tempt
the palate of a Thief, by the caution we shall not provoke any man to repent
his charge from the necessity of richer and more reserved Enclosures; Though we
have frequently seen diverse Orchards successfully planted on very poor Arable,
and even in stony Gleab, gravel and clay, and that pretty high, on the sides
and declivities of Hills, where it only bears very short grass, like to the
most ordinary Common, not worth the charge of Tillage: And yet even there the
Tenants and Confiners sometimes enclose it for the Fruit, and find their
reward, though not equally to such Orchards as are planted on better ground,
and in the Valleys. Hence we suggest, That if there be no Statute for it,
'twere to be wished there were a Law which should allow endeavors of this
nature out of the Common-field, to enclose for these Encouragements, since both
the Public and the Poor (whatever the clamor is) are advantaged by such
Enclosures, as Tusser in his old Rhimes, and all indifferent observers
apprehend with good reason.

True indeed it is, That all Land is not fit for Orcharding, so as even where
to form just Enclosures* being either too shallow and dry, or too wet and
sterving: But this (says the judicious Mr Buckland) we may aver, That there
are few Parishes, or Hamlets in England where there are not some fat and deep
Headlands capable of Rows of Trees; and that (as has been said) the raised
Banks of all Enclosures generally by the advantage of the depth, fatness, and
health of their Mould, yield ready opportunity for planting; (yea, and in many
Countries multitudes of Crab-stocks fit to be graffed;) in which latter (says
he) I have frequently observed very goodly Fruit-bearing Trees, when in the
same soil Trees in Orchards have been poor and worth nothing. To conclude,

If the soil be very bad and unkind, any other Fruit (which it may more freely
yield without requiring much depth, and less Sun) may be planted instead of
Apples.

CHAP. VI.
Of Transplanting, and Distance.
THe most proper season for Transplanting is before the hard Frosts of Winter
surprise you, and that is a competent while before Christmas: And the main
point is, to see that the Roots be larger than the Head; and the more ways that
extends, the better and firmer.

If the Stock seems able to stand on its own three or four legs (as we may call
'em,) and then after settlement some stones be heaped or laid about it, as it
were gently wedging it fast, and safe from Winds (which stones may after the
second or third year be removed) it will salve from the main danger: For if the
Roots be much shaken the first Spring, it will hardly recover it.

You may transplant a Fruit-Tree almost at any tolerable season of the Year,
especially if you apprehend it may be spent before you have finished your work,
having many to remove: Thus, let your Trees be taken up about Allhallontide,
(or as soon as the leaf begins to fall); then having trimmed and quickened the
Roots, set them in a Pit, forty, fifty, or a hundred together, yet so as they
may be covered with mould, and kept very fresh: By the Spring they will be
found well cured of their wounds, and so ready to strike root and put forth,
that being Transplanted where they are to stand, they will take suddenly, and
seldom fail; whereas being thus cut at Spring they recover with greater hazard.

The very Roots of Trees planted in the ground, and buried within a quarter of
an Inch, or little more, of the level of the Bed, will sprout, and grow to be
very good Stocks. This and the other being Experiments of our own, we thought
convenient to mention.

By the often removal of a Wild-stock, cutting the ends of the Roots, and
dis-branching somewhat of the Head at every change of place, it will greatly
abate of its natural wildness, and in time bring forth more civil and ingenuous
Fruit: Thus Gillyflowers do (by often removals, and at full-Moon especially)
increase and multiply the leaves.

Plant not too deep; for the over-turf is always richer than the next Mould.
How material it is to keep the coast or side of the Stock, as well in
Fruit Trees as in Forest, we have sufficiently discussed; nor is the Negative
to be proved.

For the distance in Fields, See Aph. 35.
they may be set from thirty two to sixty Foot, so as not to hinder the Plough,
nor the benefit of manure and soil; but in hedg-rows as much nearer as you
please, Sun and Air considered.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Fencing.
SEeing a Cider-Orchard is but a wild Plantation, best in Arable well enclosed
from Beasts, and yet better on the Tops, Ridges, and natural Inequalities,
(though with some loss of Order, as we showed,) one of the greatest
discouragements is the preserving of our Trees being plan^^d, the raising of
them so familiar.

We have in our Sylva treated in particular of this, as of one of the most
material obstacles; wherein yet we did purposely omit one Expedient, which came
then to our hands from the very Industrious Mr. Buckland to the Learned Dr.
Beal: You shall have it in his own words.

This of Fencing single Trees uses to be done by Rails at great charges; or by
Hedges and Bushes, which every other year must be renewed, and the materials
not to be had in all places neither. I therefore prefer and commend to you the
ensuing form of Planting and Fencing, which is more cheap and easy, and which
has other Advantages in it, and not commonly known. I never saw it but once,
and that imperfectly performed; but have practiced it my self with success:
Take it thus.

Set your Tree on the Green-swarth, or five or six inches under it if the soil
be very healthy; if moist or weeping, half a foot above it; then cut a Trench
round that Tree, two foot or more in the clear from it: Lay a rank of the
Turfs, with the grass outward, upon the inner side of the Trench toward your
Plant, and then a second rank upon the former, and so a third, and fourth, all
orderly placed, ( as ^n a Fortification) and leaning toward the Tree, after
the form of a Pyramide, or larger Hop-hill: Always as you place a row of Turfs
in compass, you must fill up the inner part of the Circle with the loose Earth
of the second spit which you dig out of your Trench, and which is to be two
foot and half wide, or more, as you desire to mount the hillock, which by this
means you will have raised about your Plant near three foot in height. At the
point it needs not be above two foot or eighteen inches diametre, where you may
leave the Earth in ^orm of a Dish, to convey the Rain toward the body of the
Tree; and upon the top of this hillock prick up five or six small Briars or
Thorns* binding them lightly to the body of the Plant, and you have finished
the work.

The commodities of this kind of Planting are,
First, Neither Swine, nor Sheep, nor any other sort of Cattle can annoy your
Trees. Secondly, you may adventure to set the smaller Plants, being thus
raised, and secured from the reach of Cattle. Thirdly, Your Trees fasten in the
Hillock against violence of Winds, without Stakes to sret and canker them.
Fourthly, If the soil be wet, it is hereby made healthy. Fifthly, If very dry,
the hillock defends from the outward heat. Sixthly, It prevents the
Couch-grass, which for the first years insensibly robs most plants in sandy
grounds apt to graze. And, Lastly, The grazing bank will recompense the
nigardly Farmer for the waste of his Ditch, which otherwise he will sorely
bethink.
In the second or third year (by what time your Roots spread) the Trench, if
the Ground be moist, or Seasons wet, will be near filled up again by the
treading of Cattle; for it need not be cleansed; but then you must renew your
Thorns: Yet if the Planter be curious, I should advise a casting of some small
quantity of rich Mould into the bottom of the Trench the second year, which may
improve the growth, and invite the Roots to spread.

In this manner of Planting, where the soil is not rich, the exact Planter
should add a little quantity to each Root of Earth from a frequented Highway,
or Yard where Cattle are kept; One Load will suffice for six or seven Trees;
this being much more proper than rotted soil or loose-Earth; the fat Mould best
agreeing with the Apple Tree.

The broader and deeper your Ditch is, the higher will be your Bank, and the
securer your Fence; but then you must add some good Earth in the second year,
as before.

I must subjoyn, That only Trees of an upright growth be thus planted in open
grounds; because spreading of low growing Trees will be still within reach of
Cattle as they increase: Nor have I met with any inconvenience in this kind of
Transplanting (which is applicable to all sorts of Trees) but that the Mole and
the Ant may find ready entertainment the first year, and sometime impairs a
weak rooted Plant; otherwise it rarely miscarries. In sum,

This manner of Fencing is soon executed by an indifferent Workman, who will
easily set and guard six Trees in a Winter day. Thus far Mr. Buckland: To which
we shall only add, That those which are planted in the Hedge rows need none of
these defenses; for (I am told) in Hereford-shire in the Plantations of their
Quick-sets, or any other, all men did so superstitiously place a Crab-stock at
every twenty foot distance, as if they had been under some rigorous Statute
requiring it; and I am of Opinion, that 'twere better to be content with Fruit
in the bordering Mounds, than to be at all this trouble to raise Tumps, or
temporary banks in the midst of an Enclosure; or if Pears will thrive in the
Plain of the Ortyard, as we frequently see them, (where neither Apple or other
Fruit could in appearance be expected) then Crabs, which may be raised on the
Mounds, will kindly mix the Liquor into very good Beverage.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Pruning and Use of the Fruit Trees.
THe Branches are to be lopped in proportion to the bruises of the Roots, whose
fibers else should only be quickened, not altogether cut off nor entangled: For
the Top, let a little of each arm be lopped in Cider-fruit only; but for the
Pears, cut two or three buds deep at the summities of their aspiring Branches,
just above the ^ye slanting; this will keep them from overhasty mounting,
reduce them into shape, and accelerate their bearing.

To this we add again out of Dr. Beals Herefordshire Orchards, page 23. In a
graffed plant every Bough should be lopped at the very tops, in Apples and
Pears, as in Cherries and Plums, if Transplanted without violation of Roots,
which only indeed renders it less necessary.

In most kinds of natural Plants the Boughs should not at all be lopped, but
some taken off close to the Trunk, that the Root at first Transplantation be
not engaged to maintain too many Suckers, this to be understood, though of such
as grow naturally from the Kernel, or the Bur-knot; especially if removed after
they are well rooted. And this must be done with such discretion, that the
Top-branches be not too close together; for the natural Plant is apt to grow
spiry, and thereby fails of fruitfulness. Therefore let the reserved Branches
be divided at a convenient roundness.

The Branches of those we call natural Plants (for usually the Graffed
generally fail) that are cut off, may be set, and will grow, though slowly.

If the Top prove spiry, or the fruit unkind, then the due remedy must be in
re- graffing. See Chap. xxviij. in Sylva.

Besides the Perrys, dried and preserved Fruit, useful is the Pear Tree (and
best the most barren, or Pig-taile, as they call it, which is the Wild
Pyraster) for its excellent colored Timber, hard and levigable (seldom or not
ordinarily worm-eaten) especially for Stools, Tables, Chairs, Pistol-Stocks,
Instrument-Maker, Cabinets, and very many works of the Joyner, (who can make it
easily to counterfeit Ebony) and Sculptor, either for flat, or emboss'd-Works,
and to Engrave upon, because the Grain intercepts not the Tool. And so is
likewise both the Black-Cherry (especially for the Necks of
Musical-Instruments) and the Plum-Tree.

ANIMADVERSION.
IF some of the following Discourses seem less constant, or (upon occasion)
repugnant to one another, they are to be considered as relating only to the
several gusts, and guizes of Persons and Countries, and not to be looked upon
as recommended Secrets, much less imposed, farther than upon Trial they may
prove grateful to the Public, and the different inclinations of those who
affect these Drinks: nor in reason ought any to decry what is proposed for the
universal Benefit; since it costs them nothing but their civility to so many
obliging Persons.

GENERAL ADVERTISEMENTS CONCERNING CIDER:
By Dr BEALE.
1. HE that would treat exactly of Cider and Perry, must lay his foundation so
deep as to begin with the Soil: For as no Culture or Graffs will exalt the
French Wines to compare with the Wines of Greece, Canaries, and Montefiasco; so
neither will the Cider of Bromyard and Ledbury equal that of Ham lacy, and
Kings-Capell, in the same small County of Hereford.

2. Yet the choice of the Graff or Fruit has so much of prevalency, that the
Red-strake-Cider will every where excel common Cider, as the Grape of
Frontignac, Canary, or Baccharach, excels the common French Grape; at least,
till by time and traduction it degenerateth.

3. I cannot divine what Soil or what Fruit would yield the best Cider; or, how
excellent Cider or Perry might be if all Soils in common and all Fruit were
tried; but for thirty years I have tried all sorts of Cider in Hereford-shire,
and for three years I have tried the best Cider in Somersetshire; and for some
years I have had the best Cider of Kent and Essex at my call; yet hitherto I
have always found the Cider of Hereford shire the best, and so adjudged by all
good Palates. But I shall rejoice to be better informed, and truly from all
other Countries; and do both wish and hope, that in a short time, we shall
every where be rich in many Improvements.

4. I cannot undertake to particularize all kind of Soil, no more than to
compute how many syllables may be drawn from the Alphabet; the number of
Alphabetical Elements being better known than the Ingredients and Particles of
Soil, as Chalk, Clay, Gravel, Sand, Marle, (the tenaciousness, color, and
innumerable other qualities, showing endless diversities;) and the Fruit of
Crabs, Apples, and Pears, being as various as of Grapes, Figs, and Plums.

5. Yet in gross, this I note; That as Bacchus amat colles, and a light ground,
so our best Cider comes from the hot Rie-Lands: In fat Wheat-Land it is more
sluggish; and in white, stiff Clay-Land (as in Woollhope in Hereford-shire) the
common Cider retains a thick whey-colour, and not good: Only such as rises
there (by the diligence or some Art of the Inhabitants) is bright and clear,
and so lively, that they are apt to challenge the best.

6. Some Cider mixeth kindly with Water in the Cider-mill, and will hold out a
good small Wine, and less inflaming, all the following Summer. Some Cider (as
of Long-hope, a kind of four Wood-Land Country of Herefordshire) will not bear
any mixture of Water, but soon decay, and turn more harsh and four: And thus we
noted in France, some course Wines stuck like paint in the Grass, unwilling to
incorporate with the Water: Vin d' Aye, and other delicate Wines, did spread
themselves more freely, as gold is more ductile than baser metals.

7. Some would, for a fit, extol the Cider of Pearmains, some of Pepins; (and
of Pepins I have found a congenial Liquor, less afflicting splenetick persons,
as in mine own experience I conceived:) And Sir Henry Lingen once extolled the
Cider of Eleots (as richly bedewing the Glass like the best Canaries;) and full
Hogsheads of the Stocking-Apple have been tried amongst us, but disappointing
our expectation, though perhaps by evil ordering: Yet Mr. Gritten highly
boasted a Mixture of Stocking-Apples and May-Pears, tried (as I take it) by
himself: After many years trial of those and many other kinds, the Red-strake
carried the common fame, and from most of those reduced admirers. The
Gennet-Moyl Cider was indeed more acceptable to tender Palats; and it will
require Custom and Judgment to understand the preferrency of the Red-strake,
whose mordicant sweetness most agreeably gives the farewell, endearing the
relish to all flagrant Palats; which both obliges, whets, and sharpens the
stomach with its masculine and winy vigor; and many thousands extol it for
exceeding the ordinary French-Wine: But grant it should not be so strong as
Wine; let me ask how many sober persons abroad addict themselves to mere Wine?
Then compare this with diluted Wine, as usually for temperate men, and then let
the trial be made, whether the Pepin-Cider or Red-strake will retain the winy
vigor in greater proportion of Water. Add to this, That they commonly mingle
Water in the Press with Apples (a good quantity) whiles they grind the Apple;
and the Water thus mixed, at that time, does so pleasingly incorporate in the
grinding, fermentation, and maturity of Vesseling, that it is quite another and
far more pleasant thing than if so much or half so much Water were mingled in
the Cup at the drinking time; as Salt on the Trencher will not give Beef, Pork,
or Neats-Tongue, half that same relish which duly powdered and timely seasoned.

8. I did once prefer the Gennet-moyl Cider, but had only the Ladies on my
side, as gentler for their sugary palats, and for one or two sober draughts;
but I saw cause to recant, and to confess the Red-strake to warm and whet the
Stomach, either for meat or more drink.

9. The right Cider-fruit is far more succulent, and the Liquor more easily
divides from the pulpe of the Apple, than in best Table-fruit, in which the
juice and the pulp seem friendly to dissolve together on the tongues end.

10. The Liquor of best Cider-fruit in the Apple, in best season of ripeness,
is more brisk and smart than that which proves duller Cider: And generally the
fiercest Pears, and a kind of tamer Crabs, (and such was the Red-strake called
in my memory) makes the more winy Cider.

11. Palladius denies Perry to bear the heat of Summer; but there is a Pear in
Bosbury, and that Neighborhood, which yields the Liquor richer the second year
than the first, and so by my experience very much amended the third year: They
talk much higher; but that is beyond my account.

12. As Cider is for some time a sluggard, so by like care it may be retained
to keep the Memorials of many Consuls; and these smoaky bottles are the nappy
Wine. My Lord Scudamore seldom fails of three or four years; and he is nobly
liberal to offer the Trial.

13. As red Apples, so red Pears (and amongst them the red Hors-pear next to
the Bosbury) have held out best for the stomach and durance: But Pears do less
gratify the stomach than Apples.

14. The season of grinding these harsh Pears is after a full maturity, not
till they have dropped from the Tree, and there lain under the Tree, or in heaps,
a week, or thereabouts.

15. And so of Cider-Apples, as of Grapes, they require full maturity, which is
best known by their natural fragrancy; and then also, as ripe Grapes require a
few mellowing days, so do all Apples, as about a week or little more, so they
be not bruised, which soon turns to rottenness; and better sound from the Tree
than rotten from the heap; though yet the juice of Apples and Pears (yea, of
Cherrys or Grapes) is not altogether destroyed, or quite putrified, as soon as
the Pulp seems to be corrupted; neither happily needs there such curiosity, to
cull and pick them so accurately, as some prescribe, though doubtless the
cleaner, and less contaminated, the better.

16. That due maurity, and some rest on the heap, does make the Liquor taste
rather of Apples than winy, has no more truth, (if the Cider be kept to fit
age) than that very old Cheese does taste of a Posset.

17. The harsher the wild-fruit is, the longer it must lie on heaps; for of the
same fruit, suddenly ground, I have tasted good Ver-juice; being on heaps till
near Christmas, all good-fellows called it Rhenish-wine.

18. The Grinding is somewhat considerable, rather too much than too little;
here I saw a Mill in Somersetshire which grinds half a Hogshead at a grist, and
so much the better ground for the frequent rolling.

19. See for This, excellent directions in Mr. Newburghs preserving of the
surface; C. Tailors Vessel, and Dr Smiths closing of it up.
Soon after grinding it should be pressed, and immediately be put into the
Vessel, that it may ferment before the spirits be dissipated; and then also in
fermenting time the Vent-hole should not be so wide as to allow a prodigal
waste of the spirits; and as soon as the ferment begins to allay, the Vessels
should be filled of the same, and well stopped.

20. Of late it is much ^^mmended, that before it be pressed the Liquor and Must
should for four and twenty hours ferment together in a Vat for that purpose,
covered, as Ale or Beer in the Yest-vat, and then tunned up. This is said to
enrich the liquor, and to give it somewhat of the tincture of some red Apples,
as I have seen, and very well approved.

21. As Sulphur has some use in Wines, so some do lay Brimstone on a ragge,
and by a wire let it down into the Cider-Vessel and there fire it; and when the
Vessel is full of the smoke, the liquor speedily poured in ferments the better.
I cannot condemn this, for Sulphur is more kind to the Lungs than Cider, and
the impurity will be discharged in the ferment.

22. Apples overlong hoarded before grinding will for a long time hold the
liquor thick; and this liquor will be both pleasant, and as I think, wholesome;
and we see some rich Wines of the later Vintage, and from Greece, retain a like
crassitude, and they are both meat and drink.

23. I have seen thick harth Cider the second Summer become clear and very
richly pleasant; but I never saw clear acid Cider recover.

24. Wheat or Leven is good and kind in Cider, as in Beer; Iuniper-berries
agree well and friendly for Coughs, weak Lungs, and the aged, but not at first
for every Palate: The most infallible and undiscerned improver, is Mustard a
Pint to each Hogshead, bruised, as for sauce, with a mixture of the same Cider,
and applied as soon as the Vessel is to be closed after fermenting.

25. Bottleing is the next improver, and proper for Cider; some put two or
three Raisins into every Bottle, which is to seek aid from the Vine* Here in
Somersetshire I have seen as much as a Wall nut of Sugar, not without cause,
used for this Country Cider.

26. Crabs do not hasten the decay of Perry, but preserve it, as Salt preserves
flesh. But Pears and Crabs being of a thousand kinds require more Aphorisms;
this only I would Note, that Land which refuses Apples, is generally civil to
Pears, and Crabs mingled with them, make a rich and wholesome Cider, and has
sometimes challenged even the best Red-strake.

27. Neither Wheat, Leven, Sulphur, nor Mustard, are used but by very few; and
therefore are not necessary to make Cider last well, for two, three, or four
years.

28. The time of drawing Cider into Bottles is best in March, it being then
clarified by the Winter, and free from the heat of the Sun.

29. In drawing, the best is nearest the heart or middle of the Vessel, as the
Yelk in the Egg.

30. Red-strakes are of diverse kinds, but the name is in Herefordshire
appropriated to one kind, which is fair and large, of a high purple color, the
smell Aromatical, the Tree a very shrub, soon bearing a full burden, and seldom
or never failing till it decays, which is much sooner than other Apple Trees.
It Is lately spread all over Hereford-shire; and he that computes speedy return,
and true Wine, will think of no other Cider-Apple, till a better be found.

31. I said the Red struck is a small shrub, it is of small growth where the
Cider proves richest, for ought we have yet seen in Herefordshire, viz. in
light quick land; and if the land be very dry, jejune and shallow, that and
other Cider fruit (especially the Gennet-moyle) will suspend the store of fruit
alternatively every other year; except some Blasts or surprising Frosts in the
Spring alter that Method; for two bad years seldom come together, very hardly
three.

32. In good soil, I mean of common field (for fat land is not best for
Cider-fruit, but common arable) I have seen the Trees of good growth, almost
equalling other Cider-trees, the Apple larger and seldom failing of a good
burden: thus in the Vales of Wheat-lands, in strong Glebe or Clay, where the
Cider is not so much extolled: but still Sack is Sack, and Canary differs from
Claret; so does the Red-strake-Cider of the Vale excel any other Cider of the
foresaid soil, such as is already celebrated for its kindness to good Cider.

33. Yet this distinction of Soil requires much experience, and great heed, if
we insist upon accurate directions; for as Lauremberg says, in pingui solo non
seruntur omnia recte, neque* in macro nihil. And for Gardens, Flowers, and
Orchards, I would choose many times such lands as do not please the Husbandman,
either for Wheat or sweet Pasture, which are his chief aims; and thus
Lauremberg, In Arida and ten^i terra faelicius proveniunt Ruta, Allium,
Petroselinum, Crocus, Hyssopus, Capparis, Lupini, Satureia, Thymus; Arbores
quoque tenue and macile^tum solum amant; itemque frutices plerique Hujusmodi
arbores sunt, Pomus, Pyrus, Cerasus, Prunus, Persica, Cotonea, Morus, Iuglans,
Corylus, Staphylodendrum, Mespilus, Ornus, Castanea, etc. Frutices, scil.
Vitis, Berberis, Genista, Iuniperus, Oxyacantha, Periclymenum, Rosa, Ribesium,
Vva, Spina, Vaccinia, etc.

34. But here also we must distinguish, that Pears will bear in a very stony,
hungry, gravelly-land, such as Apples will not bear in; and I have seen Pears
bear in a tough binding hungry Clay, when Apples could not so well bear it (as
the smooth rinds of the Pear Trees, and the Mossie and cankered rinds of the
Apple trees did prove) the root of a Pear Tree being it seems more able to
pierce a stony and stiff ground. And Cherries, Mulberries and Plums can rejoice
in a richer soil, though by the smalness of the Roots, the shallower soil will
suffice them. And the Quinces require a deeper ground, and will bear with some
degrees of hungry land, if they be supplied with a due measure of succulency,
and neighboring moisture; and the other shrubs, according to the smalness of
their roots, do generally bear a thinner land. I have seen a soil so much too
ran^^ for Apples and Plums, that all their fruits from year to year were always
worm-eaten, till their lives were forfeited to the fire.

35. To take up from these Curiosities, the most useful result to our purpose;
we have always found these Orchards to grow best, last longest, and bear most,
which are frequently tilled for Barley, Wheat, or other Corn, and kept (by
Culture and seasonable rest) in due strength to bear a full crop. And
therefore, whereas the Red-strake might otherwise without much injury be
planted at fifteen or twenty foot distance, and the best distance for other
Cider-fruit has heretofore been reputed thirty, or two and thirty foot; very
good husbands do now allow in their largest Enclosures (as of 20, 40 or 100
Acres) fifty or sixty foot distance, that the Trees may not much hinder the
Plow, and yet receive the benefit of Compost; and a Horse-teem well governed
will (without any damage of danger) plow close to the Trees.

36. In such soil as is here required, namely of good Tillage, an Orchard of
graffed Red-strakes will be of good growth, and good burden, within ten or
twelve years, and branch out with good store to begin an encouragement at three
years graffing; and (except the land be very unkind) will not yield to any
decay within sixty or eighty years, which is a man's age.

37. In some sheets I rendered many Reasons against Mr. Austi^ of Oxford, why we
should prefer a peculiar Cider fruit, which in Herefordshire are generally
called Musts; (so we name both the Apple and the Liquor, and Pulpe as mingled
together in the contusion) as from the Latin Mustum. White-Musts of diverse
kinds, Red-cheek'd and Red-strak'd Musts of several kinds, Green-Musts called
also Green-fillet, and Blew-spotted: Why, I say, we should prefer them for
Cider, before Table-fruit, as Pepins, Pearmains, etc. And I do still insist on
them: 1. The Liquor of these Cider-fruits and of many kinds of austere fruit,
which are no better than a sort of full succulent Crabs, is more sprightful,
brisk and winy. For Essay, I sent up many bottles to London, that did me no
discredit. Secondly, One bushel of the Cider-fruit yields twice or thrice as
much liquor. Thirdly, The Tree grows more in three or four years than the other
in ten years, as I often times remarked. Fourthly, The Tree bears far greater
store, and does more generally escape Blasts and Frosts of the Spring. I might
add, that some of these, and especially such Pears as yield the best Perry,
will best escape the hand of the Thief, and may be trusted in the open field.

38. By the first, second and fourth of these Reasons, I must exclude the
Gennet-Moyle from a right Cider-fruit, it being dry and very apt to take frosty
blasts; yet it is no Table-fruit, but properly a baking fruit, as the ruddy
color from the Oven shows.

39. I said that the right Cider-fruit generally called Musts, and deserving
the Latin name Mustum, is of diverse kinds; and I have need to note more
expressly that there is a Red-strak'd Must (as I have often seen) but not
generally known, that is quite differing from the famous Red-strake, being much
less, somewhat oblong and like some of the white Musts in shape, and full of a
very good winy liquor. I could willingly name the persons and place where the
distinct kinds are best known: it was first showed me by John Nash of Ashperton
in Herefordshire; and for some years they did in some places distinguish a
Red-strake, as yielding a richer Red-strak'd Cider of a more fulvous or ruddy
color; but this difference, as far as I could find, is but a choice of a
better insolated or ruddy fruit of the best kind, as taken from the South part
of the Tree, or from a soil that renders them richer. But my Lord Scudamore's
is safely of the best sort; and M. Whingate of the Grange in Dimoc, and some of
King's-capel, do best know these and other differences, Straked-Must, right
Red-strake, Red-Redstrake, etc.

40. The greenish Must, (formerly called in the Language of the Country, the
Green-fillet) when the Liquor is of a kindly ripeness, retains a greeness equal
to the Rhenish-glass; which I note for them that conceive no Cider to be fit
for use till it be of the color of old Sack.

41. To direct a little more caution, for enquiry of the right Red-strake, I
should give notice that some Months ago, M. Philips of Mountague in
Somersetshire, showed me a very fair large Red-strake Apple, that by smell and
sight seemed to me and to another of Herefordshire then with me to be the best
Red struck; but when we did cut it, and taste it, we both denied it to be right
(the other with much more confidence than my self) but M. Philips making Cider
of it, this week invited me to it, assuring that already it equals or resembles
High-country-wines. It had not such plenty of juice as our Red strakes with us,
and it had more of the pleasantness of Table-fruit, which might be occasioned,
for ought I know, by the purer and quicker soil. This Apple is here called
Meriot-Ysnot, and great store of them are at Meriot, a Village not far distant:
Possibly, this Meriot may prove to be the Red-strake of Somerset shire, when
they shall please to try it apart with equal diligence and constancy as they do
in Hereford-shire: This fruit is of a very lovely hue, and by some conceived to
be of Affinity to the Red-Iersey Apple, which is reported to tinge so deeply:
In truth, there can hardly be a deeper Purple, than is our right Herefordshire
Red-strake, having a few streaks toward the Eye, of a dark color, or
Orange-tawny intermingled: But, it is no wonder if an Apple should change its
Name in traveling so far beyond the Severn, when even in this Country, most
sorts of Apples, and especially, Cider-fruit, loses the Name in the next
Village.

42. I may now ask why we should talk of other Cider-fruit or Perry, if the
best Red struck have all the aforesaid pre-eminencies of richer and more winy
liquor, by half sooner an Orchard, more constantly bearing, etc. An Orchard of
Red-strakes is commonly as full of fruit at ten years, as other Cider-fruit at
twenty years, or as the Pepin and Pearmain at thirty or thereabout.

43. To this may be Answered, that all soils bear not Apples, and to some soils
other Apples may be more kind, and if we be driven to Perry, much we may say
both in behalf of the Perry, and of the Pear, of the fruit, and of the Tree; It
is the goodlier Tree for a Grove, to shelter a house and walks from Summers
heat and Winters cold Winds, and far more lasting; the pleasantest Cider-pear
of a known name amongst them, is the Horse-pear. And it is much argued, whether
the White-horse-pear, or the Red-horse-pear be the better; where both are best,
within two Miles they differ in judgment. The Pear bears almost its weight of
sprightful winy Liquor; and I always preferred the tawny or ruddy Horse-pear,
and generally that color in all Pears that are proper for Perry.

44. I rejected Palladius against the durableness of Perry; his words are,
Hyeme durat, sed prima acescit aestate, Tit. 25. Febr. possibly so of common
Pears, and in hotter Countries; but from good Cellars I have tasted a very
brisk lively and winy liquor of these Horse-pears during the end of Summer; and
a Bosbury-pear I have named and often tried, which without bottleing, in common
Hogsheads of vulgar and indifferent Cellars, proves as well pleasanter as
richer the second year, and yet also better the third year. A very honest,
worthy and witty Gentleman of that neighborhood would engage to me, that in
good Cellars, and in careful custody, it passes any account of decay, and may
be heightened to a kind of Aqua-vitae. I take the information worthy the style
of our modern improvements.

The Pear Tree grows in common fields and wild stony ground, to the largeness
of bearing one, two, three or four Hogsheads each year.

45. This Bosbury-tree, and such generally that bear the most lasting Liquor
and winy, is of such unsufferable taste, that hungry Swine will not smell to
it; or if hunger tempt them to taste, at first crush they shake it out of their
mouths; (I say not this of the Horse-pear) and the Clowns call other Pears, of
best Liquor, Choak-pears, and will offer money to such as dare adventure to
taste them, for their sport; and their mouths will be more stupefied than at
the root of Wake-robin.

46. A row of Crab-trees will give an improvement to any kind of Perry; and
since Pears and Crabs may be of as many kinds as there are kernels, or
different kinds or mixtures of soils; in a general Character I would prefer the
largest and fullest of all austere juices.

47. M. Lill of Mark-hill (aged about 90 years) ever observed this Rule, to
grass no wild Pear Tree till he saw the fruit; if it proved large, juicy, and
brisk, it failed not of good Liquor. But I see cause to say, that to graff a
young tree with a riper graff, and known excellency, is a sure gain and hastens
the return.

48. M. Speak (last high Sheriff of Somersetshire) showed me in his Park some
store of Crab-trees, of such huge Bulk, that in this fertile year he offered a
wager, that they would yield one or two Hogsheads of Liquor each of them; yet
were they small dry Crabs.

49. I have seen several sorts of Crabs (which are the natural Apple, or at
worst but the Wild-Apple) which are as large as many sorts of Apples, and the
Liquor winy.

50. I have disclaimed the Gust of Iuniper-berries in Cider; I tried it only
once for my self, and drank it before Christmas: possibly in more time the
relish had been subdued or improved, as of Hops in stale Beer, and of Rennet
in good Parmasan. Neither was the Gust to me otherwise unpleasant than as
Annise-seeds in Bread, rather strange than odious; and by custom made grateful,
and it did hasten the clarification, and increase the briskness to an endless
sparkling: thus it indulgeth the Lungs, and nothing more cheap; where Juniper
grows a Girl may speedily fill her lap with the Berries.

If Barbados Ginger be good, cheaper, and a more pleasant preserver of Beer, it
must probably be most kind for Cider: For first, of all the improvers that I
could name, bruised Mustard was the best; and this Ginger has the same quick,
mordicant vigor, in a more noble and more Aromatique fragrancy. Secondly,
Cider (as I often complain) is of a sluggish and somewhat windy nature; and for
some Months the best of it is chained up with a cold ligature, as we fancy the
fire to be locked up in a cold Flint. This will relieve the prisoner. And
thirdly, will assist the winy vigor for them that would use it instead of a
sparkling Wine. Fourthly, It Is a good sign of much kindness, and great
friendship: it will both enliven the ferment for speedier maturity, and also
hold it out for more duration, both which offices it performs in Beer.

51. Cider being windy before maturity, some that must not wait the leisure of
best Season do put sprigs of Rose-mary and Bays in the Vessel; the first good
for the head, and not unpleasant; the second, an Antidote against Infections;
but less pleasant till time has incorporated the Tastes.

52. And why may we not make mention of all these Mixtures, as well as the
Ancients of their Vinum Marrubii, Vinum Abrotonites, Absynthites, Hyssopites,
Marathites, Thymites, Cydonites, Myrtites, Scillites, Violaceum, Sorbi, etc.

53. And, for mixtures, I think we may challenge the Ancients, in naming the
Red-raspy; of which there is in this County a Lady that makes a Bonella, the
best of Summer drinks. And more yet if we name the Clove-july-flower, or other
Iuly-flowers, a most grateful Cordial, as it is infused by a Lady in
Staffordshire, of the Family of the Devereux's, and by some Ladies of this
Country.

54. I could also give some account of Cherry-wine, and Wine of Plums; the last
of which (in the best Essay that I have yet seen) is hardly worthy to be named:
But, I conceive, and have ground for it, that some good Liquor and Spirits may
be drawn from some sorts of them, and in quantity: And the vast store of
Cherrys in some places, under a penny the pound, and of Plums that bend the
Trees with their burdens, and their expedite growth makes it cheap enough, and
as in the other, so in these, the large English or Dutch sharp Cherry, makes
the Cherry-wine, and the full black, tawny Plum, as big as a Walnut (not the
kind of Heart-Cherrys, nor the Plum which divides from the stone) make the
Wine. Their cheapness should recommend them to more general use at Tables, when
dried like Prunellas (an easy art) and then wholesomer.

55. To return for Red-strake; it is a good drink as soon as well fermented, or
within a Month, better after some Frosts, and when clarified; rich Wine, when
it takes the color of old Sack. In a good Cellar it improves in Hogsheads the
second year; in Bottles and sandy Cellars keeps the Records of late revolutions
and old Majoralties. Quaere the manner of laying them up in sandhouses.

56. I tried some Bottles all a Summer in the bottom of a Fountain; and I
prefer that way where it may be had. And it is somewhat strange if the Land be
neither dry for a sand-house, nor fountainous for this better expedient. When
Cider is settled, and altogether, or almost clarifi'd, then to make it
sprightful and winy, it should be drawn into well cork'd and well bound bottles
and kept some time in sand or water; the longer the better, if the kind be
good. And Cider being preserved to due age, bottl'd (and kept in cool places,
conservatories, and refrigerating springs) it does almost by time turn to
Aqua-vitae; the Bottles smoke at the opening, and it catches flame speedily,
and will burn like spirit of Wine, with a fiery taste; and it is a laudable
way of trying the vigor of Cider by its promptness to burn, and take fire, and
from the quantity of Aqua-vitae which it yields. Cider affords by way of
Distillation, an incomparable and useful Spirit, and that in such plenty, as
from four Quarts, a full Pint has been extracted.

57. I must not prescribe to other Palats, by asserting to what degree of
Perfection good Cider may be raised, or to compare it with VVines: But when the
late King (of blessed memory) came to Hereford in his distress, and such of the
Gentry of Worcestershire as were brought thither as Prisoners; both King,
Nobility, and Gentry, did prefer it before the best VVines those parts
afforded; and to my knowledge that Cider had no kind of Mixture. Generally all
the Gentry of Herefordshire do abhor all mixtures.

Yet if any man have a desire to try conclusions, and by an harmless Art to
convert Cider into Canary-wine; let the Cider be of the former year, Masculine
and in full body, yet pleasant and well tasted: into such Cider put a spoonful,
or so, of the spirit of Clary, it will have so much of the race of Canary, as
may deceive some who pretend they have discerning Palats.

Sir PAVL NEIL's DISCOURSE OF CIDER.
My Lord,
IN obedience to the Commands of this Honorable Society, I have at length
endeavored to give this brief Account of that little which I know concerning
the Ordering of Cider; and in that I shall propound to my self six things.

First, To show that Cider made of the best Eating-apples must needs be once
the best; (that is to say) the pleasantest Cider.

Secondly, That hitherto the general opinion has been otherwise, and that the
reason of that mistake was the not apprehending the true cause why the
Pepin-cider, etc. did not retain its sweetness, when the Hard-apple-cider did.

Thirdly, What is the true cause that Pepin-cider, used in the ordinary method,
will not retain its sweetness.

Fourthly, How to cure that evil in Pepin-cider.

Fifthly, A probable conjecture, how in some degree by the same Method to amend
the Hard-apple-cider, and French-Wine.

Sixthly, That what is here propounded cannot choose but be wholesome, and may be
done to what degree every man's Palate shall wish.

Having now told your Lordship, what I will endeavor to do before I enter upon
it, I must declare what I will not in the least pretend to do.

1. I do not pretend to any thing concerning the planting and graffing of
Trees, etc.

Nor what Trees will soonest bear or last longest.

Nor what sorts of Trees are the best bearers, and may with lea^^ danger grow
in Common fields.

Nor what sort of fruit will yield the greatest store of Cider.

Nor what Cider will keep the longest, and be the strongest, and wholesomest to
drink constantly with meat.

The only thing I shall endeavor, being to prescribe a way to make a sort of
Cider pleasant and quick of taste, and yet wholesome to drink, sometimes, and in
a moderate proportion: For, if this be an Heresy, I must confess my self
guilty; that I prefer Can^ry wine, Verdea, the pleasantest Wines of Greece, and
the High-country-wines before the harsh Sherries, Vin de Hermitage, and the
Italian and Portugal rough Wines, or the best Graves-wines; not at all
regarding that I am told, and do believe, that these harsh wines are more
comfortable to the stomach, and a Surfeit of them less noxious, when taken; nor
to be taken but with drinking greater quantities than can wi^^ safety be taken
of those other pleasant Wines: I sa^isfying my self with this, that I like the
pleasant Wines best; which yet are so wholesome, that a man may drink a moderate
quantity of them without prejudice.

Nor shall I at all concern my self, whether this sort of Cider I pretend to is
so vinous a liquor; and consequently will yield so much spirit upon
Distillation, or so soon make the Countryman think himself a Lord, as the
Hard-apple-cider will do: nor whether it will last so long; for it is no part
of my design to persuade the World to lay by the making of Hard-apple-cider;
but rather in a degree to show how to improve that in point of pleasantness,
and that by the making and rightly ordering of Cider of the best Eating-Apples;
as Golden-pepins, Kentish-pepins, Pear-mains, etc. there may be made a more
pleasant liquor for the time it will last, than can be produced from those
Apples which I call Hard-Apples, that is to say, Red-strakes, Gennet-moyles,
the Broms^ury-Crab, etc. which are so harsh that a Hog will hardly eat them.

Nor shall I at all meddle with the making of Perry, or of any mixed drink of
the juice of Apples and Pears; though possibly what I shall say for Cider may
be aptly applied to Perry also.

For the first particular, I asserted that the best Apples would make the
pleasantest, which in my sense is the best Cider; (and I account those the best
Apples, whose juice is the pleasantest at the time when first pressed, before
fermentation) I shall need (besides the experience of the last ten years) only
to say, that it is an undeniable thing in all Wines, that the pleasantest
Grapes make the richest and pleasantest Wines; and that Cider is really but the
Wine of Apples, and not only made by the same way of Compression; but left to
it self has the same way of Fermentation; and therefore must be liable to the
same measures in the choice of the materials.

To my second Assertion, that this truth was not formerly owned, by reason that
in Herefordshire, and those Countries where they abound both with Pepins and
hard-apples of all sorts, they made Cider of both sorts, and used them alike;
that is, that as soon as they ground and pressed the Apples and strained the
Liquor, they put it into their Vessels and there let it lie till it had
wrought, and afterward was settled again and fined; as not thinking it wholesome
to drink till it had thus (as they call it) purged it self, and this was the
frequent use of most men in the more Southern and Western parts of England
also. Now when Cider is thus used, it is no wonder that when they came to
broach it, they for the most part found their Pepin-cider not so pleasant as
their Moyle or Red struck cider; but to them it seemed a wonder, because they
did not know the reason of it (which shall be my next work to make out) for
till they knew the reason of this ^ffect, they had no cause but to think it was
the nature of the several Apples that produced it; and consequently to prefer
the Hard-Apple-cider, and to use the other Apples (which were good to eat raw)
for the Table: which was an use not less necessary, and for which the
hard-apples were totally improper.

To my third Assertion, which is, that in Herefordshire they knew not what was
the true cause why their Pepin-cider (for by that name I shall generally call
all sorts of Cider that is made of Apples good to eat raw) was not, as they
used it, so good as the Cider made of hard-apples (for by that name, for
brevities sake, I shall call the Cider of Moyle, Red-strake, and all other
sorts of harsh Apples, not fit to eat raw.) First, I say, for all liquors that
are Vinous, the cause that makes them sometimes harder or less pleasant to the
taste, than they were at the first pressing, is the too much fermenting: If
Wine or Cider by any accidental cause do ferment twice, it will be harder than
if it had fermented but once; and if it ferment thrice, it is harder and worse
than if it had fermented but twice: and so onward, the oftener it ferments and
the longer it ferments, it still grows the harder. This being laid as a
foundation, before we proceed further we must first consider what is the cause
of fermentation in Wine, Cider, and all other Vinous Liquors. Which (in my poor
opinion) is the gross part of the Liquor, which scapes in the straining of the
Cider (for in making of Wine, I do not find that they use the curiosity of
straining) and which is generally known by the name of the Lee of that (Wine
or) Cider. And this Lee I shall, according to its thickness of parts,
distinguish into the gross Lee, and the flying Lee.

Now, according to the old method of making and putting up of Cider, they took
little care of putting up only the clear part of the Cider into their Vessels
or Cask; but put them up thick and thin together, not at all regarding this
separation; for experimentally they found that how thick soever they put it up,
yet after it had thoroughly wrought or fermented and was settled again, it would
still be clear; and perchance that which was put up the soonest after it was
pressed and the thickest, would, when the fermentation was over, be the
clearest, the briskest, and keep the longest. This made them confidently
believe that it was not only not inconvenient to put it up quickly after the
pressing, but in some degree necessary also to put it up soon after the
pressing, so that it might have so much of the Lee mixed with it, that it might
certainly, soon, and strongly put it into a fermentation, as the only means to
make it wholesome, clean and brisk; and when it either did not (or that they had
reason to doubt) that it would not work or ferment strongly enough, they have
used to put in Mustard or some other thing of like nature to increase the
fermentation.

Now that which in Cider of Pepins has been a cause of greater fermentation
than in Cider of Hard-Apples, being both used after the former method, is this,
that the Pepins being a softer fruit are in the Mill bruised into smaller
particles than the harder sorts of Apples; and consequently more of those small
parts pass the strainer in the Pepin-Cider than in the Cider of Hard-apples,
which causes a stronger fermentation, and (according to my former principle) a
greater loss of the native sweetness than in that of Hard-app^e-cider; and not
only so, but the Lee of the Hard-apple-cider being compounded of greater
particles than the Lee of the Pepin-cider, every individual particle is in it
self of a greater weight than the particles of the Lee of the Pepin-cider; and
consequently less apt to rise upon small motions, which produces this effect;
that when the fermentation of the Hard-apple-cider is once over, unless the
Vessel be stirred, it seldom falls to a second fermentation; but in Pepin-cider
it is otherwise: For if the gross Lee be still remaining with the Cider, it
needs not the motion of the Vessel to cause a new fermentation, but every
motion of the Air by a change of weather from dry to moist will cause a new
fermentation, and consequently make it work till it has destroyed it self by
losing its native sweetness. And this alone has been the cause, why commonly
when they broach their Pepin-cider they find it so unpleasant, that generally
the Hard-apple-cider is preferred before it, although at first it was not so
pleasant as the Pepin-cider. Yet after this mischief has prevailed over the
Pepin-cider, it is no wonder to find the Hard-apple-cider remaining not only
the stronger, but even the more pleasant tasted. This to me seems satisfactory
for the discovery of the cause, why in Herefordshire the Hard-apple-cider is
preferred before the Pepin-cider. But perhaps it may be some be objected, that
they have before the ten years, in which you pretend you found this to be the
cause of spoiling the Pepin-cider, been in Herefordshire, and tasted the best
Cider that Country did afford; and yet it was not like the Pepin-cider they had
before then tasted in other parts. To this I do answer, at present, briefly,
that by some mistake, or chance, the maker of this Pepin-cider, which proved
good, had done that, or somewhat like that, which under the next Assertion I
shall set down, as a Method to cure the inconveniences which happen to
Pepin-cider, by the suffering it to ferment too often, or too strongly; but
till that be explained it would be improper to show more fully what these
particular accidents might possibly be, which (without the intention of those
persons which made the Cider) caused it to prove much better than their
expectation, or indeed better than any could afterward make: they possibly
assigning the goodness of that Cider to somewhat that was not really the cause
of that effect.

To justify my fourth Assertion, and show a Method how to cure the
inconveniency which happens to Pepin-cider by the over-working, I must first
take notice of some things which I have been often told concerning Wine, and
which indeed gave me the light to know what was the cause which had made
Pepin-cider that had wrought long, hard when it came to be clear again. The
thing I mean, is, that in diverse parts, and even in France they make three
sorts of Wine out of one and the same Grapes; that is, they first take the
juice of the Grapes without any more pressing than what comes from their own
weight in the Vat, and the bruising they have in putting into Vessel, which
causes the ripest of those Grapes to break, and the juice without any pressing
at all makes the pleasantest and most delicate Wine: And if the Grapes were
red, then is this first Wine very pale. The second sort they press a little,
which makes a redder Wine, but neither so pleasant as the first, nor so harsh
as the last, which is made by the utmost pressing of the very skins of the
Grapes, and is by much more harsh, and of deeper color than either of the
other two. Now I presume the cause of this (at least in part) to be, that in
the first sort of Wine, which has little of the substance, beside the very
juice of the Grape, there is little Lee, and consequently little fermentation;
and because it does not work long, it loses but little of the original
sweetness it had: The second sort being a little more pressed has somewhat
more of the substance of the Grape added to the juice; and therefore having
more of that part which causes fermentation put with it, ferments more
strongly, and is therefore* when it has done working, less pleasant than the
first sort, which wrought less. And for the same reason the third sort being
most of all pressed, has most of the substance of the Grape mingled with the
Liquor, and works the longest: but at the end of the working when it settles
and is clear, it is much more harsh than either of the two first sorts. The
thought of this made me first apprehend that the substance of the Apple mingled
with the juice, was the cause of fermentation, which is really nothing else but
an endeavor of the Liquor to free it self from those Heterogeneous parts which
are mingled with it: And where there is the greatest proportion of those
dissimilar parts mingled with the Liquor, the endeavor of Nature must be the
stronger, and take up more time to perfect the separation: which when finished
leaves all the Liquor clear, and the gross parts settled to the bottom of the
Vessel; which we call the Lee. Nor did this apprehension deceive me; for when I
began (according to the Method which I shall hereafter set down) to separate a
considerable part of the Lee from the Cider before it had fermented, I found it
to retain a very great part of its original sweetness, more than it would have
done if the Lee had not been taken away before the fermentation; and this not
once, but constantly for seven years.

Now the Method which I used, was this: When the Cider was first strained, I
put it into a great Vat, and there let it stand twenty four hours at least
(sometimes more, if the Apples were more ripe than ordinary) and then at a tap
before prepared in the Vessel three or four inches from the bottom I drew it
into pails, and from thence filled the Hogshead (or lesser Vessel) and left the
greatest part of the Lee behind; and during this time that the Cider stood in
the Vat, I kept it as close covered with hair-clothes or sacks as I could; that
so too much of the spirits might not evaporate.

Now possibly I might be asked why I did not, since I kept it so close in the
Vat, put it at first into the Vessel? To which I answer, that had I put it at
first into the Vessel, it would possibly (especially if the weather had chanced
to prove wet and warm) have begun to ferment before that time had been expired;
and then there would have been no possibility to have separated any part of the
gross Lee, before the fermentation had been wholly finished; which keeping it
only covered with these clothes was not in danger: For, though I kept it warm
in some degree, yet some of the spirits had still liberty to evaporate; which
had it been in the Hogshead with the Bung only open, they would not so freely
have done; but in the first 24 hours it would have begun to ferment, and so my
design had been fully lost: For those spirits if they had been too strongly
reverberated into the Liquor, would have caused a fermentation before I could
have taken away any part of the gross Lee. For the great mystery of the whole
thing lies in this, to let so many of the spirits evaporate, that the liquor
shall not ferment before the gross Lee be taken away; and yet to keep spirits
enough to cause a fermentation when you would have it. For if you put it up as
soon as it is strained, and do not let some of the spirits evaporate, and the
gross Lee by its weight only to be separated without fermentation, it will
ferment too much and lose its sweetness; and if none be left, it will not
ferment at all; and then the Cider will be dead, flat and sour.

Then after it is put into the Vessel, and the Vessel filled all but a little
(that is, about a Gallon or thereabout) I let it stand (the Bunghole being left
only covered with a paper, to keep out any dust or filth that might fall in)
for 24 hours more; in which time the grossest part of the Lee being formerly
left in the Vat, it will not ferment, but you may draw it off by a Tap some two
or three inches from the bottom of the Vessel, and in that second Vessel you
may stop it up, and let it stand safely till it be fit to Bottle; and possibly
that will be within a day or more: but of this time there is no certain measure
to be given; there being so many things that will make it longer, or less while
before it be fit to bottle. As for Example, If the Apples were over-ripe when
you stamped them, or ground them in the Mill, it will be the longer before it
will be clear enough to Bottle; or if the weather prove to be warmer or moister
than ordinary: or that your Apples were of such kinds, as with the same force
in the stamping or grinding they are broken into smaller particles than other
Apples that were of harder kinds.

Now, for knowing when it is fit to Bottle, I know no certain Rule that can be
given, but to broach the Vessel with a small Piercer, and in that hole fit a
peg, and now and then (two or three times in a day) draw a little, and see what
fineness it is of; for when it is bottled it must not be perfectly fine; for if
it be so, it will not fret in the bottle, which gives it a fine quickness, and
will make it mantle and sparkle in the glass, when you pour it out: And if it
be too thick when it is bottled, then, when it has stood some time in the
bottles it will ferment so much that it may possibly either drive out the
Corks, or break the bottles, or at least be of that sort (which some call
Potgun-drink) that when you open the bottles it will fly about the house, and
be so windy and cutting that it will be inconvenient to drink: For the right
temper of Bottle-Cider is, that it mantle a little and sparkle when it is put
out into the glass; but if it froth and fly, it was bottled too soon: Now the
temper of the Cider is so nice, that it is very hard when you bottle it to
foretell which of these two conditions it will have: but it is very easy
within a few days after (that is to say, about a week, or so) to find its
temper as to this point. For first, if it be bottled too soon; by this time it
will begin to ferment in the Bottles, and in that case you must open the
Bottles, and let them stand open two or three minutes, that that abundance of
spirits may have Vent, which otherwise kept in would in a short time make it of
that sort I called before Potgun-drink; but being let out, that danger will be
avoided, and the Cider (without danger of breaking the bottles) will keep and
ferment, but not too much. Now this is so easy a remedy, that I would advise
all men rather to err on the hand of bottling it too soon, than let it be too
fine when they bottle it; for if so, it will not fret in the bottle at all; and
consequently, want that briskness which is desirable.

Yet even in this case there is a Remedy, but such a one as I am always very
careful to avoid, that so I may have nothing (how little soever) in the Cider
but the juice of the Apple: But the remedy is, in case you be put to a
necessity to use it, that you open every bottle after it has been bottled
about a week or so, and put into each bottle a little piece of white Sugar,
about the bigness of a Nutmeg, and this will set it into a little fermentation,
and give it that briskness which otherwise it would have wanted. But the other
way being full as easy, and then nothing to be added but the juice of the
Apple to be simply the substance of your Cider, I choose to prefer the error of
being in danger to bottle the Cider too soon, rather than too late: Nay
sometimes in the bottling of one and the same Hogshead (or other Vessel) of
Cider, there may the first part of it be too fine; the second part well; and
the last not fine enough: and this happens when it is broached first above the
middle, and then below; and then when it begins to run low, tilted or raised at
the further end, and so all drawn out. But to avoid this inconvenience, I
commonly set the bottles in the order they were filled, and so we need not open
all to see the condition of the Cider; but trying one at each end, and one in
the middle, will serve the turn: And to prevent the inconveniency, broach not
at all above the middle, nor too low; and when you have drawn all that will run
at the Tap, you may be secure it is so far of the same temper with the first
bottle. And then tilt the Vessel; but draw no more in three or four hours at
the least after, and set them by themselves, that so, if you please, you may
three or four days after pour them off into other bottles, and leave the gross
behind: And by this means though you have a less number of bottles of Cider
than you had, yet this will continue good, and neither be apt to fly, nor have
a sediment in the bottle, which after the first glass is filled will render all
the rest of the bottle thick and muddy.

By all this which I have said, I think it may be made out that those persons
which I mentioned in the end of the last Paragraph, that sometimes had
Pepin-cider better than ordinary, and indeed then they could make again, were
beholding to chance for it; either that their Apples were not so full ripe at
that as at other times, and so not bruised into so small parts; but the
fermentation was ended in the Vessel, and the Lee being then gross settled
before the Cider had fermented so long as to be hard.

Or else, by some Accident they had not put it so soon into the Vessel, but
that in part it was settled before they put it up, and the grossest part of the
Lee left out of the Vessel.

Or else, the Bung being left open some part of the spirits evaporated; and
that made the fermentation the weaker, and to last the less time.

Or else, they put it up in such a season that the weather continued cold and
frosty till the fermentation was quite over; and then it having wrought the
less time, and with the less violence, it remained more pleasant and rich than
otherwise it would have done.

Now for the time of making Pepin-cider, I choose to do it in the beginning of
November, after the Apples had been gathered and laid about three weeks or more
in the loft, that so the Apples might have had a little time to sweat in the
house before the Cider was made, but not too much; for if they be not full ripe
before they be gathered, and not suffered to lie a while in the heap, the Cider
will not be so pleasant; and if they be too ripe when they are gathered, or lie
too long in the heap, it will be very difficult to separate the Cider from the
gross Lee before the fermentation begins: and in that case it will work so
long, that when it fines the Cider will be hard; for when the Apples are too
mellow, they break into so small particles, that it will be long before the Lee
settles by its weight only: and then the fermentation may begin before it be
separated, and so destroy your intention of taking away the gross Lee. And if
the Apples be not mellow enough, the Cider will not be so pleasant as it ought
to be.

This being said for the time of making the Pepin-Cider, may (mutatis mutandis)
serve for all other sorts of Summer-fruit; as the Kentish-codling, Marigolds,
Gilly-flowers, Summer-pearmains, Summer-pepins, Holland-pepins, Golden-pepins,
and even Winter-pearmains. For though they must not be made at the same time of
the year, yet they must be made at the time when each respective fruit is in
the same condition that I before directed that the Winter-pepin should be. Nay,
even in the making of that Cider, you are not tied to that time of the year to
make your Cider; but as the condition of that particular year has been, you
may make your Cider one, two, three or four weeks later; but it will be very
seldom that you shall need to begin to make Kentish-pepin-Cider before the
beginning of November, even in the most Southern parts of England.

The next thing I shall mention, is, the ordering of your bottles after they
are filled; for in that consists no small part of causing your Cider to be in a
just condition to drink: For, if it does ferment too much in the bottle, it
will not be so convenient to drink, neither for the taste, nor wholsomness; and
if it ferment not at all, it will want that little fret which makes it grateful
to most Palates. In order to this, you must observe, first, whether the Cider
were bottled too early, or too late, or in the just time: If too early, and
that it has too much of the flying Lee in it, then you must keep it as cool as
you can, that it may not work too much, and if so little that you doubt it will
not work at all, or too little; you must by keeping it from the inconvenience
of the external air, endeavor to hasten and increase the fermentation. And
this I do, by setting it in sand to cool, and by covering the bottles very well
with straw, when I would hasten or increase the fermentation.

And if I find the Cider to have been bottled in its just time, then I use
neither, in ordinary weather; but content my self that it stands in a close and
cool Cellar, either upon the ground, or upon shelves; saving in the time that I
apprehend frost, I cover it with straw, which I take off as soon as the weather
changes; and consequently about the time that the cold East winds cease; which
usually with us, is in the beginning of April; I set my bottles into sand up to
the necks. And by this means I have kept Pepin-cider without change till
September, and might have kept it longer, if my store had been greater: For by
that time the heats were totally over, and consequently, the cause of the turn
of Cider.

Having now declared what is (according to my opinion) to be done to preserve
Cider, if not in it is original sweetness, yet to let it lose as little as is
possible; I shall now fall upon my fifth Assertion, which is, that it is
probable that somewhat like the former Method may in some degree mend
Hard-Apple-cider, Perry, or a drink made of the mixtures of Apples and Pears;
and not impossible that somewhat of the same nature may do good to French-wines
also.

First, for French-wines, I think what I have in the beginning of this
discourse declared, as the hint which first put me upon the conceit, that the
over- fermenting of Cider was the cause that it lost of its original sweetness
(viz. the making of three sorts of Wine, of one sort of Grapes) is a testimony
that the first sort of Wine has but little of the gross Lee, and consequently,
ferments but little, nor loses but little of the original sweetness; which
makes it evident that the same thing will hold in Wine, which does in Cider;
but the great difficulty is (if I be rightly informed) that they use to let the
Wine begin to ferment in the Vat before they put it into the Hogsheads or other
Vessels; and thus they do, that the Husks and other Filth (which in the way
they use, must necessarily be mingled with the Wine) may rise in a skum at the
top, and so be taken off: Now if they please, as soon as it is pressed, to pass
the Wine through a strainer, without expecting any such purgation, and then use
the same Method formerly prescribed for Cider, I do not doubt but the gross
part of the Lee of Wines, being thus taken away, there will yet be enough left
to give it a fermentation in the bottles, or second vessel, where it shall be
left to stand, in case you have not bottles enough to put up all the Wine from
which you have thus taken away the gross Lee.

This Wine I know not whether it will last so long as the other used in the
ordinary way, or not; but this I confidently believe, it will not be so harsh
as the same would have been if it had been used in the ordinary way; and the
pleasantness of Taste, which is not unwholesome, is the chief thing which I
prefer both in Wine and Cider.

Now for the Hard-apple-Cider, that it will receive an improvement by this way
of ordering, has been long my opinion; but this year an accident happened,
which made it evident that I was not mistaken in this conjecture. For there was
a Gentleman of Herefordshire, this last Autumn, that by accident had not
provided Cask enough for the Cider he had made; and having six or seven
Hogsheads of Cider for which he had no Cask, he sent to Worcester, Gloucester,
and even to Bristol, to buy some, but all in vain; and when his servants
returned, the Cider that wanted Cask had been some five days in the Vat
uncovered; and the Gentleman being then dispatching a Barque for London with
Cider, and having near hand a convenience of getting Glass-bottles, resolved to
put some of it into bottles; did so, and filled seven or eight Hampers with the
clearest of this Cider in the Vat, which had then never wrought, nor been put
into any other Vessel but the Vat; the Barque in which his Cider came had a
tedious passage; that is, it was at least seven weeks before it came to London,
and in that time most of his Cider in Cask had wrought so much that it was much
harder than it would have been if it had according to the ordinary way lain
still in the Country, in the place where it was first made and put up, and
consequently, wrought but once.

But the other, which was in Bottles, and escaped the breaking, that is, by
accident, had less of the Lee in it than other bottles had, or was not so hard
stopped, but either before there was force enough from the fermentation to
break the bottle, or that the Cork gave way a little, and so the air got out;
or that the Bottles were not originally well corked, was excellent good, beyond
any Cider that I had tasted out of Herefordshire; so that from this Experience
I dare confidently say, that the using Hard-apple-cider after the former
Method, prescribed for Pepin-cider, will make it retain a considerable part of
sweetness more than it can do after the Method used hitherto in Herefordshire.
Nor do I doubt but my Method will in a degree have the same effect in Perry,
and the drink (as yet without a name that I do know of) which is made of the
Juice of Wardens, Pears, and Apples, by several persons, in several
proportions; for the Reason being the same, I have no cause to doubt, but the
effect will follow, as well in those Drinks, as in Cider and Wines.

I am now come to my last Assertion; that Cider thus used cannot be unwholesom,
but may be done to what degree any man's Palate desires.

First, It cannot be unwholesome, upon the same measure that stummed Wine is
so; for that unwholesomness is by leaving the cause of fermentation in the
Wine, and not suffering it to produce its effect before the Wine be drank, and
it ferments in man's body: and not only so, but sets other humors in the body
into fermentation; and this prejudiceth their health that drink such Wines.

Now though Cider used in my method should not ferment at all, till it come
into the bottle, and then but a little; yet the cause of fermentation being in
a great degree taken away, the rest can do no considerable harm to those which
drink it, being in it self but little, and having wrought in the bottle before
men drink it; nor indeed do I think, nor ever find, that it did any
inconvenience to my self, or any person that drank it when it was thus used.

Secondly, because the difference of men's palates and constitutions is very
great; and that accordingly men like or dislike drink that has more or less of
the fret in it; and that the consequences in point of health are very
different, in the method by me formerly prescribed: it is in your power to give
the Cider just as much fret as you please, and no more; and that by several
ways: for either you may bottle it sooner or later, as you please: or you may
bottle it from two Taps in your Vessel, and that from the higher Tap will have
less fret, and the lower more: or you may bottle your Cider all from one Tap,
and open some of the bottles about a week after for a few minutes, and then
stop them up again; and that which was thus stopped will have the less fret: or,
if your Cider be bottled all from one Tap, if you will (even without opening
the bottles) you may make some difference, though not so considerable as either
of the former ways, by keeping part of the bottles warmer, for the first two
Months, than the rest; for that which is kept warmest will have the most fret.

Sir PAVL NEILE'S second Paper.
My Lord,
THe Paper which by the Command of the Royal Society I delivered in the last
year, concerning the ordering of Cider, I have by this years experience found
defective in one particular, of which I think fit by this to give you notice,
which is thus: Whereas in the former Paper I mention, that after the
Pepin-Cider has stood 24 hours in the Vat, it might be drawn off into Pails,
and so put into the Vessel; and that having stood a second 24 hours in that
Vessel, it might be drawn into another Vessel, in which it might stand till it
were fit to Bottle; for the particulars of all which proceeding I refer to the
former Paper; and shall now only mention, That this last year we were fain to
draw it off into several Vessels, not only as is there directed, twice, but
most of our Cider five, and some six times; and not only so, but we were after
all this fain to precipitate the Lee by some of those ways mentioned by Dr.
Willis in the 7th Chap. of his Treatise De fermentatione. Now though this be
more of trouble than the Method by me formerly mentioned; yet it does not in
the least destroy that Hypothesis which in the former Discourse I laid down,
(viz.) That it was the leaving too much of the Lee with the Cider, which upon
the change of air, set it into a new fermentation, and consequently made it
lose the sweetness; for this change by the indisposition of the Lee to settle
this year more than others, has not hindered the goodness of the Cider; but
that when it was at last mastered, and the Cider bottled in a fit temper, it
was never more pleasant and quick than this year: but I find that this year our
Cider of Summer-Apples is already turned sour, although it be now but the
first of January; and the last year it kept very well till the beginning of
March; which makes me fear that our Pepin-Cider will not keep till this time
twelve-moneth, as our Pepin-Cider of the last year does till this day, and
still retains its original pleasantness without the least turn toward
sowreness.

And I am very confident, the difference of time and trouble, which this year
we found in getting the Cider to fine and be in a condition to Bottle, was only
the effect of a very bad and wet Summer, which made the Fruit not ripen kindly;
and to make it yet worse, we had just at the time when we made our Cider, this
year, extreme wet and windy weather, which (added to the unkindliness of the
Fruit) was the whole cause of this alteration: And however my Hypothesis as yet
remains firm, for if by taking any part of the Lee from the Cider you can
preserve it in its original sweetness, it is not at all material whether it be
always to be done by twice drawing off from the Lee, or that it must sometimes
be done with more trouble, and by oftener repeating the same Work, so that
finally it be done, and by the same means, that is, by taking away part of the
Lee, which otherwise would have caused too much fermentation; and consequently
have made the Cider lose part of its original sweetness.

My Lord, I should not have presumed to have given you and the Society the
trouble of perusing this Paper, but that, if possible, I would have you see,
that what I think an error in any opinion that I have held, I am willing to
own; and yet I desire not that you should think my mistake greater than in
Reality it is.

OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Making, and Preserving OF CIDER:
BY JOHN NEWBVRGH Esquire
1.
IF the Apples are made up immediately from the Tree, they are observed to
yield more, but not so good Cider, as when hoarded the space of a Month so six
weeks; and if they contract any unpleasing taste (as sometimes it is confessed
they do) it may be imputed to the Room they lie in, which if it has any thing
in it, of either too sweet or unsavory smell, the Apples (as things most
susceptible of impression) will be easily tainted thereby.

One of my acquaintance, when a child, hoarding Apples in a Box where
Rose-Cakes and other sweets were their companions, found them of so unsavory
taste, and of so rank a relish derived from the too near neighborhood of the
Perfumes, that even a childish palate (which seldom mislikes any thing that
looks like an Apple) could not dispense with it.

2.
It is therefore observed by prudent Fruiterers, to lay their Apples upon clean
new made Reed, till they grind them for Cider, or otherwise make use of them.
And if, notwithstanding this caution, they contract any rottenness before they
come to the Cider-press, the damage will not be great, if care be had before
the Apples be ground, to pick out the finnewed and the blackrotten; the rest,
though somewhat of putrefaction has passed upon them, will not render the
Cider ill conditioned, either in respect of taste, or duration.

A Friend of mine having made provision of Apples for Cider, whereof so great a
part were found rotten when the time of grinding them came, that they did, as
'twere wash the Room with their Juice, through which they were carried to the
Wring, had Cider from them not only passable, but exceeding good; though not
without previous use of the pre-mention'd Caution. I am also assured by a
Neighbor of mine, That a Brother of his who is a great Cider-Merchant in
Devonshire, is by frequent experience so well satisfied of the harmlesness of
Rotten-Apples, that he makes no scruple of exchanging with any one that comes
to his Cider-press, a Bushel of sound-Apples for the same measure of the other.
Herein, I suppose, (if in other respects they be not prejudicial) he may be a
gainer by the near compression of the tainted Fruit, which, as we speak in our
Country Phrase, will go nearer together than the other. His advantage may be
the greater, if the conceit which goes current with them be not a bottomless
fancy, That a convenient quantity of rotten-Apples mixed with the sound, is
greatly assistant to the work of fermentation, and notably helps to clarify
the Cider.

3.
It matters not much whether the Cider be forced to purge it self by working
downwards in the Barrel, or upwards at the usual Vent, so there be matter
sufficient left on the top for a thick skin or film, which will sometimes be
drawn over it when it works, after the usual manner, as when it is presently
stopped up with space left for fermentation, to be performed altogether within
the Vessel.

The thick skin, or Leathern-coat, the Cider oftentimes contracts, as well
after it has purged it self after the usual manner, as otherwise, is held the
surest preservation of its spirits, and the best security against other
inconveniences incident to this, and other like vinous Liquors, of which the
Devonshire Cider-Merchants are so sensible, that, beside the particular care
they take, that matter be not wanting for the Contexture of this upper garment
by stopping up the Vessel as soon as they have filled it; (with the allowance
of a Gallon or two upon the score of Fermentation) they cast in Wheaten Bran,
or Dust, to thicken the Coat, and render it more certainly Air-proof. And I
think you will believe their care in this kind not impertinent, if you can
believe a story which I have to tell of its mavelous efficacy: A near
neighbor of mine assures me, that his Wife having this year filled a Barrel
with Mead, being strong, it wrought so boistrously in the Vessel, that the good
Woman casting her eye that way, accidentally, found it leaking at every chink,
which ascribing to the strength of the Liquor, she thought immediately by
giving it vent, to save both the Liquor and the Vessel, but in vain; both the
Stopples being pulled out, the leakage still continued, and the Vessel not at
all relieved, till casually at length putting in her finger at the top, she
brake the premention'd film; which done, a good part of the Mead immediately
flying out, left the residue in peace, and the leakage ceased. It may seem
incredible that so thin a skin should be more coercive to a mutinous Liquor,
than a Barrel with Oaken-Ribs, and stubborn Hoops: But I am so well assured of
the veritableness of my Neighbors Relation, that I dare not question it: The
reason of it let wiser men determine.

4.
If the Apples be abortive, having been (as it usually happens) shaken down
before the time by a violent Wind, it is observed to be so indispensably
necessary that they lie together in hoard, at least till the usual time of
their maturity, that the Cider otherwise is seldom, or never found worth the
drinking.

A Neighbor told me, That making a quantity of Cider with Wind-falls which he
let ripen in the Hoard, near a month interceding between the time of their
decussion, and that which Nature intended for their maturity; his Cider proved
very good, when all his Neighbors who made up their untimely fruit as soon as
it fell, had a crude, austere, indigested Liquor, not worth the name of Cider.

5.
No Liquor is observed to be more easily affected with the savor of the Vessel
it is put into, than Cider; therefore singular care is taken by discreet
Cider-Masters, That the Vessel be not only tasteless, but also well prepared
for the Liquor they intend to fill it with. If it be a new Cask, they prepare
it by scalding it with Water, wherein a good quantity of Apple-pomice has been
boiled: if a tainted Cask, they have diverse ways of cleansing it. Some boil an
Ounce of Pepper in so much Water as will fill an Hogshead, which they let stand
in a Vessel of that capacity two or three days, and then wash it with a
convenient quantity of fresh Water scalding hot, which they say is an undoubted
cure for the most dangerously infected Vessel. A Friend and Neighbor of mine
herewith cured a Vessel of so extreme ill savor, as it was thought it would
little less than poison any Liquor that was put into it. Others have a more
easy, and perhaps no less effectual Remedy. They take two or three stones of
Quicklime, which in six or seven Gallons of Water they set on work in the
Hogshead being close stopped, and tumbling it up and down till the commotion
cease, it does the feat. Of Vessels that have been formerly used, next to that
which has been already acquainted with Cider, a White Wind, or Vinegar Cask is
esteemed the best; Claret or Sack not so good. A Barrel newly tenanted by small
Beer suits better with Cider than a strong- Beer Vessel.

6.
Half a peck of unground Wheat put to Cider that is harsh and eager, will renew
its fermentation, and render it more mild and gentle. Sometimes it happens
without the use of any such means to change with the season, and becomes of
sharp and sour unexpectedly benign and pleasant. Two or three Eggs whole put
into an Hogshead of Cider that is become sharp and near of kin to Vinegar,
sometimes rarely lenifies and gentilizes it. One pound of broad-figs slit, is
said to dulcifie an Hogshead of such Cider.

A Neighbor Divine, of my acquaintance, assured me, That coming into a
Parsonage-house in Devonshire, where he found eleven Hogsheads of Cider; being
unwilling to sell what he never bought, he was three years in spending that
store which the former Incumbent had left him; and it greatly amused him (as
well it might, if he remembered the old Proverb, He mends as sour Ale in
Summer) to find the same Cider, which in Winter was almost as sharp as Vinegar,
in the Summer become a potable and good-natured Liquor.

7.
A little quantity of Mustard will clear an Hogshead of muddy Cider. The same
Virtue is ascribed to two or three rotten Apples put into it. Mustard made with
Sack preserves boild Cider, and spirits it egregiously.

8.
Cider is found to ferment much better in mild and moist, than in cold and dry
weather. Every ones Experience has taught him so much in the late frosty
season. If it had not wrought before, it was in vain to expect its working or
clearing then, unless by some of the artificial means premention'd, which also
could not be made use of in a more inconvenient time.

9.
The latter running of the Cider bottled immediately from the Wring, is by some
esteemed a pure, clear, small, well relisht Liquot; but so much undervalued by
them who desire strong drinks more than wholesome, that they will not suffer it
to incorporate with the first running.

In Devonshire where their Wrings are so hugely great, that an Hogshead or two
runs out commonly before the Apples suffer any considerable pressure, they
value this before the other, much after the rate which we set upon life-honey
(that which in like sort drops freely out of the Combs) above that which
renders not it self without compression. In Iersey they value it a Crown upon
an Hogshead dearer than the other: (This I take from the Relation of one of my
Neighbors, who sometimes lived in that Island, which for Apples and Cider is
one of the most famous of all belonging to his Majesty's Dominions) Yet even
upon this, and their choicest Ciders, they commonly bestow a pail of water to
every Hogshead, being so far (it seems) of Pindar's mind, that they fear not
any prejudice to their most excellent Liquors by a dash of that most excellent
Element: Insomuch that it goes for a common saying amongst them, That if any
Cider can be found in their Island, which can be proved to have no mixture of
Water, it is clearly forfeited. It seems they are strongly conceited, that this
addition of the most useful Element, does greatly meliorate their Cider, both
in respect of Color, Taste, and Clarity.

10.
The best Cider-fruit with us in this part of Dorsetshire (lying near
Bred-port) next to Pepin and Pearmain, is a Bitter-sweet, or (as we vulgarly
call them) Bitter-scale, of which for the first, the Cider unboil'd keeps well
for one year; boiling it you may keep it two years or longer.

About seven years since I gave my self the Experience of Bitter-scale Cider
both crude and boiled. I called them both to account at twelve Months end. I
then found the crude Cider seemingly as good, if not better, than the boiled.
But, having stopped up the boiled, I took it to task again about ten Months
after. At which time, I found it so excessively strong, that five persons would
hardly venture upon an ordinary Glass full of it. My friends would hardly
believe but I had heightened it with some of my Chemical Spirits. The truth is,
I do not remember that I ever drunk any Liquor, on this side Spirits, so highly
strong, and spirituous; but wanting pleasantness answerable to its strength, I
was not very fond of my Experiment. In which I boiled away, as I remember, more
than half.

11.
A Neighbor having a good Provent of pure-Lings (an Apple of choice account
with us) making up a good part of them to Cider, expected rare Liquor, but it
proved very mean and pitiful Cider, as generally we find that to be, which is
made without mixture. We have few Apples with us, beside the Bitter-scale,
which yield good Cider alone; next to it is a Deans-Apple, and the Peleasantine
I think may be mentioned in the third place; neither of which need the Addition
of other Apples to set off the Relish, as do the rest of our choicest Fruits.
Pepins, Pearmains, and Gilliflours, commixt, are said to make the best Cider in
the world. In Iersey it is a general observation, as I hear, That the more of
red any Apple has in its rind, the more proper it is for this use.
Paleface't-Apples they exclude as much as may be from their Cider-Vat. It Is
with us an observation, That no sweet-Apple that has a tough rind, is bad for
Cider.

12.
If you boil your Cider, special care is to be had, That you put it into the
furnace immediately from the Wring; otherwise, if it be ^et stand in Vats or
Vessels two or three days after the pressure, the best, and most spirituous
part will ascend, and vapor away when the fire is put under it; and the longer
the boiling continues, the less of goodness, or virtue will be left remaining
in the Cider.

My Distillations sufficiently instruct me, That the same Liquor which (after
fermentation has passed upon it) yields a plentiful quantity of spirit, drawn
off unfermented, yields nothing at all of spirit. And upon the same account it
is undoubtedly certain, That Cider boiled immediately from the Wring, has its
spirits comprest, and drawn into a narrower compass, which are for the most
part washed and evaporated by late unseasonable boiling.

CONCERNING CIDER,
By Doctor SMITH.
THE best time to grind the Apples is immediately from the Tree, so soon as
they are thoroughly ripe: for, so they will yield the greater quantity of
Liquor, the Cider will drink the better, and last longer than if the Apples
were hoarded: For Cider made of hoarded Apples will always retain an unpleasing
taste of the Apples, especially if they contract any rottenness.

The Cider that is ground in a Stone-case is generally accused to taste
unpleasantly of the Rinds, Stems, and Kernels of the Apples; which it will not
if ground in a Case of Wood, which does not bruise them so much.

So soon as the Cider is made, put it into the Vessel (leaving it about the
space of one Gallon empty) and presently stop it up very close: This way is
observed to keep it longer, and to preserve its spirits better than the usual
way of filling the Vessel quite full, and keeping it open till it has done
fermenting.

Cider put into a new Vessel will often taste of the Wood, if it be pierced
early; but the same stopped up again, and reserved till the latter end of the
year, will free it self of that taste.

If the Cider be sharp and thick it will recover it self again: But if sharp
and clear, it will not.

About March (or when the Cider begins to sparkle in the glass) before it be
too fine, is the best time to bottle it.

Cider will be much longer in clearing in a mild and moist, then in a cold and
dry Winter.

To every Hogshead of Cider, designed for two years keeping, it is requisite to
add (about March, the first year) a quart of Wheat unground.

The best Fruit (with us in Gloucestershire) for the first years Cider, are the
Red-strake; the White and Red Must-apple, the sweet and sour Pepin, and the
Harvey-apple.

Pearmains alone make but a small liquor, and hardly clearing of it self; but,
mixed either with sweet or sour Pepins, it becomes very brisk and clear.

Must-apple-cider (though the first made) is always the last ripe; by reason
that most of the pulp of the Apple passes the strainer in pressing, and makes
it exceeding thick.

The Cider of the Bromsbury-Crab, and Fox-whelp, is not fit for drinking, till
the second year, but then very good.

The Cider of the Bromsbury-Crab yields a far greater proportion of spirits, in
the distillation, than any of the others.

Crabs and Pears mixed make a very pleasing Liquor, and much sooner ripe than
Pears alone.

OF CIDER.
By Capt. SYLAS TAILOR.
HErefordshire affords several sorts of Cider-apples, as the two sorts of Red
strakes, the Gennet-moyle, the Summer-violet, or Fillet, and the Winter-fillet;
with many other sorts which are used only to make Cider. Of which some use each
sort simply; and others mix many sorts together. This County is very well
stored with other sorts of Apples; as Pepins, Pearmains, etc. of which there is
much Cider made, but not to be compared to the Cider drawn from the
Cider-apples; among which the Red-strakes bear the Bell; a Fruit in it self
scarce edible; yet the juice being pressed out is immediately pleasant in
taste, without any thing of the restringency which it had when incorporated
with the meat, or flesh of the Apple. It is many times three Months before it
comes to its clearness, and six Months before it comes to a ripeness fit for
drinking; yet I have tasted of it three years, old, very pleasant, though
dangerously strong. The color of it, when fine, is of a sparkling yellow, like
Canary, of a good full body, and oily: The taste, like the Flavor or perfume
of excellent Peaches, very grateful to the Palate and Stomach.

Gennet-moyles make a Cider of a smaller body than the former, yet very
pleasant, and will last a year. It is a good eating pleasant sharp fruit, when
ripe, and the best Tart-apple (as the Red-strake also) before its ripeness. The
Tree grows with certain knotty extuberancies upon the branches and boughs;
below which knot we cut off boughs the thickness of a man's wrist, and place the
knot in the ground, which makes the root; and this is done to raise this fruit;
but very rarely by graffing.

Of Fillets of both sorts ( viz. Summer and Winter) I have made Cider of that
proportionate taste and strength, that I have deceived several experienced
Palates, with whom (simply) it has passed for White Wind; and dashing it with
Red-Wine, it has passed for Claret; and mingled with the Syrup of Rasp'yes it
makes an excellent woman's wine: The fruit is not so good as the Gennetmoyle to
eat: The Winter-fillet makes a lasting Cider, and the Summer-fillet an early
Cider, but both very strong; and the Apples mixed together make a good Cider.

These Apples yield a liquor more grateful to my Palate (and so esteemed of in
Herefordshire by the greater Ciderists) than any made of Pepins and Pearmains,
of which sorts we have very good in that Country; and those also both Summer
and Winter of both sorts, and of which I have drank the Cider; but prefer the
other.

Grounds separated only with a Hedge and Ditch, by reason of the difference of
Soils have given a great alteration to the Cider, notwithstanding the Trees
have been graffed with equal care, the same Graffs, and lastly, the same care
taken in the making of the Cider. This as to the Red-strake; I have not
observed the same niceness in any other fruit; for Gennet-moyles, and Fillets
thrive very well over all Herefordshire. The Red-strake delights most in fat
soil: Hamlacy is a rich intermixed soil of Red-fat-clay and Sand; and
Kings-capel a low hot sandy ground, both well defended from noxious Winds, and
both very famous for the Red-strake-cider.

There is a Pear in Hereford and Worcester-shires, which is called
Bareland-pear, which makes a very good Cider. I call it Cider (and not Perry)
because it has all the properties of Cider. I have drank of it from half a
year old to two years old. It keeps it self without Roping (to which Perry is
generally inclined) and from its taste: Dr. Beal, in his little Treatise called
the Herefordshire-Orchard, calls it deservingly a Masculine Drink; because in
raste not like the sweet luscious feminine juice of Pears. This Tree thrives
very well in barren ground, and is a fruit (with the Red-strake) of which Swine
will not eat; therefore fittest to be planted in Hedge-rows.

Red strakes and other Cider-apples when ripe (which you may know partly by the
blackness of the Kernel's, and partly by the color and smell of the fruit)
ought to be gathered in Baskets or Bags, preserved from bruising, and laid up
in heaps in the Orchard to sweat; covered every night from the dew: Or else, in
a Barnfloor (or the like) with some Wheat or Rye-straw under them, being kept
so long till you find, by their mellowing, they are fit for the Mill.

They that grind, or bruise their Apples presently upon their gathering,
receive so much liquor from them, that between twenty or twenty two Bushels
will make a Hogshead of Cider: but this Cider will neither keep so well, nor
drink with such a fragrancy as is desired and endeavored.

They that keep them a month or six weeks hoarded, allow about thirty bushels
to the making of a Hogshead; but this has also an inconvenience; in that the
Cider becomes not fine, or fit for drinking, so conveniently as a mean betwixt
these two will afford.

Keep them then about a fort-night in a hoard, and order them to be of such a
cast by this Mellowing, that about twenty five Bushels may make a Hogshead,
after which mellowing proceed thus.

1. Pick and clear your Apples from their stalks, leaves, moaziness, or any
thing that tends toward rottenness or decay.

2. Lay them before the stone in the Cider-Mill, or else beat them small with
Beaters (such as Paviers use to fix their pitching) in deep troughs of Wood or
Stone, till they are fit for the Press.

3. Having laid clean wheat straw in the bottom of your Press, lay a heap of
bruised Apples upon it, and so with small handfuls or wisps of straw, which by
twisting takes along with it the ends of the straw laid first in the bottom,
proceed with the bruised Apples, and follow the heaps with your twisted straw,
till it comes to the height of two foot, or two foot and a half; and so with
some straw drawn in by twisting, and turned over the top of it (so that the
bruised Apples are set as it were into a deep Chees-vat of straw, from which
the Country people call it their Cider-Cheese) let the board fall upon it even
and flat, and so engage the force of your skrew or Press so long as any Liquor
will run from it. Instead of this Cheese others use baggs of Hair-cloth.

4. Take this Liquor thus forced by the Press, and strain it through a strainer
of hair into a Vat, from whence straight (or that day) in pails carry it to the
Cellar, tunning it up presently in such Vessels as you intend to preserve it
in; for I cannot approve of a long evaporation of spirits, and then a
disturbance after it settles.

5. Let your Vessels be very tight and clean wherein you put your Cider to
settle: The best form is the Stund or Stand, which is set upon the lesser end,
from the top tapering downwards; as suppose the head to be thirty inches
diametre, let then the bottom be but eighteen or twenty inches in diametre; let
the Tun-hole or Bung-hole be on the one side outward, toward the top. The
reason of the goodness of this form of Vessel is, because Cider (as all strong
Liquors) after fermentation and working, contracts a cream or skin on the top
of them, which in this form of Vessel is as it sinks contracted, and fortified
by that contraction, and will draw fresh to the last drop; whereas in our
ordinary Vessels, when drawn out about the half or middle, this skin dilates
and breaks, and without a quick draught decays and dies.

6. Reserve a Pottle or Gallon of the Liquor to fill up the Vessel to the brim
of the Bung-hole, as often as the fermentation and working lessens the Liquor,
till it has done its work.

7. When it has completed its work, and that the Vessel is filled up to the
bung-hole, stop it up close with well mixed clay, and well tempered, with a
handful of Bay Salt laid upon the top of the clay, to keep it moist, and
renewed as often as need shall require; for if the clay grows dry it gives vent
to the spirits of the Liquor, by which it suffers decay.

I am against either the boiling of Cider, or the hanging of a bag of Spices in
it, or the use of Ginger in drinking it; by which things people labor to
correct that windiness which they fancy to be in it: I think Cider not windy;
those that use to drink it are most free from windiness; perhaps the virtue of
it is such, as that once ripened and mellowed, the drinking of it in such
strength combats with that wind which lies insensibly latent in the body. The
Cider made and sold here in London in Bottles may have that windiness with it
as Bottle-beer has, because they were never suffered to ferment: But those
that have remarked the strength and vigor of its fermentation, what weighty
things it will cast up from the bottom to the top, and with how many bubbles
and bladders of wind it does work, will believe that it clears it self by that
operation of all such injurious qualities.

To preserve Cider in Bottles I recommend unto you my own Experience, which is,
Not to bottle it up before fermentation; for that incorporates the windy
quality, which otherwise would be ejected by that operation: This violent
suppression of fermentation makes it windy in drinking, (though I confess brisk
to the taste, and sprightly cutting to the Palate:) But after fermentation, the
Cider resting two, three, or four Months, draw it, and bottle it up, and so lay
it in a Repository of cool springing water, two or three foot, or more, deep;
this keeps the spirits, and the best of the spirits of it together: This makes
it drink quick and lively; it comes into the glass not pale or troubled, but
bright yellow, with a speedy vanishing nittiness, (as the Vintners call it)
which evaporates with a sparkling and whizzing noise; And than this I never
tasted either Wine or Cider that pleased better: Insomuch that a Nobleman
tasting of a Bottle out of the water (himself a great Ciderist) protested the
excellency of it, and made with much greater charges, at his own dwelling, a
water Repository for his Cider, with good success.

An ACCOUNT of Perry and Cider Out of GLOUCESTERSHIRE,
Imparted by DANIEL COLLWALL Esquire
ABout Taynton, Five Miles beyond Gloucester, is a mixed sort of land, partly
Clay, a Marle, and Crash, as they call it there, on all which sorts of land,
there is much Fruit growing, both for the Table and for Cider: But it is Pears
it most abounds in, of which the best sort, is that they name the Squosh-Pear,
which makes the best Perry in those Parts. These Trees grow to be very large,
and exceeding fruitful, bearing a fair round Pear, red on the one side, and
yellow on the other, when fully ripe: It oftentimes falls from the Tree, which
commonly breaks it; but it is of a nature so harsh, that the Hogs will hardly
eat them.

They usually plant the stocks first, and when of competent bigness (and tall
enough to prevent Cattle) graff upon them: It Is observed, that where land is
Plowed and dressed for Corn, the Trees thrive much better than in the
Pasture-grounds, so as diverse Orchards are yearly plowed and sown with Corn,
which for the most part, they suffer their Swine to eat upon the ground,
without cutting; and such Plantations seldom or never fail of plentiful Crops*
especially in the Rye-land, or light Grounds.

About Michaelmas is made the best Cider, and that of such Fruit as drops from
the Trees, being perfectly mature; and if any are gathered sooner, they let
them lie in the house 8 or 9 days for the better mellowing.

The best Mills to grind in, are those of Stone, which resembles a Mill stone
set edge-ways, moved round the Trough by an Horse till the Fruit be bruised
small enough for the Press: This done, then put it up into a Crib made with
strong studds, and Oken or Haisel twigs about 3 foot high, and 2 wide, which is
placed on a Stone or Wooden Cheese-fat, a foot broader than the Crib, fitted to
a round Trough for the Liquor to pass into the Cistern which is a large Vessel:
When the Crib is filled with the foresaid ground Fruit, they put a Stone upon
it, but first they fit a Circle of fresh straw about the Crib, to preserve the
Must (which is the bruised Fruit) from straining through the Crib when they
apply the Skrews, which being two in number, and of a good size, turn in a
great beam, and so are wrung down upon the Crib, within which they place two
wide and thick Cheese-fats, and several blocks upon the Fruit, to crush it down
with the more force, by which means it is wrung so dry, as nothing can be had
more out of it. A Crib will contain at once, as much ground Fruit, as will make
above an Hogs-head of Cider, and there may be dispatched six or seven such
Vessels in one day.

When the Pressing is finished, they take out the Fruit, and put it into a
great Fat, pouring several Payls of Water to it, which being well impregn'd, is
ground again slightly in the Mill, to make an ordinary Cider for the servants;
this they usually drink all the Year about.

When the best Liquor is tuned up, they commonly leave the Bung-hole open, for
nine or ten days, to ferment and purify; for though in most places they add
straining to all this, yet some of the Husks and Ordure will remain in it. The
Vessel after a day or two standing, is filled up, and still as the Cider wastes
in working, they supply it again, till no more filth rises; and then stop it
up very accurately close, leaving only a small breathing hole to give it air
for a Month after, and to prevent the bursting of the Vessel.

Note, That they sometimes put Pears, and of Apples.

The usual Names of Gloucestershire Cider-Fruit.
Red-streaks, growing chiefly in the Rye-Lands, sweet White-Musts, Red-Must,
the Winter-Must, the Streak-Must, the Gennet-Moyl, the Woodcock-Apple, the
Bromsgrove-Crab, the Great-white-Crab, the Heming, and diverse other sorts, but
these are the principal.

The Pears for Perry are,
The Red Squash-pear esteemed the best, the Iohn-pear, the Harpary Green-pear,
the Drake-pear, the Green Squash-pear, the Mary-pear, the Lullam-pear: these
are the chief.

Another Account of CIDER from a Person of great Experience.
CIder-Apples for strength, and a long lasting Drink, is best made of the
Fox-Whelp of the Forest of Deane, but which comes not to be drunk till two or
three years old.

2. Bromsborrow-Crab the second year; In the Coast and Tract 'twixt Hereford
and Ledbury.

3. Vnder-leaf, best at two years, a very plentiful bearer has a Rhenish-wine
flavor; the very best of all Ciders of this kind, hoarded a little within
doors. The longer you would keep, the longer you must hoard your Fruit.

4. The Red-strake of Kings-Capel, and those parts, is in great variety: Some
make Cider that is not of continuance, yet pleasant and good; others, that
lasts long, inclining toward the Bromsborrow^^rab rather than a Red-strake.

5. A long pale Apple, called the Coleing, about Ludlow, an extraordinary
bearer.

6. The Arier-Apple, a constant bearer, making a strong and lasting Cider; some
call them Richards, some Grang-apples; and indeed they make so excellent a
Drink, that they are worthy to be recovered into use.

7. The Olive, well known about Ludlow, may, I conceive be accounted of the
Winter-Cider Apples, of which it is the constant report, that an Hogs-head of
the Fruit will yield an Hogs-head of Cider.

The Summer-Ciders are,
1. The Gennet-Moyl of one year: The best Baking-Apple that grows, and keeps
long baked; but not so unbaked without growing mealy: it drys well in the Oven,
and with little trouble. The Gennet-Moyl Cider, when the Fruit is well hoarded
and mellow, will body, and keep better.

2. The Summer Red-strake, of a wonderful fragrant and Aromatique quality.

3. Sir Ed. Harley's little Apple, esteemed to make one of the richest Ciders
in the World. Also, his,

4. Great Summer-Apple, resembling the Red-strake, juicy and Aromatique.

5. The White-Must, streaked Must, etc. great bearers, and their Cider early
ripe.

6. Pearmains, have made excellent Cider, as good, if not superior to any other
in some years; and though it be true, that every sort of Fruit makes better
Drink some years than others; yet, for the most part, the goodness and
perfection of Cider results from the lucky, or intelligent Gathering, or
Hoarding of the Fruit, or from both; and this knowledge must be from Experience.

7. Generally, the Cider longest in fining, is strongest and best lasting,
especially if the fruit have been well hoarded for some time.

8. Cider made of Green, and immature Fruit, will not fine kindly, and when it
does, it abides not long good, but suddenly becomes eagre.

9. Cider kept in very cool Cellars, if made of ripe Fruit, renders it long in
fining, and sometimes Cider by exposing abroad in the Sun, and kept Warm, has
sooner matur'd, and continued long good: But the best Drink is that which fines
of it self, preserved in an indifferent temper.

10. All Cider, suffers Fermentation when Trees are blossoming, though it be
never so old; and Cider of very ripe Fruit, if Bottl'd in that season, will
acquire a fragrancy of the Blossom.

11. New Cider, and all diluted and watered Ciders, are great Enemies to the
Teeth, and cause violent pains in them, and Rheums in the Head.

12. One Rotten-Apple, of the same kind with the sound, corrupts a whole
Vessel, and makes it Musty. But,

To Conclude this Treatise,
We will gratify the Cider-Master with the Construction of a new kind of Press
brought into the R. Society, by their Curator, the ingenious Mr. Hook, and, if
perfectly understood by him that shall imitate it, recommended not only for its
extraordinary Dispatch, but for many other virtues of it, chiefly, the
accurately grinding of the Pulp, and keeping the Husks from descending with the
Liquor.

Explication of the Figures.
a The Axis, by which four Cylinders are to be moved, either by the force of
Men, Horses, Wind, or Water, etc.

b. c. d Three of the 4 (visible) Cylinders, so placed, that those which are
first to bruise the Apples, may stand at about half an Inch, or less distance
from each other: Those that are to press out the juice may join as close, as
they can well be made to move.

f. f The Trough, in which to receive the Liquor, running through certain holes
made in the lower Plate there marked.

e. e The Hopper, made tapering toward the bottom, in which you fling the
Apples, and supply them as they sink toward the Cylinders. Note, That such
another Hopper is supposed to be also made, and fitted to this forepart of the
Press, but here omitted, that the prospect and description of the Cylinders may
the better be laid open and demonstrated.

g. g. g The Spindles of each Cylinder.

h. h. i. i. k. k The Frame, consisting of two Plates, and two Pilasters, which
hold the Cylinders together. Note, That the Cylinders must be made of excellent
Oken Timber, or other hard Wood; the dimensions about 3 foot long, one foot and
half diameter: The rest of the Frame for thickness, etc. of size and strength
proportionable.

L L The Legs which support the Frame.

FIG. II. Represents the Ichnography of the First.

FINIS.

