The Late News OR MESSAGE FROM BRUXELS Unmasked, AND HIS MAJESTY Vindicated,
FROM The Base CALUMNY and SCANDAL therein fixed on Him.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Lowndes at the White Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

The late News or Message from Bruxels unmasked: And his Majesty vindicated,
from the base Calumny and Scandal therein fixed on him.
THe last night came to my view, a Paper entitled, News from Brussels, etc. At
the reading whereof, I could not but in some measure be astonished, to Imagine,
that such exquisite Malice, should still have its continuance, and prevalency
amongst some people, against that person who should (if they duly considered
their duties,) be most Dear, Tender, and Sacred to them; such a vein I
perceived there was of forged and fictitious stuff, put into a most malicious
dress of Drollery, running through the whole Tenor thereof, and snapping and
biting all along as it went, in that sense, as might be sure most to fix
calumny and slander upon that royal person, whom it chiefly intended to wound;
That I could not but contemplate thus with my self: Is it not enough that, That
Innocent Prince, ever since his Tender years has been hunted like a Partridge
upon the mountains from place to place, from one nation to another people,
robbed and spoiled of his large and ample Patrimony and Dominions, and enforced
to live (as it were) upon the Alms and Charity of his Neighbor Princes, But
his bright and shining virtues, most manifest and apparent to the whole world,
must still be subject to the reproach and scandal of every lascivious, black
and sooty quill? Were thou a Christian (Base forger) and not a foul feind
rather, clothed with humanity; Methinks the consideration of this very
particular, should draw Tears from thine eyes, or rather blood from thy heart,
then such cursed drops of mischievous malice, to issue from thy disloyal and
corrupted brain? But if thou call to mind that transcendently barbarous murder,
of his most glorious and Martyred father, such as no Age since Adam, ever
paralelled: And the deep stain of that Sacred and and Royal blood (now crying
under the Altar) which fasten upon thee; And thy therein guilty and bespotted
Soul, (For, it is more then guessed who thou art) what horror and trembling
should justly seize thy joints, and shake the scribbling instrument, of such thy
traitorously invented mischief, out of thy loathed and bloody hands? After
which contemplation, (...) a more strict and wary view of the particulars in
that scandalous Scrole: And having observed, what cunning subtilty, This forger
had showed, and what tools he had made use of, to stamp and Mint this false and
counterfeit Coin, I resolved to publish it, which I am persuaded will not be
ungrateful to any, unless such, who are of the Forgers crew; and of what sort
and principles they are, it is well known.

First, he has prepared a number of letters, which he would have the reader
think, to intend the persons now about his Majesty, whose names relate to them;
But see, how in ipso Lumine, he berays his own fictitious guilt; For this H. I.
which he would have thought to be the L. Iermin, this person was known to be
elsewhere, far distant from Bruxels, at the time of the date of that piece of
Forgery: In the next place, it is observable, That before he has wrote five
lines, he fixes a No^^^ious lie upon his Majesty, and charge him with
Swaering; A thing (...) manifestly known, he is so free from, That all his
Attendants may (...) challenged to relate, if they can, whether, ever they
heard a profane oath (...) come from him, much less used upon such a ridiculous
idle occasion* as this forger mentions; It being Notorious that he is, and ever
has been* so reserved in bestowing those ready Jewels of honor (The only
Treasure he is, or can be unrob'd of) That it is not any way probable, he
should squander one away, for a Letter, and less likely, that he should
publicly say and swear this. Within a few lines after he Talks of his
Majesty's Resolution to waft over into Ireland; For his S. C. C. he would have
understood, to be meant Sir Charles Coot; a very probable business, as he
relates it: Pray Sir which way should he waft (as you phrase it) it is a sign
you have more skill in Forgery then in Geography, and the situation of places,
and nations. Next, he fains News to arrive out of Scotland, which is the cold
Country he means; But his two hours mentioned, smells so rank of brass, that it
renders it, at first sent, a perfect counterfeit: And what must this News do?
only introduce an occasion to abuse and slander his sacred Majesty, and render
him odious to those of the Presbyterian Tenets, which indeed is the whole scope
and Tenor of this scurrulous doughty Epistle, and to make some persons here
think, that there is such a stock of rancour and malice, and such deep thoughts
of revenge, harbored in the hearts and mind of all persons attending the KING,
and in his own Royal heart likewise, That whatever pretenses and shows are at
present made to the contrary, to compass their ends, yet the issues and effects
of this Malice and Revenge, shall in due time so appear, and manifest it self;
That there is not a man, who has showed any opposition to himself, or his late
Royal Father, but sooner or later shall feel their sad and direful stroke: And
this Impress he has so Machiavelianly, and with such art and cunning,
besprinkled and scattered over the whole Paper, and in such several subtle and
wiley ways, and such seeming real phrases, proper for such persons, who he
would fain to be the Writer, and Receiver, That none but his grand Tutor and
Instructor, The Devil himself (and scarce he neither) could possily outdo him,
in some parts, of this piece of artificial forgery: Others there be, which
clearly discovers the Rat by his squeaking: But above all, that bold and
impudent lie, in representing that meek and gentle PRINCE, to have no need of
spurs to Revenge, but rather a Rein to hold him in from it, is such a piece of
open and notoriously known falsehood, That it is to be wondered at, That he
should escape a Dart from heaven, into his false and hollow sly heart, whilst
he was staining the paper* with that most mischievous malicious expression, it
being so known and manifest to all about him; That nothing has ever been, or
is, more frequent with him, in his ordinary converse; Then to express his firm
and constant resolution, to adhere close to the advertisement of his Royal
Martyred Father, who inter voces extremas (as it were) left a preceptory advice
to the contrary Of such sort likewise, is this Pasquil of the Pedigree he
mentions; false fictions of a Son of Belial, which will remain in pickle to
arise up against this forger, at a Tribunal, where the offspring of a
Plantagenet, whose most innocent blood he has sucked, will bring in a Record
beyond Murryes Manuscript, which will fright his guilty soul down to that place
of horror, prepared for him and his fellow Regicides, his Pin, Crust, and Dog,
Dam, and Kittlings, Piss and Horse-spice, King Harry's Codpiece* and the
concealed Nuntio, and all that sort of aenigmatical and Ribbald (yet very
significant and malicious) Drollery* what is it, but the filthy foam of a black
and hellish mouth, arising from a viperous and venomous heart, industriously
and maliciously set upon doing what cursed mischief lies within the sphere of
his cashiered power, in such a conjuncture of Time as this, when the Nations
hopes, are in a full and just expectation of receiving a perfect cure of those
bleeding deep wounds, and wastful, and consuming miseries made, and continued
by him, and his fellow plotters, which they have so long lay panting and
groaning under?

The Star and blew Ribbon, he speaks of, will be every way as fit, for the
shoulder which has given him and his party such a shove, and as deservedly, as
a hempen halter will be for this forgers own Neck: And it is very possible and
probable too, They may both take their different effect in due time, though we
see what art is used to thrust that shoulder from its due merit by such the
Forgers subtleties. The Romance of his Waldense Dulmano, Biting the lip, with
all the Dependent sequel of such a parcel of Mountebanq^^^y that it confutes it
self in its own relation; as also other his so (...), insinuated by bits in a
subtle way of seeming Drollery, (...) toothed in its sense and signification:
And the aim of all is (...) and vulgar apprehensions, and draw them again into
(...) As they may yet once more (if possible) fall under the worrying power of
him, and such like Ravenous Beasts of Blood, Prey, and Rapine: Sir, your Nets
are seen, and your fallacies fail you, The hooks you mention are laid too
visibly; The fish you would catch, are so far from swallowing, they will not
bite at all; you were best therefore go shave your own beard, as you have
those, in your Letter, and your Scull too: And if your brain prove not thence
more pregnant, 'Twill serve (However) to stuff your powch in stead of what,
such your Angels were intended, to have helped you too: And I would wish you
also to take this Advice from a friend, Give over your Angling this way, and
appear no more in public at the side of this Pool, least you be tumbled in
over head and ears, and your self become both the Bait and Prey to those you
thus endeavor to catch, and delude by such your Drolling subtleties.

And now having done with your forged Calumnies, I shall upon this just
occasion, desire leave to tell you, and those whom they were intended to
beguile and work upon; that the Prince and Sovereign (whom it is so apparent,
your grand aim by this design was to wound, though through the fictitious
sides of others, set up in your own Fancy) is one, to whom both you and they,
owe a Duty, and Allegiance, by all the Laws of God, Nature, and the Land. And
however, you for your part, have a mind to forget, and are not pleased to own
it, it is (however) not the less his due: And it is not altogether impossible,
but upon better and due consideration, of the horrid guilt you lie under,
Divine Grace may hereafter be so infused into you, and you thereby be made so
sensible of your Crime, that perhaps you may yet cheerfully return to such your
bounden duty, and by your future demeanor, wash off those stains, wherewith
your guilty Soul is now so foully bespotted: which that you may the more readily
do, I shall truly, and as knowingly, as I believe it is possible for any in
this Nation, give you this just and due character, of that most virtuous and
excellent Prince, whom (whatever your thoughts are now) it is possible you may
one day esteem it your chief honor to style, your dear and dread Lord and
Sov^^^igne, which is truly such, that in the opinion of very many wise and
knowing men, it would put the whole Christian world upon some difficulty, to
find his parallel or equal in all respects; His Birth and Extraction is known
to be so transcendently illustrious, that what Prince is there upon Earth, that
can challenge a greater or a more Noble, and Kingly, and for longer
continuance, for Centuries of years: His Person so lovely, amiable, and
graceful, that it even captivates the eyes of all Beholders, and every where
generates, a noble and generous affection, respect and clemency, from the
chiefest Enemies of his Ancestors, and of our Nation and Dominions. His parts
and endowments such, that were we free from subjection to him, by all Laws, and
to make search throughout all Nations and People, for a complete and well
accomplished Personage to Rule over us, common Fame and Report could not but
send us to him; so meek, gentle, and sweet of Behavior; so firm, constant, and
obliging in his Friendships, so mild, modest and patient in his Afflictions
and Sufferings; yet upon occasion so full of Princely courage and magnanimity,
so knowing and discerning in his Reason and Judgment, and by his retirement,
so fitted and adapted for moderate Government: but above all, so firmly and
irremoveably fixed, to the profession of the true Protestant Religion,
testified many ways against the cunning Arts, and subtle attempts and
allurements, of the most inveterate enemies thereof: That it is an infamy,
never to be washed off from this Nation, (unless the now general vote and
desire thereof be hearkened to, and take effect in such manner, as may in some
sort purge the same) that such a Prince as he, so qualified in all respects,
and so innocent likewise, as to the first cause of difference, and ever since,
also, saving his desire, and pursuance of his just and undoubted Birthright; a
thing which the meanest of us would be condemned for by all, even by our very
selves, should we omit, or be negligent of, were it but for a poor Cottage; I
say, that such a Prince as He, together with his Illustrious, Heroic, and
highborn Brethren, (all of them, even in this their eclipsed obscurity, the
renown and glory of our Nation) should (as is hinted before) be chased from
such an ample and splendid Patrimony, and large Dominions, and that by his own
Native Subjects, and Liege People, and suffered to wander, nay, by their means
hunted from place to place, from one Nation (as is premised) to another People,
and forced to live upon the Alms and Charity (as it were) of those, who
doubtless are not without their grand design upon Him, and all his Dominions,
as (it may be feared) Time will sooner or later clearly manifest, besides, the
subjecting Him, and that whole Royal race, by this means, to the Enticements
and Allurements, and to the Stratagems, Nets, and Entanglements of those Romish
Rooking Gamesters, who are rangeing in all parts for their prey, and will be
sure to leave no stone unmoved, to work their wicked ends, where such a quarry
of Royal Game, are to be flown at, and with such advantage (as the case stands
with them) to be attempted; that the very contemplation thereof, cannot
methinks but draw Tears from the Eyes, and almost Blood from the Hearts, of all
Pious, Loyal Protestant Christians, who have any sense and feeling, as they
ought, of that deep dishonor and reproach, which by this very means, must
needs redound to the professors of the true Protestant Religion, in all parts
and places whatsoever, and no less sport and pastime to the great Vicar
general at Rome, and his Court and Conclave: but as in the ground where Gold
grows, nothing (it is said) will thrive but Gold, so God has hitherto
preserved this virtuous Prince, most firm, sound, and en^re, in the true
Orthodox Faith, and no doubt but will so continue Him, and make him not only in
Title, but really and indeed a most magnanimous Defender thereof, against all
its adversaries.

And whereas there is either a real or seeming fear in some sort of guilty
people (and thereby the desired settlement much disturbed and retarded) that if
the old Government take place again, and the right Pilot come at the Head and
Stern thereof, that there will be such rankor, malice and revenge put in
practice, by the all along adherers to the Royal Interest, against such as any
time opposed them; and thereby such loss, damage and sufferings sustained,
with diverse other vain and empty fears, jealousies and conjectures. Now, as the
true Character of his sacred Majesty himself, is before very faithfully
expressed, so surely it will nor seem incongruous and impertinent upon this
just occasion likewise, to interpose this sincere and unfeigned protestation,
on the behalf of those Adherers to the Royal Interest; That as their
principles are truly Christian, so they most earnestly desire to pursue the due
practice of them accordingly. And whatsoever is forged in that malicious piece,
before at large spoken of that Loyal party, especially the main bulk and body
of them (who are only considerable in this case, and Extravagants and not to be
regarded) are so far from any thoughts of Rankor, Malice, and Revenge, in that
particular, or any aim of making good their Losses by the Estates of others (a
usual vogue raised by our Peace-opposers) that they do as fully and unfainedly
forgive them, and all sorts of them, as they desire of Heaven the forgiveness
of their own transgressions, and do so far detest the thought of repairing
their losses, that way feared, that to see his Majesty restored, and thereby a
firm and lasting Peace settled, that so it may be conveyed to posterity, they
would not only very cheerfully fit down by all their Losses and Sufferings,
but many thousands of them willingly sacrifice much of their present Fortunes,
and some of them their Lives too, as a grateful offertory for such a seasonable
and all-healing mercy.

FINIS.

