An Exact and Impartial Account from IRELAND, OF THE DEATH OF The Late EARL of
Tyrconnel, Who Died in the City of LIMERICK, on Tuesday the 18th. of this
Instant August: With the great Distractions and Confusions, which happened in
the said City, betwixt the French and Irish, upon his Death, about its
Surrender, and.
In a Letter from a Custom House Officer in Liverpoole, to a Merchant in
London.
Licensed, August the 26th. 1691.

Liverpool, August the 23d. 1691. SIR,
THis morning arrived here the Thomas of Leverpool, Ralph Holt, Master, and the
Preston Merchant of this Place, William Leaths Mas^er, both from Dublin, which
place they left on Friday last, the 21st. instant. I spoke with Mr. Holt, the
Master of one of the Vessels, who, upon enquiring of him what News, gave me an
Account, that a little before he came away, Advice came to the Lord Justice
Porter, that our Army had begirt Limerick on both sides the River Shann^n; that
Captain Coal, with his Squadron of Men of War, was Sailed down the River
Shannon, within six miles of the Town of Limerick, so that the place is
entirely blocked up on all hands: That by some considerable Deserters, which
came lately out of the City into our Camp, the General had an Account, that
Tyrconnel died in Limerick, the day before they came away; his Distemper was
partly a Fever, but chiefly Despair and Trouble of mind occasioned, according
to the Relation the Deserters give of it, as follows: A strong Party being
formed in the Irish Army, against the Earl of Tyrconnel, immediately after our
Armies passing the Shannon, the Chief Officers combined together, and entered
into an Association against him, which Tyrconnel having a full account of, at
the same time that the Irish Army Encampt themselves at the little Town of
Aghrim, he endeavored by all the ways and means that possible he could to
hinder the same, but all that he could do signified nothing; then they joined
in an Address, desiring him, or more rather in a Style, requiring him to begone
out of the Army, and not to be amongst them at the Battle; whereupon, seeing by
all the endeavors he had used, he could not prevail upon them, he went away in
great Discontent to Limer^ck, when the F^ct^^n g^ew strong against him there
also, which was much encouraged by Mo^nsi^^r d'USSONE, and all the French
Officers upon their return from Gall way, so that it was generally believed b^
his Friends, that the trouble and grief that he conceived thereupon, might have
occasioned the Sickness that brought on his Death. The Deserters further
declared* That notwithstanding all endeavors had been used to keep his Death
secret, yet it was so general^y known, that before they come a^ay, it had great
Disturbances and Confusions among the Enemies Forces, both Officers and
Soldiers, some being for Surrendering the Place upon the Conditions offered by
the General, others for holding out; but which means their Councils were
strangely divided, that they had for some-time detained the Trumpet sent by the
General, not being resolved among themselves what Answer to send, that all the
Foot the Irish had, that could get Arms, were gone into Limerick, with some
Regiments of Horse and Dragoons, which consisted in the whole of about 15000
Men; That their Body of Horse which is Commanded by S^^field, for the present,
lay Forragin^ r^und the Wal^s, under the protection of their Cannon; I ha^^
Tyrconnel while he lived, was a bitter Enemy against the Irish Submitting.

This Morning cleared here the Mary Ros^ Mer^hant of Wexford, bound for
Wexford, John Collet Master; the William and Thoma^ of Wickloe, bound for
Wickloe; the John of Dublin, bound for Dublin, they will Sail with the first
fair Wind.

On Friday last in the Evening, came in here the William and Henry, the
Elizabeth, the Richmond, and the Orange-Tree, all Ships belonging to this
Place, and bound from Dublin, but they having had a long Passage brought no
News.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for H. Jones, in the Strand, 1691.


