An Exact ACCOUNT of the TRIAL OF Algernoon Sidney Esquire Who was Tried at the
Kings-Bench-Bar AT WESTMINSTER, This present Wednesday: being the twenty first
of November for Conspiring the Death of the King, and his Royal (...), of which
he was Convicted.
THe Count being (...), My Lord Chief Justice, Mr. Justice (...), Mr. Justice
Holloway, Mr. Justice VValcot, sitting ^n the ^ench, and the usual O ye^, being
made, the Jury was called, Mr. Sidney would have challenged some, because they
were no ^rueholder^ but my Lord Chief Justice, told him (...) no Exception and
that, (...) Case had been several times o^er-^^led, and particularly ^^n my
lord ^ussels Case; so that he was forced to Acquie^^, and after having excepted
against several without showing (...) at last ^he Jury was Empannelled, and the
^^dgement ^eing (...) m^st El^gantly, and Legally, opened by the Kings learn^^
(...) the witnesses was called for the King.

The first that was called was Mr. West, who be^^^ to discourse, and prove the
Plot in General^ but Mr. Sidney taking* Exceptions at this way of proceeding my
Lord Chief Justice, told him, it had been the ordinary way of the Court, and
particularly in the Trial of the 5 Jesuits: so the Evidence proceeded, and
afterward did particularize, (...) though himself, did hold no Correspondence
with the Prisoner at the Bar, yet he was often told by Captain Walcot, th^^ he
was a^^ain ^ngl^e, in the contriving of all, and providing of ^rms.

The next appeared for the King, was Colonel ^umsey who gave much what the
same Evidence in Ceneral: and particularly that Mr. Sidney was a great
Contriver.

Then was called Mr. Keeling the first Discoverer; he s^oke first to the Plo^
in General, and said in particular, toward the la^^er end of his Evi^ence,
that he heard from others, that Mr. Sidney was all a long in the Plot.

The fourth and last Evidence for the King was the Lord Howard of Escriek, he
swore in particular, that Mr. Sedney, had often si^ten in (...) with other ^^e,
where they debated the means to Kill the King: New (...) the Government, and
that he was b^; when a Traytorous Letter was writ to invite their Brethren of
Scotland, and to shake of Monarchy, and particularly my Lord Howard evidenced,
that Mr. Sidney, undertook to send the Letter, and that Aron Smith was employed
by Mr. Sidney, in this business: This was ^he sub^^a^ce of what my Lord Howard
deposed as to the Prisoner ^t the (...).

Then the Kings Council produced a most vir^lent and treacherous Libel, that
was seized on in Mr. Sidney's House, when he was apprehended. Mr. Adderbury,
the Messenger appeared in Court, and att^^t^d in that i^ was taken there, and
Sr. Philip Lloyd, attested it was the same that was before the King and
Council. Then was called one Mr. Cook Goldsmith, and another Ci^izen his
Part^^^, they said they had often dealt with Mr. Sidney* and had seen several
Letters written with his own hand, and they were fully satisfied that the
abovementioned Pamphlet was written by the same hand that they were used to
receive, were Written. The substance of the Pamphlet was that the Sovereign
power was in the People, and that the King was but only the peoples Trustee,
and that if he would (it was true they said) he might depose himself, and if he
would not they might by force depose him, and chastise him for misgoverment;
and that if they proceeded to depose the King, they did not break their Oath's
because the King had no Authority to impose such an oath, and that the
Parliament were the Judges when the King did amiss and ought to be dethroned,
and that his present Majesty had fallen under these circumstances, and that was
^he reason they had to justify themselves in their proceedings, and so to draw
in the Mobile, it was a very large Pamphlet and and took a great deal of time:
there were several of the most seditious cla^s^s of this wicked Pamphlet
inserted in the Indictment.

The Kings Council, having done with their Evidence, and clearly proved the
Pamphlet upon Mr. Sidney, he was permitted with all the Freedom immaginable to
make his defense, which was very long, and not the least interrupted: the Count
giving him all the fair Play immaginable.

First he began with matters of Law, and pleaded, that there ought to be two
Witnesses to every particular fact, but he was answered by the Court, that that
Case had been often overruled; and that at the Trial of the (...) Viscount
S^^fford, where was agreed on by all the Judges, that it was not necessary, so
that they both proved the Treason, so that if one Witness proved a Fact, or an
Overt Act of Treason in one County, and another overt Act in another County,
they were two good Witnesses in Law, because they both proved treason. His
(...) Argument was that he conceived him-himself only Guilty of Mispr^sion of
Treason, because it could not be ^^oved, that he writ the^ reasonable Letter
that was to be sent into Scotland, by Aron Smith, but he was told by the Court,
that his point of Law, likewife failed him in that Case for if one be by where
Treason is consulted, though they never say nothing, if they do not discover,
it is not imprision of Treason, but High Treason, as all the Judges had resolved
in the trial of the la^ Lord Russel: then he endeavored to prove, that my Lord
Howard owing him some Money, and that he claiming it, My Lord spoke, that he
would be revenged on him: then he in^isted upon something of foreign Laws, and
flourished with some sentences of Scripture, which because they were not
penitent to the present proceeding were looked on as frevilous. Th^^ he
proceeded to several other topics, to show the improbabilitie of such a
design, he speaking very Floridly, and often smileing as if he did not qustion
but to have a good dilivery. First he endeavored to show the improbabilitie of
his being in such a design, from the greatness of his Age, he being a good deal
above threescore, and besides very infirm: which might induce any body to
believe as he said, that the Fire of Ambition must be extinguished, and that
it was fitter for him to think of a Retiring place, and give up the latter end
of his days to ease and quiet, he having been all his life time in a perpetual
hurry: His other topic was not of improbabilitie, but endeavored to insinuate
an unpossibillitie of his being concerned, because he said he was no popular
man and consequently unfit to be concerned in such an Affair, where it was fit
the people concerned should be Darlings of the Mobile, that so they might
manage them at their pleasure, These were only looked upon by the Court as
flourishes, which were not very material, and so giving him a short and pithy
Answer desired him to proceed to more solid arguments, and to call in his
evidence, which were many but were able to say little in the Prisoners behalf.

The first was my Lord Anglesey, he attested that my Lord Howard, had protested
after the breaking out of the Plot at my Lord Bedfords, that he knew nothing of
it, this was likewise attested by my Lord Baget, and by one Mr. Philip Howard,
with many Circumstances, to long to put down in so little a Paper. He likewise
produced in Court, his two Maidservants, who attested much what the same, that
the other against my Lord Howard, as before most of them had done, at my Lord
Russels Trial, and received much what the same Answer from the Court, etc. that
my Lord was not obliged to tell every body he met, how deeply either, he or any
body else, was concerned in the Plot. M. Sidney, having made the best defense
he could, sat him down, and Mr. Soliciter General summed up the Evidence, most
learnedly and distinctly. First, showing the convincing proofs on the Kings
side, then from Point, to Point, answering every Objection, ^^g^d by the
Prisoner, afterward my Lord Chief Justice summed up all, mos^ learnedly and
methodically, giving the most Loyal Directions to the Jury.

After all was done by the Court: the Jury withdrew and having consulted upon
the business about half a quarter of an hour, Mr. Sidney, remaining at the Bar,
smileing and talking; a Verdict was called, and O yes, being made after the
usual manner, and the Jury being called over, Mr, Angers the foreman, spoke for
the Rest and brought him in Guilty. Thus Judgment at last overtook one who
was Signalie remarkable, for his Violence against the last King of of blessed
memory: And for his strange Aversion to Monarchy, he being a perfect Monarch
hater.

LONDON Printed for E Mallet, 1683.


