An EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE King's March to ARDEE, And of His forcing the Irish to
Abandon the Pass of the River Boyne. And of what hapn'd in the Passage, as also
of the Irish Army's Retreat toward DVBLIN, and of our Army's Pursuit of them:
WITH AN Address presented to the King.
WHen the Irish were so easily forced from so strong a Pass as that betwixt the
Newry and Dundalk, which might have been maintained a long time by some
hundreds of Resolute Men against some Thousands, there was but little Reason to
believe they would have showed much Courage or Resolution in keeping their Post
at Ardee, where they gave it out they would stay and give the King Battle; the
late King James being then with about Twenty thousand Men. But no sooner did
the advanced Part of our Army appear, but they immediately abandoned their Camp
there, and fled to the other side of the River Boyne, where our Army was to
pass about Two Miles above Drohedagh. There they were very advantageously
Encamped, and seemed resolved to do their utmost to hinder the Passage of our
Army. King James had drawn together the Body of his Men, which consisted of
about Fifteen thousand Men to guard that Pass, and went from Regiment to
Regiment to harangue them into Courage to oppose us.

The River at that Place is not very broad, not above Pistol shot over, nor
deep, being fordable in several Places; and besides, the Enemy had planted
about Twelve or Fourteen Field Pieces to hinder our Passage.

On Tuesday last, being the First of July, the King advanced with a detached
Body of Horse to view the Place, and the Enemy playing from the other side with
their Cannon and small Shot, three or four of ours happened to be killed, and a
Cannon Bullet of about six pound weight, happened to grase on his Majesty's
right Shoulder, and it was so providentially ordered, that it carried away a
piece of his Coat, and touched only slightly on the Skin; which his Majesty was
so little concerned at, that he called for another Coat, and continued some
time after on Horsback: This was in the Morning, and after Breakfast his
Majesty having been on Horsback from Two a Clock that Morning. When his Majesty
came into his Tent, he was presently dressed, which he bore with great Courage,
without any appearance of Vanity or Affectation. The same Bullet killed the
Prince of D' Armestad's Horse. The next Morning he was on Horsback again. Count
Schomberg having past the River in another place, with a considerable
Detachment of Horse and Dragoons, forced the Enemy from their Retrenchment, and
secured the Passage for the rest of the Army, who immediately past it over. The
Enemy is retired toward Dublin; and that Wing of our Army that first past the
River, is gone in pursuit of them.

The ADDRESS Presented to the KING at Belfast in Ireland, on June the 16th,
1690.
To the King's Most Excellent Majesty; The Humble Address of the Presbyterian
Ministers, and Others of their Persuasion in the North of Ireland.
UPon the first Appearance of your Glorious Undertaking to Rescue these Nations
from Popery and Slavery, and afterward the Settling your Majesty on the
Throne, with so small Opposition, and so Universal Satisfaction; we judged our
selves bound to Adore the most High God, for inspiring you with such Heroic
Zeal, and signally blessing you with such mavelous Success, which we humbly
represented to your Majesty last Summer, at Hampton Court, by some of our
Number commissi^nated by us, and which your Majesty was graciously pleased to
accept.

And now upon this present Enterprise in exposing your Sacred Person for
Rescuing poor Ireland from its present Miseries, when its delivery must be
effected from no lower Hand; We cannot sufficiently express our Sense of your
Majesty's continued Heroic Zeal in prosecuting the same blessed Design, as
well as to bless God who continues to incline your Great Soul to such an
Undertaking: And our trust in God is, that the same Divine Hand that overcame
all Difficulties at your first Entering into England, will further appear upon
your happy Arrival in Ireland, in giving Success to your Arms, in Ruining the
Designs of Antichrist, and Advancing the Interest of Christ in this Nation, and
giving a further Luster to that Glory which the Sovereign God has already
Crowned your Majesty withal.

Great Sir, as for our Principles in Conscientious Loyalty, we most humbly
offer, That it is generally owned, even by those of other Persuasions, who have
known us, that under the various Changes of Government, since the late
Rebellion in Ireland, (wherein we have had our large sh^re in Sufferings, as
well on account of our Loyalty under Usurpers, as of Nonconformity since) we
have given undoubted Proof of fixed Loyalty, which also his Majesty King
Charles the Second, was pleased to own by his Conferring upon us diverse
Testimonies of his Princely Favor.

And Sir, we cannot but with all humble Gratitude acknowledge, That your
Majesty has been graciously pleased to augment the same Princely Favor both
as to the Subsistence of necessitous Ministers in this poor wasted Country (not
able to maintain them) and also that by your auspicious Influence we have a
Prospect of our Religious Liberty, without some Snares that attended the same
in the late Reigns; which Royal Bounty to us will engage those of our Number
now in Scotland to return, which will prove a special Means of more fully
planting this Province with such Protestants as will be endeared to your
Majesty's Government, and a Bulwark against the Irish Papists. All which
Favors we hope (through the help of God) to improve in a continued Loyalty to
your Majesty, and in such a Deportment as shall not be justly Offensive to any,
but so far as is possible, will live peaceably with all Men.

May it please your Majesty, we do in most humble manner make bold to plead an
Interest in your Royal Favor, not only as we are already (and when further
encouraged will more appear) the most numerous Body in these Parts, maintaining
the true Protestant Principles; but as we are most firmly devoted to your
Majesty's Service, the full Testimony whereof was given upon your Majesty's
first Appearing in this great Cause, both upon our early Addressing your
Majesty upon your first Arrival in England, and afterward by our public
Asserting your Majesty to be our only lawful Sovereign, and by our putting our
selves in all the readiness for farther Service, that our Circumstances (not
having the Necessaries of War) would admit, whereof the Defense of the City of
Londonderry, and diverse Actions in other Places, were Instances, and real
Demonstrations of our fixedness to your Majesty, and will be in this present,
as in all future Emergencies, and that not only for Conscience sake, as to our
undoubted Sovereign, but also from an indeared Affection to your Sacred Person,
as the great Pattern of Piety and Sobriety to all your Subjects, and the Lineal
and true Successor of that most Illustrious and Renouned Family, ever dignified
by espousing the Cause of Christ, which to us is above all.

That God would more and more multiply his Blessings upon your Majesty's
Person, and the Person of the Queen your Royal Consort, and make your Majesty
always the choice Instrument in his Hand, for supporting his Interest, and
suppressing universally abounding Profaneness, preserving your Sacred Person in
all Dangers, more and more enriching your Majesty with Faith in God, and
Courage to encounter all Difficulties yet in your way; and that after a long
and happy Reign on Earth, you may enjoy the Everlasting Crown hereafter, is,
and always shall be the Prayers of

Your Majesty's most Humble, truly Faithful, and most Obedient Subjects and
Servants

This Address was presented to the King at Belfast in Ireland, the 16th of
June, 1690. by many Ministers. His Majesty received it graciously, and Ordered
1200 l. to be paid them for their present Support.

London, Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey. 1690.


