AN EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE Siege of Namur: WITH A PERFECT DIARY OF THE Campaign
in Flanders, FROM The King's departure from Kensington, May the 12th. to his
Return to London, October. 11th. 1695.

By a Gentleman attending his Majesty during the whole Campaign.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Queen's-Head against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1695.

THE PREFACE.
THE Use of HISTORY in general, is too well known to need a Demonstration; and
all the Difficulty that arises in our esteem of Particular Histories, consists
only in their Validity; to which nothing contributes more than the Ability and
Circumstances of the Author, these furnish him with Opportunity of knowing,
that with Capacity of Conveying the Transactions he makes choice of, to
Posterity. For the first, none can be more fit than an Eyewitness; for the
second, than a man of just observation; who omits nothing Material, nor rakes
together supervacaneous and trifling Occurrences; how far the following Sheets
will agree with this, your perusal will inform you. But this I shall venture to
say without partiality, the Writar has been always with his Majesty from his
leaving England, to his happy and triumphant RETURN: and that may ensure the
Truth of what he tells us.

But the Validity of a History is not the only Motive of reading, the
Importance of the Action comes in for a large share with a sensible Reader. For
a Romance that presents us with the true Model of a Brave Commander, is for
delight at least preferrable to a dry Truth that contains nothing of Pleasure,
and little of Profit. But I am of opinion, that there never has been a War of
greater Consequence than the Present betwixt the Confedrates and the French
King, either as to the Parties engaged, or the Cause for which they fight; that
is, the most powerful Monarchs of this part of the World, for the LIBERTY or
SLAVERY of Europe.

France has for near Two hundred years been growing, and fixing the Foundations
of that Greatness they now possess; and it is no wonder that after such
Master Builders as Henry the Great, Richlieu, and Mazarine, it proves so hard a
Task to batter it down. It Is more wonderful to me that the Neighboring Nations
could with so much Vnconcern look on it, till 'twas almost too well fortified
for all their Endeavors to demolish. And I may venture without Flattery to
say, That nothing but the Providential Accession of his Glorious Majesty
WILLIAM THE THIRD to the Crown of England, and Head of the most Royal
Confederacy that ever was, we must soon have felt Our selves under the most
absolute and lasting Tyranny that ever Europe was subject to; for the situation
and other advantages of France renders it more fit for the Monarchy it aimed
at, than the Dominions of the House of Austria formerly,

But Our Sacred King (derived from a Race used to give Liberty to Europe, and
oblige Mankind the Noblest and most Sensible Way) put a Stop to the Fatal
Fabric and by taking Namur has so far underminded it, that we may hope soon a
Breach large enough for a successful Assault: It has showed us that the French
can be forced from their Fastnesses in the Eye of a Numerous Veteran, and well
Disciplined Army.

AN EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE SIEGE OF NAMUR.
ON Sunday, May the 12th, the King went from Kensington to Gravesend, where he
dined, and about Six in the Evening embarked on Board the William and Mary
Yatch, but there being little Wind, 'twas midnight ere we could reach the Buoy
of the Nore, where we came to an Anchor until Four in the Morning; His Majesty,
notwithstanding the time of night, was saluted by the firing of Guns, and
repeated Hussaes from the men of War commanded by the Lord Berkley. On Monday
by 4 in the morning we got up our Anchors, and His Majesty sailed again, the
Wind being fair, and joined the Convoy at the Gunfleet, under the Command of
Sir George Rook, consisting of 22 Men of War and Frigates, whereof 8 were Dutch;
about Noon the Cambridge (Admiral) touched on the edge of the Galloper Sand,
but by Sir George Rook's good management and care she was got off again in an
hour's time, without any damage, and pursued their Voyage with a fine gale
which carried His Majesty over by the next morning. The 14th, about 9 in the
morning His Majesty landed at the Orange-polder, where His Coaches were ready
to carry him to Naeldwyck, a House of Monsieur Reynenburg's, there His Majesty
dined, and was attended by the Pensioner, Monsieur Odyck, Monsieur Dyckvelt,
and diverse other Persons of Quality, and made it 8 in the Evening before he
arrived in the Hague, His Majesty's usual manner of preventing a public
Reception by the Burghers in Arms, etc. which they made up by their great
Acclamations and Joy for His Maiesty's safe Arrival on their Shore; the
Confederate Forces being now ordered to draw together with expedition, the
English and Scotch near Deinse, and about two Leagues from Ghent, where the
Prince of Vaudemont went this day to command, until the arrival of His Majesty:
Another Body is forming near Newport, commanded by Duke Wirtemburg; and the
Elector of Bavaria has formed another at Sellick, a League from Brussells,
where the Forces from Liege and Maestricht, under the command of Count Claude
de Tilly, joined the 11/25th of this Month, making in all about Thirty thousand.

Wednesday the 15/25th, His Majesty was waited on, and complimented on His safe
arrival, by the States General, the States of Holland, and the Council of
State, as likewise by all the Foreign Ministers, which took up all the
forenoon; after Dinner His Majesty went to the Assembly of the States General.

16/26th, His Majesty was present in the Assembly of the States of Holland, and
afterward in that of the Council of State, near two hours.

This day arrived here an Adjutant from the Duke of Holstein Ploen, to give His
Majesty an Account of the condition our Troops are in, as also to receive His
Majesty's Directions for the march of them, which will not be ordered until the
arrival of the Quarter-master-General Monsieur Dops, who is hourly expected.
Sir George Rook was yesterday in conference with the Deputies of the Dutch
Admiralties to concert measures before his return to England. 27th, New style,
(which I shall observe during the Campaign) His Majesty dined at Souestdyke;
and after having diverted himself for some hours with shooting Pheasant, etc.
returned to the Hague in the Evening.

The 29th, His Majesty's Bed, with the necessary Baggage, was sent toward Loo,
but were to halt at Zuglestien until farther Orders.

30th, His Majesty went from the Hague to Zuglestien, a Seat belonging to the
present Earl of Rochfort, where His Majesty lay. And 31st, hunted, and
afterward went to Loo, where His Majesty received an Account of the Enemy's
Motions, That the Marshall Duke de Velleroy was returned from the French
Court, and assembling the Army he is to command near Courtrey; and the Marquis
de Boufflers is arrived at Namur, where he is drawing together a Body, to be
commanded by himself separate from the other, on the Meuse, and that Duke de
Montall is forming a flying Camp between Furnes and Dunkirk.

June the 1st, The Count de Styrum came to Loo from the Emperor to concert
matters with His Majesty for the opening the Campaign on the Rhine, where he is
to return and serve under Prince Louis of Baden.

The 2d, arrived at Loo the Count de Autell from the Elector Palatine, and the
Baron de Vetilen from the Bishop of Munster, both on the same Errand, to
concert measures, and receive Directions for the march of their Troops.

5th, His Majesty left Loo early in the morning, dined at the Grave, and lay
that night at Breda, where the Pentioner of Holland again waited on His Majesty
for farther Directions, etc.

6th, His Majesty sent all his Baggage forward toward the Army, encampt near
Deynse under the Command of Prince Vaudemont.

7th, At three in the morning His Majesty left Breda, and arrived in his Camp
about midnight, taking up his Quarters at a Village called Arseele, an hour
from Deynse; His Majesty passed through Ghent, where the Elector of Bavaria
(being arrived some hours before) waited on His Majesty at Monsieur Overquerk's
Lodging; the Burghers and Magistrates received the King at some distance
without the Town, and in their Formalities, with lighted Flambeaux walked
before His Majesty, whilst the Guns were discharging round the Fortifications;
the King of Spain himself could be received with no greater Pomp and Ceremony.
The Elector left the Camp at Ninove purposely to meet His Majesty, his Army
consisting of about 40000 men.

8th, His Majesty began to review the Forces, with those of the First Line of
Foot: And the 9th, reviewed the Second Line, which His Majesty found in
excellent order; the two Lines of Foot consist of 70 Battalions, most English
and Scotch; 14000 more are encamped near Dixmuyde under Major General
Ellenberger.

The Horse and Dragoons cantoned in the adjacent Villages, have this day Orders
to join the Foot in the Camp in order to a review; this day the Earl of Athlone
marched from the Elector of Bavaria's Camp at Ninove, with 40 Squadrons of
Horse and Dragoons to observe Boufflers, who it is said is encamped near Flerus.

9th, His Majesty made a review of all the Cavalry, which were in good
condition, and made 82 Squadrons, well mounted; the French Army marched
yesterday to Escanaffe on the Schelde.

10th and 11th, The Earl of Athlone being marched with 40 Squadrons to observe
Boufflers, His Majesty detached the Marquis de Laforest with three Brigades of
Horse to reinforce the Elector's Army, which otherwise might be exposed to a
sudden Attack for want of Cavalry, Boufflers being in motion that way with some
thousands of Horse.

12th, His Majesty decamped from Arseele, and the Army marched in four Lines
(by reason of Enclosures) to Roustaer, near 5 Leagues, with great cheerfulness;
in our march we took a Party of about 50 Prisoners, that had retreated to a
Wood for shelter, but were discovered by a Boor (or Country-fellow) whom they
had pillaged, although he was under the French Government.

13th, We continued our march about 3 Leagues to a place called Becelaer a
Chatteau, where the King had his Quarters; a Party of ours met with, and
defeated two of the Enemy's; killed and took many of them Prisoners, pursuing
the rest to the Walls of Ypres.

This day His Majesty had an Account that Villeray was marched behind their
Lines, and encamped between Menin and Ypres, about three Leagues from us, their
Lines being between us and them; and that he has sent a strong Detachment to
reinforce Boufflers at Point d' Espierre, and enable him to make head against
the Elector of Bavaria, who marched that way; and who designs to be this
Evening with the Army under his command within two Leagues of him, between the
Rivers Lys and Schelde.

14th, Villeroy detached another Body of men to join Montall, who observes
Major Ellemberg, that lies with a flying Army near Dixmuyde; whilst the said
Marshall intrenches himself behind their Lines.

15th, His Majesty had an Account that the Brandenburgers and Munsterians, with
the Garrisons of Liege, Maestricht and Huy, making together a Body of 24790
men, were marching toward Namur. The King is every day near the Enemy's Lines,
and from rising ground viewing them behind the same; and our Foragers
undisturbed go under those Lines, in comparison, which obliges the Enemy to
destroy within themselves, whilst we do the same without their Lines, (but in
their Country); and what they used to preserve for filling their Magazines on
that side, we and they now destroy.

16th, Major General Ellemberg received Orders to make ready the Troops under
his command to march, and to carry Cannon and Mortars with him, upon which he
gave general Orders for every man to repair to his respective Colors upon pain
of death; the same day we seized a Spy, who was got clear of our Out-Guards,
rubbing off to the Enemy in Boors Habit.

17th, Early in the morning His Majesty sent the Duke of Wirtemberg from the
Camp of Becelaer to Dixmuyde, to take the Forces there under his command, and
march towarch Fort le Knocque, which he accordingly did that Afternoon, with 20
Battalions, and encamped near to it, taking up his Quarters at New Capell, a
small Chatteau (or Castle.)

18th, The Duke of Wirtemberg viewed all the ground, and could see the Enemy
busied in working on their Lines toward Ypres, from the right of the Fort;
they saluted him with several Pieces of Cannon without any effect, except
killing of one Horse.

19th, Major General Churchill was detached from His Majesty's Camp with 8
Battalions to reinforce the Duke of Wirtemberg, which he executed in the
Forenoon; in the Afternoon they perceived the Enemy had possessed themselves of
some Houses on their side of the Cannall, and had set fire to others, upon
which the Granadeers were detached under the command of Colonel Maytland, to
beat the Enemy from thence, which they performed with great vigor and
resolution. Further, on the right, Colonel Tiffany was sent with a Detachment,
sustained by a Regiment of Foot, and there was a very warm Fire (which lasted
till night) on both sides; the Enemy had the advantage of a little Fort upon a
Hill on the other side the Cannall, from whence they galled our men;
notwithstanding which, ours brought up six Pieces of Cannon to the side of the
Cannall, and made a lodgment; several Officers and Soldiers were killed on both
sides; Major General Churchill was shot through the Hat, and Colonel Tiffany
through the Hand.

Monsieur de Montall lay behind the Fort with a strong Detachment to succor
the Place, and relieve it from time to time, as there appears occasion, with
fresh men, and sends the wounded to Ypres.

20th, His Majesty received an Express from the Earl of Athlone, that he was
marched from the side of Lovain, toward the Meuse, to join the Forces of
Brandenburgh and Liege, which advances toward the Mehaigne, a small River two
great Leagues from Namur.

21st, The Elector of Bavaria sent Major General Fagell with a Detachment of
2500 Foot, and some Dragoons, to attack a Body of French Foot, covered by 60
Horse posted at a Mill, on a Hill, from whence the Enemy's Lines may be viewed,
which they performed without the loss of 40 men on either side.

22d, The Enemy in Fort-Knocque attempted twice to regain the ground our Forces
took from them the 19th, but were repulsed each time with considerable loss.

23d, They again attempted the same, but with no better success; and opened
their Sluices, which soon put a stop to our breaking farther ground. Thi^ day
two Spies were tried and condemned at a Court Martial, formerly Sutlers in our
Army, and executed accordingly; as were likewise several Deserters, that
attempted to go over to the Enemy; who to delude our men, and draw them from
our Service, give a Louis d'Or to each that goes over, at least makes them fair
promises of such a Reward. His Majesty reviewed the Enemy's Lines, with the
ground adjacent, with such care and exactness, that we expected we should have
forced them.

The 24th, A Spy came into the Camp, and gave an account, that the Enemy had
detached 600 of their Horse and Granadiers by the way of Mennin, in order to
intercept our Provisions coming from Ghent to our Army; His Majesty thereupon
immediately ordered 500 Dragoons, under the Command of the Earl of Essex, to
march and reinforce the Convoy that were with the Provision-waggons, which they
met with and joined near Roaseler: And at the same time another Detachment of
about 1000 Horse and Dragoons, under the command of the Earl of Portland, were
sent to find out the Enemy, which they did in a Village called Morselle, about
midnight, between Courtray and Menin; the Enemy's Foot were drawn up in the
Marketplace, and their Horse at a small distance to sustain them; having
notice of our march half an hour before we got up with them; our Dragoons
immediately quitted their Horses, and charged the Enemy with great Bravery, and
were warmly received; but after three quarters of an hour's hot dispute the
Enemy gave way, and got off by the favor of a dark night; for had this Action
been in the day, it had been morally impossible for the Enemy to have escaped
being killed or taken; 78 were left dead upon the spot of the Enemy, and a
Captain of Granadiers taken Prisoner. On our side Lieutenant Web and 5 Dragoons
were killed, Captain Holdgate and Captain Collins with 11 men were wounded; and
the Convoy arrived safe in the Camp, consisting of 500 Wagons, besides the
Sutlers Carts and Wagons with all manner of Provisions.

25th, The Earl of Rivers, Colonel of the Third Troop of Guards, and the Lord
Cuts with several Officers arrived in the Camp from England; they make no great
progress in the Siege of Knoque. Couriers come from the Duke of Bavaria's and
Earl of Athlone's Camp every day, the News they bring being as yet kept secret.

26th, A Squadron of the Duke of Scomberg's Regiment met this day with a Party
of the Enemy's in their way to Bruges, which they took Prisoners, with the
Officer that commanded them; Forage grows very scarce, we go 6, 7 and 8 Leagues
for ordinary stuff.

27th and 28th, The Army decamped from Becelaer, and marched back to Roselaer;
the Duke of Wirtemberg marching from Knoque at the same time to Dixmuyde, that
Attack being nothing but a feint to divert Villeroy that way, whilst Athlone,
etc.

29th, This morning His Majesty received an Express from the Elector of
Bavaria, that the Earl of Athlone was possessed of the Plain of Flerus, and the
Passes leading thence to Namur; upon which the Elector decamped from Kirkhoven,
and marched to Ninove, intending to continue his march and join Athlone, and
that he had got before Boufflers, who with his Army moved toward Mortaigne in
the way to Charleroy. Upon which His Majesty left His Army under the command of
the Prince de Vaudemont, and went with a Guard of Horse and Dragoons to
Distelberg, a mile from Ghent.

30th, His Majesty came to Grimberg near Vilvord, having on the way received
Advice that the Earl of Athlone was encamped at Borsele, between Charleroy and
Namur, and the Elector of Bavaria within a day's march of him, the Siege of
Namur being designed, and the necessary Provisions, and preparation of Cannon,
Mortars, Ammunitions, and other Stores of War being brought from Maestricht to
Liege and Huy for that purpose, and a great many Pioneers summoned thence.

July the 1st, His Majesty lay at Park-Cloyster by Lovain, and there received
advice that the Brandenburghs, with the Garrisons of Maestricht and Liege, the
whole Body consisting of about 24000 men, under the command of
Lieutenant General Baron de Heyde, had marched from Flerus, and passed the
Sambre, between Charleroy and Numur, and had invested Namur between the Sambre
and Meuse; and the Earl of Athlone on the side of the Town, and the other side
of the Meuse, with 40 Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, and that the Pioneers
summoned from the Province of Brabant were likewise arrived near Namur, and
those from about Maestricht hourly expected, which together will make near
40000 to be employed during the Siege for making Lines of Circumvallation and
Contravallation, raising Batteries, and carrying on Trenches.

2d, The Elector of Bavaria, with the Army under his command, after several
great Marches, came this day to Masy near Charleroy, where His Majesty arrived
about five in the Evening with a small Retinue, the Baggage following by way of
Ghent, Macklyn and Brussels.

3d, The King with the Army marched nearer to Namur (which was invested by the
Troops commanded by the Earl of Athlone, on this side the River Sambre, and by
the Forces of Brandenburg on the other side, between the Sambre and Meuse) His
Majesty took his Quarters in the Village of Flawen, about two English miles
from Namur, and the Elector of Bavaria is about a League from thence, at the
Abbey of Maloigne, on the other side the Sambre.

4th, The Pioneers began to work on the Lines of Circumvallation and
Contravallation, and to lay Bridges over the Sambre and the Meuse, for the
communication of our Quarters. The Marshall de Boufflers threw himself into
the Town with Eight Regiments of Dragoons, two only are mounted; the Duke de
Villeroy moved his Camp toward Courtray, and Prince Vaudemont his Army to
Wontregem.

5th, Continued to work on the Lines, and put all things in readiness against
the coming up of the great Guns, Mortars, etc.

6th, Greatest part of our Horse and Dragoons marched toward Masy, where the
Earl of Athlone forms a Camp to cover the Siege; and for the more convenience
of Forage, this day our great Baggage from the other Army joined us.

Deserters come over in considerable numbers, several of which are Italians and
Spaniards, taken Prisoners at the Battle of Marsalia in Piedmont, and unjustly
forced into the Service; they all concur the Garrison consists of 21 Battalions
of Foot, and 8 Regiments of Dragoons.

8th, Twenty Battalions of Foot (whereof Thirteen were English and Scotch) from
the Army in Flanders, commanded by the Prince de Vaudemont, joined us,
commanded by Lieutenant General Count de Nassau, and Major General Ramsey.

9th, A great many Deserters came over to us, amongst which were some Officers,
who say Boufflers is to stay and command in chief in the Town and Castle, which
he pretends to hold out till September, and then does not question Relief.

10th, My Lord Cuts from the other Army joined us with Four English and Two
Dutch Battalions more, so that we had now in all Ninety Battalions of Foot; the
Horse, under the Command of my Lord Athlone, marched toward Pi^ton, to post
themselves in that strong Camp, and secure that of Masy.

11th, This day we finished our Lines, and began to work on several Batteries,
and our Cannon and Mortars arrived from Huy; the same time we had Advice that
Villeroy was moving toward Pont d' Espierre, and that Prince Vaudemont lay
still at Wontegrem and Gramme, near Deynse.

12th, The Trenches were opened, Major General Fagell commanding the Troops
that had the Guard of them; in the night the Enemy made a Sally with about a
thousand men, with an intent to disturb our Workmen, and Works, but were beaten
in again with the loss of about forty men, besides what were wounded. We had
three men killed on our side, and thirteen wounded. Major General Fagell being
shot into the Neck, where the Ball remained until he came off, that is, was
relieved.

13th, The Trenches were mounted by Major General Lindeboom, and our Approaches
carried on with good success under the direction of Monsieur Tetteau,
Lieutenant General of the Dutch Artillery, and Monsieur Du Puy, chief Ingenier,
who carry the Attacks on against the Town, whilst Monsieur Cohorne carries on
those against the Castle, between the Sambre and the Meuse, where the Elector
of Bavaria has his Quarters; we have this day three Batteries playing; and more
preparing. A Convoy of Provisions that were coming from Lovain this day, were
attacked by a French Party; during the Skirmish some Sutlers Carts were
plundered, but they were soon made to retire.

14th, The King received notice that the Marshall de Villeroy had passed the
Lys, and was marching toward Prince Vaudemont; and that his Highness had
posted himself so as to receive him, or make a good Retreat, if he saw it
necessary; (and that my Lord Berkley with the Fleet had bombarded St. Maloes
and Granville with good success, the latter being quite destroyed) whereupon
His Majesty did this day detach a Brigade of Foot to join the Earl of Athlone's
Camp, and with Orders to march from thence to Prince Vaudemont's, if there
should be occasion; Deserters continue to come over upon all opportunities.

15th, His Majesty received an Express from Prince Vaudemont, viz. That on the
13th, in the Morning, he had Advice that the Marshall de Villeroy had passed
the River Lys, near Courtray, over several Bridges laid for that purpose, being
strengthened by the Troops drawn out of all the French Garrisons in Flanders;
that Monsieur de Montall, with the Forces under his command, was on his march
to join him, and that together their Army would consist of 90 Battalions of
Foot, and 149 Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons. Toward Eleven of the Clock a
Signal was given (by firing two Pieces of Cannon) for our Army, which consisted
only of 42 Battalions, and 48 Squadrons, to put themselves in order of Battle,
which was immediately done. And the Prince thought fit at the same time to
change his Camp, posting his Right at Arsele, and his Left between Gramme and
Hottom, the Village of Wontregem on our backs; after which we had notice that
the Enemy advanced toward us, and that they had already passed the River
Mandell, and the Defile of Dintergem, where our Right was before; the Night
following the whole Army continued under Arms, and we began to entrench our
selves. We thought the Enemy would have attacked us by break of day, but they
did nothing but amuse us, while the greatest part of their Forces filed off
toward our Right at Cannegem; this kept our General in suspense until Three in
the Afternoon, when we saw the Enemy's Battalions begin to plant their Colors
between Cannegem and our Right, within two Musket-shots of our Intrenchment,
while their Horse and Dragoons moved toward the Village of Fink, in order to
get between us and Ghent, and to attack our Right Wing in Rear and Flank;
whereupon our General gave Orders about four in the Afternoon for a Retreat,
and having sent away the Artillery, the whole Army marched off in great order,
and made as fine a Retreat as ever was seen; for notwithstanding the Enemy's
Numbers, who (by reason of the Detachments we had made to Dixmuyde and Namur)
were stronger than we by almost 40000 men; we continued our march without any
other disturbance, save that some of their Troops charged three or four of our
Battalions that were in the Rear of all, but they were soon forced to retire,
having killed some few on either side. We marched the 15th all night, and came
to Ghent yesterday about Seven in the Morning, and passing through that City,
encamped with the Schelde before us, where we shall observe the Enemy's
Motions, and either march toward Brussells or Newport, as shall be found
necessary. The French being enraged at their having thus missed their Aim, took
their revenge upon the Country people, plundring and burning in their march,
without having even any regard to the Religious Houses; the Duke of Wirtemberg
was sent to join Major General Ellemberg with a strong Detachment to cover
Newport, or Dixmuyde; the Earl of Athlone marched likewise nearer Flanders to
join Prince Vaudemont, if need require.

15th, Major General Salish relieved the Trenches, and carried the Works on
with good success.

16th, Major General Lindeboom relieved the Guard of the Trenches.

17th, Major General Hewklem relieved the Guard aforesaid.

18th, Our Works and Approaches being carried on within Pistol-shot of the
Enemy's Outworks upon the Hill, near the Brussell's-Gate, His Majesty was
resolved to attack the same; and the necessary Dispositions being made for it
accordingly, the Attack was begun about Six in the Evening, as follows.

Major General Ramsey was commanded with five Battalions of Guards to attack an
old Tower below a place called la Bouge; and the Enemy's Works descending
toward the Counterscarp, the disposition of the Attack was as follows. The
first Battalion of the First Regiment of Guards, the Battalion of the
Coldstreamer's Regiment of Guards, and the Battalion of Scotch Guards, for the
Right Hand Attack toward the bottom: And the second Battalion of the First
Regiment of Guards, and one Battalion of Dutch Guards, for the Left Hand Attack
by the Old Tower; at the head of each of these Attacks were 120 armed Fusiliers
carrying Fascines before them, and 120 Granadiers, followed by 100 Workmen with
Tools and Gabions. On the Right of the Body on the Right Hand were 100
Granadiers carrying Fascines before them, followed by 50 Workmen; and the same
numbers of Granadiers and Workmen on the Right of the Body on the Left Hand,
betwixt the two Attacks.

The Signal being given a little after Six in the Evening, the several
Battalions marched forward in the order beforementioned, with the greatest
Courage and Undauntedness that was ever seen, without taking any notice of the
Enemy's Fire, which was very furious; and the Fusiliers in the front carried
their Fascines to the very Pallisadoes, where laying them down, they fired upon
the Enemy; and the Granadiers threw their Grenades into the Tower and Works,
while the Battalions marched close after them in order, with their Arms
shouldered, till they came so near that they presented over the Pallisades,
drove the Enemy from thence, and pursued them through a large place of Arms, to
the bottom of that Work.

The French making fresh fire from the Counterscarp, and a Redoubt on the other
side of a hollow way on our Flank, my Lord Cuts with Three Battalions from our
Trenches, viz. Tidcomb, Stanley, and Collingwood's, came immediately to sustain
our Men; with the first Battalion he marched to the lowest Pallisades, and with
the Guards, again repulsed the Enemy, a great number of them into the Water,
and the rest where they could best escape; Brigadier Fitz-Patrick marched at
the same time with the Regiment of Lord George Hamilton, his own Regiment of
Fuseliers, Ingoldsby, Saunderson, Lawder, and Maitland; the two first of these
were sent to relieve the Dutch Guards, and those with the Lord Cuts at the
lowest Pallisades, and the rest were drawn up by the Tower to sustain as the
Action should require, except the Regiment of Lawder, which was posted on the
other side of the hollow way to prevent being flanked or surprised; in the mean
time Major General Ramsey ordered all the Pikemen to carry Fascines, and to dig
till a Work was made sufficient to resist Musket shot, where he Posted the
Regiments of Ingoldsby, Saunderson, Lawder, and Maitland; and at break of day
drew off the rest of the Troops to the first Parade; the heat of the Action
lasted about Two hours, during which time we possessed our selves of the
Enemies Works, which were defended by great numbers of Men; the General
Officers, Colonels, and all the other Officers and private Soldiers, behaving
themselves in their several Stations with the greatest Vigor and Bravery,
forcing the Enemy to give ground wherever they came, and made them pay for
their Ill Language of, Come on you English Dogs, You English Rebels.

The Chief Officers Killed and Wounded in this Action, are, of the first
Regiment of English Guards, Colonel Robinson Killed; and Lieutenant Colonel
How, and Lieutenant Colonel Davis Wounded; of the Coldstream Guards, Colonel
Matthews, Lieutenant Colonel Edgworth, Lieutenant Colonel Jones Wounded, and
Lieutenant Colonel Pierce, and Lieutenant Colonel Morrison taken Prisoners; of
the Scotch Guards, Colonel John Hamilton Wounded; of the Dutch Guards,
Lieutenant Colonel Goudaker, Major Hetzler, and Lieutenant Colonel Pannie,
Wounded; of the Royal Regiment, Major Mac Ilvan Killed, and Lord George
Hamilton Wounded; of Colonel Ingoldsby's Regiment, Lieutenant Colonel Sabin
Wounded, feveral Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns in the Regiments before
mentioned, and the others that were Engaged in the Attack, were likewise Killed
and Wounded; the whole Loss of private Soldiers, as given in by the several
Colonels, is 308 Killed, and 604 Wounded. Deserters inform us that the Enemy
had 1600 Killed and Wounded in this Action.

19th, Major General Hewklem relieved the Guard of the Trenches; the Enemy made
a Sally yesterday on the Brandenburgh Quarter, and Killed the Colonel that
Commanded, and about 100 men, surprising them in the Trenches; but Coehorn's
Regiment put a stop to the French, and gave the Brandenburghs time to Rally and
Beat back the Enemy.

20th, Major General Salish Mounted the Guard of the Trenches; the same day a
Deserter came over to us, and brought with him a Priest that he stopped making
off from our Army into the Town, whom he knew to be a Spy; upon search Papers
were found about him of Consequence; the Deserter was Rewarded, and the Priest
sent to the Provost; the Soldiers that remain in the Camp, Wounded in the late
Attack, had daily Meat and Broth from the King's own Kitchin-Tent.

21st, We finished several Batteries for 24 Pounders, besides Mortars; Major
General Ramsey relieved the Trenches, and the Works were pushed on with good
success, the Trenches being carried to the foot of the Bridge, and Batteries
preparing for 32 Mortars. Prince Vaudemont continues at his Camp of Ostacker,
the Duke of Wirtemberg at Plassendaele, between Bruges and Ostend, and Sir
Henry Bellasis near Newport, with strong Detachments to observe the Enemy, who
have an eye on Dixmuyde, where is a Garrison of 8 Battalions, under the Command
of Major General Ellemberg, who has caused the Sluices to be opened which covers
one side of Dixmuyde with Water.

22d, The Batteries for Mortars were got ready to play against the two Bastions
on each side St. Nicholas Gate; we had now Eleven Batteries playing upon the
Enemy; the Breaches in the Bastions widen considerably, but they have the old
wall of the Town with a wet ditch, and Retrenchments behind that, Major General
Lindeboom relieving the Guard of the Trenches.

23d, The King had Advice that the Earl of Athlone was marched from the Village
of Aubay to his former Camp of Pont a Selle, where he covered the Seige.
Major General Salish relieved the Trenches.

24th, Our Artillery-Horses were sent from hence toward Mechlyn, to bring
hither the Flanders train of Artillery, in which are Eight Pieces of whole
Cannon, to be employed against the Castle; Major General Hewklem relieved the
Guard of the Trenches this Evening.

25th, Major General Ramsey relieved the Guard of the Trenches, and carried on
the works with great success in order to make a Lodgment, having advanced above
300 paces in three days.

26th, We carried our Lines so far, as to cut off the Communication between the
Town and Fort Pollard, which hindered our approaches to the Counterscarp, and
the Enemies other Works near St. Nicholas Gate; whereupon the French Posted
there, were summoned to Surrender, which they refused to do, unless they might
have leave to retire into the Town, which was denied them; and our Miners set
at work, who having made a considerable advance in the night, lodged themselves
under the Counterscarp of the said Fort: The Garrison consisting of a Captain,
Two Lieutenants, an Ensign, an Ingenier, a Surgeon, and 55 chosen Men of the
Dauphin's Regiment, Surrendered early the 27th at Discretion, and were made
Prisoners at War; soon after our Guns were brought down, and a Battery raised
upon the said Fort to play upon the Counterscarp near St. Nicholas Port, where
we have been for some days making a Breach, and undermined the dams that keep
up the Water in the ditch of the Town, in order to drain the same, by blowing
them up.

28th, Major General Lindeboom relieved the Guard of the Trenches; and our
Lines being carried on to the edge of the Maese near the Counterscarp, all
things were disposed for the Attack of it, in order to a Lodgment on the
Glacis; and accordingly about 4 a Clock in the Afternoon it was begun by the
Granadiers, English and Dutch, who with continual fire, and Hand-granadoes,
with the help of our Batteries, soon obliged the Enemy to retire, and made a
Lodgment on the Glacis; but the Enemy having many works within this, as the
Counterguard, the Ravelin, and the Town-walls, they very much annoyed our Men,
being also continually relieved from the Town; however, ours Fortified
themselves and kept their Post; our Granadiers were sustained by Colonel
Ingoldsby's Regiment, which suffered very much in this Action, by the accident
of Fire taking in the Woolsacks and Gabions that were to cover their Men;
Colonel Saunderson and Colonel Collingwood's Regiments sustained next to
Ingoldsby's; the Dutch Granadiers were sustained and relieved by Detachments of
the Regiments of Ploen, Tetteau, Weed, and Heyden; Sweeds and Dutch
Lieutenant-Collonels were Killed, and another Wounded; Mr. Godfrey,
Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, who was come from Antwerp to wait upon
the King, standing very near his Majesty in the Trenches, was Killed by a
Cannon Ball; Lieutenant Colonel Eck, of the Fourth Troop of Guards, had his Arm
taken off by the same Shot.

29th, Our Lodgment being thus made on the Counterscarp, on the side of the
Maese, as was intended, our Batteries will be advanced nearer to the Enemies
Works, and a further Breach made for an Assault of the Town; in the Attack of
Yesterday we lost, that is, Killed and Wounded of the English and Dutch, about
300. The Elector of Bavaria made an Attack at the same time upon the Cloister
of Salsine, wherein the Enemy had a Garrison of 400 Men, and possessed himself
of it with little Loss; by which means he can now make his approaches nearer to
the Enemies works. Upon the arrival of an Express from the Duke of Savoy with
the good News of the Surrender of Casal, all the Foot made a treble Discharge
round the Town and Castle, whilst our Cannon and Mortars did the same against
them both, as rejoicing upon-such an Occasion. Major General Salish relieved
the Trenches.

30th, About Four a Clock in the Morning, the Elector of Bavaria, with a
Detachment of Granadiers, and 15 Battalions of Foot of his own, the
Brandenburgh, and other Foreign Troops, made an Attack upon the Works and
Retrenchments the Enemy had without the Coehorn Fort, upon the Hill toward the
Sambre, which hindered our approaches upon that side; in about Two hours time we
beat the Enemy out of them, and pursued them to the very walls of the Castle,
so that we are now Masters of their great Line drawn over the Hill from the
Sambre to the Maese, on which the Enemy had two Batteries; we are now
Fortifying our selves there in order to Attack the Coehorn work; it Rained
violently all the while of the Attack, notwithstanding which the Men continued
it with great Resolution, and we lost about 100 Men; the Enemy are much
disheartened at our being Masters of this strong Work, which they gave out would
cost us many Thousand Men; the ascent of the Hill was difficult by reason of
its rocky steepness, and the Enemies Cannon playing on all sides; yet sometimes
on all four up they got, and made themselves Masters of the pretended
impregnable Line, made by Monsieur Vauban the French Chief Ingenier.
Major General Hewklem relieved the Trenches.

31st, The rest of the wounded in each Regiment were by water sent to Liege to
the Hospital Erected there on this occasion, well furnished with Doctors,
Surgeons, Nurses, and all manner of Conveniences and Necessaries
whatsoever. This day the Guard of the Trenches was relieved by Major General
Ramsey.

August 1st. His Majesty caused an Attack to be made on the Counterscarp before
the Half Moon, and on the Demi-bastion on our left near the Maese; which was
begun about Seven in the Morning by the English Guards under the Command of the
Lord Cuts on the Right, and by the Dutch Commanded by Brigadier Dedem on the
Left; and notwithstanding the fierce and continual fire of the Enemy, by Ten a
Clock we had made our Lodgment on the Right, and secured the same, and the
Dutch lodged themselves on the point of the Demi-Bastion, not being able to
maintain the Work it self; the King was all the while in the Trenches, which
His Majesty visited every day; and because no time should be lost in giving
necessary Orders, His Majesty frequently eat in, and near the Trenches; the
Provisions, when dressed, being carried from His Majesty's Quarters thither.
Major General Lindeboom relieved the Guard of the Trenches, and carried on the
Work with good success. In this Action we had about 400 men killed and wounded
of English and Dutch; the Trenches were relieved somewhat after the usual hour
by particular Order, and then Major General Ramsey and Brigadier Fitzpatrick,
who came on the Guard, visited the Works, which they continued and carried
about 50 Paces farther to the Right; in this, as well as all the other Actions
of this Siege, our men behaved themselves with such undaunted Courage and
Bravery, that they carried all before them; for whatever they attacked, they
carried; and what they took, they maintained, to the great disheartning and
discouragement of the Enemy, who found it in vain, notwithstanding their
numbers, to pretend to resist such Vigor: Nay, the most Experienced Officers
declare, they never saw Attacks made with greater Vigor and Resolution.

2d, Preparations was made for a General Assault of the Town, the Breaches
being wide enough for 100 men in front: We had an Account that the Dauphin,
with the Household Troops, was marching from Court to join Villeroy, and attempt
the Relief of Namur, cost what it would; and that the French King in Person
would come to the Frontiers: At the same time arrived some Officers that made
their escape from Dixmuyde, after the surrender of that Place by Major General
Ellemberg; amongst the rest Colonel Brewer, who gave His Majesty an account of
the whole Treachery; and that Brigadier d' Offerrer had delivered up Deynse
upon no better Account, the Garrisons being made Prisoners at War; and the Enemy
had Razed the Fortifications, and carried the men toward Ypres.

3d, Major General Salish relieved the Guard of the Works and Trenches, and all
things were disposed for an Assault of the Town, when about Two in the
Afternoon the Enemy hung out a White Flag, and desired a Parley; which being
granted, Hostages were exchanged, Colonel William Seymour and Major Stork on
our side, and Count Nogent and a French Major on the Enemy's; and Articles were
sent out and demanded by the French for the Surrender of the Town, some of
which were granted, others disagreed unto.

4th, The Articles were Concluded and Agreed to, and are as follow.

Articles of Capitulation demanded by the French for the Surrender of the Town
of Namur; with what was Granted them thereupon.
I. THE Exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion shall be preserved in the
Town, and no other permitted.

Granted.

II. All the Privileges of the Inhabitants shall be preserved; and their Goods
that may have been confiscated, restored.

Granted.

III. All the Inhabitants, French and others, may stay in the Town; or remove
in three months with their Families and Effects.

Granted.

IV. None of the Burghers, or others, shall be troubled for having served the
French King; and they, as well as all Deserters, shall be pardoned.

Granted, Except what relates to the Deserters.

V. The Horses taken during the War, and bought by the Burghers, or others,
shall not be restored.

Granted.

VI. The Sick and Wounded shall be transported to Dinant, with the Persons
appointed to take care of them; and Boats and sufficient Carriages shall be
provided for them by the Allies (they paying for the same) with the necess^^^
Convoy and Passports within six days after signing Capitulation.

The Besieged may provide Boats for their Sick and Wounded, and shall have
Passports to send for what Boats and Boatsmen they want from Dinant, and may
make use of what Boats there are at Namur, provided they forthwith send them
back again.

VII. Such of the Sick and Wounded as are not in a condition to remove, may
continue at Namur; and when they are well, shall be furnished with Carriages
and Passports to carry them to Dinant.

Granted.

VIII. Six days shall be granted for the Garrison of the Town to retire into the
Castle with their Families and Effects; during which time no Hostility shall be
committed by either Party on the side of the Town or the Castle; and to prevent
all Disorder, the Troops of the Allies shall only possess themselves of the
Gate of the First Enclosure of the Attack; and none of them shall enter into
the Town until the Garrison is entirely retired into the Castle; and the Second
Gate of the Second Attack shall, during the said time, be guarded by the
Garrison.

There are granted to the Besieged Two days only, to begin from the 4th at
Noon; and they shall forthwith give up the Posts at the entrance of the
Iron-Gate; the Besieged may place a Guard jointly with the Allies at the Gate
of the Old Enclosure to prevent Disorders.

IX. The Garrisons in the Redoubts of St. Fiacre, Espi^^y and St. Anthony, may
enter into the Town, and thence retire into the Castle.

Granted.

X. All persons put by the French King into any Places of Judicature, or
others, shall continue to enjoy the same.

Granted.

XI. No Officer, sick or wounded, or others, shall be stopped on account of Debt,
or on any other pretense; but Security shall be given to such as shall make out
their Debts for payment of the same.

Granted.

XII. All Contracts and Agreements made between the French and the Burghers,
and with the Magistrates, shall be faithfully performed.

Granted, provided the same be not prejudicial to His Catholic Majesty.

XIII. The Horse and Equipage of the Officers and Garrison in the Town shall be
conducted with a Convoy to Dinant, and they may not be stopped or searched on
any pretense whatsoever, and no prejudice done to the said Equipages, or those
that conduct them.

Rejected.

XIV. The Prisoners taken during the Siege, shall be released on both sides.

Granted.

XV. All the Hostages may be conducted with a Convoy to Dinant.

Granted.

XVI. There shall be given up the Town which is between the Sambre and the
Attack of St. Nicholas, as also the Iron-Gate, and the two Towers which are at
the end of the Bridge on the Meuse toward the Condros, except the Drawbridge,
which is to remain in the hands of the Besieged.

Granted.

XVII. The Hostages given on both sides for the due Execution of these
Articles, shall be reciprocally restored after the full performance thereof.

Granted.

The Mines and the Magazines shall be discovered by the Besieged to those that
shall be appointed for that purpose.

The Besieged shall commit no disorder, nor insult the Inhabitants in quitting
the Town.

4th of August, These Articles were Signed by the Elector of Bavaria, and Count
Guiscard, Governor of Namur.

And in Pursuance of this Capitulation, Colonel Ingoldsby took possession of
the Gate of the Town with his Regiment.

5th, About Noon the Garrison of the Town of Namur retired into the Castle
according to the Capitulation, and broke down the Bridge between the Town and
them; they left behind them to the care of the Allies 1430 Sick and Wounded
men, of which 140 are Officers, and are all to be carried to Dinant, as they
shall be fit to be removed.

They had in the place 2400 Dragoons when the Siege begun, who are reduced to 7
or 800 men; and their whole Garrison is reckoned now to consist of 7000 men;
most of the private Soldiers went with great unwillingness into the Castle, and
many hid themselves, who have since surrendered themselves as deserters, to the
number of near 500.

His Majesty detached Count Nassau, and Major General Ramsey with 30 Battalions
to reinforce Prince Vaudemont, who is marched from Ghent to Diegem by
Brussells, upon the Duke of Villeroy's moving that way. The Prince of Hesse
(Son of the Landgrave) arrived to serve as Voluntier.

6th, The King sent the Marquis de Laforest from before the Town with 40
Squadrons of Horse toward Prince Vaudemont's Army to enable him to make head
against the French, who seemed to have some great Design in hand; and the Earl
of Athlone has Orders to join him, if it be necessary.

7th, His Majesty changed his Quarters, and went to the Abbey of Malloign, over
the Sambre, where the Elector of Bavaria had his, during the Siege of the Town,
and the Elector took his Quarters at the Convent of Carmelites, where the
French King lay when he took Namur; all the Troops being likewise disposed of;
there being none left before the Town on the Brabant side, but the Garrison. In
the Evening we had Advice the French Army was come to Hall, three Leagues from
Brussells.

8th, His Majesty had Advice the Enemy marched toward Brussells, designing to
Encamp at Anderleck; and that Prince Vaudemont had drawn his Forces about
Brussels for the security of that City, and has posted some Troops along the
Canal of Vilvord, to prevent the Enemy passing on that side.

The 9th was taken up in raising Batteries, and making provision to push on the
Siege of the Castle and Outworks with vigor, the Trenches being carried on
with success notwithstanding the continual Rains; about Midnight arrived an
Express from the Earl of Athlone. The Guard of the Trenches was relieved by
Major General Hewklem.

10th, About Three this Morning His Majesty, upon advice that the Enemy
approached nearer Brussels, left the Elector of Bavaria to command against the
Castle, and went with two Troops of Guards, the Troop of Granadier Guards, and
several Squadrons of Brandenburg Horse, to the Earl of Athlone's Camp at
Watterloo, three Leagues from Brussels; where was likewise joined the
Detachments sent from Namur under the Command of the Count de Nassau, and
Major General Ramsey; the Enemy Encamped the same day within a League of
Brussels.

11th, The King detached 10 Battalions of Foot from Watterloo to reinforce the
Prince of Vaudemont, by Brussels; Deserters come over to us from the Castle in
great numbers; Major General Salish relieved the Guard of the Trenches, and
undisturbed carried on the Works considerably.

12th, Prince Vaudemont arrived at Watterloo from Brussels to concert Measures
with His Majesty for the Security of that City, which the Enemy threatens with
a Bombardment. After Dinner a Council of War was held, after which his Highness
departed for Brussels again, and His Majesty returned to the Camp before the
Castle of Namur. This Night Lindeboom carried on our Trenches about 150 Paces
before the Coehorn-Fort toward the Sambre, and made a very good Lodgment.

13th, We advanced our Trenches near 200 Paces more, notwithstanding the Rain
continued to wash the Earth down again. In the Afternoon one of our Bombs fell
into a Magazine of the Enemy's, where they had a quantity of Grenades and
Powder which blew up; and by the Deserters we were informed, it did them
considerable damage. Major General Salish relieved the Guard of the Trenches.

14th, This Morning His Majesty had an Account that the French possessed
themselves of the high grounds near Anderleck Gate the Night before, and was
Bombarding Brussels, upon which the Elector of Bavaria, went away immediately
with a good Guard of his own and the Brandenburgh Horse, to be present and give
the necessary Orders in that City. Last Night the Enemy made a Sally upon 600
of our Men Commanded by Colonel Seymour, who were Posted near their Palisades
to cover the Workmen that were to carry on the Trenches, but they were repulsed
and several of them killed; on our side 4 Men were killed, and Colonel
Seymour's Major, a Captain, and 12 Men wounded; we continued our Works with
good success, advancing 150 Paces, though the ground was stony; the Guard being
relieved by Major General Hewklem.

15th, 115 Deserters came over last night and this morning to us, who were in
the last Sally, which they all agree in, that Boufflers designed it on purpose
to favor his Escape, by forcing his way through with his Horse, but he found
our Troops well posted and too vigilant for his purpose; they say likewise that
our Cannon and Bombs do great Execution, and harrass the Soldiers that they
know not where to shelter themselves with security. Major General Lindeboom
this day made a new Trench of about 300 Paces in the plain of Salsine behind
the other, and run a Line from our Lodgment to the old Trench at the foot of
the Mountain, to secure it against Sallies; the Enemy made but little fire, we
did not lose one Man, only 5 or 6 wounded. The Landtgrave of Hesse arrived in
the Camp, and was by His Majesty received with great Respect.

16th, We advanced our Trench in the Plain of Salsine, and enlarged and mended
that at the foot of the Mountain, which was much endamaged by the continual
Rains that loosened the Earth cast up, and made it shoot down again to the
bottom of the Trench, and lay there like mud; and rendered it very troublesome
to pass and repass.

17th. We advanced our Trench Salish at the foot of the Mountain about 100
Paces, and carried on that of the Salsine toward it. The Enemy made a great
fire in the Night both with the Cannon and small Shot, and made two Sallies to
disturb our workmen, but were presently beat in again; a Colonel of the
Brandenburghs and 10 Soldiers were killed, and some wounded; our Cannon and
Bombs play without ceasing day and night on the Castle and Coehorn, and
according to the reports of Deserters, do greatly annoy the Enemy, having
killed great numbers of them, and, dismounted some of their Cannon; this
Evening arrived here from Maestricht 32 Twenty-four Pounders to be employed
against the Castle from Count Tilly's side; the Batteries had had good success
and done the Enemy considerable mischief; and we prepare more on all sides in
order to a Breach in the Coehorn and Castle; the Forces of Hesse and Lunemburg,
which came from the Rhyne are Encamped between Liege and Huy: This Morning His
Majesty received an account that the Marshall de Villeroy had raised Batteries
on the high Ground of Anderleck, from whence he Bombarded Brussels, from the
13th about Six in the Evening, until the 15th about Noon; when he drew off,
and marched toward Engheim, by way of Hall; that the Lower Town had suffered
the most, and several Houses as high as the great Market are ruined, but all
the Magazines in general have escaped; but the Electoress of Bavaria with the
Fright miscarried, but is in no danger, and was removed to a great House in the
Suburbs.

18th. The Count de Rivera Master of the Horse to the Elector of Bavaria, and
my Lord Cutts relieved the Trenches, and we advanced our Trenches 150 Paces
notwithstanding the disturbance we met with from the Enemy, who near Midnight
made a Sally with 200 Dragoons mounted, and 500 Grenadiers; they first made an
Attack on our Right with 160 Grenadiers, when the Count de Rivera was visiting
the Night Posts immediately repulsed them; and then they made an Attack on our
Left, where my Lord Cutts had just posted the advanced Guards to cover the
Workmen. 100 Dragoons came upon Lieutenant Sutton of Seymour's Regiment, who
being posted in the Plain of Salsine with 37 English Fusiliers, let them come
on until they were within a few Paces of him, and then firing upon them,
retreated softly toward our main Guard or Body, and the Dragoons pressing
again upon him, he gave then a second Volley; at which time the Spanish and
Bavarian Horse, who were posted in the Plain of Salsine to sustain the
Infantry, fell in with the Enemy Sword in hand, and followed them to the very
Gate of the Castle, killing several, and taking some Prisoners.

19th. The Communication between the Trench of Salsine and that at the foot of
the Mountain, were joined without any manner of interruption from the Enemy,
who were sick of their last Sally. They own to have lost 100 of the 200
Dragoons, and the Officer that commanded them, Major General Hewklem relieved
Count de Rivera and my Lord Cutts.

20th. This Morning we had Advice that the Enemy was marched from Enghien to
Soignies, upon which Prince de Vaudemont, with the Army under his Command, came
from Genap and encampt at Mazy two Leagues from Namur, a Camp advantageous and
strong. This Night was employed in repairing the Damage in our Trenches,
occasioned by the continual Rains, Major General Swerin relieving the Guard,
and two Men and a Woman seized for Spies, the Woman had several Letters.

21th. Very early this Morning we began to fire from several Batteries in the
Town, with about 70 Pieces of Cannon and 40 Mortars and Haawitzers; the Enemy
began to fire some shot about Noon, and afterward from 5 Mortars, which we
endeavored to dismount; a Brandenburgher relieved the Guard. The two
Battalions of Guards, and the four English Regiments which have been employed
during the Siege, were this day relieved from the Army by six other Battalions.
This Night we continued to repair and enlarge our Trenches.

22th. His Majesty had Advice that the Enemy were come to Senefs, and had
drained all their Garrisons, in order to attempt the relief of Namur: upon
which his Majesty went to view the Army Commanded by Prince Vaudemont at Mazy,
where his Majesty dined, and in the Evening returned hither. Deserters continue
still to come over every Night, and say our Cannon and Mortars from the Town do
the Enemy considerable damage. The Guard of the Trenches was this day relieved
by Major General Salish.

23d. His Majesty was pleased to make Colonel Selwyn, and the Lord George
Hamilton, Brigadiers General of Foot, in consideration of their good Services,
and more particularly at this Siege. Our Batteries continued to play with great
success, making Breaches along the side of the Cohorn next to the Town.

About Noon the King received Advice that Villeroy had made a review of his
Troops at Soignies, and yesterday marched to Fellug between Nivelle and Senef.

The Forces of Hesse and Lunenburg came up to us this Morning, and are to
assist at the Siege; they passed the Maese about Noon, being about 7000 Foot,
the Horse and Dragoons making together 22 Squadrons, joined the main Army,
under the Command of Prince Vaudemont.

24th. We carried on our Trenches very considerably, notwithstanding the
Enemies continual Fire, and who endeavored to disturb us in the Night with
three false Salleys. My Lord Cutts and Major General Swerin relieved the Guard.

25th. Our Trenches these three last Nights were pushed on 500 Paces, 80 yards
distant one behind the other, and we are now within 200 Paces of the Enemies
Redoubt at the foot of the Cohorn near the Sambre, being a Stone Redoubt; to
Attack which all things were prepared; but upon sight of our Men, the
Lieutenant that Commanded, with 15 of the Enemy surrendered, and were made
Prisoners at War. Count de Rivera mounted the Guard.

26th. Early in the Morning his Majesty received information that the Marshall
de Villeroy was marching with the Army to Flerus; his Majesty thereupon thought
fit to leave the Camp before the Castle of Namur to the Care of the Elector of
Bavaria and Duke of Holstien Floen, and joined our main Army under Prince
Vaudemont, taking up his Quarters at the Village of Bone See near Mazy. This
day Major General Salish mounted the Guard.

27th. The Enemy remained at Flerus, and were joined by the Detachments from
Germany, and the other Troops Commanded by Monsieur de Harcourt, etc. from the
Sea Coasts.

28th. The Enemy marched to Gemblours, and seemed to dispose every thing to a
Battle; in the mean time we were not idle in preparing to receive them,
notwithstanding their Superiority of at least 20000 Men: And our Forces that
carried on the Attacks against the Castle went on vigorously.

29th. The Enemy did actually leave their Tents standing in their Camp, and
marched toward us in Battalia, as near as the Ground would permit them.
Whereupon his Majesty caused our Army to be drawn out likewise, in which
Posture we remained the whole Day, his Majesty being on Horsback from four in
the Morning until eight at Night, riding from Right to Left, and to the Right
again; appearing every where to give necessary Orders, and view the Disposition
of the Enemy; and our Army ordered to lie all Night under Arms in a readiness
to receive the Enemy if they please to come on. In the mean time all things
were ready for a General Assault.

30th. The Enemy only appeared in the Front of our Line, and moved off again
without daring to attempt any thing, and with about 70 Squadrons took Post at
Bonef on the Mehaigne, extending their Line from that place to the Right near
Perwys. Whereupon his Majesty caused our Army likewise to move, and extended
our Right to Longchamp, our Left being near St. Dennis, and a Brigade of Foot
left at Mazy Camp to secure that Post.

This Day a General Assault was made against the Castle and Cohorn. The
Disposition as follows: The Lord Cutts attacked the Counterscarp and Breach of
the Terra Nova with a Detachment of Grenadiers, and four Regiments of Foot:
Count Rivera Major General in the Spanish Service, Attackt the Cohorn on the
side next the Terra Nova with 3000 Spaniards and Bavarians: Major General La
Cave Attackt the Cohorn on the Right of the Spaniards with 2000 Brandenburgers;
Major General Swerin Attackt the Cassotte with 2000 Dutch; and the lower Town
by a Colonel and about 2000 Men.

The English advanced with great Order and Resolution, and had gained the top
of the Breach (through a great deal of Fire on all sides) but found the Enemy
so advantageously posted and entrenched behind the Breach, and the Ground on
their side so very craggy and uneven, that it was impossible to advance in any
Front, were forced to retire. Count Rivera was killed upon his approach to the
Counterscarp, but the Bavarians took Post upon a Saliant Angle of the Cohorn,
and maintained a hot Fire with the Enemy, who disputed hard to dislodge them;
and when most of the Officers of the Bavarian Guards was killed and wounded,
and that the other Regiments had suffered very much, the Enemy continuing their
Fire with great obstinacy; the English that had left the Terra Nova, not being
able to do any thing on that side, sustained the Spaniards and Bavarians under
the Command of my Lord Cutts, who at the same time ordered a Lieutenant of
Colonel Maccay's Regiment with 30 Men to pass the Pallisado's, and Attack a
Battery of the Enemies; which he executed with the greatest Bravery and
Resolution, turning seven of the Enemies own Cannon against them, securing at
the same time several of their Mines ready to spring; and the English and
Bavarians planting their Colors upon the Pallisado's made a good Lodgment.
While this happened, Major General La Cave with the Brandenburgers, and Major
General Swerin with the Dutch, made each of them likewise a Lodgment, which
they improve in order to an Attack; and the Batteries are now ordered to play
on the Terra Nova to make that Attack more practicable.

31th. The Enemy appeared with about 11 Squadrons near our grand Guard, but
were soon repulsed, and the following List was given in of the killed and
wounded. Of the English in the Assault under the Command of my Lord Cutts,

Lord Cutts wounded; of Coulthorp's Regiment, the Colonel, a Captain, 1
Subalteran, and 101 Soldiers killed. The Lieutenant Colonel, 3 Captains, 5
Subalterans, and 149 Soldiers wounded.

Colonel Frederick Hamilton's Regiment, 3 Captains, 7 Subalterans, and 86
Soldiers killed. 6 Captains, 8 Subalterans, and 185 Soldiers wounded, the
Lieutenant Colonel killed or Prisoner.

Colonel Maccay's Regiment, 1 Captain, 1 Subalteran, and 70 Soldiers killed;
the Colonel bruised; the Major, 4 Captains, 11 Subalterans, and (...)Soldiers
wounded.

Colonel Buchanan's Regiment, 2 Captains, 2 Subalterans, and 62 Soldiers
killed; the Lieutenant Colonel, 6 Captains, 6 Subalterans, and 138 Soldiers
wounded; Volantiers wounded, Col. Winsor, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Stanhop.

Sept. 1st. N. S.

This Day his Majesty dined very early, and was in the Afternoon going to
Namur, to give the necessary Directions concerning a further Attack of the
Castle, on the way met an Adjutant sent by the Elector of Bavaria, to give his
Majesty an Account that the Marshall de Boufflers, and the Count de Guiscard,
had desired to Capitulate; offering at first to do it for the Cohorn alone, but
that upon the Elector's refusal they had agreed for the whole. Upon his
Majesty's Arrival there Hostages were Exchanged, and Propositions brought from
the Castle to the Salsine; in which they demanded ten Days to expect Succor,
which was absolutely denied them; but in the General it appears, that the Enemy
suffered so much in the last Assault, and are otherwise so dispirited, that
there is little doubt of their submitting to what shall be granted them.
Hostages were exchanged on both sides for performance of what may be agreed
unto.

2d. Early in the Morning the Articles of Surrender were concluded, and part of
the Outworks given up presently after, for which a treble Discharge was made of
all our Artillery, and three Salvo's in a running Fire along the Lines, which
the Marshall and Duke de Villeroy was an Ear-witness of with 100000 Men; but
not being pleased with such rejoycings, retired with his Army from Gemblours
toward Sombref, marching all Night to get clear of his Majesty's pursuit. We
have Rain in abundance.

ARTICLES proposed by the Marshall de Boufflers to his Electoral Highness of
Bavaria, jointly with the Allies, for the Capitulation of the Castle of Namur.
1. THat the said Castle with the lower Town shall be delivered up to the
Troops of the Allies the 10th of this instant September, in case it be not
relieved: And that during the said time there shall be committted no Act of
Hostility between the Besieged and the Besiegers.

2. That on the said 10th of September, there shall be given up to the said
Troops of the Allies the first Gate of Entry into the said Castle on the side
of the Country, where a Guard of the Troops of the Garrison shall be likewise
placed to prevent the Troops mixing together, and all disorders.

Answer to the First and Second Articles. The outward Fortifications, viz. the
Fort of Cohorn, the Redoubt Cassematte, the Cassotte, and the Horn-work of Bule
shall be delivered up to morrow morning, being the 2d Instant, at 9 in the
Morning.

3. That the Marshall de Boufflers, the Count de Guiscard, Lieutenant General
of the King's Armies, Governor of Namur, with all the General Officers, and
Field Officers of the place, the Officer and Guard of the Marshall, the Troops
as well French as Strangers, the Officers of the Artillery, and all others
whatsoever that are in the Castle for the Service of the most Christian King,
shall march out on the 12th of this Month through the Breaches, with their
Arms, Baggage and Horses, Drums beating, Match lighted, and Colors flying,
with 12 Pieces of great Cannon and Mortars, as the besieged shall choose, with
their Carriages, and Arms and Ammunition for 12 Discharges for every Piece, in
order to repair altogether to Givet, along the Meuse by the nearest way, and in
two or three days at the choice of the besieged, and on any pretense whatsoever
they shall not be obliged to go another way: And a Convoy shall be given them
by the Allies, as well for the Security of the Garrison as the Equipages.

Answer. They shall march out the 5th of this Month at 7 in the Morning with 2
Pieces of Cannon of 24 Pounders, two 12 Pounders, and two 6 Pounders, and 2
Mortars; and the rest of the Article is granted.

4. That for transporting the said 12 Pieces of Cannon and Mortars, the
Equipages of the Troops, and the Sick and Wounded of the said Garrison, there
shall be furnished by the Allies, and at their Charge, 100 Carriage Horses with
their Harnesses, 100 Wagons drawn each by 4 Horses, and 50 great Boats on the
Meuse, with a sufficient number of Watermen and Horses to conduct them to
Givet; all which shall be provided the 10th of this Month, that so they may
load them time enough to depart with the Garrison, and to take the same way,
that they may arrive at the same time at Givet.

5. That the Sick and Wounded remaining in the Town of Namur, who are in a
Condition to depart with the Garrison of the Castle, may do so at the same
time; and that Boats and Watermen shall be likewise furnished them at the
charge of the Allies to transport them to Givet.

Answer to the Fourth and Fifth Article. There shall be provided for them a
sufficient number of Horses for the Cannon and Mortars, 80 Wagons, and as many
Boats as can be found in two days before that which is fixed for the going out
of the Garrison, and the rest as fast as they can be got; so as that the whole
shall be furnished by the 12th of this Month. The Besieged may leave Officers
and Commissaries to take care of the Sick and Wounded, and the Equipages who
cannot depart with the Garrison on the 5th for want of Boats, and Pass-ports
shall be given them; and the rest of these Articles are granted.

6. That such of the Sick and Wounded as are at present in the Castle and lower
Town, and who shall not be in a Condition to be transported to Givet, at the
same time the Garrison marches out of the Castle, shall be transported to the
Town of Namur, by such Carriages and other Conveniences, as the Besiegers
shall furnish before the Evacuation of the Castle; and that convenient Lodgings
shall be provided by the Allies in the said Town for the Officers, Dragoons,
and Soldiers, with Beds, Provision and Medicaments at the Charge of the Allies,
until their perfect Recovery, in the same manner as they are used to be treated
and provided for in the most Christian King's Hospitals; and also Physicians,
Surgeons, and other persons to be employed to take care of them. And as soon as
any of the Sick and Wounded shall be recovered, they shall be furnished by the
Allies with Pass-ports, Boats and Watermen, to conduct them by the Meuse in
safety to Givet, together with the Physicians, Surgeons, and others that shall
be proposed to take care of them on the way.

Granted.

7. That Monsieur de Megrigny, Marshall de Camp of the King's Armies, the
Sieur Fellet, Director of the Fortifications, the Engineers, Undertakers, and
others employed on the Fortifications, shall enjoy the benefit of this
Capitulation, and shall march out with the Troops, in order to repair by the
same way to Givet, with their Equipages and Effects.

Granted.

8. That the Sieur de Fumeron, employed for the Finances, the Commissaries of
the War, the Receivers of Contributions, and of the Fortifications, the
Treasurers extraordinary of the War, the Commissaries of Provisions and
Hospitals, and generally all those employed in the Castle, whether named or not
named in the present Capitulation, shall march out of the said Castle, together
with the Garrison, in order to go by the same way to Givet. And on no pretense
whatsoever, neither they nor their Equipages, Papers and Effects shall be
stopped, whether they be in the Castle, or in the Town of Namur.

9. That no Officer or other Person to whom the Burghers of Namur have lent any
Money, or furnished Goods or Merchandise shall be stopped.

Answer to the Eighth and Ninth Articles. Granted: Provided they give Security
or Hostages to the Satisfaction of his Electoral Highness for what they may owe.

10. That there shall be provided by the Allies 6 covered Wagons for the
Besieged, which shall go out of the Castle, and be conducted to Givet with the
Garrison; and the Allies shall not take notice what they are loaded with, nor
visit them.

Granted.

11. That the Prisoners taken during the present Siege, be released on both
sides: And that those who are in the Army of the Allies, or in the Town, shall
be sent back to the Castle before the Garrison marches out; and the rest that
are in places remote, shall be sent back to Dinant in 15 days, to reckon from
this day, with the necessary Pass-ports, that they may repair thither in safety
by the nearest way.

Granted.

12. That no Satisfaction shall be pretended of the Besieged, on account of any
Cattle taken in the County of Namur before the Siege, nor the Houses that have
been demolished in the lower Town, or elsewhere, for the defense of the place,
no more than for the Boats burnt or broke during the Siege.

Granted only for what concerns the Houses demolished: and the rest shall be
paid.

13. That the Hostages which shall be given on both sides, for the due
performance of that Capitulation shall be reciprocally restored after the full
Execution of the same, and the arrival of the Garrison at Givet.

Granted.

The Besieged shall be obliged faithfully to deliver up their Magazines,
Ammunition, Cannon, Mortars, Carriages, and Dependances, and all other
Instruments of War, none reserved or excepted, which shall be as well in the
Castle, as in the Outworks, to morrow Morning the 2d of this Month, to such
Commissaries as shall be appointed by his Electoral Highness for that purpose.

They shall be obliged faithfully to discover their Mines and Fousages to the
Officers of the Miners who shall be sent to inspect the same.

They shall likewise deliver up all the Provisions that are in the Magazines,
besides what they shall spend to the time of their quitting the Castle, and
what shall be necessary for them in their march to Givet, without wasting or
spoiling any; of which they shall give inspection to morrow, to the
Commissaries to be appointed by his Electoral Highness for that purpose.

That all the Spaniards, Italians, and others, Subjects of his Catholic
Majesty, which shall be found among the Troops of the Garrison of the Castle,
shall have liberty to return back, without any molestation or trouble to be
given them on one side or other.

Given at the Camp before the Castle of Namur, Sept. the 1st. 1695.
Two Counterparts of this Capitulation were Signed, one by the Elector of
Bavaria, and the other by the Marshall de Boufflers, and Monsieur de Guiscard.

The Garrisons of Dixmuyde and Deynse have the greatest reason to rejoice at
this Surrender; for whilst the Enemy had any prospect of relieving the Castle,
those unfortunate Men were inhumanly used, purposely to force them to take up
in the French Service: Nay, the Officers were not exempt from their Barbarity,
being (with the Soldiers) kept in the Common Prisons among Criminals and
Persons condemned to the Galleys, notwithstanding they Capitulated, and were to
be made Prisoners at War. Villeroy was pleased (whether by order or not) to
take no notice either of Capitulation, or Cartel of Agreement, which expressly
orders, That all Prisoners whatsoever, taken either in the Field or in Towns,
shall be released and sent back to their proper Masters in fifteen days by
Exchange, or upon paying their Ransoms, which is settled from the General
Officer to the Private Sentinel.

3d. His Majesty had an Account that the Marshall de Villeroy continued his
March all last Night to Sombref with such precipitation, that he left a great
many Foragers behind him, and that this day he continued his March toward the
Sambre, upon which his Majesty ordered 20 Battalions from his Camp at Bonquet
to that before the Castle of Namur.

4th. The 20 Battalions arrived in the Camp before Namur, and his Majesty soon
after them, where he had Advice of the Marshall de Villeroy passing the Sambre
in great disorder near Charleroy, where that General had a long Conference with
the Governor of that Place, and afterward caused five Pieces of Cannon to be
discharged for a Signal to the Foragers to return to his Camp, and this day
continued his March toward Philipville. Near 4000 Men has Deserted from him
since his March from Gemblours. He Detached one Regiment of Horse, and two of
Dragoons, from Sombreff toward Dinant.

5th. This Morning the Garrison, according to the Capitulation, marched out at
the Breaches of the Terra Nova, being 4190 Foot, and 1205 Dragoons (of which
only 160 were mounted) most of them in a very ill condition, with the Marshall
de Boufflers and the Count de Guiscard at the Head of them. The King was
incognito in a Coach, and the Elector of Bavaria to see them.

They had not gone far when Brigadier L'estang advanced toward Marshall de
Boufflers, and told him, He had Orders from his Majesty to Arrest him, by way
of Reprisal for the Garrisons of Dixmuyde and Deynse, which were detained and
ill treated by the French, contrary to their Capitulation and the Cartel. At
which he seemed much concerned, but being forced to submit, was carried away
Prisoner to the Town of Namur, having first had the Offer of his Liberty upon
his parol and promise to return in fourteen days, or to procure the Liberty of
our Men within that time: But he chose rather to be made a Prisoner until his
Master's will was known in that Affair.

Thus ended this great Siege: great, I say, because there never were Attacks
carried on before any Fortress with greater Courage and Resolution, nay and
Success, nor better defended by Besieged. And great, considering its importance
and situation at the Confluence of the Rivers Maese and Sambre; the reducing of
which secures Liege, and Places adjacent, which before lay exposed, and opens
to the Confederates a Passage into France. And seeing they could not defend it,
after having fortified it with so many new and very strong Outworks, and
filled it with such a number of Troops, and vast Magazines (part whereof was
designed for the Attacking of Liege) that with Assistance of such an Army they
looked upon the place impregnable, they will be glad to have their boasting
Relations forgot which they printed when they became Masters of the Place in
the Year 1692.

According to the French Gazette printed at Paris, the Garrison consisted (at
the beginning of the Siege) of 21 Battalions of Foot, 7 Regiments of Dragoons,
and one of Horse, with a Marshall of France at the Head of them, besides other
General Officers; and after a long Resistance, had an Army of 100000 men drawn
together from the Rhine, their Seacoasts and other Parts, who instead of
Relieving it, contented themselves with making some motions that way, and with
being Witnesses of the Extraordinary Bravery and Courage of the Forces of the
Allies, and particularly of the English and Scotch, which appeared in the last,
as well as all the other Attacks during the Siege, to a degree that cannot be
expressed as it ought, or sufficiently commended; for considering the Advantage
the Enemy had in their numbers of men, that they were posted so as to cut off
any orderly Retreat we could possibly make, that if they had Engaged us we must
have vanquished or perished, being shut up between three Rivers: But the
Vigilance of the Allies was superior to that of the Enemies, having overcome
them without fighting, by their Wisdom, Valor, Union and Conduct, which at
that time all concurred to this great Success. But the great Mercy of the
Almighty was then most visible in preserving our most Sacred King, who exposed
himself in all Places of the greatest Danger, and on all Occasions, as well
before the Town and Castle, as in the Field, therefore to God be the Praise and
Thanks.

An Account of the Artillery and Ammunition found in the Castle of Namur, upon
a Survey the third and fourth of September 1695. by the Commissaries appointed
for that purpose.
Cannon. 24 Pounders 7 16 3 12 2 10 9 8 4 6 12 5 18 4 10 3 3 2 1 69 Mortars
with the Arms of France 4 Hauwitzers with the same 4 Powder in several places,
about two hundred eighty one thousand weight. Great Bombs of 500 l. weight 50
Ordinary Bombs about 2000 Lesser Bombs 1000 Grenadoes of 24 l. weight 750
Ordinary Grenadoes fixed 40000 Cannon Ball 150 Barrels. Tun.
Saltpeter and Brimstone, about 15 Spare Muskets 800

Besides what Guns, small Arms and Ammunition the Enemy, after the
Capitulation, threw into the Sambre, as was suspected. The Arms may be easily
recovered thence.

6th. The King ordered the Guard to be taken off the Marshall de Boufflers,
upon his giving his parol to remain a Prisoner: And his Majesty, with the Duke
of Bavaria and the General Officers, viewed all the Breaches, in order to their
being repaired, and put in a defensible Condition; and likewise gave order for
some additional Works. The same day Prince Vaudemont left the Army, and
returned to Brussels, with orders for the English Troops to march thence to the
Burnt-bridge, whence Count Tilly from Lovain was to join them with other
Forces, and march into Flanders.

7th. The King Detached the Brandenburghers, Hessians, and Lunenburghers from
his Camp to Namur, to assist the other Battalions there to level the Trenches
and other Works, and to mend the Breaches; who are afterward to march further,
and observe the French between the Sambre and the Meuse, and toward the
Condros.

8th. His Majesty with the whole Army marched from Bouquet to Sombref, about two
Leagues; the Marshall de Boufflers was the same day removed from Namur to
Maestricht, under the Conduct of Monsieur de L'Estang; and the Hostages for
performance of the Capitulation of the Castle of Namur returned on either side.
This day the King sent ^ the fourth Troop of Dutch Guards, and some of his
Horses and Equipage toward Loo.

9th. The Landgrave of Hesse took his leave of his Majesty, in order to his
return to Cassal; and the Army marched from Sombref to Bois Seigneur Isaac, his
Majesty's Quarters being in the Cloister of that Name. The Marshall de
Villeroy marched the same day from Binch to Cambron near Aeth, having his
Quarters at Aucvre, in the same place where his Majesty lay last Campaign, when
our Forces encampt on the same Ground.

10th. His Majesty continued his March from Bois Seigneur Isaac to Limbeck near
Hall, his Majesty having his Quarters in a Chatteau belonging to the Prince of
Steinhuise.

12th. His Majesty took a Review of the whole Army, and the Foot were short of
their Complement, the Horse and Dragoons made it up by the extraordinary good
Condition his Majesty found them in. In the Evening the Elector of Bavaria
returned from Brussels to the Army, and informs his Majesty that the Marshall
de Boufflers has sent the Captain of his Guards from Maestricht to acquaint
him, That the King his Master is willing to restore the Garrisons of Dixmuyde
and Dynse, in order to his being set at liberty. And his Majesty has taken the
said Mareschal's word, that the said Garrisons shall be sent back, so soon as
the French King has Notice of his Arrival at Dinant. It Is said the Marshall is
made a Duke and Peer of France. We have had a great deal of Rain of late, which
in all probability will put an end to this Campain, without any further Action.

13th. His Majesty sent off the heavy Baggage to Brussels (with one of his
Majesty's Beds) and the Servants thereunto belonging, with orders to stay there
until further orders, that if the King should have occasion to return to the
Camp again, there might be a Bed and Necessaries ready. Quartermaster Verhaest
was likewise dispatched forward toward Breda, to order re-lays of Horses for
the Coaches.

14th. His Majesty left the Army at Limbeck, under the Command of the Elector
of Bavaria, etc. and went to Macklyn, where his Majesty lay that Night.

15th. His Majesty continued his Journey from Macklyn to Breda, where his
Majesty arrived that Evening, and was waited on by the Pensioners of Holland,
and several Members of the States, to take his Majesty's Directions about the
finishing and regulating some particular Affairs necessary to be done before
his Majesty's going over for England: Great rejoicing were every where as his
Majesty passed, for his safe and successful return from the Camp.

16th. His Majesty viewed the Fortifications, and gave Directions for the
facing with Brick a Half Moon, according to the rest of the Works, it being
washed partly away upon one Angle by the beating of the Water against it. After
which his Majesty was waited on and complemented by the Magistracy, for his
Majesty's Successful Campaign and safe Return to them.

17th. Early in the Morning his Majesty set out of Breda for the Grave, where
his Majesty dined, and viewed the Fortifications: Afterward went thence to
Dieren, five Leagues from Loo, where his Majesty diverted himself with Hunting
and shooting until the

20th. This Day the King hunted from Dieren, and the Stag running toward Loo,
his Majesty came there that Night, where his Majesty expected the Elector of
Brandenburg. At the same time had advice that the Marshall de Bouffters parted
from Maestricht the 18th of this Month, having first viewed the Fortifications
of that place, and was conducted to Dinant.

And that a Party from Aeth had suprized the grand Guard of the Enemy (which
still encamped at Chievre) killed several, and carried 2 Officers and 30
private Soldiers Prisoners to that Garrison.

21th. His Majesty received an Express from the Elector of Brandenburg, that
the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel was come to Cleve to confer with his Electoral
Highness about some Troops that are to be quartered about Collogne, which
retarded his Highnesses waiting on his Majesty for some days.

22th. His Majesty hunted, attended with several Persons of Quality, but did
not receive the expected Satisfaction, the Deer ran well, and the Dogs were in
extraordinary good Condition; but they being English bred, required English
management, which was wanting by reason the Sergeant was disabled by a fall
from his Horse.

23th. His Majesty went a shooting, and killed several brace of Pheasant and
Partridge, and one Hare. The Baggage left at Brussels was (according to order)
arrived at the Hague. And by the Post just come in, we are told that the
Marshall de Boufflers, at his arrival at Dinant, gave to each Officer that
conducted him a fine Sword, and to each Dragoon a Louis d'Or, expressing a
great many Complements for his noble Entertainment whilst a Prisoner. The
Marshall de Villeroy lay still in his old Camp, and the Duke of Bavaria in his.

24th. His Majesty received advice that the French King had sent orders to the
Intendants of the New Conquest to cause the Garrisons of Dixmuyde and Deynse to
be set at Liberty, in order to their return; and particularly, all those who
had taken Service under him, were to be discharged likewise, and Convoys
appointed to see them delivered at the Frontiers of the Spanish Netherlands.
Great Preparations are made for a Public Rejoicing all Holland over, so the
taking of Namur.

25th. News came from England with Letters from Ireland, giving an Account that
the Parliament of that Kingdom went on with great cheerfulness and dispatch,
and had unanimously voted the Supply for his Majesty, and made great progress
therein: That the Packet Boat is not yet heard of with the English Mails of the
30th of August, and the 6th Instant.

26th. The King hunted with great Satisfaction, killing a Brace of Deer; and
the same Day had an Account that the Elector of Bavaria marched with the Army
from Limbeck to Lennick St. Quintin, where his Highness encampt the 22th; and
that the Marshall de Villeroy marched from the Plain of Cambron near Aeth to
Lewze, having sent off Detachments to cover the Country of Luxemburg, their
Lines and Dunkirk; and that the Parties sent out from Aeth had, since the
French encampt at Cambron, taken 700 of their Horses, and diverse Prisoners.

27th. The Prince of Nassau, Governor and Stadtholder of Frizeland, came to
wait on his Majesty with two Foreign Ministers, viz. that of Zell and
Lunenburg.

28th. This Day arrived here the Prince of Anhalt Dessau to wait on his
Majesty, which being the Day appointed by the States for a General
Thanksgiving, it was observed here, a Sermon being preached here on this
Occasion (by one of the King's Chaplains) by his Majesty's Command; and instead
of Fire works and Humiliations, we drank the King's Health in a Glass of good
Wine. Great Rejoycings and Fireworks ran universally through the Province.

29th. Was, a general Hunting day, and his Majesty extremely well pleased with
the Sport: In the Evening Prince Vaudemont arrived from Brussels, and Mr.
Smetteau the Minister of Brandenburg from the Hague, to meet the Elector, who
was hourly expected at Loo, where is a great Court at present to attend his
Majesty.

30th. His Majesty had Letters from the Elector of Bavaria that he was still
encampt at Quintins Linnick, and did not think it convenient to remove from
thence as yet; that to preserve the Tents from Mildew he had caused the Foot to
make Huts, and had Contoned the Horse and Dragoons in the adjacent Villages.

October the 1st. Letters from Newport in Flanders bring the following Account,
That the two Mails abovementioned from England, were put on Board a hired
Sloop at Harwich for that purpose, the Master and Boy being English, and 6
Frenchmen the rest of the Crew, they were met Half-Seas over, and taken by a
French Privateer without any Resistance; nor had the Master the Honesty to
heave the Mails overboard, but suffered them to be taken likewise and carried
to Dunkirk.

3d. Mr. Abel the famous Musician (or Singing-Master) who went to France with
the late King James, and there remained until some Months ago, that want of
Bread, of Business I mean, sent him to the Courts of some of the German
Princes, particularly that of Berlin, where his Voice and good Management
procured him the Elector of Brandenburg's Picture set in Gold with Diamonds, is
this day come to this Place, and by the Earl of Essex and Mr. Blaithwait
introduced to kiss the King's Hand, and designs for England again.

4th and 5th. The King sent Orders for re-lays of Coach-horses, and the Wagons
for transporting the Equipage from Loo to the Hague: the same day had the ill
News from Hungary of the Turks taking Lippa and Titull, putting the Garrison of
the former to the Sword, except the Commandant and three others; afterward
burnt and destroyed both those places; the Elector of Saxony being advanced
within three days march of Lippa, to engage the Enemy to a Battle if possible.

6th. Most of the King's Domestics were sent toward the Hague; and his
Majesty received Advice of the Arrival of the late Garrisons of Dixmuyde and
Deynse at Ghent, the Governors of each place being at their Arrival there made
Prisoners, and are to be tried by a Court Martial. Mr. Smetteau the Brandenburg
Minister and Plenipotentiary, went hence this morning to make provision for
Lodging the Elector at his House.

7th. Early in the Morning his Majesty left Loo, and in the Evening arrived at
the Hague with the Prince of Vaudemont; the Elector of Brandenburg, by reason
of bad ways, could not reach Loo whilst his Majesty was there, is coming to
this place, and expected in two days. His Majesty was received with all
Demonstrations of Joy for his safe Return, and great Preparations were made by
the Burghers upon this Occasion, but his Majesty thought sit to decline the
Ceremony.

8th. His Majesty was Complimented by the States General, Council of State,
etc. and by all the Foreign Ministers, Nobility and Gentry, making the
greatest Court that has been seen at the Hague since the War.

9th. Orders were given for all things to be in a readiness to embark upon the
first fair Wind, the Convoy being arrived in the Goree under the Command of Sir
Clousley Shovel.

10th. His Electoral Highness of Brandenburg arrived at the Hague this Evening,
and was conducted to Prince Maurice's House, that of his Highness's Envoy being
too little to entertain his Train. His Majesty immediately after his Arrival
waited on his Highness, and were together above an hour. Afterward all the
People of Quality, the Pensioner, etc. from the States General, and Mr. Abell
our English Singing-Master amongst the rest, diverted his Highness with some
new Music, composed on the taking Namur.

11th. The Elector Dined with his Majesty and Persons of the first Rank. The
same day came the ill News of the Defeat of 8000 Imperialists by 40000 of the
Turks near Lug^, on the Borders of Transylvania, after a whole days Defense,
with the greatest Courage and Bravery possible; that General Veterani was
mortally wounded, and taken Prisoner with diverse Officers, and that General
Truchses had retreated by the favor of the Night to Caransebes, having lost
about 2000 men, and that 10000 of the Enemy were killed in this Action; the
Elector of Saxony being advanced within 3 days march of the Enemy.

12th. His Majecty and Elector of Brandenburg were splendedly Entertained by my
Lord Villiers, Plenipotentiary and Ambassador from his Britanick Majesty to
the States General: And his Majesty designed to embark for England, but the
Wind shifting Westerly, Orders were repeated for a general readiness when the
Wind should present.

13th. My Lord Portland gave a Noble Entertainment to his Majesty, his
Electoral Highness, etc. and afterward went abroad together to Surfleet, a
little mile from the Hague.

14th. His Majesty had an Account that the French Fleet, which had been fitted
out with so much diligence at Toulon, were ordered to be disarmed, except six,
who were ordered to take in 3 months Provisions, and to Convoy some Merchant
Ships from France to the Levant; the Galleys to be disarmed likewise, and sent
back to Marseilles; and that the Enemy, upon the Marquis de Castanago's
reinforcement, were demolishing Palamos in Catalonia, in order to retreat from
that place, before the Spaniards could get up with their Forces, who now were
Superior to those of the Enemy; and that Admiral Russel was sailed toward the
Streights with the Fleet under his Command.

15th. Prince Vaudemont entertained his Majesty and the Elector of Brandenburg:
The same Evening arrived the Duke of Holstein Ploen from Flanders, to acquaint
his Majesty with the disposition of the Troops in those parts, to prevent the
Enemy from making any Incursion in the Frost, and that Villeroy had detached
through the Lines, a Body of men toward Furnes with Pioneers, as if they had a
design upon Newport; but that place being well provided, its supposed they only
intend to make some addition to their Lines about Ipres.

16th. His Majesty was at the French Church, and afterward with the Elector,
made several Tours in the Forehoat, according to his usual custom in his Coach*
after the manner of that called the Ring in Hide-Park. Aft^^wards had Advice of
the Enemies Motion about Dinant, upon which his Majesty ordered all the
Officers to return to their respective Posts from the Hague.

17th. His Majesty with the Elector of Brandenburg, etc. hunted a Hare, and in
the Evening supped together, was afterward a considerable time in private with
his Highness, and it is said that Prince is to send 20000 men next Campaign to
join the Allies in Flanders.

18th. The Wind came about to the Eastward, and a good Gale, but his Majesty's
going on Board was retarded until Provisions could be sent to the Yachts. His
Majesty took leave of (...) Highness and the States, etc. and ordered all his
(...) and Baggage on Board.

19th. At 8 in the morning his Majesty left the Hague and went to Oranju
Polder, where his Majesty went on ^^^rd his Yacht, and about Noon sailed with a
fair Wind and a fresh Gale, being attended by Sir Clousley Shovel with a
Squadron of English and Dutch Men of War.

20th or 10th old Style, with Daylight made the Fo^^la^d, and about 10 in the
Forenoon his Majesty landed at M^rg^t, after an extraordinary Passage, and took
Coach for Cant^^^^^y, where his Majesty lay that Night at the Deanery, (...)ed
every where with multitudes of his good Subjects, and received with all
possible Demonstrations of Joy for his Majesty's safe Return, after so much
danger in Exposing his Royal Person on all Occasions during the Siege of Namur,
etc.

FINIS.

