AN EPISTLE To the several Congregations of the NON-CONFORMISTS.

By Cap. ROBERT EVERARD.

Now by Gods Grace a Member of the Holy Catholic Church of CHRIST. Showing the
Reasons of his Conversion and Submission to the said CATHOLIC CHURCH.

PARIS Printed 1664.

If there be any who has any Value for the Authority of the great St. Austin,
I shall beseech them to read this following Text of that Saint, and to consider
whether I have not in my proceedings observed his Rule and Method. And let them
but change the Word Manichaeus into John Calvin, and observe how nearly it will
concern them.
St. Aug. against the Epist. of Manichaeus which they call Fundamental c. 5.
Edit. Paris Tom. 6. 1. 46. IF thou shall find any one who does not as yet
believe the Gospel, what will thou do when he shall say unto thee I do not
believe? But neither had I believed the Gospel unless I had been thereunto
moved by the Authority of the Catholic Church: Those therefore to whom I
submitted, when they required me to believe the Gospel, why should I not also
yield Obedience unto them when they direct me not to believe Manichaeus? Take
your choice; If you tell me I must believe the Catholics, they give me Advice
not to give Credit to you, and therefore if I believe them I cannot but refuse
to believe you. If you tell me I must not believe the Catholics; you proceed
ill, when you go about by the Gospel to persuade me to believe Manichaeus,
because it was from the Preachings of the Catholics that I believed the Gospel
it self. If you tell me I did well when I believed the Catholics praising the
Gospel, but I do ill when I believe the same persons decrying Manichaeus, do
you take me to be so stupid as without any Reason given unto me I should
believe or disbeleive what you please? etc. But if you have any Reason to offer
unto me, lay aside the Gospel; if you hold your self to the Gospel I shall
adhere to those upon whose commands I believed the Gospel, and so long as I
Obey them I shall not believe you. But if by Accident you should find any thing
in the Gospel most evidently touching the Apostleship of Manichaeus, you will
weaken the Authority of the Catholics in my esteem who require me not to
believe you, but that being weakened I shall not believe the Gospel, because I
believe that by them; so that whatsoever you bring from the Gospel will be of
no force with me. Wherefore if nothing be found in the Gospel for the
manifestation of Manichaeus his Apostleship, I shall rather give credit to the
Catholics then you. But if any thing shall be there found manifest on the
behalf of Manichaeus, I shall neither believe them nor you: Not them, because
they told me a Lie of you; nor shall I believe you, because you urge that
Scripture to me which I believed upon their Authority who told me a Lie in
relation to you.

I cannot doubt but the Reports, which have lately spread concerning me, and of
my change and Alteration in the great Affair of Religion, put you upon an
Expectation to hear something from me; and that in Print too: It having been my
constant former Method to give an account of my self to the World that way. And
although I might very well excuse my self from the same thing now, that
scribbling humor being only in the days of my Ignorance; when God Almighty
pleased to permit a Veil to hang between my eyes and his most glorious Truth,
Namely the veil of my Pride, and Folly: Yet least from a total silence, the
world which in its own Nature is censorious enough, should apprehend, that I
either wanted Charity to my late dear Breathren, or Courage to own the Truth,
or that I thought the way unjustifiable, wherein I now Worship and Adore the
God of my Fathers, these good and Pious men, who until the pretended
Reformation of Luther and his Followers, knew no other way of Worship or
Religion, then this, by which Millions of them were sent into the Bosom of
Christ. I have at last resolved to give you a short account of my self, and
what has befallen me since the Happy Restoration of our most Gracious
Sovereign to his Crown and Dignities.

And indeed when I consider the Love which I have ever had for you, and the
returns of Affection, which I have received from many, and most of you; I think
my self more then ordinarily Engaged, to be free with you in these things, as
hoping, and in Charity believing, that if I can Convince you of the
reasonableness of my Proceedings, you will approve of what I have done; And on
the other side, if any of you can make it appear, wherein I have done amiss,
you will be so just (and this Justice I here challenge from you) as to show me
my Errors.

My carriage whilst I was in Communion with you, was (I hope) always such, as
to give you a sufficient reason to believe that I neither was, nor am byassable
by Worldly Interests, and selfish Considerations? When I professed my self
against Infant Baptism, I had run through almost (if not altogether) all the
several Professions of Ch^istianity then appearing in this Kingdom, the
Catholic only excepted, which as I never had any oppertunity to examine, as
not meeting with any of that party who were willing to publish themselves to me
for such, so neither did I think them, or their Principles worthy my
Consideration, having from the joint and unanimous consent of all our Pulpits,
believed those of that party to be so grossly ignorant, that to discourse with
them in relation to Religion, were but to cast away time and labor.

Being thus prejudiced against the Catholic party, it pleased Almighty God to
bring me into the company of a Lay Gentleman of that persuasion, and to give me
occasion to spend some considerable time with him: I no sooner understood his
Profession as to Religion, but I began to attempt him, in that wherein I
thought (as conscious of the weakness of his cause) he would never have
engaged; but I soon found my mistake by his readiness to embrace discourses of
that nature. And I found also, that we had all embraced a most notorious Error,
while we suffered our selves to be persuaded, that the Catholics were an
Ignorant Generation.

The Gentleman seemed desirous to examine every thing from the bottom, and to
lay the Ax to the Root, and truly I thought that very reasonable, as conceiving
that where the foundation was unsound, the superstructures were not to be
relied on: He enquired of me therefore in the first place, whether I was sure
and certain that the Christian Religion in general was more true, then the
Religions of the Turks, Jews, or any other, which was opposite thereunto? and
whether I was so certainly, and infallibly assured of this; that it was not
possible for me, or for those who taught me Christianity, to be mistaken in
this? And he gave me this Reason for his Question, namely, that if neither I my
self, nor those who taught me that Christianity was the only safe way to
Salvation, and the only way in which Heaven was to be attained, was infallibly
certain, or were capable of any mistake, or might in any possibility commit an
error in this thing; then as to me, Christianity could be no more, then
probably true; and we could with no color of Reason, condemn the Jew, Turk, or
Pagan, since they were as well persuaded of their several ways, as we could be
of ours, upon a fallible certainty; and for ought we knew (not having any
infallible certainty for our Christianity) some of them might be in the Right,
and we in the wrong way. And how could you say to a Jew, you must become a
Christian, if you expect to be saved, when as if he Examine you strictly and
closely in relation to what certaitny you have of the truth of Christianity,
your Answer will amount to no more then this, You conceive you are in the
Right, and you hope and believe you are not mistaken: But it is possible you
may be mistaken in this; for every man is a Liar, every man and all men, and
every Church is fallible, and subject to Error, and to be mistaken. Can such
Arguments as these invite a Jew or Turk to become a Christian?

I confess I was extremely troubled with this first difficulty, and knew not
how to answer it plainly, and without apparent shuffling, and declining the
question, which I plainly did, by urging, that if he intended to call the
Religion which Christ Established in the world into question, and to make a
doubt of the mayn and Grand Principle of Christianity, which we both of us
agreed to be true, I should treat no farther; and that if himself doubted of
the Truth of Christ's Religion, I was not prepared to Dispute the point.

This Answer seemed very strange even to my self, but it seemed more strange to
me, that I should find my self Gravelled in such a question as was fit for
every one to answer. However my Opponent used me Gently and Sweetly, and
without the least show of insulting over my weakness, he told me that in reason
I ought to answer this difficulty; for (replied he) though it may be true, and
is most certainly true, that the Christian Religion, upon the true Grounds upon
which it is founded, is infallibly certain and Divine; yet upon the Grounds
upon which you may found your belief thereof, it may possibly not be true or
certain as to you: for example, suppose you are told a thing by a known or
common perjured person, and upon his word you believe it, you cannot be
certainly assured that the thing is true, because such an Infamous, common
notorious Liar tells you so, but the thing is really to you doubtful, nay more
probably false then true, and yet the thing in it self is true: so if in the
Apostles times one had believed Christianity to be true, not because the
Apostles taught him so, but because Simon Magus affirmed it to him, in this
case who sees not that such a man's faith had not been true but that the whole
thing to him had been uncertain, the belief of it being grounded upon a wrong
Foundation, which was no ways certain? From all which it is evident that no
Heretic can have true Faith, this I shall farther prove, in regard the
contrary is an error broached publicly by Mr. Baxter in his Treatise against
Mr. William Johnson, This is taken out of Mr. Johnsons reply to Mr. Baxter,
called Novelty Repressed, Fo. 142. 143 etc.
who has fully silenced Mr. Baxter beyond all possibility of replying with
reason in relation to this particular, the proof which I give is in this
Argument. Whosoever has true Faith, beleiveth the thing believed, or the
material object of Faith for the Divine Authority of God revealing it. But no
Heretic beleiveth so. Therefore no Heretic has true Faith. The Major is
granted by all, because Christian Faith must rest upon Gods Revelation, as its
formal object. The Minor is proved thus, whosoever beleives the material object
of Faith, or the thing believed, for the Divine Authority of God revealing it,
must believe all things which are as sufficiently propounded to him, to be
revealed by God, as are those Articles, which he does believe. And must believe
nothing as a Revelation of God, which is as sufficiently declared to him to be
erroneous, or not a Revelation, as the Articles of Faith are to be revealed.
But every Heretic either refuses to believe something, which is so
sufficiently propounded to him to be revealed from God, or beleives something,
as a Revelation, which is so sufficiently declared to him to be erroneous, or
not revealed from God; Therefore no Heretic has true Faith. The first part of
this Major is proved thus: Whosoever refuses to believe, what is so
sufficiently propounded to be revealed by God, either refuses all, that is so
propounded, or beleives some things, and refuses to believe others as
sufficiently propounded, as those which he beleives: If he refuses all, he can
have no true Faith, for he belives nothing, and is therefore no Christian: If
he beleives some, and refuses others equally propounded, then he beleives not
those things, which he does believe for the Divine Authority revealing, (for
when two things are equally propounded to the understanding, they ought to
work equally upon it) but upon his own wilful choice or private judgment
refuses some, and ascents to others. As to the second part of the aforesaid
Major, viz. That no man can have true Christian Faith, who beleives any thing
as a Revelation, which is as sufficiently propounded to him to be Erroneous, as
the Articles by him believed, are propounded to be Revelations; the very same
Authority which affirms the one, denying the other: Suppose the same Authority
acknowledged does sufficiently propound to a Calvenist the Articles of Faith,
as revealed from God, and at the same time assures him, that his conceit of the
Popes being the great Antichrist was never revealed from God, but is a manifest
error in Faith: In this case our Calvenist must disbeleive that propounding
Authority, and thereby lose his Faith in the former Articles by him believed,
and have no true faith in the first; or he must believe the same Authority in
the second because it is the same Authority in both* For that very Authority
which propounds the Articles of Faith, as revealed of God, propounds the other
as not revealed, and as contrary to Gods Revelation. By all which it is most
evident, that if your Faith be built upon a wrong Foundation, it is of no
value, nor does it give you any certainty, nor is it indeed Faith, but Humor
and Opinion.

This Discourse seemed to me so convincing; that I could not but agree unto it;
and therefore I told him as a full answer to his first question, that I embraced
Christianity, and that sort of Christianity to which I adheared in opposition
to all others, because the Scriptures which are Gods Word, taught me so to do,
and that I believed the Scriptures to be Gods word from the infallible
testimony of Gods spirit, bearing witness with my spirit, that they were Gods
Words; and that I was fully convinced, that this proceeded from the infallible
testimony of Gods spirit, from a certain knowledge and feeling which I had of
the same within my self, and in my own Conscience.

To all which it was mildly replied, that upon the Grounds which I had laid,
and whereon I founded my self, it was impossible for me, to be infallibly
assured, that this testimony which I mentioned was infallibly the testimony of
the spirit of God: For having granted the Protestant Principle, that I was not
infallible, that no man or number of men was or were infallible; this spirit
which I talked of, might (for ought I knew) be the spirit of error. And for
farther evincing thereof, I was desired to reflect on these Scriptures, Jer.
17. 9. The heart of Man is deceitful above all things, who can know it? Eccles.
9. 1. No man knows Love or Hatred by all that is before them. And to consider
the strange delusion, which bewitched the Angel, or Bishop of Laodicea, Revel.
3. 17. Because thou say I am Rich and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked. How much was he deceived in his own jupgement of his own
Estate! In fine what would you (said he) answer to an Arrian, or Jew, or Turk,
should they urge the like knowledge, and feeling, with the like confidence, to
prove they were in the truth, and Christianity a delusion? What you would reply
to them, suppose as said unto your self, and see if it will not satisfy.

In the mean time (said he) you seem to imply and so to grant that we ought to
have an infallible certainty of what we believe with Divine Faith; this the
Apostles had in the time of our blessed Saviors conversing with them upon
earth, they had sufficient to prevail with their wills, to command their
understandings into the belief of his being God consequently infallible, and
consequently that whatsoever he taught was to be assented unto as infallibly
true, without being questioned by our little feeble limited Reasons. And this
was necessary for the Church then, otherwise they could not have been
sufficiently assured that what Christ taught them was true, consequently it
would not have been a sin in them to have doubted. This infallible assurance
also the Christians who lived in the Apostles times, and after the Ascension of
our Lord, enjoyed; they had sufficient to enduce them to a belief, that the
Holy Apostles were infallible guides and reachers; and that whatsoever they
taught and commanded them, was as infallible true, as if God had immediately
spoken to them the same things, and no more to be doubted, contradicted, or
disputed against by their reasons (which doubtless were as good and strong as
ours) then the immediate words, commands, or dictates of Almighty God;
otherwise those who refused to hear and obey them had been in no fault, and it
would have been an unsufferable Pride and presumption in St. Paul to have
required such an absolute submission to what he taught, as to oblige the
Christians of his time not to have believed an Angel from Heaven teaching
contrary to what he taught them. Hence it is, that the remaining writings (for
so much as we have of them) of the Blessed Apostles, are by all Christians
esteemed, as the Words of God. And this was necessary in the Age after Christ
for the Church of God, namely in the Apostles times, to have a living
infallible way of direction, in so much as had we then lived, and had
encountered with any doubts or difficulties relating to Religion, and to the
true meaning of what was either spoken or written by any Apostle, or by all the
Apostles, we should without all doubt have made our immediate recourse to them,
some or one of them, for the solving of such doubts, and the explayning of such
difficulties; and should have received and submitted unto such solutions as
made by God himself, without ever interposing our own reasons or senses in
opposition. This we see was the course taken in the fifteenth of the Acts* when
certain doubts were arisen amongst Christians, the Apostles met in a Council
they considered the things, they determined with an It seems good unto the
Holy Ghost and to us. Their Decrees and Canons were obeyed, and submitted unto
by the whole, and the Disputes were at an end. But suppose some dispute had
arisen touching the sense and meaning even of some of those Decrees, must not
it have been interprited by some judicial Authority? Doubtless yes. And
questionless the then Christians would have appealed or applied to the same
Authority that made those Canons and Decrees, for the interpretation of them,
and would have submitted to such interpretations; otherwise it would have been
with the Primative Christians then, as it is with you now, every one would have
framed his own interpretation, those who had been Masters of the greatest Wit,
power, or interest, would have framed Parties or Churches to themselves; and in
fine the Sword of the Flesh and not the Spirit of God must have given the Rule
and Law to Christianity, they would have been so far from any possibility of
maintaining The Unity of the spirit in the bond of Peace, from being One body,
that they would have divided into as many parts (to speak without grateing) as
you now are, and have gone to Cuffs, and raised Wars for the decideing of
Controversies, as we have seen you do since you divided your selves from the
Holy Catholic Church of Christ.

It is not hard for you to imagine into what confusion these Discourses put my
poor soul, to hear such things, so great evidences of Reason produced by a
private Gentleman of that party, whom I had believed so ignorant. I had
oftentimes in Disputations, both publicly and privately encountered, and (I
thought) worsted several of the English Clergy in those points wherein I
differed from them. But I found nothing now to say against these Principles,
which I had yet hitherto supposed the most ridiculous, that any people could
imagine to set up. The Books which I here intend are. The Question of
Questions, the before mentioned Novelty repressed with Fiat Lux, and that
Elaborate Treatise called Infidelity Unmasked or a Confutation of a Book
Published by Mr. Will. Chil. Fagworth.
Well I could no longer contest, but resolved to have recourse unto Almighty
God by Prayer for his Divine Assistance, and to make it my business according
to the utmost of my poor skill and understanding, to take a full view of the
Grand Principles of the Catholic Faith, and of Christianity; and laying aside
all Prejudices, Pride, and Humor, I resolved by the assistance of God to
embrace and submit unto whatsoever I should understand to be most agreeable
with his most holy will and pleasure, without taking any regard to worldly
interest, or the censures of men, which I had reason to believe would run high
against me. And the better to enable me in this search and examination, I
borrowed from this Gentleman several books and treatises, from whence I made
several Collections, the Heads of which I recommend to your considerations,
they being such, as had (by the Gracious assistance of Almighty God) such a
prevailing power upon my understanding, as to convince me of the errors of the
way, wherein I then was, and to bring me to the Knowledge of the Divine truths
of the Catholic and Christian Faith.

I gathered from the true interpretation of that Text of Scripture, Heb. 11. 6.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God. And of that Mar. 16. 16. He that
beleiveth not, shall be damned. And of that other Ephesians. 4. 5. There is but one
Faith, and one Baptism, one Lord Jesus. That the faith which was to save me,
and by the which I was to please God, must certainly be the true Faith, which
cannot be found in contrary Opinions, it being but One* and of contraries, One
only can be true. I also collected from that Text, 2. Cor. 10. 5. Bringing into
Captivity every thought, to the Obedience of Christ, That this Faith or
beleiving was to be seated in the understanding, that the understanding was to
submit, not dispute. And that this Act To believe, was a Command or Precept of
Almighty God, who will have his Will obeyed by all his Subjects, and the not
obeying of which is punished with eternal Damnation. Lastly I found from that
Text Heb. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without
wavering, for he is faithful that has promised. That Faith, if truly Divine,
must be an infallible assent of our understanding, submitting it self
obediently to believe the Revelations of God. For otherwise Faith and
consequently all Religion, may be no more then fancy, or Opinion, and then no
ways certain, and if so, then no Obligation.

From whence I thought it did very naturally follow, first that there must be
some means appointed by God, by which we may know this one true Faith from all
false Opinions for to require us to believe upon pain of Damnation, and not to
give us any means whereby we may know what to believe, were to require us to
make Bricks without Straw. Secondly that these means must be infallible, for we
cannot be brought to an infallible ascent by fallible and uncertain means, and
God would not require us to assent to an Authority which may deceive us.
Thirdly, that the understanding must submit to these means under pain of
Damnation; for if the understanding were at liberty to submit, or not to
submit, to the means by which Faith is conveyed unto us, it would be no fault
not to believe, consequently God could not justly damn us for not beleiving.
Besides, whosoever shall refuse to be governed by their means, and that
Authority which God has appointed to govern him, is a Rebel against God.
Fourthly, that two men of two differing Faiths or beliefs cannot be saved: for
they both of them, knowing that they are bound to be guided and governed by
those means which God has appointed to convey faith unto them, and one of them
flatly refusing to submit, this person who refuses, must be guilty of
disobedience to Gods command, and consequently cannot be saved. Fifthly, that
ignorant people by such reasonable diligence, as is very tolerable to humane
frailty, and very possible for them may come to the knowledge of these means.
For otherwise God would have appointed means which would be unprofitable to the
end, and the far greater number of Souls for whom Christ dyed, would not be
sufficiently provided for; by the sweet Providence of God. By which that
Prophesy would be ineffectual, Esaias. 35. Say to them that are of a fearful
heart, be strong, fear not, behold your God will come and save you, then the
eyes of the blind shall be opened and the Ears of the deaf unstopped, etc. And
one high way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the Holy way,
the way faring men, though Fools shall not err therein.

And thus far I met with nothing but what I esteemed very agreeable with all
sorts of people, professing themselves Christians. All that I ever met with
seemed to grant that there must be a way, and a Rule; there must be means
appointed, there must be a governing power to judge and decide all doubts, and
teach us the true way to Heaven with certainty. But who this Rule or Judge is,
that is the difficulty, for when once we have found it, I think all persons
will agree that they are obliged to submit unto it, as to the Apostles if they
were actually living, or to Christ himself: This therefore I thought to be the
only question that I was to gain satisfaction unto: I therefore ceased to
enquire after this doctrine, or the other Article, as beleiving, that if I
could once find out this Rule, this Judge which God had appointed as the means
to direct me, and to which I was to submit, as to that Authority which God had
appointed to Rule and Govern me, to teach me what I was, and what I was not to
believe; I should no more scruple to believe what that Authority should teach
me to be revealed by God, then if I heard God himself speaking: And I was no
way discouraged in my resolution to search, when I considered, that as God
spoke in Ancient times by the mouths of his Prophets, before and after the
Scriptures were written; and by the mouths of his Apostles before, and after
the New Testament was written; and that the writing of what God directed to be
written, did not lessen the power of God, but that he might still direct by*
the mouths of his Prophets, and Apostles, so possibly I might find God still
speaking by an Authority, which hitherto I had not been acquainted with.

I found all the Rules and means proposed by every party to amount to four in
the whole. One party would set up a claim to the Spirit directing them, and
speaking to their spirits. Another will have Reason to be this Rule and Judge.
A third will set up sole Scripture. And the fourth assigns the Holy Catholic
Church of Christ Visible here on Earth, to be that Judge and Director. And
finally that medium appointed by God himself for the ends before mentioned, and
to which all Christians were to submit. Other then these I never heard of any,
for I always esteemed the Quakers Light to be either the Spirit or natural
Reason, and I resolved to rank it under one of those considerations by a name
more known to the world, then that which they have given it. And therefore
these I resolved most carefully to examine.

As to the first touching the Spirit, bearing witness in secret with our
spirits, or in plainer terms the Private Spirit, I considered that there is no
man in the world Jew or Turk, Pagan or Christian, but may (if he will put on
confidence enough) affirm that he is taught inwardly by God; many of all sorts
do this and yet teach contradictions, some therefore must be deceived, therefore
this not the Rule. Nor has this any effect amongst those who pretend it, for
by this none of them ever as yet reconciled any differences, but each pretender
grows perverse and obstinate, and seperates from all who pretend to have the
spirit as well as himself, and so endless Heresies* and Schisms arise without
any possibility to allay them, or for either the Learned, or the Ignorant to
judge which of these bold pretenders has a true spirit: In the mean time it
will not (possibly) be hard for a sober man to find that they are all of them
governed by the Spirit of Error, who pretend thus audaciously, if he considers
well the Rule which St. John gives for discerning the spirit of truth from the
spirit of error. 1 Ioh. 4. 6. v. We are of God, he that knows God hears us,
he that is not of God hears not us: Hereby know we the Spirit of Truth from
the Spirit of Error. As if he should have said, Christ has placed Apostles,
and Teachers, and Doctors, to govern and teach his Church, we are those, and
therefore of God; therefore whoever pretends to know the Will of God, must hear
and obey and submit unto us, or it is evident what he says, is but a pretense,
and he does not indeed know God, nor is he of God; for if he did know God, or
were of God, he would certainly hear us. Here therefore is your Rule to know
true from false spirits: The spirit of truth is always remaining with that
Authority which God has placed in the World, to teach truth to the world, and
bring them to the Faith; and all that are actuated and lead by this spirit, are
taught by it to submit to this Authority, and to hear those whom God has sent
and does send by this Authority, since Faith only comes by hearing those who
are truly sent; but the spirit of error is a spirit of Pride, which refuses to
submit to that Authority which God has set up, and heaping to themselves
Teachers, having itching ears, turn away their ears from the Truth, 1 Timothy 4.
v. 3. 4. By this I saw, that although the Rule and the Judge, which I looked
for, must have the assistance and influence of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of
Truth, yet it could not be every private man or woman who laid claim to such
influences, and who could no more satisfy another that they are guided by the
Spirit of Truth, then many who are cast into Bedlam for affirming themselves to
be God, can evince themselves to be so, and whose affirmations (for ought I
know) are as concluding as the other. In this therefore I was satisfied.

The next thing which I considered was Reason, which I found could not possibly
be this Rule and Judge that I sought for, because first, it was to submit as a
Subject and Vassal to that Rule and Judge, therefore it could not be it.
Secondly, it was fallible, and strangely apt to mistake, which is against the
Nature of this Rule and Judge to be; For if God should obliege us upon pain of
damnation to submit unto, and to be governed and ruled by an Authority that
might deceive us, and might teach us that for a truth which is not, we should
be bound to believe that for true which is not so, and yet be damned for not
beleiving the truth.

Thirdly if Reason were to be this Rule and Judge, then it would follow
contrary to the Scripture, that it is not impossible to please God without
Faith, for Reason would teach us sufficiently how to please God, yea it would
be a breach of this rule to believe what we do not understand, and then every
Religion would be the truth, consequently contradictions would be true,
consequently there would be many Religions, and not only not one faith but no
faith at all; for there is scarce a man living but his reason differs from
another, understandings and judgments differing as much as Faces, and Reason
excludes faith: Therefore no one that follows his own Reason could in justice
be condemned by God, consequently all men would be saved, unless peradventure
you will say, that in a business of such consequence, as the salvation of our
souls, our private Reason persuades us to prefer the Authority of such as are
wiser then our selves before our own judgments, which is most true; But then I
infer that Roman Catholics are the most rational people in the world, and
consequently have the best Religion as acting most conformably to Reason; for
they rely upon the Authority of General Councels, consisting of the ablest and
most Learned men of all Nations, which is the greatest Authority to be found on
earth, especially if they have the assistance of the Holy Ghost, as it appears
they have both by the testimony of Scripture, and the constant tradition of all
Ages. Lastly, that would probably be the truth, and the true faith to one man
this year, which seven years hence would be an error, and a false faith, to the
same person; for in such a compass of time a man's reason has such an
alteration. Upon these grounds I concluded, that certainly God in his good
Providence, had appointed a more sure Guide, Rule and Judge to bring me to the
infallible faith of Christianity, then my own Reason.

The next thing in order to be considered, was the Scriptures, whether these
were solely sufficient to teach us the true Faith, and from time to time to
direct Rule and Govern us, and to be this Rule and Jude, to whose sentence and
determination, to whose directions and Authority all were to submit, and which
was to supply unto us the place of Christ and the Apostles. And indeed I found
this highly contended for, and several Reasons urged for it.

First the words of our Savior, Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them
ye think ye have Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me. But to
this I found several answers given, which to me were a satisfaction. For first,
it does not appear whether this in the Original be the Imparative or Indicative
Mood. St. Ciril with whom Beza agrees, takes it in the Indicative Mood, and
then the sense runs thus; You do search the Scriptures, because in them you
have an Opinion that you have Eternal Life, and yet even those Scriptures are
so far from being against me, that they testify of me; so that I shall be no
ways prejudiced if I should join issue with you, and try my cause by your own
Rule. And in this sense they are so far from proving what they are produced
for, that they prove directly the contrary; they are so far from being a
command to all to read, or search, or make Scripture the sole Rule and Judge,
that they rather seem a reprehension to all who shall frame that conceit of the
Scriptures. Secondly these words cannot extend to prove this conclusion, if
they were in the Imparative Mood (which can never be proved infallibly) because
they cannot be profitable to work Faith in those who cannot read, who are the
far greater part of mankind. Thirdly, this cannot be the sense of these words,
because they would then have excluded Christ Jesus himself, and after him his
Apostles, from being the Infallible means by which true faith was to be taught
to the world, and who were doubtless in their time the infallible Judges for
the deciding of all Controversies, and the determining true Faith, from false
Opinions, and to whose judgments all upon pain of Damnation were to submit.

The second Reason urged for sole Scripture was, 2 Timothy 3. v. 15. 16. From a
child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise
unto salvation through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given
by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works. But I found that neither would
this Text (so much and indeed so totally relied upon) serve as a proof for what
it was pretended, namely to prove that the Scripture alone was the way, the
Rule, the Means, the governing power appointed by God to judge, and to decide
all doubts, and to teach us the true Faith, and the true way to Heaven with
certainty. The Reasons why this Text would not prove this were these. First,
that which is spoken there of Scriptures is, that they were able through or by
faith in Christ Jesus to make wise, and that they are profitable to the ends
there mentioned: But this Profitable is not sole sufficient, and this Able
through or by Faith is not solely able, but supposes Faith already, and
therefore pretends not that they are the means preceding faith to beget faith.
It was agreed by all* that the Scriptures to one that had faith already, and to
the Man of God, who would submit to such Interpretations of Scriptures as God
should teach him, and hold forth unto him by that Authority which God had
appointed to Guide, Rule, Teach and Govern him, and to whom God had appointed
him to submit, were extremely profitable and able to make him wise unto
salvation. But to one who had not the faith, and who did not already believe
them to be the word of God, they were no way useful or profitable, for faith
comes by hearing, not by reading. Secondly, those Scriptures here meant, were
those which St. Timothy had known from his youth, which were the Old Testament
only; consequently by this Rule they are solely sufficient, consequently the
New Testament at the best not necessary, nor the Preaching of Christ, or the
Apostles, nor the Sacraments of the New Testament, so that this Scripture
either proves too much, if admitted in the sense for which it is produced, or
it proves nothing to this purpose. Thirdly, the word All Scripture must
signify either every Scripture as the Original word (...) ought to be rendered;
or All the Scriptures that ever were, or All the Scriptures that were when this
Text was written, or All the Scriptures that we now have. If it be every
Scripture, then it proves too much, and consequently nothing to the present
intent, for then all the Scriptures save only one book are useless. If it be
All that ever were, we have them not, as I shall show hereafter, consequently
our rule is maimed, and God has not given us sufficient means for the ends
proposed. If All the Scriptures that were when this Text was written, then at
least all that have been written since were superfluous, at least not
necessary. If All that we now only have, and that the Apostle foresaw what
would come to our hands in England, I would gladly have some assurance why the
Text must be thus understood and no otherwise?

In fine if from those words of our dearest Lord* These things I say that ye
might be saved, Joh. 5. 34. We are not to conclude that those very words or
things then spoke, were sole sufficient for Salvation, but only that they were
conducing to our salvation; so from neither of the Texts before urged, or any
other that can be urged, can we conclude, that the Scriptures are solely
sufficient, but only that they are conducing to our salvation, and that the
directions therein included if followed truly, and according to the intent of
the Holy Ghost, are able to make him who is already a good Christian, wise unto
salvation.

And now that I clearly found that no Arguments which were urged for the sole
sufficiency of Scripture, and to prove that the Scripture alone is this
infallible judge, or rule or means, appointed by God as aforesaid, did prove
the Scriptures to be so, or satisfy the point for which they were produced. I
resolved to see what could be said against this common general Opinion of all
who oppose the Church of Rome, why the Scriptures could not be this Rule and
Judge.

The first reason that I found was, that it did never yet appear to answer this
end; for those who pretend the most to consult the Scriptures, do most of all
men disagree in matters of faith, and in interpreting these Scriptures. Luther
the first beginner of Protestants, gathered a Flock of followers, which divided
into several other sub-divisions, contradicting each other. So John Calvin
raised a party in Geneva of whom Luther says expressly, Tom. 7. Fo. 380. I
scarce ever read of a more deformed Heresy, which presently in the beginning,
was divided into so many heads, such a number of Sects, not one like another,
and such variety and disagreeing of Opinions. And have we not divisions enough
in this poor Kingdom, and amongst those who call themselves Protestants? Are
there not (besides the Church of England which I pretend not to treat of
because established) Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy
men, Quakers, etc. Maintaining Doctrines contrary to each other? Do not all or
most of these pretend the Scriptures alone to be the Rule and Judge? and does
this Rule or Judge answer the end for which they pretend it was delivered to
the World? I remember it is excellently well inferred by the Learned Author of
the Book Entitled Fiat Lux, That it is impossible for any one of these parties
(which I must now crave leave to call Sects) with reason to censure or condemn
any of the others, although never so different from themselves even in points
by them esteemed fundamentals; since each of them have their uncontrollable
Plea for themselves, that their faith is in every respect conformable to what
they understand to be the true sense and meaning of the Scriptures, which they
all agree to be the sole and only Rule and Judge. Nay which of these Parties
can deny the others the Title of Protestant, or convince them of Heresy, since
to be a Protestant, no more is required (or if it be I would gladly know what
it is) then to admit of the Scriptures interpeted according to their best
understandings and Consciences to be the sole and only rule of Faith and judge
of controversies? is not he that professes to follow this principle, allowed
by all to be a perfect good Protestant though never so much differing in faith
from others who make the same profession? Good God? have thou told us that
Heresies must be, and yet left us without all possibility of convincing or
condemning them, or knowing who are, and who are not Heretics? But those who
pretend this Rule and Judge to be Scripture, do in truth as little intend it as
any who oppose them: for if they will please but to speak their consciences
clearly, it would soon appear that it is not the Holy Scriptures which bias
them, but their own private reasons, putting private senses and glosses upon
those Scriptures, which were easily quitted if they would once give themselves
the liberty to see how easy it is for their reason to err in divine things,
which are as far above the reach of reason as Heaven is above the Earth, as it
is for the same reason to mistake so much in humane affairs as we see it to do.

The second reason was that the Letter of Scriptures was to be construed and
applied by men, wherefore as men's Judgments and interests differ, so will
their Expositions of written words; from hence differing senses will be raised,
and from thence different faiths. For Example, If I were to dispute against an
Arrian, and to prove that God the Father, and God the Son are of the same
substance, I should urge that Text; Joh. 10. 30. I and my Father are one thing.
And by this, according to my judgment. I should think I had proved the
question. But then my Arrian comparing this with Joh: 17. 22. Where Christ
prays to his Father, that his Disciples might all be one thing, as thou
Father in me and I in thee, concludes that this One or One thing in both these
Texts are to be intended One in Affection, not in substance; for, (says he) it
can never be understood that Christ intended to pray that his Disciples might
be One in substance. If I should urge the Arrian farther, and say that the
Council of Nice gave the same interpretation which I do, to the Text which I
urge, he would answer as Protestants generally do, that he has a Worthy esteem
of Councils and Fathers, so far as they agree with Scriptures, but he does not
think them infallible, he beleives they may mistake and therefore where he
finds them disagreeing with the Word of God, he must contradict them all.

The third Reason which I thought forcible, was, that those who are thus far
from for the sole Scriptures, do not say that One or any particular number of
the Books of Scriptures, but All the works of Scripture, which were written by
Inspiration of God, do, being joined together, make up this Rule and Judge to
be a complete Rule and Judge. I concluded therefore, if any of these Books be
now lost, this Rule is not perfect; and then Man is left by God without means
to believe, consequently must be damned for that which is not his fault. Now
that many of these books are lost, I found clear from those which remain, there
is mentioned Number. 21. v. 14. The Book of the Wars of the Lord. This is lost.
It is said of Solamon. 1 Kings 4. 3. 2. That he spoke three thousand Proverbs,
and his Songs were a thousand and five. I conceive some of these upon a just
reckoning, will be observed to be wanting. We find named. 2 Chronicles. 9. 29. The
book of Nathan the Prophet, the Prophecy of Ahijah, and the Visions of Iddo.
These are lost, as also those named 1 Chro. 29. 29. The book of Samuel, the
book of Nathan, the book of God. It is clear from Mat. 27. 9. That part of
Jeremy is lost, for that Evangelist cites a Text of Jeremy not to be found in
any of Ieremies books which we have. So also are the Books of that Prophet
mentioned Matt. 2. 23. who foretold that Christ should be called a Nazarene. We
shall find by 1 Cor. 5. 9. That the Epistle which our Canon calls St. Paul's
first Epistle to the Corinthians was not truly his first to them, for there he
says, I wrote to you in an Epistle not to company with Fornicators; wherefore
if he hid the written an Epistle to them, this was not his first to them. St.
Paul wrote also an Epistle from Laodicea, which he mentions thus, Col. 4. 16.
Read the Epistle from Laodice. It seems there was something in it which was
material, yet we do not find that Epistle; the conclusion I think falls out
very naturally.

The fourth Reason was this, nothing can be a sole sufficient Rule to all, or
the only way and means to convey Divine and infallible Faith to all, or a Judge
to whose Sentence all are to submit on pain of Damnation, which cannot be
certainly and truly understood by all; But the Scriptures cannot be certainly
understood by all. Nay they are very subject to be desperately misunderstood,
if you believe the second Epistle of St. Peter, (and believe it we must for it
is Gods word) 2 Pet. 3. 16. where speaking of all St. Paul's Epistles in
general, he says, In which are some things hard to be understood, which they
that are unlearned and unstable, wrest as they do also the other Scriptures
unto their own destruction. It is in vain to say, that the Scriptures are easy
in Fundamentals, and in what concerns our salvation, for we have here a
testimony that they are hard and wrested by the unlearned and unstable to their
destruction, that is to their Damnation: Now if they were only hard in things
not appertaining to Salvation, the wresting of such things could not bring men
to Destruction. It follows that they cannot be a safe and infallible secure
Rule, nor indeed any Rule at all the ignorant, who are infinitely the greater
part of those for whom Christ dyed.

The fifth Reason is this, if the Scriptures that is the writings of the
Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles, etc. be this Rule and Judge, it can only be
meant of their true, Authentical and Original writings, not of corrupted
copies: Therefore if we have not their true Originals our Rule is imperfect;
Observe what the most learned Protest. Chamier says in this particular of
Scripture Translations, We acknowledge them to be made but by a private Spirit,
as far as every man's judgment, skilfulness in Languages, diligence and
sincerity were able to reach. Therefore there is none either in our own tongue
or in any other, unto which we think meet to subject either our selves or other
men. As for Translations the sense of Protestants is this, that all of them, of
what standing name, or credit soever they be and with what diligence, sincerity
or Learning soever they were made, are only so far certain as they agree with
the first Context, I mean as far as they express that sense which is certainly
manifest (and how shall that appear) to be the sense of the Hebrew and Greek
words (he must intend here the true Originals) but if they vary and swerve
never so little from hence (i. e. from the true Originals) that sense which
they give or express, we judge neither to be Divine nor Authentic, nor
Canonical, but merely humane, Cham. Panstr. Tom. 1. l. 1. 2. c. 2. S. 3. 5. So
then we must have the true Originals, or we have no perfect Rule of the
Scriptures, and therefore I would gladly see and speak with that man, who can
assure me infallibly, that the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures which we have, are
these Originals; Nay who will adventure to make Oath, that these which we have
do agree with the true Originals. And yet if we could be secure of this, I
doubt it will be hard to find any person who does so infallibly understand the
Originals, as to give us a true Translation, on which we may with as much
infallible assurance rely, as upon God interpreting: And yet if this cannot be
had, we must confess that we are not certain whether we have this Rule pure or
not. Sure I am the Apostles did not translate these books into English, we are
so far from having St. Matthews Original, that we know not in what Language it
was written, or whether he who translated it into Greek were an honest man or
not, we all agree that our English Translatours were fallible men, they might
be mistaken, and have mistaken in multitudes of places; themselves say they
were careful to get the best Copies of the Hebrew and Greek they could find,
but were not infallibly certain that those they had were true. Have we then in
these a sufficent certainty to venture our souls upon, supposing God to have
appointed the Scriptures as our sole Rule, Guide and Judge? I think no man who
has any modesty, or any consideration of his Souls good, will say that we
have. But sure I am, whoever shall dare to say it, will never be able to prove
it infallibly. Give me leave to Expostulate thus with you, who are for sole
Scripture. What Scriptures would ye have me to submit unto, who am a mere
English man? If you say the Originals, neither you nor I know where to find
them: If you say to such Copies as you have, I ask by what Authority do you
require this, since they are but Copies of Copies, which you cannot certainly
tell me that the are not corrupted, See Jus Divinum upon Presbytery, P. 69. 70,
since the most Learned do affirm that there are variety of these Copies, in
some of which whole Verses are omitted which are sound in others: and that
there are^ at least sixteen various Greek Copies of the New Testament. If you
tell me I must submit to your English Translations, I ask farther, to which of
them, See Answorths Advertisement to the Reader in the end of his Anotations
upon Deute. touching objections made against the Heb. Text.
for they have differences also, the 9. and 18. verses of the 7th. Chapter of
Daniel, of the Geneva Translation, are directly contrary to the same Verses in
the Translation put forth by the command of King James. Nay the Ministers of
the County of Lincoln in King James his time, in their grievances, delivered
unto his Majesty Page 11. 13. 14. do say that the English Translation of the
Bible takes away from the Text, and adds to the Text, to the changing and
obscuring the very sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost. Our late great Linguist
M. Broughton in his Advertisements of Corruptions, affirms to the then Bishops
of England, That their public Translation of Scripture into English is such,
as that it perverts the Text of the Old Testament, in 848 places, and that it
causes million of millions to reject the New Testament, and to run into
Eternal Flames. And Dr. Daniel Feately in his Treatise Entitled The Dippers
Dipped, has these words page 1. No Translation is simply Authentical, or the
undoubted word of God. In the undoubted word of God there can be no error, but
in Translations there are and may be errors. The Bible Translated therefore is
not the undoubted word of God but so far only as it agrees with the Original.
As touching the English Translations and the Hebrew and Greek Copies which are
now extant amongst us See John Goodwin his Treatise upon Divine Authority of
Scripture asserted, from Page 4. unto page 19 etc.
I pray consider how you will answer when thus pressed, and how you will be
able to satisfy me with certainty, that what you would have me rely upon and
submit unto is the undoubted word of God pure and uncorrupted. And by what Rule
shall I with certainty satisfy my self what books those are which are the Word
of God, for if that be not known, I see not but that it is as possible for me
to have other books imposed upon me, then what I have yet heard of or at least
seen, as part of this Word of God as well as former Christians, some Ages after
the Apostles times had the Epistle to the Hebrews, those of St. James, St.
Jude, the latter of St. Peter, the second and third of St. John, with the
Apocalips, or Revelation imposed upon them by Councils, where the Pope was
chief? these things are fit to be clearly known, and that with certainty too
before a man submit in so high a measure as you require.

The sixth Reason which I met with was; whatsoever is a sole sufficient Rule
must be plain, and clear, in all necessary points (atleast) which relates unto
Faith, or the means by which Salvation is to be had which the Scripture is not;
and above all things it must not contradict it self, which the Scriptures seem
to do; to prove these I shall give some few Instances, which I think can never
be infringed, that they are not plain and clear as is beforesaid, consider.

1. All Christians generally (except some few) do agree that the Sacraments of
the Gospel are necessary in order to salvation; now as to these, the Scriptures
are so far from being clean, that they do not so much as determine what a
Sacrament is, how many Christ ordained, or whether there be any Sacraments or
not.

2. It is necessary to Salvation to believe all the Books of the Holy
Scriptures to be the word of God, and to believe nothing written, to be the
Word of God, which is Apocryphal. But by the Scriptures it cannot be made out
plainly and clearly which Books are the Word of God, and which are Apocriphall.

3. It is necessary to believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God; but there
is no Text or Texts of Scripture to prove that the Scriptures which we have,
are Gods word.

4. It is necessary to know that the Scriptures are not corrupted, for if they
are corrupted, they cease to be the word of God, ad then they cannot be any
Rule or sure guide unto us, But of this we can have no assurance in Scripture.

5. It is necessary in order to the knowing the true mind, meaning and will of
God, and what he intended by such a Text, that we know when a Text is to be
understood liberally, when figuratively, when mistically; but this cannot be
understood from sole Scripture, as daily experience informs us.

6. It is necessary to know, that the very Copies and Translations of the
Scriptures which we have, and upon which we ground our selves, are certainly
true; for if they are not, we build upon uncertainties; and consequently have
no sure foundation for our Faith; yet we cannot be assured, nor have so much as
any information as to this particular from the Scriptures.

7. It is necessary that the many manifest controversies about the true sense
of Scripture should be decided, because where two contrary senses are imposed,
or urged, and both affirmed to be the meaning of God, and his Revelation, one
only can be true, and he who refuses to believe that which is true, shall be
damned; yet these controversies cannot be decyded by Scripture.

8. It is necessary to know what is purely and absolutely necessary to
salvation to be believed, and what not, that is as you say what is fundamental
and what not fundamental, and to be informed of this plainly, lest we err and
thereby be damned, but in this the Scripture is silent.

9. It is necessary to believe that God the Father is not begotten' that God
the Son is not made, but begotten, by his Father only; That God the Holy Ghost
is neither made nor begotten, but does proceed, and that from the Father and
the Son, That Christ is of one substance with the Father, and that these three
are One, and that One, Three: I refer to consideration whether all these points
be plainly and clearly to be found in Scripture, if they were it had been
almost impossible, for so many divisions to have happened about them, as have
done amongst persons on all sides, admitting the Scriptures to be the word of
God.

10. It is necessary (the Church of England says) that Infants should be
Baptized, that women should receive the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, that
Christians should observe the Lords day, yet none of these points are clearly
or perticularly proved by Scripture.

11. It is a Sin, and (as the Generality of Christians agree) an Heresy to
Re-baptise any one who has been Baptized by an Heretic where does the
Scripture say so?

That there are in the Scriptures several places which seem Contradictions, and
consequently some part of the Scriptures seem untrue, is easily proved; and I
shall here give you some few plain Instances for example, to which many more
might be added.

1. In the 2. Kings C. 8. v. 26. You read thus. Two and twenty years old was
Ahazia when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem, and his
mothers name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri. But in 2 Chronicles. c. 22. v. 2.
You will read thus, Forty and two years old was Ahazia when he began to reign,
and he reigned one year in Jerusalem, his mothers name was Athaliah the
daughter of O^ri. Now against the infallibility of Scripture, Reason convinces
her self to have this infallible demonstration, viz. No one who speaks two
things, the one contrary to the other, can be said to be infallible in
speaking; but to affirm of the same person that he began to reign when he was
two and twenty years old, and that he was two and forty years old when he began
to reign; is to speak two things the one contrary to the other, therefore
says Reason the Scripture is not infallible in speaking.

2. In St. Matthews Gospel, Chap. 1. v. 17. you read thus, All the generations
from Abraham to David are fourteen generations, and from David till the
carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations, and from the carrying away
into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations; Now if you please to
consider that three fourteens must make forty and two, and then please to
reckon up all the persons named, you shall find them demonstrably to be but one
and forty and no more, which is but two fourteens and one thirteen. Now Reason
asks whether this can be infallibly true.

3. In St. Lukes Gospel Chapter 3. v. 35. 36. you shall read thus, Salah, which was
the son of Cainan which (Cainan) was the son of Arphaxad, and if you read Ge.
c. 11. 12. you shall not find that Cainan was the Son of Arphaxad as St. Luke
says, but that Arphaxad lived five and thirty years and begat Salah. Now
according to St. Luke this Salah was the son of Cainan not of Arphaxad. 'If it
be answered that Salah was Arphaxads son, because Arphaxad was his Grandfather:
I pray observe that Arphaxad is said to have begotten him, and that when he was
five and thirty years old. And if you remark that Chapter in Genesis, no one is
said to have had a son before he was thirty years old: But the greatest
difficulty will be here, It is said Arphaxad lived five and thirty years and
begat Cainan. If then Arphaxad was Granfather to Salah, because he begat
Cainan, when he was five and thirty years old, (in which year of his age he
begat Salah then Salah his Grandchild, and Cainan his son must be both born in
the same year, which says Reason is impossible. Now if Scripture can determine
all controversies, I hope you will show me how to solve these difficulties by
the Scripture which how to do I profess most seriously I do not understand.

The seventh Reason which I found against this Opinion of sole Scripture was,
that if the Scriptures had been appointed by God for this end of being our sole
Rule, Guide and Judge, in all our doubts, and the sole means to bring faith
unto our souls, they would have been so in the Apostles times (at least) after
all the books of the New Testament were written; but that they were so we do
not find, for then the Authority of the Apostles must have ceased so soon as
they had made an end of Writing, which I believe no one will say, much less
prove: And then even in the times of the Apostles, if a controversy had arisen
touching the true sense of any Text, no address should have been to the
Apostles to decide the doubt, but to the book which every one must have judged,
though in opposition to the then present interpretation of the Apostles, if
they had then taken upon them to explain their own writings, which to say, I
think, will appear sufficiently absurd to all men. Nay if the Scriptures had
been intended for this, it must have followed in all probability, that our Lord
Christ would have left his own law and doctrines in writing under his own hand
which he has not done: at least he would have obleiged all his Apostles to
write, which he did not that we know of. It should also follow, that to write
had been the chief part of the Apostles Ministry, consequently that most part
of the Apostles neglected to perform the chiefest part of their Ministry, and
were negligent to do that which above all things was their duty, will any of
you presume to affirm this? yet if you speak consequently, it will be hard to
avoid it.

The last Reason which I shall recount unto you is this, that to make the
Scripture this sole Rule and Judge, is in effect not to make the Scripture so*
but to make every individual man and woman, who take upon them to read and
understand the Scriptures, such a Rule and Judge unto themselves; for what
difference is there between judging by my own Reason and judging by a Law to be
Interpreted by my own Reason: This is to make the Scripture not Gods Word, but
the word of every private man. Hence I concluded, that if Christ be God, as
certainly and infallibly he is, and if he truly loved those souls for which he
dyed, he has certainly provided for them some more assured means by which to
know the true Faith, without which he will not save them, then by leaving them
to the Scriptures to be interpreted by each one as he thinks best; for what Law
maker was there ever found so ridiculous, as to gather a people into a body,
and give them a Law book in writing to govern them, and to be their only judge
in all their differences, without appointing, nay expressly prohibeting, that
there should be any living judge or Judges, or any Court to expound this Law,
and to have the Executive Authority and jurisdiction, from whence there should
be no appeal?

Having considered after this manner what could be said, for the private
Spirit, Reason, and the sole sufficiency of Scripture, I was in the last place
to see what could be said on the behalf of the Catholic Church, resolving from
these premises, that if here I could not find a satisfaction in point of
certainty, and an infallible assurance, I was not to expect it, (as far as I
yet understood) from the Principles of Christianity, and consequently must
conclude, that Religion, and Faith, were no more then Fancy and Opinion.

I thought it not unreasonable, and other persons would doubtless have thought
the Argument strong enough, if I had sought no further, but concluded, the
Private spirit is not, Reason is not, the Scriptures are not this Rule and
Judge; therefore the Church is. But I resolved to examine farther, and having
agreed the point that such a Rule and Judge there must always be of necessity,
and therefore there has always been, and ever shall be such a One, unless we
shall say (which I hope none will) that God is defective in necessaries. I
found first, for the first 2000 years, before any Scriptures were written, the
Church of God was this Rule and Judge: Was not Circumcision and other Rights
brought in by Abraham, and practiced by the Church then without any Scripture
to try them by? what would you have said if you had then lived? would you have
disobeyed the then Church, and rejected those Ordinances because there were
then no Scriptures to warrant them?

Secondly the Church of the Jews was so to the Jews after that the Scripture
was written; and this by the express direction of Scripture Deuteronomy. 17. 8. Thou
shall come to the Priests, the Levites, and unto the Judge, that shall be in
those days, and enquire, and they shall show thee the sentence of Judgment,
etc. And according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, you shall do,
Thou shall not decline from the sentence which they shall show thee, to the
right hand, nor to the left hand; And the man that will do presumptuously, and
will not hearken unto the Priest or unto the Judge, even that man shall dye.
Therefore our Blessed Lord, whilst the Jewish Church was yet in being, gave
directions, Mat. 23. 2. 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair; all
therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. Would God direct
them unto, and punish with Death for not obeying an Authority, which might
deceive them, would our Lord command the doing of whatsoever should be done by
an Authority when that Authority was capable of mistaking?

From hence I concluded, that it was possible for the Church of God to be such
a Rule and Judge, and to be the means appointed by God, to give infallible
instructions in the Truth. Now as concerning the Church in the new Law under
Christ, I found.

Thirdly, that God had promised such a Church, such an Authority by the mouths
of his Prophets, Isa. 2. v. 2. 3, etc. It shall come to pass in the last days
( so the Apostles called the time of the New Law). That the Mountain of the
Lords house shall be Established in the top of the mountains, ( behold its
visibility) All Nations shall slow unto it, ( see its Universality and extent)
and say come ye and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of
the God of Jacob; And He ( that is God) will teach us his ways, ( in this his
house or Church) for out of Sion shall go forth the Law, ( as by the Apostles
on Whitsunday) and the Word of God from Jerusalem ( where the first Preaching
of the Gospel begun) And he shall judge amongst the Nations; Not personally for
Christ went not of Iewry, but) by his Churches Tribunal, erected amongst all
Nations so conspicuously, that they may all flow to it. Will any one say this
judgment, which is Gods judgment, can be fallible? Or that in this Tribunal,
he that teaches can teach us Errors? Isa. 35. 8. where God promises to
establish a way of holiness so direct unto us, that Fools should not err
therein Isa. 54. 3. 13, 17. Thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, thy children
shall be taught of the Lord, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in
Judgment, thou shall condemn, Isa. 56. 21. As for me, this is my Covenant
with them says the Lord my spirit ( infallible) that is upon thee and my words
( infallible also) which I have put in thy mouth ( the mouth by which the
Church teaches and judges) shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the
mouth of thy Seeds seed, says the Lord from henceforth and forever. Behold
here the spirit of Truth, intailed upon the Church to preserve it from Error,
Isa. 60. 10. 12 etc. The sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, their
Kings shall minister unto thee, thy Gates shall be open continually, they shall
not be shut day nor night, that men may bring unto thee the forces of the
Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought, For the Nation and Kingdom
which will not serve thee, ( by submitting to thy doctrine) shall perish, I
will make the place of my feet glorious, they shall call thee the City of the
Lord, I will make thee an eternal Excellency, thy sun shall no more go down,
nor shall thy moon withdraw it self, but the Lord shall be unto thee an
everlasting Light. If those shall perish who refuse to submit to this
Authority, to whom God is an everlasting Light, and whom he makes an
everlasting Excellency, we need not fear that it can deceive us, or that it can
ever so be Eclipsed, as to be at any time invisible. Many more promises might
be collected out of the Old Testament, but I come to show.

Fourthly, that Christ by his own mouth, and by the mouths of his Apostles
has promised to us likewise such a Church, Mat. 16. 19. Upon this Rock I will
build my Church, (which he had foretold by his Prophets should be of so vast
extent) And the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 18. 17. He
that will not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen or a Publican,
but if Christ by his spirit does not preserve this Church from all possibility
of teaching me error instead of a truth, I may from this Church which Christ
obliges me to hear, and unto which obliges me to submit, receive such errors
as may damn me. Mat. 28. 20. And Lo I am with you always even unto the end of
the World. this must be meant of the visible Church which was to be in every
Age, for the Apostles were not to live and to Baptize and teach always unto the
end of the world. And therefore if the same assistance and presence of Christ
was promised to the Church after the Apostles, I think we shall not doubt but
that it is the same that is infallible. But that it may clearly appear that
the Assistance promised by Christ to his Church extended to an infallible
security from all errors, consider John 14. 16. I will pray the Father and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the
spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive, and v. 26. The Comforter which
is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I shall say unto
you, and chapter 16. 12. I have many things yet to say unto you, but you cannot
hear them now, howbeit when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into
all truth. But all Truth excludes all Errors, and this for ever which was
longer then the Apostles were to live: If we therefore enquire, by what means
this teaching shall be, by whom the people shall be taught all Truths? and how
preserved from all errors? St. Paul will tell us, Ephesians. 4. 11. He gave some
Apostles (succeeding in full Apostolical Authority) some Prophets (expounders
of the Prophets) some Evangelists (Preachers of the Gospel) some Pastors and
Teachers, to what end? For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. For what time? Till we all
come in the Union of the faith. But will these secure us? the next verse will
tell you, That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Gods intent then was, to
provide such means for mankind, as might secure them in their belief in every
Age, that they might not be deceived by the cunning craft of false Teachers,
such as now think themselves able by pretending inward Lights, Private Spirits,
and evidence of Scripture, by themselves Interpreted, to teach us a doctrine
contrary to all those, who for almost fifteen Ages before them have been (and
none others, teaching a contrary Faith can be named, who have been) the
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, in the Visible Church
of Christ. In the last place I shall urge that Text of St. Paul to Timothy, 1.
Tim. 3. 15. The Church of the Living God, the Pillar and ground of Truth. And
may we not securely rely upon that Pillar, which God has erected for us? and
found our Faith upon that Ground of truth, which the God of all truth has
given us for that end?

To elude their plain and evident Texts, I know you are wont to say, in the
first place, that they may have other Interpretations, and therefore this is
not the truth. But will not the same reason hold, the Apostles cited many Texts
of Scriptures, and interpreted them so as to prove Christ the Messiah; and his
Doctrines to be true, whereas those Texts might have had other interpretations;
therefore the Interpretation put on them by the Apostles were not true? Who
sees not the weakness of this Argument. Can you show with any assurance, that
these Texts are not capable of these interpretations? If not, then according to
your own principles these interpretations may be true, for you who say the
contrary are not infallible, but may be mistaken.

Another answer which you use to give is, that you are willing to agree, that
so long as the Church of Christ teaches conformable to Scripture, she is
infallible, and so long as she does her Duty she may and ought to be believed.
But this is as weak as the former; for who sees not, that it gives the Church
no more privilege, nor allows it to have any more benefit from these promises
then the Devil has? for so long as he teaches conformable to Scripture he may
be believed. A straw may be a Pillar until it bends, and Quicksands sure
ground until they yield. What assurance can we have that the Holy Apostles did
their duty in writing what the Holy Ghost did dictate unto them? For if they
did not, their writings are not to be believed; consequently we are not, nor
can we be infallibly secure; that the Scriptures which we have were dictated
by, and are by Inspiration from God: If you can answer this, so as to be secure
that the Apostles did their duty, the same will be our answer, that the present
Visible Catholic Church of Christ at all times does her Duty.

The fifth Argument is; that the Church of God was this Rule and Judge, this
only means to convey Faith, and this infallible Guide and Authority when our
Blessed Savior was alive, and before the New Testament was written, and also
in the Apostles times both before and after the whole New Testament was
written. If not I obliege you to show some evident Text which proves certainly,
that after the New Testament was written, the Church in the Apostles time was
deprived of this priveledge and Authority, and that it had been no sin, then
to oppose, or not submit to the guidance, direction, government, and authority
of the Apostles. But if notwithstanding this you shall (without giving any
other Reason) insist that the Apostles were this infallible Rule and Judge, in
their times only, until the Canon of Scriptures was finished, and then lost
their Authority when they had completed the Canon. I pray consider what will
be the consequence in case it stands proved that the Canon of Scripture which
they finished, is now uncompleated by the loss of those Epistles and parcels of
the Apostles writings which I have proved to be lost? Will it not follow, that
for the same Reason that an infallible living rule and Judge was necessary
before the Canon was complete, the same is now necessary some part of the Canon
being lost? And what will the consequence be if it stand proved also that
supposing the Canon were complete, yet it is not sufficient to decide the
controversies now a foot amonst Christians in matters of Faith? Will it not
follow that then it is necessary to have such a Rule and Judge as is before
mentioned? The late Learned Dr. Fern a great Champion for sole Scripture,
confesses Sext. 27. That Indeed such a Judge or Umpire in Christendom would
(if to be had) be a ready means to compose all differences and to restore truth
and peace. But shall we think that our blessed Redeemer when he first founded
his Holy Church did not see this as clearly as Dr. Fern? certainly he did, and
for this reason he appointed the Holy Apostles and their Successors to be this
Judge and Umpire, and if you desire or expect to see an end of those
differences wherein ye are now involved, by relying on your own private
Interpretations of the Scriptures, you must address your selves to this Judge
and be content to stand the determination of their Umpire which is infallible;
I say infallible, for as the Apostles though as men were subject to error in
their own private affairs, and actings, and as such might one withstand the
other and reprove the other, yet were they by the assistance of Gods Holy
spirit in defining and delivering matters of Faith; so the Prelates of the Holy
Catholic Church though as men they were fallible in their own private actings
and affairs, yet when assembled in a General Council with their Supreme Pastor,
they are still made infallible in defining matters of Faith by the assistance
of the same Holy Ghost, who was as well promised to them as to the Apostles.

The last reason is, that none of the difficulties that were proposed to prove
the Scriptures not to be the Rule, and Judge before mentioned, are capable of
being objected against the Church. For first, this Judge and Rule is capable of
answering the end for which it is appointed and proposed, all who submit unto
the Church agreeing in matters of Faith: Secondly, it is not capable of being
misunderstood or misinterpreted by the various Reasons Judgments and Interests
of men; but is always in being, and capable upon demand to explain and declare
its own sense, and intention upon any difference arising. Thirdly, it is
capable of being understood by All. Fourthly, it is capable of being certainly
known by all. Fifthly, it is capable of determining what plainess and clearness
in every Article of Faith, and has always appeared to do so to the
condemation and confusion of all opposers. Sixthly, this was the said Rule and
Judge in Christ's time, and in the times of the Apostles. Lastly, this does not
set up every individual man and woman to be a Judge and Rule unto themselves,
but preserves the unity of the spirit in the Bond of Peace; by teaching all
understandings to become Captives to this Rule and Judge appointed by God, for
their guidance and direction.

But I know there will be yet an Objection made by you of the separation,
whether these Texts which speak so amply of the Church, are to be understood of
the Church Militant and visible in this World? or of the Church Triumphant? For
certainly did you apprehend that God had a Church in this world, that is, a
visible body politic distinct from that invisible Church which is Christ's
Mistical body Triumphant, you would not (as I in Charity believe) divide your
selves into so many Congregations, independent of each other or any other body
or Government whatsoever in relation to Religion. Now to satisfy you in this I
shall desire you to consider, Acts the 20. 28. Where the Text speaks of a
Church governed by High Pastors which can only be meant of the Visible Church,
and that of the whole Flock, or Church which Christ redeemed with his blood,
which cannot be meant of any particular Congregational Church 1 Cor. 10. 32.
Give none offense, neither to the Jews nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church
of God even as I please all men in all things, where he speaks clearly of the
sole and entire visible Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. where mention is made of the
Governors and Priests which are extended throughout the whole visible Church
only. God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, etc.
and Ephesians. 4. 11. before cited, Col. 1. 24. 25. Where Church is taken for the
Militant only, for St. Paul was not made a Minister of the Church Triumphant, 1 Timothy 2. 15. before cited, must signify the sole and whole visible Church, for
no particular Church can be styled The pillar and ground of truth, since they
may fall, and often have fallen from truth. Iam. 5. 14. Where he speaks in
general to all beleiving Christians, and of a Church using visible Ceremonies,
and Priests or Elders, which is not the Church Triumphant, Mat. 16. 18. where
the Church of Christ is to be built upon Peter, and therefore must be meant of
the visible Church Militant; for it is built, whilst Militant and transferred
when it is Triumphant. Nor can this be any other then a visible Church founded
upon a visible Rock or Foundation: for that Rock there spoken of is not Christ,
but St. Peter, as the words clearly signify, for our Savior says, upon this
Rock I will build my Church, immediately after he had named St. Peter, where as
if he had meant himself, or St Peter's confession of his being the Son of the
ever living God, this being the remote or mediate antecedent, he should have
said according to Grammar and true construction and upon that Rock. Besides he
says, I will build my Church, whereas if by Rock he had intended himself, or
St. Peter's aforesaid confession, he would have said, upon this Rock I have
built or I do build my Church, not I will build: For when our Lord spoke these
words, his Church was then actually built upon him, and upon his being the Son
of the Living God. He spoke then therefore of what he intended to do and of
what was to be after his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, and promises
here that for those future times his visible Church should be built upon St.
Peter. Lastly, that I may speak not as to the word only, but also as to the
thing it self, viz. The Divine constitution of the Catholic visible Church, by
the Ordinance of our dearest Savior. Consider, 1 Cor. 12. where it is at large
described by the Holy Apostle to be One body with different parts fitly
disposed, ordered and connected together in one and the same body. Whereof One,
he says is the Head, and that must be as visible as the rest of the body, (for
a visible body without a visible head would be a Monster) and such a visible
Head as stands in need of the foot, which Christ cannot do being God, and so
wanting nothing. And this the Apostle applies to the Apostolical Church in his
time, and the same is also described again Ephesians. 4. from v. 4. to the 17. But
I suppose you will be asking? Is not then Christ the Head of his Church, can
the Church have another Head besides Christ? I answer Christ is the Head of his
Church, and yet the Church of Christ by his appointment may have in its
external Government another Head, that is an external Head, by the appointment
of Christ. I say Christ is the only absolute independent Head, but he may
appoint a dependent Head derived from him. Christ is the sole Head that Governs
all both Pastors and People, and the chief Pastor also. Thus God is the King of
the World; may not he therefore have other Kings Reigning under him? Now how
opposite and contrary your Congregational Churches, and all Churches divided
from the true Visible Church are to this constitution, is easy for you to see.
What are those Congregational Churches but a confused Rabble of Itching Ears,
heaping up Teachers to themselves, without any either single Person, or
Assembly of them endowed with power to govern or direct all of their
Congregations dispersed in diverse Provinces and Countries, but every one stands
upon its own bottom, and has no dependence of the rest, as do the
Commonwealths of Venice, Geneva, Holland, etc. so that they have no visible
unity amongst them, either of coordination or subordination, but are politic
bodies, wholly separate and disjoined the one from the other. Can you think
this the constitution of Christ's visible Church on earth? Is this One Body? Is
this a compaction and conjunction by joints and Nerves, mentioned by the
Apostles? The first and Original Christian Church in our Savior time was such
an united body, as St. Paul mentions, having then our Savior for its visible
Head, and his Disciples for its Members, all united together in one visible
Communion; and was not this Original Church the Model and Platform laid by our
Savior to be imitated and followed in its manner of Government by all
succeeding Ages? The Apostolical Church next to that of our Saviors time, was
like unto it, where St. Peter was the chief Pastor, and the Apostles under him,
over the whole Church dispersed both amongst Jews and Gentiles, as appears Acts
15. and who had power to change this Original and Apostolical manner of union
and Government in after Ages into a quite opposite digestion, and to bring in a
perfect Anarchie?

I hope from the grounds here laid, it will appear as clear to you as I profess
it did to me, that the visible Church of God on Earth which in the Creed is
called the Holy Catholic Church, was and is that Rule and Judge, that means
appointed by God, for the conveying of the Christian Faith to the World, and to
whom all on pain of Damnation, were and are by Gods Ordinance to submit, as to
the Authority appointed by God to teach them what they ought to believe in
order to the attaining of Salvation, and that without disputing any more then
they would have disputed the decrees and directions of the Holy Apostles, were
they now living upon Earth, consequently that this Authority was infallible.

It will only remain that we consider which amongst all those congregations
now on Earth, which pretend themselves to be this Church of Christ is really
and truly this Holy Church and Spouse of Christ. For having once found her, and
knowing that she is so assisted by the Holy Ghost, that she cannot teach us an
Error, instead of a Truth, we shall no more dispute the verity of her
Doctrines, then we should have questioned the Articles of Faith taught by the
Holy Apostles, or the words of Christ himself? Wherefore if this Church this
infallible Guide shall teach us, that Infants are to be Baptized, that it is as
lawful to desire the Saints departed to pray for us, as to desire the Prayers
of those who are living on our behalfs, That the body of Christ our Savior is
really and truly present in the Sacrament of the Altar (or the Lords Supper) or
any the like Article of Faith, we shall no more doubt of it then, the first
Christians did dispute the verity of what the Apostles taught them; when they
informed them that they were to believe that Christ whom they had seen as man
was true and very God, that a Virgin still remaining a Virgin, might by the
power of the Holy Ghost bring forth a child. That the body of Christ
spirituallized might pass through a Door, the Door being shut: That three could
be One, and One three. For who shall dare to question what God shall tell him
to be true. And if God now speaks by the mouth of his present Church as he did
by the mouth of his Church in the times of the Apostles, who shall doubt the
truth of those words, which proceeded from his mouth?

Wherefore as to this last question, which is now this present Church of
Christ, which is our infallible Guide and Judge appointed by God for our
direction, and to whom we are to submit, as aforesaid. I shall in brief give
you that answer, which I profess gave me a full and clear satisfaction; and it
is shortly this. The Protestant Church of England and all other Churches
different from the Roman, do judge and declare and profess themselves to be
fallible, even according to the infallible word of God. If then the said
Protestant Church of England or any other Churches different from the Roman be
infallible in all that they judge, and in that they declare and profess to be
true according to the word of God; they doubtless are then infallible, and
speak then the infallible truth, when they judge, declare and profess that even
according to the Word of God, they are fallible. Therefore infallibly they are
fallible. Hence again it being thus proved that no Church different from that
Roman is infallible: And it being before proved that God has appointed some
Church upon earth to be our infallible Judge, it demonstratively follows that
the Roman Church must needs be this infallible Judge, because no church
different from it (that is none but the Roman Church) can be this infallible
Church. But I pray you do not mistake this Argument, as some have pleased to
do, who think the force of it to lie thus, viz. The Roman Church claims
infallibility, therefore she is infallible. This is nothing like the Argument
which I put, the force of which lies thus. That the Church truly appointed by
God for this infallible Judge of controversies cannot possibly be any of those
Churches, which teach themselves not to be this infallible Judge, because they
teach themselves to be Fallible: if then they be infallible in the doctrine
they teach, they are infallible when they teach themselves to be fallible.
Therefore infallibly they are fallible. Now the Church which is truly appointed
by God to be this infallible Judge, must needs have this condition that she
does own her infalibility; but this is far from saying that merely her owning
of infallibility does make infallibility her own. It is a very different thing
to say. He that must be a Minister must needs be a man and not a woman, and to
say* That such a one must needs be a minister because he is a man and not a
woman. So it is one thing to say, the Church which is the infallible Judge must
be a Church judging and holding, and professing her self to be infallible; and
cannot be a Church, which judges and professes her self to be fallible. And
another quite different thing to say, that such a Church is the infallible
Judge because she teaches and professes her self to be so.

Not be not (I pray) so far mistaken, as some are usually, and wilfully, if not
maliciously, to think that when I speak of the Roman Church, I intend the
Church of the Diocese of Rome, and so pretend to make a particular Church to be
an Universal, and the Universal or Catholic Church of Christ. No, I entend by
the Roman Church, all that vastly extended community of christians, which
lives in communion with, and in subjection and Obedience unto the Bishop of
Rome, as to their Supreme Pastor and Governor on Eearth in things
appertaining unto faith next under Christ. This is the Flock of Christ adhering
to the true Shepherd appointed them by God.

And now (dearest Friends) I have no more to say, but only entreat you in the
bowels of Charity to learn by heart that most precious lesson of our sweet
Savior, viz. Learn of me for I am meek and humble of heart. And that you may
be in a ready way to learn this, remember (in order to it) that Lesson (which I
mentioned before) of his beloved Apostle St. John. 4. 6. We are of God, he that
knows God hears us, he that is not of God hears us not, hereby know we
the spirit of truth and the spirit of error. There was nothing then required to
distinguish these two spirits, but to hear or to refuse to hear the Apostles,
and seeing St. Paul says, Faith comes by hearing; It will be as necessary now
to hear in our times, those who are lawfully sent to teach it, as it was in the
times of the Apostles. If therefore ye hear no body, or follow those who at
first, and in their beginning heard no body, you refuse to hear those who are
sent to teach you And then according to St. John, it is evident you are lead by
the spirit of error. Consider these things and be happy, according to the
Prayers of,

Your true Friend and well-wisher in the best things ROBERT EVERARD.

POSTSCRIPT.
I apprehend that it is not impossible but that some of you will be attempting
to answer this Letter, and endeavoring to shake these Principles, which have
by Gods Grace proved of strength to win me to the Holy Catholic Faith. To such
I shall only give these cautions. First that they will be pleased in their
Answer, to set down my own words as they lie entirely and without maiming them:
If they shall please to answer by Paragraphs, and to set down each of my
Paragraphs wholly and sincerely before their Answer to the same Paragraph, I
shall own their Candor and Justice; But if they Answer by setting up a Puppit
of their own, pretended to be mine, they will not make mine, but their own
Arguments ridiculous; and will not deserve a Reply from me, or to be regarded
by any one. Secondly, that they will forbear all Reproaches and Slanders,
against the Catholic Church, or Catholics in general or in particular, this
is a fault to which Protestants are too much addicted in general; but most
Perticularly those of the Presbiterian and Independent persuasions, they have
always used to deal with Catholics; as they did with His late Majesty of
glorious memory, and with our most dread Sovereign that now is, and their
party, viz. to impute crimes to them without end, and errors innumerable;
without taking care to examine whether what they charged them with was true or
false: So if they can throw Dirt enough upon the Catholics, and impute
Opinions unto them sufficiently monstrous, all is well, they know the major
part of the Nation to be biased with interest, and ready enough to believe
what ever is suggested against those whom they call the Common Enemy, and that
thousands will admit a thing for truth if they find it in Print, rather then
take the pains to examine whether it be true or not, and therefore have no
difficulty to cast forth untruths, with as much confidence as if themselves
were satisfied, that all they publish is dictated by the Holy Ghost: As for
those who are and shall be guilty of these crimes, I only wish them the like
Repentance which St. Augustine had for the like errors committed by himself
whilst he was a Manichaean, of which he makes this mention, St. Aug. the 6.
book of his Confess. c. 3. toward the end. I blush even full of Joy in regard
that I found my self thereby not to have barked against the Catholic Faith,
but against the Fancies and Fictions of carnal thoughts. But yet I have been
rash and impious in that I had said those things accusingly which I ought to
have learnt inquitingly. Nor do not (I beseech you) take a liberty to upbraid
me as if I had some private ends in my present Change; but be pleased to
consider, that I am now united to a Communion whose portion in this Kingdom is
to suffer, to be poor and scorned, to want preferments and suffer affronts from
every hand who shall please to give them. Whilst I was at the head of a Troop
of Horse in the Rebellious Army (a sin which I hope my dearest Savior has
forgiven me, I having heartily asked pardon of my God as I here do of my
Sovereign for the same) I was in a condition to rise, and thrive, and glut my
senses with what this world called good and pleasing; But I thank my Savior I
am now brought home to that Church of His, which teaches me to suffer and be
humble, to give Obedience to Authorities for Conscience sake, to become a
servant and a learner, not a master or a Teacher, to hear those that are
lawfully sent to take care of my Soul, and not to usurps the Office of the
Priests, or proudly to intrude my self into that Sacred Function. I must for
ever hereafter cease to be contentious, and let my Prince or those who are in
Authority under him determine what they please in relation to my body or
Estate, I hope I shall at all times hereafter follow the blessed Precepts of
God, which I receive from the mouth of his Church, and from the Holy
Scriptures, namely To make Supplications, and Prayers, and Intercessions, and
giving of thanks for all men, for Kings and all that are in Authority, that I
may lead a quiet life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. v. 1. 2. And to
those who shall be otherwise minded I shall only say, We have no such custom
amongst us in the Church of God.

FINIS.

