STRANGE AND Wonderful VISIONS, Being something concerning a Child that lay
fourteen Days and Nights in a Trance, and Spoke not a Word for nine Weeks
together; and when she came to her Speech, she spoke Wonderful Things. As also,
of a Man in Germany, under the like Circumstance, but Expressed more fully, what
he had seen of the Joys of Heaven, and the Torments of Hell.

Published for a General Good.

But if one rise from the Dead, some will not believe.

London, Printed, and Sold by Randol Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1693.

To the Reader.
I Having been so lately with that Chil^ that is now living with her Mother in
London, that lay Fourteen Days and Nights i^ a Trance, and her Testimony
concerning the future state, being the same with this following Treatise: I had
a very great desire to have it published, and that it might be taken into dee^
Consideration by all them that are now living* for although my Sight be but
small, my Faith is great; and though my Ability but small, my Desire is great,
and my Soul is concerne^ for the whole Creation, but especially for those that
are nearly related, and dear to me; and being one that have passed through
great Anguish and Tribulations in this World, cannot but take notice of the
great Love of God manifested to the Creature by Crosses and Afflictions, and
therefore am not sorry for those that are under Afflictions, but am sorry for
those that want that Faith that evidenceth it self by Love, without which none
can see God.

This Child was Nine Years old, and about an half, when she lay in that Trance:
It is now two Months above a Year since; and having heard both her and her
Mother with my own Ears, am fully satisfied as to the truth of what I had heard
concerning her: I had heard that she should declare most wonderful things, both
concerning Heaven, that what she saw there was unutterable, but she had
declared according to her capacity what she her self did partake of; and of the
unspeakable Horror of Hell, and that a Neighbor of theirs that she knew, that
dyed some time before, she should see her there. I asked her, What that Woman
was in her Life? The Child answered me thus, No good comes there, and she has
wicked Children. This Child uses very few Words; but makes an answer when she
is spoke to; and has an entire love for sober People. I could say much
concerning her; but I desire the Reader to take great notice of the following
Treatise, in which this Child's Testimony is confirmed, and that was written by
himself, being at man's estate, as I must conclude, which may give better
satisfaction to some: but for my own part I am satisfied concerning that
Testimony, though through a Babe, or contemptible Instrument.

The Child's Name is Elizabeth Keen, living now with her Mother in Hog-Lane in
London.

R. E.
The 28th of March, 1693.
A short Account of the wonderful Life and Visions of Hans Engelbrecht, Cloth
worker and Citizen of Brunswick, taken out of a larger Treatise, writ and
published by himself in the German Tongue.
I Have been all my Life long, a man of Sorrow, and of a sad and afflicted
Spirit, from my Youth upward, by reason of great Anguish and Distress of Soul,
which made me continually to pray and cry to God, That he would be pleased to
Comfort me with his Holy Spirit.

I was three Years with a Cloathier, to learn his Craft; but could never make
use of it to my profit, by reason of the great anguish of Soul, and deep
Sorrow, wherewith I was continually overwhelmed. Now what kind of Anguish this
was, I am no way able to describe or express to you, neither can any one know
it, except he has been tempted and tried in like manner. This made me often
attempt to make away with my self, yea, I have often risen suddenly from my
labor, and run out of the House without being able to rest any where, by
reason of the extreme anguish and horror of mind that still followed me:
Sometimes I could run down into the Cellar, and hide my self there, not knowing
for extreme anguish where to bestow my self. I daily frequented the Churches
where any Preaching was, hoping there to meet with some Comfort, but all in
vain, for my Anguish still continued: And as for converse with men, and
merry-meetings, these I altogether refrained, and had aversion for them, which
made me the object of the flouts and derision of all my Companions, and fellow
Apprentices.

In the Year 1634* the Friday before the second Sunday in Advent. I went to the
Church of St. Kathrines, in Brunswick, to hear a Sermon, where I was surprised
with unutterable Sorrow and Anguish of Mind, by occasion of seeing so few
Auditors there; and reflecting, how many for f^^r of losing any opertunity for
outward profit, did neglect the Eternal Good of their Souls; this anguish still
increased upon me, till my return home, where the extremity of it overcoming my
bodily strength and health, I was fain to betake my self to my Bed, my Stomach
being altogether taken from me, so that I could not get down the least bit of
Bread or drop of Drink: The next day finding by the great increase of my
Weakness, that my departure was near I received the Holy Communion at the hand
of Mr. Jorden, and to the amaze meant of all that were present; I received the
Bread and Wine without the leas reluctance of my Stomach; whereas some time
before I had like to have been choked, by endeavoring, at the pressing
importunity of my Master, to swallow on little bit of boiled Fish.

Having taken this Heavenly Provision I was all on a sudden so overset with
unutterable horror and anguish of So^^ which made me cry and roar out most
h^deously, insomuch that our affright Neighbors came running in to see w^^^
was the matter; who finding me in su^^ an Agony, they all fell down upon th^^^
Knees, recommending me to God, a^^ praying that he would deliver me out my
extreme Distress and Horror, cause whereof was Satan abjecting Sins to me,
tempting me to despair, and strangely tormenting me by shuteing his fiery Darts
into me, wherewith I was as sensibly pained as if so many Daggers or Knives had
been stabbed in my Heart.

Soon after this, Death began to sease me, manifesting it self in the extreme
coldness of my Feet, which increased upward, till all feeling was taken from
me; neither could I so much as open my Mouth, my Flesh was grown so stiff and
cold: Not long after perfectly perceived my Eye-strings to break; yet my
Hearing continued, for I could distinctly hear them Pray for me: I also heard
them say one to another, Eccl his Legs and Feet how cold they be; he will not
continue long now: All which I heard with my Ears; but was not sensible when
they touched me: I heard the Watchman cry past Eleven a Clock, and about
Twelve my Hearing was taken away likewise, and then it seemed to me as if I had
been taken up with my Body, and carried much swifter than an Arrow out of a
Bow, till I came before the Gates of Hell, where I could perceive nothing but
thick Darkness, Smoke, and a most abominable Stink, and loathsome bitter Savor,
which I cannot compare with any Stink in this World, it was so intolerable:
Here I heard many gashly and terrible Voices, crying, Mountains fall upon us,
Hills cover us, that we be not placed before the face of God: Woe! O Woe to us!
damned to all Eternity. And after a while I found my self surrounded with many
thousand Devils, who tempted me to despair, but I defended my self with the
Shield of Faith, trusting in the Mercy of God through Christ; in this Prayer of
Faith my Spirit cried earnestly to God, and presently thereupon this dark and
loathsome Scene disappeared.

Then the Holy Ghost appeared to me in the Figure of a man clothed all in
White, and having placed me in a Golden Chariot, he carried me into the clear
heavenly Light, whence God is called the Father of Lights, from whom all good
and perfect Gifts do proceed, and indeed this was such a Gift, when the Holy
Ghost carried me in the Golden Chariot Christ, out of the hellish Darkness,
into the splendour of the Divine Glory: for Christ alone is the Way, the Truth
and the life, neither can any one come to the Father of Glory but by him.

And when I was thus placed in the Light of the divine Glory, I saw the Quires
of the holy Angels, Prophets and Apostles, singing and making melody round
God's Throne, with Heavenly Voices and divine Music; but not in Bodily Shapes:
The holy Angels appeared in the likeness of innumerable Flames of Fire, and the
Saints like bright shining Lights; the Throne of God appeared like a Glorious
shining Brightness, which no human Reason can conceive, neither can I in the
least describe what it was: Here I heard the Heavenly Harmony, and smelled such
sweet Odours, to which all Earthly delights compared, are trifles and mere
shadows, all which as was afterward told me, was therefore manifested unto me,
that I might comfort the Afflicted and Sorrowful of Heart, who are under great
crosses and anguish in this World; and was charged to assure them that one
Ounce of Cross and Sorrow here, shall be rewarded with a thousand Pound of
Heavenly Joy; and all this of mere Grace.

During my abode here, the Holy Ghost by the ministry of an Angel, opened unto
me the understanding or meaning of the whole Pible, and that in a moment. And
by the Angelical Revelation, it was showed me, That I was to tell all those who
desire to enter into this Kingdom of Glory, that they must have a Living Faith
in Jesus Christ, and give proof of this Faith by their Love; and repent from
their whole Hearts, and be converted: Because the Lord will no longer endure
that Hypocrisy and show of Holiness which is so common in the World, because
it is determined in the council of the Holy Trinity, that no man shall see
Christ face to face, to all Eternity, but he who has ^eheld here in this time
in Faith, and in Spirit in his own Heart.

Many have a knowledge of Christ, according to the Flesh, and the comprehension
of their own carnal Reason; but few know Christ by Faith, and in Spirit, which
their Evil Fruits are an undoubted evidence and to en of; and especially this*
that there is scarcely any true Love left in the World; for all the Friendship
of the world is mere Dissembling and Flattery, no man intending the good of his
Neighbou^ from the bottom of his Heart, by (...) which they make it appear that
they have no Faith: for as little as Light can be without shining, the Sun
without Beams, a good Tree without good fruit, so little can Faith be without
Love and good Works.

So far Hans his own Words.

The following was writ of him concerning how it was with him after he came
into the Body again.

The Lord was pleased to ratify and confirm the Revelation He had given to
him, after his return to Life again, by these following Miracles:

The ^^rst was, That immediately upon his return to Life, he found himself in
more perfect Health and Vigor then ever he had enjoyed before, and that without
the use of any Medicine, or any human help whatsoever. It was observed that as
his Hearing was the last Sense he lost, so it was the first Sense he recovered
upon his return to the Body; for he heard the Voice of those that were in the
Room, before he and the use of his other Senses.

2. Another Wonder was, that the Light which had been communicated to his Soul,
whilst he was in Heaven, continued with him after his return to Life, and gave
him the knowledge of the Mysteries contained in the Scriptures, though he had
never read them.

3. Another mir^^ulous thing observed was, that he could and did Discourse
whole Lays and Night together; without either exhausting the treasure of his
Mind, or the strength of his Body, in which thing he challenged those Ministers
that slandered him to do the like.

4. Moreover his Life and Health was preserved for many Weeks together, without
any outward bodily Meat or Drink. He also experienced after he began to eat,
that the most exquilit Dainties of this world could not overcome the relish of
those inconceiveable Sweets which he had tasted in the other World, and which
ever after continued uppermost with him.

5. Another Wonder was, That he never Slept for many Weeks together; and when
his Stepmother after much ado had persuaded him to eat something, in hopes
that it might procure Sleep to him; yet for all that his watchfulness continued
with him nine Months together.

6. The last Wonder was, that for one and forty Nights after his return to the
Body, he continued to hear the Music of Angels, as he had heard it in the
other World, and himself was wont to Sing with them whole Nights together:
During this time of his hearing the Angelical melody, it happened that a
certain Woman having continued with him one Night, till all the rest of the
company was gone, and hearing him say ever and anon, Don't you hear how sweetly
the Angels sing: She became thereby inflamed with a strong desire to partake of
that Caelestial Harmony; whereupon he bid her lay her Ear to his Ear; which she
had no sooner done, but she heard it likewise, and in a strange transport of
Joy broke forth into the high Praises of God.

Some time after his return to Life, he had the following Visions of the New
Heaven and Earth, which he expresses as follows.

Hans Englbrecht's Vision of the New Heaven and Earth.
BEing in an Extacy, I saw my self placed on a transparent Earth, the Heavens
that surrounded, were as bright as the Sun, and in the same I beheld a Sun
infinitely brighter and more glorious than that in the outward Firmament: I saw
also the Moon and Stars, but unutterably surpassing those we see here, in
splendour and beauty. The Heaven, Sun, Moon and Stars, reflected their Glory
upon the Christaline Earth, and were seen in it far more clearly then any
opposite Objects are discerned in the best Looking-glasses. I beheld also the
Earth adorned with most beautiful Flowers of all sorts, which were splendorous
and shining, and their Color far more lively then these here below.

I saw no Man upon this Earth save only the Lord Jesus in his glorified Body,
resembling a transcendently beautiful Young Man, his Body was transparent, so
that I could see his Heart in the midst of it; his sacred Wounds shined like so
many glorious Stars; and his whole Body showed a luster far beyond that of the
New Heavens; in his Face I descerned my own Face more clearly then ever I had
seen it in a Looking-glass. But what shall I say more of the Glory and Beauty
of his all Glorious Face, the remembrance whereof does to this day fill my
Heart with such exalting Joy, as I cannot compare with any of the pleasures or
delights of this world. As I was beholding the unutterable Beauty of Christ, I
said unto him. Dearest Lord Jesus, show unto me thy Father: Which I had no
sooner said, but I saw a wonderful Flame, streaming forth from his Heart, which
immediately filled the New Heavens and Earth, and gave them a thousand fold
greater Glory then they had before. I said unto him also, Lord show me the Holy
Ghost: and as soon as I had so said, I saw many thousands of Beams darted from
all parts of his Body in like manner, as Rays proceed from the Sun: Thus I saw
the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son; and I saw the Father in
Christ, and Christ in the Father, for the whole Body of Christ was filled with
the fiery flaming Glory of the Father; and I saw the Holy Ghost in the likeness
of infinite Rays, proceeding from the Father through Christ, even through all
the parts and members of his Body.

Then I desired to behold the Souls of Saints; whereupon he led further into
the Father, and showed me the Souls of Believers in God's Hand, where no pain
could touch them; they appeared to me in the likeness of many great Sparks of
Light, very swiftly moving one through another. Then I desired to see my Mother
in her bodily Figure; for she dyed when I was yet a Child; which at the first
was denied me; but afterward upon continuing instant in my request, I was
commanded to return to the World, and to call all the Dead in Christ, and to
bid them arise, for Christ commanded it. Upon this I saw many Graves open, out
of which Bodies arose, and they came with me into the New world, and stood
about the Lord Jesus, I could discern them all in his Body, as it were by
reflection; and he again did shine, and was seen in every one of their Bodies
in like manner as when a Cristial Globe being hung up in the midst of a Room,
with many lesser Globes round about it, all the lesser are seen in the great
Globe, and the great Globe appears in every one of the lesser. I needed not to
ask any Questions what this or that was, for whatsoever I saw, I knew also.

I saw moreover a great number of Birds with Golden Feathers, flying under the
Heavens, and praising God. I saw also the Beasts of the Field, which were most
beautiful, the Hair of their Skin shining like Gold; with these the Saints
delighted themselves, blessing and praising God, who had created such a vast
number of beautiful Creatures for his Praise and Glory.

Whilst I was surprised with these Wonderful Sights, and transported with Songs
and Melody of the Saints and Angels, the Lord said unto me, Now return again
unto the Earth, and declare unto the Children of Men what thou have seen and
heard, and tell them, That if they would come hither to enjoy whatsoever their
Hearts can desire, and have their Bodies made like my Glorious Body, they must
heartily Repent, and not res^st the Holy Ghost by any known Sin, and thereby
hinder him from working Faith in them, which evidenceth it self by Love,
without which none can be saved, or have their Souls purified, and clarified;
for none shall have their Bodies glorified in Eternity, whose Souls have not
been purified here in time. And when I was instant with the Lord, that I might
remain in Paradise; aleadging that if I should return to the Earth, men would
not believe my Report. The Lord comforted me, and said, Do thou bear it
patiently, when thou hear men Blaspheam my Works: for the more thou shall
suffer for my sake in the World, the more hereafter shall thou rejoice with me
in Soul and Body: Return thou therefore again into the World, and tell them the
things that I command thee: Run apace, gird up thy self, let not the long
Garments of this World entangle thy Feet; let no man stop or stay thee: haste
thee away I say, and I will follow thee at thy Heels, and will come quickly to
make an end of this Wicked World, and take my Saints to me in my Kingdom, where
they shall enjoy Eternal Happiness; and will send the Wicked to the Bottomless
Pit of Hell.

Then I desired that before my departure out of Paradise, I might fly up into
the Air; which was granted me, where I saw David and Solomon delighting
themselves with Birds, that perched on their Fingers, and sung most
Melodiously: And from thence, at my desire, I mounted up to the Stars, and from
thence was carried up into the infinite space of Eternity, where I beheld the
unutterable and inconceiveable Glory of God, which I can no way in the least
declare what it was.

Then the Lord Jesus put a Golden Tankard into my Left hand, and a Golden Cup
into my Right hand, and said, Go now, and return to the World, and fill out to
every one a Taster of this Heavenly Wine of my Kingdom, and to every one that
does relish it, and desire to partake of this my Banquet, and to have their
fill thereof to all Eternity: Do thou declare that I will come quickly, and
take them along with me to my Heavenly Banquet: And those that endure great
Crosses and Troubles, do thou charge, from me, that they bare it patiently till
that blessed Hour shall come, when I shall take them to my self, to live with
me in fullness of Joy to all Eternity; wherefore let them rather in Submission
to my Will, choose to suffer Anguish and Affliction, then in their own Wills to
be freed therefrom; for in my Will all true Happiness is to be found, here in
this time with Cr^sses and Tribulation, but hereafter in Endless Joys for ever.

And whereas I had seen a Young man, through the Body of Christ; and he also
saw me through the same Body, so that we beheld one another through the Body of
Christ; the Angel told me, That hence I should take occasion to tell
Christians, That they must look one upon another, in and through Christ, with
the Eyes of Love and Charity; as also that Christ must dwell in us, and we in
^im. And whereas it was a Young man whom I saw, the Angel bid me to signisie to
Men, from thence, That in this Eternal Life we shall continually grow more
Young and Beautiful: whereas here we still grow Older and more Deformed.

Also, whereas I found that I could do whatsoever I desired, or wished for, the
Angel bid me tell Men, That when they come hither, nothing shall be impossible
for them; and whatsoever they desire, shall, as soon as desired, be effected.

Moreover I knew for certain, that there we shall find a Glorious New Heaven
and Earth, and that Paradise shall be in the midst of the Eternal Space, and
the New Heavens shall surround the New Earth, upon which shall live all manner
of Beasts, and the Air shall be full of Birds; though these shall never come
into Eternity, no more then the Sun, Moon and Stars; because in Eternity
nothing of this outward Creation is to be found; but the Beasts shall abide
upon the New Earth, and the Birds in the Air, and upon the Trees; where they
shall sing most Melodiously to the Praise of God; for upon the New Earth shall
be all sorts of most pleasant and beautiful Trees, Plants and Flowers.

And when we are here, we may as often as we please, ascend up into Eternity, and
descend again to the New Earth, and sport with Beasts and Birds, ven, with the
Sun, Moon and Stars: Here we shall, as often as we please, begin a Divine Musical
Consort, and shall rejoice in God after an infinite variety of ways, now
altogether unknown to us: we shall be able to pass through and through the New
Earth, with the same ease as Fishes glide through the Water, or Birds through
the Air. The Earth it self will be a thousand times more transparent then the
most clear Looking-glass, and consequently shall continually receive, by
reflection, the luster of the New Heavens, with its Sun, Moon, and Stars, which
will make the New Earth surpassing bright and Glorious: We shall likewise be
able to see quite through the Earth, though the thickness of it be of some
thousand of Miles: But Eternity will be our Mansion House, as being the Palace
of the great King; and Paradise shall be as a Garden of Pleasure belonging to
the same Palace, where the Saints, those heavenly Kings shall go to recreat
themselves, whose Bodies shall shine brighter then the Sun in the Firmamament,
for the Glory of God shall pierce them through and through. Now how great,
think we, will that Glory be, when many hundred thousands of such Bodies are
met together: But besides, there we shall see also Christ our Savior, whose
Body shall be more bright and Glorious than many hundred thousands of the
Bodies of the Saints together; and indeed it will be an inconceiveable Joy to
us to behold his more then Aimable and Friendly Aspect, for we shall see the
Father in him, and him in the Father, and the Holy Spirit going forth from them
both. Here we shall see truly what God is, which in this World cannot be
expressed fully, or understood: As for my part, I can never call to remembrance
the Revelation of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as was showed to me in
Paradise; but my Heart is filled with such ravishing Joys, as I can compare to
nothing in this World; yea, if it were told me, that I was King over the whole
World, it could not give me a Joy comparable to what I feel in my self, upon
calling to mind what I there saw.

FINIS.

