An Exact Relation of the GLORIOUS VICTORY Obtained upon the French and Irish
Army BEFORE LONDONDERRY, On Sunday, June the 2d, 1689. WITH An Account of
Major General KIRK's Arrival at Londonderry, and the Number of Ships under his
Command.
Lisenced and Entered according to Order.

THE Letters from Dublin say, That all Artifices are used to bring over the
Protestants, to espouse the late King's Interest, but they are ineffectual,
which is evident, for that there are in Ireland many thousand Protestants, of
which a great number are able to bear Arms, and amongst them very many good
Officers; yet has not the late King since his Arrival in that Kingdom, with
all his gilded offers of Protection, and Liberty of Conscience, been able to
prevail with Twenty Men of the Reformed Religion, to take up Arms for Defense
of his Popish Cause, or assist to enslave their Posterities.

The French already behave themselves with that haughty Insolence in the Court,
Camp, and Country, as if they were entering on the Meritorious Service (as at
home) of Dragooning the defenseless Protestants, and Lording it over the Native
Irish, insomuch, that their Biggotry and Loyalty begins to stagger, and the
wiser and wealthier of them think they are assisting a Fatal Work to their
Posterity, and Country, wishing themselves under a Protestant Protection
again; the godly Monsieur stick not to say publicly, that Ireland cannot be
blessed until there is not one damned Heretic left alive in the Kingdom.

Upon a modest Calculation, the Papist Army and Mobile, together, have already
despoiled the Protestants of their personal Estates in Money, Plate, Stock, and
Houshould-Goods, to the value of more than five hundred thousand Pounds
Sterling; and the Commissioners appointed in each County for Sequestrations,
have sequestered more than five hundred thousand Pounds per Annum of their real
Estates, and are proceeding therein.

And Orders are given for the seizing to the use of the late King what remains
unplundered in the Houses of all Protestants Absenters; and the pretended House
of Commons have unanimously voted the Restitution of all Lands belonging to
Abbeys, Priories, Monasteries, and all other Religious Houses throughout the
Kingdom, which makes the Priests, Friars, Monks, and the order of that
disorderly Crew to appear in such Herd^ as if they were upon a General Muster,
and the numbers of Masses for Success is incredible; but it is a Question among
themselves whether most are offered for the French King, or his Lieutenant.

Amidst all these their Halcyon hopes, the dissatisfaction which appears in the
most considerate of the Natives, the unanimous proceedings in England, the
firmness and swift proceedings in Scotland, and the Resolution of the Garrisons
of Londonderry, and Inniskilling, whose Courage has destroyed the flower of
their Army, and discouraged the rest, who confessed they have lost before Derry,
and elsewhere 10000 Horse, Foot, and Dragoons most killed, some wounded, some
taken, and some deserted. And it is credited at Dublin, that the Siege is
raised, and the rather, for that some harrassed Troops of Horse (some wanting
above half their number) are come thither from before Derry, and are ordered to
join the Camp that is forming near Dublin, and there to be filled up, whiles
Recruits are marching to the Northward, to Reinforce the Army.

The Account credited at Dublin concerning the late Action near Ballyshannon
is, That there are in Inniskilling 4000 Foot well Armed, and above 1000 Horse,
of as brave stout Men from the Northern Borders of both Kingdoms, as any are in
Europe, and commanded by Col. William Hamilton, Capt. Kingston, and many other
brave Officers, who have made frequent and successful Sallies upon the Irish,
particularly in May last, upon the Occasion following.

Those of Inniskilling having gotten together a great Stock of Provisions of
all sorts at Ballyshannon, which they designed to get thither by Water; the
Irish got Notice thereof, and with a strong Party of 12, some say 1500 Horse
and Dragoons, commanded by Col. Sarsfield, resolved to make themselves Masters
thereof, and were on their March accordingly. But Col. Hamilton drew out of the
Town all the Horse he had, and a considerable Body of Foot, and Attaqued them
so Opportunely, and with that Courage and Resolution, that they were soon
forced in Disorder and Confusion, and the Foot coming up and securing a Pass,
the whole Party was entirely defeated, Sarsfield and five or six more narrowly
escaping, the rest being most killed, and about 200 taken, the best of which
they kept, and the rest they stripped and sent away to carry the News to their
Friends. In this Action they got many good Horses, Arms, and Plunder, and have
gotten home their Provisions; since which, at a place called Killey-Shani, they
attaqued and routed a Detachment that was marching to the Army, and took from
them some Cannon and Bombs, 100 Prisoners, and as many killed; of both which
Actions they have given an Account to Derry, and that they are in good Heart,
and, if possible, will join them in a few days, and take the Field with what
Forces they can make, and bring Provisions with them.

Letters from Chester say, That on the 31st. past, about 3 in the Morning, the
Wind at South-East, a brisk Gale, Major-Gen. Kirk failed from High Lake, having
with him 3 Men of War, and 24 Ships of Burden, on whom are Embarked the
Major-General's Regiment, Sir John Hanmore's, and Col. Stewart's, and the rest
of the Forces, with Gunners, Engineers, and a great quantity of Provisions,
Arms, Ammunition, Bombs, Cannon, Morters, Ball, Pick-axes, and Shovels.

Last Night, being June the Fifth, came an Advice from Liverpool, sent in there
by the Portland-Frigate, with the account following, viz. That being cruising
on the Irish Coast, she met with Major General Kirk on Saturday the first
instant, at Ten in the Morning off of Carrick-Fergus Bay, with the whole Fleet,
under a good Wind for Londonderry, where they in all probability arrived on
Sabbath Day.

There is certain Advice from Londonderry, That the Protestants in
Londonderry having Notice on Sabbath Day Morning, June the Second, that
Major General Kirk, and the Fleet under his Command, were arrived within the
Harbour's Mouth, called a Council of War, and resolved to make a Sally on the
Enemy; which they executed with all the whole Force of the Garrison (about a
thousand Men excepted) and with that desperate Courage and Resolution, that
they fell pell-mell upon the Enemy in their Trenches, and beat them off from
their Three Batteries, and out of all their Trenches, took all their Mortars
and Guns: And so bloody and obstinate was the Fight, that the Protestants lost
about 1500 Men, and the Enemy 6000, some account 5000, but the least above 4000
dead on the spot.

After which the Enemy discamped with their whole Army in a very great disorder
and confusion, leaving behind them all their Bag and Baggage, of which the
Protestants are now the Masters, and of the Field eight Miles round.

This Good News is brought by the Dublin Yatch, Captain Rice Commander, who
went with Major General Kirk to Derry, and left them in the Harbor on
Sabbath Day night, intending to land on Monday Morning. The Particulars of this
Great and Glorious Action is expected next Post from Derry, with the true state
of the Garrison.

The Letters from Portsmouth do affirm, That yesterday, June the Fifth, the
Dutch Fleet consisting of Forty Ships of War, etc. came to the Spitt-head,
where the reciprocal Joy and Friendship of each Fleet, was loudly proclaimed by
their Cannon.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey.
MDCLXXXIX.


