An Exact JOURNAL OF THE Siege of Lymerick, From the 8th to the 15th of
September, 1691.
From an Officer in the Camp, to his Friend in London.
ON the Ninth, about Two in the Afternoon the Enemy came out, and appeared as
if they intended a Sally, but designed only to secure a Ditch that lay betwixt
them and our Batteries, which was no sooner known, but our Men marched down upon
them, and beat them back into the Town, killing about 30, with the loss only of
one Granadeer: All this day our Guns and Mortars played furiously on the Town,
and so continued all Night without intermission; On the 12th, in the Morning
early came over to us one Captain Dobbins, who says, That yesterday in beating
the Enemy into the Town we killed two of their Majors, and one of our Bombs
killed Monsieur La Four, who was Brother to the Governor, and that the
Governor and Officers, to keep up the Hearts of the Town and Garrison, assure
them, that the French Fleet have totally beat the English and Dutch, and forced
those English Vessels with Captain Cole into the Shannon, but that day, or
within 48 hours a Squadron of French would come into the River to their Relief,
and wholly destroy the English, etc.

That the Garrison Consisted of about 15000, of which but 7 or 8000 were well
armed, and had no Horse, nor did any Horse come there in the Night to Guard.
All this day we continued Firing, and about Six and Night the Town appeared on
Fire, in many places; to prevent its spreading, the Enemy blew up Diverse Houses
and Buildings, notwithstanding which, some very Considerable Place continued
burning with great violence until Two the next Morning.

The 11th in the Morning came to the General, some Officers of Cunningham's
Regiment Col. Echlin, of the loss of their Coll. and to pray the General's
Favor to have the Regiment: The said Coll, Sir Albert Cunningham's Regiment
being detached from the Camp to join the Forces for the reducing of Sligo, and
he staying after them, did follow with Ten Men only as a Guard. In their March,
upon the Hills near Boil, they unhappily mistook their way in a Fogg, and fell
into the Hands of 2 or 300 Rapparees, to whom they sold their Lives at the
utmost Rate, killing about 25, but were at last overpour'd, and cut in pieces,
whose Blood was soon revenged by Balderick O Donnel, who was in hearing of the
Guns, but came too late to save the Brave Coll. however he killed many of them,
and Routed the rest: We continued to batter and Bomb the Town all this day and
all night.

The 12th, Last night and this day we continued firing into the Town without
Intermission. This Morning came to us Ten Dragoons and an Officer, Deserters,
who say, That in the great Fire that was in the Town on the Tenth at night, the
Bombs set Fire to Three Magazines; one of Powder, which in blowing up, set Fire
unto, and burnt great part of the English Town, and much other Mischiefs, the
other two of Beef, Biscuit, Oats, Brandy and Wine, which was all destroyed, and
would be soon wanted amongst them.

The Weather hitherto continues very good; the Breach in the Wall is very wide,
and is every moment wider: Our Guns continually firing thereat, which gives us
hopes of being Masters thereof in a very few days, above half the Town being
already ruined with our Ball, Bombs, Carcasses, etc. Our Men are Impatient to
Storm, but when it will be we know not, all things being kept secret until put
in Action.

The 13th. the General sent an Express to the Queen, and we continued all day
to Batter the Town.

The 14th the General sent two Regiments toward Clonmell and Waterford to
reinforce the Militia, there being many Prisoners at the latter, and the Irish
in those parts become Insolent. His Excellency has also sent Miners and Guards
to support them, with Orders to blow up and demolish Castle Connell and the
other Castles we have taken near Lymerick on the Shannon, and elsewhere, to
prevent their being any more Nests of Rebels, Raparees, etc.

The 15th we continued to Bomb and Batter the Town, and made the Breaches so
wide that we plainly see into the Town, which looks ruinous. The Enemy have
made much Sod-works, and a very deep Trench or Ditch with Pallisadoes and
Stockadoes, yet the Men continue impatient to storm, they hoping to have had
Orders to have made this night a general Assault, but as yet hear nothing
thereof, though some think the Camp are ready for the work in all points.

Dublin the 17th. This night was Published a Proclamation of the Lords Justices
for a full and free Pardon to all Raparees and others in Arms against the
Government, provided they come in and lay down their Arms in 20 days, otherwise
to be excluded from Mercy, and not only leave given for any Person to kill
them, but a reward of 40 s. for each Head brought in, Which shall immediately
be paid by the next Justice of Peace, and the public Revenue to reimburse it,
which it is thought will be an effectual way to clear the whole Kingdom, and
prove more advantageous than droves of Cattle to the Raparee Hunters.

Licensed,

September the 24th, 1691. J.F.



LONDON: Printed for Abraham Mason near Temple Bar, 1691


