AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE SIEGE OF Namur, etc.

AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE SIEGE OF NAMUR: Giving a Particular ACCOUNT Of the
several Sallies and Attacks, and other most remarkable Passages from the first
Investing of the Place.

TOGETHER WITH The ARTICLES of Capitulation, both for the Surrendering the City
and Castle.

LONDON: Printed for I. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1695.

AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE SIEGE OF Namur, etc.
FOR the better understanding the Motions of both Armies, so soon as they took
the Field; of the Confederates striving to amuse the Enemy; and cover their
main Design; and of the French, deluded by those Amusements, and endeavoring
to defend themselves from the feigned Attempts of the Confede^ates, it is
necessary that we should make a Repetition of the Movements on both sides from
the beginning of the Campaign; since they all tended to a Siege; of which
Posterity, as well as the present Age, will be glad to have an Exact Account.

The Ma^shal de Villeroy was no sooner arrived in the French Army, but that he
might win the Affection of so many great Officers, over whom he was to command,
he told the chiefest among 'em, that he had in his Stables a Hundred Horses,
which they might make use of when they had occasion: That he would also keep
Three. Tables, where they would do him a kindness to come and Eat, and that his
Purse was still at their Service. After these Complements, the French General
having visited all the Army that lay in different Quarters, from Furnes to the
Meuse, caused those Troops that lay about Kievraine, to pass the River Haisne,
the 3d of June, in order to encamp at Blaton, Two Leagues from Conde. The 6th,
about Four in the Afternoon, he ordered the whole Army to march, and take up
their Post in the Camp at Leuse. The same Day also, M. de Bouflers encamped
with his Army at Gosseliers, upon the Pieton, Two Leagues from Charleroy.

In the mean time, the King of England, who arrived at Gaunt, the 6th of June,
departed the same day for the Army which lay at Aerseel, near Thielt, under the
Command of the Prince of Vaudemont, and the Duke of Wirtembergh. The next day
his Majesty visited all the Posts round about the Camp.

The Marshal de Villeroy being informed of the King's Arrival in the Army, upon
the 8th, by Five in the Morning, Decamped from Leuse, and marching all that Day
and the next, upon the 10th encamped at Cords between Tournay and Oudenard.
The same day he visited the Lines, between the Lys and the Scheld, and between
Ypres and the Lys, and ordered the raising of some new Bastions from Ypres to
Commines, and to furnish 'em sufficiently with great Guns.

Upon the 10th. the King took a review of the Horse, and upon the 11th,
detached away Twelve Squadrons, under the Marquess de la Foret, Lieutenant
General, who passed the Lys at Machelen, over Three Bridges, with Orders to
join the Elector of Bavaria, who lay encamped with his Army at Ninove. The same
day also the King decamped, and to the End he might draw nearer to the Lines,
encamped at Rousselare, over against Commines and Ypres, and advanced the 13th
to Bekelar, a League or thereabout from the Enemies Lines. Now in regard this
Movement threatened the very Center of 'em, as well as Menin, Ypres, la Kenoque,
Furnes, the Canal d' Eauve and Boasingue: Villeroy seemed to be at a great
puzzle, not knowing well what effectual Course to take for the Preservation of
so many Places at a time. Thereupon he forthwith issued out several Orders; he
caused great Numbers of Men to march several ways, under several Commanders,
and changed the Posts of several. M. de Rosen, who lay at Eschem, to defend the
Line from Courtrai to the Scheld, passed to Ypres to defend the whole on that
side, M. de Montrevel, was sent to Eschem, in the Place of M. de Rosen. M. de
Capestan was appointed to command at Kenoke; the Count de la Motte, to command
at Ypres, and M. de Pracontal at Comines. M. de Caraman commanded to Ypres, and
M. Davejan to Courtray, and M. de Montal lay next to Dunkirk. The Marshal also
ordered several Pieces of Canon to be planted upon the Rising Grounds of
Hollebeck, where he had raised new Works, as having observed that part to be
weaker than any of the rest.

During these Motions, the Elector of Bavaria, who lay encamped at Ninove,
departed from thence the 14th, passed the Dendre, and encamped at St. Stephens.
The 15th he arrived at Ename upon the Scheldt, a League below Oudenarde; and
the 17th encampt at Castre, within half a League of the Enemies new Line. On
the other side, the Marshal de Bouflers who lay with the Body of an Army at St.
Guilain, to observe the Electors Motions, being informed of these Movements,
departed the 15th, and encamped near Tournai. The 16th he drew near the Scheld,
and the 17th encamped under the Lines of Courtrai, where he received a
Reinforcement of Horse and Foot, that Villeroy sent him.

At the same time that the Elector encamped at Ninove, the Count of Athlone was
detached from his Army, with Two and Twenty Squadrons of Horse, and Nine of
Dutch Dragoons, and some Bavarian Troops, to march toward Louvain, and join, if
it were necessary, with the Troops of Brandenburgh and Liege, that lay
quartered at Hologne, about a League from that City, and where they were joined
with the Brigadier Dampre, with Four Regiments of Dutch Horse; and from whence
they decamped the 18th, in order to march to Mehaigne. All which time, the
Count de Harcourt lay with a Volant Camp of French Horse in the Condros, to
observe the Confederates on this side.

Marshal de Villeroy being informed, that the King of England drew near the
Lines between Ypres and Warneton, decamped from Cords, and marched all Night
of the 13th and 14th. The Foot being led by the Prince of Conti, and the Horse
by the Duke of Bourbon; and the whole Army encamped at Houthem in Two-Lines,
the first all of Infantry, the Second all of Cavalry.

Till the 19th, the French wrought hard to secure their Works raised all along
the Lines; they also pressed forward the finishing of the New Works, and
distributed Ammunition among the Soldiers. All the care of the French having
been by these Motions, to retrench the more safely, and so to order it, that
they might not be constrained to come to a Fight; a Proof sufficient that the
Confederates were Superior to 'em in Number.

Upon the 17th, the King detached away the Duke of Wirtembergh, with 3000 Men,
and some Artillery, with Orders to advance toward Kenoque, to the end he might
draw the Enemy that way, and make 'em believe that there was a real Design upon
that Fort: But before they could get thither, there was a Post that stood in
their way, about half a League from the Fort, of which it behooved 'em to make
themselves Masters. This Post was defended by above 400 Dragoons, who were
attacqu'd with such an undaunted Bravery, as surpised the Enemy themselves. M.
de la Motte, who commanded on that side, sent a Reinforcement to his own, so
that there was brisk Firing on both sides: But at length the French were forced
to give way, and the Assailants made themselves Masters both of the Post, and
the Mote on that side: They also lodged themselves there, and made a Battery of
Two Pieces of Canon in the same Place. It was the common Opinion, that in this
Action, the Duke of Wirtemberg lost about Two Hundred, and the Enemy near Four
Hundred Men.

In the mean time, the Count de la Motte caused another Battery to be raised in
Opposition to that which the Confederates had erected, and they began to play
one upon another with great Fury. The French also made all the haste they could
to entrench themselves beyond the Yser, casting up the Earth before the River,
because the Moat which they possessed, lay lower than that which was opposite
to it, the Ground being Marshy. They were also Masters of part of another Moat,
which lay under the Canon of la Kenoque: And they sheltered themselves besides,
by means of a Parapet which they raised all the length of the Ground which
looked toward the Consederates, and which they cut in two or Three Places, to
render the Access more difficult.

Upon the 20th in the Afternoon, the Duke of Wirtemberg being strengthened with
some new Reinforcements, Villeroy who had notice of it, sent away from the Left
Wing of his Army, Eight Battalions, and a Brigade of Horse, under the Marquis
of Feuquieres, Lieutenant General. The Night of the 20th to the 21st, was spent
in continual Skirmishes; and there was a Report spread Abroad, that la Kenoque
was assayl'd in Military Forms: But that was almost impossible, and it was
sufficiently apparent, that the Assaylants had no design to do it; but only to
draw down all the strength of the Enemy to that side of Flanders, by feigning
the Seige of la Kenoque, and thereby cause the French to run at the wrong Deer.
For it was a most difficult Task to pass the Yser, by reason of the Works which
the French had cast up; and there was no attacquing the Fort, without passing
that River: And though the Confederates had passed it, there lay beyond the
broken Bridge, a great Quagmire, with a Road about Thirty Foot broad, wherein
the French had made several Entrenchments one behind another. Besides, Montal
commanded with his Volant Camp, from Dunkirk to Fintelle: His Forces stretching
themselves from Furnes to this Place, which is a Considerable Post, well
furnished with Men, because that they who would pass the Yser must take it
before they can come at Furnes.

While these things were thus Acting on this side, the Elector of Bevaria lay
not Idle. Upon the 17th of June the Horse and Foot had orders to prepare
Facines or Faggots to be laid before the Regiments. The 19th the Elector
riding with between three and four thousand Horse to View the Ground about the
Lines, found that the French had posted themselves at the Mill of Belleghem,
which is not above half a Quarter of a League from Fort de Clar, and the Lines.
In this Place were posted five hundred Foot, and eight or ten Squardrons.
Therefore M. General Fagel was sent away with some Troops to make himself
Master of the Post. The Onset was Rude and Obstinate, for they charged and
returned to the Charge several times. But the French were constrained to give
way, and retreated into their Lines the best they could, and in great disorder,
being closely pursued by the Confederates. The Mill being thus taken, the
Victors entrenched themselves upon the Place, and maintained their ground.

By this time some part of June being spent in all these Attacks, and having
sufficiently fatigued and removed the Enemy at a distance from the Place where
the Attaque was really designed, private Orders were given to the
Brandenburghers, the Earl of Athlone, to the Army of the Elector of Bavaria and
the King of Englands Forces, to set forward in Order to put in Execution the
Design which had been laid some time before. For all this while the
Confederates, i^ order to what they chiefly proposed to themselves, had made
great Preparations at Liege of Great Guns, Ammunition and Provision, Pickaxes,
Spades, Shovels and other Utensils for Seiges, which were conveyed by Water
down the River Meuse. They had got together a great Body of Men composed of the
Troops of Munster, Cologn, Liege, Brandenburghers and others, who were advanced
as far as Falaise, upon the Mehaigne. These were all ordered to march directly
for Namur; and the Earl of Athlone decamped from Bethlem's, tending his march
to the same Place. He encamped at Roesbeck the 22d where he made a Halt one
day; then marching three days together, and crossing the Famous Plain of
Fleurus, he encamped the 29th at Melle, within an hour and a half's march of
Charleroi While the Brandenburghers got before and advanced still nearer to the
Samber: And upon the 2d of July, he crossed the Samber and invested Namur on
that side next Condros.

In the mean time the Elector of Bavaria decamped from Castre, about the 28th
at night, and came the next morning to St. Lievens Hauten, and the 30th
encamped at Ninove. The 1st of July he came to Hall, and the next day to Masy,
within two leagues of Namur. The 3d he made his Approaches nearer to the City,
crossed the Samber, posted his Men and took up his Head Quarters in the Abbey de
Maloigne. The Baron of Heiden, General of the Brandenburghers, who had passed
the Samber below Charleroi, took his Post next to Morlaigne, and sent a
Detachment over the Meuse on that side next to Condros. While the Earl of
Athlone posted himself on this side the Meuse with his Cavalry: And thus Namur,
upon the 3d of June, was invested on every side.

His Majesty of Great Britain upon the 27th of June sent away the heavy
Baggage, the Suttlers and the Artillery from the Camp at Bekelaer: And the 28th
by five a clock in the morning the whole Army decamped in two Colums, and
marching on both sides of the Road with the Artillery encamped at Rousselaer.
In the mean time the Duke of Wirtemberg having demolished the Post which he had
made himself Master off, retreated to Dixmude with the Body under his command.

The 29th his Majesty having left the Army to the Conduct of the Prince of
Vaudemont, departed with a Detachment of Granadiers and the Guards of his Body,
and took the Road of Vilvorde. However ten thousand Men of that Army had orders
to march to Brussels through Deinse, Gaure, and Alost.

His Majesty lay the 30th at Grimbery, and the 1st of July at the Abbey of Parc
near Lovain. The 2d he arrived near Namur about a eleven a clock in the
forenoon, and took up his Head Quarters at Coutoix le Chasteau. He held a
Council of War that Evening, and the next Morning the Army drew nearer the
City. The 3d his Majesty took up his Quarters at Flawen, on this side the
Samber.

Villeroy observing these unexpected Movements, sent away several Detachments
to join Bouflers. But the Prince of Vaudemont who watches the French General,
sent away as many Detachments from his Army, as the Marshal detached from his,
and Encampt at Gramme near Deinse.

The 4th in the Evening the Beseigers began to fall briskly to work in drawing
and making their Lines of Circum-Vallation, and Contra-Vallation; but
notwithstanding all their diligence they could not prevent Bouflers from
getting into the Town with several Regiments of Dragoons, and M. Meg^igni the
Chiefest Engineer in France, next to M. Vauban. So that there was then said to
be in the Town and Citadel, besides those Seven Regiments, one and twenty
Battalions, a Regiment of Cavalry, several Great Officers, a Company of Frank
Volunteers, a Company of Canoneers, another of Miners, a Brigade of Engineers,
and Ammunition and Provisions for six Months. By the 12th the Lines being
finished, and some Batteries to cover the Workmen and Pioneers, the same
evening the Trenches were opened in three several Places; and the Beseigers
played from one Battery while the Workmen labored without ceasing to bring the
rest to perfection: During which time the Beseiged made three Sallies, but in
every one had no Success, being still repulsed with loss: Though Mr. General
Fagel was wounded in one of 'em, and the Baron of Plettemberg, the Bishop of
Munster's Nephew, and a very good Officer, Slain with a Cannon Bullet.

On the 8th of July N. S. Twenty Battalions of Foot, of which Thirteen were
English and Scotch, being sent from the Prince of Vaudemont's Army joined the
Beseigers, under the Command of the Count of Nassau, Lieutenant General, and M.
General Ramsey; and upon the 10th, Four English, and Two Battalions of Dutch,
under the leading of the Lord Cutts, arrived in the Camp; so that the Besiegers
were then no less 90 Battalions of Infantry. The Artillery also consisted of
120 Great Guns, and 60 Mortars.

Upon the 12th of July, Major General Salish relieved the Trenches; the next
day, Major General Lindeboome, and upon the 14th, Major General Henkelem.
During which time, the Besiegers Works and Approaches being carried on within
Pistol-shot of the Enemies Outworks upon the Hill near Brussels Gate, his
Majesty resolved to storm those Works. To which purpose, all things being in a
readiness, the Attack was begun on Monday the 15th, about Six a Clock in the
Afternoon, upon the Right Hand, by Five Battalions of the Foot-Guards,
commanded by Major General Ramsey, seconded by Nine Battalions more of English
and Scotch: Upon the Left, Eight Dutch, and other Regiments under the Command
of Major General Salish, were ordered to undertake the Assault. This Attack was
performed with a more than ordinary Courage, and a Success answerable. For
after a very sharp and obstinate Dispute, that held near upon Two Hours, the
Besieged were beaten out of their Forts upon the Hill, and a Great Entrenchment
that leads to the Town, of which the Victors possessed themselves, being the
most considerable Outworks which the Besiegers had on this side.

In this Attack, the Besiegers had in all about 300 Men slain outright, and
400 Wounded. Of the English Guards, Lieutenant Colonel Robinson, Five
Lieutenants, and Two Ensigns were slain; Colonel Matthews, and several others
were wounded. Of the French side; M. Moulevier, and M. de Vitry who acted as
Brigadiers, and the Count of Morstein, Son in Law to the Duke of Chevreuse,
with about 50 Commanders more of Note killed, besides Inferior Officers, and
about 1600 Men Killed and Wounded,

The same day, about Two Hours before this desperate Attack, the Besieged made
a Sally upon the Brandenburghers Quarter, but after a sharp Conflict, were
beaten back, and pursued to the very Gates of the Fort near the Meuse. The
Enemies loss could not choose but be very considerable, on the other side the
Brandenburghers lost a Colonel, and some other Officers killed, and had about
a Hundred Men killed and wounded.

On the Tuesday Night following, Major General Heukelom relieved the Trenches;
the next Night, Major General Salish, and on Thursday Night, Major General
Ramsey. And at the same time, they had several Batteries playing against the
detached Bastions, that were between Brussels and St. Nicholas Gate, toward
which they were making their Approaches with all the speed they could.

While things were thus hotly disputed between the Besiegers and the Besieged
at Namur, Marshal de Villeroy well understanding that the Army under the
Command of the Prince of Vaudemont was very much weakened by the sending of
several Detachments to the Siege and other Places, thought he bad now an
Opportunity to do a considerable piece of Service for his Master, by cutting
off so considerable a part of the Confederate Forces: To which purpose he
drained all the French Garrisons round about, and having by that means drawn
together a Force that was almost treble in Number to the Prince of Vaudemont,
he set forward with a full Resolution to fall upon him in his Trenches, in
Front, Flank and Rear; confident he had him in such a Snare, that 'twas
impossible a Man should escape him.

'Twas upon the 10th of July therefore, that the French Army under Villeroy
decamped from Pont Escanaffe, and quitted their Lines to attack the Prince, who
lay near Deinse. Now in regard that the Confederates were so encamped, that the
Enemy would have had 'em in Flank, the Prince thought it convenient to alter
the Array of his Army, and to post his Right Wing beyond Aerseele, whereas it
was posted at Dendergem; and the Left Wing he posted all along the Lys, a
little above Gramme, whereas before it was posted at Zeveren, near Deinse.
About Eight a Clock in the Evening, some Squadrons of the Enemies, advanced as
far as Dendergem, and began to charge the Prince's Advanced Guards, who
retreated between Dendergem, and the Front of the Army, according to the Orders
they had received.

The Night following, the Prince ordered a Line to be cast up, to cover his
Left Wing and Main Body, and ordered several Pieces of Canon to be planted in
the principal Avenues to the Camp. The 14th, between Seven and Eight in the
Morning, it was easily perceived, that the Enemies Army began to reach
Denderghem, making a show as if they intended to side off to the Princes Left
Wing. In the mean time the Right Wing was surrounded with a Line, as the Left
and the Main Body had been environed before: But the Enemy made a Halt near
Denderghem, till about Noon, when their whole Army filled along the Highway of
Thielt, and came to post themselves within Canon shot of the Prince's Right
Wing: And then it was, that the Prince expected a General Assault. But they
durst not venture to attacque him, seeing him so well entrenched, and in so
very good Order to receive them, the Great Guns being extremely well disposed
for that purpose.

In the mean time the Prince having Advice, that the Count of Montal was filing
along his Right Wing, with a great Body of Horse and Foot, in order to charge
'em in the Rear, and the Marshal to attacque him in the Front, for that their
Forces were much more numerous than His, the Prince immediately caused all the
Baggage to pass the Scheld at Deinse, from thence to be Convoyed to Gaunt,
which was done. Afterward, he drew off his Artillery from the Batteries, and
ordered them to take the same Road; as also the Ammunition Wagons, and the
Infantry, in several little Bodies.

And the better to hinder the Enemy from perceiving his Retreat, the Prince
ordered M. d' Overkirk to face the Enemy, with all the Horse and Dragoons of
the Right Wing, and for that purpose to range himself in Battle Array, from
Aerseel to Vink, which was done; and after the Artillery, Baggage,
Ammunition-Waggons and Foot were got far enough before, M. de Overkirk followed
with the Cavalry and Dragoons, as the Prince had ordered him.

Thus was the Enemy amused, notwithstanding they lay so very near, and that the
Prince did not begin to march till about Five or Six of the Clock in the
Afternoon, and consequently in open Daylight. And this March was performed in
so good Order and with so much Speed, that the Enemy durst not attack the
Consederates. Nor had they lost one Man, but for a Stratagem which the French
used, which was by making use of Green Colors, to intermix with some of the
Rear guard, and to fall upon Two Battalions, and some Granadeers, before they
could get into a Lane through which they were to pass. But the Granadeers, and
another Battalion making a Halt, the Enemy was soon repulsed: However this
Stratagem cost the Confederates 200 Men. The Marshal enraged that such an
Opportunity had slipped out of his Hands, Burnt and Plundered the Village of
Wootergen, where the Prince had his Head Quarters.

When his Majesty of Great Britain was informed that the Army and the Prince
were safe, and what a Brave and Masterlike Retreat he had made, he sent the
Prince the ensuing Letter.

Cousin,
YOU may well imagine how uneasy I was upon the Receipt of your last Letter,
dated Yesterday Noon, which came to me this Morning by break of Day; and how
great a Joy your other Letter was to me, Dated from Marykerk, near Gaunt, this
Day at Three of the Clock in the Morning, finding that you understood so well
with so much prudence, and so gloriously to disingage your self from so
imminent a Danger. I am much obliged to you for it; for in this Retreat you
have given greater Marks of a general accomplishment in the Art of War, than if
you had won a Battle. I absolutely approve your Conduct upon this occasion, and
I hope it will caution the Enemy from attempting any more of the same Nature.
In the mean time, I impatiently expect to hear which way they will bend their
March, now they have missed their Blow. I remain always, etc.

From the Camp before Namur, the 15th, at Nine a Clock in the Evening. Signed,
WILLIAM REX.


But to return to the Siege; after the Attack on Monday was over, a Letter was
intercepted from M. Bouflers to the King of France, wherein, after the Marshal
had given him a Relation of the particulars of the Attack, he very much
lamented, that it had cost his Majesty above a Thousand Men, among which he
reckoned the Counts of Maulevrier and Morstein, the Marquis of Monbron, the
Governor of Cambray's Son, Colonel of the Dauphin's Regiment, Two other
Colonels, 16 Captains, and several good Officers and Persons of Note. It was a
Woman who undertook to carry the Letter to Dinant, from thence to be sent to
the Court; but instead of the Recompense which M. Bouflers put her in hopes of
receiving for her pains, the Besiegers hanged her up upon a Gibbet, that she
might serve for an Example to others, who should undertake such kind of
Messages.

On the 18th of July, Orders were given out for Major General Ramsey, with Five
Battalions of Guards, to Storm an Old Tower that stands below a certain Place
called la Bouge, and the Enemies Works descending toward the Counterscarp; the
order of which Attack was thus. The First Battalion of the First Regiment of
Guards, a Battalion of Coldstreamers Regiment of Guards, and a Battalion of
Scotch Guards, were ordered for the Attack upon the Right Hand, toward the
bottom. The Second Battalion of the first Regiment of Guards, was appointed for
the Attack on the Left Hand, by the Old Tower. At the Head of these Attacks,
marched a Hundred and Twenty Fuseliers, who carried Fascines before them; and
the same number of Granadiers, followed by a Hundred Pioneers with Spades,
Shovels and Gabions, etc. On the Right of the Body which advanced on the Right
Hand, marched a Hundred Granadiers, carrying Fascines before them, followed by
Fifty Pioneers; and the same Number of Granadiers was on the Right of the Body
on the Left Hand, between the Two Attacks.

Half an Hour after Six a Clock in the Afternoon, the Signal was given, at what
time the Battalions before mentioned marched forward in the appointed Order,
with that undaunted Courage and Bravery, which is not to be expressed, never
taking any notice of the Enemies Firing, which was very thick and furious: For
the Fuseliers that were in the Front, advanced with their Fascines to the very
Palisado's, where when they had laid 'em down, they fell a Firing upon the
Enemy, while the Granadiers plied the Tower and Works, the Battalions in the
mean time marching close after 'em, with their Muskets shouldered, till they
came so very near, that they presented over the Palisados, driving the
Defendants from thence, and pursuing them through a wide Place of Arms, to the
bottom of the Work.

But the Enemy firing a-fresh from the Counterscarp, and a Redoubt that lay on
the other side of a Hollow way, upon the Assailant's Flank, the Lord Cuts
immediately hastened to second those that were engaged, with Three Battalions
of Titcomb, Stanley and Collingwood; with the First of which, he flew to the
lowest Palisados, and together with the Guards, a Second time beat back the
Enemy, some into the Water, others where they could best shift for themselves.

At the same time Brigadier Fitzpatrick, with the Lord Hamilton's, his own
Regiment of Fuseliers, Ingolsby, Saund^rson, Louder and Maitland, set forward
toward the Attacks, with the Two First to relieve the Dutch Guards, and those
that were with the Lord Cutts, at the lowest Palisado's; the rest were drawn up
by the Tower, to give assistance as occasion required; only Lowders Regiment
was posted on the other side of the Hollow way, to prevent Flanking and
Surprise. In the mean time, Major General Ramsey commanded the Pike-men to
carry Fascines, and raise a work sufficient to withstand a Musket Shot; and
when he had posted in that Place, the Regiments of Ingolsby, Sanderson, Louder
and Maitland, he drew off the rest by break of Day, to the First Parade. The
Fury and Heat of this Action lasted about Two Hours, in which time the
Besiegers possessed themselves of the Enemies Works, notwithstanding they were
defended by such considerable Numbers of Resolute Men. In this Bloody Action,
the Assailants both Officers and Soldiers, signalized themselves to that
degree, that 'twas no wonder that they who did more than Men could be thought
to do, should be superior and victorious over those who did no more than only
what Men could do.

The chief Officers Slain and Wounded, were Colonel Robinson Killed, Lieutenant
Colonel How, and Lieutenant Colonel Davis Wounded, of the First Regiment of
Guards. In the Coldstream Guards, Colonel Matthews, Lieutenant Colonel
Edgeworth, and Leiutenant Colonel Jones Wounded, Pierce and Morison, Lieutenant
Colonels taken Prisoners. Of the Scotch Guards, Lieutenant Colonel John
Hamilton wounded. Of the Dutch Guards, Goudaker and Panute, Lieutenant
Colonels, and Major Hetzler wounded. Of the Royal Regiment, Major Mac Ilvain
Slain, and the Lord George Hamilton Wounded. Of Colonel Ingolsby's Regiment,
Lieutenant Colonel Sabin Wounded, besides several Captains, Lieutenants and
Ensigns, and others Killed and Wounded; and the whole Loss of Private Soldiers,
according to the Account given in by the several Colonels, was 308 Slain, and
604 Wounded. And as for the Enemy, they had no less than 1600 Killed and
Wounded, by the Information of the Deserters.

In this Interim, Villeroy had laid a Design to have surpised Nieuport, by
means of a Correspondence which he held with a Person who had undertaken to
deliver the Sluices into his Hands. But the Prince of Vaudemont having an
inkling of it, sent immediate Orders to Lieutenant General Bellasis, (whom he
had detached some Days before toward Bruges, with Twelve Battalions) to march
with all speed toward the Canal, and dispute the Passage with the Enemy, which
he did the next Night. The French knowing nothing of this, continued their
March toward the Canal, but seeing Twelve Battalions posted on the other side,
they were so astonished, that they desisted from their Design, and retreated
faster than they came, fearing to be swallowed up by the Waters of the Sluices
which the Governor had opened upon their Approach. And as for the Traitor,
finding himself disappointed, he made his Escape to Furnes.

The 25th at Night, the Besiegers posted themselves at the Foot of the Redoubt
of Pallart, and about Midnight, set their Miners to work: Which enforced the
Enemy that defended it, to surrender at discretion by break of Day, being in
all Six and Fifty Men, among whom were a Captain, an Engineer, Two Lieutenants,
and an Ensign.

Upon the 27th of July in the Morning, his Majesty having resolved that an
Attack should be made upon the First Counterscarp of the Town, came into the
Trenches himself, and after he had given ample and requisite Orders, more
particularly, that all the Batteries as well of the Great Guns as Mortars,
should play without intermission upon the Faces of the Bastion, before St.
Nicholas's Gate, and the front of the Counterguard that lay upon the Left Hand
of the Ravelin near the Meuse, returned to his Quarters. In the Afternoon, he
went again into the Trenches, and about Five a Clock in the Afternoon, the
Attack began. The English marched from the Head of the Trenches on the Right
Hand, and advanced to the first Counterscarp that covers the Sluices. All the
while the Enemy fired thick and furiously, and sprang Three or Four small Mines
filled with Bombs upon the Glacis; nevertheless the Assailants made themselves
Masters of the Counterscarp, and while they drove the Enemy from their
Defenses, the Besiegers made a Lodgment behind 'em upon the Glacis of the
Counterscarp before mentioned.

At the same time the Dutch marched upon the Left Hand, and advancing along the
Meuse, fell upon the Enemy, who defended the First and Second Counterscarp in
Flank, and in less than a Quarter of an Hour drove the Besieged out of the
first Counterscarp, from one end to the other. Which done, the Assailants
presently began to lodge themselves with Wool-sacks, Gabions and Fascines, some
of which unfortunately taking Fire, burnt a part of the Lodgment, made by the
English to secure their Left against the Counterguard of St. Rocque's Bastion.
However the English, defenseless as they were, maintained their Ground, and
kept the Enemy that were posted within the said Counterguard in play, till they
had made a new Lodgment behind the First, which was at length put out. In the
mean time the Dutch perceiving that the Enemies firing from the Counterguard,
very much galled the English, mounted the Breach of the Counterscarp next the
Meuse, plying the and Enemy with their Granado's, lodged themselves upon the
Breach of the Counterscarp, as the English had done on the Counterscarp it
self; by which means, they kept all the first Counterscarp, from the Meuse to
the Inundation. The Enemy all this while kept firing continually with Five or
Six Pieces of Canon, several of the Bullets of which flew near the Place where
the King stood; and one of 'em killed Mr. Godfrey, and took off the Arm of
Lieutenant Colonel d' Eck. Of the Besiegers, between Three and Four Hundred
Men were Killed and Wounded in this Action. Nor could the Enemies Loss but be
considerable, in regard that few of their Men who were posted in the first
Counterscarp, escaped with their Lives; as also, for that the Assailants Canon
and Bombs, and the small shot of their Infantry did great Execution.

At the same time, the Elector of Bavaria attacked, and made himself Master of
an Advanced Post of the Enemies, between the Sambre and the Castle-Hill,
wherein were lodged about Four Hundred Men, besides a Detachment to guard the
Abbey of Salsine, and another House that stood near it, Places both very proper
for laying a Bridge over the Sambre, and to facilitate the Attack of the
Castle. During this Action, the Besieged Sallied out of the Castle, both Horse
and Dragoons, to second their Men, but upon the Electors sending some Squadrons
against 'em, they presently retreated.

After these Two Attacks were over, his Majesty ordered the Ditch of the Town
to be drained; to which purpose, the Dam that kept in the Water, was undermined
and blown up.

Upon the 29th of July, it was resolved that the Electors Men, should the next
Morning early, attack the Enemies Lines, and Retrenchments that secured all
their New Works before the Castle, between the Sambre and the Meuse: And the
Forces appointed for this piece of Service, consisting of Bavarians,
Brandenburghers, and other Foreign Troops, were ordered to move soon after it
was dark, and during the Obscurity of the Night, to advance so near the Enemies
Trenches as possibly they could, without being discovered.

Upon the 30th, as soon as Day was broke, the Signals being given, the
Assaylants fell on in Three several Places. The Assent of the Hill proved
somewhat difficult, besides that the Enemy had Eight or Nine Great Guns,
conveniently planted at some distance without their Works, additional to those
mounted upon their Fortification. But notwithstanding all this, the Besieged
were soon driven from their Lines, and that with so little Loss on the
Assailants side, that had they stopped according to their Orders, there would
have hardly been Twenty lost. But the Granadiers in heat of Courage, pursuing
the Fugitive Enemy, advanced so far, that they drove 'em from the Counterscarp
of some of their strongest and most regular Works; but not being provided to
lodge themselves, they were constrained to retire to the Ground where they were
first commanded to post themselves, which was a good way within those Lines,
which were by the Enemy thought so strong, as well by reason of their
Situation, as of the New Works which they had added since the Siege, that the
Purchase of 'em would have cost much dearer than they did. This Action cost the
Besiegers about a Hundred Men Slain, and a Hundred and Fifty Wounded. The
French sent out of the Castle both Horse and Dragoons to second their Men, but
upon the marching of a Detachment no less numerous against them, they presently
retreated, without making the least Attempt.

Upon the First of August, his Majesty caused an Onset to be given to the
Counterscarp, before the Half Moon, and the Demi-Bastion, on the Left Hand near
the Meuse. This Attack was begun about Seven a Clock in the Morning, by the
English Guards, under the command of the Lord Cutts upon the Right Hand, and on
the Left by the Dutch, led by Brigadier Dedem; who notwithstandig the continual
Firing of the Enemy, before Ten a Clock had lodged themselves on the Right
Hand, and secured their Lodgement. The Dutch also not being able to maintain
the Work it self, lodged themselves upon the point of the Demi-bastion: And
this Action cost the Besiegers about Four Hundred Men Killed and Wounded, part
English and part Dutch. In this, as in all the rest of the Onsets made in the
time of this Siege, the Soldiers behaved themselves with that undaunted Courage
and Bravery, that they carried all before them, and the Oldest and most
experienced Officers declared that they never saw such vigorous Storming of
Ramparts and Bulwarks before.

And now the Besiegers being lodged upon the Counterscarp, were preparing for a
general Assault upon the Town; when upon the Third of August, about Two in the
Afternoon, the Enemy hung out a white Flag, and desired a Parley; which being
granted, Hostages were exchanged, Colonel William Seymor, and Major Storek for
the Besiegers, and Count Nogent, and a French Major for the Besieged. Upon
which a Treaty ensued, and the Town was surrendered upon a Capitulation that
contained these following Articles.

Articles of Capitulation, demanded by the French, for the Surrendering of the
Town of Namur.
I. THE Exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion shall be preserved in the
Town, and no other permitted. Granted. II. All the Privileges of the
Inhabitants shall be preserved, and their Goods that are Confiscated, restored.
Granted. III. All the Inhabitants, French and others, may stay in the Town, or
remove in Three Months, with their Families and Effects. Granted. IV. None of
the Burghers, or others, shall be troubled for having served the French King,
and they, as well as all the Deserters, shall be Pardoned. Granted, except what
relates to the Deserters. V. The Horses taken during the War, and bought by the
Burghers or others, shall not be taken from them. Granted. VI. The Sick and
Wounded shall be Transported to Dinant, with the Persons appointed to take care
of them; and Boats and sufficient Carriages shall be provided for them by the
Allies, (they paying for the same) with the necessary Convoy and Passports,
within Six Days after Signing this Capitulation. The Besieged may provide Boats
for their Sick and Wounded, and shall have Pasports to send for what Boats and
Boat-men they want from Dinant, and may make use of what Boats there are at
Namur, provided they send them forthwith back again. VII. Such of the Sick and
Wounded as are not in a condition to remove, may continue at Namur, and when
they are well, shall be furnished with Carriages and Pasports to carry them to
Dinant. Granted. VIII. Six Days shall be Granted to the Garrison of the Town to
retire into the Castle with their Families and Effects, during which time, no
Hostility shall be committed by either Party, on the side of the Town or the
Castle; and to prevent all disorder, the Troops of the Allies shall only
possess themselves of the Gate of the first Enclosure of the Attack, and none
of them shall enter into the Town, until the Garrison is entirely retired into
the Castle, and the Second Gate of the Second Attack, shall during the said
time, be guarded by the Garrison. There are Granted to the Besieged, Two Days
only, to begin from the 4th at Noon, and they shall forthwith give up the Posts
at the Entrance of the Iron Gate. The Besieged may place a Guard jointly with
the Allies, at the Gate of the Old Enclosure, to prevent Disorders. IX. The
Garrisons in the Redoubts of St. Fiacre, Espiney, and St. Anthony, may enter
into the Town, and thence retire into the Castle. Granted. X. All Persons put
by the French King into any Places of Judicature, or others, shall continue to
enjoy the same. Granted. XI. No Officers Sick or Wounded, or others, shall be
stopped on account of Debt, or on any other Pretense, but Security shall be given
to such as can but make out their Debts, for Payment of the same. Granted. XII.
All Contracts and Agreements made between the French and the Burghers, and with
the Magistrates shall be faithfully performed. Granted, provided the same be
not prejudicial to his Catholic Majesty. XIII. The Horses and Equipages of the
Officers and Garrison in the Town, shall be Conducted with a Convoy to Dinant,
and they may not be stopped or searched, on any Pretense whatsoever, and no
prejudice done to the said Equipages, or those that conduct them. Rejected.
XIV. The Prisoners taken during the Siege, shall be released on both sides.
Granted. XV. All the Hostages may be conducted with a Convoy to Dinant.
Granted. XVI. There shall be given up the Town, which is between the Sambre,
and the Attack of St. Nicholas's Gate, as also the Iron Gate, and the Two
Towers which are at the end of the Gate of the Meuse, toward the Condros,
except Gate Lewis, which is to remain in the Hands of the Besieged. Granted.
XVII. The Hostages given on both sides for the due Execution of these Articles,
shall be reciprocally restored, after the full performance thereof. The Mines
and the Magazines shall be discovered by the Besieged to those that shall be
appointed for that Purpose. The Besieged shall commit no Disorder, nor insult
over the Inhabitants in quitting the Town.
These Articles were Signed the 4th of August, by the Elector of Bavaria, and
Count Guiscard, Governor of Namur.

No sooner had the Confederates made themselves Masters of the Town of Namur,
which they had bravely and fairly won in a manner by Inches, but the unhappy
Tidings arrived, that Dixmude and Deinse were both shamefully delivered up to
the French, and the Garrisons made Prisoners of War; the one by the Treachery
of Major General Ellenbergh, the other by the perfidiousness of Colonel
Ofarrel. Ellenbergh after he had done his business, retired to Paris, to
receive the Rewards of his Villainy; and Ofarrel sheltered himself in Cambray.

Upon the 12th of August at Night, the Besiegers broke Ground, in order to make
their Approaches to the Castle, and carrying on their Trenches about 150 Paces
before Cohorn Fort, toward the Sambre, made a very good Lodgment. The 13th they
advanced their Trenches about 200 Paces farther; and that Afternoon one of the
Besiegers Bombs fell into one of the Enemies Magazines, wherein lay about 500
Granados, and some Powder, which blew up, and did them considerable Damage. The
14th, the Besiegers continued their Works with good Success. The Night
following, the Enemy made a Sally upon Six Hundred of the Besiegers, commanded
by Colonel Seymour, who were posted near the Palisados of the French, to secure
the Pioneers that wrought in the Trenches; but the French were repulsed, and
several of them Slain, and the Besiegers Works were still carried on a Hundred
and Fifty Paces farther. On the Besiegers side Four Men were Slain outright,
and Twelve Wounded, among whom, Colonel Seymor's Major, and one Captain. 'Twas
said that Marshal Bouflers designed to have taken the advantage of that Sally,
and to have forced his way out with his Horse, but that finding the Besiegers
had so well posted their Troops to receive him, he thought it not convenient to
put his Design in Execution at that time.

The 15th the Besiegers made a new Trench of about Three Hundred Paces in the
Plain of Salsine, behind the other which they had raised before; and ran a Line
from their Lodgment, as far as the old Trench at the Foot of the Mountain, to
secure themselves against Sallies. During which time, the Enemy were so thrifty
of their Firing, that the Besiegers had only Five or Six Men Wounded.

The 16th the Besiegers advanced their Trench in the Plain of Salsine, and
enlarged and mended that at the Foot of the Mountain, which had been much
endamag'd by the Rain.

The 17th they advanced their Trench at the Foot of the Hill, above a Hundred
Paces, and carried on that in the Plain of Salsine, in order to meet it. The
next Night the Enemy fired thick and threefold with their Small-shot and Great
Guns, and made Two Sallies to disturb the Pioneers; but were presently beaten
in again; Ten private Soldiers being Killed outright, and a Colonel who
commanded in the Trenches, and some others being Wounded.

Upon the 28th of August, about Eleven a Clock at Night, the Enemy made a Sally
with about 200 Dragoons Mounted, and 500 Granadiers. The First made an Onset
upon the Right Hand, with 160 Granadiers, where they were soon repulsed by the
Count of Ribera, who was visiting the Night Posts. After that, they made an
Attack upon the Left Hand, where the Lord Cutts had posted his advanced Guards
to secure the Workmen; at what time a Hundred Dragoons came upon Lieutenant
Sutton, a Lieutenant of Colonel Seymor's Regiment, who being posted in the
Plain of Salsine, with 35 Fusiliers, suffered 'em to advance within a few Paces
of him, and then discharging all his Fire upon 'em, retreated to his main Body;
after which, the Dragoons pressing hard upon him, he gave 'em a Second Volley;
at what time the Spanish and Bavarian Horse, who were posted in the Plain of
Salsine to second the Infantry, fell in pell mell with the Enemy, and pursued
'em to the very gate of the Castle. In which Action, the Enemy confessed that
they had one half of their Dragoons killed, together with the Officer that
commanded them.

Upon the 25th, came Letters to Whitehall, that His Majesty having received
Information, that Villeroy was upon a full March to Fleurus, thought it
convenient to leave the Camp before Namur to the Conduct of the Elector of
Bavaria, and the Duke of Holstein Pleon, and join the Army commanded by the
Prince of Vaudemont, taking up his Quarters at Bonesee near Mazy. The next Day
the Enemy made a Halt at Fleurus, being joined by the Detachment from Germany,
and the other Troops commanded by the Count de Harcourt.

In the Evening of the same Day, the French marched to Gemblours, and seemed to
prepare themselves for a pitched Battle, for they lest their Tents, and
advanced toward the King of England, as near as the Ground would permit. Upon
which His Majesty drew out his Army, with a Resolution to engage. And in that
posture the whole Army continued all that Day; his Majesty staying in the Field
in Person, from Four a Clock in the Morning, till Eight in the Evening; in
which condition the Confederates stood ready to receive the Enemy, whenever
they thought it convenient to begin.

And it seemed that Villeroy had either a real intent to relieve the Besieged,
or else to try what a Bravado would do. For he caused several Pieces of Canon
to be discharged, which were supposed to be a Signal, and which were answered
by the Besieged with Lights from the Highest part of the Castle. In the mean
time, the Works before the Castle went on very well, and the Canon had made
great Breaches as well in the Castle as Coehorn, insomuch that all the
Discourse was of a General Assault.

Upon the 29th of August, came an Express from his Majesty's Camp to Whitehall,
giving an Account, That a General Storm had been made upon the Castle of Namur,
that still it held out, which Assault was ordered in the following manner. The
Lord Cutts was appointed to attack the Counterscarp and Breach of the Terra
Nova, with a Detachment of Granadiers, and 4 Regiments of Infantry. Count
Rivera, a Major General in the Spanish Service, was ordered to storm the
Coehorn Fort, on that side next the Terra Nova, with 3000 Spaniards and
Bavarians; M. General la Cave, was assigned to attack the Coehorn on the Right
Hand of the Spaniards, with 2000 Brandenburghers, while M. Genesis Swering
attacked the Casotte with 2000 Dutch Infantry, and another Colonel attacked the
Lower Town with about 2000 Men more.

The English advanced with great Order and Resolution, and had gained the top
of the Breach, forcing their way through Fire and Smoke on every side; but they
found the Enemy so advantagiously posted and entrenched behind the Breach, and
the Ground on their side so very bad, that they could not get Ground in front,
but were forced to retire.

Count Rivera was Slain among the foremost, upon their first Approaches to the
Coehorn; however the Bavarians posted themselves upon a Saliant Angle of the
Counterscarp, and kept firing furiously upon the Enemy, who endeavored with
great Obstinacy to dislodge them: Insomuch, that when most of the Officers of
the Bavarian Guards were killed and Wounded, and that the other Regiments had
suffered great Damage, the Enemy still firing with a more than ordinary
Resolution, the English who had quitted the Terra Nova, as not being able to do
any good on that side, seconded the Bavarians and Spaniards, under the Command
of the Lord Cutts, who at the same time having ordered a Lieutenant of Colonel
Mackay's Regiment, with 30 Men, to break through the Palisados, and attack a
Battery of the Enemies; the Lieutenant executed his Orders with that undaunted
Bravery, that he turned Seven of the Enemies Canon against themselves, and at
the same instant secured some of their Mines; by which means the English and
Bavarians planted their Colors upon the Palisados, and made a good Lodgment.

In the mean time M. Genesis la Cave, with his Brandenburghers, and M. Genesis
Swering with his Dutchmen, made each of them Two other Lodgments, of which the
Besiegers continued in possession, and presently fell to work to improve them,
in order to another Assault; and the Batteries were ordered to play afresh upon
the Terra Nova, to make the Breach wider, and facilitate a 2d Attack.

In this Action, the Loss that fell upon the Four English Regiments, who made
the Assault, was as follows.

The Lord Cutts Wounded.

Nineteen Commission Officers killed, and Fifty Four Wounded.

Private Soldiers 339. Slain outright; 682 Wounded; Volunteers Wounded, Col.
Windsor, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Stanhope.

Other Advice from His Majesty's Camp at Ostin, Sept. 1. N.S. gave a farther
Account, that during these Transactions, the Enemy appeared every Day in the
Front of the Confedrates Line; that on the Tuesday before, they came with about
70 Squadrons to Boneff, extending their Line from that Place, to the Right
Hand, near Perwys. Upon which, his Majesty ordered the Confederate Army to
move, extending his Right Wing to Longchamp, and his Left to St. Denis; and
leaving a Brigade of Masy to secure that Post. The last of August, they
appeared with about Eleven Squadrons near the Advanced Guard, but were soon
repulsed.

The next day his Majesty having dined Early, and in the Afternoon being upon
the Road, returning to the Siege, in order to give Directions for a second
Attack of the Castle, was met by an Adjutant sent by the D. of Bavaria, to
inform his Majesty that M. Bouflers and the Count de Guiscard had desired to
Capitulate; that they had offered at first to treat for Coehorn Fort alone, but
that being refused 'em by the Elector, they had agreed to capitulate for the
whole.

Thereupon, so soon as his Majesty was arrived, Hostages were exchanged, and
Proposals brought from the Castle to the Salsine; the Enemy insisted at first,
that they might have Ten Days time to expect Succor, but that was absolutely
refused 'em; for it was plain, that the Enemy had suffered very much in the
last Assault, and that they were extremely discouraged by their Losses.

So that at length upon the 2d of September, N. S. in the Morning, the
Capitulation for the Surrender of the Castle of Namur was Signed, and the
Besiegers took the possession of part of the Outworks; upon which Villeroy
began to draw off, and retire with the French Army toward Flerus.

The Substance of the Capitulation was,

That the Outward Fortifications, that is to say the Fort of Coehorn, the
Redoubt Casemate, the Hornwork of Bale, and the Casotte should be delivered up
the 2d Instant by nine in the morning.

That the Garrison should march out with Drums beating, Colors flying, two
pieces of Cannon 24; two 12; and two 6 Pounders, two Mortars, and this upon the
5th Instance in the morning.

That they should be provided with Horses and Wagons sufficient for
transportation of their Equipage, and such of the Sick and Wounded as are able
to depart with the Garrison, and that the Besieged might leave Officers and
Commissaries to take care of the rest.

That no Officers shall be stopped for Money lent, or Goods delivered, provided
they give Security, or Hostages for satisfaction of what they might owe.

That no satisfaction should be demanded for Houses demolished during the
Siege, but that Cattle and Horses taken in the County of Namur before the
Siege, shall be paid for.

All Magazines to be faithfully delivered up.

All Mines to be faithfully discovered, etc.

Of this Capitulation, Two Copies were Signed, One by the Elector of Bavaria,
the other by Marshal de Bouflers, and Monsieur de Guiscard.

FINIS.

