An Exact NARRATIVE OF THE Trials of the Pirates. And all the Proceedings at
the late Jail-delivery of the Admiralty, held in the Old-Bayly, on Thursday and
Saturday, the 7 th. and 9 th. of Ian. 1674/5* WHERE Eight Persons were
Condemned to Dye* (VIZ.)

Capt. George Cusacke, alias, Dixon, alias, Smith. For taking and robing two
Ships, viz. the Robert, near the Fly* and the A^^* on the Dogger-sands. Gerrard
Coundon. For taking and robing two Ships, viz. the Robert, near the Fly* and
the A^^* on the Dogger-sands. William Collingwood. For taking and robing two
Ships, viz. the Robert, near the Fly* and the A^^* on the Dogger-sands. Gerrard
Stack. For taking and robing two Ships, viz. the Robert, near the Fly* and the
A^^* on the Dogger-sands. Henry Lovewell. For taking and robing two Ships,viz.
the Robert, near the Fly* and the A^^* on the Dogger-sands. Simon Harker* and
For taking and robing two Ships, viz. the Robert, near the Fly* and the A^^* on
the Dogger-sands. Miles Fitz-Gerrard. For taking and robing two Ships, viz. the
Robert, near the Fly* and the A^^* on the Dogger-sands.
And John King, For Taking and Robbing a Ship called the Palm Tree; near
Harwich.

As likewise the Fineing of an Ostend Captain 400l. and Two of his Officers
50l. a Piece, for not Strikeing Sail to the Woolwich, one of his Majesty's
Frigates.

And many other Circumstances there, very Remarkable: the like Court having not
been held for many years before.

Printed in the Year* 16^^*

A NARRATIVE OF THE Proceedings against the Pirates, etc.
CAptain George Cusacke, sometimes called Dixon, and at other times Smith, with
several of his Confederates have been detained above six months Prisoners in
the Marshalses in order to their Trial, which at last was appointed to be on
Thursday the seventh of Ian. Instant, at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayley, as a
place most convenient for that purpose; But this Captain being it seems
conscious of his own Merits, and apprehensive of the danger, on the Monday
before in the Night time broke Prison, getting first down a Chimney into a
lower Chamber, and then by a rope into a Garden, and so cleverly made his
escape, and could not be heard of till this very Thursday, just as the Court
was going to sit; at which time diligent inquiry having been made all ways, and
rewards promised for his Discovery; News came that there was notice of him at a
certain House toward the upper end of Holbourn, where immediately after he was
taken in bed with a Woman, who was brought along with him forth with to the
Old-Bayley, and was by some reported to be his Sister; The other prisoners were
brought over the Water with a strong guard.

The Court was held by special commission of Oier and Terminer, and
Jail-delivery, directed to Honorable persons of the Court of Admiralty, and
several of his Majesty's Justices of the Courts at Westminster, etc. A silver
Oar was born before the Judge of the Admiralty, and three Anchors put up on a
cloth above the Kings Arms, over the Bench.

The Judge after the Commission read gave his charge to the grand Inquest in an
excellent Oration, acquainting them with his Majesty's right of Soveraignity
over the British Seas even to the very shores of his Neighbors; that they
have always been accounted the royal Chambers of our English Monarchs, whose
Jurisdiction extends to punish all outrages, violencies, and offenses
whatsoever committed thereupon by any persons whether his Subjects or strangers
upon Ships, persons, or goods of our own Nation, or others in Amity with us;
Then he showed the heiniousness of the crime of Pyracy, that it was against the
Law of Nations, destructive to commerce, and therefore particularly branded by
our English Laws by being excepted out of the benefit of Clergy, allowed in
other cases, deviding the offenses he had to give them in charge as the
subjects of their enquiry at this time into things against the statute Law, and
things contrary to the laws customs and usages of the Admiralty, on each of
which he particularly enlarged, and amongst other things declared the Ceremony
of the Flag to be our Kings indubitable right, whereby al Ships whatsoever in
those Seas are bound to strike to those of his Majesty's wherever they meet
them, and that all that refuse so to do are severely punishable by the Laws and
customs of the Admiralty, etc.

Immediately after this, six prisoners were brought to the Bar: viz. George
Cusack, William Coundon, Gerrard Stack* Simon Harker, Henry Lovewell, and
William Collingwood; who were indicted for that on the third Day of July last
past they Pyratically and feloniously did set upon a Ship called the Robert
near a place called the Fly on the Coast of Holland, and by another indictment
that they had feloniously stolen several goods out of another ship, whose names
to the Jurors was unknown. To both these Indictments they pleaded not guilty:
But upon the Evidence the case appeared to be in effect thus* Crusacke and
others of his company, having a design to rob this ship, and understanding the
Master wanted Seamen, set two of their Confederates to offer their service to
him, where they were entertained, and at last betrayed the ship into his hands,
which he carried away, etc. The Captain at first took some exception to the
Jury not for any prejudice against any particular men of them, but because they
were Citizens, who did not, he said, understand Marine affairs, and that it was
necessary Sea Captains and Masters of ships should have been empannel'd, upon
which ocasion he cried out. We will be tried my Lord by men of our own Trade.
Which being understood in another sense made not only the Audience, but his
fellow Prisoners to laugh heartily; But being over ruled in this, he next
insisted on a Commission from the French King, which was read, but was found to
be directed to another person; but he alleged it was his Kinsman, who had the
grant of a Commission at the same time, and that by mistake the Commissions
were changed, and so his Kinsmans Commission sent to him from Calice to London,
where he paid a sum of money for it to the French resident, and that he not
being able to read French could not perceive the error, but acted by it, not
doubting but it had been his own, and that this Ship the Robert was never made
any free ship of England, but the owners were Dutch, and lived in Rotterdam,
and that they hoped the Court would all^w of his Commission, the Court told him
the Commission was nothing worth, for if it had been directed to him (as it was
not) there yet was no power given him thereby to seize ships of England as this
was proved to be; besides they asked how he durst take a Commission from any
foreign Prince directly contrary to the late treaty and his Majesty's
Proclamation. To which he replied that his Commission bore date before that
proclamation; and besides insisted that whereas by the Indictment he was
charged with an offense committed Super altum Mare upon the Sea, this Ship was
taken in one of the Dutch ports, and so not appertaining to the Jurisdiction of
the English Admiralty, but this the witnesses refuted proving she was taken
three Leagues out at Sea off from the Fly.

This having taken up some time in debate, and all heard that the Prisoners
could offer. Three more were brought to the Bar, viz. Michael Fitz-Gerrard,
Morice Fitz-Gerrard, and Daniel Cokry, who together with the six others before
named were afresh indicted on Two other indictments for taking Pyratically a
Ship called the Ann laden with Deals from Norway, and manned by Danes the Ship
valued at six hundred pound the lading (most part of which belonged to Capt.
Sherter on the Bankside) reckoned in the Indictment at 300 l. They took her on
the 23 d. of August last, on the Dogg^rsands, and putting the men they found on
board her into an old Fly-boat they had formerly taken, turned them adrift, who
after much danger and hardship, got ashore near Yarmouth, and now came in to
Evidence against them: as for the ship, they had sold her at Aberdeen, for 250
l. To all this the prisoners had little to say in excuse, only the Captain
pleaded his Commission, and that he was informed it was a Dutch ship that some
of the owners lived in Holland, etc.

So that after some time, The Jury brought them All, (Except Morris
Fitz-Gerrhard, and Cokry, against whom there was no sufficient proof, so that
they were Cleared) In guilty, some upon 2* and 3, some (particularly the Capt.)
upon all 4 of the before recited Indictments of Pyracy and Robbery.

This Mr. Cusacke, appeared to be a person of a clear courage, and good
understanding: he pleaded very well for his life, but the matter was too foul
to be washed off with good words.

There was likewise one Capt. Dela Mare of Guernsey, with John King, and
William Kendal, tried for robbing a Scotch ship called the Palm Tree off of
Harwich, and stealing several sums of Money and Goods, the Capt. showed a
French Commission, and that being at Sea in want of some Cordage and provision,
he went on board this ship, and took some necessaries, promising to pay for
them, but as for Money he knew nothing of it, but told the Master at that time
when he complained, that if he could find who had it, it should be restored.
However, plain proof came in, that saw King take it out of the Chest, so he
only was found Guilty, and the other two Acquitted*

A Captain belonging to Ostend, and two of his Officers, subjects to the King
of Spain, were Indicted and found Guilty of a Contempt for not strikeing their
Flag, and lowering their Topsail, being thereunto required by the Woolwich, one
of his Majesty's Frigates, who gave them three guns, and yet still they
obstinately refused, to the high Contempt of his Majesty, and abuse of his
Royal prerogative. They had all the favor that was possible shown them in
their Trial* because they were strangers, an Interpreter was allow^d them, and
a Jury half English and the rest of them Aliens, who could not but bring them
in Guilty, their Obstinacy and Contempt being apparently proved by several
Witnesses.

Five Young men were Indicted for a Riot and Rescue on the Sea, of which they
acknowledged themselves guilty, and were fined 5 l: a piece.

The court having withdrawn about an hour, returned to give Judgment, which
was performect in most grave and solid speeches, seting forth the nature and
aggravations of their crimes, and ad^ising them to prepare for Death, etc.
Capt. Cusacke presented a petition, wherein he begged his life very
pathetically, recounting his former services, and offering himself to the
service of his Majesty's galleys at Tangier, till by his future good demeanor
and services he might wash off the stanes of his late ill actions, etc. Most of
the others presented petitions also, desiring mercy and favor of the court,
who proceeded to give Judgment. Which against Captain Cusacke and the seven
others before mentioned to be convicted for pyracy and Robbery was. That they
should be hanged till they were dead.

As for the Ostenders, the Captain was fined four hundred sterling, and the
other two fifty pound a piece; for their contempt. The Court declaring his
Majesty's extraordinary favor in this proceeding, since by contumelious
speeches, and taking one of our ships they had justly merited capital
punishment, and might have been prosecuted accordingly.

Finis.

