AN EXAMINATION OF THE IMPARTIAL State of the CASE OF THE EARL of DANBY. IN A
LETTER TO A Member of the House of Commons.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Walter Davis, Bookbinder, in
Amen-Corner near Paternoster-Row. 1680.

AN EXAMINATION Of the (pretended) Impartial State of the CASE Of the EARL of
DANBY, etc.
THough I have little curiosity to read the Pamphlets that swarm at this time,
and think it almost as great an Error to mix with the Crowd of Writers, as to
mingle with any other Riot; yet I was drawn from my own Inclinations, by so
specious a Title, as, An Impartial State of the Case of the Earl of DANBY,
having been conversant in many Affairs that relate to that Lord.

At the first Reading of it, I was not a little surpised to find, (as I then
thought) a thing Published with such a Title, and confirmed with such confident
promises of Truth, and yet to be composed of Three things so far from
Impartiality.

The First is the manner of Arguing, which is most upon Questions begged.

The Second is, of many Untruths, which I presumed were easy to make appear by
matter of Fact.

The Third is, an endeavor to fix upon the King, most of the Errors and
Crimes that were Charged on him.

Yet with this first Nation I was not satisfied, but read it more carefully the
second time; and being then convinced it was subject to these Errors, I
thought it my Duty to my King and Country, to let them not be ignorant of any
Information that I could give; since some particular knowledge that I am
furnished withal, makes me more capable to present them with some Observations
than others, though of greater Abilities then I, could have done.

I therefore applied my self to Examine this sharp Censure upon the Parliament,
for so ill Rewarding the Merits of this Deserving Lord, as to let Malice have
too great a share in his Prosecution: And in the same place there is an
assurance, that nothing should be related, but what may be depended upon for
Truth.

Who the Author of this is, I cannot tell; but if it were not the Lord
himself, it is a Friend more passionate than usual, and one that gives him so
large a Character, and in whose Cause he condemns both King and Country; that
it seems hardly credible, that one man should be so extravagantly kind for
another, but rather the production of Self-Interest and Conceit; and comparing
the Style and Arguments with this Lords Speech in the House of Peers when he
was Charged, it helps to confirm my Opinion, that this Lord was the Friend that
Writ it; and it is more probable, that he is so much a Friend to himself, than
that any other should be so to him.

I shall now proceed to particular Remarks, and begin with the first matter of
Fact; The faithful Discharge of this Lords Trust as Treasurer of the Navy, to
the satisfaction of His Majesty, and the great content of the Seamen.

It Is fit to observe, That this Office depends on the directions of the
Commissioners of the Navy what to pay, and on the Lord Treasurer, or
Commissioners of the Treasury, for Money to pay; so that if this Lord gave
content, it seems he was supplied to make himself capable of the performance.
But his Impartial Friend attributes all this to his Lordship, as he does other
things to his Management with so much Prudence and Success.

But yet it will appear he has but ill-luck in his first Assertions; for since
the Treasury of the Navy is so confined, the great Trust that remains in him,
is only in Sums of Money, which can be violated by no ways, but falsely
disposing it, or applying some to his own private use; the last of which has
been counted a high Crime; for the King's Treasures have ever been taken to be
Sacra Patrimonia, and none were to use any of it, but were liable to great
punishments.

But this Lord ventured to apply Two thousand seven hundred forty seven pounds
five shillings and eleven pence of the Kings Money to his own use, and was
short so much in his Account for his Faithful Discharge of Treasurer of the
Navy; and was forgiven it by a Privy Seal, bearing date the 21 of February,
1676. which was about three years after he was Lord Treasurer. A seasonable
time to pass such an Account, to be forgiven for some Money, when he had gotten
the Command of all the rest: but I shall not dispute whether this fault
hindered His Majesty from being satisfied with his performance in that
employment, since his bounty and goodness was in other things much more
extended to this Lord; but how well returned, will appear by the following
Observations.

After this stumble in the Threshold, he proceeds to his advancement in 73. to
the place of Lord Treasurer, which, he says, he managed with so great Prudence
and Success, that contrary to all Men's expectations, but especially of his
Enemies (who assured themselves of his immediate ruin by that Preferment) he
supported for near six years that condition of his Master, which it was not
then thought could have been made to subsist for so many Months, without any
Supplies or Burdens laid upon the People in all his time.

Here his Impartial Friend begins boldly to assert, and as confidently to beg
the Question; That this Lord supported the Kings Condition for six years, that
was thought could not have been made subsist six Months. I believe 'twould
puzzle the Author to name the Persons that were of this Opinion; for they could
find no subject matter for their Judgment, but must be guided by Flattery or
Ignorance. And 'twere very uncharitable, if not malicious, to believe, that
those that Managed the Revenue before this Lord, should be so weak and
dishonest, (for less than such a Conjunction, could not reduce such a Revenue
to so deplorable a condition) as to give any a just ground to believe they had
not left a subsistence for six Months.

This heavy Charge on his Predecessors, seems not only very partial, but very
extravagant; which will be best discerned, by examining the great Success and
Prudence of this Lord; and perhaps it will appear, that Men should rather have
judged, and his Enemies have apprehended, that the Kings Revenue was left in
such a condition to this Lord, that it might easily have been supported for
much a longer time than six years; and if any Calculation was made for his
Ruin, it must have been from other causes.

As to that of Supplies, it is very true, that there were none given directly
to the Kings sole use in his time: but the Eighteen Months Tax for 1238750 l.
which was given in the Lord Cliffords time, was all paid in this Lord's; half
of which, viz. the last three Quarters, was solely disposed by him, and the
first three by the Lord Clifford, for Public Uses; which contributed to leave
the Kings condition in a better posture than is here acknowledged; which will
be shown in a more proper place, when I set down the state of the Kings
condition, in point of his Revenue, as it was left by his Predecessor the Lord
Clifford.

At the same time I will present how this Lord left it; by which every
reasonable man will be best convinced. Yet before I plainly set them down, I
will beg leave to take notice of some Particulars, which perhaps may be useful
to the consideration of the Generals.

The first Illustration of this Lords Prudence is drawn from the Chargeable War
with the Dutch, the whole burden of which, this Impartial Friend would lay
upon this Lord to discharge; forgetting, or resolving to forget all but his
concerns; and that the War was begun in the time of the Commissioners, and the
great Charge of it was in the time of the Lord Clifford, who might as well
complain, that he had no benefit of any Tax given in his time, as this Lord,
that there was none given in his.

But that I may not say more than I can clear, nor desire to be believed only
from confident affirmations, I must acknowledge that I have seen the
disposition of the three first Quarters of the Tax: the first was made the
third of April, 1673. which was not three Months before the Lord Clifford
resigned his staff; the second also was signed by the Lord Clifford; the third
Quarter was projected by the Lord Clifford with this Lord, then Sir Thomas
Osborne, whose Name I have seen to the bottom of the List, being so entered at
the Exchequer: the other three Quarters were not meddled with, but left wholly
to the disposition of this Lord, in whose time also, al these six were paid.
Concerning other Taxes and Moneys, I shall give the Account in a more proper
place, and only add this Observation, That all Assignments upon this Tax, ever
found credit for the advancing of Money; and this burden of the Dutch War did
not lie so wholly upon this Lord, nor was the Tax so unuseful to him in
discharging of his part of it.

I will not unnecessarily dwell upon particulars, as, what Arrears were upon
several Offices; the general states when laid down will best answer that: but I
will only touch upon some others that will not relate to that, whereby every
thing may have its just examination.

One great particular applied to the Honor of this Lord, and to the Infamy of
others, is the settling the Debt to the Goldsmiths; which yet is not a Debt
paid, but the settling of a perpetual Interest to be paid. I will not deny but
'twas a just and good action; nay, though Mr. Coleman claims a share in it,
whose benefit perhaps only made him active in it.

But upon this occasion I would only present a small view of the Impartiality
of this Writer; he calls this stop of the Exchequer an Infamous Action, and
fixes it upon many persons, allowing no excuse for them; though it was owned by
the King in a public Declaration, by reason of the necessity of Affairs; but
when this Lord was Charged with Crimes of higher natures, he allows the Plea
that the King commanded it, and though privately, to be sufficient to wipe off
all Infamy from him. This cannot appear good Reason, or clear Justice, and less
showed toward the King than any: if this Lord be charged with an ill Action,
it must be fixed on the King; and if a good one be to be claimed, it is wholly
applied to this Lords Honor, and the King must be allowed no share of his own
goodness.

The next particulars he uses to help show what great things this Lord
performed, is, the War of Algiers, and the Rebellion in Virginia: the last
quickly ceased; and while both happened, if there had been a considerable Fleet
for Summer and Winter Guards kept out besides, it had been a matter of some
consideration; otherwise, the sparing of those, was more considerable than the
paying for these.

Other more slight particulars are set forth in the next Paragraph; the great
abatement of the Corn-Act, to the diminishing the Customs Threescore thousand
pounds a year: The Act for Prohibiting the French Commodities, which has lost
not less than one hundred and fifty thousand pounds a year from the said
Revenue, which this Lords Predecessors did receive yearly into the Exchequer.
What these Acts might lessen from what the Customs might have been none, can
well guess; but one thing will confute the Argument, viz. That there was more
paid in his Predecessors times; for let any take a medium of the time of this
Lords being Lord Treasurer, and 'twill appear, the Customs never yielded so
much as in his days.

The next complaint is, the 200000 l. borrowed on the fifth part of the Excise,
and the inconvenient manner of repaying it. This I confess is hard to be
understood: for in some measure this Money was of use, not of disadvantage to
this Lord; for the full 200000 l. was lent in his time; and at his going out,
on the 25th of March, 1679. 83400 l. was left to pay, which since was paid by
these present Commissioners; so that of consequence that sum was used in the
assistance of his management, and not the whole any burden, to make the work
so much the harder for his Prudence and Success.

The next Paragraph sets forth this Lords care to be very great, to see Money
applied to the most public uses, as will appear by the weekly Certificates in
the Exchequer, (to which he appeals) and from which public uses he never
diverted one penny that was so appropriated, (notwithstanding the many false
suggesting to the contrary, etc.)

This dark Text needs a Commentary. First, as to the Weekly Certificates of the
Exchequer: it is to be observed that they do indeed give an Account of all
Appropriated Moneys; but by the way, lest it should be taken for granted it
does so of all other Moneys, it is fit to let it be understood, that though it
should and ought to do so, yet this Lord caused many Sums of Money to be paid
by his private direction, and never conizable in the Exchequer, which the
Commissioners of the Excise cannot deny; and Mr. Bertie, or a private Letter,
the Voucher for their being placed and allowed to their Account. That he never
diverted any appropriated Money (he means, I suppose, by Acts of Parliament) is
very true; but it is as true, that he could not have done it, if he had the
inclination to have attempted it; for his Warrant or directions would have met
with no obedience in the Exchequer; for the Auditor would not have directed
Moneys, nor the Tellers have paid it to a wrong Voucher; which renders not the
Exchequer a proper way for private dispositions of Money; for there no Lord
Treasurer can be obeyed against an Act of Parliament expressly directing, nor in
any thing that is derived solely from his own Authority: but yet where this
Lord had power to divert, he has not been scrupulous to use it; for when Money
was lent on the credit of the Fifth part of Excise, he hindered it from coming
in; (which was often complained of publicly at the Exchequer by the Lenders of
the Money) and diverted it to other uses: Nor can the late Commissioners of the
Excise deny this; if they should, the Lenders will prove it, who daily
solicited them to bring it in.

A second instance is in the Poll-Bill, which was given for an actual War with
France, upon which many Eastland Merchants were promised payment for Hemp and
Masts, and other Furniture for Ships, which were taken up of them; but no care
taken to reserve Money for them out of the Act, but are now before the present
Lords Commissioners, who are contriving Securities, or Payments for them; so
that it seems this Lord observed just Rules where he could not violate them,
and broke them where he had power or opportunity.

In the same Paragraph this Lords Industry is set forth, in the Improving the
Kings Revenue: but this was no peculiar Industry in this Lord that was
unpresidented; for the Customs were once let for 300000 l. per Annum, and
improved to 600000 l. just before his time, and the Excise was likewise
improved; but this is more the Industry of private men, than of a Treasurer;
for by their desire of gain, they bid upon one another; which a Treasurer must
receive, or put out the Candle they bid by; as they say was done in the Case of
Mr. George Pit, and Mr. Brett, etc.

Nor was the Art new which he there bragged of, to break a Bargain, and resume
the Farm of the Excise for the Kings advantage; for the Lord Clifford made him
a President for the like trick, by re-suming the Farm of the Customs, which he
had let to Sir William Bucknall and others, for 600000 l. per Annum; so that I
can neither say the Art is new or good.

Lastly, if this Lord so improved the Revenue, he has also improved the
Argument against himself, if he has not used it with that Success and Prudence
which is so boasted of in the beginning.

For the Revenue of Ireland, I can say little to it; only the Charge that my
Lord Ranelagh lies under, and the protection always showed in keeping that
business from a strict Examination, does not seem to make out any advantage
that the King has found by the disposition of that Farm.

The next Honor that is attributed to this Lord, is, that he paid rarely more
than Eight per Cent. for Money borrowed, notwithstanding the shakes lately
given to Credit; etc.

I hope this knowing Man in the Exchequer would not for proof appeal to the
weekly Certificates for this; if he does, he will sind nothing there of the
payment of any such Interest at all; for this Lord practiced most upon Tallies
of Anticipation, the way that has been the great destroyer of the Revenue;
which is done by a fictitious Bill thrown down by a Teller for Money, when
really he has it not, and he discharged by a Tally instead of an Issue; which
Issue is removed from being vouched by Record in the Exchequer; so that when
it is paid, or when the Interest is paid, or what Interest is paid, never
appears there; so that all the vouching lies among those that deal in Money;
and if they can but agree well, there is no sense against their Combinations.
This I set down as briefly as I can, only to show, that this Lord could not
know what Interest he paid, though he might know what he agreed for: for if a
Tally is to be paid a year after, the Interest may commence with the date of
the Tally, if they be but pleased to agree; and when the Farmers or Contracters
of the Excise have advanced great Sums, the Commissioners have by their
Acquittances given Vouchers instead of Records, for the Commencement of the
Interest; and I have heard, (nor is it improbable) that they were all very well
acquainted.

The next Paragraph is of greater moment, answering the scandal that the
Revenue has been squandred under the name of Secret Service; and upon this,
shows from the Certificates of the Pells, that there has been accounted from
Easter 73, to March 79, Eight Millions sixty two hundred seventy six thousand
seven hundred sixty seven pounds, besides the Interest of the Goldsmiths, and
diverse other particulars which are not included in that Account; and then
desires it may be computed what could possibly remain to have been laid out
extravagantly, and 'twould appear a very inconsiderable Sum.

First, it is to be observed, That it is confessed there are diverse particulars
which are not included in that Account of the Exchequer; but the Argument that
is here offered, is drawn from the Comparison of what that Account is, and what
the Revenue may amount to in that time; which infers, that only the Revenue is
brought to that Account; but since he desires a Computation, I will furnish him
with one more particular than perhaps he desires; and then (the vail being
pulled off) this fallacy among others will be discovered.

First, The Revenue in that time, may indeed amount to about that Sum; but in
the Account of the great Sum he sets down, there are these Particulars
contained, viz.

The Eighteen Months Tax, amounting to 1238750 l. The Tax for Building the
Thirty Ships, 584978 l. On the Fifth part of the Excise, 200000 l. The
Poll-Act, 252900 l. The first Act for Disbanding the Army, and other Uses, etc.
619388 l.

This had appeared an Argument of some moment, if it had been stated upon the
Account wholly of the Revenue, and that it had been left uncharged by this
Lord: but without searching into the fallacies of it, the condition of the
Revenue as it was left by this Lord, will best determine his Prudence and
Success.

The next thing insisted on, is Secret Service, which he says, those that are
versed in the Exchequer know, that many Sums are included in that way of
Payment, that are either for Public Service upon Expedition for sudden
occasions; or to save greater Fees, where His Majesty is pleased to let it be
so, as in the Case of the Lord Treasurer and Chancellor of the Exchequers
Salaries, etc.

This is a compound of Mistakes: for there are none in the Exchequer that can
know what any Secret Service Money is applied to; for the Orders are in a used
name, and no Service mentioned; but the words betray themselves: for if it be
for saving of great Fees, it is of consequence that the Exchequer knows not what
it is for, or else they would have their Fees accordingly; but for this very
cause, because those that were versed in the Exchequer did not nor could not
know what such Moneys were for, the passing of such Orders was stopped by the
Officers, till the certain Fees were agreed; for otherwise they took it as free
gift; and rather than it should be known what it was for, a proportion of Fees
were consented to. But the particular instance of saving the Lord Treasurers
and Chancellors of the Exchequers Fees on their Salaries, by this way, is yet
more unluckie; since if the Author had been at all versed in the Exchequer, he
would have known that there was never any Fees demanded or taken for those
Salaries (though the Orders came in their Names, and the payment expressed,)
since the Exchequer had a being; and this very Lords Pension of 8000 l. per
Annum, was never included in Secret Service, and yet paid without Fees.

As for the Sum paid, as I remember, 'twas delivered in Parliament to be 252467
l. paid in two years and about three Months; upon which I shall only say, that
it was much more than was used in all the time before: and since he says that
one third at least, if not half the payments for secret Service, might be
exposed to view as well as other Payments; I cannot dispute it, but only wish
they had either been so exposed, or else not so paid, that those jealousies of
ill disposing Moneys, and corrupting Members of Parliament, had not so much
prejudiced the Kings Affairs.

As to the way of Arguing, That this private Account is better than what was
formerly contrived: It is not my design to dispute upon the comparisons of ill
things, but leave every thing to be considered abstractedly, and to bear its
own proper weight; but without question, the issuing of the Kings Money ought
to be public, and the occasion intelligible on the Records; unless the
Privy-Purse, for which none sure would grudge a plentiful provision; and no
just Bounty or Reward ought to be concealed; it is just and honorable for a
King to bestow, but not for others to have the secret power; nor can any thing
be more inconvenient, than too great opportunities of power given to any
Subject; it breeds and nourishes temptation in him, and suspicion in others;
and what two greater Rocks can a King Govern between, than too much power in
one, and the jealousy of that in all others?

I will instance one particular that showed a subject for these two, and 'twill
be easy to judge, how immodestly power was used, and what just jealousies it
must give; it far exceeded this way of Secret Service; for a whole branch of
the Kings Revenue, and no less than the Excise, was endeavored to be brought
under the sole disposing of this Lord, out of all due course of Common Law,
(for so the Method of the Exchequer is taken to be) by a particular Cashier was
erected, and one Mr. Kent put in; which project the Patent says was seriously
examined by the Lord Treasurer, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, etc.

The Chancellor of the Exchequer was then Sir John Duncombe, who utterly
renounced the knowledge of it, and thought it a Patent of a most dangerous
consequence; besides, in the same Patent, when it comes to the disposition of
the Money, it leaves out the Chancellor of the Exchequer; and says, it shall
be paid into the Exchequer, or in such other manner as the Lord Treasurer shall
think. fit. These are the very words; and it is probable, if that the
Chancellor of the Exchequer had approved this and some other things, he had
not been removed from an employment which he performed with so much uprightness.

This Patent was questioned in Parliament; and being of so infamous a nature,
and a Question accordingly formed, That this Patent is illegal, and of
dangerous consequence; this Lord found such open friends (perhaps by Secret
Service) that though they granted themselves 'twas an ill Patent, yet for fear
it should be part of the Charge made good against this Lord, and not being yet
so hardy as to give their Negatives, found our an invention to avoid the sure
blow, by the Orders of the House, which give a freedom for any to move for the
adding or taking away any words to the stated Question; upon which privilege
they moved and seconded one another with private zeal in this public Cause, to
leave these words out of the Question, viz. Illegal, and of dangerous
consequence; which they carried in the Affirmative, and then the Question only
remained,

This Patent is --

It Is casie by this to judge, what power an Ambitious Man may aim at; and what
jealousies excess of power in a Subject may justly give, since it could thus
operate upon the major part of a House of Commons, and leave such an
incomparable Question upon their Books.

I have dwelt too long perhaps upon these particulars, from which I confess no
demonstrative Argument of the whole is to be framed; but I thought it fit to
show what Artifice lay hid under every specious particular, and how little the
promise was performed of relating nothing but Truth. What excuse the Author
would make, I cannot guess; unless that he was unfortunate to choose such a
subject to defend, that always gave great suspicions to be inseparable from the
contrary.

I will now give a plain Account of the Generals, which must be the sure proof
of all; first, As to the condition of the Revenue, how it was Jest by the Lord
Clifford; of which I have procured a Copy truly written from the Original
Paper, under Sir Philip Floyds hand.

COPY.
June 10. 1673.
THE Customs were Charged with about 153000 l. for the Navy, Ordnance, etc. and
I hope this last Fleet will go near to clear it.

Almost two Thirds of the Rent of the Excise for the Quarter dae at Michaelmass
next, is Charged for the Forces, Cofferer, etc.

All the Forces are provided for till the 25th of July, and the last new
Additional Leavies till Michaelmass next.

The Household is provided for till Lady Day last.

The Treasurer of the Chamber till Christmas last, except the old Arrears in
the late Lord Treasurers time.

The Office of the Works till Lady Day last.

The great Wardrobe has been supplied from time to time, as their most
pressing occasions have required.

Tangier is weekly provided for on the Customs.

The Ordnance bath had as much yearly in proportion, as in the former Dutch
War; but by reason that that Office has not kept the Accounts, I cannot justly
say how that Office stands.

The Victualler is paid within a small matter, except the last agreement for
the Land-men.

The first Three Quarters of the Tax given by the Parliament are assigned; the
three last are untoucht, which amount to about 600000 l.

There will be in October and November for payment of the Fleet and Yards, in
ready Money, these three following Sums.

From the Advance of the Excise 150000 342500 l. From the French Money 112500
Upon the 3 Quarters of the Subsidy 80000

The Chimney-Money and the Law-Bill are lest free, to be Charged as there shall
be occasion.

By this it appears, that there was 942500 l. left in Money, and the Charge
upon the Revenue not 300000 l. for the Excise was left Charged not above 110000
l. when the Lord Clifford went out; and whether this be a Truth, any that
doubts it may be resolved by Sir Stephen Fox, or Mr. Richard Kent.

And to show also that the Condition of the Customs was truly presented, and
the Lord Clifford in his Paper guessed right that the return of the last Fleet
would clear it; I have obtained a Copy of a Letter written from Mr. Mounteney,
who was then Cashier of the Customs, to Sir Robert Howard, the then Secretary
to the Treasury.

COPY.
SIR,
I Have a List signed by the Lord Treasurer Clifford, and Confirmed by the
present Lord Treasurer, the said List being wholly paid, only Eight thousand
four hundred pounds payable to the Treasurer o the Navy. I do hear there are
several Talleys struck on the Customs, but I know not of what value, nor to
whom payable. I understand the persons have made their applications to my Lord
Treasurer, and that my Lord intends to make a new list; which is all I can say
to this Affair.

Custom-house, London, the 10th. of Nov. 1673. Sir, Your very humble Servant,
Rich. Mounteney.

It now remains to show on the other side, the effect of the great Prudence and
Success so boasted of, by as faithfully presenting the State of the Revenue at
Lady Day 1679. when this Lord left it; and to be as clear in this as I was in
the other, I have obtained likewise a Copy of it, as it was presented to these
present Lords Commissioners of the Treasury.

The Charge upon the Three great Branches of the Kings Revenue Computed to
remain, Lady Day, 1672.

Remains unpaid of Tallies Charged on the Customs, 435106 01 00 Of Tallies
Charged on the Excise, 550464 15 04 To repay the Advance 250000 00 00 The
Charge on the Hearth-Duty by Tallies and the Advance-Money, 250000 00 00 Total
1485570 16 04

And now the equal Reader is left able to judge, (though the Impartial Author
says he is not) whether this Lord, or the People of England, be most unhappy in
his Misfortunes: but to those that will not take the pains to examine this, and
are not convinced there never was a better Officer in this station, he proposes
a new sort of Evidence from Coffee-houses themselves, who have complained of
the good Husbandry this Lord used for his Master, for fear it should keep off
the use of Parliaments.

I will not wonder at such a proof, for the Writer uses always great liberty;
but I will only do the same, and desire those persons also that will not take
pains to examine this, to receive the Evidences now in the Coffee-houses for
his Lordships Character. I am almost persuaded, that if Ballads had been sung
in his favor, they would have been urged as Evidences of his Innocence; but I
dare not take the liberty to urge those that are sung on the contrary, for
Testimonies of his guilt; but after such Evidences as Coffee-houses introduced,
the next may probably be Ballads.

I have now finished my Observations on that part of this Lords Ministry which
belonged to the Treasury, and shall now proceed to State Affairs, in which
other Sphere, (for 'twas not enough to shine in one) the Impartial Author
presents him as great a Minister as he has done a Treasurer; concluding as he
begun, That what he had said concerning this Lords Administration in his Office
as Lord High Treasurer, he spoke upon certain knowledge; and what he shall say
in relation to his Transactions in the Affairs of State, are partly so, and the
rest upon such assurances, that he is no less confident of the Truth of them.

Thus he tells us, that he builds upon some assurances by him received, as
firmly as on his own certain knowledge. This I suppose he might do, without any
Compliment to those from whom he received them; for by the Examinations of all
compared, 'twill I suppose appear, their Credits ought to have no pre-eminence.

He first introduces his Discourse with a Complaint he heard this Lord make,
that it was an infinite Misfortune to him, that His Majesty did take him so
much from the business of the Treasury, whereby he could not make those
improvements in his Revenue, and give those dispatches that were necessary; and
expressed his regret that he was employed in any other business than the Treasury.

As to the improving of the Revenue, it has been discoursed already; but for
Dispatches, I suppose he did not believe much time was necessary, if it be
true, as I have heard, That he endeavored to gain a belief in His Majesty,
that no man could be a good Treasurer, that was easy of access.

As for that regret this Lord had, for the increase of business, and
consequently power in the Kings Affairs; I shall only make some Observations
upon this Lords Temper and Proceedings; which will show, he rather desired to
engross all Affairs, than share any. The assurance of a modest and consigned
nature, would have best appeared, by the easy and friendly carrying on the
Kings business with such Ministers and Officers as were of good repute; but
instead of that, this Lord showed a Temper of a contrary nature, by attempting
the removal of every one that was not prostrate enough to him: he began with
Sir John Duncomb and Sir Stephen Fox, men of most unquestioned worth in their
Employments: then brought a Charge in the Council against Sir Robert Howard
Auditor of the Receipt, the success of which is publicly known, and might
questionless have been very well guessed by this Lord, but there were two great
causes that blinded his Reason; his Son the Lord Dunblain had the Reversion of
the Auditors place, and the removal of him with the others, had reduced the
Exchequer into his uncontradicted power.

The Ministers in State Affairs, (that did not submit implicitly) found him
not less ambitious: my Lord Arlington and Mr. Secretary Coventry seemed to have
Writs of Ease in Foreign Affairs, and very often were reports and expectations
of their leaving their places; and those that were upon better terms with him,
were obeyers of his power, and not sharers in any: and I am confident, whoever
thoroughly examines this Lords Temper and Carriage amongst Men and business, he
will hardly conclude it probable, that any regret could spring from his
increase of power; rather the Character of a very great Man may be applicable
to him, as to our part of the World:

Aestuat infelix angusto limite Regni.

Juv. Sat. 10. The reasons why this Lord entered unwillingly into Foreign
Transactions, was, because he always showed himself averse to the Counsels
wherein he found His Majesty engaged; and reckons up, The breach of the Triple
League, a War with the Dutch, a League with France, and an Army of English then
in France.

These Particulars will not concern my Observations; if any did amiss, let it
be examined when there is such an Impartial Account as this pretended to be
given: but upon this depends the following Paragraph, which ought not to be let
pass without some Reflections.

He complains there, that the Nation was too hasty, and did not give this Lord
time to reduce things in such a posture as might be wished; and makes a Query,
Whether it be not the most unsafe, as well as most unjust practice, for a
Nation to discourage such Ministers as endeavor to draw their Master to his
Kingdoms Interest.

Here the Impartial Author lays the Foundation of his ensuing Arguments; and
resolving to Charge this Lords Crimes on the King, he first boldly attempts to
make him a fit Subject to bear it; and to lessen his own Impeachment, draws up
one against his Sovereign, That he had forsaken the Interest of his Kingdom,
and wanted this Lord to draw him to it.

With this gratitude, he seldom fails to pay his Majesty in every particular;
and having declared what a professed Enemy this Lord was to the French Interest,
believing it destructive to this Nation, he desires,

That the Proceedings of this Lord may be impartially considered, Page 9.
and see whether they have not all tended to the diminishing the French
Interest since his time; and if it have diminished, it will be hard to find
who else there was, besides himself, near his Majesty, who had power and
inclination to do it, etc.

The Issue then to be joined, is upon the Question begged, Whether the French
Interest was diminished by this Lords Proceedings; but it will easily be
granted, that 'twould be hard to find any near his Majesty, besides himself,
that had power: And then I hope if it appears that the French Interest grew
enlarged in his days, it is as reasonable to apply his Power and Inclination to
be the Causes of it, as it is for his impartial Friend to use them for the
contrary.

I will pass over some Instances he gives, which cannot amount to the proof of
the whole; as, the breaking the League with France, Peace made with the Dutch,
the Duke of Monmouth called from the French Service, the Match with the Prince
of Orange: all which are attributed to this Lord, as the Custom is of any
reputed Good. At which I will not quarrel, because I have yielded the point
that he had all Power; but I will only put him in mind of the Address from
Parliament to the King to recall the Forces from France, and the Bills passed
in several Sessions to that purpose, even in those years when the French so
clearly owed Success to the English: and the Marriage of the Lady Mary, unless
the Consequences had been happier, might rather be thought the disposer of the
Prince of Orange to the Peace that followed, than be a prejudice to the
Interest of France, which prosper'd most after it.

In the same Paragraph, it is said, That every one knows that this Match altered
the minds of the Duke of York and Duke of Monmouth, that from being the
greatest Asserters of the French Interest, they became as forward as any for
the War of France.

And this Conversion, it seems, assisted by the Power and Inclination of this
Lord, brought on the Actual War with France, for which the Parliament gave
their Money; and by this we see it owned, that all were French but this Lord,
and people not so mistaken, it seems, that have been constantly jealous of it.
But whether the Dukes of York and Monmouth have reason to thank him for
declaring their Conversions, I know not, since he condemns them for an error
which we found ill effects of; but none on the contrary by the Conversion: and
then he says the King had good intentions, etc. which implies, that he never
had any good before; as if he had now drawn him to his Kingdoms Interest. And
as this Lord was pleased to order it, he never appears to have better after it:
for whatever he is accused of, he charges upon the King, and acts as if agreed
with what he pretended to know of the Opinion of the French, Vid. His Speech in
the House of Lords at his Charge.
that they had the Kings Person and Government in the last degree of Contempt.

I know not whether that Lord shrunk, when he spoke those words in the House of
Peers; but next the owning of such an Opinion of the King, 'twas an audacious
Crime to own a Belief that any could retain such a Judgment of him. I hope this
Lord is the only person that thinks it either probable or possible.

But leaving this point, with blushes to have repeated such a thing, I will set
down some general Observations of Public Affairs, which will best show whether
the Diminution or Increase of the French Interest, was likely to be intended or
effected in his time.

In the first place, to lay a Foundation to build upon, I suppose it may be
taken for granted, that the Parliament did ever appear warmly averse to that
Interest;;and of consequence, must give the greatest apprehensions to the
French, that from them might proceed the only fatal Opposition, and which was
not probably to be diverted either by Skill or Money.

In March 76, the Commons in Parliament presented an Address, most humbly
offering to his Majesty's consideration, That the minds of his People were
disquieted with the manifest dangers arising by the Growth and Power of the
French King, etc. And therefore humbly presented their Desires, that his
Majesty would strengthen Himself with stricter Alliances, to quiet the minds
of his People, and preserve the Netherlands. The Kings Answer agreed, That the
preservation of Flanders was of great consequence. But it seems, not being
thought particular enough, it begot a second Address, on March the 26th,
wherein they again more strictly pressed the King to enter into such Alliances as
might obtain those Ends. And in case that in pursuance of such Alliances, his
Majesty should be engaged in a War with the French King, they promise
cheerfully, upon notice of it in Parliament, so to supply the King, as that he
might prosecute the same with success. And in their Address of the 29th of Jan.
77, they humbly desired no Treaty, but such a one as might put the French King
in no better an Estate than he was after the Pyrenean Treaty.

This sufficiently showed the temper of the Parliament, and their Judgment,
That War it self was more suitable to the Interest of England, than the growth
of the French Power. But this begot great Debates, and showed so many
influenced, that they appeared ill Witnesses for the boasted Power and
Inclination; and presently after, while things of this great nature here had
heavy motions, the frontier Towns were taken, as Valenciennes and St. Omers,
etc.

I will not delay to set down the particular Reasons and Arguments that were
raised against this constant Sense of the Parliament; nor the sharp
Reprehensions they sometimes received from the Notions of their too-much
invading the Kings sole Power in Peace and War. It shall suffice to observe,
That those Reprehensions, Arguments, and Delays, did not seem to tend to the
Diminution of the French Interest.

But to proceed: to make it yet more clear, that the growth of the French
Interest and Power was nourisht in the time of this Lords Power and
Inclination, let it be fairly Examined what Proceedings here could most favor
their growing Interest.

I will presume then to assert, That nothing could contribute more to it, than
all means used to hinder the Parliaments engaging the King according to their
judgment: and probably since it appeared, that notwithstanding all opposition
by Debates, and displeasure showed to some of the Addresses, they rather grew
more warm than cooler in the pursuit; what was left, but frequent Prorogations
and Adjournments, to divert the weighty Stream of the Parliament from running
with unresistible violence against the French Interest?

Mr. Coleman was of this opinion, as plainly appears in his long Letter, where
he says, that it was their dependancy on the Parliament, that encouraged the
Confederates to continue the War; and that their Dissolution would break all
their Measures: and there says, that the good Father he writ to before, so
concurred in his Politiques that he assured him the King of France would assist
it with his Power and Purse: Colemans Trial, page 40.
and a little after gives an Account of the useful Prorogation to the 13th of
April, being to a day so high in the Spring, that the thrifty Monsieur Rovigny
thought would put the Confederates beyond their Measures: Page 48.
and it appears, this Lord concurred also in their Politiques, that a
Prorogation or Adjournment was ever a help at a Pinch; for in his Letter to Mr.
Mountague, dated the 7th of Jan. 77/8. he says, That the principal cause of the
Adjournment for Thirteen days, was to see if an Expedient for Peace might be
found in that time; and the effect of the Adjournment has hitherto been, that
no body will believe other than that the Peace is already Concluded betwixt us
and France.

I will not here set down the frequent Adjournments and Prorogations that were
made, but only observe, they kept pace with the Success of the French, and
were most frequent when they were most prosperous; and that this happened in the
years 77, and 78. when the Power and Inclination was boasted of; and in the
same years the French grew so enlarged with Success, that it is improbable any
but the Concerned Party should immediately affirm, that this Lords proceedings
tended to the diminishing the French Interest in his time.

Since then the contrary so clearly appears, That in this Lords time the French
Interest grew so enlarged; I hope it will seem more proper to give the words
their true application, and to say, If it thus increased, it will be hard to
find who else there was near His Majesty, who had power and inclination to do
it.

I come now to the last great particular of this Lords Proceedings toward the
diminishing the French Interest, viz. The Letter which was produced to the
House of Commons, and hastened, or rather necessitated, by this Lords Power and
Inclination; for 'twere hard to find any other about His Majesty, that could or
would have endeavored to have Mr. Mountagues Cabinets so violently seized; and
had he believed, as his Impartial Friend affirms, That the Letter might justly
have born a wise and useful Construction both to the King and Kingdom, he would
not by so unusual a violence have employed a guilt in his own opinion, which is
confirmed by that Secrecy he enjoins the Ambassador to use in the
Negotiation, for fear of giving offense at home.

I will here continue my Method, not to delay upon arguing Particulars and
Circumstances, where the right judgment must be drawn from the general, which
is the subject matter it self; as, that Mr. Montague confesses great Honor in
this Lord; and that by a Letter to the King, himself says, That the Earl of
Danby might have had more than ever he got by being Lord Treasurer, if he would
have prevailed with the King to agree to the Propositions of the French King;
and a little after cries, That if the Ministers intended the setting up an
Arbitrary Power at home, they would certainly neither have disobliged the
French King as they have done, nor refused his Money.

What Character Mr. Mountague gives this Lord in former Letters, or what
opinion the French had of him, was only liable to a Reflection made by a
Member of the House of Commons, when the Letters were read, That if the French
had an apprehension that this Lord was not once their Friend, he was confident
his own Letters showed that they had reason now to have a kinder opinion of
him. What the Letter to the King himself was, how my Lord of Danby might have
got Money, we know not; but it appears by his Letter now, that Money would have
been accepted: but for the last Assertion, That the Ministers had disobliged
the French, needs no confutation, but what has been said of the whole course of
things; which I fear they will never be so just to repay England by Counsels as
weak as those which so much contributed to their Successes.

From these Arguments he concludes, That it would puzzle the most uncharitable
Censurer to find another cause than their unwillingness to enslave their
Country, why Money from the French was refused.

If this be a good consequence, That to accept French Money is to enslave the
Nation; I hope it follows, that the Sum of Six Millions of Livres yearly, to be
paid for three years, and offered to be accepted, was for the same purpose.

The last Evidences, instead of Coffee-houses, is now offered from Gazettes,
and the Duchess of Mazarines Lodgings; the first declares the ill will the
French had for this Lord; and the other being a place where the present French
Ambassador [is apt to speak more freely] he used such Discourses as would
convince any man, etc.

If the French Gazettes gave such an Account of him, it is answered as the other
was, That they had no such occasion now; and for the other proof, I have heard
that the Duchess of Mazarines Chamber has been more used to the free
Discourses of the Confederate Ministers, than the French Ambassadors. But
among these weighty Arguments and Evidences, I wonder it is omitted, that this
Lord drunk a Confusion to the French at the late Bishop of Canterbury's house
at dinner; and I think it as full and cogent as most of the others.

But I am now brought close to the matter, by being desired to observe four
things.

First, That the Propositions sent, was only a Copy of what Mr. Montague was
to receive from the Secretary; so that the thing it self was no Secret to them.

This Argument seems very strange, because the Secretaries knew of the
Propositions for the Peace; which was likewise known to the Foreign Ministers:
Ergo, the treating for so much Money for three years, to beget a right temper
in Parliaments, was no Secret to them neither, though enjoined to be so,
especially to the Secretary: The Logic would be as good, to conclude, That he
that knows something, knows all things.

In that Letter also, it is fit to observe, that the King was sufficiently
informed, that the French desired Peace upon the Terms sent by the Secretary;
but thinks it not fit to stay till the Desire was formally received, and the
Ambassador as formally empowered to propose, for fear the time should be lost
of effecting the Peace; that is, for fear the Market should be missed of
contracting for so much Money as might secure against the Troubles of
Parliaments for some years. And if Adjournments and Prorogations have been the
usual prudence, certainly a well-bought Dissolution (for three years at least)
must needs be thought admirable Politiques.

The second is, That the Propositions were not originally the Kings, but the
Confederates; so that the King was to gain nothing by making the Market either
higher or lower: and the French had often experience that his Majesty would not
do otherways.

This second way of Arguing, is as strenuous as the former, and bears equal
resemblance to the reason and nature of it: for it is still grounded upon the
Propositions, That they were originally the Confederates; who at that time were
too much discouraged to hope or propose any thing equal to the Common Interest:
And therefore the Market was to be made up in the preventing that which might
raise their spirits, the meeting of Parliaments. Which Mr. Coleman (whose
policy agreed with this Lords) declares to be the Fountain of their
Resolutions. So that the Logic appears this:

There was no Markets to be made of the Propositions;

Ergo, there was no Market to be made of Parliaments.

The third continues in the same Method; which is laid down as a full
justification of his Majesty's Honor in that point, and that he had no design
of getting the Money for the purposes suggested against the Earl of Danby; for
in that case he would not have considered the gain or loss of the Confederates.
And Mr. Mountague is expressly forbidden in the Letter, to mention the Money at
all, in case the French King did not accept those very Propositions of the
Confederates, and in the Terms as his Majesty recelv'd them from his
Ambassador at the Hague.

This Argument also is like the rest, grounded upon the Propositions; and is
made to prove, that the Money was not designed for ill purposes, because there
was so great a care expressed of sticking entirely to the Propositions. Sure he
forgets that but a little before he says, That this Lord in his Letter assures
him, that they were sufficiently informed, the French desired Peace upon those
Propositions. It seems strange then, that the justness of sticking to them,
should be so insisted upon, when the French had given their permission by the
approbation of them.

I wish that in this Paragraph the Argument and respect for his Majesty's
Honor had been better defended, or wholly let alone; but first to bring the
Kings Honor in question, and then to argue so ill in the defense of it, was
two great, though not equal Crimes: for no guilt but Treason, can exceed or
equal that of too boldly meddling with that sacred Subject.

The Fourth is a new sort of Argument, from the last words of the Letter, where
the Earl tells Mr. Mountague, That he believes that would be the last time any
Proposals of Peace would be made; and that he is confident they will not be
accepted, wherefore he might accordingly take the Kings Measures and his own.

How to apply this Argument for any use to this Lord, I know not; it only
expresses an apprehension or opinion, That the Proposals would not be accepted:
sure he cannot mean the Proposals that he says were received from the
Confederates; for those he was informed were desired by the French: it could be
only the Propositions for the Money, that probably gave the apprehensions of
the refusal.

After these four Observations, he proceeds to that expression about the
Parliament (which he supposes has been a principal Cause of giving them
offense) and plainly avows, that he has heard this Lord say, That His Majesty
caused that expression to be used, only for a Motive to persuade the King of
France to give a greater Sum than Six Millins of Livers, which then had been
offered; and because otherways in the ill posture things then stood betwixt the
two Kings, the French King might suspect whether the King of England would
agree to any Peace at all: And these being the whole Contents of the Letter,
and it being writ by His Majesty's express Order, you will easily conclude this
Lord could not be so hardly prosecuted for that only, were there no other
Causes for it; when in truth he believes there are very few Subjects but would
take it ill not to be obeyed by their Servants, and their Servants might as
justly expect their Masters protection for their Obedience.

Before I enter upon the Argument of this Paragraph, it is fit that I should
first avoid the Crime that I presume to Condemn in this Lord: for if I should
endeavor to prove the thing to be ill in its own nature, and by silence leave
the King entitled to it, I should share the guilt so common to this Lord; I
will therefore first endeavor to do my self that Justice, which the law does
the Nation, to separate the King from wrong or dishonor; and I will after in a
more proper place examine the Argument drawn from Obedience.

I need not go about to prove the well-known Maxim of the Law, That the King
can do no wrong; and if he cannot be liable to do wrong, none can entitle him
to be the Author of wrong done: and this is not only matter of Law, but
grounded upon Prudence and Necessity; for to allow it to be possible that a
King could do wrong, and yet that he is accountable to none but God, were to
grant there is a mischief without the Compass of the Laws; and 'twere rational
if the King could commit the offense, that he should be subject to Men to judge
the punishment; therefore justly it is said of the Ancient Lawyer Bracton, who
wrote in Hen. 3. time: Ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo,
etc. and by the same reason the Kings Honor is as little subject to Men as his
person; accordingly the Act of the 13th of the King expresses a care of the
Preservation of His Majesty, by declaring, That in his Honor and Happiness
consisted the good and welfare of his people: so that of consequence, any one
that attributes dishonor to the King, is an Offender against the good and
welfare of the people.

On the other side, if any Favorite or Councellor should be discharged from
ill Actions or Counsels, by charging the King with the allowance or knowledge
of them, what an encouragement might this be for guilty men, and what an Asylum
to fly too when the guilt is committed? In the same Act there is a heavy
sentence on any that shall say the King is a Papist, or shall any ways, by Word
or Writing, publish or utter any thing to incite people to the hatred or
dislike of the Kings Person. I would desire any to consider, whether any of
these Crimes would be answered by Pleading, that what was said, was spoken by
the Kings knowledge and allowance; it would appear, the King that can do no
wrong, cannot avow the wrong done to him and his people. If this should appear
rigorous to any, let them but equally compare the inconveniences on both
sides, and it will appear by this way, some particular men of shaken
Consciences and Principles may suffer by their own folly; but by the other way,
the Public may suffer under the protected guilt of a few Corrupted or
Ambitious persons.

And since in all Ages it appears, how soft men are to the Impressions of
Wealth and Power; how just will it seem there should be no excuse for ill
Councils; and those that will undertake the care of great things, ought to bear
the weight and hazard of the Employment: This would increase the care of doing
well, and opposing ill; and great men would find it better and safer to depend
upon their own Virtues, than on their Flatteries; and Truth will then appear
the best Policy, when Falsehood becomes the greatest danger. And I will venture
to add this farther Remark, That this Lord has been bolder in this way, than
ever any Subject was; and it looks like an ill return to his Gracious and
Bountiful Master, that he never entitles him to any thing for his Honor; but
as I observed before in the business of the Goldsmiths, he wholly attributes
the good Action to himself, and would make the Kings Treasure purchase his
honor and esteem.

I have heard of such generous Friends that have charged themselves with their
Friends Misfortunes, to make themselves capable to suffer for them; but this
Lord has not acted so for his King; but on the contrary, would fix ill things
on him: for if what was charged upon him had been avowable, there was no need
to make any other Plea, than what might proceed from the nature of the thing.

This brings me to consider the Expression about the Parliament, which he might
justly indeed suppose had been a principal cause of giving offense.

Having now with just duty separated the King from the concern of this matter,
I dare proceed to consider it with the reason of the Paragraph.

I agree with the Author, That the Clause that gave the Parliament Offense, (he
might have added, and every Englishman that read it besides) was this:

In case the Conditions of the Peace shall be accepted, the King expects to
have Six Millions of Livres yearly for three years, from the time that this
agreement shall be signed betwixt His Majesty and the King of France; because
it will be two or three years before he can hope to find his Parliament in an
humor to give him Supplies, after the having made any Peace with France.

The reason given for this Clause is remarkable; That it was inserted only for
a Motive to persuade the King of France to give a greater Sum than six Millions
of Livres; because otherwise, in the ill posture things stood in, the French
King might suspect whether the King of England would agree to any Peace at all.

I cannot imagine the force of this Argument, unless it be to show, That there
was no Motive to the French King to give Money largely, nor to make him believe
the King of England was firm to him, but the Conditions of keeping off
Parliaments.

How clearly does it now appear, That this way only the French believed their
Interest was to be supported; and as if the old Arts of Adjournments and
Prorogations had not been sufficient, it is projected now to let a Lease of
Parliaments to the French for three years; and it is reasonably guest they would
have been out of humor to grant Supplies, when Supplies were gotten from
others to destroy them; but how after three years the Parliament should be
brought in humor, is not to be supposed; it is more probable that the Lease
would have been renewed.

The next Objection to this Letter (he says) has been, That it was Writ the
25th of March, 78. which was five days after the Parliament had past an act to
raise Money for an actual War with France.

This is confessed to be true; but Answered,

First, That an Act to raise Money for a War, is no Declaration of the War.

But that Act was grounded upon a Message from the King to the Parliament for
an Actual War, and 'twas so declared to be by one of the Secretaries in the
House of Commons: but now 'twill be hard for this impartial Friend to advise
his Lord which to stand to, whether the King was Author of the Message sent by
the Secretary, or of the Clause in his Letter: for sure, though he has been
very bold with the King, yet he would not make him own Contradictions at the
same time.

The second is, That till such Declaration, all Treaties are lawful; and even
then too, if the King pleases, in whom the sole power of making Peace and War
is made by Law.

There is no question, but in the time of War declared, the King may treat of
Peace; but whether this Lord may treat for it in such a way, as by the clause
of the Letter, is the more proper Question.

Thirdly, he says, That the Kings Ambassadors were then at Nimegen treating of
Peace, and were indeed never recalled, nor forbidden to treat the Peace; and
can it be thought a fault, for a Minister to obey the Kings Orders at home, on
the same Subject upon which other Ministers were acting at the same time abroad?

This is the usual manner of Arguing; but it it affords some new matter of
Answer, which arises from observing, that the Ministers abroad treated upon the
same Subject as this Lord did at home; which implies, they all treated for so
much Money to be the price of Parliaments, or else this Minister may be in
fault, though the others were not: But I suppose the Ministers were not so bold
upon this point abroad, as this Minister was at home; and if not, the Argument
is at an end.

The fourth Argument is composed of no new matter, till at the latter end it is
said, That had it been a Crime, his Majesty's Ambassador at Paris must be in
as much (if not more) fault to have obeyed the Kings Orders at second hand, as
this Lord was, to obey his Majesty's immediate Commands from his own mouth, and
signed by his hand.

I have before taken notice how little it adds or diminishes to any Offense, to
compare it with what others have committed; it being only just and proper,
that every thing should bear its own weight: But if it were not so, I should
not trouble my self to dispute whether the same fault was greatest in the first
or second concoction; but possibly the first might be the Adviser and Obeyer
both, which the last could not be. But perhaps the meaning of this is, that the
Ambassador had been in the greatest fault, if he had believed this Lord, that
it was the Kings Order. But Mr. Mountague did not seem guilty of such an
Error, as to believe so much in this Lord, or so well of the business; yet in
his Speech in the House, as well as in his letter, he affirms, He could produce
the Kings Hand for the most material things, and particularly for the Letters
now made use of against him.

I know not what Papers such a one, so great in the Kings Trust, and who
usually presented him with so many, might get signed; but he had showed the
same respect to the King to have published them, as to own he had them.

After this, he winds up all upon this sure bottom, in these words.

In short, it would be ill for Ministers of State, and worse for their Masters,
if the one may not Command, and the others be obliged to Obey, etc.

Though this Argument of Obedience has been often used, I thought here would be
the properest place to take notice of it; remembering a little before he says,
There are very few Subjects, but would take it ill, not to be obeyed by their
Servants; and their Servants might as justly expect their Masters protection
for their Obedience.

I desire any Reader, more Impartial than this Author, to consider the
falseness of this in every particular. First, sure there are few Masters that
would expect Obedience from their Servants in unlawful things; and the Servants
could less expect protection, unless their Masters were above the Law. The
great Master of the Nation can give no more protection, nor require more
Obedience than the Laws of God and man allow. If Obedience is the excuse of ill
acts, it ceases to be a good Duty; and if Absolution be fixed to Obedience, all
Crimes have lost their natures, and Counselors should only be sworn to a
Princes Will, and not his Interest. If a Prince of another Religion should
command a Change in me, would the Obedience be a good Plea at the last
Tribunal? And the reason holds the same in every lesser Crime: but this
Argument of such an Implicit Obedience, is only put into the disguise of
Conscience, to prevent the true Obedience of Christianity, rather to suffer
than do ill; but such a notion of Conscience is much more pleasant, that
shelters Interest and Ambition, rather than the other that exposes them to
hazard.

I have now gone through this Lords performances, in the Treasury and
State Affairs; and as for that which follows about the Murder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, I easily agree them to be Libels that Charge this Lord with it; and
think it must be an accusation against the Witnesses, Judges, and Jury; and I
for my part must confess, that the matter appeared to me clearly and fully
proved.

As to what relates to the Popish Plot, I leave it to others that know more;
not pretending to meddle with any thing that I have not had some particular
knowledge in; and therefore shall say little to his concluding Argument, upon
an Objection raised by himself, Why an Innocent man should withdraw from his
Trial, and then upon his Appearance quit all Defenses, and betake himself to a
Pardon? But this particular of making a Defense, or relying upon a Pardon,
belongs only to the Lord himself; and to draw Arguments from thence to imply a
guilt, would rather show a desire to find a Crime, than prove it. Nor will I
meddle with the nature of his Pardon, by what means obtained, or how valid;
that must be considered in a more proper place; and 'twere too much confidence
in any single Writer, to Anticipate a Parliaments Judgment: but this Impartial
Writer taking it for granted that he has made it evident that this Lord was a
good Minister and a good Englishman, he concludes, that it may be reasonably
objected from thence, Why a man so qualified to defend himself, should quit all
Defenses but his Pardon: but if by the Observations that I have made, the
contrary does appear, his Pardon was certainly the best Defense to insist on.

The Conclusion of this whole matter brings me to my last Observation, upon the
Complaint made, That Innocence is no Protection to Prince or Subject; for one,
he instances the last blessed King; for the other, this Lord; and makes the
severity of their Cases equal. This indeed, if true, is a sufficient answer for
Pleading his Pardon, when his Innocence could be no Protection; and agrees with
the foundation laid down in the beginning, That Malice had too great a share in
his Prosecution; so that he returns a Charge upon his Prosecutors the Commons
for Malice; and against his Judges and Jury the Peers, as no regarders of
Innocence: though in this Lords Case, arguing against the Libellers that would
fix Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's death on him, he says, in that they did accuse the
Witnesses, Judge, and Jury that Condemned others for it; but now it seems he
argues another way, not allowing so much favor to Lords and Commons, as to the
others. Nor does he deal less boldly with all Kings and their Reputations that
come in his way; upon this King he endeavors to fix many of the Crimes charged
on him; and with his Fathers Sufferings and Virtues compares his own; the
excellent nature and bounty of the first, as little merited the return, as the
Case of the last did the Comparison.

I have not wanted Reflections, That it seems severe to endeavor to add
weight to the Unfortunate; and were there no cause given, I should censure it
as a want of generosity to say any thing, though true, that might add to
Affliction: but since it is charged upon all, That Malice may have too great a
share in the Prosecution of this Lord; I preferred my Duty to the Public,
before any particular consideration, in presenting these Observations, to
inform them of those Truths, which by so many disguises are turned into
Masquerade, and needed some that were well acquainted with them, to make the
discovery of every particular; and the Reader is now left to judge, whether
they are well used in the promise of so much Truth, in this Impartial Case of
the Earl of DANBY.

FINIS.

