An EXACT and TRUE TABLE Of the FEES of the Chief, or Head-Searcher, and of His
Majesty's five Under-Searchers in the Port of London, Established by the
Commons in PARLIAMENT, Anno 14 Car. 2.
Together with an Account of the several Laws and Statutes that forbid them to
Exact, Require, or Receive, any other or greater Fee of any Merchant or other
Person whatsoever, than the several Fees here under-specified, and the Penalty
and Punishment of those Searchers or Officers that shall act contrary to the
said Laws.
Collected for the Benefit of all Persons, as well Merchants as others, Trading
in the Port of London.
The lawful Fees between the Chief, or Head-Searcher, and His Majesty's five
Vnder-Searchers that attend at London. s. d. For every Ship that passes into
Foreign Parts at clearing out SPAIN, Portugal, the Streights, West Indies,
Guinny, or the Western-Islands. 06 00 East India 10 00 All other English Ships
into Foreign Parts 04 00 For every Strangers Ship or Bottom 06 08 The Lawful
Fees due to His Majesty's five Vnder-Searchers that attend at London. s. d.
English and Aliens FOR every Certificate for shipping out Goods, formerly
Imported 02 00 But if half the Subsidy to be received back amounts but to forty
shillings, then 01 00 To be paid by English and Aliens for Goods that pay
Subsidy and pass out by Cocquet or Warrant. Pipe, Puncheon, or Butt 00 04
Hogshead or Bagg 00 02 Tin, the Block or Barrel 00 01 Beer-eager, Wood of all
sorts, Copperas, Allom, and such gross Goods, the Tun 00 04 Corn the Last,
Sea-Coal the Chaldron, Beer the Ton, Lead the Fodder 00 02 The Maund, Fat, or
Pack 00 06 The Lawful Fees due to the five Under Searchers. s. d. To be paid by
English and Aliens for Goods that pay Subsidy and pass out by Cocquet or
Warrant. The Bundle, Bale, Chest, or Case, 00 03 Raisins and Figs, the twenty
Frails or Barrels 00 03 Butter and such Goods, the Barrel 00 02 For every Cost
Certificate or Cocquet 01 00 Transires for the Coast, free 00 00 For every
Horse, Mare, or Gelding 01 00 For certifying every Debenture for receiving back
half Subsidy, etc. 00 06 For every piece of Ordnance 01 00 For the Endorsement
of every Cocquet 01 00 For every Certificate out of their Books, of Goods lost
at Sea, taken by Pirates, or returned, whereby by so much may be shipped
Custom-free 01 00 For every Bill of Sufferance, or Bill of Store above ten
Shillings in the Book of Rates 01 00 If under 00 06 The Fardle or Truss by
English of three hundred weight, or upwards 00 06 Woollen-Cloth, the Bale not
exceeding five Cloths, or three hundred weight, Stuffs, Bays or Says 00 03
Merchants Strangers, Un-freemen of London, or such as ship on Strangers Ships
or Vessels. The Fardle or Truss 01 00 The Bale 00 06

Signed by virtue of an Order from the House of Commons Dated the 17 th of May,
1662. E. TURNER.

Note here, That Merchants Strangers, Un-freemen of London, or such as Ship on
Strangers Ships or Vessels, are not obliged to pay to the Searchers double Fees
or Duties for any parcel of Goods whatsoever, except the Fardel or Truss, 1 s.
and the Bale 6 d.

Note also, That there is no Fees due to the Searchers, or any other Person
whatsoever for Victualling Bills and Contents. And it is farther to be
observed, That there is no Fee due to the Searchers, for any parcel of Goods
that pass out by Cocquet or Warrant, that is not particularly expressed in the
abovesaid Table, as for instance; for a Coach or Cart, etc. if they pass by
Cocquet or Warrant, there is no Fee due, because not above expressed, but if by
Bill of Store, then 6 d. and no more, by reason it pays under 10 s. Custom.

Note, That every Searcher that belongs to the Custom-House, that takes greater
Fees or Duties than what are above expressed, is guilty of that odious and
abominable Crime Extortion, or Exaction, the Definition of which, you have in
my Lord Cooks sense, to be this, (viz.) Extortion in its proper sense, is a
great Misprision, by wresting, or unlawfully taking by any Officer, by color
of his Office, any money, or valuable thing, of or from any man, either that is
not due, or more than is due, or before it be due. 1 Instit. page 368. And in
the same page, he says, that it is ever accompanied with the grievous sin of
Perjury.

Another says, that Extortion is Wrong done by any Officer by color of his
Office, by taking excessive Reward or Fee for Execution of his Office, or
otherwise; That it is no other thing than plain Robbery, or rather more odious
than Robbery; for Robbery is apparent, and always has with it the countenance
of Vice; but Extortion being as great a Vice as Robbery, it carries with it a
countenance of Virtue, by reason whereof it is the more hard to be tried or
discerned, and therefore more Odious. Expos. Law-Terms, page 153.

And because some there are that will not stick to stretch their Office,
Credit, and Conscience, to purchase money, as well by Extortion as otherwise,
it may not be amiss to give the Reader an account of those Laws, Orders, and
Rules, which are now in Force, and established by Act of Parliament, and the
Penalties that are inserted therein, that so all Searchers that shall offend in
that kind, in taking any other or greater Fees then are above expressed and
Established by Law, may know the Penalties and Dangers they incurr, and so
avoid them; and also that all Persons whatsoever grieved thereby, may know and
be acquainted with their Remedy and Relief against all such Searchers that
shall so offend.

And in general, All Persons that are guilty of Extortion, or Exaction, are
guilty of a Great Misprision, and so liable to be indicted; and for their
Punishment, my Lord Cook says, that the Ancient Common Law is, that Extortion
and Exaction in His Majesty's Officers, is punishable by Fine and Imprisonment.

12 Car. 2. For the particular Penalties against all Searchers that shall
offend in this kind, see the 24th Rule in the Book of Rates, pursuant to the
Act of Tonnage and Poundage, which is as follows (viz.) For avoiding of all
Oppression by any of the Officers of the Customs in any Port of this Kingdom,
in exacting unreasonable Fees from the Merchants, by reason of any Entry, or
otherwise, touching the Shipping or Unshipping of Goods, Wares, and
Merchandise, It is Ordered, That no Officer, Clerk, or other, belonging to any
Custom-House whatsoever, shall EXACT, REQVIRE, or RECEIVE any other, or greater
Fee, of any Merchant or other whatsoever, than such as are, or shall be
Established by the Commons in Parliament Assembled. If any Officer or other
shall Offend contrary to this Order, he shall forfeit his Office and Place, and
be for ever after incapable of any Office in the Custom-House. And it is
further Provided by the said Act, that all Merchants, as well Denizens as
Strangers, be well and honestly entreated and demeaned, without Oppression to
them to be done.

14 Car. 2. And also in an Act entitled, An Act for Preventing Frauds, and
Regulati^^ Abuses in His Majesty's Customs, it is Provided and Enacted, That if
any Person employed in His Majesty's Customs, shall demand or take any other or
greate^ ^um of Money than by Law is now due, or hereafter shall become due, or
shall put any Merchant or other out of his Turn, without express Order before,
or im^^diate Approbation after, from the Person or Persons who are or shall be
appointed by His Majesty to Manage his Customs, or the Superior Officers for
the Cu^^^ms; or shall illegally Detain the Goods of any Person, or shall
Neglect or Refuse to make Repayments and Allowances, which are or shall be due
since the ^^^th of June 1660. or shall not after Notice given, Give out and
Execute his Warrant, shall be liable to double Costs and Damages.

Munera ne capias, un^^^ ^^tet Hamus in Esca,
Nulla carent Visco ^^^era, Virus habet.


