AN EXACT DISCOVERY OF THE Mystery of Iniquity As it is now in Practice amongst
the JESUITS and other their EMISSARIES: With a particular ACCOUNT of their
Antichristian and Devilish POLICY.

Composed in the Italian Tongue by One of the Romish Religion, Translated into
English, and now Newly Published by TITUS OATS D.D.

John 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye^
will do; he was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth;
because there is no Truth in him.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. James for Benj. Harris at the Stationers Arms
Sweetings Rents in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1679.

To the Right Honorable ANTHONY EARL of SHAFTSBURY, Baron ASHLY of WIMBOVRNE
St. GILES, AND Lord COOPER of PAWLET, etc.
MY LORD,
SINCE it has pleased GOD once more in mercy to remember this poor Nation; for
discovering to it those unheard of Villainies and unparallelled Wickedness that
were contriving against its Peace and Religion; I thought it my Duty to let my
Country have a Taste of the Nature of that subtle Enemy she has to deal
withal, who envieth her Privileges and Happiness; and your Lordship appearing
to stand by the Evidence with all Candor becoming a Person of your Worth and
Dignity, in order to a full Detection of the Frauds and Designs of these
Vermin, I thought it my Duty to pray your Patronage and Protection of this
little Treatise which I now publish. I have nothing, my Lord, to plead for me,
but only the Innocence of my Intention, and question not but your Lordship will
appear, as you have ever done, to oppose this growing Interest. And truly (my
Lord) this Nation has reason to bless the Most High God for your Care for her
Peace and Establishment in the Profession of that Religion; which does oblige
all Subjects to all Loyalty to their Prince, and to live in Peace and Love one
with another. This Treatise spoke formerly the Italian Tongue, but now it is
made to speak English; and in it I find such an Account of the Nations
Adversaries, which to my own knowledge they deserve. If it be faulty, it is
because it is somewhat too short of them. Now (my Lord) I humbly conceive your
Lordship will pardon that, because it was all the Author (who was of the Romish
Religion) could say at that time when he first published it. This I hope your
Honor will accept of thus presented, as I found it, without the least
Alteration. I shall submit all to your Lordships Candor; therefore heartily
praying for your Lordships Prosperity, I humbly take leave to subscribe my Self,

28 Febr. 1678/9. Your Lordships most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, TITUS
OATS.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THis ensuing Discourse I have perused, and find it to be an Exact Character of
an Old Jesuited Jesuit; the Contents of it was their Practice whilst I
conversed with them; and therefore I am inclined to tell the World as much;
seeing these Times in which we live, require that every true Englishman and
Protestant, do understand them: To this very end, that they may detest all such
Practices, and protest against them. And whereas they have endeavored to
deceive the Simple-hearted of this Nation, by fair pretenses to the Propagation
of Religion, and by specious Shows of Zeal for the Salvation of Souls, our
Countrymen may plainly see it is not Us but Ours they seek; if it be Us, it is
to destroy Us, and not to save Us; witness their Villainous Practices thorowout
all Christendom, and especially in this our Country every since the
Reformation of the Church of God here with us. Reader this is no fained thing,
the Original Author was an Italian, and no doubt but of the Communion of that
Abominable Whore, the Mother of all Harlots; and therefore we may easily be
induced to believe the Contents thereof: for certainly had not their Practices
been notoriously known, even to those of their own Communion, this Author could
not have had the Face to have published this Treatise in his own Country, where
Popish Religion is generally practiced and professed by every Man. I tell thee;
Reader, when it pleases God to give me a little Rest from this Weighty Affair
I have now in hand, I will give the People of England such an Account of the
Villainies of these Jesuits, as will I hope make them and their Votaries to be
an Abomination to every sober and judicious Protestant, and even also to those
of their own Persuasion. I am confident that the Eyes of the Nation are open to
see their base Contrivances and Plottings against the King, Kingdom, and
Protestant Religion; and by this little Scheme we may see what would be done,
were they Lords over us. And as I commend this Treatise to thy serious
consideration (Dear Reader) so I must also recommend to thee a Piece lately set
forth, entitled, The Heart and its right Sovereign, And Rome no Mother Church
to England; in which the Nullity of Rome 's Church and Ordination is proved: By
that Judicious and Reverend Divine Thomas Jones of Oswestry in the County of
Salop; and sold by Benja. Shirly under St. Dunstins Church in Fleet Street.
Both that and this I recommend to thee, to give the Nation some satisfaction,
till God give me opportunity to do my Country that Service as to publish my
whole Narrative. I shall say no more, but beg of God for a Blessing on all our
Hearty Endeavors after a more full Discovery of this Mystery of Iniquity: And
so Farewell,

Thy Brother in Christ, TITUS OATS.

An Exact DISCOVERY OF THE Mystery of Iniquity, As it is now in Practice
amongst the JESUITS, etc.
That the Religious Order of the Jesuits was at the first planted in the
Vineyard of Christ, as a Tree which should produce an Antidote against the
Poison of Heresy, and such Blossoms of Christian and Religious Works, as by
the sweet savor of them Sinners might be constrained to bid adieu to the
Corruption of Sin, and to prosecute the sweet smell of Repentance; we need no
clearer Demonstration than the Laws and Orders on the which this Plant was
grounded, by the first Founder thereof Father Ignatius. And surely, so long as
by those first Fathers that gave it Life, it was cherished with the Dew of
Charity, This Exordium will make you know that the Author was a Papist.
and cultivated conformable to the Invention of the Planter: It brought forth
two Branches, the one of Love toward God, the other toward their Neighbor.
In so much that it was a wonder to consider the plenty of Fruits which it
brought forth in the Excellent Education of Children, the Saving of Souls, and
the Increase of the Catholic Faith. But the Devil, who makes use of all good
Inventions, but as a Whet-stone, grew as Eager and Cunning to destroy this Work
and Enterprise, as the other to promote it; and took occasion, even from the
Greatness it self of this Religious Order, and from that admirable Progress
which in small time it had made, to pervert the first Institution of it, with
an Artificial Subtility: instead of those two first Branches of Charity, now
utterly dried up, he has ingrafted two other; the one of Self-love and the
other of Profit: from which the Christian Republic receives such Damage, that
happily a greater cannot be imagined, as I am now about to Demonstrate in this
Discourse. In the which, I protest before God, I have no motion either of
Interest or Passion, but an Innocent Zeal of the public Good, for the which I
do assure my self I was born; and that Princes knowing their Artifice, may
prevent them by Oppertune Remedies.

Now we are to know that the Religious Orders of these Fathers the Jesuits
being enlarged, especially by the Education of Children (of which there is
neither City nor Kingdom but has need) was even from the beginning thereof (by
very many) much desired, and by diverse Princes so favored, that in few years
it diffused it self, as far as other Orders had done in many Hundreds. This
Greatness, which almost always induces into Men's Minds a change of Custom,
raised up in the Heirs of Father Ignatius, such a Love toward their Society,
that esteeming that more profitable unto the Church of God, and more helpful in
the Reformation of the World, than all other Orders; they concluded among
themselves to endeavor with all Art and Industry to give Increase to it; and
in that to give Growth to the Cause of Christ, the Good of the Church, nay (to
use their own words) to the only Patrimony of Christ.

And here I had need of the Subtilty of Aristotle to Discern, and the Eloquence
of Cicero, to Express those mervellous Means (A thing which for the Novelty of
it, to many seems incredulous) by which these Fathers still gain Increase to
their Society. But it shall be sufficient for me to point out only some few
things, leaving a large Room for other Men's Judgments, to raise up a Form of
what Idea themselves shall think fittest. Yet I shall not omit to propound some
few Heads, with which I intend to serve the Reader for the Ground of this
Discouse.

And First, These Fathers, the Jesuits, thought it was not sufficient to
promote their Society to that pitch of Greatness to the which they aspired,
only by Teaching, Preaching, or Administering the most Holy Sacraments, with
other like Religious Exercises; because though from the Beginning (as I said)
they were kindly embraced by many People, yet in process of time they
perceived, that either for in satisfaction, or some other occasion, whatever it
was; the Affection of many grew cold toward them; and therefore doubting least
their Growth should end with their Infancy, they invented two other Means to
enlarge their Greatness.

The First, Was to work in the Minds of Princes, and consequently of as many
others as they could, a base opinion of all other Religious Societies;
discovering their Imperfections, and after a Cunning Manner, from other
Depressions, raising their own Greatness; and by this means they impatronized
themselves of many Monasteries, Abbeys, and other main Possessions; depriving
those Religious Persons that first enjoyed them, both of them, and of all that
belonged to them.

The Second Means, Was to thrust themselves into Affairs of State, gaining
Interest with the greatest part of Christian Princes; and that with as Subtle
and Artificious a Device, as ever yet the World brought forth: into which, as
it is very hard to penetrate, so it is (almost) impossible, sufficiently to
explain it.

There resides continually in Rome the Father General, to whom all the rest
render most exact Obedience; and there is Choice made of some other Fathers,
who from the Assistance they always give him, are called his Assistants; and
there is one (at least) of every Nation, who from that Nation takes his Name.
Hence one is styled the Assistant of France, a second of Spain, a third of
Italy, a fourth of England, a fifth of Austria; and so of all other Provinces
and Kingdoms; every one of which, has it assigned to him as his particular
Office, to inform the Father General of all Accidents of State which occur in
that Province or Kingdom, of which he is Assistant. And this Office he performs
by the means of his Correspondents, who reside in the principal Cities of that
Province or Kingdom; who with all industry first inform themselves of the
State, the Quality, Nature, Inclination, and Intention of Princes, and by every
Courrier advertise the Assistants of such Accidents as are newly discovered.
And these again communicate all unto the Father General, who meeting in Council
with all his Assistants, they make an Anatomy (as it were) of the whole World;
confering the Interest and Designs of all Christian Princes. Here they consult
of all fresh Intelligences received from their Correspondents, and curiously
Examining them, and conferring them together, at last they conclude to favor
the Affairs of one Prince, and to depress the Designs of an other, as shall be
most requisite for their Interest and Profit. And as those who are Standers by
at some Game, more easily discern the Stroke than those that gave it: so these
Jesuits having in one View the Interest of all Princes, know very well how to
observe the condition of Place and Time, and how to apply the true means of
advancing the Affairs of that Prince, from whom they know they shall draw most
Water to their own Mills.

However, this is a thing simply evil, that Religious Men should so much
intermingle with Matters of State, it being their Duty rather to attend the
Saving of their own and other Men's Souls, being for that end only retired from
the World; but by this means they are more entangled, than the very Secular
Persons themselves; and for many most pernicious Consequences, we shall find
this their Course most Wicked, and worthy of a speedy and potent Remedy.

For First, These Jesuits are Confessors to the greatest part of the Nobility
thorowout all Roman Catholic States. Nay, and the better to attend them, they
will not admit Poor Men, or Poor Women to their Confessions; but rather aim to
be Confessors to Princes themselves. So that by this Course it is easy for
them to penetrate every Design, every Resolution, and Inclination, as well of
Princes, as of Subjects; of all which they suddenly inform the Father General,
or his Assistants in Rome. Now any Man that has the least measure of
Understanding, may easily perceive what a prejudice they bring to Princes by
this Device, when only their own Interest stirs them to that, to which (as to
their last end) they direct all their Endeavor.

Secondly, Whereas Secrecy is a proper and unseparable Accident, which so
accompanies the Preservation of a State, that without it, the Ruin of a State
must needs follow: Therefore all Princes are most rigorous against those who
discover their Secrets, punishing them as the Enemies both of them and their
Country. And as on the other side, to understand the Designs of other Princes,
makes a Man more cautelous, and more apt to discern his own State; and
therefore they use to spend no small sum of Money, in the maintaining of
Ambassadors and Intelligencers; yet are oftentimes deceived too in their
Relations. But the Jesuits (that is) their Father General and his Assistants,
as well by the Confessions and Consultations which their Correspondents do
make, residing in all Chief Cities of the Christian World, as by means of their
other Adherents, of whom we shall discourse hereafter, as most sincerely and
punctually advertised of all Determinations, that are concluded in the most
secret Councils: So that they better know (almost) all the Power, Possessions,
Expenses and Designs of Princes, than the Princes themselves; and that without
any other Expense than the Carriage of Letters; the which notwithstanding in
Rome alone (as the Masters of the Posts relate to us) arises to Sixty,
Seventy, Eighty, and often times to an Hundred Crowns of Gold for one Courrier.
So that they knowing so exactly the Affairs of all Princes, do not only
diminish their Credit among themselves, but wound their Reputation both with
other Princes and with their own Subjects; depressing or advancing their State
at their pleasure: and that so much the easier, because by the same way of
Confessions and Consultations, they enter into the very Secrets of the Peoples
Souls; knowing who stands well affected to the prince, and who rests
diffatisfied: so that by these Relations which they have of State Affairs, they
may easily sow Discord among Princes, occasion a Thousand Jealousies, and by
their insight into the Subjects Affection, raise Commotions and Division;
bringing into Contempt the very Person of the Prince. Whence We must conclude,
That the Interest of State does not comport, that any Prince should Confess
Himself; much less that he should permit any of his Confidents, Friends,
Secretaries, Counselors, or other his Chief Ministers, to confess themselves
to Persons that attend so diligently to spy out Matters of State, and to serve
themselves of this means, to insinuate into the Favor of Princes; since there
is this day no want of Religious Persons, Men both for Life and Learning, to be
regarded equally with the Jesuits, whom in this kind they may employ; and who
attend nothing but the Government of Souls, and of their Monasteries.

Thirdly, Which is a greater Discovery than yet we have made, or shall make
hereafter, ye are to know that there are found amongst them four sorts of
Jesuits: The First consists of certain Secular People, of both Sexes, adjoined
to their Society, who live under a certain Obedience, which themselves call A
Blind Obedience; squaring all their Particular Actions by the Jesuits Counsel,
resigning themselves most readily in all things to be commanded by them: and
these for the most part are Gentlemen or Gentlewomen, the Wealthiest Widows,
or the Richest Citizens, or Merchants; from all whom, as from Fructiferous
Plants, the Jesuits gather every year a Copious Harvest of Gold and Silver.

Of this Kind are those Women, who (in Italy) call themselves Chettine, who are
induced by the Jesuits, to forsake the World, while in the mean time they get
their Pearls, Apparel, Ornaments, Furniture of Houses; and finally very great
Possessions.

The Second Sort is, Of Men alone; but those as well Priests as Laymen: yet
such as live a Secular Life, and such as oft-times by the Mediation of the
Jesuits, obtain Pensions, Church Livings, Abbeys, and other Revenues: but these
make a Vow to receive a Habit of the Society at the pleasure of the Father
General; and therefore they are called Jesuits in Voto: and by the labors of
these Men, the Jesuits wonderfully avail themselves in the Fabric of their
Monarchy. For they maintain in all Kingdoms and Provinces, in all Courts of
Princes, and Palaces of Great Men, such of these as shall serve them in a
Kind, which I shall declare unto you in the Seventh Point of this Discourse.

The Third Sort of Jesuits are those who remain in Monasteries; and these are
either Priests, Clerks, or Converts; who because at the first they came not
from that Profession, may at the pleasure of the Father General be deprived of
it, although of themselves they have no power to leave it. And these being such
as have no Office of importance, for the most part do simply obey in any thing
that their Superiors command.

The Fourth Sort is of Politic Jesuits, through whose Hands passes the whole
Government of Religion; and these are they, who being tempted by the Devil,
with the same Temptation that Christ had in the Gospel, Haec omnia tibi dabo;
Have accepted the Bargain: and therefore labor to reduce their Society to an
obsolute Monarchy, and to place the Head thereof at Rome, where all the
principal Affairs of the Christian World meet together. There resides the Head
of these Politicians (which is their General) with a great number of others of
the same Profession; who being first informed by their Spies, of all such
weighty and important Matters as are to be treated in the Court of Rome, having
first among themselves agreed of such ends, as for their own Interest they
desire; each one takes his Office to go every day their Circuit through the
Courts of Cardinals, Ambassadors, and Prelates; with whom (cunningly) they
insinuate their Discourse of such Affairs as is then in hand, or shortly to be
handled; representing it to them after what manner they please, and in the same
shape; that by reflection from their own ends, themselves do apprehend it:
oft-times changing the Aspect of the Business, and showing Black for White. And
because the first Interpretations, made especially by Religious Men, are wont
to make a notable Impression in the Minds of him that hears them; hence it
proceeds, that many times, most important Affairs treated by the Ambassadors of
Princes, and other grave Persons of the Roman Court, have not attained that
success which Princes expected; because the Jesuits had possessed their Minds
with their oblique Relations; effecting that those Ambassadors, or other
Agents, should have but small Credit with them.

And the same Artifice that they use with the Prelates of Rome, they use also
with other Princes either by themselves, or by the means of their Pensionary
Jesuits out of Rome; so that we may conclude, that the greater part of Affairs
thorowout the Christian World, does pass through the Jesuits Hands; and those
only take effect, against which they make no opposition. Most stupendous and
impenetrable is the Art that in this Kind they use; which though it cannot by
me be perfectly described, yet may it lively be descryed by any Prince, who
will but vouchsafe to read this little touch that I give of them; because he
will presently reflect upon what things have past: and as he shall understand
the truth of my Discourse, calling to mind with what Art things have been
handled, he will discover more of that, which will seem strange and mervellous
unto him, For not being content with this their close Artifice by which they
thrust themselves into the Affairs of the World, with persuasion that it is the
only means to atchieve that Monarchical Jurisdiction at which they aim; they
made Supplication to Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, That for the time to come he
would publicly favor their Project: and representing it to him under the
public good of the Church, they required that he would command all his Legates
and Apostolical Nuncio's, to take to them, every one for his Companion and
Confident, some Jesuit, by whose Counsel he should be governed in all his
Actions.

Fourthly, By these Cunning Carriages, and their insight into State Affairs,
the Chief Jesuits have gotten the Love of many Princes, as well Temporal as
Spiritual; which Princes they do persuade, that they have said and done many
things for their good; and thereupon have followed two Weighty Inconveniences:
First, That abusing the Friendship and Goodness of those Princes, they have not
cared to displease many Private, but otherwise Rich and Noble Families;
usurping the Wealth of Widows, and leaving their Families in Extreme Misery;
alluring to their Religion, and to frequent their Schools, the most Noble
Spirits; who if happily they shall fall out to be unable and unfit for their
purpose, under some honest pretext, they license from their Society; but withal
lay hold of their Estates, of which they Society will needs be invested Heirs.
In the mean time absolutely excluding the poor from their Schools, directly
against the Orders of the Forenamed Father Ignatius, and the Intention of
those their Patrons, who gave them their Possessions; not that they should
serve their own interest, but the Christian Commonwealth.

The Second Inconvenience is, That these Jesuits cunningly make the World know
the Friendship and Inwardness they retain with Princes; setting it forth a
little more than indeed it is, to the end that they may gain the Love of their
Ministers; and so procure, that all Men shall recur to them for Favors. Thus
they publicly brag, That they can make Cardinals, Nuncio's, Lieutenauts,
Governors, and other Officers: Nay some of them have plainly affirmed, That
their General could do more than the Pope himself: And others have added, That
it is better to be of that Order which makes Cardinals than to be a Cardinal.
And these things they divulge so publicly, that there is not any Man who
familiarly converseth with them, to whom they relate not these or such like
Things.

Fifthly, Having laid the Groundwork of this their Practice in State, they
pretend a power to raise or ruin whomsoever they please; and indeed making use
of Religion only for a Cloak, whereby they may gain Credit, they many times
attain their Ends. But when they propound any Man unto the Prince for
Preferment, they never make Choice of him who is most fit and deserving; but
rather oppose to such an one, when they know he is not partial on their side;
and always advance such Persons as make for their Interest, without any regard
whether he be well-affected to the Prince, whether meritorious or fit to
undergo that Office to which he is nominated; whence there often arises
Disturbance to the Prince, Complaints and Tumults among the People.

Sixthly, As the Master of a Galley, when he perceives a good gale fair for his
Voyage, but with once whistling makes all the Galley Slaves fall to their Oats,
and stretch them before the Vessel; so when in the Dyets and Assemblies (which
these Fathers continually make by their General and his Assistants in Rome)
they conclude it fit for their turn, that some one Person should be promoted to
Dignity; the Father General signifies so much to all those that reside
elsewhere; and all those with one consent at an instant join all their Forces
to make him attain that Honor which they intend him; and he should be very
ungrateful, if afterward, in all Occurrences, he should not serve the Jesuits
with the like Zeal that they preferred him. And because such a Man, nay many
such Men (for many Dependants in this Kind the Jesuits have) hold themselves
more obliged to the Jesuits than to their Prince, of whom they have received
their Honor and Greatness; therefore they serve the Jesuits with a greater
Affection than the Prince himself. Thus they delude their Princes, who
imagining they have got a trusty Servant, have only made way for a Spy of the
Jesuits; of whom they often times serve themselves to the damage of that
Prince, who advanced hm. I could with manifest Examples confirm this my
Discourse, if daily Experience and Common Fame were not a sufficient
Confirmation to it. But not to make my self over-tedious, I will pass to some
other things, concluding that this happily is the cause why the Jesuits are
wont to call their Religion, A Grand Monarchy; as if they governed all Princes
and their Ministers at their pleasure. And it is not long since, that one of
the chief of them, being publicly to treat with an illustrious Prince, in the
name of the Society, he began with these words full of Arrogance, and grounded
upon a conceit of their Monarchy; Our Society has always maintained good
intelligence with your Grace, etc.

Seventhly, These Fathers take great pains, to let the World know, that all
those who are any way in estimation with their Prince, have been their
Favorites, and born up by their hands; so that by this means they are more
Patrons of the Subjects affections, than the Prince himself. And this is a
notable Prejudice unto the Prince; as well because no reason of State does
comport, that Religious Persons, so ambitious and politic, should be so far
Patrons of the will of the Ministers, that whenever they please, they can
cause Treason and Destruction. As also that by this means, that is by the
mediation of the Ministers their Adherents, they induce into the Princes
Service, either for Counselors or Secretaries, some of those Jesuits in Voto,
of whom I discoursed before. And these again procure the Prince to entertain
some Jesuit for his Confessor or Preacher. And thus all these together, do
serve as Intelligencers to the Father General; to whom they render an exact
account of all that passes in the most secret Councils. Whence it proceeds,
that many times we see Designs prevented, and Secrets of the greatest
importance discovered; yet no man can search out the true Author: but often times
those are most suspected, who are least in Fault.

Eighthly, As by Nature Subjects are wont to follow the Inclinations of their
Prince, so all those as give Obedience to their Father-General, perceiving that
he chiefly Attonds to Matter of State and by that means endeavors to improve
and enrich their Society, they also apply themselves that way; and making use
of their Kindred and Friends, strive by force to penetrate the Hearts of
Princes, and their most secret Designs; only to give notice of them either to
the Assistance at Rome, or to the Father-General; by this means to procure them
their Favor, and attain some Dignity; which by any other means they could
never have obtained. For amongst them, none are preferred to any Office of
Importance, but only those whom they know prone to Advance their Society to
that height of Greatness to which they Aspire; and consequently, none but such
as are known to be sufficient in the Managing of State Affairs.

Ninethly, As from diverse Flowers and Herbs, by means of a Limbick, a Man may
draw such an Ointment, as is fit to Heal a Mortal Wound: And as from several
Blossoms Bees suck Honey, so these Jesuits, from the Infallible Relation which
they have of all Princes Affairs, and of all Accidents that do happen in every
State, by the Politic Power of their own Discourse, they Extract from them
their own Commodity, which is the only Remedy to Cure that their Abominable
Wound of Covetousness and Ambition; and they compose a certain Art of their own
Profit, by which they obtain their own Ends, as well from the good of some as
hurt of others, but more often from the latter, than the former.

Thus they usually shackle with their Fetters, that Prince, into whose Secrets
they have Crept: propounding to him that they have the only and most Excellent
means to make him the Master of his Desires; but when by this means they have
drawn their own purposes from him, considering that the too swelling Greatness
of that Prince may one day prove prejudicial unto them; as Lawyers do their
Causes, they prolong as much as they can, the success of that Affair; and
afterward by Politic Plottings and various Iuglings, they utterly Ruin those
Designs to which they had given a beginning.

The League of France, Treated and Concluded by them, not long after they
abandoned, when they saw things prosper on the Kings side: And England, so
often promised by them to the Spaniards, yet in such manner performed; so
confirms this my Discourse, that there needs no farther Proof.

Tenthly, From what has been already said, it necessarily follows, That the
Jesuits have no good Intentions toward any Prince whatever either Temporal or
Spiritual; but only serve them so far as they may serve their own turns.

Nay, It follows yet farther, That no Prince, much less any under Prelates,
can make the like use of them; because they show themselves at the very same
time equally Affected to all; making themselves English with Englishmen,
French with French, Spaniards with Spaniards; and so with all other Nations and
Countries, according as their Occasions require; from which they do intend to
Extract their Profit. They have no regard to the Prejudice of one, more than of
another; and therefore, those Enterprises, in which they have intermeddled,
have seldom times succeeded well; because they have no purpose to serve,
farther than their own Interests dictates tot hem. And in this, the Artifice
which they use, is most Notorius; Some of them faining themselves to be Partial
to the Crown of France, others to Spain, others to the Emperor; and some to
other Princes, of whom they desire to be most Favored: And if any of these
Princes please to make use of some Jesuit, whom he holds for his Confident
Friend, he immediately writes to the Father General of the Affair, which he
has to Treat on; and expects his Answer, together with Order what he shall do;
and conformable to that Commission he Rules himself: Never regarding, whether
that Order be Conformable to the Intention of the Prince, who commits the Care
of that Affair to him: But if the Society be served, he takes little care what
service he does for the Prince.

Besides this, because the Jesuits understand the Interest of all Princes, and
are most knowing in all Thiings daily Treated upon in Secret Councils; those
who pretend to hold with France, Propound to the King, and his Principal
Ministers, certain Conditions of State, and Important Considerations, which are
sent to them from their Politic Fathers at Rome: And those that pretend to
hold with the Crown of Spain, do just the same with them; and so with the rest.
From which Course and Cunning of theirs, there arises such a Diffidence in the
Hearts of Christian Princes, that none will Soarce give Credit to each other;
which, is a main Prejudice to the Public Peace, and Universal Welfare of
Christendom. The which Diffidence of theirs, is that which makes it so
difficult a thing, to Conclude a League against a Common Enemy, and Precious
Peace to be of so little Value amongst Princes.

Furthermore; With these Artificious Devices, they have so opened the Eyes of
the World, and sharpened Men's Wits in Matters of State; that to this Day, tot
he notable Prejudice of the Holy Church, they attend to nothing else, but
Matters of Policy; and poize all their Actions in that False Balance.

But to the end that these Jesuitical Stratagems may yet appear more plainly, I
cannot here conceal the Means, by which they inveigle Princes to be of their
Party. There are some Years now past, since one of these Fathers, called Father
Parsons, the Assistant of England, wrote a Book against the Succession of the
King of Scotland to the Crown of England; and another Father, called
Crittonius, with some others of the same Order; in a Book, which they wrote,
Defended the Title of the King of Scotland; opposing the Opinion of Father
Parsons; and feigning (under a Specious Pretense) to be at Discord amongst
themselves: Although all this was (indeed) cunningly done, and by the Special
Command of their Father General; only for this purpose, that whosoever should
Succeed in the Kingdom of England, they might have an Excellent Argument, to
work in him a great and good Opinion of their society; and so to Extract their
own Ends from him.

A fair Example to show us, that princes are the Objects of all Jesuitical
Actions and Determinations; and (by Consequence) to make good their own Saying,
That their Society is a Grand Monarchy.

Again, That the Truth of this may appear, That the Jesuits have no Regard,
whether they Please or Displease any Prince, where their own Interest is most
nearly concerned: Although Experience of infinite Things past, makes it as
Clear as the Sun at Noonday; yet the Particulars, which I shall here subjoyn,
will render it every way most Evident.

There is no Person in the World, whom they are more bound to Serve and Obey,
than the Bishop of Rome; not only for many other Reasons, but especially,
because they make a Particular Vow to obey him: Yet when Pius Quintus went
about to Reform some of these Fathers, reducing them unto the Performance of
their Duty in the Chair, they would not obey him; esteeming that a Notorious
Prejudice to their Society. And those few, who yielded themselves to the Pope's
Pleasure, accepting that Profession, were always afterward mocked and jeered;
and called by their Fellows, Quintini: Nor could ever any of them get the least
Preferment amongst them.

In the same kind they opposed Glorious Saint Charles, Archbishop of Millain,
who as Legate, a Latere to his Holiness, endeavored to reduce them to a
Religious Discipline.

But what should I speak of these, since they obey not the Sacred Cannons
themselves; but against their Decrees make Merchandise of Pearls, Rubies, and
Diamonds, the which they bring from the Indies: And there is an Opinion, that
the greatest part of Precious Stones, which are sold in Venice, belong to the
Jesuits; the ground of which Opinion has been received from their own Brokers,
whom they have employed in the Sale of them.

But that they are no faithful servants to the Bishop of Rome, those Fathers
well know; who for default of their Service, were called by process to Rome. I
need not Name them, nor will I wade farther into this matter, as well that I
may not be compelled to speak of some Prince, whom my Discourse may not very
well please (my self designing to do Service to all, and to Offend none) as
because I intend not here to make so large an Invective against the Jesuits as
they deserve; but only to give a short and plain Draught of their Courses and
Customs.

For, as many times we behold one Afflicted with some grievous Infirmity,
sending forth such lamentable Cries as reach Heaven it self; and every one
perceived that the Man is terribly indisposed, but no man is able to discern
the Original Cause of his Evil; so the whole World Complains of the Jesuits,
some for being Persecuted, others for being Tortured; and some for being
Treacherously served by them: but the Mischief still remains amongst us, nor is
the Cause thereof easily Discovered; which is nothing else but an immense
desire which they have to Increase crease their own Power; in respect whereof,
they esteem it nothing to Vilify or Murder any Man, or to deceive Princes,
and to Oppress the Poor; to Extort from Widows their Estates, and Wrong the
Fatherless: What shall I say, to Ruinate most Noble Kingdoms; nay, many times
by their Intermedling with all importaut Affairs in matters of State, it causes
Jealousies and Despite amongst Christian Princes.

Now as there would follow a great Inconvenience, if that part which was last
formed by Nature, as an Instrument to serve the rest that were more Noble,
should attract unto it self, all the purest Blood and Vital Spirits, because
this I say, were the way utterly to dissolve the whole; so it is as
inconvenient, that the Religion of the Jesuits planted into the Body of the
Holy Church, as Instruments for the Conversion of Heretics, and the persuading
of Sinners to Repentance, should bring within their own Power, all the most
weighty and important Affairs of Princes and Prelates, and Extracting from them
the very Life and Spirit of their Interest, should convert them unto their own
purposes: Because from hence, both private and public Peace is Disturbed, many
Depressed, which were worthy to be Exalted; and many Exalted, which deserve to
be Depressed; with a Thouand Inconveniences which would follow upon it.

I could produce many Reasons, taken from Experience it self, to demonstrate
what an ingorgeous Ambition the Jesuits have to increase their Greatness; but
it shall here suffice, to make it known from Father Parsons own words, recorded
in a Book of his composed in the English tongue, and Entitled, The Reformation
of England; where having first blamed Cardinal Pool, and having also observed
many Wants and Imperfections in the Council of Trent, at length he concluded,
That when England should return to the Roman Catholic Faith, he would reduce
it to the Form and State of the Primitive Church; making common all
Ecclesiastical Goods, and assigning the Charge of them unto seven Sagii, or
Wisemen, which should be Jesuits; and they should make Distribution of Goods
at their pleasure. Nor is it his will, nay, he forbids it, under a grievous
Penalty, that any Religious person, of what Order soever, should return into
England without their License; Resolving, that none should enter there, but
those who should be Maintained by Alms.

But as it often falls out, that Self-Love blinds the VVisest Man, that he
becomes the greatest Fool, it is most Ridiculous which the same Father subjoyns
in that place: When England (says he) shall once be reduced to the True Faith,
it will not be Convenient, that the Pope (at the least for Five Years space)
should look to receive any Fruit from the Ecclesiastical Benefices of this
Kingdom; but remit all into the Hands of those Seven Wise Men, who should
Dispense them as they conceived best for the good of the Church.

This being his Design, that the first Five Years being past, by some other
Invention (of which they are very full) they would re-confirm the same
Privilege for Five Years more, and so onwards, till they had utterly excluded
his Holiness from England: Now who sees not here (as in a Table) the
Covetousness and the Ambition of the Jesuits, naturally described; together
with the hearty desire they have to make themselves Monarchs: And who sees not
with what Cunning they endeavor to promote their own Designs; procuring it
either from the Good of some, or Ill of others. What should I say more of
them: In the time of Gregory the Thirteenth, Did they not make it their
Request, that they might be Invested of all the Parish Churches in Rome? That
they might there lay a Foundation of their Monarchy? And that which they could
not get in Rome, Have they not finally obtained in England? Where they not
long since have chosen an Archpriest, one of the Jesuits in Voto, who instead
of protecting the Clergy, like a Ravening Wolf, persecutes all such Priests as
are not depending upon the Jesuits; driving them to terms of Desparation, and
depriving them (under a great Penalty) of mutual Communication; so that by this
time, almost all the English-Roman-Clergy are Jesuits in Voto; Nor do they
accept any into their Colleges, who has not passed his Word to become a
Jesuit; so that when that Kingdom shall return to the Ancient Faith, England
will be like to give a beginning to an absolute Jesuitical Monarchy; because
all the Ecclesiastical Revenues, all the Abbeys, Benefices, Bishoprics,
Arch-Priestships, and other Dignities, shall be conferred only by the Jesuits.

I here let pass many things, as the pretensions which they make concerning
other men's Estates, how jealous they are of their VVelsare, and desirous of
their Prosperity: as the Favor which they endeavor to gain from Princes, by
making them believe, that their Subjects are most Devout to their Religion, and
consequently, that they are able to make them well-affected to the person of
their Prince. Such evident things as these, I leave to every one to observe,
and with Four brief Considerations, I will conclude this present Discourse.

First, That Men of such High Spirits, and such reaching Designs, are always
Lovers of Novelty; ever searching for it, and begetting it; because without
some new-raised Motions, it is impossible they should attain their Ends: And
therefore the Jesuits cannot be helpful to any Prince that either loves Peace,
or the Conservation of his own State; since they are more likely to be the
Cause of much Trouble and Commotion: Nay, happily to Deprive him of his whole
State, if he Favor not their Party; or be not partially governed by their
Counsel.

Secondly, If these, who have not Temporal Jurisdiction, are able to cause such
great and prodigious Disturbances in the World, What think ye would they do, if
one of them should by Chance be created Pope? First he would stuff the
Consistory with Jesuits, and by that means perpetuate the Popedom to them: and
then directing themselves by their in-sight and interest of State, and having
the Arm and Power of the Pope, they would be enabled to put in Danger, the
State of many Princes; especially of those who are Neighbors and Confiners.

Thirdly, It would be the Design of that Pope, (if he could by any means) to
Invest their Order of some City, or Temporal Jurisdiction; with the which they
would afterward make way for a Thousand other Designs, which they could never
Effect without the Damage of other Princes.

Fourthly, When the Consistory should be entirely Jesuited, the whole Patrimony
of Christ would be in their Hands; And as one that has the Dropsy, The more he
Drinks, the more he Thirsts; so their Ambition growing with their Greatness,
would occasion a vast Inundation of Trouble in the World. Now, because there is
nothing more subject unto Change than matters of State, These Fathers, with all
their Power, and Crafty Cunning, would endeavor to Alter the whole Course of
Government; that they might finally introduce the Form and Project of their own
Government; and by that means absolutely Immonarchize themselves. They have had
it long in their Heads, to gain into their Society the Son of some Prince, who
should absolutely invest the Company of his State; and this they had long since
Attained, if some others, wisely Spying out their Design, had not prevented
them: but had they once obtained that, they would, without any Difficulty, have
made themselves Patrons of the State-Ecclesiastical: And as they are very
Invective and Subtle, they would afterward have found out a Thousand Ways how
to enlarge it. Thus they would have wanted no means that might make them
Masters of their Projects: And if nothing else would have done it, the
Jealousios which they would have raised in the Minds of their Confining
Princes, would have done them no small Service.

It is therefore most necessary, that for the Preservation of Public Peace,
and for the Maintenance of States, for the increase of True Religion, and for
the Common Good of the whole World, that they be utterly Rooted Out of all
Christendom; whose desires are so extremely inordinate, lest happily that follow
which was Anciently effected by the Davidi, (whose Courses the Jesuits seem to
Imitate) who were not Destroyed till the time of Claudius the Emperor.

And when I shall be commanded to Write my Opinion, concerning an opportune
Remedy how to Rectify These Fathers, and to Convince them of their Erroneous
Opinions; desiring rather that they may be good Pastors of Souls, which are the
Treasury of Christ, and not of the World, or of the Profit of the World,
(which is nothing else but vile Dung) I am ready to perform it with Charity,
and with all that Ability which it shall please God to bestow upon me.

FINIS.

