THE EXAMINATION OF Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir John Winter, Sir John Stowell, with
two other Knights, upon their knees at the Bar, in the House of Commons, the
14 day of this instant October.

With the Articles of high Treason, exhibited against them by the House of
COMMONS.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's or publisher's device

London, Printed in the year 1642.

The Examination of Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir John Winter, Sir John Stowell, with
two other Knights, brought upon their knees at the Bar in the House of Commons
the 14. day of this instant October with the Articles of High Treason exhibited
against them by the House of Commons.
Friday being the 14 of October was Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir John Winter, Sir John
Stowell with two other Knights, which were apprehended at Falmouth in the
County of Cornwall, by the Earl of Bedfords Forces, brought to the Bar in the
House of Commons, and after submission severally made to the House, they were
commanded out again by a Sergeant at Arms, upon which the House falling into
debate of the offenses by them committed in the County of Summerset-shire
Dorset-shire and Cornwall against the Kings good Subjects. They were
unanimously voted Delinquents against both King and Parliament, after which Sir
Ralph Hopton was again called to the Bar, and examined upon these questions.

First, by what authority or Commission the said Sir Ralph did leavy and cause
to be leavyed Forces in the County of Summerset-shire against the express
order and declaration published by authority of both Houses of Parliament.

2. Wherefore he endeavored to put the Commission of Array in execution in
that County, it having been declared illegal by the Judgment of both Houses
of Parliament, and in opposition to the Ordinance of both Houses for putting
the Militia in execution.

3. By what authority the said Sir Ralph caused to be raised Horse, Money and
Plate for maintenance of the war begun against the Parliament, and seizing by
force of Arms the goods of diverse Gentlemen well affected to the Parliaments
proceedings, which refused to lend any money or plate, or to set forth any
Horse according to his desires.

Upon which, the said Sir Ralph Hopton was called to make answer to the said
questions, who answered in brief, That whatsoever he had done was by authority
from Marquess Hartford, the Lord Seymour and the Lord Paulet, who had received
a Commission of Array from His Majesty, That he was not convinced in his
Judgment of the illegality of the said Commission, but by virtue thereof had
lawful power to put that County into a posture of Defense.

For his endeavoring to raise money, Horse and plate for the use and service
of His Majesty, it was by virtue of Warrants in His Majesty's Name directed to
him for that purpose, which he conceived he was bound by his Oath of Allegiance
to obey, upon which his answers he was again commanded from the Bar, and the
House falling into consideration and great debate touching the same, una voce
voted these particulars.

1. That the raising of Forces without consent of both Houses of Parliament,
and marching with the same against any of his Majesty's Subjects, is actually
leavying of war, and has been by the Laws of this Land adjudged Treason
against King and Parliament.

2. That for any Member of either of both Houses to leave their attendance for
the service of the State, and privately depart without leave of the House, and
shall in disobedience to the Orders and Summons of the same refuse to make his
appearance is a high breach of the privileges of Parliament.

3. That to endeavor to raise or procure any money, Arms or Ammunition for the
nourishing or maintenance of any war raised against the State is Treason.

4. To join any Forces so raised against the Laws of the Land, and Ordinances
of Parliament, with any persons that by both Houses are declared Traitors, is
Treason.

5. That the said Sir Ralph Hopton is guilty of every the aforesaid Votes, and
ought to be proceeded against accordingly.

6. That the aforesaid particulars shall be drawn into a charge against the
said Sir Ralph Hopton, and a Committee appointed for the perfecting of the
same, and presenting it to the House on Monday next.

7. That the said Sir Ralph Hopton shall be forthwith committed prisoner to the
Tower.

After which, Sir John Stowell and the rest were called in severally, and after
examination it being put to the question, it was resolved that the said
Knights, first for joining and confederating themselves with Marquess
Hertford, Lord Seymour, and the Lord Paulet in the war against the
Parliament, who are declared Traitors.

2. For raising of Forces jointly and severally in the Counties of
Summerset-shire, Dorchester, Devon-shire and Cornwall, and marching against
the Forces raised by Authority for Parliament, for suppressing tumultuous and
malignant persons that have endeavored to disturb the peace of the Kingdom.

3. For refusing to appear before the House of Commons upon their Summons as
Delinquents, but returning slight and disobedient answers.

4. For endeavoring to put the Commission of Array in execution against the
Parliament are guilty of high Treason.

5. Then the House of Commons appointed a Committee to draw up a charge of
Treason against the said Knights upon these several Votes, and present the
same to the House on Tuesday following, and ordered that Sir John Stowell, and
Sir John Winter should be committed to the Tower, Captain Digby to the
Gate House, and the other to the Fleet, which was done accordingly.

FINIS.

