An Exact and True RELATION OF THE Examination, Trial, AND CONDEMNATION OF The
German Princess, otherwise called, MARY CARLETON, at Justice-Hall in the Old
Bailey, January 17-1672.

Also, An account of the pretended Treachery which she was to discover to the
Bench; and the reason of her return from Jemeca.

LONDON, Printed for R. O. 1672.

An Exact and True RELATION OF THE Examination, Trial, AND CONDEMNATION OF THE
German Princess, alias MARY CARLETON, at Justice-Hall in the Old Baily, January
17. 1672.
IT is to very good reason that the Scripture forbids us to abstain from the
Lusts of the flesh, and the Eyes, which is at the World, and the Corruption of
our own Natures; for by it we are drawn and enticed to all manner of evil, it
being as it were a corrupt Root, that sends forth most bitter sowers and
rotten fruit: and this happens not only whom the Goods and Riches of the
World are in our eye, but also when one lusts after dishonest and unchaste
Delights: This Corruption it is that brings forth UUhoredoms, Adultries,
Thefts, Cheats, and many other Sins, whereout springs forth many times Floods
of Mischiefs, as may more fully appear in the Relation of a most notorious
woman, which here follows:

January the 16th. 1672. Mary Carlton the German Princess, was brought from
the Marshallses in Southwark, to take her Trial in the Old-Bailey, in Mr. John
Lowmans Coach, where at her first appearance; The Judge examined her if she
were the same woman that went by the name of Mary Carlton, that was not long
since Banished this Kingdom: To which she answered, she was the same person;
the Judge demanded the reason of her Return: To which she answered that she had
somewhat that troubled her Conscince about Treachery which she had a great
desire to discover, and till she had made it known to the Government, she could
not be at quiet; and upon that account she thus transgressed the Law of her
being Transported, only to make those things known which lay so much upon her,
till she had made a discovery of it: The Judge demanded of her to declare those
things to the Court: To which she answered it was not convenient to discover
what she had to say in so public a place, and therefore she desired time; the
which was granted betwixt that and the next morning to make her Discovery; the
which was to be the 17 day, which being come, she was brought from Newgate to
the Sessions House in the Old-Bailey; and there called to appear at the Bar,
where was an Indictment exhibited against her by a Tailor in Chancery Lane; for
stealing a Silver Tankerd and some other pieces of Plate, to the which she
pleaded she never Lodged in the house in all her life; but after speaking with
the Mistress and others, that lost those things, she said you may prosecute the
Law against me, and you will lose all, which if you do not prosecute, you may
have your Plate again. Another in Aldersgate Street, brought an Indictement
against her likewise for stealing Plate and several other Indictements brought
against her, for many Robberies, and other Cheats she has committed since she
came over; but all these did her no harm ye *Judge insisted only upon the
matter of her coming over, notwithstanding her Banishment, for which she is
Condemned to be Hanged: Before Sentence she Pleaded her Belly; upon which
twelve Gentlewomen were picked out to find whether she was with Child or not;
they brought in their Uerdict that she was not with Child.

One thing I had like to have omitted, which is this, on Friday January 17.
'twas ordered by the Court at the Sessions House, that two or three of that
Honorable Court should go to Newgate, to enquire of the Princess what that
Treachery was that she was not willing to discover before the whole Court,
withal telling her, that if she impeatch any other, it would make the better
for her self; she refused to discover any others, but the Tretchery she told
them was thus, When she was banished, there was 25. others banished with her,
and when they came out at Sea, these 25. agreed altogether with her to murder
the Master and all that were in the Ship, and to have the Ship and Goods to
what Country they pleased; and they had further agreed that notwithstanding
there were 25. of them, she should have the third share of what the Ship and
Goods were worth; this she said she discovered to the Master, upon which he
made to the next Port, and when he came there he got some help, and put them
all in Irons; sometime after they all arrived in Jamaica, when they were there,
she was so much in favor with the Master of the Ship and the Governor of
Jamaica, for the Tretchery she had discovered, that she was set at liberty to
go where she pleased, but while she was there, the Country not agreeing with
her, she had a fit of Sickness, all which time she had two Doctors ordered to
wait upon her, when she was a little recovered, she, as she said, trusted so
much to the Kings Mercy for the good she had done in saving the whole Ships
Company alive, that she ventured to came over again in that very Ship that
carried her.

I shall now acquaint you with one story more of this infamous Princess, which
was the last of her pranks, just before her last taking; the story is thus, she
took a Lodging in St. James at Mr. Aspinals, one of the Kings Watchmakers, she
told him that the rast of her Family was in few days to follow, which were
sixteen more, for all which she had Lodging provided, after she had been there
a night or two, she complained to Mr. Aspinal that the knocking about his Trad^
did somewhat disturb her, he gave her a Complement, telling her that he should
avoid giving her any disturbance as much as might be; then she began to commend
the ingenuity of his trade, which she did very highly, withal telling him what
a rare Watch her Father had made triangular ways (but she did not say a word of
his being a poor Fiddler in Canterbury) and how that she desired to have such a
one us that, he told her that was an old fashion and he had none of them, but
any sorts that were now in fashion he had, upon which she desired to see what
rare Watches he had, then he had her into his Shop and into his Chamber where
his Watches were, and let her take her view, she was very well pleased with
what she had seen, and bespoke a Watch for her self; a day or two after this
she invites her Landlord and Land-Lady to see a rare Play, which was to be
Acted that day at the Dukes Playhouse, which after some entreaty they excepted
of, when they had seen the Play the Princess invited them to the Tavern,
telling them that she would give them a treat there, for that now she was at
liberty, but after her Family came to Town, she must keep more at home to look
after them: to be brief; she got them to the Tavern, and there called for Wine
and Oysters plenty, when she had kept them there so long that they were not
willing to stay any longer; the Princess her Maid comes in and speaks to her,
after which the Princess tells her Landlord and Landlady that Oysters were not
enough to satisfy her, she must have a Neats Tong^^, or some other thing that
was good to eat after Oysters, and that she would go down to the People of the
House and see what they had, her Landlady desired her not to give herself that
trouble, but rather to send for the Man of the House and speak to him, she
answered that would not do so well, for there were thirty persons that were to
dine with her there the next day, and she must give order to the Mistress of
the House what to provide, so down she went, but coming up no more; when she had
been a prity while, her Landlord called to the people of the House, to know
what was become of her, they told him that they knew her not, nor where she was
gone, so in short, her Landlord was lest to pay the long Reckoning, and to go
home to seek his Tenant, when he came at home she was not there nor her Maid,
he had left at home only his maid and the Princess her maid, he inquired who
had been there, his maid told him only two Gentlewomen to inquire for his
Lodger, and that she told them that she was gone to see a Play, how long since,
said the Gentlewomen, about an hour replied the maid, when do you think she
will be back, said they, about two hours. UUell said the Gentlewomen, we must
speak with her this night, show us into her Chamber and we will stay there till
she comes, the maid showed them into her Chamber; then they desired a Bottle of
Wine to be fetched, which the maid did, but she stayed not long enough as it
seems for them to finish their works, so they tasted the Wine, and said it was
so bad they could not drink it, then they sent the maid to another Tavern
further off, where they said they were sure was that which was good, the maid
went, and before she came back again they had so far finished their work, that
as it appeared presently after; when Mr. Aspinal came to look for his Watches
they had taken away twenty five, six of which were gold, and some money, in all
to the value of near 700 pound; Note that when this work was done the Princess
maid went to the Tavern to give notice, which made her steal away from her
Landlord and Landlady.

FINIS.

