AN Examination OF THE CASE OF THE Suspended Bishops, In Answer to the APOLOGY
for them.

LONDON, Printed for Roger Alwin. 1690.

An Examination of the CASE of the Suspended Bishops.
THere is no folly incident to the Sons of Men, but has had some one Pen or
other to write either in its Praise, or at least Vindication. And it is natural
for Men to imitate their fore-father Adam, in sowing Fig-Leaf Aprons to cover
their Nakedness. Thence it is, I am nothing surprised to see so preposterous,
so ridiculous, and so illegal an Action, as was the Address of the Grand Jury
of Gloucester at the last Lent Assizes, in favor of the Suspended Bishops,
endeavored to be vindicated; especially by one who had the unhappiness to be
one of the Addressers himself. Yet one might have thought Men of any Discretion
or Sense, should have rather ventured to put a favorable Construction on this
piece of Folly, in Conversation among People of the Country where it was
transacted, than to expose themselves of new again to the World, by an Apology
little better upon the matter, than the Address it self. It has been the
unhappiness of Men of our Profession, (I mean the Clergy, whereof I have the
honor to be one) that the World has in all Ages taxed them with something of
willfulness and positiveness of humor beyond the rest of Mankind: And this
silly impertinent Apology does certainly add to the Calumny, if it be one: For
though a certain Gentleman of the Crand Jury of Gloucester has had the good Nature
to Father this exposed Brat, yet we know that it was a Club of our own
Profession, that have had the Honor of bringing it to the World, as they had
that of framing the Address apologized for, and inciting the Grand Jury to sign
it.

If the church were at the point of Ruin for want of the Suspended Bishops the
exercise of their Offices; If the Succession of our Hierarchy, derived to this
Day without interruption, were thereby in hazard of being broken off; If there
were no where in England to be found Men capable to handle down to our
Posterity the Doctrine of the Gospel, but they; then it had been not only
pardonable, but in some sense necessary, to use all possible means, and even
those out of the ordinary Road, in order to their re-establishment. But however
Great, however Learned these Suspended Bishops may be; we are hopeful there are
no such Miseries impending upon our Church through their Suspension, as the
fear of them should oblige us to break through Laws and Acts of Parliament
merely for their sakes, which is the thing the Grand Jury of Gloucester by their
Address would have the King to do.

I cannot but regret, that these Reverend Persons who had the Honor to give a
noble Testimony of their Constancy and Zeal for the Liberties of our Church and
Country in the last Reign, should have been so unhappy as to occasion such a
Schism, and so many Offenses in this: We justly hoped at the first dawning of
this late happy Revolution; That instead of proving Stumbling Blocks to a great
part of the Nation, by casting all the Dust upon our Deliverance was in their
Power, in refusing to acknowledge it as such, They would rather have continued
in their first Zeal, than to have left it so soon, without every acquainting
the World why they did so. In this we have a bright Testimony of the weakness
of Humane Nature, and of the Possibility of the Stars of the first magnitude
their suffering an Eclipse in the midst of their Carreer of Light.

God forbid, that in making Reflections upon this Pamphlet, I add to the ill
Circumstances these Reverend Bishops are in, from the harsh Censures of the
most of Protestants both at home and abroad; and I confess my self to be of the
Humor of Constantine, who used to say, If he found a Bishop in the Act of
Adultry, he would throw his Mantle over him. But no body will think the respect
I owe them (as being my ghostly Fathers) should forbid a Refutation of a Paper,
that at the bottom is Levelled against the King and both Houses of Parliament
that Suspended them, and at all the rest of the Reverend Bishops, and other
Clergy who took the Oaths to their Majesty's, in Obedience to the Act of
Parliament. For without all question, so hearty and so zealous an appearance
for them who have refused the Oaths, must be more than a tacit Reflection upon
others that did so.

To come to the Pamphlet it self, I shall only touch at the Passages of it,
which seem to have any weight even in the Opinion of the Author, or rather
Authors themselves: For the canting strain, and a thousand Expressions foreign
to the Affair, are neither worthy of any body's reading, nor answer.

The Title it self is Comprehensible enough, and though the Gentleman that
Fathers the Pamphlet, would seem to be only or most concerned to vindicate his
own and his Neighbors their Address; yet he shuffles in both in the Title
page, and all along the Pamphlet it self, an Apology for the Suspended Bishops.
At first sight of this specious Title, I believe other People were as much
mistaken as I; For I immediatley thought I had fallen upon some mighty
Treasure, hidden to this moment from all Mankind but the Suspended Bishops
themselves. I imagined that in this Paper we was to expect an account of all
those profound Reasons which determined the Bishops against taking the Oaths:
And which Reasons the World had been in so long expectation of. But, alas! the
poor Gentlemen, in stead of really vindicating the Bishops, as his Title bears,
leaves them in a thousand times worse Case than he found them. For if he had
been prevailed with not to appear thus in print, invita Minerva, we might have
still continued in an awful expectation of those thundering Arguments for
refusing the Oaths, which these Fathers have thought fit hitherto to lock up in
their own Breast: Whereas on the contrary, by so ridiculous and nonsensical an
Apology, he has given occasion to the World, to think more harshly of the Cause
he undertakes, and to ascribe his Friends, their stiffness, rather to a piece
of groundless sullenness, than to any persuasion from Reason. This Thought will
be the rather natural to those who reads the Apology: That all the Country
about knows it was the great product of the united Brains of those sort of Men,
though they took the Oaths themselves, who are indeed far greater Enemies to the
present Settlement, than those who refused them.

In his Dedication he begins with a Reflection on all those of a contrary
Opinion to his, calling them a restless Faction; and at the same time, he begs
the question for himself, in calling the Cause he vindicates, Truth and
Charity; alas! the Gentleman does not consider, that the People he calls a
restless Faction, as being an Enemy to his Address, is the whole Noblemen,
Clergy, Gentlemen and Commons of England, except a few of his own stamp; For
it is no fewer than all these that abhor such an Address, and are against the
design of it. But for calling his Address Truth and Charity; I know not in what
sense he means it; for it is certain, that instead of Charity, it is in it self
(as I have formerly said) an insinuation that all those who have in the
Parliament House consented to the Act for disabling the Bishops, are in the
wrong; and that all the rest of the Clergy, who have obeyed the Laws by taking
the Oaths, are so too. Thus we see a Specimen of the Man's Charity.

In the next place, he accuses his Enemies (as he calls them) for calling the
Authors and Subscribers of the Address, a Popish Jury; an Accusation these
Gentlemen scarcely can be taxed with. The Roman Catholics, it must be confessed,
have more Wit, than to have meddled in such a business; instead of signing any
such Address, they would rather play the Politicians, infomenting the
differences amongst us, by underhand influencing such unthinking People as the
Author and those of his Gang, to doit for them, thereby making use of the Cat's
Paw to pull out the Chestnut. It Is on such weak folk as our Gloucester
Addressers, that the Roman Catholics can impose Follies, that they are wiser
than to own themselves: And it will be found upon search, that the Popish
implicit Faith to the dictates of their Priests, comes nothing short of the
Addressers ignorant Devotion of their Suspended Bishops. Much good may this
Implicit Faith do both; for no Man of true Sense will long to share with them.

To come to the Pamphlet it self; I need not trouble the Reader with a
recapitulation of a long canting Rapsody he has in the first Pages, of which,
all the Sense I can make, is a design to cast Dust upon the Addressers in the
last Reign, for the Declaration about Liberty of Conscience. I shall not rip up
these old Sores, I wish they may be for ever so Cicatriz'd as never to break
out in an ungrate remembrance. But it must be said for these Addressers in the
last Reign, that they were more to be pitied than condemned, considering what
insupportable Burdens they had lain under for a great many Years before, from
the Persecuting Spirits of some of our own Church, edged on by the secret
Practices of the Papists. Indeed it was no great wonder, that People who had
filled the Prisons of England with their worn out Carcases, and who had been
rendered the Butt of the malice of a Party that played the common Enemies game;
I say it was no wonder, that these poor People should be somewhat tempted with
Liberty, and Exemption from these Severities, and even to thank the hand that
gave them that Liberty, though it was not with all the necessary Conditions of
Law.

But of all Mortals, the Gentlemen of the Author's Principles, have least
reason to cry out against the late Addresses of thanks for Liberty of
Conscience, if they look back upon their own fauning and ridiculous Addresses
in the Reign before it, when King Charles was preparing a Yoke for us, that our
Ancestors were not acquainted with. Alas! we have not forgot the unhappy days,
when these Gentlemen addressed their thanks to King Charles for dissolving of
Parliaments, for breaking through all the Hedges of the Government, and for
laying a Foundation for our slavery: For in no less than in all these, did the
Methods used by that King, in the end of his Reign, result. And if we must
compare the Addresses in King James's Reign, with these of King Charles, it
will be found that the last were the Effects of pure folly and inadvertence of
the dangers attending them; whereas the first were the effects of an ill timed
gratitude, for a Liberty that saved them from a present Ruin, though it laid them
open to one farther off.

I am very willing to comply with the Author, in a just remembrance of the Zeal
and Courage with which the Seven Bishops appeared against the Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience; and I confess they deserve a great Tribute of praise on
that account. But it could have been wished, these Fathers had continued to
concur with the necessary methods taken afterward, to put us out of Fear of
any such Illegal Encroachments for the time coming. And we cannot enough regret
their turning back in the midst of so glorious a Carreer. It Is indeed true,
that the Persecution of these Reverend Fathers hastened the then Prince of
Orange's attempt for our delivery; but it is as true, the Design was upon the
wheel long before their Commitment, and had taken effect, though they had never
met with the hardship of a long imprisonment in the Tower. They did possibly
concur in our deliverance, by opening the Eyes of England to see what was to be
expected, from a Court that dealt so severely and unjustly with so Pious
Fathers of the Church; and we know active Concurrence was not to be expected
from Men that were accustomed to Passive Obedience.

I am not so well acquainted with mystic Divinity, as to lay that stress the
Author does upon the Number Seven, being that of the Imprisoned Bishops. I know
there has been some very ingenious, Pictures and Emblems fallen upon in their
Case, of which, that of the Seven Lamps has been none of the worst. But though I
be as much a Sympathiser with these Pious Fathers as any body can be, yet I am
not willing to aggravate beyond measure the hardships of their Imprisonment.
Our Author's comparing it to that of the Holy Martyrs under Dioclesian's
Persecution, and his calling it a dreadful Confinement among Murderers and
Traitors, seems to be somewhat too Poetic; For the Tower was always looked
upon as none of the worst Prisons in the World, at least not altogether so ill
as the Dungeons underground, where the Primitive Christians were penned up.
The Gentleman's manner of aggravating the terror of the Tower, puts me in mind
of a Story of Alexander the Great, Q. Curtius tells us, that coming to the
River, Idus, and being to take his Journey home to Persia, he would needs leave
behind him some Vestiges and Memoirs of his Expedition for after Ages.
Whereupon he caused 'em to make a great many Coats of Armor for Men and
Horses, and Mangers, Bridles, and other necessaries of a Camp, all of them
thrice as big as the ordinary Sizes; and all this forsooth to make the
succeeding Ages believe, the Men and Horses of his Army were all of a Gigantick
bigness. The Historian adds this Remark, That Alexander by this piece of
vanity, did rather detract from his Fame than add to it: and instead of
persuading after Ages of the Gigantick bigness of his Men and Horses, he
thereby gave occasion to them to doubt of their true proportion. Just so our
Apologist, in setting forth a few days. Imprisonment in one of the Royal
Palaces of the Kings of England (for such the Tower is) under the Notion of
such Prisons as the Primitive Christians were buried alive in under Dioclesian,
does really detract from the real Glory the Reverend Bishops gained by their
Restraint, since every body will tell us the vast disproportion between the
Dungeons of the Primitive Christians, and the place where the Seven Rishops
were confined.

In the next period, our Author seems to be willing to teach the World how to
give Uncharitable Names to the Suspended Bishops, their standing out against
taking the Oaths: And they are very little obliged to him, for putting such
words as Obstinacy, Pride, and Prejudice, in the Mouths of uncharitable People,
who are inclinable enough of themselves to put a harsh Interpretation upon
these Reverend Persons their Carriage in that Point. But they are yet less
obliged to them, in taxing them with mourning in Spirit for the Miseries of the
Protestant Religion. Alas! how strangely does this Man accuse, instead of
defending the Persons he Apologizes for! And what can he say worse of them,
than that they mourn in Spirit for the Miseries of the Protestant Religion?
when those that have a just measure of Charity for them, believe they are so
far from looking upon the Protestant Religion to be in a worse condition
through this late Revolution; that on the contrary, we are all willing to
think, these Reverend Persons do rejoice heartily for it, as carrying with it
the happiness and prosperity of the Protestant Religion, which otherwise would
have been at the bottom of misery.

But he comes to tell us, page 4. That the Bishops Conceal their Reasons why
they do not take the Oaths, and therefore he has not the ill manners to dive
into them. Pray why an Apology for the Suspended Bishops their not taking the
Oaths, and yet no diving into the Reasons why they will not take them? I
confess, the Gentleman has fallen upon a new, and hitherto unheard of manner of
making an Apology, since he will not enter into the Reasons why they did not
the thing for which he Apologizes. If he had pleased, he might have saved
himself and us the trouble of his Pamphlet; for this is all we desire to know,
why the Suspended Bishops did not take the Oaths, and he thinks it ill manners
to dive into them. Thus we are just as wise as before, for any thing this
Gentleman is pleased to tell us to the contrary: Commend me to the Grand Jury
of Gloucester, for drawing up Addresses, and for making Apologies; though the one
comes never to be delivered, and the other never to touch the Principal Subject
it should treat of, I hope this folly in their Apologisers, will oblige some of
the Reverend Persons concerned, to do it themselves, by which they will
extraordinarly oblige the World.

But our Apologist comes, page 6. to tell us of the Christian temper of our
Holy Primate and his Brethren, in not rejoicing, as others, in the Afflictions
of that Calamitous Prince King James; and that in their anguish of Soul, and
great pangs, of Spirit they have often wept for their avowed Enemy, and
endeavored with their Holy Tears, like the Sovereign Balm Tree to cure his
Wounds. It Is a great pity this Gentleman were not in the Chair, to preach a
Panegyric upon the Suspended Bishops. What stuff and Cant is here, without any
design I know of, but either to render these Reverend Persons Cause ridiculous,
or the Case of those that have taken contrary Measures to them less odious.
Might not the Suspended Bishops have mourned for the Afflictions of the late
King, without having by their stifness encouraged a Party that is an Enemy both
to them and all of their Religion, though never so much against the present
Settlement? Where has the Panegyrist learned this new kind of canting flattery,
Holy Primate, Holy Tears? etc. And what needed the Man tell the World, that
these Fathers have endeavored by these their Holy Tears to cure that
unfortunate Prince's Wounds? This is worse of them, than I am willing the World
should know: For King James his greatest Wounds are certainly his being set
beside a Throne, his being stopped in the midst of his Carreer of destroying the
Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of three Kingdoms, his being forced
to see a Religion he abhors to become Triumphant in spite of all his hopes and
endeavors to the contrary. Pray do the Bishops endeavor by their holy tears
to cure such Wounds as these? Or does their Champion design to affront them,
with pretending they endeavor to bring King James back again to his Throne,
and to put him in condition of executing his begun design upon us and our
Religion? I know no other Cure of his Wound than this. And does this our Author
under the color of making an Apology for them, venture to put them in a new
fright, by acquainting the Mob that they endeavor to cure King James 's
Wounds, which is all one, with restoring him to the Throne. We justly say there
is no Wound like that of a Friend, and this Champion of the Suspended Bishops,
whether out of inadvertence or design, has said of them what their greatest
Enemies would scarce have ventured on, and all under a pretense of writing
their Panegyric.

I am as much as any against Harsh Treating the Suspended Bishops, and I am
loath to give the Name of Ignis fatuus to this Light (he says) these Reverend
Persons entertain in their Breasts: But I never thought it was Harsh Treatment
to get leave to enjoy the Protection of a Government at the very time they
refuse to acknowledge the Government that gives it them: And tho every Body is
pleased these Fathers should enjoy Protection and Safety under the present
Settlement, yet I must tell this Author, That there is no Government I know
upon Earth, that would be so Favorable in this case as Ours is.

To pass over that Mass of indigested Stuff about the Sacredness of an Oath, on
which our Author expatiates in the 7 and 8 Pages, I cannot but laugh at the
Poor Man's rediculous Notions, of the Suspended Bishops their not being yet
satisfied in their Perplexity of their Doubt (to give his own words tho scarce
good or intelligible) which he says, does so much affect them, that for this
reason they refuse to Swear. The truth is, we are obliged in good Manners to
think, these Reverend Persons have some Doubts that forbid them to take the
Oaths; but what these Doubts are, neither they, nor this their new Champion are
at the Pains to let us know. It Is greatly to be regrated, that this Divine
Spirit, which he says Page 8. Reigns in their Breasts, should be of the Nature
of those Spirits our Savior met with on Earth, both Deaf and Dumb; Deaf
against all Reasons offered to them, and Dumb as to all Reasons expected from
them. And tho our Author is greatly in Admiration of their former Gallantry (a
word too material for Sons of Peace) yet I can scarce be persuaded, the
Parliament will take his Counsel, in accepting the Bishops Parole of Honor for
a Formal Oath, In the Old out-of-fashion Trade of Knight Errantry, a Parole of
Honor might be of sufficient Value: But the World we know, is become Stricter
in such Points, than to follow the Martial Dictates of such Don Quixots as our
Author is. It had been a Thousand Pities this Gentleman, and the rest of his
Gloucester Addressers, were not present at that Session of Parliament, wherein
the Oaths were enacted; for he had certainly by his Eloquence and
Knight-errantoratory persuaded the Parliament to pass from so Silly a kind of
Assurance as an Oath, and to revive in its place, the Sacred Sanction of Parole
of Honor, as in the days of Amodis de Gaul, or the Seven Champions of
Christendom. But pray forgive me to ask one Question of this Learned Author,
How comes it that the Six Bishops refuse to take the Oaths, and yet (as he
says) are willing to give their Parole of Honor: For if they be willing to
give their Honor (and which is a thing most Sacred among Men of Probity) as a
Pawn of their Faithfulness to the Government, Why should they stick at giving
their Oath for it?

But our Apologist tells us, that one Huddelston, tho a Papist, was by an Act
of Parliament in King Charles his time, excused from taking the Oaths. What
then? Must the Suspended Bishops be so too? I do not remember that any of these
Reverend Persons had the Good Fortune to preserve the Life of a King, when
sought for by Enemies, nor can I find any of their Names mentioned in our
History of King Charles's wonderful Escape after the Fatal Battle of Worcester.
Until they have as great a Stock of Merit on a like Score as Mr. Huddelston
had, we must even allow them to come under the Act of Parliament with the rest
of England, and allow Mr. Huddelston to stand alone in the Act of Parliament,
without the Honor of a Clergyman to bear him company.

This is not all, our Apologist is extremely vexed, That the Convention (I
believe he would say the Parliament) did not Copy out something in Favor of
the Bishops, which if it had done, he tells us, would have saved him and his
Friends the labor of an Address. Alas that the Parliament did not call the
Grand Jury of Gloucester, and with them this Learned Author, to set a Copy for
them, how to treat the Bishops that would not take the Oaths. Sure the
Parliament would have altered all their Measures, if they had had the good
Fortune to consult so wise and sedate Heads, who are not for rapid and critical
Haste in Counsels, as he says, are the Fate of a great many Men. We never knew
before, of setting a Copy to the Two Houses of Parliament, nor till now could
we have fallen upon the Men to do it, far less did we know such Mighty
Politicians were confined to the County of Gloucester. But which was yet a
greater Omission in the Parliament, They not only forgot to follow a Gloucester
Copy in Favor of the Bishops, but by this neglect they have had the ill
Manners to put so many Great Men as our Author and his Colleagues to the labor
of an Address, which must certainly be a great Loss to the Nation, considering
the Mighty Importance of their Time and Pains. It Is hoped the Parliament will
in time coming, occasion no such Loss to the World, as the putting these
Gentlemen to the Labor of any more Addresses: And yet methinks it could be no
Labor, to appear in favor of Persons for whom they have so blind a
Veneration, and whom they treat so often with the Title of Holy.

But at last our Author from making an Apology for the Bishops to make one for
himself, and his Colleagues the Grand Jury of Gloucester, or rather for their
Address. And now it is he tells us what the Intent and Heads of the Address
was. In short, It was (says he) no other than the return of Thanks to His
Majesty for His repeated Assurances to maintain our Religion by Law
established, and for his Gracious Resolution to grant to all his Subjects
(except such Persons as he in his Royal Wisdom should distinguish from the
rest) his Gracious Pardon; And Praying that the like Favor might be extended
to their Pious Bishops, particularly their Diocesan, that the Incapacity he
lies under by not taking the Oaths, might no longer disable them from serving
their Majesty's in their several Provinces.

This is the Address, if we believe our Apologist, in its full Force, and we
need not put our selves to the pains of making a too large Commentary upon it,
since it neither deserves nor requires it; I shall only hint at a few
Reflections that rise naturally from it.

I. They return Thanks to His Majesty for his reiterated Assurances to maintain
our Religion as by Law established. This is Just indeed, and never Prince
deserved a greater return of Thanks than His Majesty does upon this Score; for
it was for the Preservation of our Religion that he ventured his Life and his
All in coming over to England at first; and if it had not been for him, it is
more than probable, we had been beyond the possibility of a Retreat from Ruin
before now. But the manner of Thanks in this Address, seems to be the very same
words of our rediculous Addresses in the two preceding Reigns, when our
Gloucester Gentlemen, among others, besieged King Charles and King James with
their Thanks for the reiterated Assurances to maintain our Religion as by Law
established; when in the mean time every Body of common Sense, saw our Religion
was every day incroach'd upon, and that Popery was breaking in upon us like an
impetuous Torrent. I am apt to think our Gloucester Grand Jury has been so
accustomed to these words of thanking the Kings that designed the Subversion of
our Religion, for their Assurances to maintain it, that they cannot get rid of
the old rot they then used, now when we are under a King, that tho he were
desired, would not alter our Religion by Law established.

II. They thank His Majesty for his Resolution to grant all His Subjects a
Gracious Pardon. A Man would naturally infer, that our Grand Jury found
themselves in some need of a good Act of Indemnity; for we all know what sort
of Men were most Earnest for having such an Act, even those that needed one
most. For my part, I do think His Majesty did express a great deal of good
Nature, in granting so Universal an Indemnity, and it was likewise an
extraordinary piece of good Policy so to do at that Juncture: But of all Men
living, those that needed it should not have endeavored to abuse it, by making
Addresses afterward, prejudicial to His Majesty's Interest and Honor, and to
the Safety of the Government, as this Address of our Grand Jury was.

III. Our Addressers have by their ordinary inadvertence and Folly, insinuated
that the Bishops needed a Pardon, which truly they did not, for they humbly
pray the like Favor ( viz. a Pardon) might be extended to their Pious Bishops,
particularly their Diocesan. Whatever Thanks they pretend to pay the King, sure
I am, the Suspended Bishops owe none to those Gentlemen who desire a Pardon for
them, when they themselves (I hope) are sufficiently persuaded they need none:
And if a Man had been designed to redicule these Reverend Fathers, it could not
been better done, than begging a Pardon for them that had appeared in the last
Reign with so much Zeal for the Liberty and Religion of their Country, and had
suffered a Confinement, like that of the Primitive Martyrs under Dioclesian,
among Murderers and Traitors (to use our Authors own words) upon that Score.

IV. Our Addressers have stumbled unhappily upon the Word Serving their
Majesty's in their several Provinces. One would have thought these Zealous
Votaries should rather have used the word Serving God Almighty, for the Office
of Bishops does more immediately refer to that, than to the Service of any
Earthly Monarch. It Is an ordinary Expression, to Serve God in the Work of the
Ministry, but it is a new one, to Serve the King in it: And I believe these
Reverend Persons will be of my Opinion. The word Provinces comes in as much
from the Purpose, for by Provinces (when referring to the Bishops of England)
are meant two, the Districts of Canterbury and York; and that of York is
already happily filled: So that the word Province should have been used only in
the Singular Number, to mean that of Canterbury now Vacant, otherwise it was
not good Sense.

But to answer this Address in one word: There is no Government in the World,
that ever allowed Men to enjoy the greatest Offices and Dignities in it, that
would not acknowledge the Government it self some one way or other: And there
can be no greater Presumption, nor Affront done the Government, than for a
Handful of Men to present a Petition or Address (which is all one) for
continuing these Men in Offices, which the Law, and all the Rules of Policy,
incapacitate them for. There is no Honest Man but could heartily wish these
Reverend Bishops might have their Consciences satisfied in point of the Oaths;
but until they satisfy the Law by taking them, we must regret their
Misfortune, without wishing them in Offices the Law cannot allow them to enjoy.
There is no question, but whenever they shall get over their Scruples, the King
will show as much Kindness to them, as he has been pleased to show One of their
Coat of late, upon his getting over his. We have some hopes, that the Pungent
Reasons which prevailed with this Reverend Parson to change his Sentiments, as
to the Lawfulness of the Oaths, may at length prevail with the Bishops too: And
it is from thence the World is in so much Impatience to see that New Convert's
Reasons in Print.

I know not if I be obliged to follow this rambling Apologist through all the
Impertinencies in the rest of his Pamphlet; But I cannot enough admire the
wonderful Application he makes of the Fable about the Camels getting from
Jupiter crop'd Ears instead of Horns, and all this our Author is at pains to
relate, merely for the sake of a fine single Epithet, in calling Crop'd Ears a
Sanctified Dress. What a Learned Man must this be, that can go back the length
of Esop's days, only to have a Nonsensical Fling at the Diffenting Ministers,
whom such Learned Authors as himself have sometime (for what Reason no body
knows) Nicknam'd Crop'd Eared Parsons. But I would fain know of this Gentleman,
whither if he himself had been to ask a Boon of Jupiter, it might not have been
as much his Interest to desire him to crop his Ears, as to give him, or allow
him to keep Horns; the one being more visible, and making perhaps a greater
Noise in the Neighborhood than the other could possibly do, especially if
hidden by a Perriwig.

He spends almost all the rest of the Pamphlet in vindicating the Grand-Juries
making their Address to the King, and not to the King and Parliament. It Is not
worth the pains to consider, whither they should have Addressed it to the King,
or to the Parliament, or to both; for whatever way they were to do it, they
were to lose their pains, and to meet with that Just Disdain such a Folly
deserves.

The Poor Man, after this, falls into one of the Saddest Fits of Fury against
the Presbyterians that can be, and no body knows what has given occasion to
this Paroxism of his. Was it because they condemned the Gloucester Address? At
that rate he might have with the same reason, belsh'd out his Venom at the
Better and Learneder part of the Church of England, who have unanimously
condemned this Address as much as the Presbyterians, as being more concerned
for the Reflection such a Folly brings upon the Church.

But how he comes to spend so much time, and so many Invectives against Doctor
du Moulin, for writing against some Mistakes in the Discipline of the Church of
England, I know not: The Truth is, I thought both the Man and his Book had been
forgotten, but it is probable our Author is Master of so few Books, that it is no
wonder he takes pains to cite so many Passages out of one that has casually
fallen into his Hands. There is very few I know, that approves du Moulin's Heat
against the Discipline of our Church; but there are others of the other side
nothing behind him, in Invectives against the Dissenters from the Church. We
have had both before, and of late, several who have gone to that length of
Animosity against the Dissenters, as for their mere Sakes to Unchurch all the
Protestant Churches in Europe, because of the want of the Order of Bishops
among them. And it is very likely, this Uncharitableness of the Church of
England, against the Protestants abroad (and particularly of the French Church,
whereof Doctor du Moulin was a Member) might animate the Angry Old Man (as our
Author calls him) a little beyond his Design, and beyond Reason and Decency
too. So that Dr. du Moulin and our Author may even forget one another, since
they are equally in the wrong to one another Party.

The Author Raves, when he tells us the Reason why People are displeased with
his Gloucester Address, is because it is in Favor of Men that are Bishops, and
for their being so. This is a rediculous and malicious Reflection; there is no
body but has a great Veneration for the Order, and for a great many Learned,
Pious and Worthy Persons that compose it: But indeed our Author will have much
to do to reconcile the Generality of Mankind (at least Protestants) to the
Conduct of the Suspended Bishops. It Is not because they were Bishops, that this
Address in their Favors was generally condemned, but it was because they by
their Stiffness have weakened the Hands of the rest of their Order and
Communion, and as much as in them lay, cast Dust upon a Revolution that
retriv'd our Religion from Ruin, by their not acknowledging it as such.

In the next Apology this Gentleman makes for these Fathers, it could be wished
in his Panagyricks upon our Holy Primate, he would use a word less Monkish than
that of Seraphick Austerities. If one who knew not the Zeal of that Reverend
Person to the Protestant Religion, were reading this Article of his Encomium,
he would be inclinable to think the Person the Author speaks of were a Popish
Bishop rather than a Protestant one. We put no Value upon that the Romish
Church calls by the Name of Austerities, which we know they do by way of
Penance and to gain Merit; and this thoughtwe know to be infinitely far from
this Pious Prelate. It could likewise be wished, that in his Praises of his own
Diocesan, he abstain from such Romantic or Martial Epithets and Expressions as
these of Glorious Exploits, etc. They belong to the Sons of Mars, and not to
the Apostles of Peace, and that Reverend Person owes him no thanks for his
pains.

But I would fain know to what use serves the reaping up the Faults or Mistakes
of others in the last Reign? Does the Gentleman think, that because others
committed unwarrantable Actions then, that it justifies his and his Colleagues
Follies and Faults now? No sure: It was never thought a good Vindication of one
Man, to accuse another of the like Guilt. And this must be said in favor of
those that in the last Reign were for an equivalent, as he tells us Page 17.
They were to be pitied as well as condemned, in going any length to satisfy a
Prince, that (whatever was his real Designs in granting them a Toleration) yet
they were obliged to him in the mean time for a Deliverance from the Clutches
of a Party of Men that had made them the Butt of their Anger for a great many
years together. We know it is somewhat Natural for Men to wish an Out-gate from
Trouble and Persecution, even at any Rate; but much more when they have a Door
open for it, upon no other Condition, but that of giving Thanks for the Favor
received: And I believe this was the Dissenters Case in King James's Reign,
whatever other unwarrantable things they might after be tempted to, in order to
free them from coming under the Clurches of their Enemies a second time. And
this color on the Dissenters Actions will be the rather believed, when coming
from one that is of another Communion.

It Is one of the strangest things in the World, to hear a Man that Vomits forth
such Scurrilous Reflections upon the Dissenters in general, speak so favorably
of Calvin, as to call him The Sweet and Angelick Spirit of Calvin: If Dr.
Heylin and some of the Stamp were alive, it were a Ground of irreconcilable
Quarrel with our Author. But I confess it is ordinary for Men of so Hot Brains
as our Author, to be inconsistent with themselves, and therefore we'll let this
kind Expression of Calvin pass, tho never so much out of purpose.

What a malicious ill-natured Reflection is that Page 18. of the Dissenters,
their being willing to have seen the Abomination of a Cursed Aelia set up over
the Archbishops Gate, and Nuncio's Apostolic Whipping Herefie out of our
Protestant Chapels. I believe there are few but such as our Author, who have
so very ill thoughts of that People; and let them be never so great Enemies to
the Church of England, it is certain they are no less to the Church of Rome; and
the Roman Church thinks so themselves.

In the end of this Pamphlet this Great Champion comes to raise up a Pillar
that has been lying equal with the Ground for a considerable time, and to show
his Skill, he falls upon the Defense of a Tenent that has been sufficiently
laughed out of Doors long e're now. What rediculous Stuff have we been vexed
with, in the last two Reigns, about Passive Obedience; and we thought the
Affair was over, but this Learned Author will needs once more rouse it up out
of his Grave. Let the Gentleman play the Fool as much as he will about this Old
Tool of Passive Obedience, as all he says of can say for it, has been a
Thousand times exploded by better Pens; I am not resolved to say over again
things that have been already convincingly said against it. And I must say, we
have reason to be satisfied of some Peoples being fond of this Principle, if so
be they look upon it as a binding one under the Present Government.

Our Author needs not terrify us with the Bugbear of the Suspended Bishops
having many Friends, Page 20. and of their not encouraging them to Rise in Arms
on their account. There is no body I hope much afraid of these their many
Friends, and there are few that dread they may Disturb the Security of the
Nation, as he Insinuates. But our Author must forgive me to tell him, If these
many Friends should Rise in Arms, yea, tho the Bishops should blow the Trumpet
for such an Alarm (as he words it) perhaps it were nothing the worse for us,
for a Quashed Rebellion Settles the Throne the Stronger. The next time our
Author troubles us with an Apology for the Suspended Bishops, he would do well
to leave out such Bragging Threats as these, for be mightily Abuses thereby the
Cause he Espouses, and certainly the Suspended Bishops will disown all such
rediculous and irritating Expressions, if they were put to it.

He comes Dictator like, to dictate to His Majesty How much Honor he would
gain by this one Act of Piety, in reinstating the Suspended Bishops in their
former Capacities, and that it would be as much as that he gained by his
Achievements of his Arms when he passed the Boyne. I believe the Author is in
one of the Railing Fits we read of, wherein Men imagine themselves Kings, or a
Stage above them; he is so free with one in that high Elevation. Pray how comes
he to know better than the King himself, which is the properest way to gain
Honor? A Prince that has in all the great Actions of his Life been in quest of
it, should, methinks, know at least as well the Paths of Honor, as a little
private Gentleman in the Country, or a few Curates or Parsons whose Brat he has
Fathered. It would indeed be a Metaphy sick kind of Honor, to reinstate Men in
a Capacity the Parliament has Incapacitated them for, especially when they will
not so much as give the least Assurance of their owning the Government that is
desired to show them such a Favor, and to break a Solemn Sanction for their
Sakes. But when our Author speaks of the reinstating the Suspended Bishops, its
being an Act of Piety, I cannot but laugh at the Poor Notions of such Bigoted
Creatures as he. I would fain know where this Act of Piety lies; and if it be
an Act of Piety, it must be a Duty, and then instead of Petitioning the King to
do it, they should have sent in some of their Dissenting Clergy (I mean
Dissenting from the Present Settlement, not the Church) to let His Majesty see
the great Hazard of omitting such a necessary and binding Duty. What narrow and
rediculous Notions have some People of Acts of Piety; sure it is in their
opinion another great Act of the same Nature, for our Author to come the length
of Lambeth from his Cell in Gloucestershire, merely to seek the Fatherly
Blessing of the Holy Blessed, etc. Primate (as he calls him) as being of a
greater Value than those of others that have taken the Oaths, and concurred with
the Present Settlement.

Our Author's mentioning the Honor His Majesty acquired in passing the Boyne,
puts me in mind of the great Expectations we were in at that time, of the
Efficacy this Success of the Kings might have had upon the Consciences of our
Suspended Clergy: For we were of Opinion that it might have proved a Convincing
Argument to remove the Scruples that could not be overcome at any time before.
But we are mistaken for once, tho we have yet some weak Glimpse of Hopes, That
the Subduing of Limerick, and the rest of Ireland beyond the Channon, may help
to open some Peoples Eyes once for all. Who knows but the Sees of the Suspended
Bishops may be left vacant till that time, and then they may be reinstated in
them, without the Necessity of an Address from our Gloucester Grand Jury, or an
Apology from our Author.

But Alas! we have mistaken mightily our Author and his Partners in this
Address, we thought they had been Men a little out of the Road of the World,
and through their Confinement to the Country, little acquainted with what
passed on the public Theater; which we deemed was the reason of their
venturing upon such a rediculous Address. No, the Gentlemen are extraordinarily
acquainted at Rome, and they are intimately conversant in the Popes Palaces,
and in the College of Cardinals: For it is there he finds the News of the
Bishops Suspension was joyfully received: Yea, they have Advice thence, That
the General of the Jesuits received the Express with Triumph and surprising
Pleasure. The Truth is, one would be almost ready to think, our Gloucester
Grand Jury had kept Correspondence with Rome, and with no less than The Pope,
the College of Cardinals, and the General of the Jesuits; yea, that they had
sent this Express our Author mentions. But really I am willing to acquit the
Honest Gentlemen of any such Correspondence, and I believe their Acquaintance
at Rome but small, they talk so rediculously of things there. It Is true, if any
body has been at the pains to talk of the Suspended Bishops at Rome, they might
indeed Laugh at the Measures of some Men, who made a great Noise once for the
Liberty and Religion of their Country, and when it came to be vindicated in a
public Settlement, turned about they neither know well whither nor wherefore.
I am of the Opinion, we here at London would laugh heartily at the Folly of any
of the Cardinals at Rome, that should not concur heartily with any thing that
might confirm or establish their own Order and Church, but should stand out
against it, without telling the World wherefore: And therefore we must upon the
like Score, even allow them to laugh at some of us here in England. But at Rome
there will be more laughing at some People I have Uncharacterized, than at the
rest of England, for their Measures toward them. The Italians are generally
wiser, than to laugh at what they would do themselves, if they were in the same
Case. And if our Author be so well acquainted there, pray let him acquaint us,
where in all that Country he has met with any of the Clergy enjoying their
Offices and Benefices, without acknowledging the Government where they lie.

He Sums up his Pamphlet with a New. Rapsody of ill Words and hot Calumnies,
against the Dissenters and all them that have condemned the Gloucester Address,
for he puts them two always in one bottom. The Truth is, I am wearied with this
Stuff, and must even leave the Gentleman to fetch his Breath a little, after so
violent a Vomit; least by stirring up this envenomed Matter, I make my self
Sick as well as he. But if any of the Dissenters be at pains to throw away as
much time as to answer such Silly Accusatrons, they may for me, for I am
neither concerned, nor have time to do it.

FINIS.

