THE EXAMINATION AND TRIAL OF Margaret Fell and George Fox (at the several
Assizes held at LANCASTER the 14th and 16th days of the First Month 1663. And
the 29th of the 6th Month 1664.) For their Obedience to Christ's Command who
says, Swear not at all.

ALSO Something in Answer to Bishop Lancelot Andrews Sermon Concerning
SWEARING.

Thus have you made the Commandment of God of none Effect by your Tradition,
Mat. 15. 6.

Printed in the Year, 1664.

(...) (...) (...) (...) owe Allegiance and obedience to the King of Kings
Christ Jesus, who has commanded me not to swear at all.

Judge. That is no answer, will you take the oa^h or will you not take it?

M. F. I say I owe Allegiance and obedience unto Christ Jesus, who commands me
not to swear.

Judge. I say unto you that's no answer, will you take it or will you not take
it?

M. F. If you should ask me never so often, I must answer to you the reason why
I cannot take it, is because Christ Jesus has commanded me not to swear at
all, I owe my Allegiance and obedience unto him.

Then one of the Justices that committed her, said, Mrs. Fell you may with a
good Conscience. (if you cannot take the Oath) put in security that you may
have no more meetings at your house.

M. F. Will thou make that good, that I may with a safe Conscience make an
engagement to forbear meetings, for fear of losing my Liberty and Estate; wilt
not thou and you all here judge of me that it was for saving my Estate and
Liberty that I did it, and do I not in this deny my testimony; and would not
this defile my Conscience.

Judge. This is no answer, will you take the Oath? we must not spend time.

M. F. I never took an Oath in my life, I have spent my days thus far, and I
never took an Oath, I own Allegiance to the King as he is King of England, but
Christ Jesus is King of my Conscience -- Then the Clerk held out the Book and
bid her pull off her Glove and lay her hand on the book.

M. F. I never laid my hand on the book to swear in all my life, and I never
was at this Assize before, I was bred and born in this County and have led my
life in it, and I was never at an Assize before this time, and I bless the Lord
that I am here this day upon this account, to bear testimony to the truth. --
Then they asked her if she would have the Oath read, she answered, I do not
care if I never hear an Oath read, for the Land mourns because of Oaths.

Judge. Then the Judge cried take her away, then thy took her civilly away, and
asked her if she would give security that she would have no more meetings.

M. F. Nay, I can give no such security, I have spoken enough for that.

Then George Fox was called before Judge Twisden, being a Prisoner the Jailer
brought him in.

Judge. What do you come into the Court with your Hat on, and then the Jailer
took it off.

G. F. Peace be amongst you all, (and said) the Hat was not the honor that
came down from God.

Judge. Will you take the Oath of Allegiance George Fox.

G. F. I never took Oath in my life.

Judge. Will you swear or no?

G. F. Christ commands we must not swear at all, and the Apostle; and whether
must I obey God or man judge thee, I put it to thee.

Judge. I Will not dispute with thee George Fox, come read the Oath to him, and
so the Oath was read, and when it was read, give him the book said they, and so
a man that stood by him held up the book and said lay your hand on the book.

G. F. Give me the book in my ltand, which set them all a gazing, and as in a
hope he would have sworn; then when he got the book in his hand, he held up the
book and said, this book commands me not to swear if it be a Bible I will prove
it; and he saw it was a Bible, and he held it up, and then they plucked it forth
of his hand again, and cried will you swear, will you take the Oath of
Allegiance yea or nay.

G. F. My Allegiance lies not in Oaths, but in truth and faithfulness, for I
honor all men, much more the King; but Christ says I must not swear, the
great Propher, the Savior of the world, and the Judge of the world, and thou
say I must swear, whether must I obey Christ or thee; for it is in
tenderness of Conscience that I do not swear, in obedience to the command of
Christ and the Apostle, and for his sake I suffer, and in obedience to his
commands do I stand this day; and we have the word of a King for tender
Consciences, besides his Speeches and Declarations at Breda; and do thou own
the King.

Judge. Yes, I own the King.

G. F. Then why do not thou own his Speeches and Declarations concerning
tender Consciences, to the which he replied nothing but George said it is in
obedience to Christ the Savior of the world, the Judge of the world, before
whose judgment seat all men must be brought, that I do not swear, and am a man
of a tender Conscience, and then the Judge stood up.

Judge. I will not be afraid of thee, thou speaks so loud thy voice drowns mine
and the Courts, I must call for three or four cryers to drown thy voice, thou
have good Lung.

G. F. I am a Prisoner here this day for the Lord Jesus, that made heaven and
earth, and for his sake do we suffer, and for him do I stand this day, and if
my voice were five times louder, yet should I sound it out and lift it up for
Christ's sake, for whose cause I stand this day before your Judgment Seat, in
obedience to Christ's commands, who commands not to swear, before whose
Judgment Seat you must all be brought, and give an account.

Judge. Sirrah will you take the Oath.

G. F. I am none of thy Sirrah, I am no Sirrah, I am a Christian, art thou a
Judge and sits there to give names to Prisoners, thou ought not to give names
to Prisoners.

Judge. I am a Christian too.

G. F. Then do Christian works.

Judge. Sirrah thou think to frighten me with thy words, and looked aside, I
am saying so again,

G. F. I speak in love to thee, that does not become a Judge, thou ought to
instruct a Prisoner of the Law and Scriptures if he be ignorant and out of the
way.

Judge. George Fox, I speak in love to thee.

G. F. Love gives no names.

Judge. Will thou swear, will thou take the oath yea or nay.

G. F. As I said before, whether must I obey God or man judge ye, Christ
commands not to swear, and if thou, or ye, or any Minister, or Priest here will
prove that ever Christ or his Apostles after they had forbidden swearing,
commanded men should swear, I will swear, and several Priests being there, yet
not one did appear.

Judge. George Fox will you swear or no.

G. F. It is in obedience to Christ's commands I do not swear, and for his sake
we suffer, and you are sensible enough of swearers, how they first swear one
way then another, and if I could swear any Oath at all upon any occasion, I
should take that, but it is not denying Oaths upon some occasion, but all Oaths
according to Christ's Doctrine.

Judge. I am a servant to the King, and the King sent me not to dispute, but he
sent me to put his Laws in execution, will thou swear? tender the Oath of
allegiance to him.

G. F. If thou love the King, why do thou break his word, and not own his
Declarations and Speeches to tender Consciences from Breda, for I am a man of a
tender Conscience, for in obedience to Christ's commands I am not to swear.

Judge. Then you will not swear, take him Jailer.

G. F. It is for Christ's sake I cannot swear, in obedience to his commands I
suffer, and so the Lord forgive you all.

And so the mighty power of the Lord God was over all.

The appearance of M. F. The second time being the 16th day of the
aforementioned month 1663/4.

Jud. 1. Mrs. Fell you stand here indicted by the Statute, because you will not
take the Oath of Allegiance, and I am here to inform you what the Law provides
for you in such a case, viz. First, if you confess to the indictment the
Judgment of a Praemunire is to pass upon you, Secondly, if you plead you have
liberty to Traverse. Thirdly, if you stand mute and say nothing at all,
Judgment will be passed against you, so see what you will choose of those three
ways.

M. F. I am altogether ignorant of these things, for I had never the like
occasion, so I desire to be informed by thee, which of them is the best for me,
for I do not know, and so several about the Court cried, Traveise, traverse.

Judge. If you will be advised by me put in your Traverse, and so you have
liberty until the next Assizes to answer your indictment.

M. F. I had rather according to thy own proposal have a Process, that I might
have liberty until the next Assize, and then to put in a Traverse.

Judge. Your Traverse is a Process.

M. F. May not I have a Process, and put in my Traverse the next Assizes, I am
informed that was the thing that thou intended that I should have.

Judge. You shall have it.

M. F. That is all I desire. -- Then a Clerk of the Crown Office stood up and
whispered to the Judge and said it was contrary to Law, and said I must put in
my Traverse now.

Judge. I would do you all the favor I can, but you must enter your Traverse
now.

M. F. I acknowledge thy favor and mercy, for thou have shown more mercy then
my Neighbors has done, and I see what thou have done for me, and what my
Neighbors have done against me; and I know very well how to make a
distinction, for they who have done this against me they have no reason for it.

Judge. I have done you no wrong, I found you here.

M. F. I had not been here but by my Neighbors.

Judge. What say you, are you willing to Traverse.

M. F. If I may not be permitted to have that which I desire (that is) longer
time, I must be willing to Traverse till the next Assizes, and that upon this
account, that I have something to inform thee of, which I did not speak on the
last time when I was brought before thee: The Justices which committed me, they
told me they had express order from above, but they did not show me the order,
neither indeed did I ask them for it, but I heard since that they have given it
out in the Country that they had an order from the Counsel, others said they
had an order from the King. -- The Sheriff said there was express order; and
also Justice Fleeming said there was an order from the King and the Counsel, so
the Country is incensed that I am some great enemy to the King, so I desire
that I may have this order read, that I may know what my offense is that I may
clear my self.

Judge. I will tell you what that order is, we have express order from the King
to put all Statutes and Laws in execution, not only against you, but all other
people, and against Papists if they be complained of.

M. F. Will that order give the Justices of Peace power to fetch me from my own
house, to tender me the Oath.

Judge. Mrs. we are all in love, if they had an order believe they had one.

M. F. If they have one let them show it, and then I can believe it.

Judge. Come, come, enter the Traverse.

M. F. I had rather have had more time, that I might have informed the King
concerning these things.

Judge. You may inform the King in half a years time, so now let us have your
friend called up.

Then after she was gone down, the Judge called her back again and said, if you
will put in Bail you may go home, and have your liberty till the next Assizes,
but you must not have such frequent meetings.

M. F. I will rather lie where I am, for as, I told you before, I must keep my
Conscience clear for that I suffer.

The 16th day of the same month G. F. Was brought before the Judge the second
time, where he was a little oftended at his Hat, being the last morning before
he was to depart away, and not many people.

Judge. The Judge he read a Paper to him which was, whether he would submit,
stand mute, or Traverse, and so have judgment past; he spoke these and many
more words so very sofily and in baste, that G. F. Could not tell what he said.

G. F. Desired it might be Traversed and Tried.

Judge. Take him away, then I will have no more with him, take him away.

G. F. Well live in the fear of God and do Justice.

Judge. Why, have I not done you Justice.

G. F. That which thou have done has been against the command of Christ.

This with much more was spoken which could not be Collected.

And then G. F. was called up.

The 29th day of the 6th month in the year 1664.

At the Assizes holden at Lancaster, M. F. Brought to the Bar, the Indictment
read to the Judge, come will you take the Oath.

M. F. There is a Clause in the Indictment, that the ChurchWardens informed of
something which seems, that that should be the ground or first occasion of
this Indictment, I desire to know what that Information was, and what the
transgression was by which I come under this Law.

Judge. Mistress, we are not to despute that, you are here indicted, and you
are here to answer, and to plead to your indictment.

M. F. I am first to seek out the ground and the cause wherefore I am indicted,
you have no law against me except I be a trangressour, the law is made for the
lawless and trangressours, and except I be a transgressour ye have no law
against me, neither ought you to have indicted me, for being that the
ChurchWardens did inform, my question is, what matter of fact they did inform
of, for I was sent for from my own house, from amongst my Children and Family,
when I was about my outward occasions, when I was in no meeting, neither was it
a meeting day; therefore I desire to know what this first foundation or matter
of Fact was, for there is no law against the innocent and righteous, and if I
be a transgressour let me know wherein.

Judge. You say well, the Law is made for transgressors, but Mistress do you
go to Church?

M. F. I do go to Church, Judge, what Church, M. F. To the Church of Christ.

Judge. But do you go to Church amongst other people, ye know what I mean.

M. F. What do thou call a Church the house or the people, the house ye all
know is Wood and Stone, but if thou call the people a Church, to that I shall
answer; as for the Church of England that now is, I was gathered unto the Lords
truth, unto which I now stand a witness before this Church was a Church, I was
separated from the general worship of the Nation, when there was another set up
then that which is now, and was persecuted by that power that then was, and
suffered much hardship, and would you have us now to deny our faith and our
principles which we have suffered for so many years; and would you now have us
to turn from that which we have born witness of so many years, and turn to your
Church contrary to our Conscience.

Judge. We spend time about those things, come to the matter in hand, what say
ye to the Oath and to the indictment?

M. F. I say this to the Oath, as I have said in this place before now, Christ
Jesus has commanded me not to swear at all, and that is the only cause and no
other; the righteous judge of heaven and earth knows, before whose throne and
justice ye must all appear one day, and his eyes sees us all and beholds us all
at this present, and he hears and sees all our words and actions; and therefore
every one ought to be serious, for the place of judgment is weighty, and this I
do testisie unto you here, where the Lords eye beholds us all, that for the
matter or substance of the Oath, and the end for which it was intended; I do
own one part and denies the other, that is to say, I do own truth and
faithfulness and obedrence to the King, and all his just and lawful demands and
commands; I do also deny all plotting, contrivings against the King, and all
Popish Supremacy and Conspiracy, and I can no more transgress against King
Charles in these things, then I can disobey Christ Jesus his commands, and by
the same power and virtue of the same word, which has commanded me not to
swear at all, the same does bind me in my Conscience, that I can neither plot
nor contrive against the King, nor do him nor no man upon the earth any wrong;
and I do not deny this Oath only because it is the Oath of Allegiance, but I
deny it because it is an Oath, because Christ Jesus has said I shall not swear
at all, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor any other Oath; and if I might
gain the whole world for swearing an Oath I could not, and what ever I have to
lose this day for not swearing of an Oath, I am willing to offer it up.

Judge. What say you to the indictment.

M. F. What should I say, I am clear and innocent of the wronging any man upon
the earth as my little Child that stands by me here, and if any here have any
thing to lay to my Charge, let them come down and testify it here before ye
all; and if I be clear and innocent you have no law against me: Then Colonel
Kirby and the Sheriff whispered to the Judge, and I looked up and spoke to
Colonel Kirby, and said let us have no whispering, I will not have so many
Judges one of one side, and another of another, here is one Judge that is to be
judge, and the judge said no no I will not hear them; and then I calsed to
Colonel Kirby, and said if thou have any thing to lay to my charge, or to speak
against me come come down here and testify against me, and I said the judge
represents the Kings person and his power, and I own that.

Judge. Jury take notice she does not take the Oath.

M. F. This matter is weighty to me, whatsoever it is to you upon many
accounts, and I would have the Jury to take notice of it, and to consider
seriously what they are going to do; for I stand here before you upon the
account of the loss of my Liberty and my Estate.

Secondly, I stand here in obeying Christ's commands, and so keeping my
Conscience clear, which if I obey this law and King Charles commands I defile
my Conscience and transgresses against Christ Jesus, who is the king of my
Conscience, and the cause and controversy in this matter, that you all are
here to judge of this day, is betwixt Christ Jesus and King Charles; and I am
his servant and witness this day, and this is his cause, and whatsoever I
suffer it is for him, and so let him plead my cause when he pleafeth.

And the Judge said to the Jury are ye all agreed have ye found it, and they
said for the King.

M. F. Then spoke to the Judge, and said, I have counsel to plead to my
indictment, and he said he would clear them afterward in arrest of judgment; so
the Court broke up that time, and after Dinner when they came again, they
intended to have called us at the first, and they had called G. F. out and was
calling of me, and I stepped up to the Bar and desired the Judge that he would
give us time till the next morning to bring in our Reast of Judgment, and the
Judge said at the first we should and I was stepping down to go my way, and the
Judge called me back again, and said Mistress Fell you wrote to me concerning
your Prisons that they are bad and rains in, and are not fit for people to lie
in, and I answered, the Sheriff does know and has been told of it several
times; and now it is raining if you will send to see at this present, you may
see whether they be fit for people to lie in or no; and Colonel Kirby stood up
and spoke to the Judge to excuse the Sheriff, and the badness of the room, and
I spoke to him and said if you were to lie in it your selves you would think it
hard, but your minds is only in cruelty to commit others, as William Kirby here
has done, who has committed ten of our friends, and put them into a cold room
where there was nothing but bare boards to lie on, where they have laid several
nights, some of them old ancient men above threescore years of Age, and known
to be honest men in their Country where they live, and when William Kirby was
asked why they might not have liberty to shift for themselves for beds, he
answered and said they were to commit them to prison, but not to provide
Prisons for them; and we asked him who should do it then, and he said the King:
And then the Judge spoke to him and said they should not do so, they should let
them have Prisons fit for men, with several more such like words; and then at
that time we were returned to our Chambers again, the next day we were called
about the 10th hour, and I stood up to the Bar, and said I had Counsel there
and named them that the Judge might assign them to speak, and I said I had two
or three words to speak before them, and I said I did see all sorts of
Prisoners that did appear before the Judge received mercy, what the Law would
afford them; but we desired only to receive Justice and Law, and the Judge said
what are we hear for else; so I stepped down and the Lawyers spoke and showed
the Judge several errors, and defects, and places of contradiction, and
confusion in the indictment; at which the Judge seemed to give ear to some of
them, others he seemed to wave, but he made a pause and a stop, and seemed
dissatisfied, and then called G. F. and so then when he came to plead, and
bringing that by which his indictment was quite quenched, and then they put the
Oath to G. F. Again the Judge spoke to the Lawyers, and said he would consider
of those particulars they had spoken to, and he would speak to his Brother
Twisden before he passed Judgment upon me; but if I do pass Judgment you may
have a Writ of Error and the Lawyers answered him again, will you pass a
erroneous Judgment my Lord, so after they had called the Grand Jury, and
tendered G. F. the Oath again, they returned us to our Chambers, and when they
had drawn another indictment of G. F. and found it, they called us again in the
afternoon, and G. F. pleaded to his indictment and entered his Traverse, when he
had done the Judge spoke to me and said, if such a word had been in, which was
not in mine, but it was in G. Fs. (and yet it was neither of those words, by
which his indictment was quashed;) but if that had been in mine he said he
would not have passed sentence, but being that it was not there he passed
sentence of Praemunire, then I stood up and told him that he had said to my
Counsel, that I might have a Writ of Error to reverse it, he said I should
have what the Law would afford me, so I said the Lord forgive thee for what
thou have done, and this Law was made for Popish Recusants, but ye pass
sentence but on few of them.

Margaret Fell.

The last Assizes holden at Lancaster the 29th of the 6th Month 1664.
I George Fox being called before the Judge, was put amongst the Fellons and
Murderers, and there stood amongst them above two hours, the people, and the
Justices, and Judge gazing upon me; and there they tried many things before the
Judge, and they called me to the Bar, and then the Judge causted me to be
brought, and he then caused the Jury to be called, and then he asked the
Justices whether they had tendered me the Oath at the Sessions, and they said
they had, and the Judge caused the book to be given to the Justices for them to
swear, they tendered me the Oath according to the indictment, and some of them
would have refused, and the Judge said he would do it to take away occasion,
that there might be no occasion; and when the Justices and Jury was sworn, the
Judge asked me whether I had not refused to take the Oath the last Assize, and I
said I never took an Oath in my life, and Christ the Savior and Judge of the
world says swear not at all; and the Judge asked me whether or no I had not
refused to take the Oath the last Assizes, and I answered, the words that I
said to them was, That if they could prove either Priest, or Teacher, or
Justices, that after Christ and the Apostles had forbidden swearing, that
afterward they commanded that men should swear, I would swear.

The Judge said he was not at that time to dispute whether it was lawful to
swear, but to enquire whether or no I did refuse to take the Oath.

Georg. Those things as concernining plotting and the Popes foreign powers,
etc. Contained in that Oath I utterly deny.

The Judge. Said, I said well in that.

George. I said to them again as before, that if they could prove that after
Christ and the Apostle forbad swearing, that again they commanded to swear, I
would swear, but Christ and the Apostle commanded not to swear, therefore I
should show forth Christianity, for I am a Christian.

The Judge asked me again, whether I had denied the Oath, what did I say?

George. What would thou have me to say, I have told thee before what I have
said.

The Judge asked me if I would have those men to swear that I had taken the Oath.

Geo. Would thou have those men to swear that I have refused to take the Oath,
at which the Court burst out into laughter; I asked them if this Court was a
Playhouse, where is Gravity, and Sobriety, for that did not become them, and
so the indictment being read, I told the Judge I had something to speak to it;
and I asked him whether all the Oath was not to be put into the indictment, and
he said yes, why then said I here is (pretended to be derived and his Heirs and
Successors) left out, and I asked him whether the Oath was to be put to the
Kings Subjects and he said yes.

I answered, why am not I put in as a Subject, but the word (Subject) left out
of the indictment which is in the Oath, and so makes it not the same Oath, Jury
take notice of it, but the Judge said I must speak to the Jury, at which words
the Judge read the Oath, and found it was as I had said, so he stood up and
said he could put the Oath to me, or any man in the Court, and so they began to
be disturbed in themselves also the Justices; And there began to be a murmuring
against the Clerks, and the Judge he got up and began to cover the error, so I
asked whether the last eleventh day of January the Sessions was kept at
Lancaster, which they call Monday, and whether or no the Sessions was not on
that they call Tuesday the twelfth of January, all people take your Almanacks,
and see whether any Oath was tendered, G. F. the 11th of January, whether the
Sessions was not upon the 12th and the Clerks and people looked their Almanacks,
and saw it was the 12th and the Judge asked whether the 11th was not the first
of the Sessions, and they answered there was but one day, and it was the 12th
and the Judge said then it was a great mistake; and then all the Justices was
struck, and some of them could have found in their hearts to have gone off, and
said they had done it on purpose, and said what Clerk did it, and a great stir
was amongst them. and then I spoke to the Jury how that they could not bring me
in guilty according to that indictment, and the Judge said I must not speak to
the Jury, but he would speak to them, and said they might bring me in guilty I
denying the Oath; then I said what should you do with a form then, and do not
go according to it, then you may throw the form away, and then I told the Jury
that it lay upon their Consciences as they would answer the Lord God before his
Judgment Seat, before whom all must be brought, and so the Judge spoke to me,
and said he would hear me afterward any reasons that I could allege wherefore
he should not give Judgment against me, and so he spoke to the Jury, and I bid
him do me Justice and do Justice, and so the Jury brought in for the King
guilty.

And I told them then the Justices had forsworn themselves and the Jury both.
and so they had small cause to laugh as they did a little before, and to say I
was mad, and before I had brought forth my reasons I stood a little while, and
the Judge said he cannot dispute, but then the people said he is too cunning
for them all, after I had brought forth my reasons, how contrary to their own
indictment they had done and sworn, and brought me in guilty; Oh the envy, and
rage, and malice, that was among them against me and lightness, but the Lord
confounded it all, that abundance of it was slain, and so I told them I was no
Lawyer, and the Judge said he would hear me what I could allege before he did
give Judgment, and so I cried all people might see how they had forsworn
themselves, and gone contrary to their own indictment, and so their envy and
malice was wonderfully stopped, and so persently M. Fell was called, who had a
great deal of good service amongst them, and so the Court broke up near the
second hour, many more words was spoken concerning the truth.

And so in the afternoon we were brought up to have sentence passed upon us,
and so M. Fell desired that Judgment and sentence might be deferred till the
next morning and we desired nothing but law and justice at his hands, for
thieves had mercy, and I desired the Judge to send some to see my prison being
so bad, they would put no creature they had in it, it was so windy and rainy,
and I told him that Colonel Kirby who was then on the Bench said I should be
locked up, and no flesh alive should come at me, and most of the Gentry of the
Country being gathered together, expecting to hear the sentence, but they were
crossed that time, so I was had away to my prison, and some Justices with Colonel
Kirby went up to see it, and when they came up in it they durst scarcely go in
it, it was so bad, rainy, and windy, and the badness of the floor, and others
that came up said it was a Jakes house, I being removed out of the prison which
I was in formerly, and so Col. Kirby said I should be removed from that place
ere long, that I should be sent unto some fecurer place, for he spoke to the
Judge in the Court, saying, he knew that the Justices would join with him, but
the Judge said after I have past sentence I will leave him to the Jailer and
how I was not a fit man to be converst with, none should converse with me, and
all the noise amongst the people was that I should be Transported and so the
next day toward the 11th hour we was called forth again to hear the sentence
and judgment, but M. Fell was called first before me to the Bar, and there was
some Counselors pleaded, and found many errors in her indectment, and so she
was taken by, after the Judge had acknowledged them, and then the Judge asked
what they could say to mine, and I was willing to let no man plead for me, but
to speak to it my self and though M. Fell had some that pleaded for her, yet
she spoke as much her self as she would, and though they had the most envy
against me, yet the most gross errors was found in mine, and before I came to
the Bar I was moved to pray, that the Lord would confound their wickedness, and
envy, and set his truth over all, and exalt his seed; the thundering voice
answered I have glorified thee, and will glorify thee again, and I was so
filled full of glory, that my head and ears was filled full of it; and that
when the Trumpets sounded and the judges came up again, they all appeared as
dead men under me, and so when I was to answer to the errors of the
indictment, seeing that all the Oath as he said himself was to be in, I told
him there was many words of the Oath left out, which was (pretended to be
derived, and his Heirs and Successors) and I bid them look the Oath and look
the indictment, and they might see it, and they did, and found it according to
my words; and I asked them whether the last Assizes holden at Lancaster was in
the 15th year of the King, which was the 10th day of March, and they said nay
it was the 16th year; then said I look your indictment, and see whether or no
it is not the 15th year, and then they were all of a fret both Judge and
Justices, for it was the 15th in the indictment; then the Judge bid them look
whether M. Fells was so or no, and it was not so: I told them I had something
else to speak concerning the indictment, but they said nay, I had spoken
enough, so the indictment was thrown out, so I told them that they had small
cause to laugh as they had done a little before, for they might see how the
Justices and the Jury was sorsworn men, and so I bid him do me justice, and he
said I should have law, and the Judge said I was clear from all the former, and
he started up in a rage and said but he would proffer the Oath to me again; I
told him they had example enough for swearers and false swearers, both Justices
and Jury yesterday before their faces, for I saw before mine eyes both Justices
and Jury had forsworn themselves, who heard the indictment, and so he asked me
whether I would take the Oath, I bid him do me justice for my false
imprisonment all this while. for what had I been prisoner all this while for,
for I ought to be at liberty, then he said I was at liberty, but I will put the
Oath to you again: Then I turned me about, and cried all people take notice
this is a snare, and all was mighty quiet, and all people was struck and
astonished, and he caused the Grand Jury to be called, for he had called them
before when I was there, when he saw they would be overthrown, and the Jury
would fain have been dismissed, but he told them he could not dismiss them, for
he had business for them, and they might be ready when he called them, and I
felt his intent, that if I was freed he would come on again, so I looked him in
the face, and he was judged in himself, for he saw that I saw him, so he caused
the Oath to be read to me again, and caused the Jury to be called, and then
when the Oath was read he asked me whether I would take the Oath or no, and the
Jury standing by, I told him I never took Oath in my life, and he bid them give
me the book and I bid them give it me in my hand and I opened it, and he bid me
swear, and I told him the book bid swear not at all, again he bid me swear, and
I told him the book said I should not swear, and held it open to them, and said
by the book I would prove that men should not swear.

And if they would prove after Christ and the Apostle had forbidden swearing,
that afterward they commanded to swear, then I would swear, for I was a man of
a tender Conscience; and if they had any sense of a tender Conscience they
would consider this, and the Judge asked me whether I would take the Oath, and
bid them give me the book again, I told them ye give me the book to swear, and
the book says I should not swear at all; and so you may prison the book, the
Judge said he would imprison George Fox, I answered nay, you may prison the
book, which says swear not at all, and the Sheriff and the Judge said the
Angel swore in the Revelations, I answered, I bring forth my first begotten Son
into the world says God, let all the Angels in heaven worship him, who says
swear not at all, and the Judge said often he would not dispute, and so then I
spoke much to the Jury how that it was for Christ's sake, that which I did; and
therefore none of them to act contrary to that of God in their Consciences, for
before his Judgment Seat they must all be brought, and for all those things
contained in the Oath, as plots and persecuting about Religion, and the Popes
power, etc. I denied them in my heart, and I am a Christian, and shall show
forth Christianity this day, and it is for Christ's sake that I stand for it is
Lotish shabim be Coldabor, and they all gazed, and there was a great calm, and
they took me away, but there was many more words both to the Jury and to them.

Then in the afternoon we was called again, where I stood among the thieves a
pretty while with my Hat on, at the last the Jailer took it off, and when I was
called to the Bar the Jury brought in guilty for the King, and the Judge asked
me what I could say for my self. I bid them read the indictment, I would not
answer to that I did not hear, and as they read, the Judge bid them take heed
it was not false again, and they read it so amazedly, that when they spoke to
me I did scarcely understand what they said, and the Judge asked me what I would
plead, I told them I desired to have a Copy of that indictment, and to have
some time to answer to it, for the last I had but lately, and never heard it
read but once, and then in the Court, and so the Judge asked me what time I
would have, and I said till the next Assizes, and the Judge said I should, then
he asked again what I would plead, I told him I was not guilty at all of denying
Swearing, Swearing obstinately and wilfully, and those things contained in the
Oath as Jesuitical plots, and foreign powers, etc. I utterly denied them, and
he said I said well in that, and the Judge said the King was sworn, the
Parliament was sworn, and the Justices and he was sworn, and the law was upheld
by Oaths; I told them they had sufficient experience of men's swearing, had not
the Justices and Jury forsworn themselves, and had they not read the book of
Martyrs, how many of the Martyrs suffered because they could not swear, both in
the ten persecutions, and in Bonners days, and the Judge said I would the Laws
were otherwise, then I said our yea is yea, and our nay nay all along; and if
we transgress our yea and nay let us suffer as they do that do break an Oath,
and so to deny swearing is not a new thing in obedience to Christ's command, and
I said this we had sent to the King who said it was reasonable, and so after
several more words I was had away to my Chamber being (as I was before) to
answer to the indictment, and so the truth and power of the Lord God was
glorious over all, and many spirits was crossed grievously in their envy and
malice.

There was many things spoken both to Judge, Jury; and People, which were too
large to mention.

And so the Judge told Margaret Fell her Sentence, and I lie upon a new
indictment.

G. F.

Something in Answer to Bishop Lancelot Andrews Sermon concerning Swearing,
being one of his Sermons upon the Third Commandment, the place that he trea^s
upon is in Jer. the 4th the words are these: And thou shall swear the Lord
lives in Truth, in Judgment, and Righteousness.
ANd further, to prove the lawfulness of swearing, he brings Deuteronomy. 6.13. Isa.
45.23. -- Psalm. 63. and last ver. and how Abraham swear. Genesis 21.24. and Isack
swear, Genesis 26.31. and Jacob swear. 31.33. and Abraham's servant swear, Genesis
21.24. and Genesis 24.3. and Numb 30.3. Which says he, an Oath is to the lifting
up of a burden as to the entering of a Bond.

First, He says an Oath is to be used in solemn matters, and he brings these
Scriptures following out of the Old Testament to prove it, Psalm. 144.8. Numb.
30.3. Psalm. 119.106. Psalm. 15.15. Chron. 2.36,9. Ezekiel. 17.12. Psalm. 110.4.
Psalm. 89.35. Kings 1.22,16. Lev. 5.1.1 Chron. 15.15. Genesis 24.3 and 47.29.

Secondly, For the nature of an Oath he quotes 119. Psalm. 9 ver. and Numb. 10.
and last ver.

Thirdly, He speaks of the manner of an Oath, and produces for Confirmation
these Scriptures following, Deuteronomy. 12.8. Numk. 5.18 Dan. 12.7. Rev. 10.5. Kings
1.8,31. Exodus 22.8. -- Neh. 5.12. Numb. 5.19 Prove. 29.24. Judge. 17.2. Lev. 5.1.
Sam. 1.3,27. Kings 1.22,16. Genesis 25.33. Kings 1.1.43. Jer. 18.8.

First, As for all the above mentioned Scriptures which he has quoted in the
time of the Law, and before the Law, and the Angels swearing in the
Revelations, do not prove that Christians may swear; and we do grant ye the
time before the Law men did swear, and also the Angel swore, But Christ is come
the first begotten whom God has brought forth into the world, and says, Let
all the Angels worship him; And this is my beloved Son hear ye him says God:
And Christ says how that in the old time men was to perform their Oaths to the
Lord, these were their true oaths which they were to perform and they were not
to swear falsely, but to perform their Oath to the Lord; so here Christ in his
Doctrine lets them see the false oaths and the true oaths in the old time, and
that was the true oath to swear by the Lord, and to swear the Lord lives: And
every tongue should swear, and Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, and
the Prophets swear, but Christ is the end of the Prophets, and does fulfill the
Law, and reigns over the house of Jacob, and Joseph, and before Abraham was, I
am says Christ; And so though they swear before the law and under the law, and
the Angel in the Revelations swear, and the Angel that swear swear by the Lord
as the oath was in the time of the Law, and before the law, and this was the
oath that Christ minds them on in his Doctrine here, that they were to perform
to the Lord, yet now mark his Doctrine, which he himself lays down and
commands, But I say unto you now swear not at all, etc. Matthew 5.24. In the
Hebrew language it is (...) But let your Communication be yea, yea, nay, nay,
whatsoever is more then these comes of evil; in the Hebrew its (...) And
further proof, see how Jamse lived in the same Doctrine and practice, and held
it forth to the 12 tribes which was the Jews, who had the oath of God, and was
to swear in the time of the law; see his general Epistle in the 5th Chap. and
also speaking in the second Chapter of such as drove them before the
Judgment Seat, but in the 5th Chapter this is his command above all things, My
brethren swear not at all, neither by heaven nor by the earth, in the Greek its
(...) This you may call creatures or made things: But mark James goes further,
and faith (...) -- nor by any other oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your
nay, be nay, lest you fall into Condemnation, (...)

Mark the danger now, and whether we have not ground enough in the fear of the
Lord God to obey Christ's commands and the Apostles Doctrines, Lest we fall into
condemnation an^ evil, we have set some words down in the Greek tongue, that
those it most concerns may see the original, but the Spirit is ours, and the
commands of Christ, and the Apostles doctrine to be obeyed in what tongue
soever it be written in, but we would Query the thing with any, whether the
Apostle James who wrote to Jews and not to Gentiles, did not write in the
Hebrew tongue and not in Greek, and if so, then his words to them in this
particular are (...) the Pricks, Points, and Accents, and the plain and naked
interpretation of the Hebrew word we have left for them it most concerns to
add.

Secondly, As for all the Scriptures he brings against rash swearing, and false
swearing, it would rejoice our hearts to have the Priests do that, and the
Magistrates punish it for a couple of Railing Priests come the other day and
swear before our faces lightly and vainly, and justified it when they had done;
it would become Magistrates and them better if they did not suffer an oath to
be heard in the Towns, or Markets, or Alehouses, or Streets, you that have
power, not to suffer those things; for you would have work enough to restrain
such things, and such persons, and not to fall upon the innocent which in
obedience to Christ's commands and the Apostles doctrine cannot swear for
Conscience sake: For imprisoning such emboldens people to swear, and would it
not be better for people, and would ye not show forth more Christianity to keep
to yea and to nay in all their Communications according to Christ's commands and
the Apostles doctrine.

Thirdly, There was Bond in the old time by oath, but Christ he looses from the
Bonds and brings to peace and liberty, and makes free, and says, swear not at
all: And so though we be in outward Bonds, it is for Christ Jesus sake, and the
word of God is not bound.

Fourthly, And though Moses swear in the time of the law, and Abraham's servants
swear, yet Christ the Son says, swear not at all and we are to hear him in all
things the great Prophet.

Fifthly, And as for the ceremonies of the oaths, Christ is the substance of
all ceremonies, that says, swear not at all.

Sixthly, And though David swear, he that David called Lord says, swear not at
all, and he is upon his Throne.

Seventhly, And where he says, thou shall swear by the Lord, and swear the
Lord lives, they were not to swear by them that were no Gods, nor creatures,
nor by the earth, nor by heaven, or by the hand, or by Jerusalem; now what are
the oaths that all Christendom swears, both Papists and Protestants? whether it
be the oath that was amongst the Jews, and whether or no they practice the oath
that they do now, and whether or no is that ceremony now used, if not, when did
God alter it; where about in Scripture, and in what place of Scripture is it
that he sets this way and ceremony of swearing in Christendom, both amongst
Papists and Protestants, which is to swear by the book, and by the Evangelists?
is this beyond the Jews swearing, by the City, or by Head, or by the Temple
which Christ forbid, and not only those oaths, but the oath of God, which the
Jews was to swear by, Answer these things.

Eighthly, And as for Zedekiahs oath to Nebuchadnezar, and Joseph's oath to
Pharaoh, this was in the time that oaths were to be Performed amongst the Jews
and Patriarchs, and what is this to Christ's doctrine which forbids oaths, which
oaths was before Christ came.

9thly, And as for the oath of Supremacy and the other, it is to acknowledge
the King of Eng. and Allegiance to him, which things has been manifest and
practiced by us, but not by such as swear Allegiance to the Kings father, and
swore the one way and the other way, and have not thou and many of you taken
the oath against him, and such as have sworn one while for him, and another
while against him; how are they in Allegiance to him that swears one way and
another way? and cannot there be in truth and faithfulness Allegiance to the
King without swearing? for now how should we stand in Allegiance to Christ if
we did not obey his commands the King of Kings (...) for he commands us not to
swear, but keep to yea and nay, and one of his great Ambassadors to Nations
that went with his Message to the twelve tribes says, above all things my
Brethren swear not at all, lest you fall into condemna^ion.

Tenthly, There were two states of oaths, the one was that people was to
perform to the Lord and swear, and the other was that God swear by himself
concerning his Son Christ Jesus, which when he came who fulfilled Gods oath, he
ended the other oath and says, swear not at all, and calls the first oath the
old time; he fulfilled the truth, and let them see how in the time of the law
false oaths were forbidden in the old time, and heathenish oaths were forbidden
in the time of the law, for they were not to swear by Baal, but they were to
perform their oaths to the Lord, which Christ says unto them, swear not at
all, and so he ended that oath; so there is no oaths before the fall, and there
is no oaths in the restoration again by Christ Jesus but yea and nay,
according to his doctrine, but amongst Moses and the Prophets, and in the old
time before Moses and the Prophets men did swear, as Abraham and Isaac, etc.
But he the great Prophet is come that is to be heard in all things, and he the
oath of God Christ Jesus stands and remains.

Eleventhly, The Apostles speaking to the Hebrews, swearing by a greater which
was an end of controversy and strife amongst them, he brought this as a
similitude, not that the Hebrews should swear, for if he had, he had
contradicted James which wrote to the twelve tribes his doctrine to them, which
were Hebrews, but he brought it as a similitude, that the oath which men swear
by the greater ended strife; but God not finding a greater then himself, he
swear concerning his Son which is Christ, who ends the strife, who destroys the
Devil and his works, the Author of strife; for the oath in the time of the law
ended the strife, but we see oaths now adays begins it, and why, the matter is
because in Christ Jesus men do not live, who is the peace and Gods oath.

Twelfthly, Where as the Bishop says, that they hold in Divinity that to swear
of and by it self considered, is an act forbidden no less then to kill etc.

Ans. In the time of the law they killed and swore, but Christ says, swear not
at all, and also he says, love enemies; and how do these agree to kill and to
love enemies, and love one another, And if one strike thee on the one cheek
turn the other to him.

And this paralleling the Magistrates executing justice upon Malefactors; As he
that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed again: Is not a
paralleling with Christ's doctrine, who says, swear not at all, for that may be
done by witnesses, without oath, as thou may read the Scriptures in the old
time, when oaths were denied in the primitive time among the primitive
Christians, who were in Christ's doctrine, thou may read how they did things
by witnesses, as the Apostle speaks in the mouth of two or three witnesses,
etc. Which place he instances of what was done in the time of the law, which
was a statute of judgment among the Jews, Whosoever kills any person, the
murderer shall be put to death by the mouth of witnesses, etc. But no oaths
are mentioned here, Number. 35. 30. with Heb. 10. 28 read that throughout, and
also Deuteronomy. 19. 15. and 1 King. 21. 10. etc And many more Scriptures might be
alleged which you that have read Scriptures are not ignorant of.

Now for the practice amongst the Saints, see Mat. 18. 16. Christ who bids them
keep to yea and nay, in that place lays down a practice to be used amongst them
in matter of fault and transgression how it should be ended by two or three
witnesses, read the words that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word shall be established, and what do thou think that he would order them to
swear, who had once forbidden it? and read the 8. Chap. of John and 17. ver.
And we do not find that the witnesses againstChrist that he should speak
blasphemy, Mat. 26. 65. That they did swear, and also you may see in Acts 6.
11, 12, 13. How they that were hired against Stephen, no mention is made of
their swearing, moreover you may see in 2 Cor. 13. 1. The Speech of the Apostle
amongst the Saints, how he tells them of of his coming unto them in the mouth
of two or three witnesses; he does not tell that he is coming to them with
oaths in their mouths, Mark, the Apostle was an Elder and had care of the
Churches. -- And again the Apostle that writes to Tim. a Bishop, an Overseer of
the Churches, says he, against an Elder receive not an accusation, but before
two or three witnesses. -Now he does not say before two or three men that
swears, for if he had he would have contradicted Christ's doctrine and James, 1 Timothy 5. 19. and 2 Timothy 2. Says the Apostle to Tim. the Bishop, The things that
thou have heard of me amongst many witnesses, the same commit to faithful men
who shall be able to teach others also. Now he received this by witnesses, not
by oath, and he was to commit it and not by oaths, and were not these the
things that the whole Church came to be ordered by? And this was amongst the
Christians in the primitive times when oaths were ended, and many more things
might be alleged which were two tedious for you to read.

Thirteenthly, And whereas he brings that objection of the Anabaptists, which
is that it stands not with Christian profession, but was tolerated as an
imperfect thing under the law.

Ans. Which objection of theirs we do not own, as we do not own the Bishop for
swearing; for it was the way of the Lord, and the way of the Lord was perfect,
and the Commandment for swearing was good in it self, until the time of Christ
who is perfect that ends the law, and people must live in him Christ Jesus and
walk in him that says, swear not at all, that ends the oath, and is the oath
of God; do thou not read of a people in the Galatians and Romans that was
turned back into the law, from the law of the Spirit, and the Apostle told them
he that broke one point was guilty of all, and he brought them to the law of
love which fulfilled the law.

Fourteenthly, And as for all the Scriptures the Bishop brings to prove that
the Christians swear in the primitive time they are nothing to the purpose,
though the Bishop say that Christ admits of some swearing, which both his own
words and the Apostles contradicts; Christ's words are, swear not at all; And
the Apostles are above all things, etc. -- And so he goes on and lets them see
what was in the law, committing Adultery was forbid under the law, but in the
time of Christ looking upon a Woman and lusting after her was committing
Adultery. -- And he sets forth in the justice of the law an eye for an eye, and
a tooth for a tooth, and shows how that in the time of the law thou shall not
kill, and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of judgment, but I say unto
you, that whosoever shall be angry with his Brother without cause shall be in
danger of judgment; and so he tells both swearing and killing to be in the old
time, and said except the Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees you shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Fifteenthly, And as to that of the Apostle speaking in the 1 These. 2. God was
his witness that he did not make Covetousness his Cloak.

Answ. It were well if the Priests could say so now, but this does not prove
that he swore, and there are many men that takes man to be his witness; and
that is not an oath, surely is it? Thou understands that? And if this were an
oath, why do you cast friends into prison?

Sixteenthly, And that of the Galatians Chapter 1. 2. There is nothing in that
place like unto an Oath which he brings.

Seventeenthly, And as for the 2 or. 4. 23. Verse, there are not so many Verses
in that Chapter. -- And as for the Ephesians th 4th and 15th which he brings
for Christians to swear, which he says we are bound at all times to speak truth
to our Neighbors.

Answ. He does not say we are to swear truth at all times, but to speak it at
all times.

Eighteenthly, And that which he brings in Acts 23. 3. How the Apostle reproved
the High Priest, that caused him to be smitten contrary to law.

Answ. Here the Apostle was preaching the Gospel and Christ's doctrine to them,
to the Priests that had the Law and outward things; this was nothing to the
purpose, that the Apostle should swear, or that Christians should swear. -- And
in the 14th Verse which he quotes. Answ. Those were the bad people that bound
themselves with a Curse, that they would neither eat nor drink till they had
killed Paul that preached the Gospel, this is nothing at all that Christians
should swear.

Nineteenthly, We say there were Heathens oaths annd Jews oaths which were to
swear by the Lord, which Christ calls the old time, which they were to perform,
which oath Christ ends; and says, swear not at all, for in the time of the law
the Jews were to deny all false oaths, and heathenish oaths, and they were not
to swear by Baal, but the true oath which Christ ends: And did not the
Christians suffer in the Primitive times, because. they could not swear by the
Prosperity of Caesar; and was not that oath then imposed upon them? And by the
good fortune of the Emperor, was not that another oath? And did not many
Christians then suffer because they could not swear, read the ten persecutions
which was a long time before the Pope got up, and then did not the Pope when he
had got up over the Churches, give forth both Oath and Curse, with Bell Book
and Candle? And was not the ceremony of his oath to lay three fingers a top of
the book to signify the Trinity? And two fingers under the book to signify
Damnation of body and soul if they swear falsely. -- And was not there a great
number of people that would not swear, and suffered great persecution, as read
the Book of Martyrs but to Bonners days, and its little above an hundred years
since the Protestants got up; And they gave forth the Oath of Allegiance, and
the Oath of Supremacy, the one was to deny the Popes Supremacy, and the other
to acknowledge the Kings of England; So we need not to tell you of their form,
and show you the ceremony of the oath, it says kiss the Book, and the Book
says kiss the Son; which says, swear not at all, and so cannot Allegiance be
to the King in truth and faithfulness, as was said before without an Oath, yea
and more then many that swears.

So you may see to deny swearing is no new thing, for it was the practice of
the Christians in former times to deny it, both in Heathens and the times of
Popery before Protestants; and so it is in obedience to the command of Christ
that we do not swear in our loves to him, and if we say he is Lord and Master
and do not the thing that he commands, that is but deceit and hypocrisy. And
so rash and bad swearing that was forbidden in the time of the Law, it was not
that which Christ came to fulfill, but true Oaths, and the true Types, Figures,
and Shadows, and he says, swear not at all.

Twentiethly, And as for Acts the 13th there is nothing spoken of swearing,
there as all people may read.

21thly, And whereas the Apostle often speaks, and taking to witness a Record
upon his own soul by his rejoyeing in Christ Jesus, what is all this to
swearing and taking an oath, or where did ever the Apostle take a solemn oath,
or command the Brethren and Churches to do the same? for often he speaks of the
witness our of the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be
established. -- And the Bishop often brings the 1 Cor. 15. 31. By our rejoicing
which I have in Christ Jesus, I die daily; This place cannot be brought for a
proof that the Apostle swear; If so, when thou say by thy meat thou art
refreshed, and by the fire thou art warmed, and people tells thee thou must go
by such a lane to such a Town, they all swear then, do they not?

22thly, As for the Particle (...) the Bishop says its never used but in an
oath only.

Answ. And what is (...) is it not ( truly) as also the Primitive word (...)
which signifies yea? and is not that word (...) in the aforementioned, 5th of
Matthew and 5th of James, where swearing is denied -- for is not (...) in Greek
yea in English; and is not (...) in Greek truly in English, and if every man
that says yea and truly swears, then the Bishop proves his Assertion. -- And
is not there a difference between (...) and (...) -- So in Meekness and Love
read this over in that from which it was sent.

POSTSCRIPT.
Christ Jesus who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Beginning and
Ending, First and Last, him by whom God will Judge the World in Righteousness.

WE Quaery of you whether he or any of his Apostles, after they had given forth
a Command that none should Swear, but keep to yea and nay in all their
Communications, can any Minister or Teacher prove this in express words out of
the New Testament that they ever commanded to swear or did swear, that will
satisfy, that will end all: But that we should be cast into prison for our
obedience to Christ's command, by you that professes your selves to be
Christians, and own Christ Jesus as you say, is not right: And he commands you
to love Enemies if you did obey his commands, and love one another; for they
that are Christians and own Christ Jesus they should love one another: For this
was a mark by which they were known to be Disciples learners of him. And so
they that are lovers of him, own him and obey him and his doctrins, so though
we do suffer here by you all the Sessions or Assizes; we do commit our cause
and you that do persecuters to the General Assizes and terrible day wherein God
will Judge the world in Rightconsness, by the man Christ Jesus whose commands
we obey in tenderness; and there we know we shall have true Judgment without
respect of persons, there our Hats will not be looked at before the Almighty,
but the action and transgression, and who has served God, and who has not
served him; for Christ has told you before hand what he will say to them that
visits him not in prison, where he is made manifest in his Brethren: Then what
will become of them that casts them into prison for tenderness toward God, for
obeying his Dctring, and keeps to yea and nay in their Communications according
to his words -- And so those things we leave to the General day, Though we can
say the Lord for give you that death thus persecute in if it be his will freely
from our hearts, for we do you nor no man harm, but seek the good and peace of
all men, and for this cause for obeying the truth we do suffer.

G. F.

THE END.

