AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE Siege of Tangier: FROM The first sitting down of the
MOORS before it on March 25, 1680.

TO The late TRUCE, May 19, following.

IN THREE LETTERS, WRITTEN By Three Eyewitnesses of the whole Transaction.

Printed at London for Joseph Hindmarsh at the Bull in Cornhill.

M DC LXXX.

AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE Siege of Tangier.
ORDERS were issued by the Lord Inchiquin, General of Charles Fort, then
surrounded with multitudes of Moors, both Horse and Foot; who falling to their
late way of Intrenching, and having not long before made some small Works from
Kendal Fort to Pond Fort, with some inconsiderable Works betwixt Charles Fort
and Henrietta Fort, as also an additional Line toward their old Lines upon
Tiviot Hill, pointing straight toward Charles Fort; they this night advanced
their Line from Kendal Fort as far as the Pond under Pond Fort, and a little
farther under the Hill, and that upon Tiviot Hill within Cast of a Hand-Granado
of our Stockado's, and that toward Henrietta Fort within half Musket Shot of
Charles Fort. Our small firing did not much disturb them, by reason of their
being always under Ground; they not firing scarce one Shot in 24 Hours.

They worked very hard in every one of the aforesaid Trenches, still Pond Fort,
to the Brink of a little Hill pointing toward our Lines of Communication,
betwixt us and the Castle; the other two not much meddled withal.

The Workmen that wrought all that night retired to their Intrenchments before
day, because the Earth thrown up that night was

They wrought so hard all night, that they extended their Trenches Pond Fort in
two Branches near to the Brink of the Hill, and withal made a Blind with
Stones from that of Tiviot-Hill, in so much that not a Gun we had could bear
upon them; from whence they fired abundance of Shot, without exposing
themselves to any danger, and winded their Trenches to pass betwixt us and
Henrietta Fort.

In so much that they cut a Gap in our old Lines of Communication.

In the morning, before day, they began to work again, and brought Peterborough
Tower; and the other, near our Lines of Henrietta.

The same day we erected upon our left hand Battery, a Cavallier, at least in
height thirty foot above ground, which would contain eight or nine Men very
well to fire from, and discover the bottom of a great many of their Lines, to
the Moors great amazement.

That night they exposed themselves to our sight, but our Shot did much abate
their Work.

They continued their Work very hard all day, and about Three of viz. one all
Red under Kendal, four with Yellow striped within Pistol shot betwixt us and
Henrietta Fort, as also one all Green, and two all Red.

Captain Trelawney, our then Governor, planting his Guns toward them, very
happily shot down one of their Colors, the Green, and tore another of them, so
that they were forced to remove them.

They continued working 'till six or seven of the clock, but did not work one
stroke all night.

This morning we espied their Army marching over the Hill in great Bodies, both
Horse and Foot, Colors flying, but to what intent we Pond Fort, before
Sunrising, were advanced within sight of our Lines of Communication; and on
the other side, entered our Line betwixt us and Henrietta.

They continued their work on both sides, which they advanced very

They advanced their Lines on Henrietta side, one passing toward Peterborough
Tower, and had ten Colors pitched flying in their Lines.

They advanced their Line close to our Lines of Communication, and Henrietta,
to the Top of the Hill, that we could not pass, either to or from the Town.

They cut through our Line.

They continued their work, so that at night their two Lines met between us and
the Town.

Saturday 10. We perceived between us and Henrietta some sorts of Engines made
by the Enemy to run upon wheels, whether it was to shelter them from our shot
in time of their work, or otherwise, we could not well judge. The same day
happened a discontent among our men for want of Wine, with their Bergoo, very
near to the height of Mutiny.

Sunday 11. The Truckles they set up betwixt us and Henrietta, but our Guns
playing well upon them, forced them to remove them the same night. About 8 a
clock at night they attaqued Henrietta; our men did ply their Small-shot and
Grenades till 3 a clock in the morning, and defended the place with much
Bravery: But what they got for their pains, we could not discover.

Monday 12. They rested all day and night, without any attempt to our view.

Tuesday 13. The Moors attempted little or nothing, save setting up their
Colors, to the number of 17 or 18, betwixt us and Peterburgh Tower.

Wednesday 14. About one or two a clock it fell a Raining, which troubled their
Trenches, insomuch that they were cleansing them all night.

Thursday 15. From the Truckle set up for a Blind betwixt us and Henrietta,
they dug a Trench toward the foundation of Henrietta, and continued working
very hard.

Friday 16. They continued working all along their Line betwixt Henrietta and
Pond Fort, making places of Arms in several places of their Lines, their Drum
beating like a Cooper upon a Tub and Pipe playing for most part of the time.
Last night Captain St. John speaking to our Governor in Town in the
Speaking-Trumpet, the Moors fell a hallowing and shouting all along their Lines.

Saturday 17. They continued their work in making their Trenches deeper; they
proceeded little or no farther to any purpose this day. We made use of our
Hand-Granadoes out of a small Mortar-piece, which threw some of them into their
Trenches amongst their Colors. This night they made a Blind of Stones upon
their Trenches, about a man's height, whether for their own, or Colors shelter,
we could not certainly tell, but supposed both.

Monday 19. They continued working on each side, particularly toward
Henrietta, as if they intended to Gap.

Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursay, Little or no extraordinary Business was acted by
them, save the cleansing of their Trenches, with the augmentation of a small
Line between Charles Fort and Henrietta Lines of Communication.

Friday 23. At night the Moors cut another small Trench through the Bullet
Store, betwixt us, and their former Trenches: Little or nothing else was acted
by them, saving their bringing a great deal of Timber, but for what use is not
yet known.

Saturday 24. The Moors cut our Lines betwixt their Trenches and Peterborough
Tower into gaps, at 5 or 6 yards distance each gap, and took away their Blind
upon the little Hill near Pond Fort, and cast up the Earth in the form of a
Half Round, and likewise advanced that Trench begun the night before in the
Bullet-store about 20 yards toward the Henrietta.

Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, They wrought little or nothing. They sent a Flag of
Truce with a Frenchman and an Englishman from Teinan, to tell us, that they
had undermined all our Forts, and if we would not yield our selves Prisoners at
War, every one of us to be Slaves; they would set Fire to their Gunpowder
within an hour, which was all the time they would allow for an Answer; and for
our satisfaction, brought a Seguro from the Alcaide for some of our Men to view
the readiness of their Mines: We sent two of our Miners, who returning within
the limited time, and the Moors having the Answer of our Commanders in Chief,
That we would stand it out to the last; They sprung their Mine between 3 and 4
a Clock without any damage to us, (God be praised.)

Friday 30. They did little or nothing, save cleansing their Trenches of some
Rain that fell the night before; and this morning they removed all their
Colors to the number of 17 or 18, out of their Trenches, which had stood night
and day ever since the 31th. of March last.

Monday, May 30th. Tuesday and Wednesday, They did attempt little or nothing,
save making a small Line between the Bullet-store, and our Line from Henrietta,
I believe for Loop-holes to fire out of, their other Trenches being so deep
since the time the Rain has continued so violent, that they were troublesome to
them.

Thursday, May 6. They brought the small Trenches next us to meet, and cut some
of our old Lines betwixt us and Henrietta, heightning their Trenches in the
bottom by Kendal Fort, where our Shot did much trouble them in mounting their
Guards, by reason their former Trenches were full of Water.

Saturday, May 8. They swarmed from their Camp into their Trenches, as we
thought to the number of 400 or 500, who fell to cleansing their Trenches of
the Rain. About Two a Clock in the Afternoon, we spied them halling Carriages
of great Guns along Jews River, which they placed on a little Hill near to
Henrietta, from whence they fired their Shot 5 or 6 times against the place: We
understand by some of their Balls that went into Town, that they were not much
above two pound, which we thought would come as short of Battering down any of
our Forts, as their Mine came short of blowing up Charles Fort.

Sunday, May 9. Our People from Henrietta called to us, that they could hold
out no longer, by reason that the Moors had made a Breach in their Wall, and
that their Mine was under their Fort. At night Captain St. John declared the
same to our Governor his Excellency the Earl of Inchiquin for his better
satisfaction.

Monday, May 10. A Flag of Truce came out of Town, as we thought with some
Letters, which was received by the Moors; and answer was given in the same
manner; which caused the Alcaid to draw down all his Forces upon the Lines, and
place them one by another like so many Sheep, as we thought, to the number of 5
or 6000, the result not yet known. They likewise began Three more Trenches; One
inclining to pass through the Bullet-store, between our Fort and the rest of
their Line; another from Henrietta, pointing straight toward us; the Third
from the brink of the Hill where they sprung the last Mine, and as we think,
laid the Foundation of Three other Mines, which we hoped to be to as little
effect as the first.

Tuesday and Wednesday, From every one of the Moors former Trenches, they
seemed to Mine against us; insomuch that by reason thereof, and their covering
themselves with Boards, we found our selves not in a condition to resist them.

Thursday, May 12. We fell into a Consultation among our selves; and
considering on one side, that our Men had declared, that if they were not
relieved in three days, they would leave us there: and on the other side, our
having refused their giving us quarter, which we could not expect, if they
forced us out; by that means likewise our Guns might be taken, without being
spiked and wedged, which would be a great Assistance to them to batter the
Town; weresolved to quit the Fort on Friday, and Fight our way throught;
whereupon we spiked and wedged all our great Guns, broke and made useless all
the rest of our Ammunition of War, putting them amongst our Powder which we
made ready to Blow up so soon as we should be gone out of the Fort; which we
abandoned about 7 or 8 of the Clock, but we found their Trenches so deep that
we could not make the defense we expected; so that from a 170 odd men we
brought off but 44, Captain Trelawney being cut to pieces amongst the rest.

The Town made a Sally at the same time to favor us, as follows: Forlorn Hope,
Captain Humes, Lieutenant Pierson, Lieutenant Bagley. 4. Sergeants, 80
Soldiers.


Main Body 150 yards in the Rear of the Forlorn Hope. Major Boynton, Captain
Gyles, Captain Eley, Captain Winkefield, Lieutenant Talbot, Lieutenant Grimes,
Lieutenant Bellinger, Ensign Dean, Ensign Adams. 8 Sergeants, 128 Soldiers.


Reserve 100 yards in the Rear of the Main Body. Captain Muneresh, Captain
Barber, Lieutenant Tate, Ensign Bowen, Ensign Withers, 4 Sergeants, 104
Soldiers, 6 deep.


On the Right of the Rear toward the Burying place 40 yards. Captain Lesley,
Lieutenant Ogleby, Ensign Winkefield, 3 Sergeants, 66 Soldiers.


In the Ravellin without Peterborough Tower. Captain Row, Lieutenant
Fitzgerald, Ensign Bowen, 4 Sergeants, 66 Soldiers.


The Pallizado without the Ravellin was lined with Seamen, Commanded by
Lieutenant Sprag, and Lieutenant Fox.

The Sally was at 8 a Clock in the Morning, and the men of Charles Fort were to
begin, and our Forlorn Commanded by Captain Humes, was to Advance to the
Enemies Trench, and the other Captains to advance according to their several
posturs.

After this Action was over, the Moors took our Guns that were in Charles Fort,
and unspik'd them, and cleared them; and with them began to play upon Pole Fort
and the Town: Upon which the Governor called a Council of Officers to consult
what was best to be done, and sinding that we could not maintain Pole Fort, and
if we should not abandon it, we should lose 100 men with three Officers: We
sent and Treated with the Alcade, being resolved to quit Pole Fort, and Norwood
Redoubt with as much Honor as possibly we could at that time. The Alcade
concented to let us carry off our Ammunition and our Pallyzadoes, and agreed to
a Cessation for four Months, in which time in all likelihood they will be
content to consent to an Honorable Peace.

The Out-limets are agreed on by each party how far we shall go, and no further.

FINIS.
A LETTER FROM Tangier-Bay The 17th of May, 1680.
ON Thursday the 13th instant at night, calm, Captain Trelawny called to the
Town, by a Speaking Trumpet, acquainting my Lord Inchiquin, they could no
longer defend themselves, the Moors having several Mines, and that his Men
mutinied, so that they designed to quit Charles Fort next morning at Eight of
the Clock, and endeavor their Escape to the Town; my Lord desired them to be
ready at Six, they answered they could not be ready before Seven. My Lord
called two Councils of War, and it was agreed to make a Sally at the same hour
to assist their retreat, and ordered that Captain Geo. Humes, second Captain of
the 4 Scotch Companies which came from Ireland in the James and Swan Frigates,
should Command the Forlorn hope of about 80 men to attacque the Trenches, and
Major Boynton, Captain Giles, etc. to Command the main Body which lay half way
between the Trenches and the Palasado under Peterburough Tower, and 2
Lieutenants to Command Parties in each Flanck of the Forlorn-hope, the Reserve
placed within the Spure and Palasado, Commanded by Lieutenant Spragg, being
Seamen; and the Bonnetta Sloop, two Barkalongoes and Ships Boats at the same
time, to be near Giles Fort near Whithy, in which was 13 men (to endeavor to
bring off the Vice Admiral and Sea Commanders being in the Sloop.) Henrietta
Fort it seems Capitulated 2 or 3 days before, the Moors carrying them fresh
Water and Milk, yet kept the Men entire in the Fort until they pleased to take
them out, having Mined under them, which being unknown to the Town or Charles
Fort, the latter still by their Trumpet told them their design, which it is
believed might give the Moors some notice of their leaving their Forts though
spoken in Irish; the 14th at 7 in the morning the Garrison quitted Charles
Fort, being one hundred seventy six men, and Captain Trelawny's little boy,
leaving the Guns double shotted, spiked and wedged with steel, as also one
little Morter-piece, but put their Ammunition and best things into the Mine,
with a train of Powder and 2 Inches of Match lighted, one Inch being spent
before they got out of the Gate, and by their coming into the Moors first
Trenches the Mine sprang, they got well over 2 Trenches, but that next to the
Town being deepest, was at least 14 Foot with water and dirt in the bottom, by
reason of the late Rains; the first that came into it, some got over by the
help of the other, and so escaped meeting with places not so difficult, but
notwithstanding Captain Geo. Humes with the Forlorn-hope behaved themselves
very bravely, clearing the Trenches with hand Grenades, yet no more but 39
came off, the rest being cut in pieces in the great Trench, save 14 and the
little Boy, whom they took alive: Amongst the slain was Captain Trelawny, who
brought up the Rear, and was killed in helping the little Boy up (as is said.)
Captain St. John got over first, but was shot through the body when he was near
our Palisado, it is hoped he may recover, the Lieutenant and Ensign escaped. Our
Boats at this time being near Giles Fort, could not persuade the 13 Men to run
into the water, they saying the shot flew so thick they should be all killed;
save one man which swam off, the rest surrendered themselves to the Moors, viz.
12 of Giles Fort, 30 in Henrietta, and 14 and the Boy of Charles Fort, in all
57 were made Captives, and about 125 or more slain. The next day the Alcade
sent in a flag of truce to fetch our dead, whose bodies were accordingly
brought in, but without their heads, they being all cut off, which in the
afternoon the Alcade sent in also. In the Adventures Boat was killed a
Voluntier called Wray, Brother to Sir Boucher Wray, who was yesterday buried in
Tangier Church, with his Brother Captain Trelawny. The Moors are now placing
their Guns against Pools Fort, and have already sent several shot through the
Wall, they have three Guns mounted of several natures, of 9, of 6, and of 3
pounders; it is believed they have brought some from Arzilla. We are using all
means possible to defend Pools Fort, but it is somewhat doubtful it will fall
into the Enemies hands, with those so near the Gate, as well Norwoods Redoubt,
and the other.

May 18. This morning appears in our sight a Battery upon the Hill, South-west
from Pools Fort, and about half a Pistol shot off they have Palisadoed it
round, we believe with those we left at Charles Fort, and are now hard at work
diging. This Battery looks into the upper Castle, and upon my Lords House; they
have placed one Gun in it already, 2 or 3 days will show us the Effect of this,
which though it be nigh the Irish Battery, yet cannot play upon it, for the
brow of the Hill over it. We yet continue to relieve Pools Fort every day, but
these People having very dextrous Miners from Algier and the Levant (as is
said) it will not be easy to hold any of the Forts; What design they may have
upon the Town is uncertain, but to all appearance it is in danger, if they
continue in their approaches, except we had men sufficient for to make Sallies,
especially Horse; for want of which our Men very much dread theirs: Captain
Moncress and another Captain shot in the Legs, Lieutenant Bailey is shot
through the Body which is doubted to be mortal, Ensign Carr is shot through the
Wrist, these are Scotch; Captain St. John is likely to recover. This is all the
News I can give you, which I know to be plain and downright truth.

A SECOND JOURNAL
O Mar Ben Haddu Alcaide of Alcasser, encouraged by former successes, Tangier
with an Army of about seven thousand Men.

He First brake Ground and began to Entrench, the design of the Charles,
Henrietta, and Giles Forts. His Excellency, our Governor, took all possible
care, to furnish them with the best of his Men, with Ammunitions of War and
Provisions requisite for five Months Siege, hoping in that time, that either
the Moors would be tired out, or we furnished with Succors from England to
raise the Siege. The Moor works incredibly fast, their Trenches being in all
places deep, and in most places treble a man's height. They did not cut off our
Communication from the said Forts; until April the 8th, all which time we were
night and day firing with great and small shot; but they only small.

From the beginning of this Siege, the Moors began a Mine from the Southward of
Charles Fort, and We a Countermine. The mouth of their Mine was about two
hundred Yards from the Fort.

At night, the Moors attacqued Henrietta Fort, designing to sap Moors began a
Mine against it, drilling through the Earth as they went, that they might not
mistake the Fort.

The Alcaide sent to summon Charles Fort, telling them that he had a Mine ready
to Spring, and threatening if they refused to surrender, Trelawny and Captain
St. John, the Commanders of the Fort, returned this Answer, That he should do
his worst, they were sent thither to maintain the Fort, and not to yield it.
The Alcaide sent again, desiring them if they would not give credit to the
danger he informed them of, they should send out two of their Men to view his
Mine. They did so, and upon the return of their Men, they made no other Answer
than Vollies of small shot, and displaying of their English Colors in defiance.

About Eight of the Clock that day, the Moors Mine sprang, but without success,
short at least of the Fort thirty yards.

The Alcaide sent to Complement Sir Palms Fairbon upon his Portuguez had it,
and that if they had any mind to make an end of the War, they should surrender
the besieged Forts, and quit the rest.

The Moors played against Henrietta Fort with a Falcon, Shooting a

Henrietta Fort informed Charles Fort of their distress, the Moors Charles Fort
by their Speaking-Trumpet informed his Excellency, who presently sent out to
the Alcaide, to offer the Surrender of Henrietta Fort, on condition the Men
might return to the Town with Bagg and Baggage, (or at least Naked) the
Alcaide's answer was, that he wanted not Stone-walls, but Slaves for his
Masters Service, that he could Destroy them when he pleased. All that he
promised was, that if they would yield, he would give them good Quarter.

The Moors played a six Pounder against Henrietta, and made a little Charles
Fort Spoke to us in Irish that Henrietta was distressed, the Moors having
Entrenched nearer, and begun three Mines, desiring his Excellencies assistance
to further their Retreat to the Town.

Resolved at a Council of War, that Charles Fort be quitted the Giles Fort
should in the Hurry make their escape to the Seaside, where a Sloop and all
the Boats of the Fleet lay ready to receive them. About Eight or Nine at Night
Henrietta Fort surrendered.

About break of day, the Moors Blew up Henrietta Fort with their Mine. About
seven a Clock, the Men of Charles Fort having Spiked Moorish Trenches; Captain
St. John leading the Van with the Granadiers, and Captain Trelawny bringing up
the Rear, our Forlorn at the same time consisting of Eighty Men, Advancing
toward the Trenches. Two Trenches our Charles Fort Men safely past, but the
third being very deep and watery, and a great number of Enemies pressing on hard
upon them, a Hundred and twenty four were there killed, Fourteen taken
Prisoners, only Forty seven escaped; among which Captain St. John (but
afterward wounded in the Side) and all the other Officers, except the brave
and never enough to be lamented or Commended Trelawny. Our Countermine took
Fire, and blew up the left Bastian, but the Grenades did not. Our Forlorn did
bravely under the Command of Captain Hume, a Scotch Officer; we killed several
Moorish Horsemen, an Alcaide of great note, called Garboose, who endeavored
to cut off our Men that escaped the Trenches. When the Forlorn Retreated, one
brave Moor Charged them all, but his Horse riding over Captain Home, stumbled
at him and threw him down, our men Clubb'd their Muskets and presently
dispatched him.

In the Forlorn three or four were killed several wounded, a Captain Shot in
the Leg, and a Lieutenant Shot in the Body; one Man Swam to the Vice-Admiral's
Boat from Giles Fort, the rest pretending they could not Swim, thought it
better to commit themselves te the mercy of the Moors than the Sea.

One Voluntier was killed, and about ten Men, and two and twenty Wounded in the
Boats.

We got leave of the Alcaide to fetch in our Dead, all miserably

The Enemy from the side of an Hill near Charles Fort, played a Pole Fort, and
hit it five or six times.

The Enemy began a Trench from Monmouth, and another from Pond Fort (I mean the
places where they formerly stood) designing to Entrench between the Town and
Pole Fort, and Norwoods redoubt.

They raised two Batteries, within an Hundred and fifty yards of Pole Fort, and
Fired twice, but the Flag of truce coming in, all further hostility ceased.

His Excellency made a Truce with the Alcaide for four Months, in Alcaide was
to withdraw his Army and great Guns within three days, and to remove his
Battery.

We were in the same time to Demolish Pole Fort and Norwoods redoubt, and to
have the liberty of feeding our Cattle within fixed bounds.

His Excellency had an enterview with the Alcaide, hoping to win Charles Fort,
which he had Unspiked and Unwedged.

The Alcaide drew up all his Army, and made them Fire three great Vollies of
small Shot, and so went their ways.

In the three days the Alcaide staid after the Truce, we had free entercource
with the Moors, they coming freely in to us, and we going securely among them.

Two Boys belonging to our Garrison, and a Seaman, went out and turned Moors.

One of our Men belonging to Henrietta Fort is turned Moor, and made Master
Gunner.

A Moor run away to us, who informs us, that the Moors have lost Alcaides, and
several Almuckades, that is, Captains, a great many Moors killed, two died of
their Wounds the day he came in, that the Alcaide had drawn his great Guns into
a Wood in sight of us, where he left them till his next return, which would be
shortly after the expiration of the Truce.

In the whole service, we had about an Hundred and sixty Men killed, Fifty
three taken Slaves, among which is Lieutenant Wilson, Commander of Henrietta
Fort.

The Moors grow a formidable Enemy, being improved in all the Arts of War, as
Mining, Sapeing, Intrenching, Scaling and Battering.

In Charles Fort they took thirteen great Guns, seven they had taken formerly
from other Forts.

They have a Morter-piece likewise taken in Charles Fort, and three thousand
three hundred hand Grenades, with an incredible number of great Shot, part
from Charles Fort, the rest which we have in many years Shot at them, which
they carefully gathered up and kept.

After the expiration of this Truce, it is to be feared, they will not only
Batter the Town from Pole Fort, an overlooking piece of Ground, but from a
Battery on the sand Hills, will hinder all imbarkation riding in the Mould,
from whence also they may Batter down all the Houses and Stables on the Mould.

We have three Forts left, as Cambridge, Fountain, and Bridges Fotr, which be
not defensible, when it shall please the Enemy to design to reduce them.

So that we shall be brought to the condition the Portuguez were in, but we
cannot bring the Moors to the same they were in, being in my short abode of four
years here, from a cowardly and inconsiderable Enemy, turned to a puissant and
formidable Foe.

All that we have to hope is these three things; either that the Moors will
make a Peace with us, as the Alcaide seems inclined, or that the King of the
Country will be engaged in civil Wars, and so have other occasion to employ
his Force, or that our King will send such strong recruits, as we may Sally out
and beat them from their Trenches and great Guns, when next they Besiege us.

The number of our Soldiers is few, but of Fighting Men much less, many being
superannuated, but more disabled by Debauchery. The Freemen be not to be
trusted in case of distress, they being not under Military Command.

FINIS.

