RELATION Of the Several ENGAGEMENTS AND ACTIONS OF HIS MAJESTY'S FLEET, Under
the Command of His Highness Prince Rupert: And of all Circumstances concerning
this Summers Expedition, Anno 1673.

Written by a Person in Command in the FLEET.

LONDON, Printed for J. B. Anno Domini. 1673.

An Exact Relation, etc.
SINCE my coming from Sea, I have Read the several Prints which have been
published, and have also in daily conversation about Town observed the various
Reports, and opinions of Men, every one discoursing as he stands affected,
touching the Conduct and Behavior of the several Squadrons of his Majesty's
Fleet by Sea, during this Expedition: I perceive, that through the heat of Men's
manifold Contradictions both in Court and City, the Story of the whole matter
is told only as this and the other Faction, or Affection would have it, by which
means the Truth of things has been hidden from His Majesty; and is like to be
from the Parliament and People of England, unless there stand forth some
faithful Relator. Therefore in all Loyalty to my King, and with a most
affectionate regard to His Service, that He and His Parliament may truly
understand where the fault lies, that they, after so great an expense of Blood
and Treasure, have reaped no greater fruit of so grand an undertaking; I
conceive it my Duty, having had the opportunity to be an Eye Witness of every
Motion and Action from first to last, and being no way obliged to favor or
disfavour any Party concerned therein, to take Pen in hand, and give this clear
account of the Business.

But before I come to Matter of Fact, it will be very convenient to acquaint
you with some Particulars, the knowledge whereof is absolutely necessary to
gain a right understanding of the Subject here related.

After a continuation of the War this last Summer with the United Provinces had
been Resolved on by His Majesty, the next thing to be thought on was the
appointing a Commander in Chief over the Fleet that should be sent forth; and
concerning the Person, though all Men judged the Employment of Course might
continue in the Hands of His Royal Highness the Duke of York, as Lord High
Admiral of England, yet upon weighty Reasons of State, it was at length
thought best for the good of this Kingdom, which is highly concerned in the
safety of the Heir Apparent of the Crown, that at present His Royal Highness
should be excused from running any further hazard of his Person in so dangerous
a Service; he having already too often Exposed himself at Sea with high Courage
and Resolution; and therefore His Highness Prince Rupert being nominated, as
the next fittest Person to undertake that Command, His Majesty was pleased to
resolve thereupon. And with this His Majesty's purpose there immediately ensued
a marvelous Concurrence of the Peoples Affections in City and Country, (all
over the Kingdom) as well in Regard of the Royal Stock from whence His Highness
sprang, as of His high Courage, Conduct, and long Experience in Affairs
Military by Sea and Land, in this, and many other Nations; but yet more in
respect of His tried Constancy to, and zeal for the Reformed Protestant
Profession of Religion, and all the Interests thereof, for the sake whereof He
and His Royal Family had long suffered the utmost extremity: The Sense whereof
was that which chiefly drew the Hearts of the People to rejoice in His
Majesty's Assignation of that most illustrious Prince; it being at such a time
when the Parliament had taken Cognizanse of the Confidence and Insolence of the
Popish Party; many of which being crept into places of Trust and Command, gave
an universal jealousy to the Kingdom, in so much that His Majesty and the
Parliament saw it necessary, for the breaking of their Strength and Confidence,
to put an Universal Test upon all men that held any public Office or Employ by
Sea or Land, in order to the removing of all such, as not submitting thereto,
should be found Popishly affected. But yet notwithstanding this general
Approbation and Applause of the Commander in Chief, there were a Generation of
Men of another mind, who having found all their Arts and Endeavors of
diverting His Majesty from this choice to be in vain, tacked about to the old
trick of State, of devising how underhand to take off the Chariot Wheels of the
Princes Expedition, and to clap on dead weight to retard him; and so to handle
the Matter among all sorts of Navy and Sea-Officers, that partly defect of due
preparation, furniture, and supplies might disable Him, partly the ill timing
of every Requisite, and finally the starting of Interests discontents and
little Feids in the Fleet, might render the whole Enterprise of no more Effect
than might just suit with their own Ends, and if possible, bring back the
Prince with no more Victory than what might please them, and their Accomplices.
In order hereunto, it is worth the while to consider how pat things were laid
and fell out; for, our Preparations were so delayed, that the Dutch got their
Fleet out before us; and after we were in part ready, it was toward the end of
April before the Prince could get his Commission, and Instruction to act by
them; so that the Dutch having a Design to sink Sinkers between the Middle
Grounds, to spoil the going of our Ships out and into the River, were very near
the effecting of it; and had done it, but that His Highness suspecting it, with
much industry got together as many of the 4th. and 5th. Rate Ships as he could,
and some Fireships, with which he went quickly out, and defeated the Mischief
they intended.

Matters being carried thus tardily by Friends at home, the same spirit seemed
also to possess our Confederates on the Coast of France: so that there was the
more urgent necessity for us to have doubled our diligence, and to have made
all imaginable have, For, we had certain intelligence, that the French Fleet,
being then at Breast, would not stir from their own Coast, till they should hear
that Ours were got into the Channel; so that even then an ill Omen arose in
our minds, that they, in time of Action, might fall short of such alacrity as
becomes so grand an undertaking: Especially seeing we had at the same time
Intelligence also, that the Dutch were laboring night and day to augment their
Fleet, and would grow stronger and stronger every day. It being therefore
necessary we should join the French with all speed, His Highness resolving
thereon, gave a high proof of His Courage in all Attempts, to pass in despite
of the Enemy then Riding nigh the Gunfleet; and of his Prudence, in so cleanly
passing with the Fleet against the Wind, through a passage of so great hazard
as the Narrow; For which hazard, tothe endangering of His Majesty's whole
Fleet, the Nation ows much tot he Contrivers of those delays, which gave the
Dutch opportunity to reduce His Highness to the necessity of so passing, if he
meant to unite with the French: Which brave Achievement of his struck such a
terror into the Enemy, that they durst not abide by it, but bore away to their
own Coast, to ride secure upon their Guard within the Sands at Schonevelt.

Which Gallant Action of His Highness deserves so much the greater Estimation,
seeing never any Prince went forth upon a War for the public good, and the
Honor of any Nation, under greater discouragements. For, some Persons of high
Trust under His Majesty had such an Influence upon Affairs, that when they
could no longer hinder the issuing forth of His Highness Commission, they took
care so to qualify and Curtail it, that they left him not power to make so
much a one Officer in the whole Fleet, unless he could upon request obtain the
favor so to do so that Persons were put upon him for Sea-officers, from whom
(for the most part) as he could have no particular assurance of affection to
himself, so he was altogether unacquainted, whether they had most Faith and
Firmness to His Majesty and the Kingdoms Service, or to the Intrigues and
Service of their own particular Patrons.

Upon this account it was, That when the Prince had pitched upon Sir Robert
Holmes for Employment under him, as a Man of tried Valor, Fidelity, and
Experience in Seafights, and one that his Highness could safely Confide in,
being one that from his Youth had been Educated in his Flighness 's Family, it
was so carried that he could by no means be admitted into any Command: and
because of some animosity betwixt him and Sir Edward Spragg, that one point was
made use of, as a pretense for the laying of him aside, notwithstanding the
earnest Endeavors of the Prince to have got his old Servant along with him;
one whom he might surely have relied on. And to that end, his Highness had
propounded such ways and means to reconcile the matter, so as to make both of
them useful to the public Interest, and to satisfy the Reason of all the
Interested Objectors, if they had had a mind to be satisfied.

But it seems by what fell out afterward, that they had other work for Sir
Edward Spragg to do besides fighting by Sea; and therefore the sacrificing of
Sir Robert Holmes to Privacy, and the laying him aside from the opportunity of
prying into the management of Sea-affairs, was a thing by them judged on diverse
accounts at this time absolutely necessary to their ends; for they had
determined (as appears) to send Sir Edward Spragg, though Vice Admiral of the
Blew Squadron, on a special Journey by Land to negotiate in the Court of France
(who surely is the first Vice Admiral that ever went out of England to the
French, to learn how to Fight by Sea) where he was Graciously Received, Highly
Caressed, and thence Nobly Dismissed (some say with a Jewel, etc.) and all this
so carried, that it was without the privity of Prince Rupert, who perhaps knows
not to this minute, and no more then His Majesty does, what business he
transacted there.

Nor was this all; for, to make sure work yet further, it was as cautiously
provided, that his Highness might not be crowded with too many Concerns; for,
when His Majesty in his Royal Wisdom thought fit, to give him a Commission to
raise a Maritime Regiment, which was to have been paid out of the Establishment
of Ireland by my Lord Ranelagh, they presently cast about how to frustrate this
Order of the Kings, and thereupon offered so specious Reasons for it to his
Royal Highness the Duke of York, that he was thereby induced to divert His
Majesty's purpose in that matter. So there was an end of this Commission.

And for the Chief Officers of his Highness's own Squadron, it must be remarked
also, how he was accommodated (viz.) with Sir John Harman for his Vice Admiral;
which is not mentioned as if any fault could have been found with Sir John
Harman, if he had then been the Sir John Harman he once was, (that is to say)
the same Active man and Gallant Commander; but alas! he was Sick when he went
aboard, and there tied by the leg in his Cabin with the Gout, not able to stir
either hand or foot. The appointed Reer-Admiral of the Blew was Capt.
Norborough, who being then absent in the Streights, came not in till after the
two first Engagements; which otherwise might have occasioned some competition
among the Officers of the Fleet for that Place: For, though he were a good
Seaman, yet there were many others in the Fleet that were of better merit, and
longer Service; and the offense that must have been given to others, had he
enjoyed it, was taken off by putting a Person of so great Quality as my Lord
Ossory into the Place. His Highnesses own Reer-Admiral, was Sir John Chicheley,
a Person of Honor and Quality, yet but of late a Seaman: which is not said
with intent of diminution, but only to give a clear account of things: For
though a man may be of ever so much merit in other Qualifications, yet if he be
put upon any Office or Employment, the less Experience he has had therein, the
less advantage he is like to bring to the Service.

By these things it appears how the main Wheels were clogged, and how sick the
Officers must needs be, and how faint the hearts of the whole Fleet, to observe
how they were dealt with upon so important an occasion, as a War for the
Interest and Honor of the King and Kingdom; especially when they saw they
wanted both Workmen and Tools for the work, (that is to say) Seamen and
Supplies. As for Seamen, it is to be noted, That though the Prince made it his
Business to urge the getting of them betimes, Yet notwithstanding all his
solicitations, the Order for impressing of Seamen could not be got till it was
very late, so that it was the Month of March before the Press began, though in
the precedent year it began as early as November. But though it was this year
so late as March, yet even then, matters were so carried, that it was
impossible for his Highness to be sufficiently Manned, seeing the
Press-warrants were of little effect, being Checked by Protections which had
before been granted to Thousands of Seamen and Fishermen, and Watermen that
would have made good Seamen. Nevertheless, his Highness abating no whit of his
Affection and Zeal for His Majesty and the Nations Service, resolved to break
through all discouragements; and as ill accommodated as he was, seeing the
Dutch Fleet were got out, braving it upon our Coast, did with all Expedition
hasten forth to Sea; being fed at least, and set forward with some empty
promises, That Seamen and Necessaries should be sent after him; which proved
at length to be but a miserable Slurr put upon so high a Commander: And all
other things miserably suited, when after it drew on to the Point of Action; as
will appear in the ensuing part of this Relation.

For, on the 27th. day of May, which was the day before our first Engagement
with the Enemy; when his Highness perceived they would not admit of a Fight in
fair Searoom, but kept to their Advantage riding within the Sands at
Schonevelt, He according to a resolve of a Council of War (His Majesty present)
like a Magnanimous Prince, resolved to Fight them in that very place, rather
then permit them to wear away the Summer with longer delays; which they seemed
mainly to intend: which is the highest proof of Courage, the like Action having
never been attempted in that station before. So all the Sands having been
sounded some days before, and it having been concluded at a Council of War held
on Board the Royal Charles, to Attack the Enemy Riding there at Anchor in a
Line between the Rand and the Stony Bank, his Highness on the 28th. day about 9
a Clock in the Morning Commanded the firing of a Gun, upon which we loosed our
fore-topsail, and Weighed, and Hoisted the Union Flagg on the Mizon Pe^k, which
(...) the Signal to Sail on toward the Enemy. This was accordingly obeyed by a
Squadron that was ordered out of the several Divisions of the Fleet, consisting
in all of 35. Frigates, and 13. Fireships, who went with an easy Sail, the Wind
at S. S. W. In the mean while the Body of the French (all, except some who
straggling got into our Division, did indeed behave themselves very gallantly)
made little or no Sail, but kept in the Rear of us, though they saw the
Hellander stretch it to the Northward. Then the Prince petforth the Red Flagg
on the Fore-topmast head; so all our Commanded Ships went a head, and by 12. a
Clock at Noon Engaged the Enemies Van, Commanded by Tromp: The Prince himself
also Engaged two hours before the French; in which time we so pressed Tromp,
that he was forced to give way, and retire as far as the Sands would give him
leave: Then the Count d'Estrees and the French Squadron became at length
Engaged with de Ruyter: which prospered not so well; for, they bore him not
down, but rather left him. And de Ruyter, not to be behind with them in
kindness, quitted them, and came to his Highness; whose Squadron being too near
the Shore, was for that Reason necessitated to stand the other way, to such
degree, that had it not been for fear of the Shoales, we had driven them into
their Harbors, and given His Majesty at that time a better account of them,
notwithstanding the ill accommodations that we were under; more particularly in
the Royal Charles, his Highness 's own Ship, which proved so Cranck-sided, and
fetched so much Water in at the Ports, that her lower Tire of Guns could not be
made use of, though it was a very easy Gale that we had during this
Engagement; the Issue whereof was, That the Enemy had many Men slain, many
Ships disabled, and some destroyed; Yea, and de Ruyter and Tromp must have been
burnt by our Fireships, had they done their Duty. We saw two Ships sunk. The
French say they saw one burnt, two disabled, and three run ashore. The Loss on
our side was very inconsiderable, two of our Ships being only disabled, viz.
The Cambridge and Resolution: very few Common Men were lost, and only these
Officers, Capt. Fowlis, Capt. Worden, and Capt. Finch. Colonel Hamilton had his
Leg shot, of which returning home, he dyed at London. All the rest that
Engaged came off very bravely.

Now from the time of this Action to the 4th. of June little was done, save the
repairing of defects, and amending our Tackle, toward which we were all ill
furnished as we were with all other Necessaries, not having so much as Needles
and Thread sufficient for the work, to the great Praise of our Providers be it
spoken. And though his Highness had made it his Business Night and Day to get
the promised Supplies of Seamen aboard, and some had undertaken to do it, yet
it came to no Effect. On the 3 d. of June, which was the day before our Second
Engagement, his Highness suspecting the Enemy, that Riding on their own Coast
they might be refitted and furnished with all things, the which benefit they
knew (as the Wind stood) we could not have, and so would be Encouraged to come
out again upon us, bestirred himself exceedingly to get into a posture fit to
receive them: and not presuming to trust himself the second time in the Royal
Charles, he this day quitted her, and having opportunity of Weather, went
aboard the Royal Sovereign, where imagining the Enemy might Attack us that
Night, he went not to Bed, but waited till Morning, June the 4th. when about 9
a Clock our Scouts gave the Sign, That the Enemy was a Weighing with fresh
Seamen and Provisions, to take their advantage against us, as they very fairly
had it; for then a strange thing was done by Sir Edward Spragg, who, though he
was told of the Enemy, and saw them himself, yet would needs lose so much time
as to come six Miles in his Boat, and bring his Rear Admiral my Lord of Ossory
along with him aboard the Sovereign, under a pretense of Business; the
Consequence whereof was, That the Enemy coming on with the advantage of a stiff
Gale of Wind at N. E. The Blew Squadron Commanded by Sir Edward Spragg, by
reason of his absence, stood not away close by the Wind to the Northward, as he
had been Ordered to do, though his Highness with all possible speed hastened
him back; who being got on Board, at length, after loss of time, made Sail to
the Northward. This passage of Sir Edward Spragg being observed by Count d'
Estrees, he thereupon took occasion to lay by, and delay time; which point of
behavior we knew not what to think of, it being the season of Action, for that
the Dutch were bearing down to us. And now more then ever we became sensible of
the want of Sea men, not having enough to Weigh up our Anchors; so that to
prevent a greater mischief, his Highness was constrained to order the cutting
off his own Cable, that we might be up with the Enemy. By this time Tromp with
the Van became Engaged with Spragg, and de Ruyter with his Highness, who made a
show as if he would come very near us; but before he came within Musket shot,
he sp^^ng his Loof, and closed his Wind as much as he could, going off on a
sudden for good and all; and then closing with Tromp, their whole Fleet being
bravely repulsed, they cautiously stood Pelting at us at a great distance, that
they might be the nearer to their Reserve of security within the Sands at
Schonevelt upon occasion. It was about 5 a Clock in the Afternoon that the
Engagement began; and when they were reduced to Pelting, it so continu^d till
11 or 12 a Clock at Night, we all the while keeping our Ground, notwithstanding
their Fireships; after which they Tacked, standing toward the East Southerly.
(Then about two in the Morning we Tacked also, and stood after them; but seeing
no likelihood of reaching them before they could get within the Sands, we
thought not meet to follow them any further, and so Tack't again and stood for
our own Coast. What Loss they sustained, we, by reason of their going off in
such a Confusion, cannot tell. On our side we lost very few of our Men, and of
our Commanders only Capt. W^i^e of the Warspight, and Capt. Sadlington of the
Crown were killed; of the Foot Officers, Capt. Henshaw, and Lieutenant Fitz
Gerald; and Lieutenant Tuston was Wounded? But for our Ships, as in the first
Engagement, after we had sufficiently beaten the Enemy, we came off without the
loss of one man of War, or so much as one Ship touching the Ground, though that
Fight was maintained in a dangerous place. So in this Second Engagement,
wherein the Enemy came on with the advantage of the Wind, Fresh Men, and
Provisions, etc. against us, we lost never a Ship, and but few Men. For which
His Majesty and the Nation owes much, next under God, to his Highness, who at a
time when non supplies, and want of Men, and of all necessaries, would have
startled any man, gave such signal Evidence of his Courage, Diligence and
Prudence in the Conduct of the Fleet, as is Admirable to consider in so great
Discouragement and Disorder as we were under, by reason of the preposterous
behavior and delays of some others.

The next day, being June the 5th. and no Enemy in sight, we had leisure to
consider our Condition; and then from the whole Fleet came miserable complaints
to his Highness of want of Seamen, and all manner of things in every Ship;
though all things had been often written for, and promised they should be sent
after us; the Commanders exclaiming they should be thus exposed, so as not to
have convenient Supplies, but be in want of Powder, Shot, Water, ^eer, and
small sto^^^, Fishes, and what not; whereupon it being impossible to avoid a
going home, to revictual and refit our selves presently, we set Sail for the
Gun^fl^et, and about 9 a Cloc^ a^ Night came to an Anchor there, and thence the
following day made toward the B^oy of the Nore, where on the (...) June we
Rode at Anchor, and on the 14th. his H^g^ness returned to London to give His
Majesty an Account how things stood, and to Press on a spe^dy supplying of ^ll
Necessaries for the Refitting of the Fleet out to Sea again.

On the 21st. his Highness returned to the Fleet again, where, with
indefatigable Industry, he set all things in forwardness, and made so quick
dispatch, that had not a delay intervened, about a design of sending Soldiers
to be Landed by us in Holland, we had been much sooner out at Sea: but by their
6th. of July his Highness Weighed, and His Majesty also in his Yacht, having a
strong Gale at S.W. and came to the Middle-ground, where humbly taking his
leave of His Majesty, he quickly got the Fleet through the Narrow, and on the
19th. of July stood with an easy Sail for the Coast of Zealand. The next day
we discovered the Enemies Fleet at Anchor in the Schonevelt, bearing S.E. of
us: On the 22d. in the Morning we stood to Sea, the Enemy no sooner perceived
it, but they stood after us, and the Wind Veering suddenly to the S. W. made
them get the Wind of us, so that none of our Ships could weather them. And to
wave an Engaging, for which when they saw us putting our selves in Order, they
stood for their own Coast again, and we pursued our Resolution of standing
along their Coast, which we did the 24th. looking into the Vly to Anchor fair
off of the Texel. So that on the 9th. of August we had the opportunity of
taking one of the Dutch East India Ships, called the Papenburgh, making
homewards. On the 10th. we had sight again of the Holland Fleet standing to the
Northward, and bore down to them. Then his Highness Commanded the French a
particular course, the Enemy being come three Leagues to Leeward of us; but
here the French were pleased to give us an early Taste of their Temper: For,
their Fleet lay by twice that Night, and made so little Sail, that the Enemy
had opportunity to stretch out a head of us. The first time that the French now
faltered thus was about 11 a Clock at Night; which his Highness wondering at,
as contrary to Order, our whole Fleet was forced to lie by whilst a Messenger
was sent on Board the Count d Estrees to know the Reason, and to Order him to
make Sail again. Nevertheless, after a little more Sail made, he about one a
Clock in the Morning laid his Sails to the Mast again; which gave a second
stop to our Fleet, while his Highness sent a Message by a second Messenger to
the same purpose. And by this means the Dutch, making all the Sail they could,
and the Wind Veering to the E. and E. by S. they got the advantage of the Wind
of us, being close by the Shore under Camperdown. About daybreak we saw them
about a League and half to Windward of us, the Wind being then at E. S. E. fair
Weather: at which time both our Fleet and theirs were standing to the
Northward. Upon this his highness stretched it away till six in the Morning,
being Monday the 11th. of August. The Dutch being then to Windward, began to
bear down upon him: Whereupon his Highness thought fit to Tack, not having Room
to the Eastward to Fight; by which Tacking the Fleet was brought into a very
good Line and Order. The Wind now at S. E. his Highness prepared all things for
a full and deciding Battle, putting abroad the Signal for our Fleet to Tack to
the Southward; which they did. He had put the French in the Van, himself in the
Middle, and Sir Edward Spragg in the Rear. Our Fleet being extended longer then
the Enemies, and the Wind coming to the South, the French lay fair to get the
Wind of them. However, the Enemy bore down and Engaged us; de Ruyter undertook
his Highness; Tromp provoked Sir Edward Spragg and his Blew Squadron, who laid
his fore-top Sail to the Mast to stay for him, contrary to his Highness 's
Express Orders, and his own Duty; while de Ruyeer and Bankaert Vice Admiral of
Zealand, both of them with all their Men of War and Fireships, came down upon
his Highness his Red Squadron, except eight Men of War of the Zealand Squadron,
whom Bankaert had sent with three Fireships to fall upon the Rear of the French
Squadron; where Monsieur de Martel, the French Vice Admiral, being Cannon shot
nearer to the Commanded party of Zealand, then any other Ship of his Division,
received Five of them with such bravery of Resolution, that he fought them two
hours, and was so fortunate as to disable one of them, which the rest had
enough to do to carry off; but by the way she appeared to be on Fire, caused by
some Fireballs that had been shot into her. This Gentleman de Martel seems by
many Circumstances a most Gallant Man, zealous of his own Honor, and the
Honor of his Nation, and Faithful to the utmost; so that when he had observed
the Carriage of his own Admiral Count d' Estrees upon this occasion, he after
the Fight sent the Prince an Account thereof in a particular Relation, it being
as he said, the same that he had sent to his Master the King of France; wherein
he taxed the Count, that he gave those Zealanders leave to pass by the whole
Squadron of the French with their disabled Ship, to secure her and themselves
in making back to the rest of their Zealand party: of which when de Martel
challenged the Captains of his Division for failing to relieve him, they said
they had Orders from Monsieur d' Estrees to regard none of his Motions, so that
it seems the Count chose rather to venture a point of Honor, then depart from
his own private reserve of mind. This Action being over, de Martel retired, and
united again with the main Body of the French Squ^dron; where he afterward
durst not be so forward any more, but stood as still as the rest of his
Fellows: Of which more by and by.

By this behavior of d' Estrees there is Ground enoug^ to Collect, That de
Ruyter and the Zealand Vice-Admirat were beforehand pretty Confident, that the
French would not hurt them: which made the Zealander send only that small party
of Men of War, to fall upon de Martel for his forwardness; else there had been
no reason he should have presumed so far to neglect the French, as to unite
himself and all the rest of his Zealanders with the Squadron of de Ruyter, to
bring their whole Force upon his Highness.

It was about 8. a Clock e're the Fight began, and before 9. there fell a Fogg,
with a small Rain, which continued until nigh Noon; then it cleared up, and
the Wind came to the South, which put the French, being a head, to Windward of
the Dutch: And then the Battle being renewed, the whole burden and brunt of de
Ruyter and Bankaert, (those Men of War also that fought de Martel being United)
fell again upon his Highness and Sir John Harmans Division, while the French,
instead of Tacking and Engaging the Enemy (as was expected from them) stood
away to the S. E. the Wind then at S. S. W. and stood full two Leagues away
before they Tacked again, adding this Complyment to the former, (...) when they
gave the eight Zealand Men of War free passage back from de Martel to their
Fellows. Now as this gave great Encouragement to the Enemy, so it would have
appell'd any Man less Courageous then the Prince to see himself thus deserted.
But besides this, it was strange that Sir Edward Spragg, contrary to Order, and
to the solemn assurance that he gave his Highness in Person the day before, not
to be from his side, should make a separate Fighting with Tromp so far Leeward
of all the rest. Nor was his Highnesses Reer-Admiral Sir John Chichely with his
Division near, because the Enemy had soon interposed between him and the
Prince: so that betwixt twelve and one of the Clock, his Highness was wholly
surrounded by the Dutch, being pressed by de Ruyter and his Squadron on his
Lee-quarter, an Admiral with two Flags more on his Weather-quarter, and the
Zealand Squadron on his broadside to Windward. Thus they employed all their
Forces, having designed to take no more notice of the French than the French
did of them, or of his Highness; although they had continually in their Eye the
Blew Flagg set upon the Mizon Peek, which was the Signal to fall on, Expressly
set down in the General Instructions for Fighting, which had been sent before
by his Highness to Count d' Estrees; which has been attested also by Martel in
his Relation, and that the Prince did give the Signal before mentioned, with
all other signs that might incite d' Estrees to bear down to his Assistance,
having a fair Wind for the purpose; but that instead of this, he kept the Wind,
contenting himself to give his Ships more then common and half distance from
the Enemy. And it is related further by de Martel, That himself saw very well
how shameful this was; but being under Command now, not to Attempt any thing
without Order from the Count; and besides, not daring to trust the Captains of
his own party to follow him, who in the former Action this day had deserted
him, he shrugged up his Shoulders, and could do no more but forbid any shooting
from his Ship: And he concludes his Relation with these words, That if the
Count would have fallen in with the fair wind upon de Ruyter and Bankaert, at
their first Engaging, who far exceeded the Prince in number of force, they must
needs have been enclosed between his Highness and d' Estrees, and so there
would have been an entire Defeat of the Enemy.

Nevertheless, his Highness prosecuted the Fight on with an undanted mind, and
so Answered them at all points, that he gave them enough of it, and so forced
them to give way, that he soon got an opportunity to join with Sir John
Chichely: which being done, about two of the Clock his Highness discovered Sir
Edward Spragg with his Blew Squadron at a great distance, about 3. Leagues to
Lee-ward bearing N. N. E, and not knowing what condition that Squadron was in,
and not hearing the Guns well plied, he made all the Sail he could toward
them, to unite and relieve them, if he should find occasion required it.

No sooner had de Ruyter perceived the design of the Prince, but he left
Firing, and boar away also with his whole Fleet, to the relief of Tromp; so
that both Fleets ran down side by side within Range of Cannon-shot; but without
firing on either side; and as we were Sailing down we saw many of Spragg's Blew
Squadron, which we judged had received some damage to Windward of his Body; and
some of the Red likewise, to whom his Highness fired (...) Gun, as a call to
them to bear down to him: notwithstanding which they did not; but about 4. a
Clock we were got nigh the Blew Squadron, where we found Sir Edward Spragg's
Ship the Royal Prince wholly disabled, her Main mast, Mizon-mast, and
foretop-mast shot away, and diverse more Ships of his Squadron disabled, the
Vice Admiral of the Blew laying to Windward of her, mending his Sayls and
Rigging; the Earl of Ossory, Reer-Admiral of the Blew, lay a stern of the Royal
Prince, between her and the Enemy; bending of his new Sails, and mending his
Rigging, and two Frigates by him: whereupon, his Highness sent two Frigates to
take the Royal Prince in a Tow.

Now Tromps Squadron lay to the Eastward of them, some of them Disabled also of
their Top-masts and Yards, part of his Squadron with his Vice Admiral and
Reer-Admiral standing to the Eastward close by a Wind with all (...) Sail they
could to gain it, and so they Tack't again upon the Blew; at which time we came
near them, being about 4. a Clock: Then de Ruyter fired a Gun, upon which Tromp
Tackt, with design to make themselves Masters of our Lame Ships, viz. The Royal
Prince and others; the Royal Prince being bravely defended by Sir John
Kempthorn, and the Earl of Ossory, and Assisted by some of the same Squadron.
This made us lay by for Sir John Kempthorn, to get our Fleet in order to Attack
the Enemy again, and then his Highness put out the Blew Flagg upon the
Mizon-Peek, which is the usual Signal to bring all the Ships into the Generals
Wake or Grains, and sent Ketches, Sloops and Boats, to Ships that were to
windward, to Command them in: whereupon we bore up, and steered in between de
Ruyter and our Lame Ships, and fired a Gun to some of our own Ships to Windward
to bear down; but none came near to Assist his Highness but Sir John Kemphorn
and my Lord of Ossory; so we have reason to believe, that except his Highness
had comein so happily to the relief; the Blew Squadron had been totally lost,
since they were so Disabled, that no more of them but those two Flaggs only
were in a condition to give him any Assistance in a further encountering with
the Enemy.

About 5. a Clock de Ruyter, with all his Flaggs and Fleet came side by side
close up with the Prince: so there began a very sharp Engagement; his Highness
had none besides the Vice Admiral and Reer-Admiral of the Blew to second him,
but Sir John Harman, Capt, Davis in the Triumph, Capt, Stout in the Warspight;
and his Highnesses own Division, Sir John Holmes in the Rupert, Capt. Leg in
the Royal Katherine, Sir John Berry in the Resolution, Sir John Earnley in the
Henry, Sir Roger Strickl^nd in the Mary, and Capt. Carter in the Crown, a 4th.
Rate Ship; in all, not above 13, or 14. Ships: The Fight was very sharp and
close; about 7. a Clock his Highness forced the Enemy into a very great
disorder, and then sent two Fireships amongst them; which increased it; and if
the French, who now again lay at a convenient distance to Windward, would have
obeyed the Prince his Signal, and bore down upon the Enemy according to their
Duty, we must needs have Routed them, and Torn them to Pieces. It was the
plainest and greatest opportunity that ever was lost at Sea. The Fight
continued till the day was nigh spent, and the Sun just setting; at which time
his Highness seeing my Lord of Ossory and Sir John Kempthorn both in some
measure Disabled, and none else likely to be Assisting to make a through end of
the Business, it was high time to carry off our disabled Ships; to which
purpose he edged off toward them with an easy Sail, and the Dutch laid their
heads to the Eastward: so the Battle ended.

When the Night had parted us and the Enemy, and no more was to be done, came a
Messenger from Count d' Estrees the French Admiral, to demand Orders, and to
know what was meant by the Blew Flagg upon the Mizon-Peek, though all the
English knew, and so did his own Vice Admiral acknowledge, and the Instructions
for Fighting which the Prince had sent him, and others of the French Captains
can tell, and all the World, that he had as much Reason to know it, and more
Eminently, than any of themselves; however, it was cunningly done of Count d'
Estrees, by a special Message to complete the whole affair thus with a perfect
Mockery, after the Hollanders had stood off to their own Coast.

As to the Damage on either side, great Execution was done upon the Tackle and
Rigging by both Parties, and diverse Ships disabled; Tromp shifted his Ship on
that Account once, and Sir Edward Spragg twice; so that when the Royal Prince
was disabled, he went and set up his Flag in the St. George; which becoming
disabled also, he was fain to take Boat to go on Board the Royal Charles, and
had not Rowed (...) ten Boats length, but a Bullet came and broke his Boat:
They made back again as fast as they could, but before they could get within
throw of the Ropes, the Boat sunk, and Sir Edward Spragg was drowned, though
when he was taken up his Head and Shoulders were found above Water, his Arms
having taken so dead a hold of some part of the Boat, that they could not
dis-engage him from it. Neither we nor the French lost one Ship of War; only
the Henrietta Yatch was sunk by the side of my Lord of Ossory. Of the slain we
are to reckon Captain Leneve, Captain Merryweather of the Duke of Buckinghams
Regiment being Foot-Officers, and Mr. May a Volunteer. Of Sea-Commanders Sir
William Reeves (a person of great bravery, one that from his youth had been
Educated by his Highness, and who had constantly attended him with high
Courage, and Fidelity in all Fortunes by Sea and Land; so that he arrived to
the skill, and made good the Character of a Gallant Commander) and Captain
Heywar! (a Gallant old Sea man) both dyed of their wounds, which were all of
note that we hear of. In his Highness's own Ship were sixty men slain and
dangerously wounded.

What the Enemy lost was hard to determine; but two of their great Ships of 70.
and 60. Guns were lost, in our sight, the one sunk by Sir John Kempthorne. Two
of the Dutch Flag-Officers with several Captains were slain; and of Common
Seamen a very considerable number.

Now, having run over all the particulars of this Summers Action, let us pause
a little, and consider the Heroic behavior of this Excellent Prince; how
Gloriously he acquitted himself in all the parts of a great General, and
whether it were possible for any Man, under such Circumstances, to do more then
he has done? In the midst of so many Intrigues of Opposition here at home, so
many delays of his Commission, so few Powers contained in it, such scantly
number of Seamen, so little assurance of diverse Chief Commanders, such failure
of Provisions, such want of Ammunition and all other Necessaries, such deceit
of Navy-Officers, such non-observance of Orders at Sea amongst his own English,
and so manifest defections of the French, not to be Staggered in his
Resolutions, nor to be put out of all Patience and Prudence in Action, nor to
abate of his Affection and Zeal for the Honor and Service of His Majesty, the
safeguard and Interest of Religion and the Kingdom, in a season when so many
Popish Projectors played a Game under board, and above too, will be an
everlasting Argument of his Highnesses Valor and Renown; and must needs be a
strong Obligation upon the King, the Parliament, and People of England; who are
now left to judge, whether it was not a wonderful good Providence of God, and
one of the most memorable pieces of Service ever done at Sea, to surmount all
those difficulties, and even Envy it self; and after all, to bring home the
Fleet Royal of England, without the loss of one Man of War, to her own Shore in
Safety, in despite of all Enemies that designed otherwise by Sea and Land.

Tantum potuit unius viri virtus, and fortuna.

FINIS.

