AN EXACT RELATION OF THE DEFEAT OF THE REBELS AT Bothwell-Bridge.

Published by Authority.



In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1679.

AN Exact Relation Of the DEFEAT of the REBELS at BOTHWEL-BRIDGE.
HIS Grace the Duke of Monmouth came up to the Kings Army on Thursday the 19th
day of June, which then lay at Moorhead beyond Blackhorne; and having sent for
some Provisions from Edinburgh, which he found wanting, as soon as they
arrived, He resolved to march against the Rebels, who lay encamped beyond
Bothwell-Bridge, up toward Hamilton, about Nine miles distance from our Camp.
And accordingly on Saturday the 21 of June, in the Evening, his Grace began his
March; Major Oglethorp was ordered to Lead the Van with five Troops of the
English Dragoons, and One hundred Horse, commanded by the Lord Hume. His Grace
followed with the rest of the Horse and Dragoons, and Three hundred Commanded
Foot; The Earl of Linlithgow, Major General, led the Foot. About break of day
the Van came in sight of the Rebels, who were all ready Drawn up in two Bodies,
though they had no other notice of our March than what they had from our
lighted Matches. Major Oglethorp with his Party was commanded to march directly
toward the Bridge, and draw up before it, which they did within Pistol-shot of
it, approaching so much the nearer, because they found the Rebels had
Barricadoed the Bridge with Stones and Timber, that endred it very difficult to
Pass; the Rebels had posted themselves very advantageously, for there was no
coming to them but over that Bridge, the River Clyd running between the two
Armies. His Grace drew up the Army in Battle upon the height parallel to the
River, in full view of the Rebels; which being done, He went to visit the
Dragoons Post about a Mile distant; He was met on the way by an Officer, who
acquainted him that a Parley was Beat, and delivered him a Petition sent from
them, and Signed by Robert Hamilton in the name of himself and the Covenanted
Army in Scotland now in Arms; The Purport whereof was, That they had lay'n
under great Oppressions in their Estates and Consciences, which had Obliged
them to have recourse to Arms for their own Preservation, which they would keep
no longer, when the Things set forth in their Declaration were granted them.
His Grace admitting of the Parley, there came out to him, Mr. David Hume, one
of their Ministers, with another Gentleman; and being asked what they came for,
Mr Hume answered, They were informed that his Grace was a Merciful Man, that
took no delight to shed Blood, and one that had Power to do them Good. His
Grace told them, He should be very glad that they would prevent the effusion of
Blood, and to that end he was willing to Hear what it was they desired. Mr.
Hume answered, That all their Desires were contained in their Declaration. And
being asked whether he meant the Declaration that passed under their name, as
Proclaimed at Rugland. He answered, God forbid we should own that; But the
Declaration he spoke of, was one they had lately Printed, a Copy whereof he had
with him, and desired liberty to Read it; and having read it, His Grace told
them, He supposed they would take this as a Proof of his Clemency and
Forbearance toward them, that he had Patience to hear such a LIBEL against the
Kings Person and Government read throughout; But that he saw no Article in it
he could possibly agree to; and therefore would make them a much shorter
Proposal: Which was, That if they would immediately lay down they Arms, and
submit themselves to His Majesty's Mercy, the Kings Forces should not fall upon
them. Mr Hume said it was impossible to agree to that, for that it would be to
lay their Heads upon the Block; his Grace advised them to consider well what
they had to do, and to reflect a little (if that number of Men (showing them
the Army as it was Drawn up) were not sufficient to oblige them to new
Resolutions; He returned it very briskly, Desiring his Grace would take a View
of the Covenanted Army, assuring him, That every Man he saw there, would Die in
the place where he stood, in Defense of the Covenant. His Grace said no more to
him, But that a few minutes would show the truth of that, if they refused his
Offer.

The other Gentleman, who appeared the more moderate, desired a Cessation of
Arms for one day, but being told it was not to be expected that the Kings
Troops should grant that to Rebels, he pressed it for a quarter of an hour
only. His Grace told them if they would go and consider what he had said, and
send him their Proposal in writing, he would at any time, when he heard their
Drum, stop to receive their Paper, though the fight should be begun, and so
dismissed them and immediately Ordered the Cannon to advance, which was brought
to the height opposite to the Bridge, and whilst preparation was making to
Fire upon them, they beat a second Parley; and Major Maine was sent to know
what they would have, who brought back a Letter to this effect, That they had
considered what had been said; but could agree to nothing less than what was in
their Declaration; and that they understood His Grace had brought with him from
England, some Terms of Accommodation; If he would please to communicate them he
should have their Answer, if they were such as they could accept. Major Maine
was sent back to acquaint them, that a more satisfactory Answer was expected,
therefore they would now do well to look to themselves, and their Officers
might, if they thought fit, retire from the Bridge (who were come thither upon
the account of the Parley) for they should hear from his Grace in another
manner. As soon as they were retired, Orders were given for the Cannon to Fire,
which they returned with so great a Volly of shot from the Bridge, that our
Gunners quitted their Guns, but soon returned to them again: Major Oglethorp
was ordered to make a Trench on the edge of the Hill to cover his men, but
before it was finished, upon the Firing of the Cannon against the Bridge, the
Rebels began to run from it. Whereupon His Grace ore-rod Major Oglethorp to
possess himself of the Bridge, and advance no farther; but his men finding the
Enemy to retire before them, could not be hindered from passing the Bridge, and
going up some part of the rising ground after them. But the Rebels perceiving
their small number, advanced upon them, and forced them to retire to the houses
at the foot of the Bridge. His Grace sent Three hundred Foot to second them,
commanded by the Lord Leviston, Son to the Earl of Linlithgow, who behaved
themselves so well, and made so great Fire, that they and the Dragoons forced
the Rebels up the hill again. They were immediately seconded by the Regiment of
Guards, and by the Troop of Guards led by His Grace. Upon these Troops passing
the Bridge, the Rebels fell to running, but rallied again upon Hamilton Heath,
at a quarter of a miles distance, and His Grace advanced, with the Troops that
were already passed, to the top of the hill, and there made a Halt to give time
to so many of the rest of the Forces to come over, as would make the first
Line. In the mean while the Rebels were drawing up in Battle opposite to us,
and his Grace observing that they strengthened their left Wing with a design to
take the advantage of a hollow Ground, he ordered his right to be strengthened
and commanded 100 Highlanders of the Marquis of Athols Regiment to post
themselves in that hollow, and the five Troops of English Dragoons were to
second them; this was no sooner done but, they advanced upon us at the same
time that His Grace was forming the second Line. Our Highlanders and their Foot
began the Fight in the hollow ground, but the Highlanders advancing too far
were forced to retreat back to the Dragoons. At the same time the Cannon Fired
upon their left, where their strength lay, and had not fired twice round when
their Horse began to run; whereupon, His Grace ordered Major Oglethorp with the
Dragoons, Major Maine and Captain Claveres with their Troops of Horse, and the
Earl of Eglinton with his Troop of Volunteers to pursue whilst he followed
himself with the rest of the Army so fast as not to be put in disorder: And the
Army followed no farther then to the end of the Heath which was about a Mile.
But the others pursued them so close, that there were taken above 1200
Prisoners, and between 7 or 800 killed. The Heat of the Business was over by
One of the Clock, after which time there were none killed. Many of the
Prisoners were sorely wounded, and those his Grace ordered to be dressed by his
own Surgeon. The Prisoners of Note that were taken are John Kid, one of
their Ministers, and of the most Factious, who was taken by the Dragoons; and
John King a Minister, who was taken some days after the Fight near Glasgow, Mr.
David Carthcart; a Captain of Foot was taken with Kid, and old Gordon, Lord of
Earleston was killed.

It was said by the Prisoners, that they had no account from David Hume of what
his Grace offered them, which they believe would have been accepted of by the
Generality, so careful are their Ministers that those poor Misguided People
should rather be Destroyed than Undeceived.

FINIS.

