THE EXACT NARRATIVE OF THE CONFLICT AT DUNKELD, Betwixt the Earl of Angus's
Regiment and the Rebels, Collected from several Officers of that Regiment, who
were Actors in, or Eyewitnesses to, all that is here Narrated, in reference to
these Actions.
THe said Regiment being then betwixt seven and eight hundred men, arrived at
Dunkeld Saturndays night, the 17 of August, 1689. under the Command of
Lieutenant-Collonel William Cleland, a brave and singularly well accomplished
Gentleman, within 28 years of age. Immediately they found themselves obliged to
ly at their Arms, as being in the midst of their Enemies. Sunday at nine in the
morning, they began some Retrenchments within the Marquess of Athol's
Yard-dykes, the old breaches whereof they made up with loose Stones, and
Scaffolded the Dykes about. In the afternoon, about three hundred men appeared
upon the Hills on the North side of the Town, who sent one with a white Cloth
upon the top of a Halbert, with an open unsubscribed Paper, in the fashion of a
Letter, directed to the Commanding Officer, wherein was Written, We the
Gentlemen assembled, being informed that ye intend to burn the Town, desire to
know whether ye come for Peace or War, and do certify you, that if ye burn any
one House, we will destroy you.

The Lieutenant-Collonel returned Answer in Writ, to this purpose, We are
faithful Subjects to King William and Queen Mary, and enemies to their enemies;
and if you who send those threats, shall make any hostile appearance, we will
burn all that belongs to you, and otherwise chastise you as you deserve. But in
the mean time he caused solemnly Proclaim in the Mercat-place His Majesty's
Indemnity, in the hearing of him who brought the foresaid Paper.

Monday morning two Troops of Horse, and three of Dragoons, arrived at Dunkeld,
under the Command of the Land Cardross, who viewed the Fields all round, and
took six Prisoners, but saw no Body of Men, they being retired to the Woods.

Monday night they had intelligence of a great gathering by the Firey Cross;
and Tuesday morning many people appeared upon the tops of the Hills, and they
were said to be in the Woods and Hills about Dunkeld more than 1000 men. About
eight of the Clock, the Horse, Foot, and Dragoons made ready to March out, but
a Detatch'd Party was sent before of forty Fusiliers, and fifteen Halbertiers,
under the Command of Captain George Monro, and thirty Horse with Sir James
Agnew, and twenty Dragoons with the Lord Cardoss his own Cornet; after them
followed Ensign Lockhart with thirty Halbertiers; the Halberts were excellent
Weapons against the Highlanders Swords and Targets, in case they should rush
upon the Shot, with their accustomed fury: They Marched also at a competent
distance before the Body; one hundred Fusiliers more under the Command of
Captain John Campbel, and Captain Robert Hum^, two brave young Gentlemen; and
upon the first fire with the Enemy, Captain Borthwick, Captain Haries, with 200
Musketeers and Pikes were likewise commanded to advance toward them; The
Lieutenant-Collonel having proposed by that method to get advantage of the
Enemy in their way of loose and furious fighting. The Body followed, having
left only an Hundred and Fify Foot within the Dykes. The first Detatched Party,
after they had Marched about two Miles, found before them in a Glen, betwixt
two and three hundred of the Rebels, who fired at a great distance, and shot
Cornet Livingston in the Leg: The Horse retired, and Captain Monro took up
their Ground, and advanced, fireing upon the Rebels to so good purpose, that
they began to reel and break, but Rallied on the face of the next Hill, from
whence they were again beat. About that time the Lieutenant-Collonel came up,
and ordered Captain Monro to send a Sergeant with six Men to a House on the
side of a Wood, where he espied some of the Enemies; upon the Sergeants
approach to the place, about twenty of the Rebels appeared against him, but he
was quickly seconded by the Captain, who beat them over the Hill, and cleared
the Ground of as many as appeared without the Woods; and upon a Command sent to
him, brought off his Men in order. Thereafter all the Horse, Foot and Dragoons
retired to the Town: And that night the Horse and Dragoons Marched to Perth;
the Lord Cardross who Commanded them, having received two peremptory Orders for
that effect. The second was sent to him upon his answer to the first, by which
answer he told they were Engaged with the Enemy, and it was necessary he should
stay.

In that Action three of Captain Monro's Party were wounded, one of which died
of his Wounds. William Sandilands a Cadee, Nephew to the Lord Torphichen, and a
very young Youth, being of that Party, Discharged his Fusie upon the Enemy
eleven times. The Prisoners taken the next day, told that the Rebels lost about
thirty Men in that Action.

After the Horse and Dragoons were Marched, some of the Officers and Soldiers
of the Earl of Angus's Regiment proposed, that they might also March, seeing
they were in an open useless place, ill provided of all things, and in the
midst of Enemies, growing still to greater numbers (the Vanguard of Canons Army
having appeared before they came off the Field) The brave Lieutenant-Collonel,
and the rest of the Gentlemen Officers amongst them, used all Arguments of
Honor to persuade them to keep their Post: And for their encouragement, and to
assure them they would never leave them, they ordered to draw out all their
Horses, to be shot dead. The Soldiers then told them, they needed not that
Pledge for their Honor, which they never doubted: And seeing they found their
stay necessar, they would run all hazards with them.

Wednesday with the mornings light, the Rebels appeared, standing in order,
covering all the Hills about (for Canons Army joined the Athole men in the
night before, and they were repute in all above 5000 Men). Their Baggage
Marched along the Hills toward the West, and the way that leads into Athole,
consisting of a Train of many more than 1000 Horses. Before seven in the
morning, their Cannon advanced down to the face of a little Hill, closs upon
the Town, and 100 Men all Armed with Back, Breast, and Headpiece, Marched
straight to enter the Town, and a Battalion of other Foot closs with them; two
Troops of Horse Marched about the Town, and Posted on the South-west part of
it, betwixt the Foord of the River and the Church; and other two Troops Posted
in the North-east side of the Town, near the Cross, who in the time of the
Conflict showed much eagerness to encourage and push on the Foot.

The Lieutenant-Collonel had before possessed some Out-posts with small Parties,
to whom he pointed out every step for their Retreat. Captain William Hay and
Ensign Lockhart were Posted on a little Hill, and the Ensign was ordered with
28 Men to advance to a Stone Dyke at the foot of it, they were Attacked by the
Rebels, who were in Armor, and the foresaid other Battallion: And after they
had entertained them briskly with their fire, for a pretty space, the Rebels
forced the Dyke, and obliged them to retire, firing from one little Dyke to
another, and at length to betake themselves to the House and Yard-dykes: In
which Retreat Captain Hay had his Leg broken, and the whole Party came off
without any more hurt.

A Lieutenant was Posted at the East end of the Town with 18 Men, who had three
advanced Sentinels ordered, upon the Rebels closs approach, to fire and Retire,
which accordingly they did; And the Lieutenant, after burning of some Houses,
brought in his Party.

Lieutenant Stuart was placed in a Baricado at the Cross, with 20 Men, who
seeing the other Lieutenant retire, brought his Men from that Ground, and was
killed in the Retreat, there being a multitude of the Rebels upon them.

Lieutenant Forrester and Ensign Campbell were at the West end of the Town,
within some little Dykes, with 24 Men, who fired sharply upon the Enemies
Horse, until great numbers of Foot Attacked their Dykes, and forced them to the
Church, where were two Lieutenants, and about one hundred Men.

All the Out-posts being forced, the Rebels advanced most boldly upon the
Yard-dykes all round, even upon those Parts which stood within less than forty
paces from the River; where they crowded in Multitudes, without regard to the
shot liberally poured in their Faces; and struck with their Swords at the
Soldiers upon the Dyk, who with their Pikes and Halberts returned their Blows
with Interest: Others in great numbers possessed the Town-houses: out of which
they fired within the Dyks, as they did from the Hills about. And by two shots
at once, one through the Head, and another through the Liver, the brave
Lieutenant Colonel was killed; While he was Visiting and Exhorting the
Officers and Soldiers at their several Posts, He attempted to get into the
House, that the Soldiers might not be discouraged at the sight of his Dead
body; but fell by the way. And immediately thereafter, Major Henderson received
several Wounds, which altogether disabled him, and whereof he died four days
after. Captain Caldwal was shot in the Breast, and is not like to recover.
Captain Borthwick was shot through the Arm, going with succors to the Church:
And Captain Steil got a Wound in the Shoulder, which he caused Pance, and
returned again to his Post.

The Lieutenent Colonel being dead, and the Major disabled about an hour after
the Action began (which was before seven in the morning) The Command fell to
Captain Monro, who left his own Post to Lieutenent Stuart of Livingstoun. And
finding the Soldiers galled in several places by the Enemies Shot from the
Houses; He sent out small Parties of Pike-men with burning Faggots upon the
points of their Pikes, who fired the Houses: And where they found Keys in the
Doors, locked them and burnt all within: which raised a hideous noise from
these Wretches in the fire. There were sixteen of them burnt in one House, and
the whole Houses were burnt down, except three; wherein some of the Regiment
were advantageously posted. But all the Inhabitants of the Town, who were not
with the Enemy, or fled to the Fields, were received by the Soldiers into the
Church, and sheltered there.

Notwithstanding all the gallant Resistance which these furious Rebels met
with, they continued their Assaults uncessantly until past eleven of the Clock.
In all which time, there was continual thundering of Shot from both sides, with
Flames and Smoke, and hideous cries filling the Air. And which was very
Remarkable, though the Houses were burnt all round, yet the Smoke of them, and
all the Shot from both sides, was carried every where outward from the Dyks
upon the Assailants, as if a wind had blown every way from the Center within.

At length, the Rebels wearied with so many fruitless and expensive Assaults;
and finding no abatement of the Courage or Diligence of their Adversaries, who
treated them with continual Shot from all their Posts, they gave over, and fell
back, and run to the Hills in great Confusion. Whereupon they within beat their
Drums, and flourished their Colors, and Hollowed after them with all
Expressions of Contempt, and Provocations to return. Their Commanders assayed
to bring them back to a fresh Assault, as some Prisoners related, but could not
prevail; for they Answered them, they could fight against Men, but it was not
fit to fight any more against Devils.

The Rebels being quite gone, they within began to consider, where their
greatest Danger appeared in time of the Conflict, and surrendering these places
more secure, they brought out the Seats of the Church, with which they made
pretty good Defenses, especially they fortified these Places of the Dyk which
were made up with loose-stones, a poor Defense against such Desperate
Assailiants. They also cut down some Trees on a little Hill where the Enemy
galled them under covert. Their Powder was almost spent, and their Bullets had
been spent long before, which they supplied by the diligence of a good number
of Men, who were employed all the time of the Action, in cutting Lead off the
House, and melting the same in little Furrows in the Ground, and cutting the
Pieces into Sluggs to serve for Bullets. They agreed that in case the Enemy got
over their Dyks, they should retire to the House; and if they should find
themselves overpowered there, to burn it, and bury themselves in the Ashes.

In this Action, fifteen Men were killed, besides the Officers named, and 30
wounded.

The account of the Enemies loss is uncertain, but they are said to be above
three hundred slain, amongst whom were some Persons of Note.

That handful of unexperienced Men, was wonderfully animated to a steadfast
Resistance against a Multitude of obstinat Furies. But they gave the Glory to
God, and Praised Him, and sung Psalms, after they had fitted themselves for a
new Assault.

Amongst many who showed extraordinary Courage, some young Gentlemen Cadees
deserve a special Testimony and Remembrance, As William Sandilands above named,
James Pringle of Hultrie, William Stirling of Mallachen, James Johnstoun a
reformed Lieutenent, and others,

Diverse Officers besides those above specified, viz. Another Captain John
Campbel, Captain Haries, Lieutenent Henry Stuart, Lieutenent Charles Dalyel,
Lieutenent Oliphant, Lieutenant Thomas Haddo, Ensign William Hamilton, and most
of all the Officers behaved very worthily at their several Posts throughout the
whole Action, and deserve well to be Recorded as Men of Worth and Valor. And
the whole Soldiers did every thing with such undaunted Courage, and so little
concern in all the Dangers and Deaths, which surrounded them and stared the in
their Faces, that they deserve to be recommended as Examples of Valor to this
and after Ages, and to have some Marks of Honor fixed upon them. And it is
expected His Majesty will be graciously pleased to take Notice both of Officers
and Soldiers.

Upon the Saturday immediately after those Actions, the young Lord of Bellachan
came in to Dunkeld, to treat for the benefit of His Majesty's Indemnitie for
all those of Athole. And he Declared that Lord James Murray was willing to
accept thereof.

But Major General Mckay (Who by his gallant and wise Conduct, prevented the
conjunction of Ill-affected People, with the Rebels, and baffled all their
Designs upon the Low Countries) is now in the High-lands, with a brave Army.
And with the Blessing of GOD, will shortly give a good Account of them all, and
put an end to the Troubles of this Kingdom.

Edinburgh, Printed according to Order, 1689.


