An Exact RELATION of Routing the Irish Army under Sarsfield, and of the
Hostages agreed on, in order to a Capitulation for Surrender of Limerick into
Their Majesty's Hands.
ON Friday the second Instant, we had Letters of 22d September, from the Camp
before Limerick, with Advice, That on the Nineteenth the Great Cannon for
Battery having done their designed office, were ordered from off the Batteries
and carried down to be put on Board the Ships in the River, and Orders given to
the Commanders of all the whole Squadron, forthwith to destroy and bring off
all the Enemies Corn, Forage, Provisions, etc. which they could come at all
along the Shannon, on Clare side, in order to streighten the Town, which had
all its support from that County, and the County of Kerry; which latter,
Brigadier Leviston had already so reduced, that most of the considerable
Inhabitants had taken Protection from him, and but a few days before had routed
the main Body the Enemy had in that County, which consisted of two Regiments of
Horse, and of Foot and Rapparees, near Three thousand.

Things standing thus, a Council of War was called, and a Resolution taken to
pass over the Shannon, and reduce Clare, or fight Sarsfield. And pursuant
hereunto, the General disposed all things proper in the Camp.

And on Tuesday the Twenty second of September early in the Morning,
accompanied with the Prince of Wirtemburgh, the Prince of Hesse, General
Sravenmore, etc. with Ten Regiments of Foot, Fourteen Fieldpieces, Eight days
Subsistence, and all the Horse and Dragoons, (excepting Colonel Coys Regiment,
and Fifty from out each Regiment that marched) marched over the Bridge of
Pontoons into the said County of Clare. The Enemy during their March to the
said Bridge, not sparing their Cannon Ball.

The same Letters gave us an account, that the Town was extreme short of
Provisions, and could not subsist Ten days, and were much divided in their
Resolutions; as also that after the Defeat of their Four Regiments of Dragoons,
Commanded by Brigadeer Clifford a few days before, and Sarsfield Decamping
toward the Mountains with their whole Body. They were within for a Surrender,
and on the brink of Mutiny, of which advice being Convoyed to Sarsfield, he in
the Night threw himself into the Town with a great Body of Horse, some say
1500, designing to watch our drawing off, and to Sally upon our Rear.

The General left before the Town Major General Maccay, Major General Talmash,
and a sufficient strength to secure the Works and Trenches against all the
Force could come against them, and orders to continue (as they had done before)
night and day without intermission to Play upon the Town, which our Camp
expected would have made a vigorous Sally the 23 or 24th. but they had not the
Courage so to do, though reinforced by Sarsfield, of whose coming in we had no
intelligence.

On Sunday Morning October the fourth, an Eminent Citizen who has been very
happy and early in his Intelligence from Ireland, waited on Her Majesty with
Three Letters from persons of known Reputation and Integrity, which give the
following account, viz. That the General and Army marched up into the County of
Clare, to find out the Enemy, and on the 23 met with them, Commanded in Chief
by Dominick Sheldon, the Lord Galmoy and others, who took their March toward
Limerick; the General followed them hard, and on the 24 not far from Limerick,
fought and beat them killing 600 on the place, and took 300 prisoners, amongst
which are one Colonel, three Lieutenant Colonels, fifteen Majors, 22
Captains, and diverse Subaltern Officers.

The routed Enemy fled to Limerick over the Shannon-Bridge, and our Men pursued
them so close, that many went in with them; and had not the Governor shut
Thomond-Gate, our whole Army had fell in Pel-mel into the Town, and taken it by
Storm.

By the Governor's shutting the Gate, and drawing up the Bridge, many of the
Enemy were shut out, and left to the Mercy of our Men; which the Irish within
seeing, forced (as its thought) the Governor to hang out a White Flag.

And immediately a Sentinel was sent into our Camp to Major General Talmash, to
know on which side General Ginkle was, in order to a Capitulation; and
forthwith a Lieutenant-Collonel from our Camp, and a Lieutenant-Collonel from
our Governor, were sent on Clare side to the General, to acquaint him
therewith: who in a little time consented thereto; and the Hostages were agreed
on, viz. for the Town, Sarsfield and Wahoup; and for the General, the Prince of
Hesse, and Major General Scravenmore; who were immediately exchanged
accordingly.

So that we may reasonably believe, the next News from Ireland will be an
Express from the General, with the Articles and Day of Surrender: Which will
put an end to that War, and determine the many Wagers depending on
Michaelmas-Day; before which, or on that day, its thought the Capitulation will
put it into Their Majesty's Hands. Whom GOD grant long to Reign.

London: Printed for J. Smith, near Fleet-Bridge. 1691.


