An Exact JOURNAL OF THE ENGAGEMENT Between the English Fleet and the French
From May the 18th. to the 25th. 1692.
May 18. ABOUT nine a Clock this Morning, the Admiral, with the whole Fleet
weighed, being all at Anchor off Dunnose with the Wind at W. S. W. and S. W. by
W. stood over to the French Coast all night, etc.

May 19. This Morning at daylight, the Wind W. S. W. and W. by S. we
discovered the French Fleet a great way to Windward, signal was made for our
drawing into the Line of Battle, and about nine a Clock the French began to
bear down, Tourville himself, with a great deal of Bravery singled out our
Admiral; and was received with more than equal Courage: At Eleven, the French
being got pretty near, Tourville himself being brought to within less that
Musket Shot of Admiral Russel, which was admired in general both by the
English and Dutch, that the French Admiral, being so small a Fleet, should so
Resolutely attack outs, being so much Superior to his in number, for the French
Line spreading but little farther a Head or a Stern than the Red Squadron, we
could not well construe the meaning of their vigorously falling upon that
Squadron, the Dutch and the Blue having little or no share in the Fight, but in
less than a quarter of an Hours time there was nothing to be seen but a
Terrible Smoke and Fire that darkened all the Air, so that none could perceive
a Cables length from their Ships, which was accompanied with a continual
Thunder of Guns for four Hours, the Firing being smart on both sides, from
Eleven till Three; but the French Admiral finding the English too hot for him,
and his Main Top Sail Yard being Shot, about Five a clock he got his Main Tack
on Board, and it proving little Wind he towed off, and endeavored to get out
of the way and reach of our Mischievous English Guns: His Example was followed
by the rest of the French Fleet, but about Six or Seven of the Clock the Wind
shifted to the Eastward, they fell in amongst the Blue, some of which Squadron,
together with Sir Cloudsley Shovell, had a very hot dispute with them till near
Eleven a Clock, the French fighting their way through, and it being but little
Wind, we stood till night after them, and at Ten a Clock at night we saw some
Ships Blown up.

May 20. All last night we continued the Chase, and the Wind this Morning
having shifted to the Westward, the French were again got to the Windward, they
Plying and we after them; at Five in the Afternoon they Anchored, and we did
the same, Cape de Hogue bearing W. S. W. about seven Leagues distant, and a
prodigious strong Tide running at Eleven this Night, we weighed and plied to
Windward all night.

May 21. This Morning part of the French Fleet run in at the Race of Alderney,
the rest plying to Windward, and Anchored to the Westward of it. Sir John Ashby
and some of the English Windward, most Ships Anchored after the French; Admiral
Russell and the Fleet with him Cut, and followed some Ships of the French, that
drove out of the Race again, their Anchors not being able to bring them up
against so strong a Tide; the Admiral left Sir Ralph Delavall with some Ships,
to destroy part of the French Fleet that were run into Cherburg, whilst he
himself followed others into La Hogue.

May 22. Sir John Ashby, and the Ships with him, not being able to get up with
the Ships he chased, only one Fire Ship which was taken yesterday in the
Evening, the French having this Morning borne away among the Islands of
Alderney, Jersey and Guernsey, and the Rocks, Sir John and the rest bore away
to the Admiral and Sir Ralph, with the Fireships and Boats with him (having
first sent ashore a Flag of Truce to give the French warning, to take their Men
both Well and Wounded out of their Ships) burnt three of their Capital Ships,
one of them the Soleil Royal, the French refusing to take their Men ashore,
great part of them were Burnt and Blown up.

May 23. This Morning Sir John Ashby, Sir Ralph Delaval and the Dutch, Joined
the General and the Ships with him, who Anchored off La Hogue; and there all
the rest of the French Men of War that were drove out of the Race, were close
into the Shore, which the Admiral designed to Burn and Destroy, having ordered
Vice Admiral Rooke with a Detachment of some of the Third and Fourth Rates to
go in with six Fire ships, and all the Pinnaces and Long boats of the Fleet.
About Six a Clock they were got into the Shore, and our Ships Fired at their
Ships and Forts that were there, but could not get in; so the Boats attempted
to tow in the Fireships, but finding the business might be done without
burning the fire ships, the Boats only went in, and about Nine a Clock set on
Fire the first Ship, which was by it self, and set on Fire (...) Five more that
Night, which made the most extraordinary Bonfire that ever was seen, five of
them being three Decked Ships, and it being in the Night, was seen to all the
Advantage imaginable, the Smoke and Fire, together with the Guns Firing and
Ships Blowing up, being Prodigious: The Earl of Danby signalized himself by
going in the Headmost Boat, and going on Board three of their biggest Ships and
Burning them.

May 24. All this day the Boats continued to Burn the French Ships in the
Shore, and Burned Eight Men of War more, of which there were not above four
small Ships of Forty or Fifty Guns, all the rest of a Hundred or Eighty Guns,
besides a great many Merchant Ships and small Craft, and their Magazine of
Powder Blowing up a Shore. There never was so many fine Ships destroyed at one
time, nor so terrible a Light for People to behold on their own Coast: And
about Twelve a Clock at Noon, the Vice Admiral with all the Ships and Boats
came off again into the Fleet, having left all the Enemies Ships on a Flame,
and a great Army to be Spectators, there being drawn down about Thirty thousand
Men, Commanded by Belfont, King James being there to see all the Transactions.

In all we lost not one Man of War; some Fire ships were burned without doing
Execution, some by Accident; and we cannot find that any Officers are Killed
besides Rear-Admiral Carter and Colonel Hastings, Captain Graydon is said to be
Dead, but of that no Certainty.

The French have lost Gabaret their Admiral of the Blew, Ship and all in the
Fight Burned, and one Captain Decombe, who was Captain of the Illustrious, a
Ship of Seventy Guns Burnt: Tourville's Nephew is thought to be Killed also;
what Damage they immediately received in the Fight, is not as yet known: But
upon the whole matter, there never was so great a Victory obtained at Sea in so
short a time, and I hope it is a presage for a future Success.

May 25. This Morning the Wind at East and by South, and E. S. E. the Admiral
and the Fleet Sailed and Steered away N. E. by N. and N. by E. for England.

ADVERTISEMENT.
TRuth brought to Light: Or the History of the First 14 Years of King James I.
In Four Parts. I. The happy State of England at His Majesty's Entrance; The
Corruption of it afterward. With the Rise of particular Favorites, and the
Divisions between this and other States abroad. II. The Divorce betwixt the
Lady Frances Howard and Robert Earl of Essex, before the King's Delegates,
Authorized under the King's Broad Seal: As also the Arraignment of Sir Jer.
Ellis, Lieutenant of the Tower, etc. about the Murder of Sir Tho. Overbury,
with all Proceedings thereupon, and the King's Gracious Pardon and Favor to
the Countess. III. A Declaration of His Majesty's Revenue since he came to the
Crown of England; With the Annual Issues, Gifts, Pensions, and extraordinary
Disburstments. IV. The Commissions and Warrants for the burning of two
Heretics, newly revived, with two Pardons, one for Theophilus Higgins, the
other for Sir Eustace Heart. Sold by Richard Baldwin.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane,
1692.


