AN EXACT COPY OF THE PETITION OF THE Protestants in France To their Sovereign
LEWIS XIV. For Redress of their present Oppressions. Faithfully Translated from
the French.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1680:

A Petition presented to the King, by those of the Reformed Protestant Religion.
SIR,
YOur Subjects of the Reformed Religion throw themselves at Your Majesty's
Feet, with a profound Respect, to represent to Your Majesty the great Number of
Mischiefs that are heapt upon us from time to time, and to supplicate most
humbly, that Your Majesty will be pleased that we may find the Effects of Your
Justice and Goodness.

The Edicts of the Kings your Predecessors, and particularly those of Harry the
Great and Lewis the Just, which Your Majesty confirmed Authentickly at your
happy coming to the Crown; and after that by several other Declarations, have
had a special regard to those of the said Religion, as being such that make a
considerable part of the People which God has submitted to your Power. As such
they were not only admitted into Employments, to practice Arts and follow
Trades, without which your Subjects are not able to gain their Livelyhoods, but
also to Charges and Honors, which are the Recompense of Merit and Virtue. They
had, together with the Liberty of their Consciences, the free Exercises of
their Religion and Church Discipline in all places allotted by the same Edicts.
Besides these, Commissioners were authorized to hinder all Obstructions that
might impead the same.

There were Chambers set apart, to the end that those of the Religion might
assure themselves of impartial Justice, as well in reference to their Persons
as Estates. The Gentlemen particularly had Right and Possession, to put
Officers whether of the one or the other Religion into their Fees. In short,
Your Majesty's Suppliants enjoyed to all intents and purposes almost the same
Happinesses and the same Advantages as the rest of Your Majesty's Subjects.

It is true, Sir, That they were the Concessions of the Kings your
Predecessors, and of Your Majesty it self; but such Concessions as were
established by the tenor of the same Edicts, and rendered as a perpetual and
irrevocable Law to keep Your Majesty's Subjects, both of the one and the other
Religion in a firm and lasting Amity. Your Majesty's Subjects may say, That
they have always lived under the Laws of those Concessions, and that they never
had the misfortune to render themselves unworthy of that Favor. On the other
side they have had this advantage, that Your Majesty has been most graciously
pleased, to make a public and solemn Declaration of the entire Satisfaction
which Your Majesty has received from the Zeal and Loyalty, which your
Suppliants have always made appear in times of greatest jeopardy and hazard.
Notwithstanding, Sir, not to look back toward times far remote, how much is the
present Condition of your Suppliants different from that wherein they were
established some years since.

They are not only no longer admitted to public Charges and Employments, as
they were before, but deprived of those wherein they were invested, and wherein
they had served with Honor and Reputation.

They have taken from us the Party-Authority, and the Municipal Employments in
those Cities where your Suppliants are most numerous, and where they have the
most Interest, in Political Administration, and in the Management of that Money
which is imposed upon them.

They are no longer admitted to the meanest public Employments in diverse
places, nor to the practice of Arts, nor the profession of Trades, which are
the only means of their Subsistence.

They can reckon near 300 Churches that have been ordered to be pulled down in
less than ten years, some of which were expressly named in the Edict of Nantes,
or at least comprehended in the tenor of the same Edict.

The Commissioners, who are always ready to hear the pretended Controversies
and Disputes which are imputed to your Supplyants, refuse to take Cognizance of
those of which your Suppliants complain; or if they do, they never pronounce
Judgment, but such as tend to partiality.

Many times the Catholic Commissioners give judgment against your Supplyants,
without advising or consulting the Commissioners of your Supplyants Religion.

They who cannot find Repose of Conscience without the Limits of their
Religion, after they have first quitted it, and would return again, are exposed
at present to the most Rigorous punishments, under the notion of a Relapse,
being farther Menaced, That their Ministers and Consistories shall be suppressed,
which is sometimes actually performed.

If others have a desire to go from the Catholic, to the Reformed Religion,
they disturb those of the Reformed Religion, who make their Addresses for the
satisfaction of these Scruples, or for a Declaration of their Faith, and
pretend it to be an effect of Subornation.

The Chambers of Edict are not only Incorporated into the Parliaments, as it
was the Sense of the Edict that they might be, but wholly extinguished and
suppressed.

In short, it is come to this, That your Supplyants Children, though born in
the Reformed Religion, are taken from their Parents, before they have attained
the Age agreed on and consented to in the said Edicts, for them to choose their
Religion.

If upon this they make their applications to your Majesty's Intendants, as
charged with the Execution of the said Edicts, either they refuse to take
Cognizance of the same, or else they Ellude, as for many years they have done,
all the Complaints which we bring before them.

They would reduce those of the Reformed Religion, to have no more then one
School, where there are about two or three Thousand Children, as if one Master
were sufficient to teach so many Children.

There is a Declaration come to your Supplyants hands, which informs them of a
Change intended of altering the form of holding their Synods by the
intermixture of Catholic Commissioners, which is altogether contrary to the
Tenor of the Edicts, and the Declaration of Lewis the Thirteenth, in the year
1633, and the Custom always observed. And all this under pretenses quite
contrary to the Honor and Reputation of your Supplyants, and the Fidelity they
have always manifested for your Majesty's Service.

The Bishops under pretense of their Visits, by a Decree of your Council,
assume to themselves to hinder the Exercise of our Religion several weeks
together.

The Catholic Ecclesiastics going to the Reformed Churches to hear their
Sermons, lay to the charge of our Ministers those things which they never said;
or else take occasions from Scholastical Terms of Theology, which cannot be
avoided in Controversy, to prosecute us Criminally, before Judges incensed
against our Religion, while the same persons forbear not to make use against
your Supplyants, of Terms positively forbid by the said Edicts.

The Chief Judges of places to whom it never belonged to take Cognizance of the
said Edicts, assume to themselves a power, by ways of proceeding unheard of, to
interdict and silence the Ministers of whole Provinces. At length it is come to
this, that they have Published a Declaration, by which it is forbidden, That
the Wives of those of the Reformed Religion, shall make use of any other than
Roman Catholic Chyrurgeons, or Midwives, which is directly contrary to the
Tenor of the said Edicts, and the principles of your Supplyants Religion. It
being impossible that their Consciences should allow them to submit to the
Roman Catholic Custom, in reference to Roman Catholic Infants; in regard
that on the one side, they do not believe Baptism to be absolutely necessary,
when death prevents the care of them that are obliged to procure it; And on the
other side likewise believe, That so great a Sacrament cannot be performed by
Lay-persons; and that Dipping cannot supply the place of Baptism. All these,
Sir, and many more considerable things, which would be too long to recount, and
too tedious for your Majesty's perusal, are either publicly known, or to be
justified by such proofs, as are in your Majesty's Supplyants hands; as also by
Judgments already given, and by public Acts and Declarations in print.

All the world that sees to what a low condition your Supplyants are reduced,
begins to look upon them, as if they were abandoned to the prosecution and
hatred of those that only seek their Ruin; they can add nothing more to the
general Consternation, wherein all they of the said Reformed Religion are in
all parts of the Kingdom. Some have already left their Habitation, either out
of fear of Necessity, to seek their Repose or Quiet in Foreign Countries, the
greater number are detained by that Love and Duty which they owe your Majesty,
and perhaps some out of reluctance to leave their Estates, and the Land of the
their Nativity. However, all of us, Sir, next to God, expect no other safety or
repose, but from the Justice and Clemency of your Majesty. You have always
allowed us your grace and favor to have access to your Sacred person, and a
tenderness to hear our Complaints. You have also nominated Commissioners to
examine them more particularly, and to make their Report; but the Wars wherein
your Majesty has been engaged, having taken up your time abroad, the Evils and
grievances of your Supplyants have been still multiplied and increast. Now
(Sir) that your Majesty enjoys the Splendor of a Success that has favored all
your Designs, and that all your people expect to reap the fruit of your Royal
Labors, your Supplyants also hope, That your Majesty's Justice and Bounty will
not now forsake them; and that you will be pleased not to make a distinction,
between your Majesty's Supplyants and the rest of your Subjects, or be the
occasion, that while the one are in full joy and prosperity, the other should
be in continual Mourning and Lamentation.

For these Reasons, Sir, and for that always your Supplyants have had the same
zeal and Loyalty for your Service, May it please your Majesty to be so
gracious, at to express your Majesty's Declaration to the Lords of the Council,
to your Presidents, Procters general of your Parliaments, and your Intendants
and Commissioners appointed for the execution of the Law; your other
Magistrates and Officers, that it is your Majesty's Royal Intention, that the
said Edicts be Observed and Executed, and to order the Commissioners nominated
by your Majesty, or such as your Majesty shall be pleased to appoint, to
examine the Memoirs and justifications of your Supplyants, and to make Report
thereof to your Majesty; particularly to your Majesty's Secretaries of State,
to make immediate Report of those who are under oppression, and whose
Sufferings are most grievous; to the end there may be a Remedy applied
according to your Majesty's good will and pleasure, and your Supplyants shall
always continue their Wishes and their Prayers, for the prosperity of your
Sacred person and your Reign.

FINIS.

