AN EXACT RELATION OF THE Barbarous Murder COMMITTED ON LAWRENCE CORDDEL A
Butcher, who was Buried alive At Christ-Church, on Friday last being the 21 of
June, With lamentable Screeks, groans and horrid cries, made by him in his
Grave on Sunday night, and the sad, wounded and mortyfy'd condition he was
taken up in on Monday, June 24.

Also the Examination and Confession of His Landlord and Land-Lady ( William
Cook and his Wife, at Pill-cock-Lane in Newgate-Market) before the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor of LONDON, by whom they were both Committed to
NEWGATE-

LONDON, Printed for J. Jones, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange ^n
Cornhill, 1661.

A TRUE RELATION OF A Bu^cher in Pilcock-lane, who was buried alive on Friday
last, at Christ-Church, being the 21 of June 1661.
The forwardness of people in these days (by their Coveousness; does, and has
oftentimes caused the untimely end of many, who doubtless might upon due and
seasonable time of funeral, have outlived those who have been the cause of
their untimely end, as might have been seen to appear in him who we are here to
treat of, had not his Landlady obstructed it by her greedy desire of gain by
his untimely and much to be lamented burial.

The truth of this horrid act was in brief as follows, viz.

That the person that was thus inhumanly dealt of was by name Lawrence
Corddial, by Trade a Butcher of London, employed at several Slaughter-houses
both at Smithfield Bars, and also in the Shambles, and by report a man that
has had many fits of the Falling Sickness, which he has been trobled several
years.

Upon Thuysday last being the 21 of this present month, he being late out, at
length came home full of drink to his Lodging which was at one William Cook's
house a Chandler in Pill-cock Lane, near adjacent to the Shambles at Newgate
Market, and there was entertained very jocundly by Jezebel his fat Landlady;
who to raise her one stock by the sins of the people was always willing to keep
her tap going to any such noble Customers as he, who was easily persuaded to
spend all in her service.

But when he had received as much of the creature, nay none then he could well
bear, he took his way to bed, yet in such a condition that he was unable to
help himself, for he could not make himself unready, but when one Stocking was
off, he could not pull off the other, so he was fain to ly in it all night.

On Friday Morning Mris Impudence his fat Land-lady, not finding him up to give
her a mornings draught, was inquisitive to know where he was, and going to his
chamber he seemed to be dead, but yet withal somewhat warm, yet she strongly
reported that he had no life in him, (which doubtless was her desire) to effect
which she bought a Coffin, for which she was well paid with the money he left;
nevertheless to blind the world she sold his cloths the very same Friday.

This being done the Searchers came to see the Corpse, and feeling him warm
said, There is life in him yet, therefore we wish you to forbear the buirl of
him for the present. So did the poor honest man her husband desire her, That
she would not bury him so soon b^^ let him ly till next day.

All this would not prevail with her, for she ^old him, that her neighbors
advised her otherwise, therefore she would bury him out of hand.

Thus having the better of him by wearing the B^iches, she like a Mr. of
Mis-rule invited whom she ^eas^d to the b^ryal, which was in the afternoon
performed with what se^^esie she possibly could, neither of his Sister^ being
invited (...) it, or any friend of his whatsoever so much as acquainted
therewith till the Sunday at night following, that they heard of it by the
report of the people that heard the rumor about it in Christ-Church.

Thus this wicked piece of Moatality thought to have smothered this her wicked
enterprise. But yet the crying sin of blood could not be hid, though it lay
obscure all the Saturday following; for upon Sunday the three and twentieth
instant, several people coming from Christ-Church toward the place of Burial,
they heard a sad noise as it were the groanings of a dying man, about the place
where the said Lawrence Corddel was buried, upon which the multitude increased,
several people approaching to the place, to hear this doleful sound.

The people listening diligently heard lamentable Screeks, sad cries and a
rumbling noise, and after inquiry who was buried there, it was declared to be
the Butcher that lay at Mr. Cooks in Pil cock Lane.

Whereupon night drawing on the multitude decreased, but some of them spoke to
the Sexton to dig up the Grave, but he told them he could not without order,
wherefore they all went home for that night, by this means his sisters came to
understand the sad and lamentable suffering of their brother, who lay in this
miserable torture till the next Morning to the great grief of them, and the
wonderful amazement of some who lived near the Churchyard, to whose restless
ears the sad groans of their poor brother did ascend that night.

Yesterday being Monday several persons living about Christ Church, gave
further information that they heard (in the night sea^^^g several groans and
lamentable screeks, making great complaint that he was not taken up that he
might if poss^ble be preserved.

Whereupon order being given for opening the grave, one George Day the
grave-maker at St. Gile^es Cripplegate, did with much d^ligence (by the
assistance of some othe^s) take up the Corpse, and laid it ready for the view of
the Crowners many hundreds of people flocking thither to see the same, which
indeed was a sad and lamentable spectacle to the eye of each Spectator.

For in the grave he had so mo^tified himself that hardly a place was free in
his body from bruises, his head wounded, his Face beaten flat, his Arms,
bruised, his belly, back sides and Legs and feet were sad to behold for any
one that had but the lest spark of Christianity.

The horrioness of this inhumane burial being taken into consideration,
Messengers were sent to Pil-cock lane, who were not backward in a work of so
high conce^nment, but did with all expedition hasten thither, and seized on his
barbarous ^and-lady, who with Mr. Cook her husband was brought before the Lord
Mayor, and being examined why he buried him so soon, he answered, That he would
not have had his wife bury him till Saturday, but she would be Master whether
he would or no. And after examination their Mittimus was made, and immediately
they were conveyed by the Officers to Newgate, upon suspicion of murdering
the said Butcher.

In which place she is to continue till the next Sessions, at which time if she
do not give a better account then she has done, no doubt but justice will be
inflicted according to her deserts.

The house he lay in has an ill report amongst neighbors, it being a place
frequented by many persons of little or no credit, and a house of ill Orders
and ill hours, which adds somewhat more to this horrid act.

This is a true account of the barbarous and inhumane burial of this poor man
whose horrid murder cried aloud for vengeance, and may well be a warning to
all covetous minded muck-worms, that they be careful hereafter how they ever
hereafter have a hand in the death of any such person, by putting them in the
ground so soon after their departure; for nothing can be so secretly done, but
their is an omnipotent power that will make it known, though by such means as
cannot be imagined by us poor mortals. The sin of blood being a crying sin,
that will surely be repaid, and fall heavy on the heads of those that shall
conceal such horrid cruelties.

Therefore it behooves all men to be careful how they are mastered ^y their
wives, and are silent in such cruelties, least they suffer for their inhumane
practices, from doing which the Lord oeliver all good Christians.

FINIS

