AN EXAMEN Of the WAY OF Teaching the Latin Tongue TO Little Children, BY Use
alone.

Englished out of FRENCH.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for J. Martyn Printer to the R. Society, at the Bell
without Temp'e-Bar, 1669.

AN EXAMEN Of the Way of Teaching the Latin Tongue to Little Children, by Use
alone.
CHAP. I. The Occasion of this Writing.
It Is some Months since, that there was much discourse at Paris about a young
Child, knowing no other Language, but Latin, and using the same as other
Infants do their Mother-tong. A person of quality having made mention of it to
the King, his Majesty would see it; and thereupon it was seen by all the Court.
Every body discoursed of the confidence of the Child, of the pretty things it
spoke and of its manner of speaking them. I have seen it twice, and entertained
it well nigh three hours, and must confess, it surprised me, notwithstanding
all I had heard said of it before, to its advantage.

This Child had not yet four years. I found it very cheerful, active and
confident; and withal observed judgment and a good nature in all it did. I
spoke to it of many things, which was impossible, it could foresee. It
understood very well all I said to it, and answered me with such frankness,
that whatsoever I may speak of it, I shall never make it appear so much, as
it is. I have not heard it speak one word, which was not proper; and it has
even the dexterity to vary the expressions, when it is obliged to say often the
same thing. It commits no fault in the Inflexions, and is not only exact in
what it speaks, but with a strange quickness takes up and corrects those, that
speak not right. Some body having asked it, Vbi ibis a prandio; it rectified
him, saying, Quo ibis? An other saying, Conscendere in equo, he reply'd' Equum
conscendere. Another using the word Agaso, to signify a Groom of the Stable,
this Child at first perceived not this impropriety; but one of them, that were
present giving it to understand, that they were speaking of a man that leads a
horse, he suggested the word Equiso to him that had committed this fault. Which
few Instances may show, what exactness it observes in Words. Instances also
might be given for a mark of its Judgment in such particulars, as occurred
where it was, if we were not to Judge of the Education of a Child, rather by
the connection and sequel of all its words, than by certain particular
occurrences; there being almost no Child, which occasionally will not say
something or other, which is surprising.

Every body will easily guess, that this Child can never have had other Rules
for its language, than Use and Conversation. The Father thereof was happy in
finding two friends honest and able, who asked it of him upon its being weaned.
It Is manifest, that they have omitted nothing that might serve either for
giving it the purity of the Language, or for possessing it with good Manners;
and that their chief care and industry, to render the Child what it is,
consisted, as for Manners, in speaking all things to it with discretion, in
removing it from all evil Examples, and in presenting to it nothing but what
was harmless and honest; and what concerned the Language, in using none but
proper and fit words, and in reprehending in its presence those, that spoke
false. This is the reflection, which a very Wise and very Virtuous Princess
made upon this Child, after she had seen it above an hour converse with a
Person of quality; adding, That, how advantageous soever the way of teaching a
Language (which is left no where but in Books) might seem to her, yet she was
far more surprised at the Openness of the understanding of this Child, than
its Ability in speaking this Language; although she believed, that the way,
wherein it had been taught, had much contributed to make it so rational and so
well disposed, as it was.

Now the success of this Education, the Importance of Learning Arts and
Sciences, wherewith the Latin Tongue is so much linked, and the extreme
difficulty there is in the Common ways of learning it, have ministered unto me
some thoughts and considerations, which I judged were not amiss to be put in
writing; although I think not, I shall persuade all, that shall take the pains
of reading them; and although I also know, that many of those, who shall have
the same thoughts with me, shall not be in a condition to put them in execution
and practice, for want either of a subject, or of persons capable to make such
an attempt succesfull.

CHAP. II. That this way of Teaching languages is very Ancient, and infallible.
IN the mean time, there is nothing more Natural, nor more Infallible, than
this success; and I wonder less, that the Masters of this Child resolved to
instruct it after this manner, than that all the world does not the like. For
first, no man is ignorant, that since the beginning of the World unto this day
every one has learnt his Mother-tong without Rules, and spoken it better, than
any other. Secondly, as to foreign Languages, all know likewise, that the
shortest, surest and easiest means of learning them, is, to go into the
Contry's, where they are Vulgar, where Rules are needless to learn them.
Thidly, it is also known, that Montagne learnt the Latin tongue from the
Breast; which way of learning it succeeded so well, that this Example alone was
sufficient to encourage the attempt of those, whom we now speak of.

There is therefore no reason at all to wonder either at the undertaking, or
the success. Mean while it is Just, to give them, in both, the honor due unto
them. First, though the Way proposed be Infallible, yet it is certain, that
there are not many persons fit to accomplish so readily and so fully, what they
have done. And I cannot say, that the meeting with a child of good natural
parts has much helped them. For, besides that Children, whether they be
sprightly or no, learn almost equally well their Mother-tong, it appears not,
that this Child, we speak of, had any advantage of that nature above many
others. Me thinks, I observe nothing more in him, than a habit of reasoning,
and a certain docibleness, which seems to proceed from nothing else, than from
the manner, which those that have taught him, lived and conversed with him in.
And I am confirmed in this thought by the Example of two other Children very
young, that are entered into the same conduct, and that have almost nothing
Childish in them, but the Motions and gayness, which are inseparable from that
age, and which are so necessary for it.

Secondly, the Example of Montagne did not much remove the doubts, which might
rationally occur in this matter. We know nothing of it, but what himself says
of it; and it might be doubted, Whether the Essay, that was made of this method
upon his person had all the success, he relates; this Author having with the
qualities, that render him esteemed, the ill repute of setting too high a prize
on those things, that were advantageous to him, or which he believed to be
such. It might also be doubted, Whether the thing would succeed in so populous
a city, as Paris, and with persons not lodging alone, and not being masters of
those, they lodge with; it having succeeded in the solitudes of Perigort, and
in a Castle, where all obeyed Montagne's Father, who had imposed silence to all
that were about his son, those excepted, that could speak Latin to him.

Lastly, it might be feared, that either the thing would not succeed, or it
would be requisite to maintain a number of good Latinists about this Child, as
the Father of Montagne had done about his Son, which would have caused great
expenses.

It is easy, to satisfy all these doubts after the Event; but it was not so
easy to foresee it, and yet less easy, well to manage such a design. When
one sees things done, they are not found difficult, and often they are found
the more easy and the more natural, the more pains they have cost to do them.
Nothing appears more easy to invent, than Printing and the Sea-compass, and
nothing more obvious, than to discover the Circulation of the Blood. The
Principles of it have been known more than 1800 years ago. There wanted
nothing, but to make deductions. And yet the World has been, as 'twere, asleep
until these later times, in things of that importance, which now appear so
clear and easy, that it seems not credible, either that they should not have
been understood, or that there should have interposed the least difficulty in
putting them in execution. But we do not therefore esteem those the less, that
have showed them us; for, either we must universally disesteem all men, that
have been before us, for not having found those things, which presented
themselves to them as 'twere of their own accord; or we are highly to esteem
those, who had the Wit and Judgment to see those consequences, which so many
men had not perceived for so many Ages.

I think, I do not use too much exaggeration, when I compare this manner of
teaching Infants Latin with the Invention of Printing and the Sea-Compass, and
to the Discovery of the Bloods Circulation; and possibly those, that shall read
this, will Judge of it as I do, when they shall have considered; first, How
important it is to know the Latin tongue. Secondly, The advantages, that
occur in this manner of teaching it, to know it well. Thirdly, The
consequences of those advantages.

CHAP. III. The importance of the Latin Tongue.
It Is needless, to insist much upon the showing the Importance of the Latin
Tongue. It Is known to all, that there is no public Profession of any science
to be made (the Mathematics perhaps excepted) without knowing that Tongue. Not
that it is absolutely necessary for the Learning of any of the humane sciences;
but that it is an established Custom, to examine and to exercise in Latin, as
well those that are to be admitted to the practice of the Law and Physic, as
those, that are to be received into Ecclesiastical Functions. It Is also
obvious, how useful it is to know that Tongue, not only to be able to read
profane Authors in their own language, but also to understand the Vulgar Latin
Translation of the Bible, and the Latin Fathers: That it is also little less
than absolutely necessary, not only to understand it, but also to write and
speak it, if you will have any correspondence with the more Northern Nations,
either in affairs of State, or in matter of Learning and Sciences: That it
renders very easy to us the understanding of Spanish and Jtalian: Lastly, That
a man can scarce pass for an Able man, except he understand Latin, Custom here
carrying it from Reason; though one may know it without being an Able man, and
become very knowing and very able without understanding it.

Although the greatest part of the World think not on all these reasons, it is
obvious that most are persuaded (I know not How) of the necessity of knowing
the Latin Tongue, forasmuch as their Children are subjected to incredible pains
to learn it, and since also one of the most cosiderable parts of our life is
sacrificed thereto. In the mean time this is clear, That what use soever may be
made of the knowledge of this Tongue, yet that were to be esteemed very
inconsiderable, if it should take us off from the knowledge of Things.

CHAP. IV. An Examen of the Common way of Teaching Latin.
IT is therefore strange enough, that commonly for the Teaching of Latin (which
may be called the Language of the Learned) there is used such a way, of which
the most considerable effect is, to put most men out of the way to become
Learned, and to bring it to pass, That they know a few things very late and
very imperfectly. And these inconveniences are the more intolerable, that that
Conduct, after it has needlessly engaged us to prefer the knowledge of Words'
to that of Things (which is a great Evil) does not conduce to teach us even
that Language, which we have sacrificed all unto. Above all things, it being
most easy, to re-establish an Ancient tried way, which is infallible easy,
short, and as commodious for the knowledge of Things, as advantageous for the
knowledge of Words.

And yet this is very near, what happens in the Ordinary method of Teaching
Latin to Children. All which will appear by what follows. But I believe, that
all those, who shall read this Tract, do acknowledge beforehand, that one
cannot show the advantages of our way of Teaching generally all Tongues, and
particularly the Latin, by Use, but by opposing it to the defectiveness of the
Rules, that constitute the Ordinary Method; And I hope, they will in the
sequel easily distinguish those defects that cannot be avoided, from such, as
may, without changing altogether the common road; and that they will soon find,
that whatever care be taken to better it, it will never so be advantageous as
this, which we recommend; as also that it would not be impossible to render
this as Universal and as Public, as that, which has been hitherto received
and practiced, at least for the Rich and Great, and perhaps for persons also of
a mean Condition.

They commonly put their Children into the College at the age of 6. or 7.
years, and keep them there till 17. or 18. One forgets easily enough pains that
are passed, but those that have been endured all that time, are so long and so
irksome, that with very little thinking they may easily be remembered. I speak
not of Children untowardly born; I speak of those, that have a mind to learn,
and are naturally disposed thereunto: What trouble and vexation must they
undergo, to distinguish all the parts of a discourse; to learn all the
inflections or Accidents thereof; to connect them for good sense; to know all
their respects and dependences; to learn words; to distinguish all their
significations and proprieties; to apprehend the order they are to keep to one
another etc? All these things are certainly very difficult in themselves, and
are the more so to Children, in that they less comprehend what it means, that
they are taken all at once from the Commerce of the World to speak a language
to them, they understand not, which they think they need not, and which affords
them no pleasure at all, but rather deprives them of al their divertisements,
gives them much trouble, and draws on them all the little punishments, and
tedious treatments which they cannot be exempted from, how much soever you be
inclined to educate them with ingenuity and gentleness. When a Child is punished
for having beaten another, for lying, stealing, etc. it understands well
enough, that it has done ill; and though it should not know it, yet it sees
that in those things there is equal Justice done to all children, they passing
every where for faults which deserve punishment: But it would be pretty
difficult, to give to a little child a reason, natural enough, of the evil it
has done, and of the punishment it has deserved for having mis-construed an
Adjective with a Substantive, and why we exact that of him, which we require
not from so many other Children, who do no more than to read, write and speak
their Language, without being obliged to take notice either of Declensions, or
Conjugations, or Syntax, or Heteroclites, nor any of all those perplexities of
Tenses, Cases, Persons, Articles, and Constructions. It Is notorious, how great
an aversion we naturally have from all what is constrained, and how sure a
means it is to hinder Children from doing a thing, to command them to do it,
though even that, which they are commanded, should be agreeable to them. And
thence it is easy to guess, what aversion they naturally conceive for a thing
painful in it self, wherein it seems, that we command them only to command
them. And the whole sequel of their Studies may appear, as if we would make
them believe, we took a kind of pleasure in tormenting them, or at least that
we indulged them not enough, since, besides the difficulties which seem
unavoidable, we also engage them in such, as might be avoided; as some Persons
very able and very well versed in the Art of Teaching Children have showed,
both by their Writings, and by the Tayals they have made.

In those Writings it has been made appear, first, Of what importance it would
be, to give (for example) in French the Rules of the Latin Tongue, that are
given in Latin. Secondly, How much more advantageous it would be, to make
Children read Authors as soon as they have learnt the more general Rules of the
Grammar, and not to oblige them to translate French into Latin, but when they
shall have known, by the reading of Authors, the propriety of the words, their
order and dependences. We shall not repeat here, what may be seen in those
Writings; but it is easy to infer from what is there laid down (which
experience confirms every day) that it is almost impossible, that a young man,
educated after that manner, entering into Rhetoric, can therein produce any
thing but what is very mediocre, since it is impossible to write well in a
Language, which one understands not well, and well to understand a dead Tongue,
but by a long use of Authors; and that the Scholars, who are taught it, have
almost read nothing of Authors in the other Forms. Thus they commonly spend two
years in that Form in composing a Language they understand nor. It Is true,
that then it is endeavored to make them understand it by Reading; but it is too
late, to make them begin what they should have done before they undertook any
composition. Thus all, they can have profited at the end of those two years,
is, to have got by their Reading some relish for the Latin Tongue, yet without
any readiness either to express themselves therein in familiar conversation, or
to write of any considerable matter in the same; which two things are of a more
important, more frequent and more universal Use, than those Themes in the Air,
which are given them to dilate upon, teaching them to say that in many pages,
which they might say in few lines.

It is needless to add here the disadvantage, there is in all this as to
Rhetoric; it is sufficient to take notice, that none but a very inconsiderable
progress can be made in the Latin Tongue the Old way. And yet that is all the
fruit of C. or. 7. years: In regard of which slender proficiency, it would be
the more proper not to expose a young habit, which has cost so much, and is
yet so feeble, to so many things, that may weaken it. But yet this is that,
which is done: to which two faults may be joined a third, perhaps the most
considerable; viz. That Children are made to pass from Rhetoric to Philosophy.
There they remain two years; during which time they are spoken to and are made
to speak in a Language, that is neither French nor Latin. There is almost no
Latin in it, but the Terminations of words: certainly you can find nothing of
true Latinity there. I see nothing more capable to make them forget Latin, than
this Philosophical Latin; and I am persuaded, that it makes them lose more the
true gust of it, than the Tongue, of all others most remote from Latin. And yet
it would be very easy to teach them the same things in the true purity of that
Tongue. There is nothing more accurate nor more acute in all Logic, than in
the Academick Questions of Cicero; there is nothing greater nor sublimer in the
Morals, than in the Entertainments of Tusculum, in the Books of Good and Ill,
and in those of the Duties of the Civil Life: There is nothing more exact in
Natural Philosophy, than in the Books of the Nature of the Gods, and the
Fragment of the Traduction of Timeus by the same Author. In a word, I am
persuaded, that if one had a mind to copy with attention those Originals, one
might find matter and form to frame thence a very dogmatical, very clear, and
very Latin Philosophy.

It is now easy to conclude from all that has been said, that one learns in
the common Schools very little Latin with great pain and with great expense of
time: To which may be added, That children forget the best part of what they
knew before they entered them, which is, their own Mother Tongue and the Writing
thereof, and that they fail to learn what they might have learnt all that
time, they have bestowed upon a little Latin.

If now we shall put it into the balance, on one side, the little that is
gained, the much that is lost, and that might also have been acquired; and on
the other side, the Uses, that one may propose to one's self in the Learning of
that Language, I do not doubt but it will appear too costly at that rate, and
that all will acknowledge, it were better for the greatest number of those, who
learn it, not to know it at all, than to know it, ever perfectly, at that price
and on those conditions, which have been discoursed of.

It Is true, that one might learn it by Rules with more ease, in less time, and
more perfectly; first, by giveing the Rules (e. g.) in French, and in a smaller
number: secondly, by making the Learners to translate out of Latin into French,
and not out of French into Latin, but after a long use of Latin Authors:
thirdly, in delivering unto them in true Latin whatever appertains to
Philosophy. But I do not think, that by those things you shall ever equal the
shortness, nor the easiness, nor the perfection, which proceed from Use and
Converse alone.

CHAP. V. An Examen of the Way here proposed.
TO be persuaded of the fitness thereof, we need no more but consider the
Conduct, that has been used in the Teaching of this Infant, as I have
collected it from the several Conferences, had by me with its Masters, and as
it is to be observed hereafter.

The Child was but twenty and two Months of Age, when they undertook it, upon
its being weaned from the breast. They need not be taken in hand younger. It is
advisable to stay, till their health be somewhat confirmed in the Change of
Diet; you may therefore stay till they have 25. or 26 Months. It Is not
material, if they have learnt of their Nurses some words of their
Mother Tongue; that will be soon forgot, as Experience shows.

Those, that have bred up this Infant, were very ready to undertake afterward
two others, the one of which had 31. Months, and spoke many words of our
Language; but they both forgot all they knew of it, within 2. or 3. weeks. I
have seen the first, who in a Months time had learnt so much Latin, as he had
known French; and I saw also the other, who in 5. weeks had learnt to speak
much more Latin, than before he could say words in his Mother Tongue. There is
always with them one of their Masters, and the biggest of the three Children
serves in a manner for a third Master to the other two. The Servants, that take
care of them, know so much Latin, as needs to speak to them, and to correct
them, when they speak amiss in familiar matters. The first of them has been
thus brought up till he was 4. years of age; and his Masters now begin to put
him to learn French; therein following the Conduct of Quintilian, who was not
for being superstitiously tied from teaching Children for a long time no other
Tongue but the Greek, but advised, that the learning of the Latin should soon
follow after, and so both Languages be cultivated together.

This cannot want good success. Nor is it to be feared, that the two Languages
will be confounded, since, besides the Example of the Romans, who observed that
practice, we have also that of some modern Nations, that are not reputed to
have more wit, than We; among whom Children learn at the same time, at least
two Languages very different: As the Children of Constantinople, who learn the
vulgar Greek and Turkish; and those of the Suisses of Newcastel and almost all
Flemmings, who, besides the Dutch and French, learn very often the Spanish and
Latin too.

This Consideration may put us upon the thoughts to teach Latin after this way
not only such Children as know not yet any Language, but also those, that do
already speak their Mother-tong, viz. by putting them among those, who speak
nothing but Latin; if there were not some danger of confounding and retarding
those, who are yet weak in this Language. But this Confusion may be prevented;
first, by forbidding those Children, that are already capable of reason, to
speak their Mother-tong in the present of the other lesser children allowing
certain hours for entertaining them in their Mother-tong. Secondly, by taking
of those Children, able to speak their Mother Tongue, but one at a time, that
so the inability, which shall be in all the rest, of answering him, when he
shall speak to them in his Language, may oblige him to strive to speak to them
in theirs; with the reserve of giveing him a Companion, when he shall have
gained an equal habit in both Tongues. And as those, that know nothing but
their Mother Tongue, shall have been taught by the Conversation of those, who
speak nothing but Latin; so might also such, as know nothing but Latin, be
instructed by the Conversation of those, that know their Mother-tong;
distinguishing the hours, when it should be permitted to speak the
Mother Tongue, from those, when it should be allowed to speak Latin.

And this might be carried so far, as to make even persons advanced in Age
capable to learn the Latin Tongue: which might be done by putting together many
Men able in that Language, who should make, as 'twere, a little Latin
Republic: Which would be very easy, if the King, who has done so many great
and difficult things, would think fit to issue his Orders for it, which perhaps
would be none of the least Objects, that his Majesty could propose to himself;
as may appear by the sequel of this Writing.

This is the whole Mystery of this Instruction, in what regards the study of
the Latin Tongue: Upon which may be made the following reflections.

CHAP. VI. Reflections upon this Way; and first that it is easy.
THere is nothing in the world more Easy for Children, than to learn Latin
this way. It is so natural, to desire to understand what others say, and to
make them understand our thoughts, that it is impossible, but Children will have
a strong bent of themselves to learn that Language, which is spoken in their
presence. As this Tongue mixeth it self in all their divertisements, in all
their wants, they strive of their own accord to learn the same. They do not so
much as think to learn it, and even that makes them learn it the better. The
little boy, who has ministered the occasion to this Writiug, could not, two
months a go, say the Pater noster without failing and hesitating, how great
care soever had been taken to repeat it to him for two years. Mean time he
has learnt a great number of Words and Inflections, of which he has made
himself master without any body's taking any other care, but of speaking to and
answering him. He has never been threatened nor punished to learn this
Language: which is of no small importance. The exclamations, menaces, and
punishments, are not only present evils, which Humanity requires should be
spared as much as is possible; but they are also Sources of evils, which
Prudence oblieges to prevent. Nothing streitens the Heart like Fear and Grief;
and I know not, to which of these two, the Soul or the Body, those two
passions are most contrary. The tediousness of learning a lesson one loves not,
the fear of being punished if one say it ill, the fretfulness for having been
punished, keep Children always alarmed, and make them loose a great part of
that Ingenuity, Cheerfulness and Frankness, they have, in an Age, wherein
nothing more should be thought on, than to confirm their health, by forming
them at the same time to an innocent gayness, to a confidence in those, who
have the conduct of them, to a freedom from choler, to a love of their duty,
and to a cousideration, from the conduct used toward them, that Honesty and
Justice in all things are the only good, which Men put a value upon.

The best means to sink into the Minds of Children this Maxim (which is more
important to Society, than all the Languages of the world) is to accustom them
not to be punished, as near as may be, but for actions repugnant to Justice. And
that will not only serve to cause them to make a great distinction of those
kinds of duties, but also to bind them the more to the observance of them, in
that the punishments becoming more rare, they accustom themselves less to, and
are the more sensible of them. This is not said, as if we were not obliged,
sometimes to chastise them for other faults; but it is as well the surer, as
the better, not to put our selves upon a necessity of multiplying those kinds
of chastisements; and no man can doubt that they are cut off, when the Rules of
the Latin Tongue are so.

You may make Children understand reason in other, even painful, things, as
the learning to Read, and to Write etc. and you may cause them even to be
desirous of it. Now if this be of consequence for Children of a middle
condition, it is the more so for those of Grandees, in whom the difficulty of
learning those things is an almost invincible obstacle to learn them, although
the knowledge thereof is little less necessary to them.

It is therefore very easy to teach them the Latin Tongue after this manner,
and there is a great advantage in this easiness. But it is not easy to know as
much Latin as needs, to entertain them with that latitude and freedom, which
is requisite. You must know to play, and to speak seriously in Latin; to
entertain them during the two first two years with whatever may be incident in
the most familiar discourses; which extends further then one is aware of.
Afterward, to form their Manners, and to try their understanding for
employing it in what it is capable of, whether it be for Reasoning, or for
History, or for Descriptions etc. Farther to increase insensibly this little
stock, to run through the most ordinary Arts, and to use in their presence the
general terms thereof; and to speak all with that frankness and brevity, which
is so peculiar to that Tongue, and to say nothing but what is exact both for the
Words and the Matter.

It is to be wished, that all these things may concur for this Latin converse
with Children, and for making them speak according to their capacity, and with
all desirable freedom. This is difficult enough in general, because it is not
easy to find many, that well understand even their Mother Tongue to that extent
and so particularly; and because in the Latin there are difficulty's to be met
with, that are not found in the vulgar Tongues. Habits, Utensils. Manners,
Politics, Government, Religion, etc. having been changged, and some Arts
invented, since the Latin Tongue has ceased to be Vulgar, it is hard enough to
know, how to express all those things in that Language. Yet it is certain, that
we find many things in Antiquity, which have a great affinity with our
Novelties, and that, when we find none such, we must be allowed to form words
after the model and by the Analogy of what is ancient. And this has been very
well observed by those, that have instructed this Infant. But we do not find
our selves often in that necessity: For, the Latin Tongue reaches farther than
we imagine; there is almost nothing, which is not found expressed in Books; and
to be convinced of that, we need but cast our Eyes upon Terence, Plautus,
Pliny, Columella, Cicero, and Justinian. For there is almost nothing, whether
great or small, common or particular, which may not be found in those Authors.

CAHP. VII. That this way is Short.
IT cannot be otherwise, but that this manner of Teaching Latin must be Short,
since it is so Easy. But it will not be amiss to consider, How much it is
shorter than the Ordinary method, and how important it is, not to employ much
time in Learning Latin.

This little Boy has learnt all he knows within the space of two years, viz.
from two years old to four; and he would know more, if a Child of that age were
capable to understand more Things. But it is moraly certain, that excepting the
particular Terms of Arts and Sciences, he may know all the rest before he shall
have attained the Age of Nine years: which will be but Six years in all.
During which time one may teach this Child, and any other, as many Things, as
he shall be able to comprehend in so small a time; so as the Language, which he
learns, shall take up no time, nor retard at all the other knowledge, you shall
instill into him. To which if you add, that all that, which one could have done
during all that time, would have been to teach him the same things, (e. g.) in
French; it will follow, that the knowledge of the Latin Tongue will cost him no
more, but so much time precisely, as he shall employ to learn so much French,
as one knows of it at the going out of the College. But now, I think not, it
can be denied, that a Child, altogether left at the Age of nine years to his
Mother Tongue, may not learn in two years at least as much French, as one
knows of it at the going out of the Classes or Forms at the Age of 15. or 16.
years. Thus the Latin will cost him but two years; and it may be, it will cost
him much less. For, having been to see this little Boy since the Writing of
this, I have found, that he knows already a great many French words, which he
takes delight to speak; and that he will find a great facility in learning the
rest, when it shall be desired. This being so, it may be affirmed, that the
Latin will almost take up none of his time, since he will not learn the less
French; and that he will increase the knowledge of the Latin Tongue in the same
time, that shall be given him to learn French, and also that he will not the
less know all sorts of other things.

It Is certain therefore, that this Way of Learning Latin is far shorter then
any other: which advantage is by so much the more considerable in this present
Age, because not only Histories increase every day, but there are also invented
many new Arts and Practices; it being observed, that there has been added more
to the Arts and Inventions of the Ancients within these last hundred years,
than has been done for Fourteen hundred years before. But, forasmuch as the
Life of Men is not longer now, than it has been before, it will be more
necessary than ever, to redeem from that time, which has been spent in the
Learning of Languages, a portion to learn what is more important; especially if
that saving of time hinder us not from knowing as well the Tongues by this
short way, as by that, which has been followed hitherto.

CHAP. VIII. What it is, to know a Language; and what this Way can contribute
to the knowledge of the Latin Tongue.
NOw since it is infallible, that the Latin Tongue is better to be learned by Use
alone, than by all the Rules whatsoever, we shall, the better to understand
this, explain, what is meant by Use, and by well knowing a Language.

I mean by well knowing a Language (to begin with that) to speak it exactly and
readily, and with that extent, as to speak of all that falls under common
discourse, that is, of public and private affairs, of the vulgar Arts, and of
what is common in them all. The Exactness comprehends not only the Inflexions
and Constructions, so as to commit no fault there, but also the Propriety of
the Words. And it supposes on one part, along custom for the said Inflections
and constructions; and on the other, a great Choice of the fittest words; which
choice supposes a Copiousness: And from both these, viz. Habit, and Copiousness
arises Facility and Readiness. And this I call the knowing of a Language.

By Use I understand the Habit one acquireth both by the Reading of Authors,
und a discourse in Conversation.

Now we are to examine, Whether it be true, that Use alone, thus understood, is
able to contribute so much as is affirmed, to make one speak a Language with
that exactness, fullness, and facility.

The Plenty of words, and the Habit a man has to turn and to place them, do
serve much to speak with exactness. Without this copiousness and this habit, a
man must often hesitate, stop, and be silent: And although in such Accidents
there is no failour as to exactness, forasmuch as a man is silent, that he may
not speak ill; Yet, as we cannot say, that a man speaks, when he is
necessitated to be silent, so we cannot say, that such an one speaks exactly.

Now as to the Extent, it cannot be denied, that Use renders it more large,
when it begins with Infancy, than when it begins later. For, as we cannot
educate a Child unto the age of 8. years, without telling it many things,
without entering with the same into many Colloquies, without reasoning upon many
accidents; lastly without describing to it an infinity of things, that occur in
daily convers; it is certain, that it is impossible, but the Child must be
initiated in all those things, and imitate them upon occasion; in a word, it
must hear and speak of many things, which are not spoken of in Schools; yet so
as not to fail to hear also of those matters, that may be there spoken of, as
far as they are of use. And this is, what respects personal Converse.

But as to Authors, it is likewise certain, that the Child may be much more
furnished, our way, with what they can contribute to the knowledge of a
Language. The eldest of these Children, we speak of, reads Phaedro, and
understands of him all that is not above the reach of a Child; and it will
understand very well at the age of six years, (at the latest,) what Children
commonly understand not at the age of twelve. As therefore a Child, taught by
Use, may employ in Reading all the time, that is ordinarily employed in the
Grammar and in making of Themes, he may together with it at the same time have
all these advantages, viz. To read Authors sooner by four years, to understand
them sooner by ten, and continually to bestow twice more time upon them, than
others can do; even then, when they begin to be most used to this Language,
that is, from the age of twelve Years to that, when they come out of the
College. Thus he shall have read all the Latin Authors of all Professions and
Arts within the time, that those, who have been instructed after the common
way, shall have been able but to read some few scraps of Orators, Historians
and Poets.

It cannot be, but that this multitude of things read and understood, which
serves so much to instill into the memory the terms of different art, to
express different things, (which is that, we call Extent) must also in-still
into the same, many different terms and ways to exrepss the same thing; which
is that, we call Copiousness.

Lastly it is impossible, but that the habit, we take from our Birth, and
continue for 6. or 8. years, and entertain 8. or 9. years more, and which
has no other bounds during all that time, but of such things as make up the
converse of civil men, must be incomparably larger and stronger, than that
which we begin but to take at the age of 14. or 15. years, and which we
continue but for 3. or 4. years, which also is much interrupted during that
little time, and is bounded by a style of Rhetoric, and by matters of a
Philosophical nature. Not that Children are not made to venture at speaking
Latin even in the lowest Forms, and even in the plays they divert themselves
with in public on their play-dayes; but we all know, that all that goes not
beyond 20. or 30. phrases, and that the necessity imposed on them to speak
Latin, is so displeasing to them, that it injures them more, (by accustoming
them to ill manners, and by draining, as 'twere, their understanding by the
custom of not-thinking, which follows that of not speaking,) than it can
advantage them by remembering them of a few Latin words, which they have always
upon their lips, and besides which they can speak nothing but they commit
abundance of gross faults. Thus indeed they are not in a condition of speaking
Latin, but when they are entered in Rhetoric; and then they exercise themselves
more in Writing than Speaking. This Exercise lasts not but two years, after
which they enter into Philosophy, where indeed they speak more than they write,
but all know, how they speak there, and what is to be hoped from thence.

These are the Advantages of this Education above the received common one; viz.
To learn more easily, in less time, and more perfectly. And these 3. advantages
are not only considerable in themselves, but they are more so in their extent;
since in the one way, we learn with the greatest facility in the world, what in
the other cannot be learnt but with the greatest difficulties; and since the
time, employed to learn our way, is valued almost nothing in the life of man,
whereas that, which is spent in the other method, takes up one of the
considerablest portions of our life; and lastly since there is no comparison
between the perfection, that may be acquired by Use alone, and that little
knowledge, which the Rules do give us.

But how great soever the Advantages are, which we may propose to our selves in
this Education by Use, there are some Inconveniences, which we must not
conceal, and which deserve to be examined.

CHAP. IX. The Inconveniences of this Way of Teaching Latin. I. That Mothers
shall not understand their own Children. What respect we are to have to this
Inconvenience.
1. It may be reckoned for an unavoidable Inconvenience, that Children know not
their Mother Tongue for some years. Their Parents, that know no Latin, are all
that while deprived of the pleasure of being diverted by the pretty Babes.

First, This is nothing to those, that have no Children, or that have many, or
that love them but indifferently. But I know that some persons, otherwise very
rational, intending to have their Children instructed this way, and having been
satisfied as to some other difficulties, could not overcome this. In the mean
time it appears not reasonable to me. For, besides that they should consider,
that the Creator and Lord of all things does not give us our Children for
Puppets, to play and divert ourselves with, without seeking and procuring their
true good and welfare; they ought also to consider, that the delight, which
those Children give us in so tender an age, can be but very slight and
transitory; whereas the pleasure of a good Education is rational, solid, and
lasting as long as we live: Again, that the best testimony, they can give to
themselves and to others of a genuine affection to their Children, is, the care
they shall take to prevent their ill, and trouble; threatenings and pain,
tears, vexation, and subjection; to all which another Education may subject
them: Further, that a rational Love obliges them to prefer to an indiscreet
fondness the great benefits, which their Children may reap from thence; and
that, if they will have no regard to reason nor true and durable contentment,
they ought at least to consider, that this silence of their Children to them
will not last but from their second to their fourth year of age, and that then
they may begin to learn their Mother tongue, and after they are confirmed in
the Latin, they may then keep them at home, and not loose them out of their
sight. These Considerations ought, me thinks, to prevail so as to render
Mothers reasonable in this point; and especially the last. For it must be a
very blind affection, not to be able to deprive on's self of the contentment to
see a Child, by committing it for a year or two to the trust of some virtuous,
civil, and rational person, after we have without trouble abandoned them for
two whole years to a Nurse, which commonly has neither moderation, nor
civility, nor store of tenderness in what concerns the rational care, due to
children.

But we may add here, that Mothers might be indulged in the fondness to their
Children, so far as to let them see them sometimes without any danger of
hindering or spoiling their Latin. An hour of interruption will not sensibly
alter a custom already taken; and I see, that Experience has put those, who
educate such Children, above this scruple, since they permit their Parents to
see them as often as they can reasonably desire.

CHAP. X. That Children thus instructed shall know less their Mother Tongue.
The mistake in apprehendnig such an Inconvenince.
II. IT may be feared, that if Children should learn Latin first, they would
less know the Tongue of their native Contry, than if they had learnt that
first. This inconvenience would indeed be considerable, since it is important to
know our Mother Tongue as perfectly, as is possible. But it is to be
considered; 1. That the Romans did not the less perfectly learn Greek in
Greece, although they had learnt their own Tongue a long time before they
understood a word of Greek. 2. That the Childern, which are carried into
foreign Contr'ys at the age of 9. or 10. years, there to learn the Language,
do not the less perfectly learn it, although they have spoken their
Mother Tongue for 8. or 9. years together. 3. That the Habit, which Montagne
had acquired in the Latin tongue, did not hinder him from learning to speak
French as well as any man of his time, nor from being a Pattern to one of the
most eloquent men of his time, and who has followed closest the Eloquence of
the Ancients.

After these experiments, which are over-sufficient to show, that we shall not
the less know our Mothertongue for having learnt Latin first; it is needless to
say, That the Latin Tongue, being incomparably more difficult than our own,
it is the more fit to be learnt first of all. It will suffice to consider, that
Quintilian, exhbrting the Romans to learn Greek by Use alone and in their
Infancy, sticks not to alledg, That the Greek is much more difficult than the
Latin; which though he could have proved very easily and irrefragably, yet he
loved rather, to do it by this only reason; viz. That the Latin Tongue being
at Rome more generally in use than the Greek, it would sink into the memory,
whether one would or no.

We must therefore not think, that this Preference, we give to the Latin, will
hinder us in the knowledge of our Mother Tongue. On the contrary, it is easy to
foresee, that this is one of the greatest advantages of this way of teaching,
that it contributes much to the knowledge of our Mother Tongue, by giving us
leisure to apply ourselves more to it, than we could do, if we learnt Latin by
Rules. For, Children shall be able to read and speak the Language of their
Country during the same time, which is commonly spent in learning the Rules,
and during which we are, as 'twere forced, to forbid them the use of their
Mothertongue, that we may constrain them to apply themselves only to Latin. to
beat that into their heads.

CHAP. XI. III. That Children will have nothing to do from the seventh year
of their Age to the fifteenth or sixteenth. That this pretended inconvenience
is a true Advantage for real knowledge.
III. I Shonld be somewhat ashamed to propose as an Inconvenience the time
saved in this kind of Education, if this Inconvenience had not been very
seriously proposed by men otherwise of good sense, and who even take a great
care of the Education of their Children. They say then, that Children will have
a very great Intervall of time from Seven to Fifteen or Sixteen years, that
one shall not know, what to do with them. The Answer to be given to this
Objection, is apparent enough from what has been said already; but it may not
be amiss, to propose it here at length.

I do not well know, how men, that complain of the Shortness of the Life of
man, and who are not able either to lessen the number and vastness of things
desirable to be known, or to lengthen Life, should want matter to employ it, as
long as it shall last; and how those, who avow, that Latin may be learnt till
the age of seven years, doubt, Whether there will be matter enough of more
consequence than the Latin Tongue, to take up the time from seven years to
fifteen. For, if you be only in pain, how to employ them, without changing
the ordinary course of instructing Children in Learning, you may give them to
read from time to time, not only some of the familiar Letters or Orations of
Cicero, as is usual, but also his Books of Oratory, and all his Philosophical
Works, wherein there is so much matter to learn and study; besides, Quintilian,
Terence, the Commentaries of Caesar, Pliny the Younger, Livy, Salust,
Columella, Tacitus, Pliny the Elder etc. then Virgil, and some selected parts
of Ovid, Horace, etc. Further, the modern Historians, as Cambden, Strada,
Masseus, Paulus Ievius, thuanus, etc. not to mention so many French Books, that
may be recommended to their perusal during that time.

It cannot be doubted, but that those and such like Books will employ a Child
until it be 17. or 18. years old. 2. That such employment will be more
beneficial to Children, than the rules of the Language. 3. That it will be
more pleasing and delightful to them. 4. That it it will prove a great ease to
the Parents, that cannot be at the charges requisite to entertain Tutors at
home; forasmuch as after their Children shall have learnt the Latin Tongue by
Use alone, they may be placed in Colleges, and there applied to read Authors
and Books written in the Language of their own Country, and especially such as
belong to the History thereof, during the time, which other Children spend in
the inferior Schools; making them give an account, of what they thus read, in
the intervals of those Schools.

But as men are born to know other things, besides Fables, Rhetoric and
History, and since there is much knowledge more necessary, and Children are
capable to be entered in such knowledge; it will certainly be found, that that
pretended Vacuum, how great soever it may appear, will hardly be sufficient to
learn, what a Child well born can and ought to know, before it is engaged in
any Profession.

It would be the only means to equal the Ancients by following their Example:
For, they have not surpassed us, but in this, that they employed in learning to
Design, Arithmetic, Geometry, Music, Exercises, Eloquence, Philosophy, and
Arms, that same time, we spend in learning the Rules of a Language. And this
was that, which made their Philosophers Soldiers, (as we may see in the person
of Socrates) and their Generals Orators and Philosophers, as Xenophon,
Alexander, Caesar, and so many others.

It would be proper, to show in this place, that Children are capable to
understand some of the Sciences, and even the most important and the most
necessary. For that purpose it would suffice to allege, that it is a thing that
has been tried, not only by the Ancients, as easily appears by reading Plato
and Aristotle, where there are express places, but also by the Moderns; and
that most of the Sciences may be so proposed, that the study of them will
rather be a divertisment, than a Labor. But it will be fit to add, that though
we had no Experience of it, yet it were easy to foresee, that it would be so,
by Reason. For those, that are most tied to the Teaching of Latin by Rules,
must the more grant, that they suppose, Children are capable to understand
them. But there is none of all those, who teach Grammar, that knows not, that
it contains, 1. The Ideas of the different parts of Discourse. 2. The Rules for
each of those different parts. 3. The Rules of their Composition, called
Syntaxe. They must therefore Judge Children capable to understand all that,
even from the Age of 6. or 7. years. And indeed, I have known some of that age,
who had passed thorough all those 3. parts, and understood them. Now I say,
that whosoever is capable to enter into that knowledge by that way, is capable
also to enter into almost all Scienecs; especially those, that Object of which
is sensible.

1. What concerns the Ideas of the different parts of discourse, we must grant,
that they cannot be understood, unless you make, in general at least, the
distinction of Substance, Accident, Place, Time, Action, Passion, and of all
the Relations, thence resulting: which comprehends that part of the
etaphysicks, we call Categories or Predicaments; which we know to be very
abstract, they being only invented to facilitate the Mental distinction of
many things, which we commonly see confused in Nature. Now who can doubt, but
it will be more easy to show to a Child the Rising and Setting of the Sun, and
Moon, and the other Principles of Cosmography, which they may be directed to
see without vexing them with Abstractions; and afterward to make them pass to
Geography, and the other Sciences depending thereon.

2. As to the different Inflections or Accidents of Speech, who sees not, that
they depend on a thousand eqstractions from Persons, time passed, present, and
to come? That the Infinitive comprehends in its Idea the abstraction of all the
differences of Time, Numbers and Persons? And that in the Times, given to it,
it is nevertheless Infinitive, that is, Indefinite, because it contains in its
Idea the Abstraction from all Persons? That the distinction of those Moods
depends on the distinction, which is between the Idea of the simple Indication,
and that of Command, and Desire etc. That the Cases of Nouns are at least as
abstracted, as the Moods of Verbs, and yet more difficult to understand? And
this being so, who can doubt, but a Child would be more capable to understand
History with some Figures? That the Genealogies themselves, who make one of the
greatest difficulties thereof, would not be more easy to him, then the
reducing of a Derivative to its Primitive, called the Investigation of the
Theme; and that it would not be more ready to him, to remember, e.g. that the
King is the Issue of Robert Count of Clermont, Son of St. Louys descended of
Hugh Capet, issued of Childebrand son of Charles Martel, borne of the Marriage
of Ansbert and Blitilde Daughter of Clotaire the First; than to say, that such
a Word is the third person of the singular number of the preter-plus-perfect
Tense of the Subjunctive of the Passive of such a Verb.

In short; there is not a Child, which you may not make comprehend sooner the
Demonstration of that Theorem of Geometry (and of almost all others) which
says; If two Sides are equal to two Sides, and the Angle to the Angle, the
whole is equal; than the simple terms of the following Rule of Syntax, which
may serve for an Example of many other Rules; viz. If two Substantives meet of
different Genders and different Persons; then the Adjective or Relatif of the
Plural Number must agree with the more noble Gender; and the Verb being also
of the Plural, must accord with the more noble Person, or with the latter
Substantive; or, when the Substantives are of things Inanimate, the Adjective
is to be put in the Neuter Gendre, or ti must agree with the later Substantive.

We might therefore teach Children to Read and Pronounce well, (which is a
thing very rare and necessary;) to Write, to cast Account; History, Geometry,
(forasmuch as it relates to ordinary use;) the Principles of Mechanics; the
Anatomy of Man; the Principles of Physic; History, and the Custom and Laws of
their Country. And these are the particulars of what may be called very Useful
and very necessary knowledge.

If you add thereto those many other Arts, which regard Politeness or honest
Divertisments, as the History of Nature, Cosmography, Geography, a general
Scheme of Chronology, the History of the greatest and most Illustrious Nations,
of the present and former times; that which is natural and general in Grammar,
(to which might be referred what is particular in ever Mother Tongue,) the
Italian and Spanish Tongues, the learning whereof will be rendered very easy by
knowing the Latin; the Greek, Natural Philosophy, Music, Engines, Perspective,
Hydraulicks, the Exercises of the Body necessary to Civil Society, as Dancing
(as far as it serves to a handsome garb and comely behavior,) Riding,
Fencing, Swimming, and Games of wit and dexterity. If, I say, all these things
be added for those, that are capable thereof (which oftener happens, than is
imagined,) or some of them, for those, whose Genius is less ready, we shall
find, without amusing Children in things altogether ueless, wherewith so to
fill up that space of time, that there will be many more, that will find it too
short for so many things, than there will be of those, that are troubled how to
spend it. I speak not of other Arts, having already said more than enough of
it, not only to disabuse those, whom so slight a reason should deterr, but to
excite all those, who know the importance of the Arts, I have spoken of, to
embrace with Joy all the means, that may be given them for it, to pass through
them; a time, out of which we cannot think to learn them but out of season.

Yet I cannot abstain from making herean Overture to those, that are capable
of it. We might find in the Mechanics some very divertising and very useful
Spectacles or Sights, which un-tiring the minds of Children would fill them
with certain Idea's, raising their Imagination, and rendering it capable to
invent and produce of it self. There are few Mechanical Arts, where a man of
natural endowments may not find much to learn; and I believe, that all those,
who shall give themselves the leisure to examine some of them, will find, that
Socrates had reason to say, that there are none but Artists and Crafts-men,
that really know any thing. Gardening, Husbandry, Chemistry, Weaving of Stuffs
and Tapisteries, Watch-making, Refining, Melting, Engraving, Etching, Stone --
cutting, Wire-drawing, Dying, Tanning, Gunpowder-making, Saltpeter-making and.
will certainly furnish young men with very pleasing and useful divertisements:
And it is not easy to conceive, what great knowledge may be drawn from thence,
without which one cannot well enter into the Study of Natural Philosophy.
Nothing were easier, than to show the Uses thereof in particulars, and to
dispose those divertisements in their natural order; but that this is not a
place fit to treat thereof.

CHAP. XII. The Consequences of that advantage. I. For the Choice of a
Profession.
I. IT is therefore very advantageous in it self to have time to enter into all
that knowledge: But that advantage will doubtless appear incomparably greater,
if we consider the Consequences thereof. For 1. by that means we should be
able to try the natural Capacity of Children and their Inclination, by
successively presenting to them all those different Principles, and all those
Arts; among which we might choose that, to which they should be found to be most
disposed: Which is of great importance for the settling of men in Civil
Society's.

And the Sight thereof ought not to offend those, who are resolved not to
engage their Children but in high Professions. How worthy and honorable soever
a Profession be, the person, that is invested with it, may be but little worth
and of small esteem, if he have no natural disposition to it; and on the
contrary, he that excells in a mediocre condition, may render himself very
considerable. The Arts of Painting and Architecture are Civil and Ingenious
Professions, but perhaps less honorable than that of a Lawyer, yet there is no
rational man, that would not much rather be Monsieur le Brun, or Monsieur
Mansard, than a weak Advocat.

It would therefore be a great advantage to youth, to be able to try
themselves, and to be tried by wise men, upon the general view, that should be
allowed them of so many different Arts. But then, this would also be a great
advantage to Arts. For it is beyond doubt, that, if those, whose Understandings
have been opened by Letters and Learning, did take them in hand, whether it
were to practice them, or only to take good notice of them, they would in a
short time improve them, and add to them many things, which else nothing but
Chance would introduce, and which ordinarily is not introduced, but in a long
tract of years.

CHAP. XIII. II. For Manners.
II. THat General View of Arts would not only serve to render men Able, but
also to make them more Honest and more Virtuous. It would be a means to keep
them from all Idleness; for it would prove a delightful occupation, and a
prevention of spending precious time in trifles or doing ill. And who doubts,
but that men are often out of humor, for want of good or innocently divertising
employment? Which happens. because they are destitute of knowledge, and have
not been made sensible of many things, the understanding of which is very
delightful and very harmless. Who can doubt, that the Ignorance and
insensibility, which is among men concerning such things, is the sourse of so
much trifling Conversation, and of so many ridiculous plays and
divertisements, which are not tolerable but when men are tired of serious
business, and which yet so many make their only business, being tedious to
themselves all their life time, and yet not understanding, that there are other
things, that may be delighted in? In short, who can believe, that a Man, having
the use of his senses, can without a Miracle forbear vicious pleasures, if his
Eyes and Ears have not been inured to find a sensible pleasure in such
objects, as of themselves do not lead to vice, and if his Mind have not been
disposed to find pleasure in things abstracted from Matter, (as are the Pure
Mathematics,) or in the other Sciences, that are more Material, but such as
have less relation to the Objects of the Senses, which commonly are the ruin
of all men.

It Is true, that all those things will never breed Christian Virtue, nor yet
Moral virtue, because there lurks a snare in them all, and they may be turned
to ill use; but I cannot but believe, that it is easier to be morally honest
with, than without them. And besides it seems, that Moral virtue is a
disposition to Christian virtue; since that, when at length we are become, for
example, Temperate and Just, upon what motive soever, we need no more but to
change the Object, to render that Temperance and that Justice Christian, and
that this change of Object, how impossible soever it may seem to the sole
strength of Nature, seems less difficult, than the change of Life.

But it is not only in that, where this Way of instructing Children may serve to
form their Manners; but also herein, that it puts Children into a condition to
return early to be under the Conduct of their Fathers and Mothers, who do
love and practice Christian integrity. As there are but very few of such, we
must avow, that, how great soever that advantage be, it regards but few persons.

This we would not have understood stood, as if we derogated from the Virtue of
those, who employ themselves in a public way to instruct Children; All we
would say, is this, that it is very hard, to take particular care of Children,
that are educated in Common; and that, unless it should be thought fit to alter
the ordinary and received Method of Studies (which perhaps would meet with
great difficulties from interest, incapacity, and humersomness) that cannot be
done for them in Common, what may be done in private; and do you what you can,
you shall never give them in those places the Air of the World, I mean, that
understanding and deportment, which depends from a free and uninterrupted manly
converse, without which it will be very hard to mould their Spirit and their
Manners.

But yet we will grant, to the comfort of those that are not qualified not able
to educate their Children in private, that they may be bred in Common after a
manner, which approaches very much to this way, we are giveing the Model of;
provided that the persons, with whom you entrust them, have good Principles of
Religion, constancy, gentleness and discretion; that they undertake not too
many; and have those whom they receive, constantly in their Eye; receiving none
that are ill natured, or, if they chance to do, presently dismissing them:
Besides, that they be able, if not each in particular, at least all together,
to instill into them by conversation the General Principles of those Arts and
Sciences, that are of any importance.

This therefore would be one of the means, which Parents should use themselves
to form their Children to honesty and good knowledge, or to make those, whom
they shall employ about them, to use it. This would indeed prove a Course of
Philosophy, diffused through all the actions of their life, and resulting from
the Entertainments and Examples, that should be given them by Speaking and
Acting before them, as we would have they should speak and act.

This would not hinder them from going to hear Orators and Philosophers, in due
time; but it is likely they would not need it, and that this domestic Course of
Philosophy, which they should make without being aware of it, would be no less
regular nor less beneficial, nor less complete, than that, which they should
make in a College. I could dispense with my self for giving a more particular
and precise Idea, and perhaps should do better to forbear, in the Judgment of
some persons, that are not convinced, that the method, wherein Philosophy is
taught, serves little to the forming of Discourse, Reasoning and Manners, and
to the knowledge of Nature; But if this Idea is of no use to such persons, it
will perhaps not be useless to those, who are already convinced of that truth,
or are willing to be informed therein.

I wish therefore, that the Rhetoric of Children might be made to consist in
seasonable Speaking and Silence; in expressing themselves manly, briefly,
significantly, and sutably to the motions or passions, which every thing is to
raise in the Spirit of Sober men; in relating and examining the reasons of
things, and valuing them according to their precise worth; and in forming, from
their infancy, their Gesture and Elocution.

I would have their Logic to consist in accustoming them, with a few Rules,
with many Corrections, and with a constant Use of reasoning aright upon the
most frequent occurrences of life, to determine seldom, to esteem it an honor
to yield to reason, to Judge equitably, to speak their opinion modestly, to
distinguish doubtful things from certainties, and the different degrees of
probability and evidence from inevidence.

I would teach them no other Ethics or Morals, than to exercise them to suffer
others, and to endure themselves; to do nothing in passion, or at least to
hide their passions till they shall have mastered them; not to lift themselves
above any man how poor or wicked soever; to believe, that all is ill done, what
is not done for a good end.

I would have the New Testament read unto them, after they have been thus
prepared: and it might be made out to them (as it is not difficult) that
whatsoever is taught and prescribed there, is consonant to right Reason. I am
not only persuaded, that those Maxims, used in all their Converse and in the
whole Conduct of their Life, would stand them instead of Morals, but that all
other Morals are useless, and can serve for nothing, but to fill the head with
vain speculations.

After these things I know not, whether I should speak of Natural Philosophy;
at least, this I know, that Children should not be troubled but diverted
therewith; and I am persuaded, that, having been taught to esteem nothing
greater in the world than Serving God, and Doing good to Men, they need employ
no other time for that knowledge, than what is requisite to study the History of
Nature, Mathematics, and such Arts, as I have been speaking of, especially
Mechanics, Chemistry, and Anatomy.

This great Art of Life, which Aristotle himself calls Useful Philosophy would
do the whole business. Upon this Principle one might proceed with them; and it
would be so much the more easy to form them by this means to virtue, that
they having been bred up in the Latin tongue until the 7th year of their Age,
they would have been sheltered from all the idle and sottish converse of mean
and servile people, whose manners they are else so apt to take up: And thus
they would not enter into the world, but at a time, when they had already
acquired some habit in good; nor be discomposed or put out in the conversation
with reasonable men, as other Children are, by the ill habit they have taken at
that age of being idle, or employed in nothing but trifles.

CHAP. XIV. The Conclusion of this Discourse.
THese are the Advantages, which I am persuaded may redound, from this way of
Teaching the Latin Tongue, to Learning, to Arts, Sciences, Manners, and the
whole conduct of Life. I know not, whether they be so, as they appear to me,
and whether I have related them such as they are; but this I know, that nothing
can be too much esteemed, nor too well received, that is capable to contribute
to things so important to humane Society.

ERRATA.
Page 17. l. 16. r. be so. p. 23. l. ult. r. 6, or 7. years. p. 49. l. ult. r.
arts. p. 66. l: 14 r. for this reason.

FINIS.

