AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE VICTORIOUS EXPEDITION OF THE Confederate Fleet, The
last Year, under the Command of the Right Honorable Admiral RUSSEL; Giving an
Account, Of his Relieving BARCELLONA, and the Taking of a great number of
Prizes from the French.

WITH A COPY of the LETTER sent by the Algerines to Congratulate the English
Admiral's Arrival in the Mediterranean.

To which is added, A Relation of the Engagement between Capt. Killegrew, and
the Two French Men of War that were taken in the Fare of Messina.

LONDON: Printed for I. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1695.

TO THE READER.
IF we peruse the Histories of the Ancients, we shall find the Mediterranean
Sea to have been the first most Eminent Neptunean Theater of Blood and
Slaughter. And the same Stories tell us, with Astonishment, (for all Excesses
are wonderful to Man) of the Naval Force of all the Persian Empire, quite
broken and destroyed at Artemisium by Euribeas the Lacedemonian; and at
Salamine, by Themistocles the Athenian Admiral. Succeeding Histories relate the
Bloody Contests of the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, the Romans and
Carthaginians, for the Dominion of the Mediterranean. Asterwards, we hear of
Augustus and Mark Anthony, covering the Mediterranean with Two powerful Fleets,
contending for the Empire of almost all the Inhabited World, till the
Engagement at Actium decided the Controversy. I might add to these, a dismal
prospect of the Genoeses and Venetian Fleets for many Years together,
contesting upon the same Seas for Superiority: The Two vast Fleets of Selym the
Ottoman Sultan, and that of the Christians under Don John of Austria, that met
near the Bay of Lepanto, where the Victory, wrested from the Infidels, within
the space of a few Hours, set at liberty no less than 13000 Christian Captives.
And lastly, that Invincible Armada, with which the King of Spain then thought
not only to have conquered England, but to have freighted the spacious Island
it self, and removed it into his own Seas. But all these Numerous Fleets of
Galleys, and Cock-boats, would have made but a small Figure on that Watery
Stage, had the Magnificent Terror of the First, Second, Third and Fourth Rates,
at this present, under the Command of Admiral Russel, spread it self among 'em.
Great things are therefore expected from such a prodigious Force, than which
the Mediterranean never carried upon her Shoulders a more Formidable, since the
Phaenicians first taught the Art of Sailing. No question then, but a just and
true Account of the Exploits performed by such a Congress of Thunder and
Lightning cannot choose but be acceptable to all the World. Which as we have
already began to give, so we shall continue, as Occasions offer. All that we
can say as yet, though this be also very great, is only that it has saved one
of the most spacious Provinces of Spain from the complete Conquest of an
Insulting Enemy; and that, if any thing of Unhappiness has hitherto attended
it, it is only that no Opposition dares meet it: While Tourville, an Admiral now
without a Fleet, is so far from presuming to adventure an Engagement, that he
does all he can to secure his Terribles and his Triumphants with Land
Fortifications; afraid to trust 'em in their proper Elements. Fear makes him
avoid the sight of this Formidable Fleet, and Fear makes others court the
Terror of it; witness the Submissive Language of the haughty Algerines to the
Admiral that commands it. This I say, is all very great; but as greater things
are expected, so there is no question but we shall give the World an Account of
them, the next time we appear in Print.

A JOURNAL OF THE ENGLISH and DVTCH FLEET, Under the Command of Admiral Russel.
ABOUT the end of April, in the Year 1694, the Right Honorable Admiral Russel,
being appointed by his Majesty to command the Confederate Fleet, then designed
for the Mediterranean Sea, arrived at Portsmouth, and the next Morning after
his Arrival there, went on Board the Britannia. The whole Fleet which was
numerously formidable, was said to be vittl'd for Four Months, which made most
People conclude what was only conjectured before, that such great Preparations
were not intended for a short Expedition. For it was plainly seen by the Letter
which the King of France sent to the Bey of Algier, purporting, that he had
ordered a Numerous Fleet of 50 Ships of Line of Battle, 20 Bomb-Vessels, and 44
Galleys, into the Mediterranean, to Bomb and Destroy all the Seaport Towns of
Spain, that would not preserve themselves from utter Ruin by large
Contributions of Money, and to exact great Sums from Genoa and Legorn, That
Tourville was to brave it in the Levant, and shut up the Passages of the
Streights in such a manner, that there should be no Trading for either English
or Dutch; and for the Spaniards, they were to be exterminated out of the Ocean.
'Twas therefore thought convenient to divide the Confederate Fleet, and send
the greatest part of it under Admiral Russel, in search of this same Threatening
Enemy, in order to fight the Marshal where e're they found him, if he would
stand the shock, and to keep the Seas open for freedom of Trade.

For this purpose, upon the 5th of May, he set Sail from St. Helens, with part
of the Fleet, directing his Course Westward; the rest of the Men of War
remaining behind at the Spit-head, under the Command of Sir Cloudsly Showell,
Vice Admiral of the Red Squadron.

As he sailed on, the Admiral had intelligence, that there lay in Bertume Road,
a considerable Fleet of French Merchantmen, Eastward bound. Upon which he sent
away Capt. Pickard in the Monmouth, together with the Resolution and Roebuck
Fire-ship, either to bring them away, or to destroy them. Accordingly upon the
10th of the same Month, as soon as it was light, they made toward the French
Shore, about Seven Miles from the Fleet; and by Five a Clock in the Morning,
they deserved several Ships behind a Point of Land near Conquet Bay; which,
immediately upon a Signal given from one of their Scouts, hois'd their Sails.
In the mean time Capt. Pickard pursued the Man of War that was their Convoy,
and forced her to hale in with the Shore, and run against the Rocks, under the
Castle that stood farthest into the Sea. This Man of War, as the Prisoners
afterward declared, hapn'd to be the Jersey Frigate, which the French had
taken from the English some time before, in the West Indies, and which soon
after was blown up, either by Accident or Voluntarily, it is not material
whether. After this, the English Men of War stood into White Bay, as far as
they could with safety, plying the French Ships that were there with their
great Guns; but their Vessels being 27 in number, all ran ashore together, with
as many more in and about Conquet. The English Frigates then stood into Bertume
Bay, and took one of the Merchants Ships, though the Castle plied them all the
while with their great Shot and Bombs. There were in this Fleet Six Sloops,
carrying from Ten to Sixteen Guns, two of which, as the Prisoners confessed, were
burnt by the blowing up of the Jersey. There were also among them, Four Vessels
of good Burden, part of whose Lading was Guns and Mortars, the biggest of
which ran ashore against the Rocks of St. Matthew's Point. The Merchants Ships
were in all about 55 Sail, of which 35 were either burnt or sunk, 25 in
White-Bay, 4 on the South Side of the Point of the Bay, and 6 on the South Side
of Conquet, their Lading being for the most part Salt, Wine and Brandy. The
News of this Exploit so luckily performed, came to Whitehall by an Express
dated from the Fleet, the 18th of May.

By another Express dated the 19th of the same Month, an Account was given,
That Capt. Townsend in the Foresight, and Capt. Cooper in the England Frigate,
having Four English Privateers in their Company, upon the 17th, about Six a
Clock in the Morning, to the Eastward of Cape la Hogue, got sight of another
Fleet of French Merchants, bound for Diep and Dunkirk; and giving them Chase,
tacked upon Five of them, one of which happened to be a Man of War of 23 Guns,
and ran them all ashore, in a Rocky Place, called Omonvel, where they were
protected by a small Castle. Upon which they made after the rest of the Fleet,
and forced several of them ashore near Sherburg; and while they kept off the
French Convoy, the English Privateers took Six of them: The whole Fleet
consisting of about 50 Sail, laden with Corn and Bread for the service of the
French Army in Flanders.

This first motion of part of the Confederate Fleet, was only to observe the
Countenances of the French in Breast, and to get the best intelligence that
could be had, what Strength they had left behind in the Ocean; for that the
Admiral did not sail from S. Helens till the 29th of May in the Morning, at
what time there being but little Wind, and that which was being against him, he
was forced to come to an Anchor again; but at length upon the 30th in the
Morning, the Wind choping about to the North with a fresh Gale, the whole Fleet
set sail, and before Noon of the same day, were quite out of fight.

It Is said, that the whole Fleet, English and Dutch, consisted of 48 Sail, or
56, as was said by others; particularly that the English Fleet was composed of
3 First Rates, the Britannia, the Sovereign, and the St. Andrew; 6 of the
Second, 18 of the Third, 6 of which carried 80 great Guns apiece; 6 of the
Fourth, 2 of the Fifth, 6 of the Sixth, together with 9 Fireships: which were
to be reinforced by 23 Sail more, that lay at Cadiz, and to be farther also
joined by the Men of War, and Galleys of Spain.

In the mean time, Nouailles being ready to take the Field in Catalogna,
Tourville was sent down to Toulon, to hasten out the French Fleet with all the
speed imaginable; and he was so quick, that he was got with a Squdron of Men of
War into the Road of Toulon, and was ready to set Sail. But upon the 9th of
May, so violent a Storm, attended with Thunder and Lightning, arose in those
Parts, that the Admirals Ship; and Two more, were so much endamag'd in their
Masts, that it was the 14th before he could put to Sea, in order to join the
Galleys, and so set fayl together toward the Coasts of Catalogna, where he was
to assist with his Bombs from the Sea, while the French attacked the Seaport
Towns of that Province by Land. To that purpose, he sailed away with the
Galleys from Marseilles, to the Bay of Roses, where he was joined by Chasteau
Renaut, with a Squadron from Breast.

And now the French carried all things before them in Catalogna; Tourville rode
Triumphant at Sea, and Nouailles, Victorious by Land; had won Palamos and
Gironne, and there was no question but that Barcellona would have been the next
that would have been Besieged; which seemed indeed to be the principal Design
of that Campaign. But the Tidings that Admiral Russel was approaching toward
the Streights, quite altered the Measures of the French; so that Tourville
instead of sailing from Palamos to Barcellona according to his First Orders,
was directed to return to Toulon, with all the have he could. And indeed 'twas
a lucky Escape for the French Admiral, who got into Toulon but the 4th of July;
whereas Admiral Russel, as the Letters from Marseilles at that time confirmed,
appeared at the height of Barcellona the 7th.

However it were, it was not to be imagined, that the Confederate Fleet, which
could sail no faster than the Wind could carry them along, and of whose Motion
the French Court was able to give more speedy Intelligence, and as much as was
necessary for Tourville's Preservation, more conveniently than the Admiral
could hasten to prevent it; for these Reasons, I say, it was not to be
imagined, that the Confederate Fleet could easily surprise the French. After
the English Admiral had weighed, and set forward from St. Hellens, there was
little or no News heard of him; only that he was seen to pass at a distance by
Dartmouth and Plymouth the 5th of June; and that upon the Ninth at Night, the
Alliance Packet-Boat bound from Corona in Spain, in her Voyage to Falmouth,
discovered a great number of Lights to the South West of Vshant, which he
judged to be the Fleet under Admiral Russel. To which we may add the Report of
the Master of another Vessel which put into Portsmouth, and about the same
time, brought Advice, that he met Admiral Russel in the height of Lagos, in
Portugal, steering toward the Streights with a favorable Wind. So that after
it was heard, that he had doubled the Cape of St. Vincent, between Lisbon and
Cadiz, the first Express that came from him, and was received at Whitehall, was
dated on Board the Britannia, the first of July, Old Style, off of Tangier,
wherein the Admiral gave an Account that he had not so much as touched at
Cadiz, but that he had sent Orders to Rear Admiral Nevil, who rode in that Bay,
with a Squadron of English and Dutch Men of War, to join him to the Westward of
Cape Spartel; which they accordingly did on the 30th of June. Farther, that
when those Letters were written, he was hastening with all the speed he could
toward Barcellona, being informed that the French Fleet lay between that Place
and Alfagues. That he had likewise ordered the Turkey Ships both English and
Dutch, together with the Men of War appointed for their Convoy, to make the
best of their way to Cartagena, and there to stay for such farther Orders which
he should send them from Alicant, according to the Intelligence which he should
receive of the Enemy.

Upon the 13th of July, the same welcome News was sent by an Express from Cadiz
to Madrid, where the Tidings were joyfully received in the Spanish Court, that
Admiral Russel had passed by that Harbor with the English and Dutch Fleet
toward the Streights, having sent in a small Frigate before, with Orders to
Rear Admiral Nevil, to join him near Cape Spartel. This Frigate arrived at
Cadiz the 8th of the same Month, and the next Morning the English and Dutch
Squadron, together with Ten Spanish Men of War which lay in that Bay, sailed
away all together with a fair Wind. And now fearless of Molestation, diverse
Satees and other small Vessels were ordered from Cadiz, Port St. Mary, and St.
Lucar, freighted with above 2000 Soldiers and Seamen, for the Succor of
Barcellona, to Malaga; where lay Six Galleys ready to convoy them, with Sixteen
more that were gone before to Cartagena, in expectation of others that were to
join them, which being joined, would make Twenty Eight in all, and were to
attend the main Fleet, or at least the greatest part of them.

Upon the 23d of July, an Express from Gibraltar, brought News to the Court at
Madrid, that the English and Dutch Squadron commanded by Rear Admiral Nevil,
and the Ten Spanish Men of War, had joined Admiral Russel upon the 10th and
11th of the same Month near Tangier; at what time the whole Fleet was stopped by
a strong Levant, till the 15th; when the Wind chopping about to the West, they
past through the Streights the same day, steering their Course toward
Barcellona.

Upon the 17th of July, Capt. Banks in the Carslile Frigate, with Four Ketches,
was sent to Malaga, to setch fresh Provisions for the Fleet, which he rejoined
the next day, still directing its course for Barcellona: For the English
Admiral thought it not convenient to come in sight of Malaga, but passed by it
the same day that he sent Capt. Banks thither, keeping more to the Shore of
Barbary. All this while no French Fleet appeared; only Six of their Men of War
were seen off Almeria, upon the 13th, where they would have had Provisions for
their Money, but it was refused them; they being supposed to be Scouts sent
forth to get intelligence of the Confederate Fleet. In the mean time, the
English and Dutch Merchants Ships bound for Turkey and Italy, under the Convoy
of Five Men of War, proceeded unmolested in their Voyages.

On the 8th of August, Admiral Russel arrived before Barcellona with the whole
Fleet, consisting of about 140 Sail, of which 88 were Ships of Line. He had met
with several Remora's, occasioned by contrary Winds, which rendered the Voyage
somewhat Tedious, though every Moment were improved to hasten it. Of this
Marshal Novailles gave the King of France advice, by an Express from his Camp
at Blaines, (not far from Barcellona) adding withal, that while Admiral Russel
anchored before the City, Two and Twenty of the Spanish Galleys came before the
Place; and making in as close to the Shore as they could, Canonado'd the French
Troops that were posted near the Shore.

Admiral Russel continued before Barcellona with the whole Fleet riding in
Three Lines, from the 8th to the 26th, at what time he weighed, and the next
day appeared before Blaines, which is about Four Leagues from Palamos. And
there was no question but the English Admiral would have been glad that Marshal
Tourville would have tarried for his coming. But upon the News of his Approach
to the Streights, or, at least, of his having passed the Streights, the French
Admiral instead of Sailing to Barcellona to assist Nouailles in the Siege of
that Place, according to his first Orders, made a speedy return to Toulon, and
was so early in his Retreat, that he entered that Port upon the 4th of July.
And such was his fear of being assayl'd in the Harbor, that he sent away some
part of the Galleys to Marseilles, and moored the rest before his Men of War
for their better Security: And more than this, he took out the great Guns out
of the great Men of War, to make Batteries upon the Shore; for the raising of
which, his Men wrought Day and Night, and of which he tried the firmness, and
how far they were able to annoy an Assayling Enemy, after they were finished.
He also caused the biggest of his Ships to be hailed within the Castles. He
also caused several Pieces of Canon to be planted upon the Islands near
Marsailles. And still for the security of the great Ships at Toulon, he ordered
moreover a strong Chain and a Boom to be laid cross the Entrance of the Port.
Nor was all this thought sufficient, till besides all these Precautions, he had
raised a New Fort, which was called Fort Tourville, to defend the entrance into
the Haven.

This was a sign, that the French Admiral lay under great Apprehensions of
Danger; and yet in the midst of these fears, it was then reported, that
Tourville held a Council of War, wherein it was debated, whether he should put
to Sea and fight the Confederate Fleet, upon an Imagination that the Seamen
were tired out with the length of their Voyage, and Sickly; upon which
Suppositions, he thought there might be some Advantage gained. But it was
carried in the Negative, all the Officers alleging, that the English and Dutch
were no fresh water Soldiers, and therefore that it would be a Madness to
engage so formidable a Fleet. However it was at the same time confirmed, that
the whole Coast of Provence was in a great Consternation, and that the
Inhabitants of the Sea-Towns carried away the best of their Goods up higher
into the Country, for fear of being Bomb'd in their Houses. The Court of France
also was not a little mistrustful of their own Seamen; and therefore fearing
least the Officers and Seamen belonging to the Galleys should play their
Officers a scurvy Trick upon the appearing of the Confederate Fleet upon the
Coasts of Provence, remitted to Marsailles an Hundred Thousand Livres, for the
payment of part of their Wages, thereby to engage them to stand firm in their
Duty.

On the other side, there was great Joy in the Court of Madrid, to hear of the
Arrival of the Confederate Fleet upon the Coasts of Spain. The King
particularly, as a demonstration of his great satisfaction, sent a Present of a
Jewel to the English Admiral, valued at Five and Twenty Thousand Crowns, and
another to Vice Admiral Calenberg, valued at Twelve Thousand.

When the Confederate Fleet arrived in the Bay of Barcellona, the Duke of
Escalona, Viceroy of Catalogna, went on Board the Britannia, to Compliment the
Admiral, and during their Interview, all the Canon of the Fleet, and the City,
were discharged Three times. The next day Admiral Russel went Ashore to repay
the Viceroy his Visit; who received him with all the Honor and Respect that
was due to his Person. After a Conference of a little more than an Hour, there
was held a Council of War; at the Conclusion of which, the Admiral returned to
his Ship. The Viceroy also sent him as a Present, a Hundred and Fifty Sheep,
Four Calves, Six Hundred Candles of Virgins Wax, Six Hundred Tallow Candles,
Six Hundred Pound of Chocolate, One Thousand Six Hundred Pound of Sugar, a
great number of Capons, Pullets and Turkies, a great quantity of Pulse, and all
sorts of Fruits, a Hundred Barrels of Excellent Wine, and proportionably of
other Liquors, with a proportionable quantity of Snow to cool his Wine. The
Magistracy also of Barcellona made him a Present of Two Barbary Horses richly
harnessed, to the value of Three Hundred Pistoles.

And now to return to the Course of the Confederate Fleet, Admiral Russel
having stayed before Barcellona from the 8th to the 26th of August, set sail
from thence the same Day, no body knowing what Course he intended to steer;
only that he proceeded as sar as Blanes, Four Leagues beyond Barcellona, as the
Letters from Toulon signified. For Mounsieur Tourville no sooner heard of
Admiral Russel's leaving Barcellona, but he sent out several light Frigates to
get intelligence of his Motions; but whether it were that the English Admiral
was well informed that the French Fleet was too strongly Barricado'd up in the
Port of Toulon, to be attacked without time and leisure, or that perhaps he had
not then received his Orders to winter in the Mediterranean; and therefore
finding the Season far spent, thought it high time to return back into the
Ocean, he steered back again for the Streights, and upon the 5th of September,
passed by Alicant, with a fair Wind; and the next Day in the Afternoon, the
whole Fleet passed by Cartagena, with the Spanish Men of War, the Galleys only
being ordered back to Cartagena; and upon the 15th he came before Malaga.

In the mean time, the French Admiral meditated Two Designs, either to slip by
the Confederate Fleet, and get before Admiral Russel with the Squadrons of
Breast, into the Atlantic Ocean, while the English and Dutch were busied in the
more distant part of Provence; for there was a Rumor spread abroad, of an
intended Bombing of Nice, or else to watch the return of the Fleet to the
Streights, and sail away a second time for Barcellona, where Nouailles lay
ready, together with such new Succors as he should bring him, to finish the
Conquest of Catalogna. The first he had received Orders at one time to attempt,
when Admiral Russel covered Barcellona; but upon better Considerations, the
Court of France not finding it feasible to get by a watchful Enemy without
being encountered, discharged him of those Cares.

As to the second, so soon as Admiral Russel's Back was turned, and while there
was yet no certainty of Admiral Russel's wintring in the Mediterranean,
Nouailles and Tourville were in great hopes, that they together, might carry
Barcelona before the end of the Campaign; and the Court of France flattered her
self with the same Expectations. Tourville therefore having sent before Seven
or Eight Men of War, and some Fiteships, under the Command of Monsieur Beaujeu,
on which were embarked several Regiments, set sail with the rest of the Fleet
for the Coast of Catalogna. The News of this sailing of the French Fleet,
carrying with it some Thousands of Land Soldiers for the Reinforcement of
Nouailles, and the Marching thither at the same time of a considerable Body of
French Horse by Land, made all People believe that some great Enterprise was to
be undertaken on that side, and that the Siege of Barcelona was resolved upon.
About the same time also, Three French Men of War, of Sixty and Seventy Guns,
appeared off of Alicant, attended by a Fireship, which gave a suspicion of a
greater Number. All these things put together, brought Admiral Russel again
into Alicant Road, where he cast Anchor upon the 20th of September, New Style:
Of which when the French were informed, and moreover that it was resolved that
the Confederate Fleet should winter in the Mediterranean, new Orders were
dispatched away from Court to the Marshal, which he received just as he was
beginning to land his Men at Palamos and Blanes; so that he was forced to
return again with all the speed he could to Toulon, where he arrived the 23d of
September, having escaped Two very terrible Storms, one at his setting out,
which brought him again into Harbor to repair the Masts and Rigging of several
Men of War; the second at his Return, which scattered his Ships, though they
all rejoined at length, except one large Man of War, which had several
Companies of Soldiers Aboard, and a Fly-boat laden with Bombs and Mortars.
After which disappointment and ill success, they fell to unrigging their Ships,
the whole Fleet being ordered to be laid up.

While Admiral Russel lay in the Road of Alicant, he was taken ill of a Fever;
but after he had been some days ashore in that City, was perfectly restored to
his Health, and returned Aboard the Fleet, a considerable Squadron of which had
however been cruising as far as Minorca, under the Command of Vice Admiral
Aylmer, to see if he could get sight of the French. But hearing no News of the
Enemy, he came to an Anchor again in the same Road the 2d of October.

Much about the same time, Six Dutch Privateers as they were Cruising not far
from the Island of Maltha, came up with Two French Men of War, the one of
Sixty, the other of Forty Four Guns, having Four Merchants Ships richly laden
from Smyrna under their Convoy; upon which the Privateers attacked the Two Men
of War, and so rudely handled the biggest, that she was forced to bear away for
Maltha to save her self; but the Privateers took the other, together with the
Four Merchant Men. At the same time also Three Zealand Privateers cruising near
Sicily, took a French Frigate of Eighteen Guns, and an Hundred and Ten Men, on
Board of which, they found Ten Thousand Pieces of Eight in ready Money. And
while one of the Privateers guarded the Prize to Palermo, the other Two met
Three French Men of War, of Sixty and Forty Guns, which they fought several
Hours, till Night parted them.

This quick Return of Marshal Tourville to Toulon, upon Admiral Russel's
sailing back to Alicant, was in some measure ridiculed by the French
themselves, as appeared by a Letter written from Paris, upon occasion of
Tourville's Retreat, to this effect.

THE quick Return of our Fleet to Toulon, gives occasion to various Discourses;
what the Success was, is publicly known: The Managers only feel the Thorns of
it. We shall have neither any Engagement, nor any Siege of Barcellona this
Year: 'Twas not thought convenient to hazard the one, nor attempt the other.
Yet all things seemed to tend to a Trial of these Two Events. The Departure of
the whole Fleet, and the Expense of setting it out, with Bomb Galliots and
Mortars, showed that there was something else intended, than a bare Landing of
Men; nor did they send their Horse by Land, to go up the Hill, and so come down
again. Yet all are returned or returning, both Fleet and Cavalry. Whatever the
Reasons were, the Campaign is now at an end, and the Court are at their Wits
end, what Course to take with the Fleet, whose lying still, or doing nothing to
the purpose, is laughed at in all the Courts of Europe.


When it was that Admiral Russel received his Orders from England to Winter in
the Mediterranean, is not material. Certain it is however, that when he
understood that the Marshal was gone back, and that the intended Attempt upon
Barcellona was given over, he set sail from the Road of Alicant upon the Fifth
of October, sending away the Greyhound Frigate to the Bay of Gibralter, with
Orders to such English Men of War as lay there, to join him at Cape Spartell,
where he intended to cruise for some time, in order to meet the French, in case
they should attempt to pass the Streights. This was written from Malaga; and
other Letters dated the 12th of October from Cadiz, affirmed, in Confirmation
of the former Intelligence, that the whole Fleet under the Command of Admiral
Russel, appeared in the sight of that Port the same Day; and that at the same
time also an Hundred Sail of Ships from England, with Provisions and other
Necessaries for the Fleet, under the Convoy of several Men of War, arrived in
that Port.

In the mean time, it was confirmed on all Hands by fresh Intelligence, that
the French were unrigging all their Men of War at Toulon, except Six, who were
to Cruise during the Winter; and that the Seamen of the Western Provinces,
were to return back by Land to Breast.

But notwithstanding those Confirmations, Admiral Russd careful to avoid all
Surprises of the French, under the pretense of unrigging their Ships, though he
appeared before Cadiz upon the 12th of October, yet kept off at Sea for several
Days; nor was it till the 17th, that he came to Anchor in the Bay of the same
Place, after he had le^t several Men of War to cruise in the Streights. All
this while, notwithstanding the Rumors spread abroad by the French, to lessen
the Fears of the People, that there was a great Mortality, and want of
Provisions in the English and Dutch Fleet, and that they had lost one third
part of their Men, the whole Fleet continued Healthy, and in a good Condition,
as being all along carefully provided with all things necessary, both as to the
Men and Ships.

At length however, the English Admiral who lay ready to sail, in order to
cruise about the Streights Mouth, being assured that the French were in earnest
as to the unrigging their Ships, and that there was no fear of their making any
farther Attempts that Season, he took up his station in the Bay of Cadiz, about
the beginning of November; where he first gave order for the Cleaning and
Careening of the smaller Ships with all the speed that possibly could be, in
order to their Cruising, intending afterwords to do the like by the Great ones.
In the mean time, the Duke of Sesta, Captain General of Andalusia, and Don
Francisco de Velasco, Governor of Cadiz. went several times on Board the
English Admiral, to pay him their Respects; which Visits of his, the Admiral
repaid with equal Civility. 'Twas also said, that His Catholic Majesty had
engaged to pay five Hundred Thousand Crowns toward the Expenses of the
Confederate Fleet in the Mediterranean, and that Assignments had been already
received for a good part of the Sum.

In this same Posture of Affairs, the main Business now was to keep some Men of
War always in a readiness to prevent all sinister Events, and to send forth
other Frigates upon the scout, to discover what Ships the Enemy had Abroad, and
for the preservation of the Merchants Trade. And this continual Cruising of the
English and Dutch, had such good success, that the Commerce of the French
received considerable Interruption almost every day. About the 20th of October,
were brought into Cadiz, besides those already mentioned, a French Man of War
of Twenty Four Guns. and an Algerine, having on Board Two Hundred Turkish
Passengers, with a great many Presents for the Grand Seignor, the whole being
valued at Four Hundred Thousand Pieces of Eight. Captain Cornwall in the
Adventure, took Two French Prizes as they were sailing through the Streights
Mouth, bound from Marseilles to Lisbon, very richly laden with Silks and other
valuable Commodities, and brought them into Cadiz upon the 30th of September.
Capt. Watton in the Lark, took a French Prize laden with Fish from
Newsoundland, and carried her into the same Port, upon the 9th of October. The
Mary Galley and Greyhound, carried in another Prize upon the 12th, bound from
Lisbon to Marseilles; and the same day the Portsmouth Galley arrived at Cadiz,
with Two French Satee's bound from Sally to Marseilles. About the middle of
December, the Dragon took a French Man of War that carried Thirty Six Guns, and
Two Hundred Men, called the Sphere, upon the Coast of Portugal, and sailed
away with his Prize to Cadiz. So that the Damage which the French sustained by
the Cruising of the English and Dutch, in the Spanish and Mediterranean Seas,
was no less than the loss of Nineteen Prizes, among which were Seven
Merchantmen richly laden, and all this before the end of November. Nor must we
omit another very Rich Ship, bound from Marseilles to Smyrna, said to be worth
several Hundred Thousand Pieces of Eight, which was taken about the beginning
of January, by Two Dutch Privateers that cruis'd about Maltha.

Toward the latter end of January, the Letters from Cadiz gave an Account, that
the Spaniards were diligently preparing to get their Men of War ready to join
the Confederates, who by that time had Careen'd the greatest part of the Fleet;
Admiral Russel all the while restraining both Soldiers and Seamen under the
Severity of an exact Discipline, and was become so Formidable in the
Mediterranean, that the Divan of Algier, thought it high time to court him; and
to that purpose sent the following Letter.

The Vice-Governour Ibrahim Estandi, and all the Divan, to the Renowned
Admiral, and Valiant General Russel, our Dear and Well-beloved and Faithful
Friend, so well esteemed also by that Christian King, whose Kingdom may it be
always prudently governed, Greeting.
WE write this Letter to you, protesting that it is impossible to express our
Friendship for you, nor to utter it in our Words. We beseech the Almighty God,
that your Enemies and ours, may be reduced to that Extremity, that they may be
always unable to withstand your Power. And it is our Desire, that the
Friendship which is between us, may every manner of way increase. God be
praised, for that this Year you are come into the Mediterranean Sea, to our
great Joy. The Ship, which you sent us, is happily arrived in this Port, and
the Captain, who is at your Service, together with the Consul, who in all
Places, and upon all occasions, loudly speak your Fame, have delivered the
Letter which you wrote to us and the Divan, wherein we find Assurances of your
own, and the Friendship of your great King: Upon which, we caused all the Canon
of our Castle to be discharged, to the great joy of those that love us, and the
terror of our Enemies. We are assured, that the English are the best Friends we
have, and we beseech God to preserve both them and us from all Evil. We were
extremely overjoyed at the sight of these Ships, and we shall take great
delight to behold them, as often as your Affairs will permit. We admired the
Prudence and Conduct of your Captain, in the Proofs which he gave of his good
With, and in his whole manner of Acting; but we were not in a capacity to show
him that kindness which he merited. Our Thrice Fortunate Governor and Master is
now besieging Tunis, with Thirty Thousand Men, which is the Reason of his
Absence, and which we beg of you not to take in ill part; for so soon as it
pleases God that he returns Victorious, the English will have no reason to be
dissatisfied with the Testimonies of his Friendship. You likewise give us to
understand, that your Master has granted our Desires, in setting Mr. Cole, a
Person well known to us, to be his Agent and Consul amongus, and to recall our
Ancient Friend Mr. Baker, to which we consent with all our Hearts. And yet, how
is it possible he can leave us, before he sees our Fortunate Governor, his
intimate Friend, It may be our Governor, when returned, will send to the King
of England other Letters, and other News, with greater Proofs of his
Friendship. We expect him in Forty or Fifty Days. And though the Consul be very
earnest to Embark, we all desire that he would be pleased to stay till our
Governor's Return. We will have ready at his Service, whatever Ships shall be
requisite for him, in case there be none that belong to his Britannic Majesty.
And perhaps this little stay of his, as it may not be unprofitable to us, so
neither may it be dis-serviceable to your Monarch. This puts us in hope, that
our Request will not be displeasing to you, but redound to the Consternation
both of yours and our Enemies. We return you Thanks for defending our Vessels
against the Hollanders. We acknowledge your Favor, and beg of God, that in
recompense of your Kindness, he would afford you his Benediction. The Dutch
were our Friends, when we were under another Governor, till the French both
kindled and fomented the present War. The time will come when we shall renew
our former Friendship, and Brotherly Union, if God blesses our good Friend, the
King of England with Life. War is a strange thing, it causes more Vexation than
Pleasure: Yet if the Hollanders are in Amity with the King of England, and
desire to be our Friends, it may so fall out, that our Successor will accept of
their Friendship. God grant that the Affection which the King of England has
for you and us, and which we have for that Prince and you, may be always
Cordial, Sincere, and of long Continuance. We recommend you to the Peace of God.

The Fifteenth Day of the Moon Mahorticam, in the Year 1106. From out Renowned
City of Algiers, in Barbary.

Nor were the Calm Words of this Letter, the sole effect which the wintring of
Admiral Russel wrought upon the Pirates of Barbary; for upon the 5th of
September last, Mr. Baker then Consul for the English Nation at Argier, went
from thence in an Algerine Man of War for Tunis, and being conducted to the
Camp of Shahan Dey, who then lay before that City, delivered to him the Letter
from His Majesty of Great Britain. Upon which, the Dey calling together all the
Tripoline Officers that were in the Camp, recommended to them the renewing the
Peace which they had with the King of England; and having written to the same
Effect, to the Dey of Tripoli, ordered a Man of War to carry Mr. Baker thither,
where he was not only welcomed with a Reception, but easily obtained his
Desires, which ended in a Confirmation of Peace with the Governor of that
Place, much to the Advantage of the English Nation, and as much to the
Disappointment of the French, who endeavored all they could to prevent it.
Though others say, it was Mr Lodington who revived that Pacification.

The 31th of December arrived at Cadiz, under the Convoy of the Rupert, and
several other Men of War, the Store-Ships and Victuallers that set Sail from
the Spit-Head, the 5th of the same Month.

Upon the 26th of December, Ten English Men of War set sail from Cadiz, to
cruise about the Coast of Portugal; and Three Davs after, a Dutch Privateer
carried into Cadiz, a French Prize, which he had taken in the Mouth of the
Streights, and sent it away for England, under a Convoy bound thither, with
several Merchant Men.

Letters also from Madrid of the Sixth of January, New Style, gave an account
that the English and Dutch Frigates cruising in the Streights, had taken and
sent to Cadiz, Two Ships belonging to Genoa, as they said, but bound for
several Ports of France, and richly laden.

Soon after, a French Man of War sailing out of the River of Lisbon, with Two
Merchant Men under her Convoy, Homeward bound, was taken by one of the Men of
War, which Admiral Russel had sent to cruise upon the Coast of Portugal; and
the Two Merchant Men had run the same Fate, had they not escaped by the favor
of the Night. The Captain of the French Frigate, whose Name was Monsieur De la
Rochefueille, was afterward set Ashore at Cascons, together with all his Men,
to the number of Three Hundred. Nor was it long after, before Three Zeland
Privateers carried into Cadiz, a Dunkirk Caper of Twenty Guns.

Toward the beginning of March, arrived at Whitehal the News of an Engagement
between Capt. Killegrew, and certain French Men of War in the Mediterranean.
The Relations were imperfect at first, That Capt. Killegrew having with him a
Squadron of Seven English Men of War, sent away. Three of them to cruise in the
Channel of Malta, and Three about Cape Pessaro, while he remained with his
single Ship in the Fare of Messina; that quickly after Capt. Killegrew fell in
with Two French Men of War, one of Sixty, the other of Fifty Guns, and engaged
them both for the space of Four Hours; at what time upon the Report of the
Guns, one of the Men of War that had been sent away to cruise, came into his
Assistance, and so well seconded Captain Killegrew, that the French betook
themselves to a running Fight, and that in a short time after, the Ship of
Fifty Guns surrendered, but soon after sunk; and that the other having all her
Masts shot by the Board, yielded also, and was carried to Messina. This
Relation likewise gave an Account, that there were Seven Hundred Men Aboard the
Two French Men of War, the one half of which were Killed and Wounded, and that
Capt. Killegrew was killed in the Fight, and about Fifty of his Men Killed and
Wounded.

In the mean time other Letters from Madrid, of the Ninth of February, New
Style, gave an Account that his Majesty's Ship the Plymouth, was sailed up the
Streights to Cruise, but said nothing of this Fight. The same Letters also
farther added, that upon the First of January, the De^^sord Man of War returned
to Cadiz from Cruising, and brought in with her, Two Vessels of Genoa, to be
searched, and Two French Prizes, the one a Ship of Sixteen Guns bound from
Marseilles to St. Malo's, and the other a Brigantine of the same Place, bound
to Martenigo; and moreover, that the great Ships were then Careening.

Soon after, came other Letters from Madrid, dated Feb. 17th, giving an Account
that Two English Men of War were arrived at Bilboa, who had taken a French
Privateer of Eighteen Guns belonging to St. Malo, and retaken an English Ship
bound Home from Virginia. Other Letters also of the 23d of February, gaye
notice, that the Men of War and Merchants Vessels which were laden with
Provisions and Stores for the Fleet, and which set sail from the Spit head
about the middle of January, were all safely arrived at Cadiz.

But upon the 11th of March, was published a more ample Relation of the
Engagement of Captain Killegrew, and the Two French Men of War; giving an
Account, that upon the 20 of February, a Venetian Ship arriving at Leghorn,
from the Coast of Sicily, brought in News of an Engagement in the Channel of
Malta, between some English, and Two French Men of War, and that the Two latter
were taken: Which was also confirmed by a Bark that arrived at the same Port,
in Eight days from Messina, with the sollowing Circumstances.

The Plymouth, Carlisle, Newcastle, Southampton, Falmouth and Adventure
Frigates, the First being a Third Rate of Sixty Two Guns, and all the rest
Fourth Rates, cruising very near the Island of Pantalaria, upon the 28th of the
last Month, early in the Morning, discovered Two French Men of War, one of
Seventy Guns, named the Content, commanded by the Marquis de Chalard; the other
called the Trident, of Sixty Guns, commanded by the Count D' Anoy, who
supposing the English Frigates to be Merchant Men, bore up toward them; but
finding their Mistake, bore away again: Upon which the English made all the
Sail they could after them; so that it was Four in the Afternoon before the
Plymouth, commanded by Captain Killegrew could come up with them; and the Wind
being then Calm, she along engaged the French Ships for the space of more than
an Hour; in which time Captain Kill grew was killed with a Cannon Shoe. Then
came up the Falmouth, Captain Grantham Commander, who engaged them for near
another Hour, till the other Four English Frigates came in. Upon which the
French separated; the Carlisle, Newcastle and Southampton, pursued the biggest
of them, and the Falmouth and Adventure the le^e^; the Plymouth being forced to
bear away for Messina, having lost her Foretop Mast, and her other Masts and
Rigging being very much shattered. As for the French they made a Running Fight
of it the Night following, and part of the next Day; when their Ships being
very much shattered, and the Count D' Anoy, one of their Commanders, with many
of their Men Killed, they both yielded. The Trident being Leaky, and the Wind
blowing very fresh, the English sent her to Gorgonti, and carried the Content
to Messina, where they arrived the 2d of March. The Plymouth had Fourteen Men
Killed, and Thirty Wounded. Captain Kill^grew was buried (...) Messin^^ and the
Ca^^^sle, Newcastle and Southam^^^^ b^ing resitted, put to Sea again the 15th,
having notice, as it was said, that Two other Frigates were cruising near
Sicily: At the same time also the Plymouth and Falmouth were resitting,
together with the Prize. The English Conful at Messina, sent away the Marquess
of Chalard, and the greatest part of the French Prisoners, being about Five
Hundred and Fifteen, in Two Spanish Barks, and a Mall^^^ Ship for Leghoun, with
a Months Provision.

Some time after these Relations had been Printed in England, came another
Relation from France, written by the Count De Chalard himself, wherein the
Count would seem to be very particular; though he strains hard to give as much
honor as is possible for him to do to his own Country men.

AN ABSTRACT OF A LETTER FROM THE Count de Chalard, TO THE French Court.
UPon the 28th of January, (says he,) early in the Morning, we discovered Six
Sail, which we judged to be English.

By Two a Clock in the Afternoon, we were joined by a Vessel, which as we
judged, carried about Six Guns, which came up within Pistol Shot before she
fired a Gun. The Trident and I fought her for some time, but she being soon
after joined by some others that were the most nimble Sailors of her Squadron,
the Trident divided her Fire, while I plied the first Vessel altoge there till
Night came on; at what time my Adversary having lost one of her Masts, kept
off; but then I was attacked by another Vessel, which left the Trident, to fall
upon me.

All this while the Trident fought with great Violence, suffering several
Discharges from those that came toward the Content; but she lost one of her
Masts a little before Night came on: After which I saw no more of her. In the
Condition that I was, I sailed toward the Isle of Maretimo, being continually
chased by Three Ships, of which one was as big as the Content, which joined me
about Seven at Night, and fought me about Two Hours, and very much disabl'd me.
However I continued my course as well as I could.

The next Day in the Morning, I was rejoined by the Ship that fought me the
Evening before, which was followed by Two more; so that by Ten a Clock in the
Morning I lost my Main Mast.

The Enemy pursued their Advantage, and in the Afternoon cut down my Mizon, and
all the rest of my Masts; so that the great Ship played upon me as she pleased
her self; for we had neither Helm nor Sails left to govern our Ship. For which
reason, finding my self in this pitiful condition, I called the Officers
together to have their Advice, who all testified their willingness to sacrifice
their Lives for the King's Service; but considering the Condition of the Ship,
and the Superior Number of the Enemy, it was resolved that we should yield,
which was done the 29th, at Four in the Afternoon.

The Officers and the Marine Guards, behaved themselves with extraordinary
Courage and Bravery.

After we had yielded, we were put Aboard the Carlisle; by the Captain of which
Vessel we were extremely well used; nor did they take away our Swords, which
was done out of a particular esteem which they had for my Person.

We were carried to Messina, where we met the other English Men of War, and the
Officers of the Trident, which fared no better than we did, though the Officers
and Soldiers behaved themselves with all the Bravery imaginable. And the next
day that we arrived in the Port, the Governor of Messina sent us a Civil
Compliment, offering to serve us to the utmost of his Power, and ordered us to
want for nothing. This Letter was subscribed

CHALARD.


Upon the 8th of March, Five English, and Four Dutch Men of War, sailed away
from Cadiz, to meet the Homeward bound Turkey Ships, and the Mary, Canterbury,
Dragon, and Mury Galley returned from Cruising. And much about the same time
Rear Admiral Nevil was going out with another Squadron of English and Dutch Men
of War.

Toward the beginning of April, the Portsmouth, Greyhound and Lark returned
from Cruising, having been as far as Toulon, where they took a fisher Boat with
Six Men, who confirmed what had been reported before, that the French had no
design to fit out their Fleet at Toulon, but that they were Fortisying the Town
and the Haven, to secure it against the Assaults of the English and Dutch:
More-especially, that they were at work to Cleanse and Fortify a small Port in
Provence, wherein to lay up their Galleys, as believing they will be more safe
there, than at Marseilles.

On the 6th of April, Seventeen English and Dutch Men of War set sail from
Cadiz, under the Command of Roar Admiral Nevil; but upon the 9th, they were put
back by contrary Winds.

Upon the 18th of April, Six English Frigates returned to Cadiz, that set sail
from thence some time before, having left in the Port of Messina, the Two
French Ships of Seventy and Sixty Five Guns, which they took in the Channel of
Malta.

Upon the 20th of the same Month, Admiral Russel ordered the whole Fleet to
fire their Guns at a Minutes Distance between the Firing of every Gun, as being
a Solemnity due upon the first notice of the Queen's Funeral.

Upon the 22d of April, a numerous Fleet of Store-Ships, Victuallers,
Bomb-ketches, Transport-Ships, and Merchantmen, making in all Sixty Sail,
arrived at Cadiz from England, under a Convoy of several Men of War, commanded
by Captain Warren; and then it was said, that Admiral Russel would speedily put
to Sea with the whole Fleet. It Is also said, that there is an English Consul
arrived at Rome, to assure that Court, that if the Confederate Fleet came into
those Seas, it would not be to do the least Damage to the Ecclesiastical State;
and that he also at the same time demanded that the said Fleet might have leave
to buy Fresh Provisions at Civita Vecchia, in case they should stand in need of
them.

After this, the Letters of the 4th Instant, gave an Account, that the Fleet
had lain several Days with their Top sails loose, so that 'twas generally
believed they were put to Sea e're this.

Other Letters also from Coronna, gave an Account, that Two English Frigates
had lately taken a French Privateer of Twenty Four Guns off of the Southern
Cape; moreover that the Delaval had taken a Brigantine of Six Guns, and Seventy
Men: And farther, that Captain Goade in the Boyn, has brought to Gibraltar, a
Great French Ship richly laden, that pretended to be a Venetian.

Thus we have accompanied this Magnificent and Formidable Fleet in all the last
Summers Expedition, to the great disappointment of France, brought it into
Harbor during the Winter, and seen it ready to put to Sea again. So that if
the French have not made Toulon and Marseilles Inaccessible to Fire and Flames,
and Impenetrable to the Batteries of Marine Thunder, it may be expected, and,
we doubt not, but to give a more pleasing Relation of the Actions of this
Summer, and fuller of Variety in the next Account.

FINIS.

