An Exact RELATION of the most Remarkable Transactions that happened lately in
IRELAND. With an Account of a great Sea Fight between the ENGLISH and FRENCH
Fleets.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

THE late King James, or rather the French King Lewis having got into their
hands all the Towns and Ports in Ireland, Londonderry, and Inniskilling
excepted, and by that means stopped all Opportunities of Correspondence, by the
former Methods, we have no Advices thence, but what either come by way of
Scotland, or else by Persons who make their escape by Sea hither, as frequently
some do even in Gabbards, viz. an open Vessel not unlike our Lighters on the
Thames.

Diverse of which have arrived near Chester, Liverpool, and in the West of
Stotland, one of which lately arrived with 80 Passengers, who came from
Londonderry, and say that garrison had made offers of Surrendering to the late
King, on Conditions to carry off their Baggage, and have their Lives, which was
at first accepted of; but Monsieur D'Aveaux. who presides in all Councils,
would not consent, alleging, That sort of proceeding was not the way to arrive
at the Conquest that must be made in that Kingdom, which has so exasperated
and defperated the Garrison, as to resolve to hearken to no Conditions, but
stand it out to the last Man, or until it shall please God to give Opportunity
for their being reinforced with such sufficient help as to be enabled to take
the Field.

Our last Advices thence say, they are Besieged by a great Army, but have 7000
Fighting Men in Garrison, Arms, Ammunition, and Provisions for two Months, and
doubt not of holding it, having in three Sallies killed many of the Irish and
French, and amongst the latter a General Officer, and it is believed e're this,
that Major General Kirk, Sir John Trelawney, and Sir John Hanmore, with their
Regiments, and the Regiment, late Col. Edgworth's, now the Earl of Meath's, are
got safe into Derry.

On Monday arrived at Chester Col. St. George, to Command the Regiment late
Col. Richards, (a Serjent of which for deserting did suffer Death the 7th
Instant at Chester) and also Colonel Stewart to Command the Regiment, late
Col. Cunningham's now at Liverpool, and the same day went post for London, the
Colonels that formerly Commanded them.

The Garrison of Londonderry having (for what Cause not yet known) a Jealousy
that Col. Lundee their Governor was guilty of some Designs upon them, they
confined him, and chose another as you have heard; but their Rage continuing,
and fearing every day to be hanged, he found means to make his escape in a
small Vessel, which putting in at Grenoch in the West of Scotland, and being
there known, and the Circumstances he was under, the Scots secured him, and
sent him Prisoner to Dumbritton Castle, whence on the second Instant he was
brought to Edinburgh, and will there be Examined, Punished, or Acquitted.

The brave Lord Kingston, Col. Buchan, and diverse Persons of Quality are
arrived from the North of Ireland to Edinburgh, and thence gone for England, to
wait on the King: Some of these Gentlemen say, that the present State of the
Protestants is scarce conceiveable, being surrounded with all sorts of
Miseries, and laboring under all the Necessities of Humane Life, and the daily
fears of Death by Barbarous hands, having no visible deliverance under God, but
from England: These worthy Persons kept together, and in diverse Skirmishes
killed many of the Irish, and defended their Families, Neighbors, and Friends,
until Powder, Ball, and Provisions failed, and the Enemy so far advanced, that
they could not retreat so far as Derry, but Embarked for Scotland, first
killing all their fine Horses, to prevent them falling into the Papists hands,
Who give out, That when they have received their further Succors from France,
and reduced to Obedience, the Heretical Rebels in Londonderry, and in
Inniskilling, they are to march further Northward, and Embarque for Scotland:
But by the Unanimous Zeal of the Convention and People of that Ancient Kingdom,
their Expectation and Dependence has deceived them, most of the Chiefs of
Clanns or Tribes have freely offered their Service for the King and Estates,
and the rest Cited to give the Bond of Peace for themselves and Vassals: Nay,
the Viscount of Dundee who has with about 200 Horse rode the length of Murray
in the North, and amongst the Duke of Gordon's, and other of the Highland
Clanns cannot get any to obey his Commands, or by Persuasion engage any
Gentleman to join with him, no not the Papist Highlanders; and such have been
the Zeal and dispatch of the Convention, that all the Militia both Officers and
Soldiers are settled, and all good Protestants: And above all this, the Lord
Neile Campbell, Sir Hugh Campbell of Caddell, and all the Nobility, Lords, and
Lairds, whose Territories are in any Danger from an Irish French Invasion, have
applied to the Convention with Offers of raising and heading many Regiments
without Charge to the Public, which is accepted, and Powers given them so to
do, and all the Militia put into Protestants Hands: So that it is believed an
Army of 20000 Horse and Foot will sooner be in the North of Ireland from
Scotland, than Scotland invaded by the French and Irish Army, whose very Names
are become more odious then seared by the Bratish.

The French Fleet having in March last Transported the late King into Ireland,
returned back to Breast, where they have lain ever since, and being increased
unto near Forty Sail of all sorts.

On Friday Morning, April the 26th set Sail again for Ireland, having on Board
many Land-men, a great Sum of Money, Arms, and Ammunition, steering for
Kingsale, and were met on Monday the 29th at eight at Night, seven Leagues
Westward of the Cape of Ireland near the Shore, the Wind at East, by Mr. Andrew
Hopkins Commander of the Adventure of Byddiford, homewards bound from Maryland
with Tobacco, who says they were in all 37 Sail, whereof 20 Capital Ships, 8
Fireships, the rest Tenders, and Fly-Boats with Soldiers, one of them made
Sail after Hopkins, who braced to his Sails, and staid for him, but the French
Admiral fireing a Gun the Frigate left the persuite, and borne up to the Fleet,
who made but a slack Sail, most of them having their Topsails on the Cap, and
all in a Line in a fighting posture, and believes they were designed for the
North of Ireland.

On Tuesday about eight in the Morning, April the 30th, Mr. Hopkins met one of
Admiral Herbert's Scouts who commanded him on Board, and afterward went to the
Admiral, and gave him a description of the French Fleet, and that they were
then about to Leagues to Leeward of our Fleet, upon which the Seamen gave a
very great Shout, and made all preparations to engage them, making also all the
Sail they could: Our Fleet consisted of 26 Sail without the Fireships who were
left in Milford Haven, being very Leaky; when Mr. Hopkins left our Fleet, some
of his Men from the Topmast head discovered 8 Sail which he believed were part
of the said French Fleet, and that our Fleet met them that Evening; and further
says, the French could not Land their Men, etc. thereabouts.

On Tuesday last the Mary, Captain Matthew Aylmer Commander, came to the
Spithead, and came ashore at Portsmouth, whence he immediately took Post for
the Court, to give his Majesty an account of the Engagement that ensued on
Wednesday May the first, as Follows; the English Admiral finding them on
Tuesday Night got all into the Bay of Bantrey, lay by all Night, and next
Morning by break of Day stood in upon them, and with 8 or 9 Sail made a
desperate Fight against 28 Sail of the French, and five Fireships, with all
the disadvantages imaginable, the Enemy having the Wind, and the English not
able to make use of their lower Tire of Guns, yet nevertheless maintained the
Fight for many hours, and at five at Night stood off to Sea, and the French at
the same time tacking from them, by which it is guessed they have received great
loss of Men, and damage in their Ships, and had not then Landed either Men,
Money, Arms, or Ammunition; which two reasons may be given for; the one, that
they pursued not the Advantage they had by Numbers and Wind; or else according
to their constant practice by Land and Sea, not to hazard Men or Ships without
inevitable Necessity; their work then being to Land Succors, not fight.

Letters of the third Instant from our Fleet say, the French were in the Bay,
so near the Shore, that they could not get to Windward of them, that five of
their Capital Ships were at one time upon the Elizabeth, Admiral Herbert's
Ship, and the Pendennis, Capt. Cloudsly Shovel's Ship, but cleared themselves
bravely; the Admiral is much damaged in his Sails and Rigging, and lost 20 or
30 Men, the Pendennis not so many, Captain Ashby in the Edgar 60 or 70, Captain
Aylmer in the Portland is killed, and 14 or 15 of his Men.

They have sunk two of the French Capital Ships and killed many of their Men,
that five of the English Ships chiefly bore four hours hot Engagement, the reit
not being able to come up to them.

Letters from Exon of the 8th Instant say, Admiral Herbert is come into
Plymouth, and that they have sunk the French Admiral, and one more, and that
the English are refitting their Sails, and Rigging, in which they suffered the
most Damage.

Letters from Chester of the 8th Instant say, the Advice-Boat with an Express
from the King to Londonderry that went off from Liverpool the 30th past, is
come back, and gives account that the Irish Coa^t was full of Soldiers, but
however with some difficulty, by help of a Man of War ent in the Express, which
when received by direction, they were to give three Huzzaes, which they did,
and made great rejoicing for it, drinking their Majesty's Healths in Spring
Water; and it is said have assured the King by Express back, they will hold out
to the last, and want neither Ammunition nor Provisions, and in three late
Sallies on the Besiegers, have killed 400, and retreated each time with little
loss.

And this Week is come to Town one Mr. Web a most worthy, Grave, and Reverend
Divine, who is Minister of Inniskilling in Ireland, who having Proclaimed King
William and Queen Mary, and publicly Prayed for them, enraged the Papists to
that height, that the Lord Galmoy at the head of some thousands of Irish were
drawing toward the place, threatening to hang up the said Minister higher than
Haman was, and to put the rest to the Sword. But they fear him not, having 2000
Men well Armed in the place, and Ammunition and Provisions for some Months, yet
such was their respect and tenderness to this worthy Divine, that they even
sorced him to withdraw, least time and Accidents might force them to Surrender
into the hands of those who would have no Mercy on him; so he escaped to
Londonderry, and there got ten Barrels of Powder to be sent to Inniskilling.

Since the arrival of Captain Aylmer (Brother to the late Captain Aylmer that
was killed in the Fight) who brought the Account to the King of the Engagement,
diverse Letters are come, which confirm the former Relations, and some with this
Addition, That the next day after the Fight they took two small French Vessels,
who were making homewards with Advice of the Action: The Prisoners do declare,
that their Admiral was killed, and two of their Capital Ships sunk, 12
disabled, and a great number of their Men killed and wounded, and that they all
highly applaud the Courage of the English Seamen, and bravery of their
Commanders. Admiral Herbert is certainly come into Plymouth, much disabled, and
the other disabled Ships into Portsmouth, where all hands are put to refit
them, to join the Dutch Fleet, which are passed Westward, consisting of 28 Sail
of Capital Ships, 10 Fireships, and some Tenders.

LONDON: Printed for J. Morris in Fleet Street. MDCLXXXIX.


