THE EXAMINATION OF Francisco de Faria, Delivered at the BAR of the HOUSE OF
COMMONS, Monday the First day of November. in the year of our Lord, 1680.

Perused and Signed to be Printed, according to the Order of the House of
Commons, By Me WILLIAM WILLIAMS,Speaker.

Reprinted 1680.

THF INFORMATION OF FRANCISCO de FARIA,
Born in America, Son of John de Faria a Jew, of St. Giles in the Fields Gent.
Taken upon Oath before Me Edmund Warcupp Esquire; one of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace in the said County and City, in presence of John Arnold Esquire; by
command of the Right Honorable the Lords Committees, for Discovery of the late
Popish Plot. 26. October. 1680.
THis Informant says, That, being a Limner in Antwerp in Flanders, in the year
1675. by the persuasion of Three of the Sisters of Sir George Wakeman then in
the Nunnery of Sta. Teresia, and of Father Worsely a Jesuit, he became a Roman
Catholic, and often communicated at his hand. And the said Worseley then
persuaded this Informant to come into England, and he would make this Informant
happy, and then gave this Informant 35 pistols in Gold, to bear this
Informantes charges for England. But this Informant did not immediately follow
him to England, but took up Arms, and was a Captain Lieutenant under Colonel
Montgomery, in the Prince of Orang's Service, where he practiced to make and
throw hand-Granadoes, and grew to some note for that Service; and in the year
1678 this Informant being in England, and well versed in Seven or Eight
Languages was preferred to be Interpreter and Secretary of Languages to Gaspar
Abrew de Freitas Ambassador in ordinary from the Prince of Portugal to the King
of England. To which Ambassador this Informant had been known for many years
before, and the said Ambassador among other things, acquainted this Informant,
that Don Francisco do Melos the late Ambassador that died here was much out of
favor with the Prince of Portugal, for that he had in disercetly pushed on,
the promotion of the Catholic Religion before a due time, and had caused
several Popish Books to be Printed in English, which had given too great alarm,
with many other things relating to the Popish Religion, which he greatly
condemned him for; And the said Ambassador, to indear this Informant, did often
give him Money and entrusted him in Assairs of the greatest Moment, and carried
this Informant with him, to all or most of the great Ministers of State in
England, using him for his Interpreter; and employed this Informant to resort
to several Persons for an account of the Orders and Passages in the Kings
Council, of all which the said Ambassador usua ly had an account within an hour
after the rising of the Council, or any Committees. And the said Ambassador,
much about the time of the Trial of the Five Jesuits, expressing a great sorrow
for the oppressing of the Catholics, did wish that Oats and Bedlow were made
away; And then commanded this Informant to go to Mass and Confession, and then
told this Informant, that he might do the Catholic Cause great Service, and
might make his own Fortune if he would join in destroying Oats and Bedlow, and
that 50000 Reales d'ocho should be given for that Service, and that two
sufficient men should join with this Informant for the Killing of Oats and
Bedlow; But the said Bedlow being about that time in Ireland the said Murder
was deserred, and a repert being spread, that Bedlow was dead in Ireland, the
said Lord Ambassador said to this Informant, What a Fool were you! had you
killed him, you had gained that Money which I promised: But afterward
understanding that Bedlow was not dead, the said Ambassador renewed his
Solicitations to this Informant to prosecute the death of Oats and Bedlow,
assuring this Informant, That he would make good his promise of the said Sum of
Money to them, which should kill them; That he would besides, pay this
Informants Debts, and take this Informant with him into Portugal. Upon which
Discourse this Informant took the boldness to tell the Ambassador, That the
Death of Godfrey had done much hurt to the Catholic Interest, and he much
feared, that the Death of Oats and Bedlow would bring greater hurt. To which
the Ambassador, replied, he feared not that; and if Oats and Bedlow and
Shaftsbury were out of the way, the Parliament might come when they please.
Whereupon this Informant asked, How shall Shaftsbury be killed? He replied,
Lord Shaftsbury goes often into the country, and I know you are excellent at
hand-Granadoes, you shall throw one of them into Shaftsbury's Coach, which will
destroy all that are in the Coach upon the breaking, and you and your
Companions shall also have Fire Arms to kill, if the other do not full
Execution. And the Ambassador added, that he had provided Two other Persons,
Men of Honor, to join with this Informant in that Service, but na^ed them not,
not the reward that was promised to be given for it; And then Ordered this
Informant to provide a Man who ^ could speak French and Dutch to carry a Letter
into Flanders; Whereupon this Informant applied himself to one Salter, who
keeps a Sempsters Shop in Drury Lane, to carry the Letter: Who saying, he could
not go, because he had Horses lame; which this Informant's Servant observing,
said Sir, If you please my Husband shall go; But this Informant refused him as
not speaking French, nor acquainted with the Country. And this Informant did
(according to the Ambassadors Order) offer the said Salter ^0. l. to undertake
the Journey, because he was acquainted with the Country, etc.

February last past, the said Ambassador lest England, and returned to
Portugal, leaving this Informant on a sudden with very little Money, after his
many promises to take this Informant with him into Portugal, and to get the
Prince to provide plentifully for him in Portugal. Upon which this Informant
recollecting the said former passages, and fearing lest he should beaccused,
though Innocent, went to his own Father, declaring the offers made to this
Informant for the killing the Persons aforesaid; but his Father and Mother
advised him to throw Ashes upon it, for none that have discovered are secure,
because some are of one mind and some of another; And this informant then left
a Note with his Mother, signifying that if this informant were killed, it must
be by the Portugals, and he would lay his Death to them, because of the
passages aforesaid; and did the like with Mrs. Mary Seares, who finding this
informant in a very disturbed condition, observing that in his Frenzy sits he
spoke of the Death of Oats, Bedlow and Shaftsbury; so far prevailed with this
informant when out of his Frenzy sits, as to make him relate the whole Story to
her, who then persuaded this Informant to keep all secret, lest he brought
himself into Troubles. But this Informant hearing about the 6th. of April last,
That a certain Gentleman of Note was wounded almost to Death, did recollect
that one Wyard had tempted him to Bastinado such a kind of Person, which this
Informant had before, viz.

In the beginning of March, told unto the said Mrs. Mary Seares, for an account
whereof this Informant refers himself to his Information taken before Sir
Philip Mathews, a Copy whereof this Informant delivered this day to the said
Committee of Lords: And this Informant did also repair about the first of May
last to the Earl of Clarendon, and in writing gave the said Earl under his
hand, a Paper containing the matter about the wounding the said Gentleman, and
hopes the said Earl will produce the said Paper, to which this Informant
refers. To which this informant added by word of Mouth, That the Earl of
Shaftsbury was in danger of his Life: to which Earl this Informant repaired,
because he was going into Flanders, and fearing he might be accused for the
wounding of the said Gentleman, during his absence, That that writing delivered
to the Earl of Clarendon might clear his Innocence; And this Informant farther
says, That the Lady Abergavenny sent for this Informant into
Lincolns-Inn-fields this last Summer was a twelve month; And then told this
Informant, the Lord Powjs would speak with him in the Tower: To which this
Informant answered, He would; but acquainting the said Ambassador therewith,
His excellency forbid him to go: Wherewith this Informant also acquainted the
said Earl of Clarendon, who seemed to know the Lady Abergavenny, saying, She
was his Neighbor; and he farther says, That a certain person came to the
Ambassador, and in this Informants presence told the Ambassador That one
Roberts Porter to the watergate at Somerset House was apprehended, upon which
this Informant observed the Ambassador to look very pale, and thereupon a^ked
the Ambassador, My Lord, Is he concerned in this business with me? To which the
Ambassador replied, He is a man of Courage, and will undertake any thing.

And in May last, this Informants Brother, Abraham de Faria coming to London,
this Informant told the Ambassador of it; who asked if he were a Catholic: and
being answered thereto, His Excellency asked if he were a man of Courage.
Whereunto this Informant replied We are all well born and bred. And his Lordship
replied I would have him in this Affair with is, were Isare of him: And
Commanded this Informant to send him to him, this Informant told his said
Brother, that the Ambassador would speak with him. But this Informant was not
with him when he went to the Ambassador, nor knows what passed between And
this Informant says, that upon the day of Sir George Wakeman's Try^l, the
Ambassador sent him in his Coach to wait upon the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs,
and sent up word by one of his Gentlemen, That one from the Portugal Ambassador
would speak with him. The servant brought answer, That he could not see the
Ambassador that day, because he should be engaged upon the Trial of Sir George
Wakeman all the day. Which the Ambassador being acquainted with, his Lordship
sent this Informant to hear the Trial. And this Informant stood by Sir George
all the time, and gave him White paper to Write upon: and employed one Mr.
Cooper a Scrivener in Drury Lane to take in Writing the Trial, and gave him 20
s. for his pains: which this Informant delivered to the Ambassador; who
immediately sent it to the Queen then at Windsor: with which, and a Letter,
this Informant should have gone to Windsor, had he not been very weary. And the
same night this Informant was sent to Sir George Wakeman: in St. Martins-Lane,
to Complement him on the Ambassadors part: but he was not then come to his
Lodging in St. Martins-Lane.

So this Informant went next morning, and found him in bed with his Wife, and
(as this Informant was Commanded) told him from the Ambassador, That his
Fortune and Estate was at his Service, and so was his Prince 's; and the
Prayers of the good Catholics have prevailed for your delivery; and we are all
bound to Sir Philip Lloyd for his Generosity to you at the Trial: and we are
all bound to pray for him. Whereunto Sir George Wakeman replied, If it had not
been for him, I had not been saved: and so we are all bound to pray for him.
And I pray return my Lord many thanks for his Offers: and that he would wait on
his Excellency that very day, to give him thanks for his Favors: but that he
must first go to Windsor, to wait on the Queen: but at his return he would wait
on his Excellency. And Sir George then took this Informant by the hand, and
said, I am sorry, Mr. Faria, that I had not the happiness to speak with you
before: For I am informed what a man you are; and that you could do great
Service for the Catholics: But alas! it is now too late. Thence this Informant
went again by Order, to the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, to know when my Lord
Ambassador should visit him. The Lord Scroggs answered, that the Ambassador
would do him great Honor to visit him, but he was that day to go out of Town
by one of the Clock. Wherewith the Ambassador being acquainted, he went about
Twelve in his Sedan, with a Coach of State, wherein this Informant was, to the
Lord Scroggs in Chancery Lane, The Complement was in Portugueze (and this
Informant Interpreted) to this effect: My Lord, I come to visit you as you are
a Minister of State; and am sent as Ambassador from the Prince of Portugal, to
the King of Great Britain, and am directed to visit you and am likewise to
thank you for the Justice you have done yesterday to Sir George Wakeman. To
which the Lord Scroggs answered, I am placed to do Justice, and will not be
curbed by the Vulgar, and so I thank your Prince, and your self for the Great
Honor you have done me. And this Informant farther says, That a Portugueze
came to him, when the Earl of Ossory was to go for Tangier, offering this
Informant, that he might go with the said Earl, as his Interpreter, and should
have 300 l. per annum for his pains. But this Informant reflecting, that the
sum offered was too big for that Service believed this was a Snare to take away
his Life. The same Portugueze offered him to go for Flanders, where Monsieur
Fonsec might prefer him to the Prince of Parma. But he looked upon that as a
Snare also, and therefore refused. And this Informant says, That about 6
months ago he was assaulted by two unknown Persons, with their Swordsdrawn; but
he happily escaped from them. And farther says not. Fra: de Faria. The
Information that the said Informant gave to the Lord Clarendon, May 1. 1680.
The Information of Francis de Faria of St Giles in the Fields, Com. Midd. Gent.
Taken upon Oath before Sir Philip Mathews Bar. One of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace for the said County, Assigned this 15 day of July 1680.

THis Informant on his Oath says, That about the latter end of March, or the
beginning of April last past, a Gentleman who called himself Mr. Wyard, came to
this Informant at Will's Coffee-House in Coven-Garden, and spoke very kindly to
this Informant, and desired this Informant to go to a Taveren and drink a Glass
of Wine with him: Which this Informant consented unto, and went out of the
Coffee-House with him, and desired him to go to the Rose. Taveren in
Bridges-street: But he desired to go farther. At the Horse Shoe Tavern this
informant desired the said Wyard to go in thither; But he there desired to go
farther, and so drilled this Informant on into Gray's Inn Walks: which this
Informant consented unto. And in Discourse he there told this Informant, that
this Informant had his Fortune in his hand. This Informant asked him, In What?
The said Wyard replied, He knew my wants: if you will but Cudgel a man, you
shall have 200 l. One Hundred in hand, and the other Hundred when the work or
business is done. To which this Informant replied, that that might be done by a
Porter for a shilling. To which the said Wyard replied, you may believe, by the
Sum that is offered, that there is something more to be done besides
Cudgelling. And when you have done, you shall have a better Reward.

To which this Informant replied, he scorned such unworthy and base proposals;
and utterly refused to treat with him about it. Then the said Wyard desired
this Informant to go and speak with the Lord Powis in the Tower. To which this
Informant answered, That he had no business with the Lord Powis, nor the Lord
Powis any with him, as he knew of. who then showed this Informant a Letter from
the Lord Powis to this Informant: which Letter was to this effect,

Mr. de Faria, Come to me to the Tower, and speak with me: but let no body know
who you are. The said Mr. Wyard, when he found this Informant utterly refused
to go to the Lord Powis, or to treat in the said business any farther, the said
Wyard then told this Informant, He would meet this Informant in the same place
on the morrow; and would then bring this Informant a Letter from a person of
Quality, whose hand this Informant did well know: and that this Informant had
Papers then in his pocket, under the said Persons hand. And on the morrow the
said Wyard did meet this Informant in the said place, and then showed him a
Letter writ in the Portugueze Language, which contained these words being into
English Translated.

Francis,
Do what this man bids you; for it shall be well done.

Subscribed G. A. B.


And this Informant farther says, That He knew the Hand, and did compare with
some Papers he had in his pocket, then signed by the same Hand. But
notwithstanding the said Letter, this Informant utterly refused to treat about
the said business any farther.

The said Wyard then desired this Informant to meet him the next day again, and
took his leave. And this Informant being desirous to know who the said Wyard
was, and where he lay, followed the said Wyard down Chancery Lane, and into
Cursitors-Alley, and into several turnings, but lost sight of him. And the next
day this Informant went to the same place, to meet the said Wyard, but the said
Wyard came not; nor could this Informant ever since find the said Wyard, or
hear of him, though he has made a great and general Enquiry after him: But
says, He could know him again if he could see him. And farther this Informant
says, That He the same day declared unto one Monsieur Camash, That he was
offered 200 l. to Cudgel a man. And also says, That being apprehensive that he
might be called in question after Mr. Arnold was Assaulted, the said Monsieur
Camash having charged him with it, and with receiving of the said 200 l. This
Informant went unto the Right Honorable the Earl of Clarendon, about the first
day of May and desired his Honor to take his Information in writing, (this
Informant being to go into Flanders) which the said Earl did; and this
Informant set his hand to it. And farther at present says not.

Signed, Francisco de Faria.
Jurat coram me,

Philip Mathews,
15th. July 1680.

This last Information only was Sworn before Sir Philip Mathews.

Francisco de Faira.




