AN EXACT RELATION OF THE Grand Ceremony OF THE MARRIAGE OF CHARLES the II. The
Most Catholic KING, WITH THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS Mademoiselle Marie
Louise D'Orleans, Neice to the High and Mighty Monarch CHARLES the II. King of
Great Britain, by the Mother's; And to LEWIS the XIV. the present French King,
by the Father's side. As it was performed at Fontainbleau by Cardinal Bouillon,
the Prince of Conti being Proxey in behalf of the most Catholic King.

By an Eyewitness, as it was Printed at Paris, and faithfully Translated.

LONDON: Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey, 1679.

THE CEREMONIES OF THE MARRIAGE OF THE KING of SPAIN, WITH Mademoiselle, etc.
SO soon as the Peace between France and Spain was signed at Nimmenghen, and
that the Ratifications were exchanged, the King of Spain applied himself to
nothing with greater diligence and affection, than to a strict confirmation of
the same Peace by a new Alliance with the King of France; the features of
Mademoiselle, and the continual Encomiums of her Wit and pleasing disposition,
made him take a resolution to send an extraordinary Ambassador to desire her in
Marriage.

To this purpose Don Paolo Spinola, Marquess de les Balbasez, who had been
chief in the Embassy of Spain, at Nimmenghen; being chosen, arrived at Paris
the 26 th of April, 1679, and in a particular audience which he had of the King
at St. German en Lay the 10 th of May, demanded Mademoiselle in Marriage for
the King his Master: To which the King made answer, That the asfair was of
importance, and that he would consider of it.

The Ambassador returned to Paris, and made his public Entry the 11 th of
June; and two days after had public audience of the King at St. Germans. At
last upon the 12 th of July, the King after he had discoursed the Queen,
Monsieur, and Mademoiselle, gave audience to the Ambassador; and at the same
time told him, That most gladly he consented to the demand of Mademoiselle by
the King of Spain.

The Marquess de les Balbasez immediately dispatched a Courier to Madrid, to
give the King of Spain the knowledge of the News which he expected with so much
impatience.

The King of France also sent another Courier to the Duke D' Estrees his
Ambassador at Rome, to demand of the Pope a Dispensation of the Let of
Consanguinity; which demand was also* seconded by another Courier from the
Marquess de les Balbasez, to the Marquess de Liche, Ambassador at Rome for the
King of Spain. The Pope readily yielded to their desires; and because it is the
custom to give these Dispensations to the Husband, they were therefore given
into the hands of the Marquess de Liche, who sent them to the Marquess of
Balbasez.

The 13 th of July the King of Spain had intelligence, that the King of France
had consented to his demand of Mademoiselle; and because it was necessary that
some person should espouse her in his behalf, he sent a blank Procuration,
desiring the King of France to fill it up, as should be most to his own liking.
So soon as this News was made public at Madrid, it caused a unanimous and
universal rejoicing. The whole City seemed to be all in a flame for several
days. The young Lords strove to outvy each other in magnificence of Festivals;
and the common people cried, That they had been always happy in Queens sent
them out of France.

In the mean while, the Chancellor of France, the Marshal, Duke of Villeroy,
the Sieur Colbert, Minister and Secretary of State, who had been nominated by
the King to draw up the Articles of the Marriage, signed them the 9 th of July,
together with the Ambassador of Spain.

The 20 th of August the Marquess of Balbasez had public audience of the King
of France, and gave him the King his Masters Procuration, and the Popes
Dispensations. Immediately the King of France deputed the Prince of Conti for
the person that was to espouse Mademoiselle in behalf of the King of Spain.
Some days before he had nominated the Prince and Princess d' Harcourt to attend
the Queen as far as the Pyrenean-Hills, and had ordered the Marshal of
Clerembauts Lady to wait on her, as Maid of Honor, and the Daughter of the
Marshal de Grancy, as Madam Dresser, till she came to the place who were to
attend her upon the Frontiers, were ordered to stay.

Some days after the King of France thought meet to appoint Fontainbleau as the
most proper place for the Grandeur of the ensuing Ceremonies; and therefore
ordered that the Contract should be there solemnized upon the last of August.

To which purpose he departed from St. Germans with the Queen, Monsieur the
Dolphin, Madam, and Mademoiselle, and arrived at Fontainbleau at six a Clock in
the Evening.

The 28 th the Sieur Pompone, Minister and Secretary of State, to whom the King
had given the Procuration of the King of Spain, and the Popes Dispensations,
went to the Prince of Conti, to show him the Procuration, and afterward
carried the same with the Dispensations to the Cardinal de Bouillon, who as
Grand Almoner of France, was to perform the Ceremony of the Nuptials.

The 30 th of August, the Eve of the day assigned for the Ceremony of the
Marriage was performed the Ceremony of the betrothment; In the Morning
Mademoiselle received the Communion, and at five in the Evening she went to the
Kings Apartment, where all the Princes of the Royal Family made their visits to
her. At six of the Clock the Sieur de Saintot, Master of the Ceremonies, came
to give the Queen notice that the King was in his Apartment, and that it was
then time for her to bring Mademoiselle to him. Immediately the Queen of France
began to set forward, led by the Knight de Vieville her Knight of Honor, and
by the Marquess of Hautefort her first Squire. Next to her proceeded Madam, led
by the Count de Vaillae, her Knight of Honor, and by the Marquess of Brom her
first Esquire. After her went Mademoiselle led by Monsieur the Dauphin, who
gave her the right hand; and by Monsieur who gave her the left hand. She had on
a Mantean of Tiffany interwoven with gold, the train whereof six Else in
length, was carried up by Madam Valois her Sister. Mademoiselle d' Orleans,
Madam Grand Duchess of Tuscany, and Madam de Guise, all three Daughters of the
deceased Monsieur, and Great-Grandchildren to Henry the Fourth, followed after;
after whom went Mademoiselle de Blois, Mademoiselle de Nantes, and the Duchess
of Vernevil.

The Queen coming into the Grand Cabinet, found there the King seated upon a
place raised on purpose, attended by the Prince of Roche sur Yon, the Count of
Vermandois, the Duke of Maine, and the Duke of Vernevel. Behind him was a great
Chair with elbows; before him a Table, and upon the Table a little Scritoire.
The Queen placed her self upon the left hand of the King, having also an
elbow-Chair behind her. The Princes and Princesses that attended her, ascended
the Scaffold, and placed themselves upon the right and left hand of the King
and Queen, after the manner of an Amphitheater.

Upon the right hand of the King was Monsieur the Dauphin, Madam, Mademoiselle
de Valois, Madam the Grand Duchess, the Prince of Roche sur Yon, Mademoiselle
de Blois, Mademoiselle de Nantes, and the Duke of Vernevel.

Upon the left of the Queen were Monsieur, Mademoiselle, Mademoiselle D'
Orleans, Madam de Guise, the Count of Vermandiise, the Duke of Maine, and the
Duchess of Vernevel.

In the interim, the Chevalier de Lorrain, accompanied by the Marquess of
Rhodes, Grand Master of the Ceremonies, and by the Sieur de Bonnevil,
Introductor of Ambassadors, were gone in the Kings Coaches to fetch the
Marquess de les Balbasez, whose Lodgings were in the White-horse Court; and
having crossed the whole Court, where was drawn up a Company of the French
Guards, and another of Switzers, the Drums of which Companies beat all the
while; he conducted him to the Prince of Conti, who received him at the end of
the Court, and walked not above two paces before him. Then the Ambassador
desired him to go the King in order to the Betrothments. As they came out, the
Prince of Conti went first, and they took Coach in the Kings Coach at the foot
of the Horse-shoo-stairs, alighted at the Sphinx Staircase, where a hundred of
the Guard of Switzers were ranged on each side of the Stairs. At the door of
the Guard-Hall they were received by the Duke of Luxemburgh Captain of the
Guards of the Body, who conducted him into the Kings Cabinet, where the Prince
of Conti entered, having the Ambassador on his right hand, and the Chevalier de
Lorrain on his left. After which, the Prince of Conti went and placed himself
between Madam the Grand Duchess, and the Prince of Roche sur Yon; and the
Ambassador applied himself to the King to complement him in behalf of the King
of Spain, be-covered while he spoke, as were all the Princes of the Royal
Family, and the Chevalier de Lorrain also.

At what time they ascended the Scaffold of State, the Chancellor of France
ascended also, and took his place according to custom, at the right hand of the
Chair of State. The Duke of Gesures, the Marquess of Gesures, the D. of St.
Agnan, and the Lord of Beauvilliers, first Gentlemen of the Chamber, the Prince
of Marsillac, Grand Master of the Wardrobe; the Marquess of Tilladel, Master of
the Wardrobe, ascended the Scaffold likewise, to place themselves behind the
King, while the D. of Montausier put himself behind the Dauphin, as first
Gentleman of his Chamber.

When the Ambassador had ended his Complement, he retreated to the side of the
Scaffold over against the King, where he stayed with the Chevalier of Lorrain
upon his left hand. Then the Sieur Pompone advanced toward the Table, and so
soon as the King and the Queen were seated in their Chairs of State, he read
with a loud voice the beginning of the Contract. But he had scarce read over
one part of the Conditions, before the King told him it was enough, and
presently signed the Contract.

The Queen, Monsieur the Dauphin, the Princes and Princesses of the Royal
Family, signed also underneath in the same Column, and afterward the
Ambassador signed alone upon the other column.

When the Contract was signed, the Cardinal of Bouillon entered, accouter'd in
his Pontifical Habits, attended by the Bishop d' Alet, and the Abbot of St.
Luc, the Kings Almoners, by Peter de la Chaise the Kings Confessor, and other
Ecclesiastics belonging to the Kings Chapel, and seated himself in a Chair of
State, placed upon the Scaffold just opposite to the King.

Presently Mademoiselle led by Monsieur the Dauphin, and by Monsieur, made
their approaches, and the Prince of Conti having put himself upon her right
hand, presented the King of Spain's Procuration and the Pope's Dispensation to
the Cardinal, who after that pursued the Ceremonies of Betrothment. He demanded
of the Prince of Conti, Whether or no he did not promise in the Name of Charles
the Second King of Spain, to take Marie Louise of Orleans, then present, for
his Wife? Upon which the Prince of Conti made his obeisance to the King, and
besought his leave. Which done, he asked Mademoiselle, Whether or no she
promised to take the King of Spain for her Husband? Who before she answered,
turned her self toward the King and Queen, Monsieur and Madam, and with a
profound reverence begged their permission.

The Affiance thus completed, the Cardinal Bouillon retired. The Prince of
Conti, accompanied by the Ambassador of Spain, returned to his Chamber: The
Queen, attended by Madam, Mademoiselle, and the other Princesses of the Royal
House, returned to their Apartment, and set themselves to order all things in
reference to the Marriage, which was to be consummated the next day.

The Great Chapel of the Castle was chosen for that Ceremony. The great Altar
of this Chapel fronts the great Gate, and there are eight small chapels on
each side. From the bottom of the two first of which, on both sides the Altar
was raised a stately foot-pace for the Cardinal. Over the great Gate were
Amphitheaters built for the Music. All along the Cornish, from the
Amphitheaters to the Altar, and in all the Overtures of the little Chapels
were made Balconies for the Persons of Quality, who were not concerned in the
Ceremony.

In the midst of the Chapel, somewhat nearer the Grand Altar than the door,
there was raised a kind of a high Scaffold, with a Canopy of State, with an
ascent of three steps, on the side whereof stood a fair Altar to say Mass at,
covered with a Canopee of Violet Velvet, embroidered with Flowerdeluces of
Gold, parted into three parts by two double Valance. The Scaffold was spread
with a Persian Carpet of Tapestree, the Ground whereof was Gold, and over this
Tapestry a foot-cloth of Violet Velvet, powdered with Flowerdeluces of Gold,
which covered all the kneeling-place before the Altar, and half the Scaffold.
All the Balconies also were spread with Persian-Tapestry, whose Ground was
Tissue.

Near the Altar, upon the Epistle-side, were raised three seats for the Clergy;
and a little lower, toward the high Canopy, three others for the Council. On
the other side were three more for the Ambassadors, over against the Clergy;
and three for the Secretaries of State, over against the Council; and of each
side of the high Canopy, one for the Knights of the Order. All the seats were
covered with blew Velvet, powdered with Flowerdeluces of Gold.

In the Morning, the Duke of Luxemburgh, Captain of the Guards of the body, had
placed his Guards at all the Entrances into the Chapel, to prevent confusion.
At Ten of the Clock the Chancellor of France habited in his Violet Satin
Robes, lined with Crimson, attended by the Councellers of State, and Masters of
Requests, in their Robes of black Satin, and square Caps, went to the Chapel,
and was placed by the Sieur Saintot, Master of the Ceremonies, upon a seat with
elbows, without a back, prepared on purpose for him: The Mace-bearers being
upon their knees at his feet, holding their Maces upright till the King came;
behind him stood his Secretary, and one of the Lieutenants of the Provosts.

The Count of Morstein, Ambassador extraordinary of Poland, the Abbot of
Staglia de Verne, Ambassador of Savoy, the Sieur Taborda Envoy extraordinary
from Portugal, and the Sieur Bagliani, Resident for the Duke of Mantua, arrived
almost at the same time, conducted by the Sieur Bonnevill, the Son, Introductor
of Ambassadors, and were seated by the Sieur de Saintott, Master of the
Ceremonies.

The Marquess of Segnelay, the Marquess of Chasteau Neaf, and the Sieur
Pompone, Secretaries of State, came presently after.

After them followed the Archbishops, and Bishops, the Bishop of Alet, and the
Abbot of the Prignan, Agent-General of the Clergy going before them, and were
placed by the Sieur Saintott.

The Duchess of Osnaburgh, the Princess her Daughter, the Duchess of
Mekelburgh, the Marchioness de les Balbasez, Prince Frederick Augustus of Saxon
Eusenach, Prince Augustus William of Wolfenbuttell, Prince William of
Fustenbergh, the Duke of Pastrante, Ambassador extraordinary of Spain, the
Rhinegrave Charles Lewis, Son of the Elector Palatine, the Chevalier
Lubomirski, Grand Ensign-bearer of the Kingdom of Poland, and all the Ministers
of the Protestant Princes were placed in Balcony's by themselves. Mr. Savill,
Envoy Extraordinary from England retired before the Mass began.

About a Eleven, the King, who was in the Queens great Cabinet, with all those
that were to attend him to the Chapel, set forward with all his Train. The
Knights of the Order of the Holy Ghost preceded, by four Heralds at Arms, their
own Herald, and the President of the same, Grand Master of the Ceremonies of
the Order, proceeded first two by two, habited in black, with their Collars
over their Clothes.

The Duke of Crussol, who was to wear the Honors of the King of Spain, went
after the Knights of the Order, in a habit embroidered with Pearls, and
buttoned with Diamonds; behind whom came the Grand Prior of France, and the D.
of Vendome his Brother.

The Ambassador of Spain followed them, having on his right hand the Count of
Brionne, Grand Squire of France; upon his left the Sieur de Bonnevill, who had
waited on him to the Prince of Conti's, when he went to bring him to the King,
as he did the day before. The D. of Vernevil, the D. of Maine, the Count of
Vermandois, the Prince of Roche sur Yon, and the Prince of Conti, in a Cloak
embroidered with Pearls and Diamonds, marched afterward.

Next to these came the King, preceded by two Ushers of the Chamber, with their
Maces: The Marquess of Tillader, Captain of the Guard of a hundred Swisses,
going immediately before him, and behind him the Duke of Luxemburgh, Captain of
the Guards of the Body, upon whose right hand went the D. of Gessures, first
Gentleman of the Chamber, and upon his left the Prince of Marsillack, Grand
Master of the Wardrobe.

Next the King, came the Queen, led by the D. de la Vieville, her Knight of
Honor, and the Marquess of Hautefort, her chief Esquire;. The train of her Gown
being nine Else long, was born by the Duchess of Richelieu, her Lady of Honor.

Next to her followed Mademoiselle. Her proportion, the air, sweetness, and
graces, both of her person and countenance, testified to all that beheld her,
how much she merited the Crown that was going to be set upon her head. She was
led by Monsieur the Dauphin, followed by the D. of Montausier, first Gentleman
of his Chamber, and by Monsieur, followed by the Chevalier Chastillon, Captain
of his Guards. The train of her Robe six Else long was born by Mademoiselle d'
Orleans, by Madam the Grand Duchess of Tuscany, and Madam de Guise. Her Gown
was of blew Velvet, faced with Ermins, with an edging three fingers broad of
the same, and three rows of Flowerdeluces of each side; the end of the Gown
being powdered with Flowerdeluces, her Jippo was edged like her Gown, faced
before with Ermins six fingers broad, with three rows of Flowerdeluces on each
side; the body of her Jippo was also of blew Velvet, powdered with
Flowerdeluces of Gold, with a fingers breadth of Ermin in all the seams. Her
Sur-Coat was of Ermins covered over with precious Stones, as was also the
forebodies of the Jippo. Her Shoes were of blew Velvet, powdered with
Flowerdeluces of Gold. Upon her Head she had a Crown of Gold, enriched with
Diamonds, with a Globe in the middle, and upon that a Cross of Diamonds. The
Train of Mademoiselle d' Orleaus was born by the Count d' Esears, that of Madam
the great Duchess by the Count of Saint Ples^^, and that of Madam de Guise,
by the Chevalier de Plailly.

Next to her followed Madam, led by the Count de Vaillaz her Knight of Honor,
and the Marquess of Broon, her chief Squire, her Train which was seven Else
long, being born by the Duchess du Plesses, her Maid of Honor.

Then followed Mademoiselle de Valois, led by the Marquess d' Efsiat, her Train
being carried by the Count of Flumarin.

Next to her went Mademoiselle de Blois, led by the Count de St. Geran, her
Train being born by the Marquess de Boulioneax. Mademoiselle de Nuntes, led by
the Marquess de Dangeau, her Train being born by the Chevalier de Soyecort, and
the Duchess de Vernevil, led by the Marquess de S. H^ran, her Train being born
by the Count de Pleilly.

The Dutchesses and Ladies of the Queens Palace closed the Procession.

In this Order they set out of the Queens Apartment, and went directly through
a Lane of Guards on each side to the Chapel; the Trumpets sounding, the Fifes
playing, and the Drums beating all the while.

When they were entered into the Chapel, the Archers of the Grand Provost, stop
at the door, and the Drums, Fifes, and Trumpets remained under the Music
Amphitheater, while the King at Arms, and the four Heralds, went and kneeled
on each side of the Altar, and the Knights of the Order placed themselves upon
their Benches, upon the right and left hand of the high Canopy.

The D. of Crussol, the Grand Prior of France, and the Duke of Vendosme, seated
themselves upon a Bench covered with blew Velvet, powdered with Flowerdeluces,
prepared for them on the right hand of the Secretaries of State.

The Marquess de les Balbasez, the Count of Brionne, and the Sieur de
Bonnevill, Introductor of Ambassadors, seated themselves on the other side,
upon a seat covered in the same manner on the left hand of the Council.

When the King was come upon the high Scaffold, he fell on his knees before the
Altar; and rising again in a short while after, stood upright, having his Chair
of State behind him, covered with blew Velvet, embroidered with Flowerdeluces
of Gold. The Queen placed her self upon his left hand, having her Chair of
State behind her. Mademoiselle put her self between the King and the Queen, at
a farther distance from the Altar, the Daulphin and Monsieur holding her still
by the hands, and the three Dutchesses still bearing up her Train while
Mademoiselle de Valois placed her self on the other side, at a little distance
from the King. The Prince of Conti, and the Prince of Roche sur Yon, placed
themselves just opposite one to another, behind Madam, and Mademoiselle de
Valois, and at the end of the same high foot-pace, in the same line sat the
Count of Vermandois, and the Duke of Maine in the middle, Madamoiselles de
Blois, and Nantes on each side of them, and the Duke and Duchess of Vernevil
at the two corners.

The Bishop of Orleans, chief Almoner to the King, the Abbot of Lionne, the
Bishop of Alet, the Abbot of St. Luck, were placed in a line between the
kneeling-place and the Altar; and upon the Queens side was the Archbishop, Duke
of Rheimes, Grand Master of the Chapel; and over against the Bishop of
Orleans, not far from the Queen, stood the Cardinal de Bo^zi, Grand Almoner to
the Queen, with his Cardinals Cap, and the Abbot of Fleari, Almoner to the
Queen.

The whole Assembly being thus placed, the Cardinal de Bouillon came out of the
Sachristie preceded by the Ecclesiastical Officers, and accompanied by the
Bishop of Again, who served him as Deacon of Honor, and the Bishop of Seez, as
Subdeacon of Honor; and after he had bowed to the Altar, the King and the
Queen, he seated himself in his Chair of State that was placed for him upon the
steps of the Altar, as did the two Bishops his Assistants in their seats of
each side the Cardinal. This done, after the King at Arms, and the Heralds had
made their Obeysances to the Altars to the King and Queen, the Dauphin,
Monsieur, Mademoiselle, and the Prince of Conti; after they had ^also saluted
the Spanish Ambassador, with stopping; and that the Marquess of Rhodes, Grand
Master of the Ceremonies, had made the same Obeysances, they descended from the
high Scaffold, and went to the Altar. Then it was that Mademoiselle moved
toward the Cardinal, the Dolphin and Monsieur quitting her hand, and the Prince
of Conti placing himself upon her right side. The Ambassador of Spain
accompanied with the Count of Brionne, drew near also to the Altar to be a
Witness of the Marriage.

Then the Cardinal Bouillon began the Ceremonies of the Marriage; He blessed
thirteen pieces of Gold, and a Ring of Gold and Silver mixed together, which
were presented to him in a Basin, and gave them to the Prince of Conti, who put
the Ring upon the fourth finger of the left hand of Mademoiselle, and gave her
the Thirteen pieces of Gold in pledge of Matrimony in the Name of the King of
Spain. When the Cardinal demanded of the Prince of Conti, whether as Proxey for
Charles the Second King of Spain, he took Mary Louise d' Orleans for his Wife?
the Prince of Conti turned toward the King, and made him a profound Obeisance
before he gave any answer. Neither did Mademoiselle return any Answer to the
Prince of Conti, till she had also made her Obeysances to the King, Queen, to
Monsieur and Madam, in testimony of her desiring their permission.

The Ceremonies of Marriage being finished, Mademoiselle being now become Queen
of Spain by the Sacrament of Marriage, went first, led by Monsieur the Dauphin,
and Monsieur, her Train being born by the same Princesses as before, and seated
her self between the King and the Queen in the same line, in a Chair of State
of blew Velvet, powdered with Flowerdeluces.

Then the King and Queen, attended by the Princes and Princesses of the blood,
returned to the upper State, and took their places; at what time the Dauphin
quitted the Queen of Spains hand, and sat down behind her upon a Stool of blew
Velvet, scattered with Flower-de-Luces. Monsieur placed himself behind the
King, and Madam behind the Queen, upon foldingstools, like that of the Dauphin,
though at a little farther distance from the King and Queen than he sat.
Mademoiselle de Valois, Mademoiselle d' Orleans, Madam la Grand Duchess, and
Madam de Guise, seated themselves all four in a line, having before them
cushions of blew Velvet powdered with Flower-de-luces. At the same time
cushions of the same were brought for the Prince of Conti, the Prince of Roche
sur Yon, the Count of Vermandois, the D. of Maine, Mademoiselle de Blois,
Mademoiselle de Nantes, and the Duke and Duchess of Vernevel, who placed
themselves as before they went to the Altar.

The Officers of the King who had attended him in his proceeding, they who had
led the Queen and Madam, they who had attended Monsieur the Dauphin, and
Monsieur, stood upon the first step of the upper State, as did also the Bishop
of Condom, who was Almoner to the Dauphin, the Bishop of Man's, first Almoner to
Monsieur, and the Abbot of Telleman, chief Almoner to Madam. The Dutchesses who
had attended the Queen, placed themselves there likewise, and had cushions. But
they who led the Princesses, or had carried the Trains, went and seated
themselves upon Seats above those of the Knights of the Order.

When the King was thus returned to the upper State, Cardinal Bouillon,
assisted by the Bishops that served him as Dean and Sub-dean, went and gave the
Holy Water to the Queen of Spain, the King and Queen, and began the Mass. The
Bishop of Seez sang the Epistle, and after the Bishop had sung the Gospel, and
had given the Book to the Cardinal to kiss, he carried it himself, together
with the Bishop of Orleans, to the Queen of Spain, the King and Queen, for them
to kiss also.

After the Offerture, and during ^the usual perfuming, the King at Arms having
made his obeisance to the Altar, the Queen of Spain, the King and the Queen,
the Dauphin, Monsieur, and Mademoiselle de Valois, who wore the Honors of the
Queen of Spain, he went and kneeled by the Altar with a great Wax Candle
charged with twenty crowns in Gold. After him the Marquess of Rhodes, having
made the same obeisances, and then Mademoiselle de Valois approached the Altar,
and the Queen of Spain descended from the High State, and kneeled upon a
cushion before the Cardinal, who was sitting in a chair of State, with the two
Bishops his Assistants on each side of him upon their chair of State likewise.
Being thus on her knees, she kissed the Jewel which she had upon her finger,
and presented him the Taper which she received from Mademoiselle de Valois, to
whom the Marquess of Rhodes had given it, who had taken it from the King at
Arms, and so she returned to the Upper State between the King and the Queen.

In a moment after, one of the four Heralds made the same obeisances as before,
as also to the Prince of Conti, and the D. of Crussol, who wore the King of
Spain's Honors in his behalf, and then went and kneeled by the Altar with a
Taper charged with twenty crowns in gold. Then the Sieur Saintot made the same
obeisances, and then the Prince of Conti went and kneeled upon a cushion before
the Cardinal, and having kissed his Jewel, presented him with the Taper which
was given him by the D. of Crussol, who received it from the Sieur Saintot,
after he had taken it from the Herald, and so returned to his place.

After the Pater, the King at Arms made the same obeisances again, as did also
the Marquess of Rhodes, and then the Queen of Spain descended again from the
Upper State, and kneeling before the Cardinal upon a cushion of crimson Velvet
laid upon a foot-cloath of the same, was followed by the Prince of Conti, who
also kneeled upon her right side at the same time. Then the Bishop of Orleans
on the right hand, and the Abbot of Lionne upon the left, held over the heads
of the Queen of Spain, and the Prince of Conti, a Canopy of Silver Tissue,
which they did not take away till the Cardinal had finished the usual Prayers.
The Queen of Spain and Prince of Conti remained upon their knees; and first the
Bishop of Orleans, the Kings Almoner, and the Bishop of Seez gave the Peace to
be kissed by the Queen of Spain, the King and the Queen. Mass being thus
finished, the Cardinal turned toward the Queen of Spain, and the Prince of
Conti, and presented them the holy Water, after which they returned to their
places; and now the Cardinal having said the last Gospel, advanced toward the
upper State, accompanied by the Assisting Bishops, and presented the Corporal
to be kissed by the Queen of Spain, the King and the Queen, and the Bishop of
Orleans presented them the holy Water.

Then the Cardinal opened the Book of the four Evangelists, and presented it to
the King, at what time the Chancellor of France, and the Sieur Pompone,
Secretary of State, ascended the upper State, where the Sieur Pompone read the
Oath aloud, by which the King swore to preserve the Peace with Spain, kneeling
all the while, and laying his hand upon the Book, which the Cardinal held
standing upright with his Miter upon his head.

The Ambassador of Spain also at the same time drew near to be a testimony of
the same.

Then the Curate of Fontainbleau brought the common Register of the Marriages
of the Paris, which the King, the Queen, the Dauphin, Monsieur, and Madam, as
Witnesses signed in one Column.

The Queen of Spain, and the Prince of Conti signed on the other, and the
Curate underneath. This done, the Cardinal tuned the Tedeum, which was Sung
with music, after which the Queen of Spain was conducted to her Apartment. She
went first, led by M. the Dauphin, and Monsieur, her Train being held up as
before.

The King and Queen followed her, and when the Queen of Spain arrived at her
Lodgings, the Marquess of Balbasez, having in a Complement given the King
thanks on the behalf of the King of Spain his Master, he conducted the Prince
of Conti to his Chamber, from whence he was attended by the Count of Brionne to
his own Lodging.

The King and Queen attended by the Princes and Princesses of the Royal House,
set forward presently after to return to their Apartments, whom the Queen of
Spain accompanied to the Gate of the Hall of the Guards.

FINIS.

