AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE Victorious PROGRESS OF THEIR Majesty's Forces Under
the COMMAND of Genesis Ginckle, This SUMMER in IRELAND: GIVING A Particular
ACCOUNT of the Several Skirmishes, Battles, Sieges and Surrenders of ATHLONE,
GALLOWAY, SLEGO, etc.

TOGETHER, With the Total DEFEAT of the IRISH at Agrim and Thomond-Bridge: And
Lastly, of the Capitulation and Surrender of LIMERICK.

LONDON, Printed for Randolph Tailor near Stationers' Hall, MDCXCI.

TO THE READER.
IT IS well known, that Ireland was conquered at first by the English, and bad
been all along under the easy Yoke of the Kings of England, till James II.
ascended the Throne. But he, by a Policy, contrary to all the World, designing
to subdue England to Popery and French Government, endeavored all he could to
have made Ireland in her Turn the Instrument of that preposterous Conquest. To
which purpose, he made use of the general Inclination of that People to the
Romish Religion, sent for whole Regiments of that Nation into England, bred 'em
up both for. Officers and Soldiers, with no less Care than the Turks do their
Janissaries; and when he had filled all {iIreland} with expert Warriors,
delivered up the whole Power of the Government into the hands of the Roman
Catholics; so that all that part of the English Monarchy was only tackt to
England, by the single Thread of Papistical Obedience, during a Catholic
Reign. After which, King James himself, having abdicated England, headed a
general Revolt of the Irish from the Imperial Crown of Great Britain, which had
only left subordinate to it the City of Londonderry, and one Corner of Ulster.
So that so fair a Portion of the British Dominion, so Convenient for spacious
Harbors, so fertile for the Soil, so abounding in all Things for the support of
humane Life, and so particularly famous for admitting no venomous Creatures to
live in it, but only Priests and Jesuits, was either to be quite lost, or quite
to be re^conquer'd.

Therefore while the late King James, assisted with French Succors, commanded
all things, and had set the forfeited Crown of Irleand upon his Head, Duke
Schomberg was by King William sent to stop the Career of the abdicated Prince,
and his abominated Crew of Gallick Foreigners. And first of all the Duke, like
the Roman Fabius, Cunctando restituit rem. Next King William in Person, like
the far-fam'd Scipio, forced the defeated Invader to abandon the Kingdom. And
now, lastly, this Campaign, and second Summer from the Contest begun, you see
the threatening War concluded, while the renowned Ginckle, like a Torrent,
sweeps all before him, and after his having broken the Enemy in Battle, stripped
'em of all their strong Holds by storm, or constrained 'em to surrender, and
scattered the Fugitives to starve among the Mountains, leaves no part of the
whole Kingdom unreduced under the Obedience of her lawful Sovereigns.
Atchievments not attained by Number, but by Courage and Conduct, and meriting
large Encomiums, beyond the narrow Limits of a Preface.

And now I would fain know what are become of those brisk Jacobites, who
thought a languishing French Cause could be supported by laying malicious and
extravagant Wagers. Wherever they are, they have nothing now to do, but to
pay their lost Money, and, with Hudibrass, conclude, That Wagers are Fools
Arguments. And indeed, it is pity, they do not live at this time in France,
where the King is setting so many Projects on foot to raise Money. For their
Names would certainly be taken, to inform the King where the Men of Money
lived. And then he presently sends his Officers for such a Sum to be re-paid ad
Graecas Kalendas. I only tell'ent the Story; let them pick out the Inference
themselves.

AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE Victorious Progress of Their Majesty's Forces this
Summer in Ireland, etc.
HIS Majesty, King WILLIAM III. by the prosperous Success of his Arms at the
Boyn the last Year, was in a very short time become Master of the greatest patt
of Ireland; and had driven the late King James quite out of the Kingdom; but
the Season of the Year, and the excessive Rains, so frequent in that Country,
would not permit him any farther Action. For which reason, after he had given
order for his Forces to take up their Winter Quarters in such a Manner, as to
shut up the Rebels within the most narrow limits that might be, and prevent
their Incursions into the regained Countries, His Majesty returned for England;
leaving to Command the Army and complete his Conquests, General Ginkle, a
Person of great Experience, Fidelity, Conduct and Expedition; as will appear by
the ensuing Journal. So that if Story receive its luster from the Grandeur of
the Actions which it relates, perhaps this Journal may be thought as
considerable as has for many years come forth; as well for the Courage of the
Soldiers, the Difficulty and Success of their Euterprizes, and the Importance
of their Conquests. During the Winter, Both sides lay quiet, but the very
Approach of Spring warmed the English to Action, which though not so
considerable, yet was preparatory to facilitate the Opening of the grand
Campaign, which did not begin till sometime after. For upon the 14th. of March
(where this Journal begins) Colonel Lillington, between eight and nine at
Night, marched from Roscreagh, with a Party of his own, which being joined by
another from Bix, made up together Three Hundred Horse, Foot and Dragoons, and
advanced toward Nagah; but finding the way to be longer then he expected, and
day coming on, he detached Eighteen Horse and as many Foot, which he mounted
upon Garrans, and made all the haste he could to secure the Bridge about half a
Mile from Nenagh. Upon which the whole Garrison sallied out, to oppose him:
However with that small party he maintained the Pass, till his Foot came up;
and then leaving them at the Bridge, he advanced with his Horse toward the
Enemy, who at a distance were very free of their Shot, but so soon as the
English came nere them, began to run: upon which the English pursued them, and
killed about Twenty, of which number was a Lieutenant, and took one Cornet.
This done, the Colonel sent a Detachment to secure the Pass on the other side
of Nenagh, toward Limerick, while the rest of his Men entered the Town (the
Rebels flying into the Castle) and burnt all the Houses, together with a great
Quantity of Malt and Mcal, and brought away three hundred Head of black Cattle,
with the Loss but of two Men slain outright, and another wounded; but of the
Rebels were killed between forty and fifty.

At the same time News came from Cork, that upon advice that a Party of the
Rebels were come before Ballimagoolis, a frontier Garrison possessed by the
English in that County, a Party was sent from Cork to relieve it, of which the
Enemy being informed, they drew off in great disorder; whereupon the Garrison
sallied out, kill['d several of the Enemy, and took sever Prisoners.

Upon the 15th of March a detached Party or 150 Dragoons, 100 Militia-Horse,
and 130 Foot, marched from Cork under the Command of Major Culliford, toward
Ballyclongh, where the Rebels were about to have entrenched themselves; but
upon the appearing of the English, they quitted their Works, and fled with that
haste, that all the English could do in the pursuit was, to take seven
Prisoners, of which four were Officers. With better success a Party of Sir
David Collier's Regiment, quartered about Bandon, together with some of the
Militia of that Place, 300 in all, Commanded by Lieutenant Colonel George
Hamilton, marched at the same time into the Enemies Quarters about Bantry,
where they killed above seventy of the Rebels, took fifteen Prisoners, six
hundred Head of Black Cattle, and a good number of Horses, without the loss of
one Man.

Of this Action, soon after there came a more full account: That upon notice
that Brigadier Caroll had a design to send five Companies of Foot, with some
Ammunition, to join Colonel O Donavan, in order to maintain Bantry, and put
the Country under Contribution; Lieut. Coll. Hamilton marched on the 15th of
March, with 200 Foot of Sir David Colliers Regiment, 60 Horse commanded by
Lieut. Coll. Ogilby, and 80 of the Militia, and the next day about two in the
Afternoon, came in sight of Bantry; but finding that the Enemy had quitted the
Place the same Morning, followed them with all the expedition he could.
Whereupon the Enemy, perceiving themselves so closely pursued, left all their
Cattle behind, and betook themselves into the Bogs; however the English
followed 'em four Miles, killed about 40, took 14 Prisoners, Coll. Courcy
narrowly escaping, and brought off 1500 Head of Black Cattle, leaving several
thousands behind, for want of People to drive 'em, That night the English
stayed at Bantry; and the next day, after they had burnt the Town, returned
back. In their way, the Enemy had laid 600 Men in Ambush, about six Miles from
Bantry; but being discovered by the Vantcurriers of the Party, after one Volly
they ran away to their Hills and Bogs, whither the English could not pursuc them

March 25. Thirty of the Militia-Dragoons, commanded by Lieutenant Powel, were
ordered to fetch up several Persons out of the County of Mead, who were
suspected to have been concerned in the Murder of Coll. Foulks's Soldiers;
but in his return, he had notice that a Party of Rapparees waylaid him not far
from Hackets-Town, with a Resolution to rescue the Prisoners: Upon which, he
sent away seventeen of his Dragoons with the Prisoners, and with the other
thirteen marched to Hackets-Town; where sending for the Constable, after some
hard threatening Words, the Constable informed him where the Rapparees lay; and
then he immediately marched to find 'em out. So soon as he approached the
Place, he advanced with four of his Men into a Field adjoining, where he fell
in with a Party of twenty eight Irish, commanded by Captain O Neale. The Enemy
seeing so small a number, came up and fired at 'em, but without doing any hurt
to the English, who answered them in the same Element to better purpose,
killing two of the Rebels, and wounding O Neale himself. By which time, the
rest of the English, being come in, charged the Irish, and killed four of them,
put the rest to flight, and pursued them from place to place, till they had
killed about twenty of them, and among the rest their Captain O Neale; who
being wounded before, was now perfectly cured; his Enemies becoming his
Surgeons. Of the English only three were wounded, and two Horses killed.

March 27. Captain Mark Baggot, who came as a Spy from Limerick, and was taken
in Women's Apparel, was tried, and sentenced by a Court Martial; but his
Execution was respited, upon his offering to make some discovery. However, it
appearing afterward that he did but dally with Justice, and that all his
pretended Discoveries were of no moment, he was hanged outright upon the
Twentieth of May following. At the conclusion of this Month, a Proclamation was
published in Dublin, bearing Date March 26. purporting,

That notwithstanding the great Clemency extended by their Majesty's to the
Popish, Irish, whereby upon their submission they have had equal protection
with their Protestant Subjects, yet such was the inveterate Malice of many,
that upon all occasions they not only relieved their Majesty's Enemies, but
joined with them in committing and concealing many horrid Murders, one of
which of eight Soldiers inhumanly strangled at one time, and in one place, was
lately discovered, to have been perpetrated by the Inhabitants of the Place
where the Soldiers were quartered, for which some of the Criminals had
received just Punishment: And the Lords Justices-being fully satisfied that
such Offenses could not be committed without the help or connivance of the
Protected Inhabitants; and having received Information that there was a
Confederacy among them to relieve their Majesty's Enemies, and to take all
Opportunities to destroy their Officers and Soldiers; their Lordships
therefore declared, That if any such Murders be hereafter committed, and the
Inhabitants do not use their utmost endeavors to apprehend the Malefactors,
that they shall be put out of their Majesty's protection, and be proceeded
against as Spies and Enemies, according to the course of War.

April 2. Coll. Tiffin sent out from Ballyshannon a Party of two hundred Foot,
and two Troops of Coll. Winns Dragoons, who marched within three Miles of
Slego, where they killed thirty two of Captain Macksherry's Men, and took nine,
and brought away with them a Booty of 180 Cows, 50 Sheep, and 30 Horses; but
the Captain with the rest made their Escapes to the Mountains.

April 4. A Party of Longford Garrison, meeting with some of the Enemies
Dragoons neear the River Enye, slew six; upon which, the rest taking the River
where it was not fordable, ten more of them were drowned: Such a strange thing
is Fear, that it makes many Men run from one Death to another.

April 5. A small Party of Dragoons, commanded by Quartermaster Topham, met
with a detached Party of the Rebels, under the Command of Captain Bourke; of
which they slew five, and an Ensign, the rest betaking themselves to their
heels.

The same day Brigadier Stewart sent from Belturbat a Detachment of fifty Foot
and twenty Dragoons, under the Command of Captain Stewart, with Orders to march
toward Mohil, to free the Country from the Rapparees. The next morning, by
break of day, being come within a Mile of the Place, they discovered two Troops
of the Enemies Dragoons, and about fifty Foot, that were guarding some
Kereights; upon which, the English see to work with them, without any
Preambles; but the Rebels, after the first firing, quitted their Horses, and
betook themselves to the Woods and Bogs, whither the English Foot pursuing
them, made a shift to kill thirty, and take five Prisoners: Which done, the
Victors returned to their Quarters, without any manner of Loss, bringing along
with them about an hundred Head of Black Cattle, and between sixty and seventy
Horses.

April 6. Quartermaster Topham, with eighteen Dragoons and twelve
Foot-Souldiers mounted upon Garrans, surpised the Enemies Guards near
Newsastle, killed seventeen, and brought away nine Prisoners, seven of which
being found to be Rapparees, were immediately hanged.

April 7. Fifteen hundred of the Irish Army came before Inishkeam, and attackt
the Garrison of that Place, consisting of no more than forty four Men,
commanded by Ensign Lindsay and Ensign Dalyel; but notwithstanding so great a
multitude of the Rebels, a part of that small Garrison defended the two Avenues
to the Town above two Hours, till some of the Popish Inhabitants treacherously
gave the Enemy entrance into the Town through a by-way, and then the English
retreated to the main Guard, which they maintained six Hours longer, at what
time the Rebels summoned the Defendants to surrender; and upon their refusal,
had brought together several Hundreds of Faggots to fire the Guard-House; when
in the very nick of Opportnnity, Colonel Ogilby, with a Party of Horse and
Foot, came to their Relief; upon whose approach, the Enemy drew off in
confusion; which the Garrison perceiving, sallied out upon the Rebels, and
killed about fifty, with no more than the loss of one Man.

April 9. Some of Captain Green's Militia-Dragoons, marching into the Enemies
Quarters, killed several of the Rapparees, and laid in Ashes a Village that
gave them harbor. The same day also a Court Martial was held, where Brigadier
Stewart presided, and where several Persons, who upon their Trials appeared to
be Spies, and such as had assisted and sheltered the Rapparees, were sentenced
to be hanged.

April 13. Quartermaster Callaghan went out with a Party, and in a short time
after, returned with eleven Prisoners, twelve Horses, and seventy Head of Black
Cattle.

April 18. General Ginkle arrived at Dublin, whither most of the General
Officers repaired at the same time, to consult with the Lords Justices about
the Affairs of the Campaign, and hastening their Majesty's Forces to take the
Field; which he was the more encouraged to do, in regard that the Monmouth
Yacht had already brought Money for the Army, and that several other Ships were
arrived at Cork, Waterford, and Kingsale, with Recruits both of Horse and Foot,
of which two thousand were by that time come to Dublin, where, through the
great Care and Diligence of the General, the Train of Artillery, with the
Wagons and Carriages lay all ready fitted.

Much about the same time was published a Proclamation for the apprehending and
securing Christopher Brown a Romish Priest, who by the Examinations of several
Persons, appeared to be, if no the first Contriver, and principal Directer, yet
a main Abetter and Incourager of the Murder of many of their Majesty's
Soldiers, in Mallahudder's Church; and proposing a Reward of Fifty Pounds for
any Person that should seize him.

April 19. No less than seven hundred of the Irish standing-Army attackt a
Stone-House, called Croghan, near Philipstown, and valiantly took a Corporal
and six common Soldiers, after they had with much more Bravery defended
themselves till all their Powder was spent, and that they had killed twelve of
the Enemy.

But this Loss was revenged the same day with advantage; for the English being
informed, that a considerable number of the Rebels were come near to Macromp,
one of their Majesty's Frontier Garrisons, a Party of eighty Horse and an
nundred and fifty Dragoons, of the Army, and as many of the Militia, was drawn
out under the Command of Major Kirk. This Party marched the 19th in the
Evening, and by break of day the next Morning came up with the Rebels, who
presently took to their Sanctuaries in the Woods and Bogs, whither the English
pursued them; and after a chase of some hours killed twenty, took five
Prisoners, and brought off some Horses and Cattle. Much about the same time the
Rapparees coming with a strong Party to Curraglass near Tallough, had stolen
some Horses belonging to Colonel Denopp's Regiment, and surpised four Troops.
Upon which, the Colonel gave present Orders for the taking up several of the
Irish. Inhabitants about that place; declaring withal, That if they did not
procure the Horses and Men to be brought back by such a certain day, they
should every one be hanged: Which wrought so effectually upon the Prisoners,
that both Men and Horses were brought back, by the time appointed, to the place
where they were taken; and for a further Atonement of the Injury done, some of
the Fellows also, that had been Actors in the Robbery.

At the same time three hundred Rapparees, lying in Ambu^^ cade, not far from
Kennegad, had seized upon forty eight Sack of Meal, that were going thither
with a very small Guard that made their escapes; of which notice being given to
the Town, a Party of the Garrison fally'd out, recovered a good part of the
Meal, and killed several of the Rapparees, with their Captain.

April 24. Captain Pallaser, upon some intelligence that was given him of the
Rapparees, marched out with forty Firelocks of the Army, and twenty of the
Militia; but by the Treachery of one Terence Magragh, was drawn into an Ambush
of no less than two of the Enemies Regiments of Foot and some Horse:
Nevertheless, the English got into the Ruins of an old Castle, where theless,
the English got into the Ruins of an old Castle, where they vigoriously
defended themselves till all their Ammunition was spent; but then were forced
to accept of Quarter, and were carried Prisoners to Nanagh.

April 27. The Earl of Meath's, and the Lord Lisburn's Regiments arrived at
Mullingar, and encamped without the Town. The same day one Walter Brown,
formerly High Constable of the Barony of Delwyn, was hanged for a Spy in the
same Town. And upon the same 27th of April also it was, that five hundred of
the Militia of the County of Dublin, marched out of that City to the Town of
Kildare, where they joined the Regiment of Horse, commanded by Colonel Piper,
and which were designed to clear those parts from the Robberies and Violences
of the Rapparees. And the same day arrived in Dublin Road the Ships from
England, laden with the Stores for the Artillery and Ordnance.

April 28. Colonel Brewer, and Lieutenant-Collonel Hamilton, with six hundred
Foot and twenty Horse, marched into the Enemies Quarters beyond the Castle of
Donere, between which place and Kilbegan, about two thousand of the Rapparces
had for some time sheltered themselves in Hutts and Cabins. But though at the
first sight of the English they drew up in a kind of Bravado, upon the Hills,
in several Bodies of Horse and Foot, yet upon the Colonels nearer approach,
they flew to their Bogs and Woods, whither the English pursued them, killed
about fifty, and after they had burnt a great number of their Hutts and Hovels,
returned to their Quarters.

April 30. Capt. Clayton was sent with a Party of Men, to relieve the Garrison
of Ballimagooly, where Capt. Hornycrose then commanded, and was the same day to
have marched his Men to Cork, so soon as Captain Clayton had relieved him. But
understanding that the Garrison of Ballyclough had a design to intercept him,
he thought it not convenient to march by day, and therefore set forward about
12 a Clock at Night. However, this was not so privately carried, but that the
Irish had notice of it, and thereupon drew out a hundred and twenty of their
best Horse, and as many Dragoons, with two hundred and fifty Volunteers and
Rapparees, commanded by Brigadier Caroll, Sir James Cotter, the Lord of
Kinsale, Colonel Lasly, Major Slingsby, Captain Coppinger and Captain Combdon,
who fell upon the English just on the other side of Six-milewater, about three
of the Clock in the Morning. Upon their approach, the English faced, and about
twenty fired upon the Enemy so well to the purpose, that they brake the Rebels
Front, and put them into some disorder; which gave the English a good
opportunity to retreat to an old Pound that had a Mud-wall about it,
breast-high, and to clap up a Truckle at the place where they entered. Whereupon
the advanced Party of the Enemy, believing the day their own, boldly made up to
the Pound, and offered the Captain and his Man Quarter; which he refusing, they
began a brisk Charge, and pressed hard upon the English, by whom the Rebels
were so warmly received, that several of their Number were slain, and carried
off, during the heat of the Action: However, they made a second and a third
Attack, though with the same ill success. And thus the Conflict lasted for
several hours, till notice of it being carried to Cork, a Party was forthwith
sent from thence to the Captain's relief; but the Enemy were all fled before
they arrived, leaving dead upon the place Captain Coppinger and Caprain
Combdon: Colonel Lasly and the Lord of Kinsale were likewise dangerously
wounded, and carried off, and about fifty more wounded. Major Slingsby was
brought dangerously wounded to Cork, where, in little hopes of Life, he was so
ingenious as to confess, That he believed the Hand of God was against their
Party, for that altlio' they offered and promised Quarter to the English, yet
had they yielded, they had resolved to put them all to the Sword. Of the
English were lost no more than eight Men out of fourscore; but of the Enemy
it is believed that more were killed and wounded than those they fought against.

At the beginning of May, the Lords Justices put forth a Proclamation, strictly
charging and commanding all Officers, Civil and Military, and all Soldiers of
their Majesty's Army, not to molest any Sutlers that should have a Warrant from
the Lord Justices, the General of the Army, or Colonel of any Regiment, to
follow the Camp; nor to take any thing from the said Sutlers, nor to use any
violence toward them, upon pain of being severely proceeded against: And that
the Colonels should take care that the Soldiers paid for every thing they had
of the Sutlers, according to the settled Rates: And to prevent the Robberies and
Spoils committed upon the Country, by several unnecessary Persons that followed
the Camp, they further ordered all their Majesty's Subjects, both Protestants
and Papists, to stay at, or repair to, their several Habitations, for the
Preservation and Improvement of the same; and that no Persons should presume to
follow the Camp, but such as brought Provisions to the Army, or upon some
lawful occasion approved by the General, or Commander in Chief.

By another Proclamation, all the Inhabitants of the Counties of Waterford and
Tipperary, were commanded to repair to their Places of Habitation, or the next
Garrison; and the Inhabitants of the Counties of Cork, Limerick, and Kerry,
were ordered to do the same, in order to their being employed in the Militia,
for the Defense of the Country, when their Army should be drawn into the Field.

And by an Order of General Ginkle, all Officers and Soldiers, and all other
Persons whatsoever, were strictly commanded not to press any Horses or Carts,
without license from himself in writing; nor to press any Horse that was
actually listed in the Militia, upon any pretense whatever.

May 1. Captain Thomas White of the old Lord George Hamilton's Regiment, drew
out an hundred Men under the Command of Captain Johnston, who marched with his
Party to Belnamona in Kings County, where he had such good success, that by
break of day he surprised two Troops of Dragoons of Brigadier Clifford's
Regiment, and three Troops of Horse of the Lord Merrion's Regiment, killed
Lieutenant Archibald, Quartermaster Barnell, and fifteen Dragoons, took two
Ensigns, and other Prisoners, burnt the Town, and returned with a good Booty of
Horses, Arms and Cattle.

My 3. The Governor of Clonmel, with a Detachment of Horse, and two Troops of
the Militia-Dragoons, marched by Night into the Enemies Quarters toward
Michels-Town; but not meeting with any of the Rebels, was returning back to his
Quarters, when a Corporal of Horse making a halt a little behind, was shot at
by four Rapparees: Upon which, the English surrounded the Wood; and after some
hours Man-Hunting, killed above thirty of the Rapparees, and one Cashan their
Captain.

May 4. Major Wood marched from Mountmilock to Castle-Cuff, with a Party of
three hundred Foot, drawn out of Colonel Lloyd's and the Lord George
Hamilton's Regiment, and fifty Horse of Colonel Byerly's. In his march, he
divided the Foot into several small Parties, in order to surprise the Rapparees
in the woods and Bogs, keeping with the Horse along the skirts of the Bog, to
hinder their escape: By which means, they made a shift to kill about seventy
Rapparees, and to take a good number of their Cattle. Which done, Major Wood
advanced with thirty Foot, and thirty four Horse, beyond the Togher of
Mallybone, and from thence sent the Cattle homeward under a Guard of thirty
Men, and was returning to his Party with those few that were with him, about
ten of the Clock in the Morning, when he discovered two Bodies of Men of the
late Kings Army, computed to consist of four hundred each Body, marching
silently between the Wood and the Mountains; but who, so soon as they perceived
themselves to be espied, beat their Drums; upon which, the Major drew up the
chiefest part of his whole Party in a Plough'd field, and faced 'em: Presently
the Enemies Granadiers came over the Hedge, and made toward the Major, till
seeing the English stand firm, they also made a halt. Whereupon the Major,
apprehending that the thirty Men that guarded the Booty, were not got clear of
the Wood, and consequently might be exposed to the Enemies Numbers, wheeled off
by the skirt of the Wood to their succor; and by that time he had got his Horse
and Foot over the Bog, he heard the Enemy firing very thick upon the thirty
Men, who bravely however opposed 'em, under the Command of Lieutenant Ellis.
The noise of this firing brought in fourscore more of the English, who had been
laid to watch the Rapparees. Thereupon Major Wood ordered the Foot to march in
two Parties on each side the River, while he with the Horse marched between 'em
both. Being in this manner come within sight of the Enemy, and judging that the
Horse might do most service, by fetching a compass about, and getting behind
the Rebels, he galloped round, with an intention to fall upon their Rear; which
the Enemy perceiving, and being at the same time hard put to it by the Foot,
began to make an orderly Retreat. But then it was, that the Major, unwilling to
lose his Advantage, fell immediately upon-their Flank with his Horse, and that
with so much Courage and undaunted Bravery, that he put the Enemy first into
great disorder, and soon after to an absolute flight. Both Horse and Foot
pursued the Fugitives quite through the Wood down to the Bog, and killed about
150 among whom was Capt. Chales, with 2 Lieutenants, and took Prisoners Maj.
John Fitz-Patrick who commanded the whole Force, 5 Captains, 9 Lieutenants, 2
Ensigns (belonging to the several Regiments of Coll. Butler of Ballyraggats,
Colonel Robert Grace, Colonel Charles Moore, Sir Morice Eustace, and Colonel
Simon Lutterel's Dragoons) and a hundred and five private Soldiers, six
Sergeants, seventeen Corporals, a Surgcon and three Drums; together with a
hundred and fifty Muskets: All which was done by a hundred and ten of the
English Foot, and thirty four Horse. With the Foot were Major Rider, Captain
Nenny, Captain Dixy, Lieutenant Barton, and Ensign Russel. With the Horse were
Cornet Joshua, Cornet Haslington, Adjutant Robinson, and Quartermaster
Cadford, who with their Men, both Horse and Foot, behaved themselves with an
extraordinary Bravery; gaining so considerable a Victory over above six times
their number, with the loss only of Adjutant Robinson, one Corporal, and two
Foot-Souldiers killed outright, and one Trooper wounded.

The same day this memorable Action was performed; a Party of Colonel Brewer's
Men were going from Mullingar toward Kinnagan; at what time a Sergeant and
four Soldiers lagging a good way behind, were surpised and murdered by the
Rapparees; only one escaped, whom they left for dead, and whose Eyes they had
most barbarously picked out with a Skean.

But the next Day, being the 6th of May, three Rapparees were taken, who being
brought to Mullingar, one of them, whose Name was Ellis, gave Evidence against
the other two, who were thereupon immediately hanged. The same day Captain
Richard Points went out of Mullingar, with a hundred Men of that Garrison, and
falling upon a Party of Rapparees near Managhan, killed above forty; and Lieut.
Coll. Hodson sallying out at the same time from Mountmelock, posted his Men
over night at a Place called Isikapog; the morning by break of day, the Foot
antred the Woods and Bogs, while the Horse scoured the shirts of both; to the
destruction of 18 of the Rapparee Vermin killed outright, and several taken
Prisoners, among whom was one O Rourk their Captain; who because he was
notoricusly known to have committed several Robberies, was hanged upon the
Place. A fair satisfaction, in so short a time, for the Murder of the four
Mullingar English, and digging out the Eyes of the fifth.

May 8. The French Convoy arrived at Linner-Lake, with Provision, Clothes and
Ammunition, but neither Men nor Money: The Sieur de St. Ruth, who is to command
the Rebels, and two French Lieutenant-Generals, came over in the same Ships.
And this was looked upon like the pouring of Brandy down the Throat of a dying
Man.

May 11. A hundred and fifty of the Irish Army came to Castle-Lyons, and took
away some Cattle from thence: But Coll. Donep being there with about 20 Danes,
and 20 of the Militia-Dragoons, pursued the Enemy; at what time a Lieutenant of
the Danes, with 8 Horse and 6 Dragoons, getting before the rest, and overtaking
the Rebels at Ballyderrawne, beat off 60 from the Hedges which they had lined
in that part, though with the loss of the Licutenant, who was there slain. But
then the Colonel coming up with the rest of his Party, constrained the Rebels
to run; and being reinforced with 50 Men out of the Regiments of Colonel.
Boil, Colonel St. Ledger, and Captain Barry's Militia-Troops that lay posted
at Formoy, they continued the pursuit a Mile an half beyond Kilworth, killed
about 50, of which two were Commission-Officers, took 40 Horses, and several
Silver-hilted Swords, Clothes, Arms, and other Accoutrements, recovered the
Booty, and got about 30 Cows besides.

May 14. The Lords Justices and Council set forth a Proclamation, declaring,
That all Popish Irish Inhabirants, where any Rapparees should commit any
Robberies, Burnings or Murders, or make any Insurrections, if they did not
immediately give notice of such Rapparees and Insurrections, to the Justice of
Peace or Military Officer next to their Habitations, and assist them in their
taking of such Rapparees, and suppressing such Insurrections, should be deemed
Confederates with the Rebels, and Enemies to their Majesty's Government, and be
proceeded against with the utmost severity of Military execution. They farther
ordered, That no protected Irish Papists should be out of their Houses after
nine at Night, nor stir out of their Houses before four in the Morning, upon
pain of being put out of their Majesty's Protection. And that after the 30th of
May, if any Arms or Ammunition should be found in the possession of such Irish
Papists, they should be looked upon as Rebels, and punished accordingly.

May 26. The Train of Artillery, consisting of 36 Pieces of Cannon, and 8
Mortars, set forward from Dublin, and upon the 30th arrived at the general
Rendezvous near Mullingar. The same day General Ginkle went from Dublin to the
Army, expecting General Douglass to join him with 12000 Men from the North.

They who beheld the vast Preparations for this Campaign, had a fair prospect
of their Majesty's extreme Care and Providence for the total Recovery of
Ireland, and were easily convinced that the Public Treasure was not now as
formerly given for the Welfare, but expended for the Destruction of the
Monarchy; parted with for the Honor of the Nation, but wasted upon Pleasure,
while they beheld all the proper Ports of the Kingdom continually filled with
Ships and Vessels, some transporting Money, others Recruits to the Army; while
they beheld such amazing Quantities of Provision, Arms and Ammunition; 500
Draught-Horses at a time for the Carriages, and such other vast stores for the
Artillery, with all other Necessaries for so great an Enterprise. Which shows
the difference of a Nation's being under the Care of good Stewards, and from
being under the negligent Misgovernment of Profuseness and unthrifty
Prodigality.

As for the Irish, they were as busy at the same time, as their Assistance
would permit 'em: And certain information was given, That their new French
General St. Ruth, issued out all his Orders in the French King's Name, and
required several of the Rebel's Officers to take new Commissions under the
French King, in prosecution of a Design of subjecting Ireland to France, that
had been long carried on in that Kingdom by Abbot Gravelle, and of which his
own Letters to a great Person in France, that have been since intercepted, are
a sufficient Evidence.

But before we launch into the grand Campaign, there is this Observation to be
made, That though these lesser Encounters which have been hitherto related, may
seem to be of little value, yet considering the continued success of the
English, though for the most part their Parties were much inferior to the
Enemy, and the continued bad Fortune of the Rebels, such a Prosperity must
needs be a great Encouragement to the one side, and no small Disheartning to
the other, not to have one smile of Fortune in their Favor. Add to this, the
picking up of so many of the Enemy for Hawks-meat, not suddenly taken notice of
by a cursory Reading, was like a kind of Hectic Fever, wasting their Body by
degrees; which if the condition of the Kingdom would have endured it, must have
consumed the whole Bulk of the Irish Opposition at the long run. For most
certainly it may be found by an easy computation, that in less than two Months
before the Campaign opened, the Rebels lost, by these petty Gleanings, 1079,
Men killed out right, and above 230 Prisoners, in all 1309 Men, of which some
were considerable Officers, and perhaps in the Number of the most experienced
and daring Commanders; whereas about 40 was the utmost of the English loss;
besides, that the ill Omen of being always beaten, makes a deep impression in
the Minds of Men more courageous than the Irish.

But now all things being in a readiness for the English to take the Field,
General Ginkle, Commander in Chief of their Ma jesties Forces in the Kingdom in
Ireland, upon the 6th of May, decamped from Mullingar; and being joined the
same day by General Douglass with the Northern Forces, which made up the whole
Army 15 Battalions of Foot, and 3000 Horse, upon the 7th of May came before
Ballymore, seated upon a tongue of firm Land, jetting out into a Lake, being in
circumference about a Mile, ending on the two sides with Bogs that are
unaccessible, which leave but a very straight Avenue from the main Land. The
Enemy had fortified this place with two Retrenchments in the Winter, of which
the first was a Horn-work, the second two whole Bastions, whose outward
Curtains on each side extended down to the Lake; and within the last
Retrenchment was an old Danish Mount, so fortified as that it made a third
Retreat.

Upon the General's approach to the Town, the Marquess de Rovigny was sent
before with a strong Detachment of Horse and Dragoons, to possess himself of a
Pass between the Town and Athlone; and as soon as the advanced part of the Army
appeared upon the Hills that look into the Fort, the Enemy began to play upon
the English with two ^ield-Pieces, but without doing any harm. In the mean time
a Detachment of Foot was sent to possess themselves of the Rebels out Posts,
which they quitted upon the approach of the English, and ran as fast as they
could into Ballymore; only a Sergeant and twelve Men continued firing out of a
round Tower, and killed two of the English: But the Tower soon after being
taken by Assault, the Sergeant was hanged upon a high Hill, in sight of the
Enemy, for firing upon the Besiegers after the Communication was cut off from
him and the Town. That Night the Besiegers raised five different Batteries; the
first of 12 Pounders, the second of six 18 Pounders, to ruin the second
Retrenchment; the third of 8 Fieldpieces to break the Pallisadoes; the fourth
of four 18 Pounders, and two 12 Pounders, which battered the Horn-work; as also
a Lodgment on the same side for three Mortar pieces. All which were brought to
play the same Night. About eight of the Clock the next Morning, the General
sent a Message to the Governor, That if he and the Garrison would surrender
within two Hours, he would save their Lives, and receive 'em as Prisoners of
War: If not, that they should expect no quarter. To which the Governor
returning a shuffling fort of an Answer, in hopes to get better Terms, the
Batteries played on, and about Noon the Breaches of the first and second
Retrenchments were so far advanced, and the Pallisado's so effectually cut
down, that the General resolved to storm the Town in five several Places, on
the Hornwork, and the two sides of the Bog by help of Faggots, and by that
means to divide the Garrison, which consisted of 1000 Men. The Besiegers also
had four large Wherries a float upon the Lake, which were brought from Dublin
with a great deal of trouble, into which were put an hundred and fifty
Granadiers, that at the time of the general Aslault, were to attack the
Besieged on that side that lay open to the Lake. All which Preparations, and
their own Condition, put them into so great a Consternation, that they hung out
several white Flags; and about seven a Clock in the Evening, when they left off
firing on both sides, the Governor Colonel Mich. Bourk, and several Officers
came out, and submitted to the General's Mercy.

Upon the 9th of May the Garrison came forth, consisting of 780 Men, drawn out
of the Enemies standing-Army, besides 4 Field-Officers, 16 Captains, 14
Lieutenants, 12 Ensigns and Cornets, etc. and 259 Rapparees, all well armed;
who all laying down their Arms, were made Prisoners in the innermost part of
the Fort. Besides the Garrison, there were above 600 Women and Children, among
whom a Load of Ammunition-Bread was ordered to be distributed. There was found
in the Place several Sacks of French Oat-meal, about ten Barrels of Powder,
with Shot proportionable in their Magazine, two Field pieces and about three
hundred Head of Cattle, and five hundred Sheep, which were given to the
Soldiers.

The same Night that the Town surrendered, there was a hot Alarm that the Enemy
was at hand, with a Body of 25000 Men; which occasioned the Besiegers to double
their Guards, and send out a strong Party of Horse and Foot toward Athlone, who
within two Miles of that place, surpised an advanced Guard of the Enemies
asleep the main Body consisting of 1000 Men who retreated in safety, in regard
the english had no Orders to advance any farther.

So soon as the Town was taken, the English fell to work in repairing the
Breaches, making some additions of new Works, and levelling the Batteries; and
a Garrison was put into it of 500 Men: The Prisoners, being 51 Officers, and
900 Soldiers, were sent away to Mullingar, and from thence to Dublin. After
this, the General lay a while encamped near Ballymore, in expectation of the
Prince of Wirtemberg, who upon the 4th of June decamped from Thurles, with the
Forces under his Command, consisting of 12000 Horse and Foot.

June 5. They came to Roscreagh, where they rested all the next day.

June 7. They marched on to Bir; and upon June the 10th, continued their march,
and came to Streanes Town the 14th, and upon the 18th joined the General, six
Miles farther in the way to Athlone.

On the 18 of June, early in the Morning, the Army marched from Ballymore; and
the Prince of Wirtemberg having joined the General, they encampt at Ballymore's
Pass; from whence a strong Detachment of Horse and Dragoons was fent to Athlone.

On the 19th the Army came before the Place, passing through many narrow Lanes,
which might have cost a great many Men, had the Enemy as floutly defended 'em,
as they might have done; and it seemed a new sight, to behold none but French
Colors in four parts of an Irish Garrison.

Upon the 20th of June, a Battery of ten 18 Pounders was finished, and began to
play upon the Bastion near the Water side looking toward Lanesborough; and the
Guns were so well directed, that by three of the Clock in the Afternoon, the
whole Face, Flank, and part of the Curtain, was laid in Ruins; and thereupon
the General gave Orders for an Assault to be made, which was performed in this
manner: First marched 300 detached Granadiers, then 50 Pioneers with Bavins,
next 200 Fuziliers, and then 2 Regiments of Foot, commanded by Brigadier
Stewart; after which followed 200 Pioneers with more Bavins, and 20 Men with
Felling-Axes, to cut away any Barricado of the Enemies they might meet in their
way. All things being thus in a readiness, about six in the Evening the Sign
was given, by a discharge of all the Cannon in Battery: Upon which, the English
advanced in very good Order to the Assault. The Enemy seemed resolved at first
to have maintained the Breach; but upon the first sight of the Hand-Granadiers,
they fled, retiring in great consusion to Connaught-side, diverse also leaping
over the Shannon for haste: So that the English had nothing to do but to enter;
which the whole Party did, and advanced to the Bridge; where lying open to the
Enemies shot from the other side, several of the English were killed and
wounded, till the Enginiers had completed some Blinds to cover them from the
Town. In this Action however, not above 20 of the English were wounded, and
some few slain outright: In the number of the first was Brigadier Stewart, who
was shot in the right Arm and in the Neck, but not dangerously; but Lieut.
Coll. Gore, that led on the Granadiers, was shot at the Breach; and Lieutenant
Kirk of Villiars's Regiment, was unfortunately killed by a Cannon-Ball, as he
was viewing the Place from the top of a Hill that was just by.

On the 24th, a private Soldier seeing one of the Enemies Colors floating
upon the River near the Bridge, threw himself into the Water; and though many
shot were made at him, brought it off, and presented it to the General, who
gave him a good Reward.

And thus one part of the Town being taken, upon the 25th of June, the
Batteries against the other part of it were all finished, and thirty two Pieces
of Cannon, and six Mortars, planted upon 'em, which played upon the Castle and
the Enemies Works, on the other side of the River, with great success.

The 27th at Night the Soldiers wrought hard to repair the Stone Bridge, of
which two Arches were broken down by the Enemy: One of them was quite made up,
and the other almost finished, when early next Morning the Enemy pulled away
some of the Planks, and threw them into the River; which made the English
resolve to carry on a close Gallery upon the Bridge; which being done
accordingly, Orders were given for storming the Place on the 29th, at seven in
the Morning; but before all things were in a readiness for it, a small Party of
the Enemy came out, and set fire to the Gallery, though with the loss of most
of their Lives. This Accident occasioned the deferring the Assault till the
next day. In the mean time the Cannon and Bombs continually played upon the
Town and Castle, doing most terrible execution. However, the success the Enemy
had in burning the Gallery, gave them so great assurance, that they did not
expect to be so soon attackt.

Nevertheless, all things being in a readiness, in pursuance of the Orders
given by General Ginkle, upon Tuesday the 30th of June, about four a Clock in
the Afternoon, the Attack was made by 1500 Granadiers, and 6 Battalions of Foot
standing ready to support 'em, if occasion should be. The Signal was the
ringing of the Church bell, upon which the Granadiers (with whom M.G. Talmash,
though he did not Command that day, went along as a Voluntier) entered the Ford,
which was the only Passage the Assailants had, in regard the Bridge was so
broken, that they could not get over it. The Enemy at first fired very smartly,
but the Assailants, who waded up to their Breasts in Water with continual
Huzzaing, advanced under the shelter of their own Cannon; and throwing their
Grenades, forced the Enemy from their Posts and Trenches; and in less than
half an hours time, made themselves entirely Masters of the Town, with all
their Enemies Works and the Ruins of the Castle. Major General Maxwel, with
several other Officers, and 200 common Soldiers, were taken Prisoners; and
between 1000 and 1200 were killed upon the Place, besides Officers of note,
such as were Brigadier Mackelicuddy, Colonels Mac-Mahoon, O Neale, O Gara,
Lieut Colonels Macgenis and Barnwel; and Maj. Murray, Coll. Grace, being slain
the day before: The rest escaped over the Ramparts, and fled to the Enemies
Camp; from whence some Battalions were coming to their Relief; but meeting with
the Fugitives, and receiving a warm Salute from those very Works that were so
very lately their own, they retreated back to their Camp.

Of the English were about 20 slain, and 30 wounded; while all, both Officers
and Soldiers, behaved themselves beyond an ordinary Imagination, and perhaps
beyond the Parallel of many Histories, where so much Bravery of Enterprise is
rarely to be found, for only 3000 Men to assail a fortified Town, cross a
River, and make themselves Masters of it in so short a time, in the very face
and view of the Enemy; an Action, with which only the Taking of Buda can stand
in competition: Particularly the Major-Generals Teteau and Mackay, Brigadier de
la Meloniere, and the Prince of Hesse-Dermstadt, who conducted the Attack; the
Prince of Wirtemberg, Major General Talmash, Count Nassau, and Brigadier
Bellasis, merited lasting Honor, in contributing so greatly as they did, by
their Conduct and Courage, to the good success of so signal an Atchievment.
There were in the Town six Pieces of Brass Cannon, and two Mortars; but the
stores of Powder, Bullet and Provisions, were but small. The Town and Castle
were reduced to a heap of Ruins; and the Prisoners said, That before the
Attack, there were killed in the Town about 1200 Men, by the Besiegers Cannon
and Bombs, of which, nor of their Bullets or Stones, the Assailants were no
Niggards, as having bestowed upon the Place, before it was taken, 10000
Bullets, 600 Bombs, and several Tun of Stones.

The Town being thus reduced, the Enemy decamped in the Nightime, between the
30th of June, and 1st of July, and retreated ten Miles off, to a Place called
Bally-Nash, where they lay with the River Soke before 'em, giving out that they
designed to stand a Battle: In pursuance of which Resolution, they at the same
time quitted Slego, James-Town, and Lanesborough, in so much haste, that they
left their Powder and great Guns behind 'em.

On the 10th of July General Ginkle passed the Shannon at Athlone; the Foot
over a Bridge of Boats below the Town, the Horse and Artillery over the
Stone Bridge; and that Night they encamped about five Miles from Athlone.

The 11th they marched, and encampt on the left side of Ballinaslow, upon the
River Suc, with in three Miles of the Enemy, who lay very advantagiously
encampt at Aghriam, their left Wing stretching out toward Kilkon^el Abbey, and
their right upon Rilcommodon-Hills: Before them lay two Bogs, between which,
the Road leads to Galloway. On their left lay the Ruins of an old Castle, which
was entrenched and lined with Foot; and on their right they had made several
Entrenchments for the security of their Camp.

On the 14th, in the Morning, the Army marched from Ballinaslow, and by eleven
a Clock had passed the River Suc, the Horse at two Fords, and the Foot over the
Stone Bridge: Where after some skirmishing, the English drove in the Enemies
out-Guards, and the left Wing of their Majesty's Army drew beyond the Bog,
which covered the Enemies right Wing, and made room for the Foot to advance
between that and them. In the mean time, the English Cannon had dislodged the
Rebels Horse, from the end of the narrow Lane that leads to Aghriam, and the
Kings Horse and Foot took up their Post there, still pouring over Men into a
small spot of firm Land, that lay between the two Bogs and the old Castle.

In the mean time, the Enemy drew down great Bodies of Horse and Foot upon the
left Wing of the English, and were so strongly posted behind the high Banks
that lay one behind another, that the Foot had a very warm dispute with the
Rebels for two hours, but at last forced 'em to give ground, notwithstanding
new Supplies both of Horse and Foot were still sent by the Rebels to relieve
and second those that gave way. At the same time also three Battalions of
English Foot advanced on the right hand, over the skirt of the Bog, and a
little River that supplies the Suc, into a Corn-Field, where they were warmly
entertained by several of the Enemies Battalions and Squadrons. However, the
English maintained their ground till more Regiments came to their assistance;
and forcing the-Enemy to retreat, gave time for the right Wing of Horse to come
on, who immediately charged up the Hills upon the Squadrons of the Enemy; at
what time the left Wing of the English having beaten the Irish from their
ground, and the Right pressing hard upon 'em at the same time, put 'em into an
absolute Rout.

The Victors pursued the flying Rebels about four Miles; for Night would not
permit 'em to do it any farther, in regard it was six a Clock in the Afternoon
before both Armies engaged, and eight in the Evening before the Enemy was
absolutely routed.

The Irish were never known to fight with more Resolution, especially the Foot;
besides, that the Rebels were much superior to the English in number, being no
less than 20000 Foot, and 8000 Horse and Dragoons, with all the Advantage
moreover imaginable, that the Situation of the Ground could afford 'em However,
the superior Valor and Conduct of the English was such, as surmounted all
those Disadvantages, and wrested a complete Victory out of the hands of an
Enemy more stubborn than had been known for some Ages in that Kingdom. But it
was the last Effort, pro Aris and Focis, wherein the gasping Honor of the
Choice of all the Catholic Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom strugled to do
its utmost.

Of the Enemy 5000, or if you will believe Major General Dorington, who was one
of the Prisoners, 8000 were slain upon the Place; among whom was the French
General St. Ruth, who was slain by a Cannon Bullet; the Lord Galloway, Coll.
Barker, Coll. Moore, and Coll. Baggot, with several others.

The Prisoners of note were Maj. Genesis Hamilton, Brigadier Tate, Lord Bellew,
Brigadier Gourdon O Neale, Lieut. Coll. Roberts wounded.

Maj. Genesis Dorrington, Lord Slane, Lord Kilmore, Lord Ruffin, Coll. Butler,
Coll. Grace, Maj. Lawless, Coll. Walter Bourk, Lieut. Coll. John Baggot, Lieut.
Coll. James Braudier, Maj. William. Bourk. Maj. Edmund Butler, 9 Captains, 11
Lieutenants, 7 Ensigns, 2 Corporals, 8 Quarter Masters, 2 Sergeants, 190
private Soldiers, in the hands of the English Provost.

Prisoners in the Dutch Provost's Custody. Major Ter. Kelly, 18 Captains 20
Lieutenants, 4 Cornets, 4 Quarter Masters, 13 Ensigns, 1 Adjutant, and 217
private Soldiers: In all 407, which were afterward made up full 500.

Trophies of Honor were also taken, 12 Standards, 30 Colors, and one
Kettle-Drum; with which the Lord O Bryan was sent into England, to present 'em
to the Queen.

Add to this, That never better Conduct nor Gallantry was ever shown, than
among the General Officers; never more Bravery and Resolution seen among
private Soldiers, who, with a surprising Courage and undaunted Fury, pressed on,
beat down all before 'em, and forced the Enemy from their advantageous Posts
and Entrenchments, to make way for Victory and a glorious Triumph, with the
loss of no more than 500 slain, and 700 wounded. Of the number of the slain
were Maj. Genesis Holtstaple, Coll. Charles Herbert, first taken Prisoner at the
beginning of the Fight, and afterward inhumanly murdered by the Rebels when
they saw the Battle lost; Coll. Mongatz of the Danes, Maj. Petit of
Bel-Castle's Regiment, Maj. Devenish of Earle's, Maj. Colt of Brewer's, Maj.
Cornwall and Maj. Fox, of Fouke's, with diverse inseriour Officers. Among the
wounded were the Prince of Hesse-Dermstadt, the Lord George Hamilton, the Lord
Cutts, Coll. Earl, Lieut. Coll. Brudenell, with some others.

After the Battle was over, the General encampt where the wish lay, and the
next day, being the 13th of June, sent away Brigadier Eppinger with a
Detachment of 1200 Horse Horse and Dragoons, to seize Portumney, where the
Rebels had a great Magazine of Provisions, who soon possessed himself of it;
and the next day, being the 14th, the Fort and Castie of Banaker surrendered to
Major Wood; whereby the English became Masters of all the Passes upon the
Shannon, except Limerick, and those within eight Miles of it.

Upon the 17th of July the Army advanced to Loghreah, and from thence upon the
19th to Athenree, where the General left about 3000 Horse, under the Command of
Lieutenant General Scravenmore, and Major General Rovigny, to observe the
Enemies motion, but more especially to secure the free Passage of the Convoys
and great Guns; and from thence advanced to Galloway.

So soon as the General came before the Place, he sent a Trumpet to the Lord
Dillon, Governor of the Town, and offered him the Benefit of the Lords
Justices Proclamation of the 7th of July, in case he surrondred before the
Cannon were brought to fire upon the Garrison. His Answer was, That Monsieur
d'Ussone, who Commanded, was of the same Opinion with him and the rest of the
Officers, and that they resolved to defend the Place to the last.

Upon this, the English immediately made their Approaches, and the next day,
being the 20th, by break of day, the Besiegers attacked a Fort upon a Hill,
which commanded a Valley between the Town and them. The Granadiers that were
drawn out for this Action, marched with that silence, that they got to the soot
of the Glacis, before they were discovered by the Enemy; at what time
delivering their Grenades, they went on directly to the Pallisadoes, and
entered the Fort without opposition, and made themselves Masters of it without
the loss of one Man, the Enemy crying out for Quarter, which was readily
granted.

Immediately the English, having thus taken the Fort, entrenched themselves in
the Valley; at what time the General hearing that Baldarick O Donnel was on his
march, in order to throw himself and and his Brigade into the Place, the
Tin-Boats were immediately launched in the River, and six Regiments of Foot and
four of Horse sent over the River, and posted full in the way where Baldarick
was to pass: Who finding it impossible for him to bring about his Design,
retreated with his Rabble into the Country of Mayo, burning and destroying all
before him. The taking this Fort, and crossing over the River so suddenly, may
well be thought to have frighted the Enemy into a Treaty; for upon the 21st,
about ten in the Morning, the Governor sent for a safe Conduct for some
Persons he intended to send to the General, in order to a Capitulation: Which
being granted, three Lieurenant Colonels came forth as Hostages, in the
Afternoon. The Treaty lasted the rest of the day and night, at what time the
Commissioners were ublig'd to go back, and consult their Superior Officers. But
at last it was agreed,

That the next Sunday, being the 26 of July, in the Morning, the Town should be
delivered to such Officers as the General should appoint; and that in the mean
time five Hostages should be delivered to the Besiegers, for due performance of
Articles; and that all the Outworks of the Town should be put into their hands.

That the Enemy should forbear to fortify in the mean time, and withdraw all
their Cannon from the Walls; but that the Besiegers should be permitted to work
and post themselves where they would, provided they came not within three yards
of the Wall, nor planted any Cannon upon the Battery they made.

That the Garrison and Townsmen that remained behind, should have the Benefit
of the Lords Justices Proclamation, which gives them their Estates and
Liberties.

That they who had a mind to depart, should be conducted safe to Limerick, with
their Arms, Drums beating, etc. with six Pieces of Cannon.

Lastly, That they shall have the liberty to send to the Lord Tyrconnel, to
acquaint him with what they had done, and persuade him to do the same at
Limerick.

According to this Capitulation, they sent the Lord Clanriccard, and four
Officers more, for Hostages, and allowed two Persons appointed by the General,
to enter into the Place, and take an account of the Stores, etc.

Thus upon the 26th of July was the City of Galloway actually surrendered, the
Garrison marching out in the Morning, and a'Vssone, the French
Lieutenant General, departing the Town two or three hours before the rest, as
it were Incognito; being a Civility desired by the Monsieur, and with no less
Generosity allowed by General Ginkle; who as soon as the Town was clear of the
Rebels, put into it three Regiments of Foot, under the Command (...) Sir Henry
Bellasis. Galloway being thus reduced, upon the 28th of July, the English Army
set forward from thence toward Portumney, where the great Cannon for Battery
was to meet them from Athlone: And there it was that the General received
advice, That Captain Coal, with a Squadron of English and Dutch Men of War,
and the Provision and Ammunition-Ships from Kinsale, was arrived before
Galloway; upon which, the General ordered him immediately to sail away for the
Shannon. From Athernee, the Army advanced to Banabar-Bridge, where they were
joined by seven Regiments more that lay Quartered in those parts; and while the
General stayed there, a great number of Draught-Horses were taken up, in order
to carty Provision and Ammunition to the Camp. At the same time also, several
Deserters came from the Enemy; who gave an account, That the French that were
in Limerick, had been endeavoring to get off a Night or two before; but
perceiving several English Ships in the mouth of the River, they returned back
again. They further informed, that there were above twenty Merchant Ships and
two Privateers, all laden and bound for France. Whereupon Orders were sent to
Captain Coal, who commanded the Squadron then lying in the Shannon, to take
care to secure those Vessels, and prevent their getting out.

Upon the 3d of August, the English decampt from Banabar, and the same day
Brigadier Leveson, with 500 Horse and Dragoons, got before, and in the Evening
came to Nenagh; upon whose approach, the Governor, Brigadier Carroll quitted
the Place in great haste, having first set it on fire; which, however, it was
soon put out, by eleven of the English, who happened to be Prisoners there, and
were left behind.

On the 6th of August, Collon^l Mitchelhourn having blocked up Slego on both
sides, the Governor Sir Teague O Regan, submitted to a Capitulation, and
signed Articles the same day, to surrender the Town by the 15th next ensuing.
But afterward, out of that same treacherous Inconstancy, natural to the mere
Irish, he refused to yield upon the Capitulations he had signed. So that a more
numerous Force was drawn out, and sent away to join with 3000 of the Militia,
to bring him to another sort of Repentance.

At the same time also Baldaric O Donnel, sormerly a Colonel in Spain, and
said to be the true Earl of Tyrconnel, whose Name has hitherto made a great
Noise among the superstitious Irish, that pin their Faith upon Prophecies, sent
to the General a Proposal of some Conditions which he desired might be granted
to him and his Followers, upon their laying down their Arms; and that for the
present, an Article for a Cessation might be allowed him, for continuing
unmolested with his Men, in some place to be assigned him, till their Majesty's
Pleasure should be known concerning his Demands.

Upon the 7th or 8th of August, the Militia of the County of Cork made an
Incursion into the Rebels Quarters, beyond Bantry, under the Command of
Colonel Beecher, and Lieutenant-Collonel Moore; who in their march to join
with Lieutenant-Collonel Freek, Lieutenant Colonel Roberts, Major Wade, and
Major Morris, met with a Body of the Enemy, consisting of 400 Men, near
Skibberteine, which they presently defeated, killing above 60, and taking
several Prisoners. Which done, they joined the rest of the Party; and making up
500 in all, marched toward a place where they were informed that Mac-Carry
Moore, and O Danavan, lay with their Regiments; and with great difficulty got
over a Pass, which the Rebels might have defended with 20 Men, against 2000.
Which put the Enemy into such a Consternation, that they betook themselves to
their Heels, in so great a confusion, that they left behind, for a Prey to the
English, a thousand Head of Black Cattle, five hundred Garrans, as many Goats,
two thousand Sheep, and store of other Booty.

Much about the same time, a Vessel, on board of which w^^ St. Ruth's Goods and
Plunder, attempting to get out of the Shannon, was taken by one of their
Majesty's Frigates that was cruizing about the Mouth of the River; at what time
two other Ships, in which were Sarsfield's Lady, and some other Persons of
Quality, observing, as good luck for them would have it, the Misfortune of the
first Vessel, returned back to Limerick.

Upon the 11th of August, the General marched from Nenagh ^o Shadey, about two
Miles from the Silver Mines. The next day he advanced to Tullen, and upon the
14th, to Caricken-Lysh, which is about four Miles from Limerick.

Upon the 15th, the General went with 1500 Horse and Dragoons, within sight of
the Town; and having beaten in the Enemies out Guards, took a view of the
Rebels Works, from the Hills where their Majesty's Artillery was lodged the
last Year.

On the 16th, being Sunday, the Earl of Tyrconnel, who departed this Life the
Friday before, as it was certainly said, out of mere Anguish of Mind, to see
the ruinous Condition of his Master's Affairs, was buried at Limerick; who
being thus laid in his Grave, a Commission was produced from the late King,
which Mr. Plowden, formerly one of the Commissioners of the Revenue in Ireland,
had brought but a little before from France, appoine ting Sir Alexander Fitton,
Sir Richard Neagle, and the said Mr. Plowden, Justices of Ireland; who
immediately, by virtue of the same Commission, took upon 'em to act, within the
narrow Confines of Limerick, as Lords Justices of that Kingdom.

At the same time Colonel Henry Lutterell had been seized by order of the
French Lieut. genesis d'Vssone, for having made some Proposals for a Surrender;
and was sentenced, by a Court Martial, to be shot to Death. Of which General
Ginckle being informed, sent word to the French Monsieur by a Trumpet, That if
any Man were put to death for having a Mind to come over to the English, he
would revenge it double upon the Irish Prisoners.

August 25. The English Army drew near Limerick, and drove the Enemy from all
their several Forts and Places of defense without the Town; of which they
quitted some upon the approach of the English. Nevertheless, in another Fort
which they had newly built, and wherein they had six hundred Men, they made a
show of greater Resistance; but upon the advance of fourscore Granadiers to
attack it, they only gave one general discharge upon 'em, and then made a
running Retreat by a Covert-way, within their Flank Lines, which they had newly
raised round about the Town.

The next Morning, a considerable Detachment of Horse and Foot was sent away,
with some Cannon, under the Command of the Prince of Hesse-Dermstadt, to take
in Castle-Connel, where the Enemy had a strong Garrison: And another Party was
sent to reduce three other Castles, in the Enemies possession, that lay upon
the River below the Town.

Upon the 25th of August, the whole Army decamping from Carrick-^^glish, about
three in the Afternoon came before Limerick, the left Wing reaching to the
River; but in regard the Enemy had planted two Pieces of Cannon on the other
side of the River, to the Disadvantage of the English, a Regiment of Dragoons,
and another of Horse, that were posted: nearest to the Banks of the Stream,
were constrained to remove to a little farther distance out of Harm's way.
Being thus come before the^ Town, the English advanced to Cromwell Fort, without
any opposition, the Enemy quitting both that and the Line of Communication,
which they had made to the Church, and retreating to their Intrenchments that
were nearer the Town. And at the same time, a Derachment of fourscore
Granadiers were immediately ordered to attack one of their Outworks, which was
a new Fort, and guarded by six hundred Men; which upon the advancing of the
English, they abandoned after one single discharge, and fled by the Covert-way
into the Town. Upon which, the Granadiers entered the Fort; and pursuing the
Fugitives, killed several, and took about twenty Prisoners, with the loss of no
more than one Man. Only one unhappy Accident sell out that night, that Colonel
Donep of the Danish Horse, was unfortunately slain by a Random-shot.

The 26th the heavy Cannon and Mortars arrived, and the Soldiers began to work
upon the Lines of Communication.

The 27th a Battery was raised by the Besiegers against Thomond Bridge; and the
same day Lieutenant General Scravenmore was sent with a Detachment to reduce
Castle O Gunnel, which presently surrendered at discretion; so that the whole
Garrison, consisting of a hundred and fifty Men, were all made Prisoners of
War. At the same time some lighter English Frigates made up, and cast Anchor
within sight of the Town, while Captain Cole with the rest of the Squadron lay
about six Miles off. It Is said that the Besieged, upon the first appearance of
the small Frigates, expressed an extraordinary Joy, believing them to have been
French; but were as much appalled, when they found their unlucky Mistake.

The 28th Castle-Connel surrendered to the Prince of Hesse-Dermstadt, which was
attended with the surrender of several other petty Castles thereabout, and made
the English Masters of above nine hundred Prisoners.

Upon the 30th the Besiegers began to play upon the Town with nine Mortars,
which set it on fire in several places, though it burnt not very long, the
Buildings being all of Stone, and very strong. However, the second Bomb that
was thrown killed the Lady Dillon, and wounded several others. The next day
nine Cannon began to play upon the Castle to ruin it, and to hinder the Enemies
Communication with their Camp; and the same night was erected a Battery of two
Mortars more, of eighteen Inches diameter; and soon after two more Batteries
were finished, one of fourteen Pieces, the other of ten, all carrying twenty
four and eighteen pound Ball. The Report of all the Deserters, who daily came
over to the Leaguer, at that time was, that the Garrison in the Town was very
numerous, but that they were not half armed, and that they were in great want
of Previsions. But though it is not amiss for a General to hear what such
People say, yet there is but little Credit to be given to their Reports, which
are most frequently framed to curry favor. Thus in a few days after, other
Deserters reported, That there were not Provisions in the Town for many days,
and that d'Vssone the French Governor, had promised to dismiss the Militia
that were forced into the Town, after the Battle of Aghrim, if succor did not
come from France in twelve days. Of the Truth of all which, an easy Conjecture
may be made by what has happened since.

However, after all these fair Stories, the General hearing that several
Regiments of the Enemies Horse, with a Party of Rapparees, were drawn together
in Kerry, about sixteen Miles from Limerick, sent away Brigadier Leveson with
five hundred Horse and Dragoons, in pursuit of the whole Party; who being
informed of his March, divided themselves into two Bodies, to make their
retreat the more easy. Which Brigadier Leveson understanding, did the like;
and with one part of his Detachment, himself pursued one of the Enemies Bodies,
while Colonel Newenhuys pursu^d the other. Nor was it long before the
Brigadier overtook the Party which he pursued; and so entirely put them to the
rout, that very few escaped; among the rest, the Lord Castle Connel was taken,
and sent to the Camp with the rest of the Prisoners.

Upon the 3d of September, the Enemies Horse quitted their Camp, under the
Cannon of the Town, and betook themselves to another that lies in the Road
between Limerick and Killalow; and thus their Horse being near to second 'em,
they posted four Regiments of Dragoons to guard the Fords of the Shannon, in
case the Enemy should attempt to pass the River. On the other side, the
Besiegers had by this time finished their Line of Circumvallation, with four
Redoubts to defend it.

September 4. Three hundred Horse and Dragoons were sent to reinforce
Brigadier Leveson; who after the Defeat of the two Regiments, and the Body of
Rapparees, in Kerry, was advanced farther, in order to the reducing of those
few small Garrisons which the Irish had left in that County; to which purpose,
is Pieces of Cannon were also ordered him for the more speedy effecting his
Design.

About the same time, the Irish having put between 2 and 300 of the Protestant
Inhabitants of Limerick into a little Island in the Shannon, under a sufficient
Guard, their sad and starving Condition moved the Compassion of the Officers,
to whose care they were committed; who being no less desirous themselves to go
over to the English, sent to Maj. Stroud, who then lay posted with some of the
Melitia not far from the Island, to let him understand their intentions; upon
which, the Major went over with a Party in small Boats; and brought away not
only the Guard, but the Prisoners, that were almost starved for want of Food,
in a place where they had only two pitiful Hutts to shelter them from the
Inconveniences of the Weather.

September. 8. The great Battery of 22 Pieces of Cannon began to play very early
in the Morning, and in a short time made a Breach of about 30 yards in the
English Town, on the North-East side of it. Upon the left of this Battery were
also planted 8 Mortars, two of which were 18 Inches in diameter. The next day,
being the 9th, two more Batteries were finished, which played upon St. John's
Gate in the Irish Town. These Batteries and Mortars playing without
intermission, made a world of Havoc, dismounted the Enemies Cannon, made
several Breaches, set the English Town several times on fire, and laid the
greatest part of it in Rubbish; and all this by the 12th at night; at what time
some of the Besiegers Bombs falling among the Enemies Stores, burnt three of
their Magazines, one of Brandy, and the other two of Bisker, and shortly after
fired and blew up another Magazine of Powder, which forced the Enemy to remove
what Provisions and Ammunition they had left, into the Irish Town.

September. 15. The Lord Lisburn was killed by a Cannon Ball, as he was lying
upon his Quilt in the Trenches.

On the 17. One Capt. Taffe came over to the English, and informed the General,
that the English Town was utterly ruined; that the great Guns and Bombs had
killed a great number of the Garrison, which at that time was reduced to 6000
Foot, and those but very ill clad.

Upon the 18th. an Express was sent to Dublin by the Earl of Granard, giving
this Account, that upon his coming before Slego with a Body of the Army, and
Militia of the Country, consisting of about 3000 Men, to whom Baldaric neale,
who was absolutely come over to the English, had joined his own Thousand
followers, the Irish quitted the Town, and retreated into the Fort; upon which
his Lordship caused a Battery to be Raised against it. But then the Irish
choosing rather to submit in time, then suffer the fatal Effects of a successful
Storm, surrendered the Fort upon the 15th. of September, and Marched out
accordingly to the Number of between 5 or 600 Men. They left in the Place 16
Pieces of Cannon, 30 Barrels of Powder, more Shot in proportion, and a great
Quantity of Provision. The Articles they obtained were almost the same with
those that were granted to Galloway, wherein diverse other petty Garrisons were
included, upon this Condition that they furrendr'd twenty four Hours after
being Summoned. Much about the same time, General Ginckle having determined
that part of the Army should pass the Shannon, with a resolution to dissipate
or remove the Irish Horse that lay Encamped in the County of Clare, and shut up
the Town on that side also, the better to conceal his design, made a show by
giving Orders to draw off and ship the heavy Cannon, and quit several Castles
near the Camp, as if he intended to raise the Siege; which the Enemy believing
to be real, expressed their joy by loud and frequently repeated Shouts. But the
same Night the Pontons were laid over the Shannon about a Mile above the Town;
which was performed with that Order and Silence, that upon the 16th. by break
of day, the Royal Regiment of Dragoons, with a Detachment both of Horse and
Foot had passed the River before they were discovered by the Enemy. All this
while Brigadier Clifford lay with four Regiments of Dragoons on the other side
of the Water, to have hindered the English from getting over; and so soon as he
perceived himself frustrated in his design; brought down all his Men on foot
(their horses being at grass) to make the best opposition he could. But they
were presently routed, and forced to betake themselves to their Heels, flinging
away their Arms, and leaving behind them all their Tents. Baggage, Saddles,
Bridles and other Accoutrements, together with two Pieces of Cannon, and the
Standard of Maxwell. Many were killed, and several taken Prisoners, among whom
was a French Lieutenant Colonel. Upon this, the rest of the Irish Horse, that
lay higher up toward Ki^lalow, took the Alarm, and drew out as if they had
intended some stout resistance, but as it proved, 'twas only to secure their
Baggage, and get time to take down their Tents. For so soon as the English drew
near 'em, and had passed the first Lane that was between the Irish and Them,
they Marched off in great disorder toward the Mountains. Which done, the Horse
returned to the Camp, and the Foot were posted at the head of the Bridge. At
what time the English also took a Castle that stands in the Middle of the
Shannon, the Garrison of which consisting of about threescore Men, surrendered
at discretion; besides another Post not far from it which were of great Use to
the Besiegers. The English also removed their Bridge of Boats nearer to the
Town, and secured two more Passes to it, of which one was called the Pass of
Annabegg, where the English went over the last year.

On the 22d. of September the General of the English passed the Shannon very
early in the Morning with a strong Party of Horse and Dragoons, and Ten
Regiments of Infantry, and fourteen Pieces of Cannon, leaving the rest of the
Army under the Command of the Duke of Wittenbergh to secure the Besiegers Works
on the other side of the River. About Noon the same day, both Horse and Foot
were drawn up before the Irish Town, notwithstanding that the Enemy played upon
'em all the while from the Castle, and several Towers, both with their great
Guns and small Shot. About four of the Clock in the Afternoon, the General
Ordered all the Granadeers together with the Regiments of Colonel Kirk,
Colonel Yiffin, and the Lord George Hamilton to Advance and Attack the Fort
that secures Thomend Bridge; at what time the Besieged sent two great
Detachments out of the Town, to reinforce and second their own Party that
defended it. But notwithstanding all this, the English went on with that
Courage and Bravery, that they beat the Enemy from their Works, who thereupon
fled to the Town in hopes to have been let in. But the Governor fearing least
the Victorious English should have Entered with the fugitives, durst not let
down the draw Bridge to receive them, which occasioned a great slaughter of the
vanquished Irish, so that nothing was to be seen from the foot or Thomond
Bridge to the draw Bridge, but heaps of dead Bodies. Six hundred of the Enemy
were slain, and about one handred and thirty raken Prisoners, among which
Number was Colonel ^kelton (since dead of his wounds) two Lieutenant
Colonels, two Majors, three Captains, seven Lieutenants and six Ensigns. The
loss which the English sustained was occasioned more by their own Contempt of
Danger, and too eager pursuit of Victory, than the Resistance of the Enemy. For
all the while the conflict endured, the Enemy played with their Great and Small
Shot from the Walls of the Town at a more than ordinary Rate: which was the
reason that the Mettle of the English precipitating them too far, they were
much more than they needed to have been, exposed to the Enemies Fire: so that
between two and three hundred were slain and wounded, tho not any one of Remark.

The next day in the Afternoon the Garrison beat a Parley on both sides of the
River, and desired a Truce, which was agreed upon by the General; which time
being expired, Sarsfield and Wahop came forth, and desired the Truce might be
continued for three days, to the End they might send to their Horse, which lay
toward Clare, to know upon what Conditions they expected to be comprehended in
the Capitulation.

Upon the 25th. Colonel Sheldon, and some other of the Enemies Officers came
into the English Camp, and thence went into Limerick. The next Day S^rsfield
and W^hop dined with the General; and the Lord Cutts, Sir David Collier,
Colonel Tiffany and Colonel Fiper were sent as Hostages into the Town, and
the Lords Westmeath, lveagh, Trimblestown and Lowth, remained in the Camp as
Hostages for the Garrison. Upon the 27th. the Irish sent out their Proposals,
which the General not approving, instead of an Answer, sent back twelve other
Articles, which was all he would allow them; and at the same time gave Orders
for the great Guns and Mortars to be in a rea^^ness, in case they resas'd the
Proposals he had sent; which brought down the Stomac^^ of the Irish, who seeing
the Resolution of the General and finding to other Remedy, at length, upon the
third of this Month came to a final Conclusion, so that the Articles of
Capitulation were signed the same Day, consisting of two Parts, the one
relating to Civil Affairs, which were signed by the Lords Justices, the
General, and the Persons deputed by the Garri^on; and the other in reference to
the Military Affairs, which were subscribed by the Generals on both Sides, Such
of the French and Irish as have a Mind to pass the Seas, are to have the
Liberty, for their present Convenience, to stay in the English Town and the
Island, till they can be shipped away. And the Castles of Ro^s and Clare,
together with all other Places and Castles that as yet are in the Possession of
the Irish are by Virtue of the same Capitulation, to be forth with delivered up
to the English. So that the ^urrender of this Town complents the Conquest of
the whole Kingdom of Ireland. In pursuance of the Agreement, one Gate of the
Town was delivered up that ^vening; it being (...) late t^ march into the Town;
but the next Day the Irish being quite (...) out, the Lord (...) in and took
Possession (...) it with seven Reginments of Font. (...) some others, (...)
design to repair their (...) in the French (...) themselves the more acceptable
(...) up some of their (...) the French (...) to go along with (...) may our
next Journal attend (...).

FINIS.

