The Execution of the Popish LORD: OR, THE TRAYTOR'S DOWNFALL.

Being an Account of the BEHEADING OF William Viscount Stafford

For High Treason: On the 29th. of this Instant December, 1680.

On a Scaffold Erected for that Purpose, on Tower Hill: with many particulars
most Remarkable, that happened therein. And of the Disposal of his Body after
Execution. Which may be a large warning to all the yet remaining Popish
Conspirators; how they seek to take away the Life of the King, and by seeking
to destroy the Protestant Religion, have hopes to plant Popery once more in
England.

woodcut depiction of an execution

Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball in West-Smithfield.

The Execution of THE Popish Lord, etc.
IN most Cases it is observrd, that Traitors seldom depart in Silence or quiet
to their Graves, some untimely Death or other still awaits their Impieties, and
those that dig Pits for others, most commonly fall into the same themselves;
for it is certain, that those whom the effects of such Treason most may profit,
will in no wise after trust the Traitor, least he upon some distaste should
Propagate, or at least endeavor the like against him when opportunity lies
fair; For in Ancient Times it has been noted, that Traitors have been looked
upon as Infernal Pests, even by those they have Perpetrated their Villainies and
Ignominious Treasons to advance: Nay, could not the short sight of Humane
Reason dive into their Pernicious ways, the God that views the Secrets of all
hearts, would by one means or other lay them open to the World; so that each
discerning Soul might fatham the depth of their dire policies, so often is
their Wisdom turned into Foolishness: and when they think their Plots most
secure, they are nearest discovery; as has been in the most of their late
Conspiracies and intended Evasions. But to come nearer to the particulars of
this late Lord Viscount Stafford, of whose deserved downfall we are to inform
the world.

HE being formerly but a-mean Gentleman, but Marrying to the Countess of
Stafford, his Majesty was graciously pleased to Confer the Titles and Honors
of that Family upon him; for which, Viper-like, he endeavored to destroy what
was the only fountain of his Greatness and Prosperity; by engaging a Damnable
and Hellish Plot, against the Life of the King and Protestant Government; which
just as it was going to break in upon us, was by the will of Divine Providence,
made manifest to the whole Nation; broached even by those that themselves had
given the greatest Confidence to; for all the Evidence that have as yet been
Instrumental in the Discovery, were those whom they had employed for the
promoting the Design, so weak is the piercing Intelect of Humane reason
compared with that Divine. Full Sixteen Years, according to Evidence, has this
Device been managed, not only by the whole Conclave of Popish Cardinals, the
Pope, and the greatest part of his Clergy, but by a great part, if not all the
Popish Nobility of England, Scotland, and Ireland, whose Estates have been
consumed and much impaired in the Management of the same, as hoping to be
doubly repayed, in possessing the Lands and Wealths of Heretics, as was also
proved against this Lord. True it is, they looked for a plentiful Harvest
because their Design was to fatten the Earth with Protestant Blood; nor did the
Massacre they designed, portend any less: All above Ten years Old had Perished
by prescription, had not the Mercy of an Infinite God interposed to have
stopped the Torrent of their Rage, which like a Flood was swelled even with the
Banks, and just prepared to overflow Church and State; but in what they thought
themselves most secure, they were found most Weak, for by Murdering Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, to prevent a farther Discovery, they laid their Wicked
Projects open to the view of all; whereupon many of the Plotting Traitors were
Detected, and amongst the rest, this Viscount continuing by a Commitment of
Parliament a long space Prisoner in the Tower, where no ways were left
unpracticed to gain his Freedom, but his nor any the rest could prevail, for on
the Thirtieth of November he was brought in a Barge from his Imprisonment, to
Westminster Hall, where the Great Court of Justice was Erected for his Trial,
the Tower Ax being born before him: His Looks at the beginning of his Trial
were Blithe and Cheerful, as not fearing any ill Consequence, but when he heard
the Witnesses swear, in number Three, That he would have Hired some or all of
them, to Murder the King, and that the Protestants should be Massacred, and
that he was in the Conspiracy to bring in a Foraign Power, and to Establish
Popery, he began to Tremble and look pale. It Is true, he produced many
Witnesses, but they could not speak any thing to the purpose in his behalf,
their Affirmation consisted only in Circumstances, and rather perjudiced his
Cause then farther'd it; In fine, he was found Guilty by his ^eers, the Lords
Temporal assembled in Parliament, and according to his just Deserts, received
Sentence of death; being conveyed back to the Tower, where he continued till
this day, preparing for his Latter end, yet by no means forsaking those
preposterous Superstitions that had brought such Ruin on his Head.

In the morning he was brought out of the Tower, attended by a Guard of
Partisans and Soldiers, the Tower Hamlets making a Lane for him to pass to the
Scaffold, prepared for his Execution; great part of the City Train'd-bands
being in Arms. When he came to the Scaffold he was helped up by two or three
Attendants; and being mounted looked very wishfully, as loath (no doubt) to
dye: for sure it is, how ever men can slight death at a distance, yet when it
comes near them, and is certain, it strikes a Consternation, especially where
the Breast is charged with Guilt and diabolick Treasons.

After he had spoke to some of his Friends, and made several prayers to
himself, for the most part holding in his hand, as it is said, his Beads and
Crucifix, he kneeled down to try how the Block fitted, then having a Cap on, he
after some consideration, gave the Executioner a sign to strike, which he did,
and with one enforced stroke, divided the Head from the body, both of them
containing motion of Life for a while, but the body longest.

After Execution his Head and body were wraped up in a convenient Garment, or
put in a Coffin, and carried back to be disposed of as his Majesty shall think
fit. Thus was he Rewarded for his Treasonable practices, and received the
Merits due to such Hellish intents; so that although Justice does oftentimes
delay, yet at last it will strike home, to the destroying from off the face of
the earth, all such as wilfully Sin against their own Consciences, to gratify
Ambition or Revenge, against such who never offered them the least Indignity:
For as notonly this Lord, but many others did confess that the King could no
ways be found fault withal, but was a good and just Prince, but being a
Heretic and not for their turns, he must be made away. So the Devil, out of
envy to their Happiness, plotted the Downfall of our first Parents in Paradise,
and ever since wicked men have envy to those that are Upright.

FINIS.

