THE EXECUTION Of the 11 Prisoners that suffered at TYBURN, And one in
Little-Brittain, On Wednesday the 22th of this Instant January, 1679. With the
manner of their behavior in Newgate before Execution. Viz.

Rich. Mills, John Butler, William Brown, Christopher Brunker, George Kenyon,
all of them for a Robbery in Hatton-Garden.

William Adkins, For a Burglary. Anthony Tyler, For a Burglary. Francis Jones,
For a Burglary. Timothy Smith, For a Burglary in the Strand. Margaret Wallis,
For a Burglary in the Strand. William Brain, For Horse-stealing. Robt. Freeman,
For shooting his Master.
WITH The description of every Man's Fact for which he dyed.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for D. M. 1679.

The Confession and Execution of the Prisoners that were executed at Tyburn on
Wednesday the 22th of this Instant January. 1679.
IT would almost amaze a serious thought to consider with what headlong fury
some men attempt their own destruction, even to throw themselves into the
gaping Jaws of ruin, and spur that Fate, which of it self too swiftly hurries
on, and winds away the short-span'd Clue of their disastered Lives; they sin
secure, and never dream of Ills whiles Justice whets his Sword and gives
command to Time, who orders Death with his suppressing shafts, to put a period
to their impious Crimes, and stay their full Career with a disgraceful end: And
yet we can but pity their untimely transmigrations from this lower World, if we
reflect upon them with impartial thoughts, considering they are our
Fellow Creatures, cast in Natures Mold, the same by Heaven made, but yet
depraved and made more vile by that deceiving power who dwells in darkness, and
delights to work on easy Souls, and snare them with his wiles, and chain them
fast till Justice strikes the blow; and then, except they timely do repent, and
close with yielding mercy, they are too sure his own. But let us not be over
rash, for the Almighty's goodness is as boundless as his power, and he can save
unto the utmost all that come unto him, nor will he cast them of, if by sincere
contrition they return and claim his gracious promise; and yet it is dangerous
so to linger till the utmost moment twinckles an Eternity, to stand upon the
verge of Flames beneath, yet think to reach the Stars, Face Death with joyful
expectations, whose dread Menaces can yield them naught but Terrors; yet such
presumptions have too often deceived careless men, and Satan's gilded Bates been
luscious poison to their pleasing tastes, too often indulged them in their darling
sins, and with delusions, under specious forms of interest, profit, or of
growing great, overpowered their craving wills, which before were prone enough
to close with such alluring Cheats. But I suppose the nature of Malefactors is
so amply known, I need not much enlarge upon the subject; for why, they are
most of them men of lend Conversations, for the greatest part, who first most
commonly begin with Crimes of a smaller note, and by degrees emboldened in the
cursed Trade, they trample upon fear and stifle all remorse; a sympathy so
frequently observed in their insolent behaviors, who often have been known,
when in their Infancy, to scoff at Admonitions, and make a jest of Piety, but
this is only when they are free and unrestrained, roving to and fro, as Sacred
Writ makes mention, to mark out houses for themselves in the daytime, so that
when darkness comes they may break through; but when they are shackled by
Justice, and the ends of all their courses come before their Eyes, then they
are of other minds, and often make their pious departure to another life, as I
question not but some of these untimely Wretches (of which I here intend to
treat) have done: The first of which in order were William Adkins and Anthony
Tyler, who were indicted for Burglary, were found guilty and sentenced
accordingly; they were both old Offenders, especially the former, for he had
been once before condemned, twice burnt in the hand, once in London, and once
in Maidston, at the Assizes held for the County of Kent, and were now Executed
for breaking open a house in White-Chappel; to see the inevitableness of Fate,
for as the ancient Proverb most truly denotes, The Pitcher that goes often to
the water at last returns broken home: So it appeared in the Catastrophe of
these Offenders, who, after a long practice of their Hellish Trade, were
intercepted by Justice; they confessed the Fact, and bewailed their former
leud-vices, their ends were reasonably penitent.

The next were Richard Mills, John Butler, Alias Armstrong, and William Brown,
Christopher Brunker and George Kenyon; these were the notorious Offenders that
robbed the house in Hatton-Garden after the newest fashion that has been heard
of in any Modern Age, for going accouter'd in the habillaments of Trained-band
Soldiers, pretending orders to search for Recusants, whilst some detained the
people of the house, the other robbed it of Plate, Moneys, Rings, etc. to a
considerable value, for which they were found guilty and sentene'd accordingly:
One of these, viz. Butler, Alias Armstrong had formerly been in a Robbery with
Thomas Sadler, for which Monday, Tatnam, and others, were formerly Executed.
Brunker was a Purser of a Ship, but was never known to have been in Newgate
before, as likewise Mills and Brown, but they all confessed they had been vile
livers, and desired people to take warning by their untimely end; and
especially to be cautious how they were drawn into bad Company, the which had
been the cause, and chiefest Instrument, of their disgrace and ruin.

Robert Freeman, who was indicted for killing his Master, he was brought in by
the Grand Inquest Guilty of willful murder, and accordingly sentenced, and this
morning, about Nine of the Clock, drawn upon a Sledge to Little-Brittain, a
Gibbit being there set up, before his Exeoution he was very penitent, but would
in no wise, to the very last moment of his Life, confess the Crime, he was
solicited often and pressed upon by many Ministers.

The next was Anne Sly for murdering her Child, the which after its barbarous
Execution she closed in her Box, thinking so to secure the Crime; but that sin
which seldom is long concealed, in spite of all the cunning was brought in
Guilty, but was graciously reprieved.

The next was one William Brain, who was indicted for that Ancient and so long
practiced Trade of Horse-stealing, and was found guilty, and this day Executed;
he seemed in outward appearance to be very sensible of his latter end.

The next was Francis Jones, for a Burglary; It was proved against him plainly,
he could not deny the Fact; wherefore he was found Guilty by the Jury, and
suffered for the same.

Timothy Smith, and Margaret Wallis, were found Guilty of a Burglary for
breaking open several Locks in the Strand; the latter, having been an old
offender, and having been before in Newgate, is supposed she might entice the
former into the Action, the which proved destructive to them both; they were
both reasonably penitent.

The next in this fatal Catastrophe was John Holland, for stealing of several
Horses; he had been an old Offender; and for long time used the fatal employ;
he had been burnt in the hand at the Surry Assizes: he was condemned, but
received a gracious reprieve.

And now one would think these lamentable and to be deplored Miscreants should
be as so many Examples or Trophies of offended Justice, to warn, or rather
restrain, all lend persons from their evil course, that they may turn back from
those pernicious paths, that tend to Death and Hell.

FINIS.

