The Excellent and Renowned HISTORY Of the Famous Sir Richard Whittington,
Three times Lord Mayor of the Honorable City of LONDON.

Giving an Account of all the Remarkable and noted Passages of his Life.

This may be Printed,

R. P.



depiction of incidents from the Legend of Dick Whittington depiction of Dick
Whittington's cat at the court of the King of Barbary depiction of Mr.
Fitz-warren's ship Mew


depiction of Dick Whittington's cat depiction of Dick Whittington, Lord Mayor
of London on horseback

The Excellent and Renowned History of the Famous Sir Richard Whittington.
CHAP. I. ^ow Richard Whittingon came to London, and being almost starved, was
taken by a Merchant into his House.
THat there is something more than ordinary, in the Fares and Fortunes of Men,
relating to Adversity and ^^^sperity; is wonderfully evident by the (...) or
sinking of some in the World, who (...) their utmost labor, industry and
dili^^^ce, to prevent it: and the rise of others (...) neither strive for it,
or in the least ex^^^ it. And one of this Fortunate Ones (...) the Person,
whose unexpected advance^^^ts and great increase of Riches, etc. ^s this
Relation, to whose story I (...) proceed.

Richard Whittington, born of obsc^^^ Parents, so that the certain place of
(...) Birth is unkown; being in his Child^^^^ cast out to a desperate Fortune,
he wan^^^^^ for a considerable time, about the Cou^t^^ but finding no
employment whereby he c^^^^ subsist, he resolved for London: where, ^^ter many
weary steps, he arrived; but (...) there a stranger, and altogether friendle^^
he did little but wander up and down (...) streets for the space of two days.
But (...) the third, being tired and faint for want food, he laid himself down
at the door of (...) Rich Merchant, to bemoan his present ^^happy condition:
which he had scarcely d^^^ before the Merchant came out to go to (...)
Exchange, and finding him there, began (...) chide and threaten him as a lazy
Pi^ and a Loyterer; telling him that suc^ (...) able Fellow, as he appeared to
be, ought (...) taking upon him such an idle course of (...) to be sent to the
Stocks or Whipping-p^^^ But his Replies being modest and ^^affirming that he
would refuse no La^^^ he was capable of performing, if he c^^^^ find a Master
by whom he might be su^ed with Victuals to ease his Hunger, (...) Clothes to
cover his Nakedness: (...) made such a visible Relation, of the ^ing and
perishing condition he was in; ^^^t the Merchant, whose name was Hugh ^ warren,
who was naturally compassio^^^^ melting at the story, changed his Pas^^^^ to
mildness; and calling one of his ^ts, ordered him to take in that stran^^^, and
supply his wants with provision* (...) withal, not to dismiss him till his
Re^^^^. And so proceeded to look after his Af^^^^^ abroad.

CHAP. II. (...) Mrs. Alice, the Merchant's Daught^r procured his being taken
into Ser^^ce, and of the hard usage he received him the Cook-Maid, how he
purchased his Cat and sent her for a Venture.
WHittington being taken out of the pinching cold to a warm fire, and ^ed with
provision to his content; did (...) a little inwardly rejoice at this begin^^^^
of good luck: But whilst his thoughts (...) employed many ways, and busied in
an^ng the many Questions the Servants (...) him, in relation to his Birth,
Coun^^^ Travels* fair Mrs. Alice the Mer^^^^^s only Daughter, upon notice a
stranger was ordered by her Father to be ^tained, came out of curiosity to see
him: (...) on sight of whom (his color and Comp^^^^on being by this time
pretty well reco^^^^^ she was not a little pleased, and the more (...) by his
modest, though suitable, Answ^^ her Questions, she found him Witt^ (...)
Ingenious, beyond what his habit o^ ^^^ward form could reasonably promise:
(...) hearing her Father was returned and (...) upon the Board, she left him to
dine with Servants: Yet so far he ran in her (...) that although her Father,
through the (...) of Business, had, in a manner, forg^t he had caused him to be
entertained, (...) him in mind of him, and so prevailed; (...) she, upon urging
that he might be servic^^ in the Kitchen, going of Errands, clea^ of Shoes and
Boots, etc. procured him be listed or entertained in the Family: (...) in
consideration a Lodging was want^^ she further pleaded, that allowing (...)
homely Bed, the Garret, that lay usel^^^ and unimployed, might afford him a
c^niency. And thereupon, all scruples of th^^ kind, being removed, he joyfully
(...) upon his new Service; as not doubting (...) give content for the meat,
drink and cl^ which he only expected to be the Reward h^^ Labor and diligence:
but being most^^ put to drudge in the Kitchen, the Cook-(...), under whom he
served in the nature of (...) Scullion, being of a cruel and froward ^^^per,
used her Authority beyond the Rule (...) Reason or Humanity, by not only rating
(...) frequently scolding at him, though he was no ways remiss in performing
what ^^e^er was enjoined him; but upon the least ^ous occasion, and frequently,
without (...) cause, would lay on him unmercifully ^^^h the Spit, Tongues,
Ladle or what ^^me next to hand; and the rather she used ^^is Cruelty, because
she found him so good ^^tured as not to complain of his hard Usage; being
resolved if possible, to over^^me Perverseness with Patience. During which
suffering of his, it so happened, (...) through his diligence had gained the
good^^ll of all the Family beside, and especially (...) fair Mrs. Alice. But
now another trouble happened, the Garret wherein he lay, by ^e^son of its long
unfrequentedness, being ^^^^edingly pestered with Rats and Mice; (...) his
quiet was molested in the day by the ^^^k-maid, so they did the like in the
night, (...) running over his Face and frequently ^aking to the disturbance of
his Repose, which obliged him to consider some way to destroy them: and
thereupon he conclu^^ to purchase a Car with a penny that he (...) got for
cleaning a pair of Boots for a G^^tleman who accidentally lodged in his m^sters
House. How it so happened that the generous Merchant, whom he served, nev^^
sent any Ship to Sea, but he caused t^^^ one of his Family, as well Servants
(...) others, to send some part of their prope^ Goods as an Adventure, for
which they (...) to have their respective Returns, Fraig^^ free. And now being
about to set out the prosperous Ship called the Unicorne; he called his
Daughter and Servants to delive^ their Adventures to his Factor, who
accordingly came, Whittington excepted, ea^^ according to his or her Ability,
deliverin^ something valuable. At what time Whittington came into remembrance,
and being called, the Merchant told him the custome^ and demanded what he had
that he could ca^^ properly his own to send as an adventure To which he
replied, his Poverty rendere^ him incapable of any thing in that nature*
Whereupon, fair Mrs. Alice drew out he^ Purse and offered to lay down moneys
for him; but her Father would except nothin^ but what was his proper Goods; and
aga^^ demanded if he had nothing that he could properly call his own: to which
the poor (...) replied, with a sigh, that he had nothing could rightly call so,
unless his Clothes (...) a Cat which he had purchased with a any; the latter of
which, the Merchant ^^^ered him instantly to fetch, which he with (...)
unwillingness and almost with tears, (...) as being loath to part with what was
(...) serviceable to him. And now their Ad^^^ture being delivered to the
Factor, he ^^cryed them aboard the good Ship the U^^corne, which was fallen
down to Black^^all; and soon after set sail upon the intend^^ Voyage.

CHAP. III. ^ow Whittington, by reason of his hard Usage, attempting to run
away, was brought back by the ringing of Bow Bells; and of the great Riches he
received for the Adventure of his Cat, and how it came to pass.
WHittington being still in Mr. Fitzwarren's house, under the unperi^
Cook-maid; and she finding her power (...) him, used it with such rigor, that
it (...) him, in a manner, weary of his Life: which put him upon purpose of
runnin^ way; and in order thereto, early in the ^^^ning on St. Allhallows-day,
he packed (...) his clothes and went as far as Bun hill-(...) where, it being
yet scarce day, he sat (...) down to consider whether or to what plac^ (...)
should go; and to bewail his unhappy (...) uneasy Condition: when, to his
think^^^ he heard the Bells at Bow-Church (...) Cheap Side, in their tuning
express th^^^ Words; viz. Turn again Whittington
Thrice Lord Mayor of London.
Turn again Whittington
Thrice Lord Mayor of London.


This made so deep an impression in h^^ mind, that it quite altered his former
^^termination and made him resolve upon r^turning again to his Service; which
(...) accordingly did, ever he was missed by any (...) the Family: where we
must leave him (...) a while to follow his drudgery, and bear p^tiently the
Cook-maids Doggedness (...) Cruelty, to follow the Ship; which, (...) this
time, was tossing in a fearful (...) upon the Ocean.

The good Ship the Unicorne being dri^^^ by Storms and Tempests, through ^y
dangerous Seas, not without great ^^zard of being Cast away; arrived at last
(...) the Coast of Barbary or the Golden (...), then unknown and un-navigated
by ^^e Christians; and there exposing their ^s to the view of the Moors, who
flock^^ to the shore to admire them. It was ^^t long before the news was
carried to the King of the Country, who sent one of his Lords to bring the
Master and Factor to Court; and with them some of every Commodity they had to
expose to Sale: which so highly pleased him, that he commanded they should be
feasted at his own Table in his Royal Palace; bargaining beforehand for their
whole Ships Cargo.

Now so it happened, that whilst they were ^^^^ing on Carpets spread on the
Pavement, (...) the Moorish fashion is, the smell of the ^^inties, which were
their present, drew ^her such a multitude of Rats and Mice, ^^^t they, in a
manner, covered the Table ^^twithstanding the diligence the Servants ^sed to
drive them away; which made the Master inquire of one of the Noblemen ^^^t sat
by him, whether they cherished that sort of Vermin for increase, seeing they
were there in such numbers: to which h^ replied, no, but that they were the
Pla^^^ of the Palace, and so annoyed it, that (...) King could neither eat nor
sleep in quiet (...) them, although he kept many persons (...) purpose to guard
him and drive them aw^^ and that he would give half the Reven^^ of his Kingdom
to be rid of them and (...) his Repose.

At this the Master inwardly rejoy^^^ told him he had in his Ship a little Bea^
though very rare and strange, that he d^^^^ed not, in a short time, would clear
the P^^lace of them. This discourse passing (...) way of an Interpreter, came
soon to (...) King's Ear; who expressed much I^^ thereat, and Embracing the
Master and t^^ Factor, desired them instantly to send f^^ the Beast they spoke
off, and that if she p^^formed what they averred; he would (...) Lieu of her
Ballast their Ship with S^ and Lade it with Gold and Pearl. T^^ great offer at
the first dash, that the (...) might be the more valued, and the (...) more
desirous of her, made them seem (...) willing to part with her; alleging,
(...) she was so useful in the Ship in preser^^^^ their Victuals and
Merchandise from t^^ like spoil, that they were very loath to (...) her* but
the King continuing his offers, (...) more earnestly desiring her, she was
(...) the end sent for, and from under the (...) of him that brought her,
whilst great (...) the expectation of all that were present (...) what manner
of Creature it might (...) ^he was cast suddenly upon the Table; (...) espying
the Vermin busy at the ^^ers which were prepared as a second feast, (...) fell
upon them with such fury, that bi^ off the Heads of some, the Legs of o^^^^s;
leaving some panting for Life and ^^^^rs quite dead: she in less than half an
^^^rs space killed and put them to flight, in (...) a manner, that not one
alive was to be ^^^^d in the Room. The which whilst she ^^a doing, great was
the pleasure the ^ing and his Nobles conceived thereat, ^^^mending the sport
beyond that of the ^ing the Lions; with which Creatures (...) Country abounded:
some praising her (...) her Tabby skin; others for her noble ^^^age; and some
again for her Lyon-like ^^^ntenance: when, in the mean while, ^^^ing no more
work to do; she came pur^^^^ and curling to the King and Queen as (...) she had
proclaimed her own Victory. ^^^ch made them the more Rejoice, especially when
the Master told them that she was with Young, and that those young, (...) time,
might furnish the whole Coun^^^ so that the King, having first paid for (...)
Cargo and caused it to be Landed, se^^ (...) Lieu of the Cat, Silver, Gold,
P^^^^^ Diamonds and other precious Stones i^ such abundance, that the Master
was ^^^zed; and finding himself sufficiently fr^ed he took his leave; and
weighing Anc^^^ soon after came safe to Black-wall. W^upon the Master and
Factor with others (...) the Ships crew came to Mr. Fitz-warres House, situate
in Leaden-hall-street, bri^^ing with them the Gold, Pearls and Ie^els, etc. as
being too precious to be lon^^^ trusted on Board: And first presenting t^^
Bills of Lading, the Merchant was ^^^derfully satisfied therewith: but when
(...) saw the Treasure, which was not containe^ therein, he grew amazed,
demanding t^ whom it appertained and having heard the whole Story, as before
recited; he cause^ Whittington by the Title of Master to be called; who, after
some excuses, with much cringing and bashfulness, came; where he was saluted by
the name of Mr. Whittington by all present, and forced to sit down* and when he
had a while wondered what thi^ strange alteration, in carriage toward him,
should mean, and made many excuses of his ^^worthiness, as merely supposing
they did (...) mock him: his Master came to him ^n^ told him, that what they
did was in ear^est, though he might take it otherwise; for that he was a better
man in Estate than himself: and thereupon presented him with the Treasure, and
told him all that he had been ^^formed; saying, God forbid that he should
^^^^in from him any thing that was his. (...) which the poor man, overjoyed,
fell down ^^^n his knees, and returned most hearty ^^^nks to God, that had
looked upon his ^^sery and taken compassion on him: and ^^ereupon distributed
liberally, not only to the Master and Seamen, but to all his fell^^ Servants;
giving even the ridged C^^k-maid, who had so severely used him, 100 l. toward
her Marriage: but above ^ll, he remembered fair Mrs. Alice with a present of
Pearls and Jewels, as an ac^nowledgement of her kind offer.

CHAP. IV. How Whittington married his Masters Daughter, and was chose Sheriff
of London, and afterward chosen the first time Lord Mayor: with other things
that happened.
WHittington upon this great success, being put into good Clothes, having his
Lodging changed from the Garret to the best Room in the house; began to look
like himself: insomuch that being a comely Person, from that moment fair Mrs.
Alice began to cast her Eyes upon him, and he to be caressed by Merchants and
others, abroad and at home, who were taken as much with his Person and modest
discourse, as with his admirable Fortune.

Long it was not ever Mrs. Alice having discovered her Affections she bore
Whittington to her Father; he propounded a Match between them, which was
joyfully embraced to the content of either Party: so that they were splendidly
married, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and many worthy Citizens, being at the
Wedding. And now his fame spreading wide, by his trading in merchandise, which
he above all things chose, since at first he had been so fortunate therein. He
was pricked for Sheriff, which he, in modesty, would have refused to hold;
offering his Fine to be excused: but his Father-in-law resolving to have him
take upon him that honorable Trust he complied with his desires, and so well
behaved himself in his Office, that he ever after gained the Love of the whole
City; Drewry Barratine being his Brother-Sheriff and Sir John Hudly Mayor of
London, as we find it in Stow and Fabian, Anno 1493. and four years after,
himself was chosen Lord Mayor and Knighted: and so well he managed that great
Office, that although there were Differences and Discontents between the King
and the Commons, Trade flourished in the City in the greatest Splendour
imaginable, and Merchandise improved more then ever; so that the Commodities of
all Nations flowed in upon us: And in this year of his Mayoralty, it was that
the Dukes of Hereford and Norfolk were banished by K. Richard the second, after
he had suspended the Combat that was to be fought between them; the former for
ten years and the latter for ever. So well did Sir Richard Whittington behave
himself in his first Mayoralty, that in the eighth year of the Reign of Henry
the fourth, he was a second time chosen Lord Mayor; and again so well
discharged his Trust to the honor and advantage of the City; that the Citizens
being, as it were, enamoured of so good a Magistrate, men of great Estates
being then scarce, that he was a third time chose Lord Mayor, in the 7th. year
of the Reign of Henry the 5th. so that he had the honor to bear the Sword in
the Reign of three Kings. And in this last Mayoralty, King Henry the 3d. having
conquered the greatest part of France; returned into England victorious, with
Katherine his Queen, Daughter to Charles the French, was met on Black Heath by
Sir Richard Whittington and his Brethren, the Aldermen and other prime
Citizens, in gold Chains and Scarlet, to the number of 300, who had prepared
Pageants and many splendid devices for their Entertainment: and on St.
Mtathews-day following, the Queen being solemnly Crowned in Westminster Abbey;
and the Magnificence attended by all the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Bishops,
etc. Sir Richard Whittington and his Brethren the Aldermen, gave likewise their
attendance; and taking their places at the Table of feasting, were welcomed and
in their order as highly entertained as the rest. And all Lord-Mayors of
London, have ever since had the honor to be at the solemn Inaugurations of
Princes; claiming it as ^h^ir ^ight to attend, etc.

CHAP. V. How Whittington being a third time Lord Mayor of London, Entertained
King Henry the fifth at Dinner in Guild Hall; of the Entertainment and
Satisfaction the King and his Nobles received, and other matters of note.
SIR Richard Whittington flourishing and abounding in Riches, beyond what can
reasonably be credited; his Estate likewise augmented by the Death of Mr.
Fitzwarren his Father-in-law, who left him sole Executor. He soon after the
Inauguration of the Queen invited the King and his Royal Consort, together with
the Ambassadors and Nobility of the Court to a splendid Entertainment at Guild
hall, London; where they vouchsafed to come and honor the City with their
Presence; and were entertained not only with Pageants and pompous Shows, but
with all the varieties imaginable; with music and whatever might be thought
pleasing to the Royal Guest: and in the Presence Chamber where the King and
Queen, etc. dined, the fire was made of Cedar, Cinnamon and Cyprus; into which
were cast Myrrh, Frankincense, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves and the like; which so
fragrantly perfumed the place, that the King being wonderfully pleased thereat,
told Sir Richard, that although every thing was costly and delicate to his high
contentment, yet he was taken with nothing more than the scent the fire cast
through the Apartment: to whom he humbly replied, that it much rejoiced him
that any thing was in his power to give his Majesty satisfaction, or the least
cause to be pleased; but since his Highness had been pleased to praise that
fire, he purposed, ever he departed, to entertain him with one that should give
him far greater content: which the King being desirous to prove, he went out
and suddenly returning, brought under his arm a bundle of Writings: saying, May
it please your Majesty, I have here a Faggot, left designedly for this Fire,
which I humble conceive will more redound to your Majesty's satisfaction; and
thereupon opening the Bundle he said, here is your Highnesses security for
moneys lent by the Company of Mercers, to maintain your Wars in France, viz.
10000 marks; which I here ^^ncel in the flames: and after it I send ^^is
security of 1500 marks lent by the City upon the like occasion; and next,
another for 20000 marks borrowed of the Company of Grocers: a fourth for 3000
marks borrowed of the Merchant-Taylors: a fifth for 1000 marks borrowed of the
Drapers: a sixth for 1000 mark borrowed of the Skinners: a seventh for 1000
marks borrowed of the Ironmongers: an eighth for 1000 marks borrowed of the
Merchant-Staplers: a ninth for 3000 marks borrowed of the Goldsmiths: a tenth
for 3000 marks borrowed of the Haberdashers: and three others for a thousand
marks, each borrowed of the Vintners, Brewers and brown Bakers: with diverse
others, which here I sacrifice to the flame, due from your Majesty to Mr.
Fitz-warren my Father-in-law, deceased, to whom I am sole Executor: with others
likewise due from diverse of your Nobility present; all which I sacrifice to the
Love and Honor I bear my Sovereign: amounting to the sum of 60000 pounds
sterling. And can your Majesty, said he, desire a fire more pleasing? at which
voluntary generosity, the King, not being a little surprised, rose from his
Seat, and taking him in his Arms, tenderly embracing him, said he, I believe no
King had ever such a Subject: and upon the returning to his Palace, did him
all the honor imaginable; promising ever to esteem him amongst the first rank
of those he held his friend and wore nearest his heart: and so highly satisfied
with his magnifieent Entertainment; Sir Richard Whittington Lord Mayor,
carrying the Sword before the King, conducted him out of the City: and having
received the thanks of the Noblemen at parting, who highly commended his
generosity and greatness of Spirit. He returned to his Charge, and flourishing
many years after; lived and dyed beloved of all men.

Thus he, who rising from a mean Estate,
Was three times Londons chiefest magistrate;
Favored of Princes, and beloved of all;
For which, him luckey Whittington we call.
CHAP. VI. His Deeds or Acts of Charity in Buildings and Gifts were many; the
most material of which I shall not spare to mention.
IN the Vintry he built a Church, dedicating it to St. Michael; calling it
Paternoster in the Royal; adding a College dedicated to St. Mary and an
Hospital called God's House, indowing them liberally. He built likewise another
College, which he called by his own name. And of his sounding was the Prison of
Newgate. He added to and much repaired St. Bartholomew's Hospital: And erected
a Library at the Gray-Fryers, London. And built a Stone Market-house in the
place now called the Stocks. He enlarged and paved Guild Hall, adding a Conduit
to serve the places near it with Water: and many other things worthy of himself
and of imitation by others.

CHAP. VII. Of things of note that happened in his three several Mayoralties.
THE two Dukes beforementioned were banished.

Constantinople was taken by Mahomet the second, Emperor of the Turks.

A great Tempest of Thunder and Lightning happened, which destroyed in diverse
places 600 Houses and 3000 People.

William Foxly Pot-maker to the Mint in the Tower, slept 14 days and 15 nights,
and afterward waking it seemed to him that he had slept but one night.

Great Iusts were held in the Town before the French Nobility taken Prisoners
in France at the Battle of Azin Court.

Seven Dolphins came up the River of Thames, and played up and down till four
of them were killed and the other three carried off by the Tide.

A terrible and universal Earthquake, accompanied with Tempest of Thunder and
Lightning, happened for the space of six hours.

A Combat was fought before the King in Smithfield; but taken up ever any of
the parties were killed.

Paul's steeple was set on fire and burnt with Lightning, after it had been
once quenched with Vinegar.

And thus much for famous Whittington, and what happened whilst he filled, as
her worthy praetor, the Chair of London.

FINIS.
depiction of vignettes from the Legend of Dick Whittington depiction of Dick
Whittington's cat at the court of the King of Barbary depiction of Mr.
Fitz-warren's ship Mew


depiction of Dick Whittington's cat depiction of Dick Whittington, Lord Mayor
of London on horseback

