THE EXERCISE OF THE FOOT; With the Evolutions, According to the Words of
Command, As they are Explained.

AS ALSO The Forming of Battalions, with Directions to be Observed by all
COLONELS, CAPTAINS, and other Officers in Their Majesty's Armies

By Their Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1690.

General Observations.
I. FIrst it is to be understood, That the Colonel, during the time of the
Exercise, remains at the Head of the Battalion. The Lieutenant Colonel and the
other Officers, at the First Beat of Drum, Face to the Right about, and at the
second Sign by Beat of Drum, Advance their Arms, and March through the
Battalion, placing themselves in the Rear, in the same Order they were before
in the Front; Excepting the Lieutenant Colonel, who places himself in the Rear
of the Captains, where they are to stand till the Exercise be done.

At the same time the Sergeants, who are posted on the Wings, as also the
Drummers of both Wings, are to place themselves behind the Battalion, next, or
in an equal Line with the other Sergeants, and the Drummers that stand in the
Center before the Pikes, are at the same time to place themselves behind the
Major, that they may be always ready when any Sign is to be given, for the
Exercise by Beat of Drum.

II. When Notice is given by Beat of Drum, after the Exercise is done, the
Officers Advance their Arms again, and March through the Battalion, and place
themselves in their former Post at the Head of the Battalion. At the same time
the Sergeants of the Wings, as also the Drummers, return to their former Posts.

III. It must be taken for a General Rule, That nothing be done, nor any Motion
made, until the last Word of every Command be fully delivered, then all is to
be performed with a graceful Readiness and Exactness.

Orders, and Words of Command, for the Exercise of the Musket, with the
Explanation, the Musket being Shouldered.
I. THe Soldier having his Musket Shouldered, must stand with a straight Body,
holding up his Head without moving, always looking to the Commanding Officer,
and make no other Motion then what is Commanded him. This is to be observed as a
General Rule in Commands.

II. The Feet are to be at one Step distance, the Heels in a straight Line, the
Toes a little turned outward.

III. The Musket must lie upon the Left Shoulder, and the Left Hand upon the
Butt-end, the Thumb in the Hollow thereof, pressing the Guard hard against the
Breast, that the Muzzel of the Musket may be mounted; the Lock must be turned a
little outward, so that the under part of the Butt-end come straight with the
middle of the Body, that the Musket may more easily be born.

IV. The Match must be in the Left Hand, the one End betwixt the first and
second Fingers, and the other between the two last, both Ends standing about a
Fingers length out of the back of the Hand; the rest of the Match hangs down by
the inside of the Butt-end of the Musket; and because the Match is not to be
laid down in the ordinary Exercise, so it is not to be lighted or burning
without express Command.

V. The Musket being Shouldered, the Left Elbow must be a little turned upwards
from the Body, but without constraint of the Arm, the Right Arm hanging close
downward along the Body, with the Palm of the Hand turned to the Thigh.

Words of Command. Explanation. 1. Ioyn your Right Hand to your Muskets 1. YOur
Musket being carried in the forementioned posture, upon the Left Shoulder, you
must turn it inwards with the Left Hand, and at once take hold with your Right
Hand behind the Pan, that the Thumb of your Right Hand come on the Stock
upwards, and both Elbows in an equal Line, the Musket strait, and the But-end a
little mounted.

2. Poise your Muskets. Note, That when the Musket is put on, or taken from the
Shoulder, you must always look toward the Left Hand, yet without turning the
Head.

It is to be observed, that in all Tellings you never make the Motion, till you
come to the last Number, and that the telling the last Number and the Motion,
be done at one time.


2. At this Word of Command, with both your Hands, with a quick Motion, you
bring up the Musket from your Shoulder, and at the same time, without holding
it still, thrust it from you with the Right Hand, (in doing which, let loose
the Left Hand, and let it fall down your side) so that the Lock be turned
outward, the Thumb inwards against your Face, your Feet strait against one
another, unconstrained and standing still.

3. Ioyn your Left Hand to your Muskets. 3. Let your Musket sink quickly with
your Right Hand, and at the same time falling back with the Right Foot, take
hold of it with the Left Hand almost in an equal balance, about Two Hands
breadth above the Cock, that the Stock lie in the full Hand, and the Thumb
upwards, and that the Muzzel hang a little forward, so low as the Hands and
Arms will permit without constraint, holding both Elbows a little turned
outward, the Right Foot a little turned toward the Right Side, the Left Knee
a little bending, the Body strait, you hold the Musket on the Right Side a
little from the Body, that the Body and Face present it self as much forward as
may be, and the Hand remain unconstrained under the Pan.

4. Handle your Matches. 4. Take that end of the Match which is held between
the two last Fingers of your Left Hand, with your Thumb under and your two
foremost Fingers above the same, and tell 1, 2, bring it quick out of your Left
Hand, hold it a little lower then the Left Hand is, and about a foot distance
from the Pan with the Cole or end downwards, and keep your Body in the same
posture as before.

5. Blow your Matches. 5. In the blowing of the Match you must hold your Head
still, and bring with your Right Hand the lighted Match against your Mouth,
tell slowly 1.2. blow the Match quick and strong, and bring the same with a
motion somewhat slow to its former place with the Cole as before downwards.

6. Cock your Matches. 6. Put your Two foremost Fingers a little asunder,
bringing the Match above the Cock, thrust in the same with your Thumb in such a
manner that the Cock comes between your Two Fingers, and the Thumb upon it,
keep your hand thus till the following Command.

7. Try your Matches. 7. Bring the Cockt Match to the Pan, if it be too low,
you must raise it a little upwards with your undermost Fingers, and if it be
too high, you bend it downwards with your foremost Finger and your Thumb, till
it comes just in the middle of your Pan, and being thus well fixed, you must
bring it with the Cock back again, holding it fast till the following Command.

8. Guard your Pans. 8. Let loose your hand from the cockt Match, and cover
your Pan with your two or three foremost Fingers (if the breadth of the Pan
require it) placing your Thumb behind the Pan.

9. Blow your Matches. 9. As before you move not your head, and bring the
Musket with both hands just before the middle of your Body (at the same time
bringing up your Right Foot) the Cock must come just against the mouth, tell
slowly 1, 2, blow your Match hard, and thrusting the Musket suddenly from you,
hold it with outstretched Arms before you, so as the Left Hand comes no higher
then your Left Shoulder, and stand still.

10. Present. 10. In presenting the Musket, it must come from the former
Posture with the falling back of the Right Foot (though a little to the Right
Side, and not behind the Left Foot, that the Body may the better present it
self forward) and so brought to your Breast; and as soon as it is brought to
your Breast the Pan is to be opened; the Musket is held with the Right Hand
under the Pan, so that the Thumb lies in the hollow of the Butt, the foremost
Finger before the Tricker (yet without touching the Tricker) and the Three
other Fingers upon the Guard; the Musket in Presenting must not come too low on
the Breast, but be set firm in the hollow of the Right Shoulder; and must be
held strongly, you must keep up your Body strait, only pressed down a little
against the Musket, the Elbows as much as possible in an equal Line, with the
Butt a little below the strait Line, or Breast high, the Head strait upwards,
the Left Knee a little bent.

11. Give Fire. 11. As soon as this Command is given, you draw the Tricker with
the First Finger, which you held before the Tricker, drawing the cockt Match
quick and strong upon the Pan. If it discharge or not you must have a special
care that you draw your Tricker but once.

12. Recover your Arms. 12. Bring up your Musket quick again straight before
you, together with your Right Foot, and keep the Posture, as in Explan. Nine is
shown.

13. Return your Matches. 13. Take the Match with the right Thumb under, the
the two fore Fingers above, and with a turned, or backhand, bring it out of the
Cock, to the two last Fingers from whence it was taken before, tell 1, 2, and
join your Right Hand again under your Pan.

14. Blow your Pans. 14. Keep still your Head, and bring up the Musket with
both Hands straight before your Mouth, tell slowly 1, 2, blow the Pan strong
and quick, bringing the Musket again with a quick Motion before the Body.

15. Handle your Primers. 15. Fall back quick with the Right Foot behind the
Left, that the Heels, come straight behind one another, and bring down at the
same time with a nimble Motion your Musket with both Hands, holding the Muzzel
a little lower then was shown in Explan. 3. tell 1, 2, upon that take hold of
the Primer, the Thumb upwards upon the Cover, tell again 1, 2, and bring it
upwards about a Hands breadth from the Pan.

16. Prime. 16. Hold your Musket still, turn up your Hand with the Primer, and
shake out as much Powder upon the Pan as is needful, tell 1, 2, bring it again
to its former place, and remain in that Posture till the following word of
Command.

17. Shut your Pans. 17. Open your Right Hand, let fall the Primer, then shut
the Pan with a full Hand, that your Fingers lie against the undermost part of
the Stock, tell slowly 1, 2, bring up the Musket with both Hands before your
Body, bringing up the Right Foot again at the same time; in which bringing up,
you put your Right Hand under the Pan, and with outstretched Arms remain in
that Posture, as in Explanation 9.

18. Blow your Pans. 18. Hold still your Head, and bring the Musket with both
Hands straight before your Mouth, tell slowly 1, 2, blow off your loose Corns
from the Cover of your pan hard and quick, and thrusting your Musket with a
quick Motion from the Body, bring it to the former Posture again.

19. Cast about to Charge. 19. Turn the Musket with both Hands, so that the
Barrel come outmost, and tell slowly 1, 2, let go the Right Hand, bring down
the Musket with the Left, step one Pace forward with the right Foot, though not
directly before the Left, but placed a little to the Right Side, that the Body
present it self the better forward, take hold of it at the Muzzel with your
Right Hand, that the bringing down of the Musket, the putting down of the Right
Foot, and the taking hold of the Muzzel, be done at one time; hold your Thumb
upwards upon the Stock along the Rammer, and the Barrel downwards in your full
Hand, keeping the Body straight, only the Right Knee a little bent, which
remains thus bent all the time you Charge; keep the Musket straight before your
Body, with both Hands and out stretched Arms, the Muzzel standing straight
forwards.

20. Handle your Chargers. 20. Bring the Musket with both Hands strait to your
Body; tell 1, 2; quit your Musket with your Right Hand holding it with your
full Left Hand, about the middle in balance, with the Muzzel a little forwards,
and then take hold of one of your Chargers or Bandeliers, telling again slowly
1, 2, bringing the same forward a little higher, and about a Hands breadth
sideways off from the Muzzel, the Thumb upwards upon the cover of the Charger.

21. Open them with your Teeth. 21. Bring the Charger to your Mouth, pulling
off the Cap with your Teeth, and the help of your Thumb; tell 1, 2, and bring
it to its former place, keeping your Thumb upwards upon the Charger.

22. Charge with Powder. 22. Bring your Charger to the Muzzel, turning it up,
pouring the Powder in the Barrel. Continue in this posture, till the following
word of Command.

23. Charge with Bullet. 23. Open your Hand, and drop your Charger; take the
Bullet out of your Mouth with your Fingers; tell 1, 2, and with your Fingers
bring it to the Muzzel; let the Ball run down; keep your two foremost Fingers
upon the Muzzel, the rest of the Fingers hanging down the Barrel, till the
following word of Command be given.

24. The Wad from your Hats. 24. Take with your Right Hand some of the Wad that
sticks between your Hatband and your Hat, tell slowly 1, 2, and bring the same,
as you did the Buller, to the Muzzel, pressing it in with your Fingers; leave
your two Fingers upon the Muzzel, as before, the rest hanging down by the
Barrel.

25. Draw forth your Rammets. 25. Take your Rammers with the Fingers of the
Right Hand, holding the Thumb upwards, draw out the same so far as your Arm can
well reach, then take hold of it again, turning the Right Hand so that the
Thumb comes downward to the upper end of the Stock, or about the uppermost
Ring; tell slowly 1, 2, draw it then wholly out; at this second drawing hold it
between the Thumb and the two foremost Fingers, the which, with the rest of the
Fingers and the whole Arm, must be stretched out even with the Right Shoulder,
that the small end be toward the Body, and the thick part outward in an even
Line.

26. Hold them up. 26. Move your middle-most Fingers which support the Rammer,
and let the thick end sink down, and hold it so in your hand, with an
outstretched Arm, the Thumb turned upwards in the same height with your
Shoulder.

27. Shorten them against your Breasts. 27. Set the thick end of the Rammer
against the lower part of your Right Breast, in an equal Line with the Musket;
tell 1, 2, and slip your Hand down to a Hands breadth of the end, the Thumb
always upwards, and turning the Elbow a little upwards from the Body.

28. Put them in the Barrels. 28. Bring the Rammer upwards before the Muzzel,
tell 1, 2, then place it upon the Wad thrusting it down so far till your Hand
touches the Muzzel, then take it about the middle, tell 1, 2, thrust down again
your Wad, till your right Hand comes to the Muzzel; and then take hold of it at
the top, tell again 1, 2, and thrust it fully down to the Charge, holding the
Rammer fast with the Fingers and Thumb.

29. Ram down your Charge. 29. You draw up your Rammer as far as the Arm
unforced will permit, tell 1, 2, ramming down the Charge with an ordinary
force, and then holding still your Rammer, as before.

30. Withdraw your Rammers. 30. With a quick motion draw the Rammer with your
Right Hand till half of it be out of the Barrel, then take it with a turned
Hand, the Thumb downward, tell 1, 2, and then draw it wholly out of the Barrel,
holding it with the thick end turned toward the Shoulder; keeping the Posture
you were told in Explanation 25.

31. Hold them up. 31. Let the small End of your Rammer sink down, and keep
your Posture, as in Explanation 26.

32. Shorten them against your Breasts. 32. Set the small End of your Rammer
against your Breast, as you did before the thick End, as in Explanation 27, the
Hand nt quite so low, but about a Foot from the End of the Rammer.

33. Return your Rammers. 33. Return the Rammer giving it a gentle turn with
the Right Hand under the Barrel, tell 1, 2, put it in the Stock, thrusting it
in so far as you held it with your Hand, then take hold of it again in the
middle, tell 1, 2, thrusting it downward so far as your Hand again, then take
hold again at the top, tell again slowly 1, 2, and thrust it now wholly down in
these Three Motions, take hold immediately of the Muzzel of the Musket, the
Thumb upward, tell 1, 2, and thrust the Musket suddenly from your Body, and
keep the same Posture as in Explanation 19.

34. Your Right Hand under the Pan. 34. Hold the Musket firm, as it was held in
the Left Hand, cast it out of the Right Hand, that with a very small motion it
comes readily straight up, then take hold of it with the Right Hand under the
Pan, holding the Musket from the Body, the Hands as low as the Arms
Unconstrained will suffer.

35. Poise your Muskets. 35. Face upon the Left Heel very quick to the Right,
and bring at the same time the Musket with both Hands straight before you, at
which time you let go your Left Hand, and push it forwards suddenly with the
Right Hand; so that this thrusting forward the Musket, and the setting down of
the Right Foot, is done at one time; then keep in the Posture directed in
Explanation 2.

36. Shoulder your Muskets. 36. Turn your Musket with the Right Hand, that the
Barrel comes outward, and the Guard inwards against the Left Shoulder; take at
the same time the Butt-end with the Left Hand, laying your Thumb in the hollow
of the same; tell flowly 1, 2, and bring it then with both your Hands upon your
Left Shoulder, not moving the Head; tell again 1, 2, quit the Right Hand, and
let it fall quickly down along the Right Side, and observe further the Posture,
as in Explan. 1. is shown.

37. Rest your Muskets. 37. This is done as in Explan. 1. Tell then 1, 2, and
quickly Poise as in Explanation 2. is shown. Tell again 1, 2, and do as is
directed in Number 3. Let loose your Right Hand from behind the Pan, and with
the two or three foremost Fingers, according to the breadth of the Pan, cover
the same, lay your Thumb behind the Pan, and keep the Posture as in Explanation
3. is directed.

38. Order your Muskets. 38. Raise your Musket with both Hands strait upwards,
without bringing it higher or lower; tell slowly 1, 2, then let loose the Right
Hand from the Pan, sinking the Musket with the Left Hand, taking at the same
Moment the Musket with a full Right Hand near the Muzzel, so that the Thumb
lies upwards against the Barrel, and reaches the end of the Muzzel: Tell again
slowly 1, 2, quit your Left Hand, and set down the Butt-end of the Musket at
the outside of your Right Foot (with a quickness) upon the ground, in such a
manner that the Right Foot and Musket come down at one time, the Heels in a
straight line, the Toes turned outward, letting your Arm hang from the Hand to
the Elbow by the side of the Musket, the Left Hand, in which the Match is,
hangs down by the Left side, with the ends of the Match outward.

39. Lay down your Muskets. 39. Lift up your Right Foot, turning the Musket
inward at the same time, that the Barrel come just to your Body, setting at the
fame time the Right Foot against the Flat of the Butt-end, then step directly
forward a good step with the Left Foot, lay down the Musket (with a stiff Body)
upon the ground, with the Lock upward; before you tell 1, 2, 3, raise your self
up again, stepping back with your Left Foot, on the Heel over the Butt-end at
the inside of the same, letting both Arms hang down by the Body.

40. Take up your Muskets. 40. Turn your Right Foot upon the Heel again over
the Buttend of your Musket, and set it down behind the same; at the same time
turn the Right Hand with a small motion to the Right Side outward, over the
Right Foot, and without intermission, step forward with the Left Foot a large
step along the Musket, and at the same time bring the Right Hand with an
outstretched Arm over the Musket strait forward, and as much as possible with a
stiff Body, taking hold of it with the Right Hand, tell 1, 2, 3, raise up your
self and the Musket, with the bringing back of the Left Foot; then take up your
Right Foot again, and set it at the inside of the Butt, turning at the same
time the Butt-end outward, that the Feet, Musket, and the whole Body be in the
same Posture as they were before the laying down of the Musket, and thus
standing with your Musket Ordered, as in Explanation 38. is shown.

The Soldiers must also Observe, That in their laying-down, and taking up of
the Musket, not to keep their Hands above the Muzzel, but in the laying down of
the Musket to sink their Hands as much as is necessary, and at the taking up,
to take hold of it at the same place where their Hand was at their laying it
down; then sliding the Hand upwards to the Muzzel, but so that it be done with
ease, and unforced.

Note, It is further to be observed, That at the grounding and taking up their
Arms, the Soldiers keep up their Heads as much as possible: And that all may be
done more exactly, at one and the same time, the Soldiers that stand next one
another in the Ranks, must look to the Right Hand Man, (yet without turning
their Heads aside) and those that follow one another in Files, must also
observe their Leaders.

41. Rest your Muskets. 41. Turn your Thumb inwards, and let your Hand sink
downwards as far as the Arm without constraint will permit; tell slowly 1, 2.
raise it with the Right Hand, take hold of it at the same time with the Left,
just under the Right Hand, tell 1, 2. let go the Right Hand and cover the Pan,
at the same time falling back with the Right Foot, so that the resting of the
Musket and the falling back of the Right Foot be done at once, hold then the
Musket, Body and Feet in the same Posture as in Explan. 37. in Presenting of
the Musket is shown.

42. Club your Muskets. 42. Keep your Musket firm in your left Hand, cast about
the same with the Right Hand, bring up the Right Foot at the same time that the
Butt-end is upwards, and the Muzzel downwards, the Lock outward; at once
taking hold of it with the Right Hand about a foot from the Muzzel, that the
Right Thumb come upwards, and the Left downwards, tell 1, 2. let loose the Left
Hand, and take hold again at the same time with a full Left Hand an Inch from
the Muzzel, hold it with outstretched-Arms against the Left Shoulder, tell 1,
2. and bring it upon your Shoulder, with the Lock upwards, tell 1, 2. quit your
Right Hand nimbly and let it hang down by your Side.

43. Rest your Muskets. 43. Turn the Musket with your Left Hand inwards, and at
the same time take hold with the Right above the Left, the Thumb upwards, and
the Elbows in a strait Line, tell 1, 2. bring the same nimbly with both Hands
before the Body, tell 1, 2. let loose your Left Hand, sinking the Right Hand
and Musket a little, and taking it at the same time with the Left Hand turned,
both Thumbs turned againstone another, tell 1, 2. loose your Right Hand and
turning the Musket bring the Buttend down, and rest your Musket with the
steping back of the Right Foot, and observe further the Posture as has been
expressed in the resting of the Musket.

44. Shoulder your Muskets. 44. Bring up your Musket with the bringing up of
the Right Foot to its Poise, with a stretched out Arm straight before you, and
take hold of it under the Pan, with your Right Hand, so that the Poysing of the
Musket, and the setting down of the Right Foot, be done at the same time.

Take heed to Make Ready at Three Words of Command. 1. Make Ready This is to be
done as has been shown before at large in the Exercise of the Musket, from
Explan. 1. to Explan. 8. inclusive.

2. Present. This is done as has been shown in Explan. 9, 10.

3. Give Fire This is done as in Explan. 11. after which you go forward until
you are again Ready Charged, and then Shoulder your Muskets.



Here follows the Exercise of a Granadeer, with the Explanation, beginning when
they are under Arms, viz. the Fire-lock Shouldered.
THE Posture, and what a Granadeer is further to observe in the Exercise of his
Arms, is fully shown in the General Observations, where the Musket is Treated
of.

It is also to be Observed, That when the Granadeers stand in a Body with the
Musketeers, that they then must make the same Motions as the Musketeers,
because they do not then meddle with their Granades or Bayonets.

Words of Command. Explanation. Take heed Granadeers, to Exercise your
Firelocks. 1. Ioyn your Right Hand to your Firelocks. 1. THis is done the
same way as that of the Musket, Explan. 1.

2. Poise your Firelocks. 2. This is done the same way as that of the Musket,
Explan. 2.

3. Ioin your Left Hand to your Firelocks. 3. This is done as that of the
Musket, in Explan. 3. except that you are to take up the Sling, and join it
with your Left Hand under your Fire-lock, and your Right Thumb upon the Cock,
and your Forefinger upon the Tricker, and the other Fingers behind, or below
the Guard.

4. Cock your Firelocks. 4. Keep your Thumb upon the Cock, and bring up your
Firelock with both Hands straight before you, at the same time bringing up your
Right Foot, your Arms half stretched out, that you may the more easily bend the
Cock, tell 1, 2, and then Cock, thrusting your Firelock nimbly from you with
both Hands, holding your Thumb upon the Cock, without touching the Tricker with
your Fingers, keep your Arms outstretched before your Body.

5. Present. 5. In Presenting, you take away your thumb from the Cock, and do
as is shown in Explan. 10. except that you are not to open your Pan.

6. Give Fire. 6. This is done as with the Musket, in Explan. 11.

7. Recover your Arms. 7. This is done as with the Musket in Explan. 12.

8. Handle your Slings. 8. Turn with both Hands the Fire-lock, that your Lock
come outward, holding it with your Right Hand before your Body, the thumb
upwards, draw with you Left Hand your Sling quickly in an equal line, with your
Fire-lock to the Left Side, the Thumb upwards, and stand thus till the
following word of Command.

9. Sling your Firelocks on your Soulders 9. Bring your Sling with your Left
Hand just above your Right Shoulder, and at the same time bring your Fire-lock
with your Right Hand under your Left Elbow; bring the Sling over your Head,
draw the Sling with your Left Hand in the letting loose of the Right, that the
Fire-lock hang upon your right Shoulder, with the Muzzel up, and the Butt-end
downwards; tell 1, 2, let loose your Left Hand, and let it hang straight down
as the Right Hand.

10. Handle your Matches. 10. Bring both Hands readily with half outstretched
Arms before your Body, about the height of your Shoulder; take at the same
time, with your Right Hand, the lowermost end of the Match, your Thumb under,
and your two foremost Fingers above; tell 1, 2, and bring it over the back of
your Hand between your Thumb and your two fore Fingers; tell 1, 2, thrust out
the Left Hand with the Match quickly forwards, letting at the same time the
Right Hand hang down upon the Bag.

11. Handle your Granades. 11. Keep your Left Hand in its former Posture, face
nimbly upon the Left Foot to the Right, at the same time lifting up the cover
of your Granade Pouch with your right Hand, take the Granade; tell 1, 2, bring
it with an outstretched Arm, in a straight Line with your Left Hand, your
Thumb against the Fuse, and stand in this Posture.

12. Open your Fuse. 12. Hold still your Left Hand, and bring the Granade to
your mouth with your Right Hand, tell 1, 2, open the Fuse with your Teeth, tell
again 1, 2, and thrust it nimbly from you to its former place.

13. Guard the Fuse with your Thumb. 13. Cover the Fuse with your Thumb,
without making any other motion.

14. Blow your Matches. 14. Bring up the Match before your Mouth, tell 1, 2,
blow it off hard and quick, and thrust it at the same time to its former place.

15. Fire and throw your Granades 15. Meet the Granade with your Left Hand, a
little downwards toward the Righ^ Side, as the Arms w^^^ best permit, to which
side you turn your Body and Face a little, fire the Fuse, tell slowly 1, 2, 3,
in which telling bring back the Right Hand a little, with the Granade, throw it
with a stiff Arm; stepping forward with the Right Foot, in an equal Line with
the Left, bringing down the Left Hand with the Match to the former place,
letting the Right Hand hang down by the Pouch; remain in that Posture, and
expect the following Command.

16. Return your Matches. 16. Bring again both Hands straight before your Body,
as in Explan. 10. take the Match, put it in its former place, in such a manner
as in the Exercise of the Musket, Explan. 13. tell 1, 2, and let both Arms hang
down by your Body.

17. Handle your Slings. 17. Take the middle of the Sling with your Right Hand,
and with the Left Hand below, about a Hands breadth from the Fire-lock, lift up
the Fire-lock with the Left Hand, so that the Elbow comes through under the
Fire-lock, lying upon the Arm and Shoulder; let go your Left Hand from the
Sling, and take hold of your Fire-lock about a Hands breadth above the Lock;
let the Stock come to lie between the Thumb and the two foremost Fingers, and
hold it so with a stretched Arm so much as the Slings will permit, with the
Butt-end before you.

18. Poise your Fire-lock. 18. Bring the Sling with your Right Hand over your
Head, and your Pire-lock with your Left Hand, and mount it with half stretched
Arms, the Barrel turned forwards, let go your Right Hand from the Sling, turn
your Fire-lock with your Left Hand, that the Lock come outward, and put at the
same time your Right Hand under the Cock, the Thumb upwards, then thrust the
Fire-lock quickly from you, let go your Left Hand; at the same time you must
observe that your Right Hand must be equal with your Shoulder.

19. Cast about to Charge. 19. Take the Fire-lock with your Left Hand, about a
hands breadth from the Lock, the Thumb upwards, turn it about that the Barrel
come outward, and do further as in the Exercise of the Musket Explan. 19. was
directed.

20. Draw your Bayonets. 20. Bring your Fire-lock with both your Hands to your
Body, tell 1, 2, take your Bayonet with your Right Hand, tell again 1, 2, draw
it, and bring it with an outstretched Arm straight before your Body in a right
line with your Shoulder, holding the Bayonet, and the Thumb upwards, and the
flat of the Blade toward your Body.

21. Screw your Bayonets in the Muzzels. 21. Put your Bayonet in the Barrels,
tell 1, 2, turning about the Guard toward you, that it may lie fast, and flat,
take hold of the Muzzel of your Fire-lock with your right hand, the thumb
upwards, tell 1, 2, thrusting it with both Arms nimbly from your Body.

22. Rest your Bayonets. 22. Mount your Bayonet with both Hands, turning at the
same time, without resting, upon the Left Heel, to the Right; As you Face let
go your Right Hand, and bring it under the Cock, that the Barrel be turned
toward your Body, tell 1, 2, fall back Hand and Foot, and keep the Posture
shown you in the resting of the Musket, Explan. 37.

23. Charge your Bayonets Breast high. 23. Bring your Bayonet nimbly up with
both hands; and the bringing up of your Right Foot, in which bringing up, you
bring your Right Hand under, so that the Butt rest upon your Fingers, the Thumb
outward up-the Butt-end, tell 1, 2, fall back with your Right Foot, charge
your Bayonet Breast high, in which charging the Butt-end lies in a full Right
Hand, and the Thumb upon it.

24. Cast about your Bayonets to the left side. 24. Bring up your Fire-Lock
straight before you, with the bringing up of your Right Foot; letting loose at
the same time your Right Hand from the Butt, and bring it under the Cock, turn
your Fire-Lock with both your Hands, so that the Barrel comes outward, tell 1,
2, then proceed further as has been shown in the Casting about the Musket,
Explan. 19, except that in stepping forward with your Right Foot, you lay your
Right Hand upon the guard of your Bayonet, and at once turn it from you,
remaining thus with outstretched Arms till the following Command.

25. Recover your Bayonets. 25. Bring your Bayonet with both Hands to your
Body, tell 1, 2, Draw it out of the Barrel, hold it out with a stretched Arm
before your Body, as in Explan. 20. is shown.

26. Put up your Bayonets. 26. Turn your Bayonet with the Point downwards, on
your Left Side; tell 1, 2, put it in the Scabbard; tell again 1, 2, take hold
of your Fire-lock with your Right Hand by the Muzzel, thrusting it readily from
you, with stretched Arms.

27. Half Cock your Firelocks. 27. Bring your Firelocks with both Hands
mounted before your Body, as in Explan. 4. the Barrel turned toward your Body,
Facing to the Right, upon the Left Heel, without intermission; in which Turning
you let go your Right Hand, take hold of the Cock with the Right Thumb, your
Fingers under against the Guard, as in Explan. 3. tell 1, 2, and half bend your
Cock, then bring the same Hand under the Cock, holding your Fire-lock exactly
and readily before you, in such a Posture as often has been shown.

28. Blow your Pans. 28. Do this as with the Musket, Explan. 14.

29. Handle your Primers. 29. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 15.
only the Muzzel is held a little lower.

30. Prime. 30. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 16.

31. Shut your Pans. 31. Let fall your Primer, take hold of the side of the
Steel with your Thumb upwards, and your two foremost Fingers under, shut your
Pan, tell slowly 1, 2, and do further as in the Handling of the Musket in
Explan. 17. is shown.

32. Cast about to Charge. 32. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 19.

33. Handle your Cartridges. 33. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 20.

34. Open your Cartridges. 34. Bring the Cartridge before your Mouth, bite off
the top, tell 1, 2, and bring it again to its former place, holding the
Cartridge with the Thumb upwards.

35. Charge with your Cartridges. 35. Bring the Cartridge just before the
Muzzel, turn it up with your Hand, put it in the Barrel, holding your two
foremost Fingers upon the Muzzel till the following word of Command.

36. Draw forth your Rammers. 36. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 25.

37. Hold them up. 37. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 26.

38. Shorten them against your Breast. 38. This is done as with the Musket,
Explan. 27.

39. Put them in the Barrels. 39. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 28.

40. Ram down your Charge. 40. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 29.

41. Recover your Rammers. 41. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 30.

42. Hold them up. 42. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 31.

43. Shorten them against your Breasts. 43. This is done as with the Musket,
Explan. 32.

44. Put them in their places. 44. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 33.

45. Your Right Hand under the Locks. 45. This is done as with the Musket,
Explan. 34.

46. Poise your Firelocks. 46. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 35.

47. Shoulder your Firelocks. 47. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 36.

48. Rest your Firelocks. 48. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 1, 2.
tell then 1, 2, and do further as with the Musket, Explan. 3. only putting
your Thumb upon the Cock, and the Fingers under, against the Guard.

49. Order your Firelocks. 49. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 38.

50. Lay down your Firelocks. 50. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 39.

51. Take up your Firelocks. 51. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 40.

52. Rest your Firelocks. 52. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 41. but
with the difference as here above in Explan. 49.

53. Club your Firelocks. 53. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 42.

54. Rest your Firelocks. 54. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 43, yet
with the difference aforesaid in Explan. 48.

55. Shoulder your Firelocks. 55. This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 44,
only putting your Right Hand under the Cock before the bringing up of your
Fire-Lock.

Take heed to make ready to give Fire at Three Words of Command.

56. 1. Make ready. 56. This is done as in the first Three Explanations is
largely shown.

2. Present. This is done as in Explan. 4 and 5.

3. Give Fire. This done as in Explan. 6 and 7.

Take heed to make ready to Fire and throw your Granades at Three Words of
Command.

57. 1 Make ready. 57. This is done as is shown from Explan. 8 to 13 inclusive.

2 Blow your Matches. This is done as in Explan. 14.

3. Fire and throw your Granades. This is done as in Explan. 15.

Take heed to make ready to use your Bayonets.

58. 1. Make ready. 58. This is done as has been shown before in the Manual,
from Explan. 16 to Explan. 22 inclusive.

2. Charge your Bayonets Breast high. This is done as in Explan. 23.

Take heed to make ready your Firelocks again.

59. Make ready your Firelocks. 59. This is likewise done as has at large
been shown in the Exercise of the Grana-deer, from Explan. 24 to Explan. 47
inclusive.



The Exercise of the Pike, beginning from the Advance.
THE Posture of a Pikeman, with his Pike Advanced, must be the same with that
of a Musketeer with the Musket Shouldered, viz. That he stand with a straight
Body, hold up his Head, look lively, his Eyes always upon the Commanding
Officer, make no other Motion then what he is Commanded, his Feet must be a
little Pace distant from each other, his Heels in a straight line, his Toes
turned a little outward, holding the Butt-end of the Pike in his Right Hand,
stretched down along his Body, the back of his Hand turned outward, but
without constraint, the Pike must be kept close to his Shoulder, and the out
side of his Thigh, that it may stand straight upward, this must be always
observed with an Advanced Pike.

Words of Command. Explanation. Pikes take heed to your Exercise. 1. To the
Front, Charge. 1. THis as all other Chargings of the Pike, and likewise
returning to the former Posture, must be done at Three Motions; As First, take
hold of the Pike; Secondly, bring it before your Body; Thirdly, Charge your
Pike, as is more largely to be shown in the following Pages.

First, You take hold of the Pike with your Left Hand, just at the Right
Shoulder.

Secondly, You tell 1, 2, and bring the same with both Hands and outstretched
Arms with a nimble Motion, straight before your Body, at the same time turning
your Hand, so that the Thumb which was under comes uppermost, holding the Pike
in a full Hand, you must also at the same time turn the Left Foot upon your
Heel a little inwards, in the bringing forwards of the Pike, that the Toes come
forwards, and at the same time lifting-up the Right Foot a little, and turning
it to the Right Side outward, that the Heel come in a straight Line with the
hollow of the Left Foot.

Thirdly, Tell 1, 2, and step nimbly with the Right Foot behind the Left, that
the hollow of the Right stand in a straight Line with the Heel of the Left
Foot, and pulling at the same time the Pike with both Hands backwards, Charging
it at the height of a Man's Breast, and so, that at one time the Right Foot and
the Pike come down together. You must further observe this following Posture,
namely, that the Right Arm stretched out backwards lie just along the Pike, the
Right Hand at the end of the Pike, the Pike between the Thumb and foremost
Fingers of the Left Hand, and against the Body, and in a straight Line with the
Right Hand; the Left Elbow must be lifted a little from the Body, the Head and
Body kept straight, the Right. Knee stiff and straight, and the Left a little
bent forwards, that the Pike may not only be kept firm in this Posture, but
must lie with a flat Spear the aforesaid height of a Man's Breast; which Posture
must be observed in all Charges of the Pike.

2. As you were. 2. As the Pike in the former Commands was Charged at Three
Motions, so must it be returned to your Advance.

As First, Press the Right Hand strongly down, bring the Left Hand upwards,
then bring the Pike with both Hands, and outstretched Arms, nimbly before the
middle of your Body, at the same time bringing the Right Foot forwards, and
placing the Heel in a straight Line with the hollow of the Left Foot.

Secondly, You tell 1, 2, bring the Pike with both Hands to your Shoulder, at
the same time turning the Hand and Foot as above is shown, tell 1, 2, let loose
your Left Hand, and let it hang down by the Body, observing further in this
Posture what is directed in Explan. 1.

3. To the Right, Charge. 3. Take hold again of the Pike with the Left Hand by
your Shoulder, tell 1, 2, bring it with outstretched Arms just before you,
observing the Motion both with Hand and Foot as in Explan. 1. tell 1, 2,
turning nimbly upon the Left Foot to the Right, turning at the same time the
Heel of the Right Foot the Fourth part of a Circle, and against the hollow of
the Left, observing that the Pike in your turning may always be kept with
outstretched Arms upwards in a straight Line, tell 1, 2, step nimbly back with
the Right Foot, Charge your Pike; And further observe to keep this Posture as
in Explan. 1.

4. To the Left as you were. 4. Raise your Pike with a quick Motion, at the
same time bringing up your Right Foot, turn nimbly upon the Left Foot to the
Left, bringing the Pike with outstretched Arms just before the Body, tell 1, 2,
bring it to your Right Shoulder, observing what is shown in Explan. 2.

5. To the Left, Charge. 5. Take hold of the Pike with the Left Hand at your
Right Shoulder, as before, tell 1, 2, bring the same with straight Arms nimbly
before the Body, tell 1, 2, turn nimbly upon the Left Foot to the Left, that
the Heel of the Right Foot come to stand the Fourth part of a Circle against
the Left Foot, tell 1, 2, Charge the Pikes as before, Breast high, and at the
same time stepping back with the Right Foot, keep the Posture shown in the
former Chargings.

6. To the Right as you were. 6. This is done as before; the Pike is raised up
readily with the bringing up of the Right Foot, tell 1, 2, turn nimbly upon the
Left Foot to the Right, tell again 1, 2, bring the Pike to the Right Shoulder,
observing what is shown in Explan. 2.

7. To the Right about Charge. 7. Take hold of your Pike with your Left Hand at
the Right Shoulder, as before, tell 1, 2, bring it then with outstretched Arms
before the middle of your Body, tell 1, 2, turn nimbly on the Left Heel to the
Right about, turning the Right Heel an half Circle against the hollow of the
left Foot, tell 1, 2, Charge Breast high, as before, stepping back with the
Right Foot, and observe further as in Explan. 1.

8. To the Left as you were. 8. Bring the Pike, as before, straight up, at the
same time bring up the Right Foot, tell 1, 2, turn nimbly upon the Left Foot to
the Left about, and bring the Pike in turning, with straight Arms just before
the middle of the Body, tell 1, 2, and bring it to the Shoulder as before,
observing what is shown in Explan. 2.

9. To the Left about Charge. 9. Take hold of the Pike again at the Right
Shoulder, tell 1, 2, and bring it with both Hands, and outstretched Arms
straight before the middle of your Body, tell 1, 2, turn nimbly upon the Left
Foot to the Left about; tell again 1, 2, Charge the Pike Breast high, at the
same time bring back the Right Foot, and keep in the Posture as before was told
you.

10. To the Right as you were. 10. This is done as formerly, namely, that you
bring the Pike up nimbly before you, with the bringing up of the Right Foot,
tell 1, 2, and turn nimbly upon the Left Foot to the Right about, holding the
Pike with outstretched Arms just before the middle of your Body; tell again 1,
2, and bring the Pike again to your Shoulder, observing what is said before.

11. Shoulder your Pikes. 11. Take hold of the Pike with the Left Hand at the
Right Shoulder, tell 1, 2, and bring it with both Hands just before the middle
of your Body, tell again 1, 2, and set your Right Foot an ordinary Pace
backwards, turning the Left Foot upon the Heel, that both Feet stand in an
equal line, the Toes turned outward; let go the Pike with the Right Hand at
the same time as you tread back, and turning the Foot, let the Left Hand and
the Spear sink down backwards, till the Hand comes just about the middle of the
Body; take hold of the Pike again immediately with the Right Hand about the
height of, and against the Shoulder, in such manner, that the stepping back of
the Right Foot, and the taking hold of the Pike with the Right Hand, is done at
one time, then hold the Pike thus with outstretched Arms, the Thumb upwards
along the Pike, turned inwards toward the Body, the Pike sloping in such a
manner, that the Butt-end of the Pike come within a Foot of the Ground, tell 1,
2, bring the Pike then upon the Right Shoulder, and at the same time bring up
the Right Foot. Observe, that bringing the Pike upon the Shoulder, the setting
down of the Right Foot, and the letting loose of the Left Hand, be done all at
one ^^me; In this Posture the Heels must be in a straight Line, the Toes turned
a little outward, the Feet an ordinary Pace asunder, you hold the Pike thus
upon the Shoulder with the Right Hand, the Thumb turned upwards, and outward
from the Body, that the Pike may the better lie upon the Shoulder, the Spear
mounted, and you must take care that you keep the Butt-end but a Foot from the
Ground, exactly between your two Feet, straight before your Body, letting your
Left Hand hang down by your Body as before is shown; Hold up your Head and Body
straight, which Posture must always be observed with a Shouldered Pike.

12. To the Front, Charge. 12. Take the Pike with your Right Hand from your
Shoulder, turning at the same time upon the Left Foot to the Right, placing the
Left an ordinary Step from the Right, the Heels in an equal line, the Toes
turned outward, as before is directed; In this turning take hold of the Pike
with the Left Hand against the middle of your Body, with outstretched Arms, a
straight Body, the Pike sloping, as before, the Butt-end a Foot from the
Ground, tell 1, 2, then bring the Pike straight upwards, with both hands before
you, and in this bringing up of the Pike, let go your Right Hand, which is
above, and take hold with it at the Butt-end of the Pike, and at the same time
bring the Right Foot forwards, so that the taking hold of the Butt, and the
setting down of the Right Foot be done at one time; tell 1, 2, upon which you
step a good Pace backwards, with the Right Foot just behind the Left, Charge
the Pike forwards Breast high, so that the Charging of the Pike, and the
putting down of your Right Foot, be done at one time; Keep in the Posture shown
in Explan. 1.

13. Shoulder as you were. 13. Raise up the Pike nimbly as in Explan. 2. tell
1, 2, and step back with the Right Foot, at the same time letting loose your
Right hand from the But-end, take hold of it again (in the setting down of your
Right Foot) above the Left Hand the height of your Shoulder, tell 1, 2, and
observe in the Shouldering of the Pike, Explan. 11.

14. To the Right, Charge. 14. Raise the Pike with your Right Hand again from
your Shoulder, take hold of it with your left hand stepping back with the Right
Foot, hold it sloping with straight Arms before your Body, as in Explan. 11.
tell 1, 2, bring up the Pike right before you, letting go your Right Hand, and
take hold of it again at the Butt-end, placing at the same time the Heel of the
Right, against the hollow of the Left Foot, tell 1, 2, and then immediately
with the Treading back of the Right Foot, Charge as before Breast high.

15. To the Left as you were. 15. Raise the Pike again with the bringing up of
your Right Foot, tell 1, 2, quit your Hand from the Butt-end of the Pike; The
Pike being in the Left Hand, let the Spear end of the Pike sink backwards, take
hold of it with your Right Hand, about the height of your Shoulder, at the same
time you remove your Right Foot, hold the same sloping with outstretched Arms,
the Body straight, tell 1, 2, bring the Pike upon the Shoulder, with the
bringing up of the Right Foot, and observe further the Posture of a Shouldered
Pike.

16. To the Left Charge. 16. Bring again the Pike sloping before your Body, as
often has been said, tell 1, 2, and raise it up straight, tell again 1, 2, and
turn to the Left about upon the Left Foot, and place at the same time the Heel
the Right Foot against the hollow of the Left, tell again 1, 2, Charge again
Breast high, as before.

17. To the Right as you were. 17. Raise up the Pike again with the bringing up
of the Right Foot, tell 1, 2, and turn upon the Left Foot to the Right about,
tell again 1, 2, and bring the Pike (with the removing of the Right Foot again)
sloping before the Body, tell again 1, 2, bring the Pike upon the Shoulder with
the bringing up (as said before of the Right Foot; Observe further the Posture
shown before.

18. To the Right about Charge. 18. Bring the Pike again sloping before your
Body, tell 1, 2, raise the same with the removing of the Feet nimbly, tell 1,
2, turn upon the Left Foot nimbly to the Right, holding the Pike strait up with
outstretched Arms, at the same time the Heel of the Right Foot must stand
against the hollow of the Left, tell again 1, 2, and Charge the Pike Breast
high, as before has been shown.

19. To the Left as you were. 19. Raise up the Pike with the bringing up of the
Right Foot, tell 1, 2, turn upon the Left Foot to the Left, tell again 1, 2,
let go the Hand from the Butt-end, and bring it sloping before your Body with
the removing of the Right Foot, and outstretched Arms, tell 1, 2, and
Shoulder, as often has been shown.

20. To the Left about Charge. 20. Bring the Pike again sloping before your
Body, tell 1, 2, and raise it straight upward with the bringing up of the Right
Foot, as in Explan. 12. tell again 1, 2, turn upon the Left Foot to the Left
about, tell 1, 2, and nimbly Charge the Pike with the stepping back of the
Right Foot Breast high.

21. To the Right as you were. 21. Raise the Pike straight up nimbly, tell 1,
2, turn upon the Left Foot to the Right about, hold the Pike with outstretched
Arms straight before the Body, tell 1, 2, let go the Right Hand, and take hold
of the Pike again with the setting back of the Right Foot, so as in Explan. 13.
tell 1, 2, lay the Pike on the Shoulder, with the bringing up of the Right
Foot; Observe further the Posture of a Shouldered Pike, as before.

22. Port your Pikes. 22. Bring the Pike again before your Body, and do as in
Explanation 12. is shown, excepting only, that the Spear of the Pike do not
come so low as to be Breast high, but a little higher upon the Port.

23. To the Front Charge. 23. Sink the Left Elbow with the Pike, so that it be
Breast high, and remain in the Posture shown in a Charged Pike.

24. Trail your Pikes with the Spents behind. 24. Let go your Right Hand from
the Buttend, and at the same time (holding the Pike with the Left Hand between
the foremost Fingers and the Thumb) drop the Spear upon the Ground, turning at
the same time upon the Left Foot to the Right, that the Heels of both Feet
stand in an equal Line, the Toes turned outward, and the Right Hand hanging
down by the side of the Body.

25. Charge as you were. 25. Turn upon your Left Foot to the Left, that the
hollow of the right Foot come against the Heel of the Left, take hold at the
same time of the Butt-end of the Pike with the Right Hand; Charge your Pike
Breasthigh.

26. Push your Pikes. 26. The Pike being thus held, you thrust it out strongly
forward with both Hands, not stirring the Feet, in such manner that the Right
Hand come to the Left Shoulder, or as far as the Right Hand can reach, pulling
it back again, and Charging Breast high, as before.

27. Trail your Pikes the Spears before. 27. Stand still with both Feet, take
hold of the Pike with the Left Hand forwards as far as the Arm can reach, let
go the Right Hand, bring back the Pike with the Left, take hold again with the
Right as far as the Arm can reach, bring the Pike with the Right Hand, take
hold of it again with the Left as far as it can reach, bring the same back; And
lastly, take hold of the Pike with the Right Hand, (with the stepping forward
of the Right Foot) about a Hands breadth from the Spear, in such manner, that
the thumb and the flat of the Spear lie upwards, hold the Pike thus with the
Right Hand at the Right Side, the Elbow turned outward almost in an equal Line
with the Body, the Left Hand hanging down by the side of the Body, the Feet and
Heels in an equal Line standing with the Toes turned outward.

28. Present your Spears. 28. Take hold of the Pike with the Left Hand just
above the Right, the Thumb upwards, let go the Right Hand, and take hold of the
Pike again about a Foot backwards, laying the Pike with the Right Hand to the
side of the Body, and hold it thus with both Hands, the Elbows turned outward,
the Spear flat, the Left Knee a little bent, one Foot behind the other, that
the hollow of the Right come in an equal Line with the Heel of the Left Foot.

29. To the Front, Charge. 29. Stand still with both Feet, let go the Left
Hand, bring the Pike forwards as far as the Arm can reach, take hold of it with
the Left, let loose the Right, bring the Pike forward with the Left, take the
Pike again backward with the Right Hand, let loose the Left, and bring the Pike
again with the Right Hand forward, take it once more with the Left, let loose
the Right, and take hold of the Butt-end, and Charge again Breast high, as
before is shown.

Note, The thrusting the Pike forward, and the taking hold of it backward, must
be every time done as far as your Arms will permit.

30. Advance your Pikes. 30. Raise the Pike nimbly straight before you, with
the bringing up of the Right Foot, tell 1, 2, bring it to the Right Shoulder,
with the turning or removing the Feet and Hands, observing further the Posture
as in Explan. 2. is shown.

31. Order your Pikes. 31. Take hold of the Pike at the Shoulder with the Left
Hand, bring the same nimbly with outstretched Arms before your Body, tell 1,
2, let loose the Right Hand, let the Pike with the Left Hand sink down as far
as the Arm (unforced) will suffer, tell 1, 2, bring it to your Side by the
Right Foot, let loose the Left Hand, hanging it down by the Body, in such a
manner, that the letting loose of the Left Hand, and the setting down of the
Pike, is done at one time; hold the Pike thus to the Ground by the outside of
the Right Foot, the Thumb over against the Right Eye, the Arm from the Hand to
the Elbow, hanging down by the Pike, so that the same come to stand up
straight, the Feet with the Heels in a straight Line, the Toes turned outward,
hold up the Head, and the Body straight, so as in the Posture of the Advanced
Pike has often been shown.

32. Lay down your Pikes. 32. This is done in the same manner as is shown in
the laying down of the Musket, Explan. 39. viz. That you take up your Right
Foot, and set the hollow of the Foot against the Butt-end of the Pike; step a
large Step forward with the Left Foot leaning toward it, lay down your Pike
with as straight a Body as possible, and remain in that Posture looking to your
Right Hand Man, but without turning your Head, holding it up as much as
possible, tell 1, 2, 3, then raise your self up with the stepping back of your
Left Foot, turn your Right Foot inward upon your Heel over the Pike, setting it
along by the Buttend, both your Arms hanging down your Body, and stand with
your Body in the same Posture you did before the laying down of the Pike.

33. Take up your Pikes. 33. This is also done as with the taking up of the
Musket, Explan. 40. turn your Right Foot outward upon the Heel over the Pike,
and set the hollow of your Foot against the Buttend of the Pike; At the same
time turn your Right Hand with a small Motion outward to answer the Motion of
your Foot, as has been shown in the taking up the Musket; Step forward a large
Step with the Left Foot along the Pike, and come forward with a stiff Body, as
has been said; take the Pike with your Right Hand at the same place where you
held it at laying down, tell 1, 2, 3, raise your self up with the Pike, with
the stepping back of the Left Foot; take up your Right Foot, and set it inwards
by the Butt-end; observe the Posture as is shown before the laying it down.

34. Plant your Pikes. 34. Take hold of the Pike with the Left Hand against the
Body, as much downwards as the Arm unforced will permit; put back the Right
Foot a little; thrust then the Pike with both Hands fast into the ground; set
your Right Foot forwards again; let both Hands hang down by the Body.

35. Order your Pikes. 35. Take the Pike with both hands in the same place
where it was let loose; draw it out of the Earth, with the setting back of the
Right Foot; and then in the bringing up of the Right Foot, let go the Left
Hand, put the Pike down by the Right Foot, and further observe the Posture as
in Explan. 13. is shown.

36. Advance your Pikes. 36. Bring up the Pike with the Right Hand just before
the Body as far as the Arm can reach; take hold of the Pike with a full Left
Hand, as much as the Arm unforced will permit, just before the middle of the
Body, bring the Pike with vour Left Hand (letting loose the Right) as high as
your Shoulder; then take hold of the Pike with the Right Hand at the Butt-end,
tell 1, 2, bring the Pike to the Right Shoulder, tell again 1, 2, let loose the
Left Hand, which must hang down by the Body, as often in the Advanced Pike has
been shown.



General Words of Command for the Evolutions.
Words of Command. Explanation. Take heed to Exercise your Evolutions. 1. Take
heed. 1. AS soon as this Word of Command is given, there must be great Silence
observed throughout the whole Battalion, the Soldiers doing no Motions either
with their Head, Body, Hands or Feet, but such as shall be ordered, looking
steadfastly to the Commanding Officer, who is to Exercise and give the Words of
Command, as was formerly said in the Exercise.

2. Carry well your Arms. 2. The Musketeers and Pikemen must carry their Arms
as in the Exercise has been shown; namely, the Musketeer must carry his Musket
even upon his Shoulder, the Muzzel even and high; the Pikeman holding his Pike
firm and straight up, as in the Exercise is shown; the whole Ranks and Files
carry their Arms in a straight Line and high, that when one stands behind or
before the File, or at the Wing, or End of a Rank, the Pikes and the Musketeers
show as if there was but one Pike or Musket.

3. Straighten the Ranks and Files. 3. Those that stand next to one another in
the Ranks, look to the Right and to the Left Hand, and must keep themselves in
such a Posture, that neither Head or Body is to be seen before or after one
another, but that the Head, Shoulder and Heels, be in a straight Line; also
those in the Files must always stand with their Face against the middle of the
Neck of their Leader; Further it is to be observed at the Parade, or when you
will Exercise, the Ranks must always be Four ordinary Paces asunder, and the
Files one Step, or the length of an outstretched Arm; In the Marching up, the
Ranks must open to the distance which shall be Commanded, either a whole Step,
or a half; namely thus, the Right Files stands, and those Files of the Left
Hand must stand each from his Righthand Man an whole Step, or as far as he can
reach with an outstretched Arm (or an half Pace, which is the half of an
outstretched Arm, that is when the Hand is set bent against the Side; which
distance is always to be observed when you Give Fire;) The Files in their
Marching off must Close so near, that their Shoulders almost touch, and the
Ranks keep to their former distance.

They must begin their March always with the Left Foot, and in their Facings
must always turn upon the Left Foot, except in some Commands in the following
Evolutions.

They must March very softly, and without turning their Heads look toward
their Right and Left Hand, but most to the Right, that the whole. Rank may
March straight, their Hats cockt, the Head upright, and carry well their Arms.

When Arms is mentioned, it signifies both Musketeers and Pikemen; you are not
to Charge with the Pikes when the Muskets are Presented.



Evolution with Musketeers and Pikemen together.
Words of Command. Explanation. Take heed the whole Battalion to Present your
Arms. 1. Present your Arms. 1. THE Musketeers must Rest their Muskets, and the
Pikemen Charge their Pikes to the Front, the Spears in a Line Breast high; and
observe, when they have brought up their Arms before their Body, to stand in
that Posture whilst they slowly tell 1, 2, (and after they have looked upon
their Right and Left Hand Man and their Leaders; that the Ranks and Files be
straight) they Rest their Muskets, and Charge their Pikes altogether, and stand
in that Posture as in the Exercise of the Pike and Musket has been shown.

2. To the Right. To the Right. To the Right. To the Right. 2. In these Four
Facings, both Musketeers and Pikemen must raise their Arms up before their
Bodies, at the same time bringing up the Right Foot, tell 1, 2, Face Four times
upon the Left Foot to the Right, turning at each time the Fourth part of a
Circle, in such a manner, that the Heel of the Right Foot comes always to stand
in the hollow of the Left, and every one to take heed to observe his Right and
Left Hand Man, and his Leader, that the Ranks and Files always remain straight,
tell 1, 2, nimbly Rest your Musket, and Charge your Pike with the stepping back
of the Right Foot, so as before is shown.

3. To the Right about. 3. Raise your Arms at the same time, bringing nimbly up
the Right Foot, tell 1, 2, Face to the Right about upon the Left Foot, holding
out your Arms as far as may be without constraint before the Body, tell 1, 2,
Charge, and nimbly Rest your Arms, with the stepping back of the Right Foot.

4. To the Left as you were. 4. Raise your Arms at the same time with the
bringing nimbly up the Right Foot, tell 1, 2, Face nimbly to the Left about
upon the Left Foot, telling again 1, 2, Charge and Rest your Arms as before.

5. To the Left. To the Left. To the Left. To the Left. 5. This is done like
the Facings to the Right, only with this difference, that you turn upon the
Left Foot to the Left, every time the Fourth part of a Circle.

6. To the Left about. 6. This is done as in the Facings and Chargings and
Restings to the Right about, has been shown, only with this difference, that
you Face upon the Left Foot to the Left about.

7. To the Right as you were. 7. This is done as in Explan. 1. is shown, though
with this difference, that you Face upon the Left Foot to the Right about.

8. Poise your Muskets, and Advance your Pikes. 8. Raise your Arms nimbly up
with the bringing up of the Right Foot, and stand thus with outstretched Arms
till the following Command, viz. as the Musket is in Explan. 44. and the Pike
as in Explan. 2.

9. Shoulder your Muskets. 9. Bring the Musket upon the Shoulder, and the Pike
to the Shoulder, and keep in this Posture as in the Exercise of the Pike and
Musket Explan 1. is shown.

Ranks take hred to double your Front. 10. Ranks to the Right, double your
Front. 10. The Second, Fourth, and Sixth Rank stands ready to double the other.

11. March. 11. The Second Marches, and doubles in the First, and the Fourth in
the Third, and the Sixth in the Fifth Rank.

Note, That in this and all other Marchings and Doublings, it is to be
observed, that the whole Rank is to step forward with the Left Foot, Marching
slowly, always looking toward the Right and Left Hand, but principally to the
Right, that the whole Rank may March equal, carrying their Arms with a straight
Body, holding up their Heads, and every one Marching in Four Paces to the Right
Hand of their Leader that stood in the Rank before him.

12. To the Left as you were. 12. Those Ranks which Doubled, Face at once upon
the Right Foot to the Left, and tread at the same time with the Left Foot half
a Step backwards; in which Facing they carry their Arms up high and straight,
that the one do not touch the other, nor make any clattering, and stand thus
ready to March.

13. March. 13. The forementioned ranks which have made half a Step backwards
tread forwards with the Left Foot, and March in Four Paces to their former
Places, the Right Foot making the Fourth Pace, and must be set in his former
Place, the Left Foot after it; and stand thus till the following Command.

14. Halt. 14. As soon as this Word of Command is given, the Ranks which
Marched, Face at once upon the Right Foot to the Right about, every one taking
heed that he stand straight in Rank and File as before.

15. Ranks to the Left double your Front. 15. Those Ranks which before Doubled
to the Right, stand ready to March, and Double to the Left.

16. March. 16. The foresaid Ranks step forward with the Left Foot, and March
in Four Paces in the Ranks where they are to Double, placing themselves on the
Left Side of the Man which stood before them; and observe further as in the
former Marches was shown.

17. To the Right as you were. 17. The Ranks which Doubled, Face at once upon
the Left Foot to the Right, setting the Right Foot half a Pace out backwards,
carrying their Arms high and straight, as before has been shown.

18. March. 18. The forementioned Ranks step half a Pace forwards with the same
Right Foot, and March in Four Paces to their former Places; so that the Left
Foot makes the Fourth Pace, and stands in his former Place, and must remain
thus till the following Command.

19. Halt. 19. The former Ranks Face upon the Left Foot to the Left about, and
take heed to even their Ranks and Files.

Ranks take heed to double your Rear. 20. Ranks to the Right double your Reet.
20. The Ranks which before stood still, Viz. the First, the Third, and the
Fifth, must now March and Double, and turn upon the Right Foot to the Right
about, standing thus ready to March.

21. Match. 21. The forementioned Ranks step forward with the Right Foot, and
March in Four Paces into the Ranks which stood behind them, the Left Foot makes
the Fourth or Last Pace, and come to stand close to the Right Foot of the Man
that stood behind him, and so to stand till the next Word of Command.

22. Halt. 22. The forementioned Ranks Face on the Left Foot to the Right
about, and every one does straighten himself with his Right and Left Hand Man,
carrying the Muzzel of the Musket high, the Pikes straight, as has been said
before.

23. As you were. 23. Those Ranks which Doubled, stand ready to March to their
former Places.

24. Match. 24. The forementioned Ranks step at once with the Left Foot
forward, and March slowly in Four Paces to their former Places, and observing
also their Marching and Standing, as is shown in Explan. 11.

25. Ranks to the Left double your Beer. 25. The foresaid Ranks turn upon the
Left Foot to the Left about, and stand so ready to March.

26. Match. 26. The forenamed Ranks step upon the Left Foot at once forward,
and March in Four Paces into the Ranks that stood behind them, in such a
manner, that their Right Foot comes to stand in the Fourth Pace by the Left
Foot of the Man that stood behind them; and stand thus till the following
Command.

27. Halt. 27. This is done as in Explan. 22. except that you turn on the Right
Foot to the Left about, straightning your Ranks and Files, carrying your Arms
as before.

28. As your were. 28. The foresaid Ranks stand ready to March.

29. Match. 29. The forementioned Ranks step at once with the Left Foot
forward, and March in Four Steps to their former Places, observing all what in
Explan. 11. has been said, and the Note thereon.

Rear Half* Files take heed to double your Front. 30. Rear half Files to the
Right double your Front. 30. The Three last Ranks make ready to March and
Double.

31. Match. 31. The forementioned Ranks step at once forward with the Left
Foot, and March slowly and exactly, carrying their Arms well; The Fourth Ranks
Marches into the First, the Fifth in the Second, the Sixth in the Third Rank,
and place themselves on the Right Side of the Man that stood before them;
observing further as in Explan. 11.

32. To the Left as you were. 32. This is done in the same manner as in Explan.
12.

33. Match. 33. The foresaid Ranks step at once forward upon the Left Foot, and
March thus slowly to their former Places; so that the Right Foot makes the Last
or Twelfth Step, and is set before the other.

34. Halt. 34. The foresaid Ranks Face at once upon the Right Foot to the Right
about, observing further what in the former Commands has been said.

35. Rear half Files to the Left double your Front. 35. The foresaid Rear
Half-Files stand ready to March forwards, and to Double.

36. Match. 36. The foresaid Ranks step at once with the Left Foot, and March
straight and slowly forward; observe further as in Explan. 31.

37. To the Right as you were. 37. Do as in Explan. 17.

38. Match. 38. The forementioned Ranks step at once with the Right Foot
forward, Marching slowly to their former Place, so that the Left Foot comes in
the Last or Twelfth Pace, and stands forward, observing what has been further
said of straightning their Ranks and Files, and carrying their Arms well.

39. Halt. 39. The forementioned Ranks Face at once upon the Left Foot to the
Left about; and observe further what in the former Commands has been said.

Front half Files take heed to double your Rear. 40. Front half Files to the
Right double your Rear. 40. The Three foremost Ranks Face upon the Right Foot
to the Right about, and stand thus ready to March, and Double.

41. Match. 41. The aforesaid Ranks step at once with the Right Foot forward,
and March slowly, viz. the Third Rank in the Sixth, the Second in the Fifth,
and the First in the Fourth; so the Left Foot makes the Last and Twelfth Step,
and must stand by the Right Foot of the Man in his File he is to Double, and so
remain, expecting the next Command.

42. Halt. 42 The foresaid Ranks Face at once upon the Right about,
straightning their Ranks and Files, as formerly has been said.

43. Front half Files as you were. 43. The foresaid Three Ranks stand ready to
March as they were.

44. Match. 44. The forementioned Three Ranks step at once with the Left Foot,
and March slowly forward, carrying their Arms high, straitning their Ranks, and
evening their Files, when they come to their former Places.

45. Front half Files to the Left double your Rear. 45. The foresaid Three
Ranks turn upon their Left Foot to the Left about, and stand thus ready to
March, and Double.

46. Match. 46. The foresaid Ranks step again at once time forward with the
Left Foot, and March slowly into the Ranks that stood behind them, it such a
manner, that the Right Foot is the ^st and Twelfth Step, and stands next the
Left Foot of the Man they are to Double, and stand thus till the following
Command.

47. Halt. 47. The foresaid Three Ranks turn upon the Right Foot to the Left
about, and straighten their Ranks and Files.

48. Front half Files as you were. 48. The forementioned Three Ranks stand
again ready to March as they were.

49. Match. 49. The foresaid Three Ranks step at once forward with the Left
Foot, and March slowly to their former Places, carrying their Arms well and
high, and stand straight in their Ranks and Files, as formerly has been said.

Files take heed to double. 50. Files to the Right double. 50. The Files which
are to Double, turn at once upon the Left Foot to the Right; namely, the
Second, the Fourth, the Sixth, and the Eighth, reckoning from the Right Hand,
and so through the whole Battalion; but the uneven Files must stand, viz. the
First, the Third, the Fifth, the Seventh, etc. through the whole Battalion.

Note, That in this Doubling of Files, the Pikes are never mixed amongst the
Musketeers, nor the Musketeers amongst the Pikes, but that every Division
Doubles it self apart, and so they must have even Files; and in case there be
u^even Files, they are to stand still.

51. Match. 51. The forementioned Files thus Faced, ready to March and Double,
must at once step forward with the Left Foot, and March slowly, every one
placing himself behind his Right Hand Man, so that the Left Foot in the Third
and Last Pace comes to stand foremost; with the Heel behind the Left Heel of
his Righthand Man he is to Double, expecting the next Command.

52. Halt. 52. The foresaid Marched Files turn at once upon the Left Foot to
the Left, and straighten their Ranks and Files, carrying their Arms well, as
often has been said.

53. To the Left as you were. 53. The foresaid Files which Doubled, Face at
once upon the Left Foot to the Left, and stand thus ready to March as they were.

54. Match. 54. The forementioned Files step at once with the Left Foot
forward, and March in Three Paces to their former Places, and stand in their
Ranks and Files as before.

55. Files to the Left double. 55. The Files which before stood still, must now
upon the Right Foot Face to the Left, and stand ready to March and Double.

56. Match. 56. The forenamed Files standing thus Faced, ready to March and
Double; namely, the First, the Third, the Fifth and the Seventh, etc. step at
once with the Right Foot forwards, and March in Three Paces slowly behind the
Man that stood on their Left Hand, so that the Right Foot in the Third and Last
Pace stands foremost; with the Heel behind the Right Heel of the Left Hand Man
he is to Double, expecting the following Command.

57. Halt. 57. The forementioned Files Face at once upon the Right Foot to the
Right, standing even in their Ranks and Files, and do as before has been said.

58. To the Right as you were. 58. The foresaid Files which have Doubled, Face
again at once upon the Right Foot to the Right, and thus stand ready to March
as they were.

59. March. 59. The forenamed Files step forward at once with the Right Foot,
and March in Three Paces to their former Places, and straighten their Ranks and
Files as formerly they stood.

Half Ranks take heed to double your Files. 60. Half Ranks to the Right double
your Files. 60. The Half-Ranks of every Division Face upon the Left Foot to the
Right, and so stand ready to March and Double.

Note, That this Doubling is either by the Half-Ranks of every Division apart,
or by the Half of the Battalion.

61. March. 61. The forementioned Files that are Faced to Double, step at once
with the Left Foot forward, and March straight forward to the Place where the
First Man of the Right Hand stood; where every one to the last Man must turn
(observing in this March, that the Left Foot must never come at the outside of
the Line of the Front) and March thus in the midst of the Ranks and Files
wherein they are to Double; so that the Left Foot must make the last Step, as
in Explan. 51.

62. Halt. 62. The foresaid Half-Ranks Face at once upon the Left Foot to the
Left, and straighten their Ranks and Files.

63. To the Left as you were. 63. The foresaid Half-Ranks Face at once upon the
Left Foot to the Left, and so stand ready to March in their former Places.

64. March. 64. The foresaid Half-Ranks step at once forward with their Left
Foot, and March thus forward till they come to their former Places (observing
again, that the Right Foot do not come without the straight Line of the Front)
expecting the following Command.

65. Halt. 65. The foresaid Half-Ranks Face all together upon the Right Foot to
the Right, straitning their Ranks and Files, carrying their Arms well and high.

66. Half Ranks to the Left double your Files. 66. The Half-Ranks which stood
still before, must March now, Facing at once upon the Right Foot to the Left;
stand thus ready to March and Double

67. March. 67. The foresaid Half-Ranks begin their March with the Right Foot,
and March straight forwards, every one following his Leader to the Place where
the first Left Hand Man stood and turned, where every one to the last Man must
turn, and March thus forward (observing that the Right Foot never comes without
the Front Line) into the midst of the Ranks and Files in which they are to
Double; The Right Foot makes the last Step, and stands forwards, as in Explan.
56. and thus stand expecting the next Command.

68. Halt. 68. The foresaid Half-Ranks Face at once upon the Right Foot to the
Right, straightning their Ranks and Files, carrying their Arms well, straight
and high.

69. To the Right as you were. 69. The foresaid Ranks Face at once upon the
right foot to the Right, standing thus ready to March to their former Places.

70. March. 70. The forementioned Half-Ranks step forward all together with the
Right Foot, and March back to their former Places (observing again in their
March, that the Left Foot does not come without the Line of the Front)
expecting the following Command.

71. Halt. 71. The foresaid Ranks Face all together upon the Left Foot to the
Left, straightning their Ranks and Files, and carrying their Arms straight and
high.

Files take heed to Countermarch. 72. Files to the Right about Countermarch.
72. The first Man of every File must Face upon the Right Foot to the Right
about.

73. March. 73. The whole Battalion steps at once with the Left Foot forward,
and March every one slowly to the Right Side of the Man that stood behind him,
till the first comes to the last, and the last to the first Man's Place,
(observe further, that in their March every one turns at the same place to the
Right about, where the first Man turned; also that they carry their Arms well,
straight and High, every one observing their distance in Ranks and Files, that
they disorder not one another) expecting the following Command.

74. Files to the Left about Countermarch. 74. The first Man of every File
must turn upon the Left Foot to the Left about, and expect the following
Command.

75. March. 75. The whole Battalion steps at once with the Left Foot forward,
Marching slowly by the Left Side of the Man that stood behind him, till every
one is come to his former Place, observing further all what has been shown in
Explan. 73.

Ranks take heed to Countermarch. 76. Ranks to the Right about Countermarch.
76. The whole Battalion turns at once upon the Right Foot to the Right, and
stand thus ready to Countermarch.

77. March. 77. The first Man of every Division Faces upon the Right Foot to
the Right about, and Marches straight in the middle between the Ranks (all
follow one another to the Place where the first Man Faced to the Right about,
and in the same Place do likewise Face, and so March forward till he stands
upon the Left Hand that stood upon the Right, and he that stood upon the Left
stands upon the Right; in which March care is to be taken, that as soon as the
first Man is past, the last to March in the same Line, Marching with his Right
Foot where the last Man Marched with his Right Foot, Marching thus in the
straight Line of the Front, and because the Soldiers come something near each
other in this March, good care must be taken to carry their Arms well, that
they may not touch or clatter; and likewise the last Rank must Face altogether,
and observe their Leader.

Note, This Countermarch may be done by Division, or by the whole Battalion.

78. Halt. 78. The whole Battalion Faces at once upon the Right Foot to the
Right, straightning their Ranks and Files, carrying their Arms well.

79. Ranks to the Left Countermarch. 79. The whole Battalion Faces upon the
Left Foot to the Left; and stands thus ready to Countermarch.

80. March. 80. The first Man of every Division Faces upon the Left Foot to the
Left about, and Marches straight in the middle of the two Ranks, the which all
follow till they come to their first Place; In which March is to be observed,
that the first Man, as soon as he is past the last, tread in the same Line with
his Left Foot where the other did go with his Left Foot, and thus to March in
the straight Line of the Front; and further to observe in the Countermarch what
is said in Explan. 77.

81. Halt. 81. The whole Battalion Paces at once upon the Left Foot to the
Left, straightning their Ranks and Files, carrying their Arms well.

Take heedth close your Files. 82. To the Right and Left close your Files to
the Center. 82. The whole Battalion Faces to the Right and Left inwards at the
Center; namely, the Half-Ranks on the Right Face to the Left upon the Left
Foot, and the other half on the Left, Face on the Right Foot to the Right, that
they stand with their Faces and Feet toward each other, standing thus
expecting the following Command.

83. March. 83. The Right Half-Ranks step with the Left Foot, and the Left
Half-Ranks with the Right Foot, at one time forwards, and those that stand in
the middle make but half a Pace, and March thus against one another to the
distance of half a Pace, carrying their Arms well and high, that they do not
come to touch, and stand thus expecting the next Command.

84. Halt. 84. The Half-Ranks of the Right turn upon the Left Foot to the
Right, and those of the Left Hand turn upon the Right Foot to the Left.

Note, When you close your Files to the Right or Left, the whole Battalion must
Face upon the Left Foot, and March with the Left Foot; and this is to be
observed in their returning to their former Places.

Take heed to close your Ranks. 85. Ranks close to the Front. 85. The Five lase
Ranks stand ready to March, and close forwards.

86. March. 86. The first Rank stands, the five other step at once with the
Left Foot forward, Marching thus slowly, and Close within a Pace of each other.

Take heed to Wheel. 87. To the Right Wheel. 87. The closed Ranks and Files
stand ready to March and Wheel.

88. March. 88. The whole Battalion Marches with the Left Foot at once
forwards, and March and Wheel the Fourth part of a Circle, viz. the first Man
of the first Rank of the Right Hand, turns with his Body and Feet slowly; but
so, that the Right Foot does not come out of his place, he only turning upon
the Heel, the other of the same Rank also Wheel with him, and according to
proportion, as they are distant from the Right Hand Man, do March faster or
slower, looking carefully to their Left Hand, without turning the Head, that
the whole Rank may March even; The first Rank in their Wheeling must keep close
to the Right, and not March so quick as the other, they having a greater
Circumference; The other Ranks must observe the same Order in their March, though
hot to Close themselves to the Right as the first Rank does, but to the Left,
and to observe their distance well in Ranks and Files, carrying their Arms
well, every one observing his Leader, and the Right, and Left Hand Man Ranks as
they are further from the Front, so in proportion they are to March faster.

89. The whole Battalion having Wheeled the Fourth part of a Circle stands,
straightning their Ranks and Files, carrying their Arms well, and expecting the
following Command.

90. To the Right, Wheel. 90. The whole Battalion stands again ready to March
and Wheel.

91. March. 91. The Battalion steps again at once with the Left Foot forward,
and Wheels the Fourth part of a Circle. Observe further Explan. 88.

92. Halt. 92. They stand still here, as was shown in Explan. 89. straighten
your Ranks and Files, and carry your Arms well and high.

93. To the Left abaut, Wheel. 93. They stand again ready to March and Wheel.

94. March. 94. As the whole Battalion at twice did Wheel at each time the
Fourth part of a Circle, so must it now at once Wheel half a Circle to the
Right about; so that every one comes to stand in his former Place again,
observing as in Explan. 88.

95. Halt. 95. The whole Battalion being come to their former Place, stand,
straitning their Ranks and Files, carrying their Arms well.

96. To the Left, Wheel. 96. The whole Battalion stands ready again to March
and Wheel.

97. March. 97. The whole Battalion Marches at once with the Left Foot forward,
and Wheel to the Left the Fourth part of a Circle. The first Man of the Left
turns in his Place upon the Left Foot, as also the first Rank Closes to the
Left, and the other Ranks in their March Close to the Right, without turning
their Heads. Observe also what has been said of Distance, Ranks and Files, and
carrying of Arms.

98. Halt. 98. They stand still as before, straightning their Ranks and Files,
carry their Arms well and expect the following Command.

99. To the Left, Wheel. 99. They stand again ready to March and Wheel.

100. March. 100. They Wheel the Fourth part of a Circle to the Left, and
observe all in the abovesaid Wheeling.

101. Halt. 101. They stand thus, expecting the following Command.

102. To the Left about, Wheel. 102. They stand ready to March and Wheel.

103. March. 103. As the whole Battalion did Wheel at twice, each time the
Fourth part of a Circle, so must it now at one time Wheel the half of a Circle
to the Left about, by which every one comes to his former Place. Observe also
what has been formerly said.

104. Halt. 104. The whole Battalion being now come to their former Places,
remain thus straightning their Ranks and Files, carrying their Arms well and
high.

Note, That when you are to Wheel with open Ranks, the following, Rank must not
Wheel till it comes to the Place where the first Rank did Wheel; And when you
Wheel to the Right, you must Close to the Right, and look to the Left; And when
you Wheel to the Left, you must Close to the Left, and look toward the Right.

Files take heed to open to your former distance 105. Files to the Right and
Left outward, to your former distance. 105. The Half-Ranks of the Right Hand
turn upon the Left Foot to the Right, and the Half-Ranks of the Left Hand turn
upon the Right Foot to the Left, and stand now Back to Back, as in Explan. 82.
they stood Face to Face. Above all, care must be taken to carry their Arms
straight and high.

106. March. 106. The Half-Ranks of the Right step forward with the Left, and
the Half Ranks of the Left step forward with the Right Foot all at once, and
March to their former Places; those that stand in the middle make but half a
Pace.

107. Halt. 107. The Right Half-Ranks Face upon the Left Foot to the Left, and
the Left Half-Ranks Face upon the Right Foot to the Right, and straighten again
their Ranks and Files, and carry their Arms well, straight, and high.

Ranks take heed to open to your former distance. 108. Ranks as you were. 108.
The Five Ranks which in Explan. 85. did Close forwards, turn upon the Left Foot
to the Right about, standing thus ready to March as they were, The First Rank
of the Five which turns, must take special care to carry the Muzzels of their
Arms high, that they may not touch the Arms of the First Rank that stands still.

109. March. 109. The forementioned Five Ranks step at once with the Left Foot
forwards, Marching slowly to their former distance of Four Paces, observing
that the Left Foot comes down, last, and stands foremost; and expect the
following Command.

110. Halt. 110. The foresaid Five Ranks Face at once upon the Left Foot to the
Left about, straightning their Ranks and Files as before.

Take heed to lay down your Arms. 111. Rest your Muskets. 111. The Muskets are
taken from the Shoulder and rested, as is shown in the Exercise of the Musket
in Explan. 37.

112. Order your Arms. 112. This is done as in the Exercise of the Musket,
Explan. 38. and of the Pike, Explan. 31.

113. Lay down your Arms. 113. This is done as in the Exercise of the Musket,
Explan. 39. and that of the Pike, Explan. 32. has been said; and it must be
observed, that the Musketeers and Pikemen perform all their Motions at one time.

Take heed to quit your Arms 114. For Straw. 114. As soon as this Command is
given, the whole Battalion must Face upon the Left Foot to the Right about, and
expect the following Command.

115. March. 115. The whole Battalion step with the Left Foot forwards, and
March slowly between the Files of their Arms, and March so far clear from their
Arms as the Commanding Officer pleases to order.

Note, When the Soldiers are Marched beyond their Arms, they do not then
observe Ranks and Files; which Marching and Returning may also be done with the
Drum, or with the Shot of a Musket, according as the Commanding Officer pleases
to order.

116. To your Arms 116. As soon as this Command is given, they all draw their
Swords, and run together (holding their Swords in their Right Hands even with
their Shoulders, the Points upwards) to their Arms and stand thus expecting the
following Command.

117. Put up your Swords. 117. The whole Battalion turn at once, the Points of
their Swords down, looking toward the Left Hand, and put them in the
Scabbards; tell 1, 2, let go the Right Hand, stand thus, both Hands hanging
down by the Body, till the following Command.

118. Take up your Arms. 118. This is done as in the Exercise of the Musket,
Explan. 40. and of the Pike, Explan. 33. taking heed that every one observe his
Leader, and his Right Hand Man, that they all rise at once.

119. Resh your Muskets. 119. This is done as in the Exercise of the Musket,
Explan. 41.

120. Poise your Muskets, and Advance your Pikes. 120. The Muskets and Pikes
are brought up at one time, and held before the Body; viz. The Musketeers take
their Muskets with the Right Hand under their Pans, and bring up their Muskets
before the Body with both Hands, (at the same time bringing up the Right Foot)
in which Bringing up he lets go the Left Hand, and holds his Musket with an
outstretched Arm before the middle of his Body; The Pikemen do as in Explan.
36. and all stand thus expecting the following Command.

121. Shoulder your Muskets. 121. This is done as in Explan. 9. carrying your
Arms well, as often has been said.



RVLES for the Forming of Battalions, the Posting of Officers, Salutes, etc.
I. FIrst, the Companies which are to Form a Battalion, shall place themselves
according to the Date of their Commissions; Viz. The Colonel, or first Company
on the Right Wing;. The Second, or Lieutenant Colonels Company, upon the Left
Wing; The Majors, or Third Company, upon the Right Wing, next the First or
Colonels Company; The eldest Captain, or Fourth Company upon the Left Wing,
next the Lieutenant Colonels or Second Company. All the other Companies after
that manner must place themselves, till the youngest Company come to stand in
the Center.

II. When the Companies are Marching to the place where the Battalion is to be
Formed, the Pikemen must March with their Pikes Advanced; they must always be
placed on the Left Hand of the Musketeers of their Companies.

III. When all the Companies are come to the place where they are to Form the
Battalion, a Drummer is to stand before the Center of the Battalion, and to
Beat a Ruffle for warning; and the Musketeers of those Companies which make the
Right Wing, shall Face to the Right, and the Pikes to the Left; The Musketeers
of the Left shall face to the Left, and the Pikes to the Right; upon which all
the Drummers shall Beat a Troop, and the Musketeers and Pikemen March through
and Form the Battalion.

The Officers also at the same time when the Ruffle is Beat, must stand with
their Faces toward the Battalion, their Pikes and Partisans in their hands;
and also when the Troop Beats, March and Post themselves in their proper places.

In the same manner is the Battalion to be Reduced again to Companies; only
with this difference, that all those which in the forming the Battalion faced
to the Right, must then Face to the Left; and those which Faced to the Left,
must Face to the Right.

Here is also to be observed, that when they March off by Companies, the
Company on the Right Wing shall March first, Beating a Troop, with their
Muskets Clubbed, and their Pikes Advanced; And then the Company on the Left
Wing follows, and so one after another, according to Seniority.

Note, That when they Troop off, the Pikes March before the Musketeers.

The Pikes must always be Advanced when they March before the King.

IV. The Battalion being Formed, as is said before, the Colonel places himself
in the Center, before the Pikes and Colors; The Lieutenant Colonel behind him;
the half of the Captains; as also of the Lieutenants in one line upon the Right
Wing, the other half upon the Left Wing of the Musketeers; And the Ensigns
before the Pikes, either with the Colors or Half-Pikes.

And that the Officers may not alter their places by their continual Moving to
and fro, the Captains, as also the Lieutenants shall remain upon that Wing
where their Musketeers are, and there Post themselves according to their
Commissions; that is, the eldest outward, and the youngest toward the Center;
so that those that have their Musketeers upon the Right Wing must remain before
them, though there should be found elder upon the Left Wing. But in case there
should be a great many Officers more absent upon the one Wing then the other,
the youngest are always to go over to the other Wing, to make the number equal;
Though upon Action every one shall remain and be left as near his own Company
as possible may be; Of which all Colonels and Commanding Officers of
Battalions, are to take great care, and to see that all be done for the best of
the Service.

The Sergeants are to Rank themselves in the Rear of the Battalion, except
those that are Commanded to stand upon the Wings; those Battalions which have
but few Companies, and by consequence but few Sergeants, must have Three upon
each Wing, that is, at the First, the Fourth, and Last Rank; but those
Battalions where there are Sergeants enough, must have one upon the Wing of
each Rank, and this is to be ordered according ^s there is more or fewer
Companies in the Battalion.

And as to the Drummers, they must be divided into Three Parts; The First Third
Part shall place themselves upon the Right Wing of the Musketeers, next to the
Corporal, or outmost Granadeer; The Second Third Part upon the Left Wing; And
the other Third Part before the Pikes, behind the Colors, where the Hoboys are
also to place themselves.

V. The Battalion being to Exercise, no Officer may be absent without leave,
but always stand by the Exercise, with his Arms in his Hand, upon the Post
which in the Rule of Exercise is assigned him, still expecting such Orders as
may be given him; to Exercise the whole Battalion, some part of it, or a single
Company, which they are always to perform with their Arms in their Hands, and
not to quit their Arms.

No Officer shall Exercise on Horseback, except the Major, or those that in his
absence do perform Majors Duty.

VI. When the King is to be Saluted, so soon as he draws near, all the Drummers
are to Beat a March; and his Majesty being come near the Regiment, the
Musketeers being Shouldered, they shall Rest their Muskets, and the Pikemen
(having their Pikes Advanced) shall at the same time Charge their Pikes with
the Spears Breast high, and remain in this Posture till his Majesty shall be
past the Regiment; In his Riding by the Officers shall Salute him, he being
Three or Four Paces distance from them: And all those that are of one
Character, shall Salute all in one Form.

Here is to be observed, that in the absence of the Ensign, which otherwise
being present, must carry the Colors before his Breast when he is to Salute,

He that carries the Colors being no Ensign, as is commonly done by the Free
Corporal, may March and stand in the Ensigns Place, but not Salute.

When his Majesty passes the Rear of the Battalion, no Officer nor Colors
shall go through the Battalion to the Rear, nor Salute any further; but the
Soldiers Present their Arms to the Right about, as before has been shown, the
Pikes being Charged, and the Muskets Rested.

VII. When a Battalion is to File off and March, the Colonel Marches foremost
alone, or he that Commands the Battalion, although he were but a Captain; upon
which the half of the Captains in one Rank follow, and then the Musketeers; The
other half of the Captains March in the Rear of the last Division of
Musketeers, and behind them the Lieutenant Colonel; but the Lieutenant Colonel
being absent, or in the absence of the Colonel, he Leading the Regiment, no
Captain shall Close in the Rear, to March in the Lieutenant Colonels Place, but
shall March in the same Rank with the rest of the Captains, in the Rear.

No Captain is to March in the Lieutenant Colonels Place.

The Lieutenants shall Lead the Divisions of the Musketeers, and the Ensigns
the Divisions of the Pikes; but those Ensigns that carry the Colors, shall
March together before the middle Division of the Pikes, and wanting
Lieutenants, some of the Ensigns shall be taken to Lead the Divisions of
Musketeers, where Lieutenants are wanting.

The youngest Captain shall always March before the Pikes, having one Ensign
behind him, or more if there be any left when the Divisions are provided.

It must be observed, that they must not March with more Divisions then there
are Officers to lead them; and sometimes finding the Way too narrow to March
with a strong Front, then they must March with Half-Ranks, or less Divisions,
or Doubling of Files, as may be most convenient.

VIII. The Drummers shall in their March continue divided in Three Parts, and a
Third Part of them by each Division of Musketeers on the Right Wing; and
another Third Part by the Second Division of Musketeers on the Left Wing; and
the other Third Part by the Pikes. They shall always in their March, one of
them Beat in each Division, but when a Battalion Marches into a Town, or other
public Places, they must all of them Beat.

It is to be observed, that they must always March between the Third and Fourth
Rank of every Head or Chief Division; that is, one Third Part by the First
Division.

IX. The Officers in Marching shall carry their Arms downwards, till such time
as they are to Salute, and then the Captains and the Ensigns Shoulder them, and
from thence Salute; But the Ensigns that carry the Colors, shall in their
March carry them upon their Shoulders, and only take them before their Breast
when they are going to Salute.

The Sergeants and under Officers are not to Salute, but carry their Arms upon
their Left Shoulders, the Spears in their Hands downwards, and only in Marching
by take off their Hats.

X. His Majesty shall not be Saluted by Guards, or otherwise, but once a day,
except he finding a Regiment or Company Posted, having afterward Commanded to
see it March by; upon which Occasion he must be again Saluted.

It is to be noted, that a Battalion being Commanded to March by the King in
Companies, that then all Commanding Officers, the Colonel included, must March
at the Head of their Companies.

XI. The further Ceremonies to be performed to his Majesty, as also to all
others, do remain as formerly, the General Officers hereafter named included.
The Lieutenant Generals, or those that are in the same Quality or Degree, shall
for the future be Saluted by all Officers, the Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, and
the Colors excepted.

In the Field or Camp shall be given them Three Ruffels, also in Garrison by
the Main Guard; but all other Guards shall Beat a March.

Before their Door shall be placed a Sergeant and two Sentinels.

The Major General shall be Saluted by no Officer, and but Two Ruffels given
him either in Camp or Garrison, and at his Door Two Sentinels.

For those Governors that are no Generals, there shall in all Places where
they are Governors, be given them one Ruffel.

But for them that have no Commissions as Governors, no Drum shall Beat.

The Main Guard shall Rest their Arms to the Governor, as also every Sentinel;
but if he continue Walking or Standing before the Guard, they may lay down
their Arms.

The Colonels shall have one Sentinel at their Doors, and those of the Garrison
one of their own Regiment. He that Commands the Regiment in absence of the
Colonel, shall have that Sentinel at his Door.

The Main Guard shall turn out, and Stand to their Arms for a Colonel, though but
once a day; they may return into the Guard, if he continue to Stand or Walk
near the Guard, but all other Guards shall Order their Arms for him; the
Sentinels of his own Regiment shall Rest their Arms to him, but those of other
Regiments shall remain Shouldered.

The Lieutenant Governors and Commanders shall be Treated in their own
Garrisons as Colonels, and the Major Comadants as the Lieutenant Colonels,
except by the absence of the Commander they Command in his Place, and then to
be Treated as before is said of the Commanders.

For the Lieutenant Colonels and Majors, the Main Guard is to do nothing, but
the other Guards turn out and stand over their Arms. The Sentinels of their own
Regiment must Rest their Muskets to them, but those of other Regiments keep
their Muskets Shouldered.

For Captains and Subalterns, the Sentinels shall keep their Arms Shouldered,
except it be in Places where they Command; and then they are to Rest their
Arms, and the Guards to turn out.

XII. No Cannon shall be Fired for any General mentioned in the Eleventh
Article; that is to say, when they come in, or go out of a Garrison.

FINIS.

