THE EXCELLENT WOMAN Described BY HER TRUE CHARACTERS AND THEIR OPPOSITES.

Licensed and Entered --

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Watts, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard, M DC
XC II.

TO THE EXCELLENT AND MUCH HONORED LADY, The Lady Mary Walcot.
MADAM,
THERE is not any Thing that can Recommend Virtue to the World, with so much
Force and Advantage, as the Examples of those that eminently Practice it.
Virtue is like Beauty in this, That it has Peculiar and Nameless Charms, in the
Living Original, which no Art can possibly represent in the Draughts or
Descriptions of it.

But it is the great Unhappiness of the World, that these Excellent Examples are
seldom very Numerous: And none but those who live within the Sphere of their
Converse, can have the Benefit of their Influence: And, which is yet a greater
Disadvantage, perhaps several of these, like your Ladyship, do Love and Choose
Retirement. In which case they can be seen but by Few.

All that we can do then for the Rest of the World, toward the making them in
Love with Virtue, and the persuading them to Court and seek it, lies in these
following Things. We must present them with as exact a Draught and Picture of
this Beauty as we can, in the clear and distinct Explications of Virtue. We
must add to this, the most fitting and advantageous Dress, in giving it the
becoming Illustrations and deserved Praises. And it may further conduce to our
Purpose, to draw also, and set near the Former, the deformed Characters of the
opposite Vices; which, like a Black-a-more by a Fair Lady, will set off the
Beauty to more Advantage.

Thus much, I presume, is tolerably performed in the following Book, which is
greatly Ambitious to obtain the Honor of Your Ladiship's Approbation.

Besides these, there is but one Thing remaining, that can be serviceable to
our Purpose: But it is that which seems as Necessary and Conducing as all the
Rest that we can do. And that is to assure the World, That the Excellent
Draught, or Picture we have made, is the Description and Character of some Real
Person, who rather Excels, than falls short of the Representation. Without
this, the Skill of the Representer may be admired, but the Thing represented
cannot; when it is not known, that there is any such Thing really in Being; and
so the Design of the Labor would be lost, and the End frustrated.

When we propose a Person, in whom those Excellent Characters of Virtue may all
be found, and that with advantage; then we make it known, that the Precepts and
Rules prescribed, are not Notions but Practice; they are not only what ought to
be done, but what is done; they are not invented, but are raised fr^^
Observation. When we can mention an Excellent Example, we confute that
Prejudice which deters the Cowardly and Mean Spirits, from the Pursuit of
Virtue; who represent it to themselves, as too strict in the Rules of it, as a
Thing in Imagination only, and as too difficult, or even impossible to be put
in Practice: And we do that which will inspire the more Generous Souls, with a
Spirit of Emulation; and kindle, in all such, a brave Ambition to imitate and
equal, if they can, what is so Excellent and Commendable.

It is for this, Madam, that I have made so bold, as to set Your Ladiship's
Name to the Front of this Book. It Is well known of Your Ladyship, by all that
have the Honor and the Happiness of Your Acquaintance, that the best
Characters here are no more the Description of an Excellent Woman, than they
are Characters of You. And they will all bear with me this Testimony to Your
Worth, that wherein soever this Description comes short of the Subject, it
might be perfectly completed by one that were able to complete Your Excellent
Character. To the Instances of particular Virtues in the Body of the Book, I
had a Desire to add an Universal One.

This Apology, Madam, I ought to make for my Interrupting Your better
Employment; for venturing to Publish those Virtues to the World, which Your
Ladyship does seek to Conceal; and for ascribing those Praises, which You are
as unwilling as deserving to receive. I hope You will be pleased to Pardon
that, which a Zeal for the Honor and Advantage of Your Sex has inspired; and
suffer me to Subscribe,

MADAM, Your Ladiship's Most Humble and Devoted Servant, T. D.

THE PREFACE.
To the Female Sex,
I Present you here with a Piece of Morality, wherein you have the Characters
of Virtues and Vices; drawn, indeed, with design to Recommend the One Sort, and
to Expose the Other: Yet I think it is done with Sincerity too, and that there
needs no more but to represent these Things truly for both those Purposes. The
Book, I am sure, would most effectually recommend its self to you, if you would
take the Pains to Read and Consider it well; and compare what it says, with the
Common Practice of the World. This is the best Way to know fully how Useful and
Important to you those Intimations are, which are here presented. But since
this cannot be known without such an use of it, and especially those who have
most need of these Instructions, will be apt to neglect them, I think fit to
say some few Things to Recommend the Reading of it.

It is designed and directed to serve the Honor and Happiness of the Female
Sex, who are perhaps the larger Half of Mankind; and who doubtless are, or may
be, as Important, at least, as the Other I cannot choose but think, that the
Glory and Worth, and Happiness of any Nation depends as much upon them, as upon
the Men. And, perhaps, others will be of my Mind, if it be considered; That we
are born of them; that we commonly derive from them what we are in our Nature,
more than from the other Parent: So far as this does depend upon the frame of
the Body, which is not a little, it is formed in the Womb. We are beholden to
our Mothers Virtue and good Disposition, and wise ordering of her self for our
natural Inclinations to any Virtue, for the Calmness of our Temper, for the
Brightness of our Wit, for the Regularity of our Constitutions, and for the
Strength of our Bodies. And on the contrary, from their Exorbitant Passions we
are disposed to great Passions; and from their ungoverned Appetites, their
Intemperance and other Vices, we often derive the Strength of Vicious
Inclinations, a crazy Constitution, and a weak Body? But further will their
Influence upon the World appear, if we consider that Invincible, and Universal
Law of Nature, which inclines the other Sex to love and seek their Conversation
and Company.

From hence it must needs follow, That their Influence upon the Men, may be
commonly as great as they will. Their Example will effectually lead us; we
cannot choose but put on some Conformity to those whom we love: Their
Persuasions and Instigations will powerfully provoke and excite us; their
Approbation and Applause is a great Encouragement, and their Condemnation or
Dislike, necessarily weakens and dispirits our Endeavors. Do not these things
appear in the Experience of all Ages? Could Adam himself long keep his
Innocence, when Eve had eaten the forbidden Fruit, and added to that the
Persuasion of him to do the same? Was not the Mighty Saul moved to a mortal
Envy against David, because the Women in their Songs and Applauses, had
preferred the lucky Youth before the practiced Warrior? Did not the Idolatrous
Wives so far prevail with Solomon, as to draw that wise Prince into the absurd
Sin of Idolatry? Do not Histories show us that they have been able to persuade,
even, the greatest Men to what they would? That they have by their Instigation
overturned Kingdoms, confounded Commonwealths, laid Cities desolate, and
brought to pass the greatest Revolutions and Confusions? And that on the other
side, they have sometimes been the Springs and first Movers of the Bravest
Actions? Have they not saved many Cities, and Contributed greatly many times to
the Strength and Prosperity of Commonwealths? Some of these Things may be seen
in the following Book* We may see it common in the World, that the other Sex
are often but the Tools and Slaves to their Vices; or the Instruments and
Servants of their Virtues: And indeed, that they take Delight in being so; that
it is usually their greatest Joy and Pleasure, and the most sensible part in the
Reward of their Hazards and Labors, to have pleased this Sex in what they have
done; to have promoted the Honor and Interest, or to have gained the Praise
and Favor of the Woman that is loved.

These Things are not said to Impute to them all the Vice and Folly of the
World; but to show, from the Influence which they can have in it, How necessary
and Important it is, that they be brought up in Learning and Virtue, and have
their Minds well furnished and governed by these Accomplishments. They have
contributed no more toward Vice, than toward Virtue. What harm that Sex did
to the World in Eve, they have made us a sufficient amends for in the Blessed
Virgin. What harm soever they do to the present Age, and whatever their share
may be in the Vices and Follies of it, this we may justly blame the Men for;
who take upon them to govern all Things, and condemn the Women to such an
Education, as can render them but very little useful, and leaves them apt to be
only mischievous and hurtful to the World. Certainly there cannot possibly be a
greater oversight, than to banish them to those little, trivial and useless
Employments, which usually take up their precious Time of Leisure, and a single
Life. To confine them to the Molding up of Wax, when they should be forming of
their Minds, by the Laws of Virtue and Wisdom: To learn the adjusting of their
Clothes, rather than of their Words and Actions. If these Employments keep them
out of the way of such Temptations as would corrupt them; yet what good do they
put into them? If they keep them from Vice, what Virtue do they form in their
Minds? The Truth is, they cannot hinder the growth of Vice and Folly, from the
Seeds of them that are in our corrupted Nature. These will improve and get
Strength in them, by the Exercise of their own Thoughts. Ill desires will be
stirring, if they are kept from evil Actions: And they may be corrupted by
their own untaught and ungoverned Discourses with each other.

There is no Opposition to Vice and Folly made by this Sort of Education; and
then it must needs grow if it be not checked and killed: yea it rather serves
to cherish and promote it. They are bred in a great concern and care abeut
their Bodies, and in a neglect of their Minds; they are taught to strive to
recommend themselves to the World without any real worth, and merely by the
Ornament and disposal of the Outside. What measure of Chastity are they taught,
by making the Image of a Fair Woman, with but one Garment on, and Caressing a
Black-a-moor? Their Music joined with such Songs, as have for their common
Subjects either fond Love, or obscene Intimations, or blasphemous Flatteries of
their Sex; what does it but cherish Vanity and Pride, and feed and excite
foolish and shameful Desires? And what Virtue are they taught, what useful
Knowledge are they possessed with, by this Education? What Virtue do they learn
by the Management of the Needle? How little may they understand of Fortitude,
or possess of it, for all the Forming of a Broad-shoulder'd Image in Wax, and
the setting it by a Pillar? Or what degrees of Charity does it put into them,
and what Rules of Exercising it are taught them, by their learning to make up
the Image of a Woman, with Three naked Children about her? What do they learn
of the Nature and Use of Fruits and Plants, while they learn to imitate them in
their Shape and Color? Might not the Wit that can excel in these Curious and
Useless Trifles, be taught more important Things? Why might they not learn
Physic and Surgery, as well as Cookery; to save as well as to destroy Men
pleasantly? That which is a Vice rather than an Accomplishment, as commonly
practiced; why are they not as soon taught the wholesomeness or unwholesomeness
of Meats and Drinks, as what is Pleasant and Grateful to the Palate? Why have
they not Lectures of Morality read to them in their Schools, and the Mistresses
showing them the Importance and Usefulness of the Precepts of Virtue? Why may
not they learn Languages as well as we? Whenever they set well about it, they
commonly do it better than we can. And if they were taught the Art of
Reasoning, and the Art of Speaking; if their Minds were well furnished with
Philosophy and Divinity; if they were plentifully endowed with useful Knowledge
and refined Virtue, we should not think one Language, nor hardly one Tongue
enough for them. Their chief Time for Improveing is spent without Improvement,
and all they learn in it is not any thing that they can ever be the wiser, or
the better, or the happier for. Their Education is not directed, nor designed
to teach them how Odious a Thing Vice is; how shameful and contemptible
Ignorance, and how Glorious and Lovely a Thing it is to be Virtuous. We have
reformed our Nunneries, the Schools of our Women, from Popery and Superstition,
but not from Pride and Vanity; nor have made them, as we should do, the Schools
of Virtue, and Religion, and useful Knowledge.

See here the Ground and Reason of all the Defects and Disparagements of that
Sex. Hence are we so often vexed or tainted with their Vices and Follies: This
is the fundamental Occasion of all the just Complaints that are made against
them. And most unjusty are they used, while they are bred to be of no use, and
then are despised for being so: and while there is no care taken to possess
them with Virtue, and Religion, and Learning, and then they are railed at for
Ignorance, Folly and Vice. To this Cause must all their Emptiness and
Impertinence be imputed; hence it is they are no more useful to the World. To
this also, we must impute all their Vices, the ill Influence they have among
Men, and all the Mischief they do.

Thus we may see how Important it is to the World, and how much for the
Interest of the Other Sex, that the Women be bred to useful Knowledge and
Virtue. And thus I have followed the Common Custom, in giving the Preference to
the Men, and speaking first of their Interest in this Matter.

I shall now apply my self directly to the Women themselves, and endeavor to
make it appear to them, how Important and Useful it is to themselves, to be
Learned and Virtuous. Something is said of Learning in the following Book, and
therefore I shall say the less here; and the Particular Virtues are
recommended, and therefore I shall only insist upon some General Commendations
of it.

Let me entreat you then, to consider the Pleasure and the Advantage of
Knowledge. This is, like Light, Chearing and Delightful to the Mind; and
Ignorance, like Darkness, is Uncomfortable and Sad. Knowledge enlarges the
Soul, Ignorance contracts it. The former is the Brightness and Beauty of the
Soul, and adds Luster to it, as Polishing does to a Jewel, the latter sullies,
and dims, and makes it ugly. Knowledge elevates the Mind, Ignorance depresses
it: Knowledge tends to refine it from the Dregs of Sensuality, Ignorance leaves
it polluted. Knowledge improves its Powers, increases its Liberty and Freedom,
and releases its Activity from the Shackles that Ignorance lays upon it.
Ignorance is weak and poor, Knowledge is rich and Strong. Enough cannot be said
in Praise of this inestimable Thing.

But especially, are Moral and Divine Knowledge most to be valued; these do
especially improve and adorn, and will make you acceptable to God and the
World, and easy and happy in your selves. The Rules of Pious and Virtuous
Living, are the certain Rules of Happiness. The making of us Virtuous and Good,
is the greatest Blessing, and the highest Benefit that can possibly be
conferred upon us. Those are most deplorably Ignorant of the Natures, both of
Virtue and Vice, that imagine there can be a greater Good than the One, or a
greater Evil than the Other; that we can be Happy and Vicious, or miserable and
excellently Virtuous. Virtue and Wisdom tame the Appetites, and guide them
Safely and Honorably. They Compose and Calm the Passions, and quiet the Mind.
Virtue sets the Soul in Order, which is Beautiful and Pleasant; it teaches
every Faculty and Power in us its right Place and Office, makes it know its
Bounds and do its Duty: Vice Disorders and Confounds all. Virtue is the Health,
Vice the Sickness of the Soul; and as the Health of the Body improves and
maintains its Beauty and Strength, so does Virtue for the Soul; and Vice, on
the contrary, Weakens, Deforms, and gives it Pain and Trouble. Virtue is Serene
and Calm, Vice is Stormy and Tempestuous: The Virtuous Woman may live without
Fear or Distrust, in Tranquillity and Repose. She has no cause to blush in
Company, nor to tremble when she is alone. She can enjoy the Present Time with
Quietness and Peace; has neither Shame nor Remorse for what is past; and none
but fair and joyful Hopes for what is to come. The most lasting and most
tasteful Pleasure attends it: Pleasure, that no Man can take from her; such
Delight as does not Torment with Impatience, nor make her Sick with Disgust;
that does not depend as those of the World do on innumerable Circumstances,
whereof if any one be wanting, they are Odious or Insipid. Virtue and Wisdom
are the only Things that can fit you for all Conditions, to adorn them and be
happy in them. They direct to the most Honorable and comfortable Use both of a
Good and Bad Fortune, both of a Married and a Single State.

These (believe me) are the most powerful, and the most lasting Charms. These
will gain you true Admirers and sincere Servants, while outward Beauty and
Ornament, procure only fiegned Ones: And will hold the Hearts they win faster
than the fading Advantages of an outside. Inclination may make a Man Court and
Seek you, it may be enough to be a Woman for this, especially if to that there
be added Beauty and the Invincible Charms of a good Fortune; but these cannot
beget a true and lasting love. Without Wisdom, and Virtue, and Knowledge. The
Servant is no sooner better acquainted, but it may be Folly and Vice distaste
him, and his Addresses are at an End. If Interest engage him still, then he
proceeds to make up the proposed Bargain; and there is a Marriage without Love,
which is an Hell upon Earth. Beauty without these Things, though it be Charming
at the first Sight, yet it can secure none but the lightest and most foolish
Part of Mankind; and in them it kindles no more than a brutish Desire, which
turns into Distaste very commonly, as soon as it is gratified. Their mighty
Admiration falls into Contempt; and one may see the fine and pretty thing
sitting alone, for all him, while the Passionate Lover is hugging a Bottle
perhaps and kissing the Glass instead of her, and any thing is able to draw or
detain him from her Company. Knowledge and Virtue would make you worthy of that
Love-which Nature inclines us to present you, and would make your Society
always pleasant and always desirable, and that to the best and wisest of Men.

It is no small advantage to you, that as Wisdom and Virtue are the most
charming things and will give you the greatest power you can have over the
other Sex; so they will direct you to judge rightly of Men, and to place your
Favors and Affections there where they are best deserved, where they will be
best requited, where it will be most for your Honor and Happiness to place
them. As these will enable you to know and discern which are the best and
wisest of them, so they will dispose you to value such Men most, and to prefer
them. When guided by these you will not be caught with fine Clothes or a spruce
Mien; you will not fall in love with a Man for his boasting of and commending
himself, nor for his addressing blasphemous Complements to you, you will not
judge of his worth by the former trick, nor of his love by the latter. You will
not think to be happy and be at the mercy of a fool, or expect that he will use
you well who has not one Virtue to direct or dispose him to do so. Nor will you
think that an abundance of Wealth is sufficient alone to make you happy. And
let me add, That your Constant preference of the best and wisest Men would be
one of the most powerful means to reform the Age. It would soon make Virtue and
Wisdom more generally sought after among Men, when it should appear that these
were absolutely necessary to the recommending them to your Favor and Esteem;
and this also would return to your advantage, since by this Influence upon the
World it would come to pass, that you could not want a proportionable number of
fit and worthy Objects of your Affections and Choice. To your great advantage
it would be, to stir up in the Men an Ambition to be well accomplished too; to
make them ashamed of Ignorance and Vice by your Example; and you your selves
would be the more happy in Brothers, Husbands, and Children.

And the Women of our Age have perhaps greater advantage than ever their
Ancestors had for the Improvement of their Minds; at least so far as the
Reading of Good Books can contribute toward this. When you have a great many
of the best Books in the World either wrote in your own Language or Translated
into it. Translation is a mighty Favor to you. It brings the Wisdom of the
Ancients to you unveiled, and inables you to study and learn it without the
previous discouraging fatigue of Learning Languages. We have lately seen some
of the choicest Histories and best Pieces of useful Philosophy that Greece or
Rome could boast of, Translated into English. And still this Work of
Translating goes on, and will especially do so if it has the Encouragement and
Favor of your Sex: And I would hope to see our own Language as Learned as any
other in the World. And why may we not see the costly useless Trifles that fill
the Closets of our Ladies thrown out, and Excellent and Useful Books set up
there in their stead. You have almost nothing else to do but to study all the
time that you live single, and are at liberty from Affairs of the World. To be
sure there is nothing you can do so much to your advantage as to entertain and
employ your selves much with Good Books. I need not Recommend to you Plutarch
or Hierocles, or Livy or Seneca, or the Excellent Antoninus, lately Translated,
with the Learned and Useful Reflections of Madam Dacier, a Philosopher of your
own Sex, at this time Famous for her Wit and Learning. Nor shall I mention any
more, since they may be met with at every Booksellers: And it is chiefly my
present Business to Recommend the following Book.

Here, then, you have the Characters of the Virtues and Vices very faithfully
and truly drawn. Whereby you may learn to distinguish the one from the other;
and may avoid that common and mischievous Error of mistakeing Virtue for Vice,
and Vice for Virtue. Vice is an Ugly Name, and that which almost all abhor
should be imputed to them; and Virtue is generally in the Notion commended and
esteemed, and therefore almost all pretend to Virtue in general. But when we
come to the reproof of particular Vices, and to charge them upon those that are
Guilty; and so when we come to insist upon particular Virtues and to urge the
Practice of them: Then the World boggles and hesitates; or it may be is angry
and opposes. Then the beloved Vice will not be believed to be a Vice, and it
shall be accounted ill nature or moroseness or a particular spite that calls it
so: And the Virtue that we want, and do not care to put in practice, will not
be allowed to be a Virtue, but shall be disputed against. The one will be
defended under a soft and specious name, and the other rejected under a bad
one. Thus do many Persons often deceive themselves to their disparagement and
shame and misery. While they cannot discern aright in this matter, they perhaps
shun the most Honorable Virtues, and embrace the most shameful Vices. They
will refuse what is good, and betake themselves to what is hurtful. They will
be ashamed of Virtue, and boast of their Vices. Further, as Persons are apt for
themselves to find out this way to evade the Arguments for Virtue, and the
Reproofs of Vice; so they will endeavor to influence others after the same
manner. They that are Vicious naturally desire to have others like themselves,
that their better practice may not condemn or disparage them, that others may
fall into the same inconveniences which they have brought themselves to by
their wickedness, and so may not be able to deride or despise them, or that
they may accomplish upon those who are yet afraid of Vice, some base and
shameful design. To these Purposes they endeavor much the confounding of all
things, and especially of the natural and common signs of Passions and Vices in
the Soul: These they would fain have not regarded, nor believed to be the Marks
and Symptoms of any such things. Highly necessary it is then to be possessed with
a clear and distinct knowledge of these things.

And here you have Virtue represented in her true Beauty and Luster, and the
ugly Mask the frightful Vizor which spiteful Sinners put upon her is taken off.
You may see her in all her Charms, as far as they can be represented in a
Description or Picture of her: which I confess cannot have the advantages of
the Life, in a sublime Example, but yet may be sufficient to beget in us some
Love and Admiration of the Beauty. And here you have also Vice represented in
its true Colors, and all her Deformity shown, as far as was consistent with
Modesty and Discretion: and the Paint and Disguise which the Vicious Wit of the
World puts upon her is also removed. Here are Motives to Virtue, and just
Disswasives from Vice, proposed. The Means of practicing and improving in the
one, and of abstaining from, and mortifying the other. You have the Subjects
treated on, such as are of common Use and Concern, such as relate to every one:
The Virtues such as all may reach, and the Vices such as all are exposed to.
You have all the Discourse plain and easy: Free from the crabbed terms of the
Schools. You have a Philosopher not dictating after the rudeness of an Academy,
but complementing and insinuating his wholesome Counsels in the style and manner
of a Courtier. And if that will recommend the Book, further I must tell you,
That the most of it was written by a very Eminent Person in a Neighbor Nation,
who had the Honor to be a Counselor and Preacher in Ordinary to the King
that then Reigned there.

Here you have an Excellent Anatomy as it were of the Soul, a view of the
Insides of Mankind, so that you may see the secret Motions, Workings, and
Effects of all sorts of Passions and Humors. Here you may learn the World then
without mingleing with it, which is the safest way and the pleasantest of doing
this: For thus you will not be in danger of being corrupted or vexed with the
wickedness and folly of it while you are learning it, which things in Converse
you will be constantly exposed to. This Book, like a Mariners Chart, shows the
Rocks and Shelves of Vice whereon unwary and untaught Souls are wont to make
Shipwreck of Honor, perhaps of Health, of Fortune and Estate. And it shows the
Safe and the Honorable Roads of Virtue. And is it not a very Important and
necessary thing to be taught these Matters before we launch into the World?
Without this we shall be in danger of learning the Shelves in this dangerous
Sea, by running aground there, and the Rocks, by splitting upon them. Without a
previous Admonition and Instruction about what we are to avoid and what to
choose, we shall learn the World only to imitate it, we shall learn and comply,
and endeavor to be as like it as we can; we shall be led away with the Error
of the Wicked, and follow a Multitude to do Evil. We are naturally prone to
imitate what we see done by others, and more prone to imitate Evil than Good;
and we shall commonly meet with more Ill Examples than Good ones. By
consequence we shall be in greater likelihood of learning and following Vice
than Virtue, if we are not fenced against it by Good Instruction before we
venture into the World.

Let me add, It Is of very great Importance to you to be as early as is possible
acquainted with these things; to learn betimes the Knowledge and Practice of
Virtue. For as much as Habits of Good or Ill are continually growing in us; but
especially in our young and tender Years. Our Actions in those Years are as it
were the Seeds or Foundations of future Habits: which we contract when we are
young, and are not able to leave when we are old. But if we cannot rightly
discern Good from Evil, we shall become accustomed to do Evil before we know
what it is. And if once we are arrived as this, it will be a matter of as much
difficulty to cure our selves, as it were for the Ethiopian to change his Skin,
or the Leopard his Spots. This increases the difficulty of convincing us of our
Faults. We shall be loath to own that we have been in an Error: This will engage
us to justify our Faults rather than acknowledge them, that we may let our
selves go on without shame or remorse. And besides, if we are convinced of a
Fault, after that difficulty is over, there is more remaining, and it is yet a
very large task to conquer and forsake it, when it is become as it were a second
nature. It is easy to correct and form young and tender Inclinations to Evil.
But when several Years are gone over them, and they are become confirmed
Habits, they are then not easily subdued. We must then know Virtue and Vice
betimes, and know them in their least beginnings and lowest degrees that we may
practice the one, and abstain from the other.

And it is necessary that we begin betimes to practice Virtue and to resist and
avoid Vice, that we may be inured and accustomed to do so. Then will it be
easy to be Virtuous all our Days, and we must put a Violence and Constraint
upon our selves if we would comply with the Solicitations of any Vice. Whereas
without this we shall fall into that unhappy State that it will be easy to us
only to be Vicious, and we must put a Constraint upon our selves when we are to
do that which would become us, and would be for our Interest or our Honor.
Besides it is our Wisdom and Happiness to have as little occasion for repentance
as is possible, and therefore to begin a Course of Virtue betimes. And it is our
Honor to have attained a great and eminent degree of Virtue; but the sooner we
begin to endeavor this, the more likely we are to attain it. Virtue in youth
settles a good Constitution and confirms Health in the strong Bodies, and
supports a tender and weak Constitution which Vice would quickly destroy.
Virtue in youth makes the best Provision of Worldly Enjoyments and Comfortable
Thoughts for Old Age. It defers the Infirmities of Old Age, and makes that
commonly the freer from the things that are usually grievous to it. To Young
Persons then, I would particularly recommend the Use of this Book for the
promoting of Virtue among them.

To conclude: The Women have here an excellent Mirror wherein they may see
themselves and all the World, they may discover whatever Spots or Deformities
are upon themselves or others. This is a Glass that will certainly show you
what does best become and most adorn you. Dressed by this, you must needs like
your selves, and may do so with good reason, and without flattering your
selves: and you would also approve your selves to God and the Holy Angels, and
to the best and wisest among Mankind.

I must only desire you to take notice of this further, That I do not apply the
great Character I have given of this Book to what you now see of it, but to the
whole; that which is here is at most but half worthy of it, for it is but half
the intended design. The other half is actually under Hand, and I hope will be
speedily presented to you; And then I doubt not but it will appear worthy of
your Esteem, and of my Recommendation; and Highly Useful to promote your Honor
and Happiness, the end for which it is designed.

A TABLE OF THE Subjects Treated on in this BOOK.
Chap. 1. OF Reading; with some Remarks upon that of this Book. Page 1 Chap. 2.
Of Conversation. Page 31 Chap. 3. Of the Cheerful Humor and the Melancholy.
Page 51 Chap. 4. Of Reputation. Page 70 Chap. 5. Of the Inclination to Virtue,
and of Devotion. Page 82 Chap. 6. Of Chastity and of Complaisance. Page 91
Chap. 7. Of Courage. Page 102 Chap. 8. Of Constancy. Page 112 Chap. 9. Of
Prudence and Discretion. Page 123 Chap. 10. Of the Learned Women. Page 131
Chap. 11. Of Habits or Ornaments. Page 141 Chap. 12. Of Beauty. Page 148 Chap.
13. Of Curiosity and Slander. Page 156 Chap. 14. Of the Cruel and the
Compassionate. Page 163 Chap. 15. Of a Good Grace. Page 170 Chap. 16. The
Debauched or Lewd Woman. Page 176 Chap. 17. Of Jealousy. Page 183 Chap. 18. Of
Friendship and the Love of Inclination, and that of Election. Page 196 Chap.
19. Of the Complaisant or Pleasing Humor. Page 216 Chap. 20. Of Birth or
Nature, and Education. Page 252 Chap. 21. Of an Equal Mind under Good and Bad
Fortune. Page 279
ERRATA.
PAge 8. Line 5. for least read last. p. 18. l. 6. for west r. wast. p. 20. l.
8. for Jammuz r. Tammuz. P 57. l. 28. for void r. avoid. p. 121. l. 18. for
Wickednesses r. Wickedness. p. 134. l. 15. for really r. rarely. p. 180. l. 20.
for Impudence r. Imprudence. p. 272. l. 2. for are r. are not.

Of READING; With some Remarks upon that of this Book.
THERE IS NOT any thing more true than that Reading, Conversation, and
Contemplation, are three of the most useful and most charming emploiments in
the world. By Reading we enjoy the Dead, by Conversation the Living, and by
Contemplation our Selves. Reading enriches the Memory, Conversation polishes
the Wit, and Contemplation improves the Judgment. But among these noble
Occupations of the Soul, if we would determine which is the most important; it
must be confessed that Reading furnishes both the other: And without that our
Contemplation would be of no advantage, and our Conversation without pleasure.

It is necessary to the Ladies of greatest Wit, as well as to those of the
meanest; in that it gives to the former much the greater Luster, as it mends
the Imperfections and Defects of the latter. It renders these tolerable and
makes them admirable. And to say the truth, Reading shows us many things which
our own reasoning could never discover; it adds solidity to our thoughts, and a
charming sweetness to our discourse: It finishes and compleats that which
Nature has but only begun.

Nor is it strange that we should receive so great advantage from this, since
the best Inventions in the world have owed their Original to Reading joined
with Judicious Thinking; and the one is as the Father, the other a Mother to
the sinest Thoughts. And because neither of these separately can produce any
thing of perfection, it is easy to comprehend why they who have no love for
Books can speak nothing but what is trivial, and their conversation is no
better than a persecution of their company.

That a good Wit may set off its self well enough without any thing of Study,
as they say a good Face needs no Ornaments, is what I cannot, without
dissimulation, allow. But on the contrary it must be said that as the stomachs
which have greatest heat, have need of most food to keep the body in good
plight and maintain life; so the brightest Wits have most need of reading, to
acquire thereby politeness and fullness; and especially to moderate that vigor
which cannot succeed but by chance when it is altogether alone. It is then in
this incomparable School they must learn what is excellent, to entertain the
company that is good, and to be a remedy against the bad. Here the Ladies must
receive antidotes against the persecutions of those whose discourse is all Idle
and Impertinent. It is Reading that renders Conversation most grateful, and
Solitude least tedious.

There are others nevertheless of another opinion, and such as think that it is
sufficient, for learning the best things in the world, to enjoy the
conversation of good Wits, without putting ones self to the trouble of turning
over Books. But tho I grant that the Conversation of Worthy Persons is very
necessary, and may as a living School influence us most powerfully while we see
the rule and an excellent example together: Yet it seems to me that they who
content themselves with the company of those that Know much, might become more
complete by reading their works. It is my Opinion, that if Conversation gives
readiness, Reading affords abundance; that the former distributes only what
this latter acquires, and is liberal of the riches which reading heaps
together. Moreover, since men take more pains about what they write, than what
they speak, and no man employs so much care in that which is to endure but for
a moment, as in that which is to endure for ever: It must be owned that we may
rather expect to find excellent things in the Writings of great Persons than in
their Discourse; for while they let nothing pass in their Books that is not
finished, it is not possible but many things imperfect will slip from them in
discourse and conversation.

Besides, there needs no more but an agreeable voice, or with some a great
noise, a sweet accent, or a good grace to charm those that hear: But there is
nothing to abuse or impose upon them that read. It is much more easy to
deceive the Ear than the Eye. Discourses pass on with but a superficial notice
taken of them; and hardly have we the leisure to observe their defects: But
Writings remain steadily exposed to the Censures of those that judge, and the
faults of them are never pardoned. Herein there lies, as I think, a very good
reason for the reading of good Books that the great Wits have in them left us
their best performances; and they have employed their watchings and studies,
more to the Writing than Speaking well.

However, if it be necessary for the proof of this to join Experience with
Reason, what can any desire for the Ornament of the Mind, that may not be met
with in Books? We may find there Instructions of every make, we may see Virtue
under every sort of Visage: We may there discover Truth in every representation
of it we can desire; we may see her with all her strength among the
Philosophers; with all her purity among the Historians, and with all her
beauty, postures, and sine disguises in the Orators and Poets. And from this so
agreeable variety it is possible for all sorts of humors and conditions to
find content and instruction. It is here that Truth is not disordered by
Passions; that she speaks without fear as well as without design; and dreads
not to enter the Palaces, nor even the Presence of the greatest Monarchs.

For this reason too is Reading extremely requisite to the Ladies; for since
they want Mute Instructors as well as Princes, and as well Beauty as Royalty
does not so easily find Teachers as Flatters; It is necessary that for the
apprehending their defects they should learn sometimes, from the admonitions of
the Dead, That which the Living dare not say to them. It is in Books alone that
they can remark the imperfections of their minds, as in their Mirrors they
discern those of their Faces. It is there they will find Judges that cannot be
corrupted either by their Love or Hatred. It is there that the most fair, as
well as the least so, are equally treated, having to do with Arbitrators that
use the Eyes they have, only to put a difference between Virtue and Vice.

BUT HOWEVER, since all Books are not excellent, and there are many which truly
deserve to be brought to no light but by the fire; the printing of which should
rather have been hindered than the reading them: It must be acknowledged that
there is no less difficulty in choosing good Books to employ us when we are
alone, than to choose good Wits for our entertainment in company. So that if
any find they must not rely upon themselves in this matter for the making of a
good choice, they ought at least to follow the counsel of the most knowing and
most virtuous, for fear that in reading they may happen to infect the Mind or
debauch the Conscience.

I cannot forbear in this place to reprehend the tyranny of certain Wits, who
form among themselves a kind of Cabal for the censure of all things; and think
the approbation of their Cabal must be first obtained before a thing can
deserve to be approved by others. As the value of Money derives it self from
the Ordinance of the Prince, so must the value of Books and the purity of
Language depend upon the opinion of these Imaginary Kings. It is not possible
to avoid their sharp censure if we do not submit to their Judgment; both the
Use and the Approbation are at their dispose: the credit they give is necessary
to success, and there is no glory but what they distribute. And although the
most able persons disappoint this small traffic and these ridiculous
intreagues, there are nevertheless some weaker spirits that commit themselves
to their Conduct. And by this mistake it often comes to pass that very good
Books are not relished at first while these petty Impostors decry them, and
hinder their excellency from being known. They persuade themselves that when
they have found great fault with the writings of others, we shall read none but
theirs, and that the Ladies will abide by their sentiments as an Infallible
Rule. But as at last Innocence will appear in spite of all accusations, and
Merit will shine in desiance of envy; so the reputation which is checked a while
by their malice will spread it self the more gloriously; and experience will
make it appear, that we ought not to follow the advice of those who speak not
of Books according to truth, nor even according to their own inward opinion of
them, but only according to some interest and design which they have proposed
to themselves. The Ladies ought to determine in this matter, That they must not
so much defer to the Judgments of others, as altogether to renounce their own,
and that there is no color or appearance of reason for relying entirely upon
so bad Conductors as these.

But I do not intend hereby to put upon them the trouble of reading all Books,
or that they should affect to read a great number of them: On the contrary I
esteem this as unprofitable as troublesome, and that in reading diverse Books we
should do as they who visit several Countries, where they pass on without
staying; for after they have seen and traverst a great many, they choose one at
least where they fix their abode. Why should we seek in many Books what may be
found in one alone? As if the Sun had need of the assistance of the Stars
toward the making of Day, or that glorious Luminary had not light enough of
his own to enlighten the World.

It is not a multitude that wise men choose; and one single Book, if it be very
good, may be as serviceable as a Library. I find to this purpose an admirable
Sentence in St. Jerome, who writing to Furia to persuade her to forsake all
other reading and apply her self wholly to the study of the Sacred Scriptures,
says thus, As you would sell many Jewels for the purchase of one which should
have the beauty and worth of all the other in it self; so you ought to renounce
all sorts of Books besides, and confine your self to that one wherein you may
find all that is necessary either to please or instruct you.

And indeed to read but few Books, provided they be such as are useful and
agreeable, will not diminish our advantage but resine it; we shall not be the
less rich in improvement, but shall be less perplexed and confounded. On the
other side, As they who eat incessantly, contract but a mass of ill humors; so
they that read too much are ordinarily incommoded by the confusion of their own
thoughts and discourses. And as excess of food weakens the natural heat of the
body, so an excess of reading at length dims the light and abates the vigor of
the Spirit.

It is not then, at all necessary to read a multitude of Books, but to read
only those that are good, and, above all, to avoid the desire of those with
which we cannot become acquainted without the danger of becoming vicious. It is
necessary that in this place I encounter two grand Errors; and that I attack
too much fear on the one hand, and next too much confidence in this matter on
the other: For there are some persons who scruple to read the Books of the
Heathens that yet allow themselves to use Romances. There are those that make
Conscience of abstaining from the Books of the Ancient Poets and Philosophers,
tho they be full of most excellent Precepts; and are afraid even of Virtue it
self if it comes from the Schools of Plato or Socrates.

BUT NOT TO dissemble; Their scruple proceeds from their ignorance; and they
fear, as the Holy Spirit speaks, where there is no cause of fear. For if God
himself commanded the Hebrews to borrow the goods of the Egyptians that they
might afterward be consecrated to the service of the Tabernacle, why may not
we take the good precepts that are in Heathen Authors, provided we do it with a
design to employ them to the glory of God and the instruction of our
Consciences? As the Israelites when they took along with them the Treasures of
the Egyptians, left their Idols; so when we take the Knowledge of the Heathens,
we do not also for the sake of that take their Errors and Idolatry. What danger
can there be in ravishing this Divine Wealth from Profane Possessors, to make
use of it to some better purpose? And since the Church of God has admitted the
Infidels themselves to Baptism, why may we not render their Fables also and
their Histories Christian? Especially when we find in them most excellent
examples to form our manners by, and good rules for the direction of our Lives.
If we do meet with some things there that are bad, we must do by their Books as
the Jews did by the Captive Women whom they married, whose Nails they first
pared and shaved off their Hair. I mean that in reading these Ancient Authors
we should retrench what is superfluous, and whatever contradicts our belief.
But I, all this while am in the wrong when I speak thus of the Ancients, for we
do not derive any thing from the Heathens when we take whatever is excellent
and good in their Books. This is the very wealth which they have stolen from
our Fathers; this is that sublime Philosophy of Egypt which they transported to
Athens. Whatever their Poets or their Sophisters have of good in them, they
drained our Prophets for it: This is the Learning of the Caldeans too, tho they
have given it another form, and veiled it under certain Riddles, that they
might the better conceal their Theft.

So then we steal not from the Heathens what we take from them, but only
recover what is our own. And so far is it from a fault to do this, that on the
contrary, It is no less meritorious to draw these excellent instructions from
their Books, than to deliver Innocent Captives from the hands of Infidels. But
now as for the reading of Romances, we must needs speak of that after a very
different manner; for there is nothing in them that is not extremely bad and
extremely dangerous, and That mingled with what is agreeable and pleasing; but
in the other there is excellent morality alloy'd with somewhat superfluous.
There is indeed some appearance of Ill in the Writings of the Ancients, and
there is nothing but an empty appearance of good in the Romances which are
read, insomuch that if we take away the Mask, and pierce the Shell of the one
and the other, we shall find nothing but Vice in these last mentioned, and
nothing but Virtue in the other. We ought not to abandon the Ancients for so
little evil as is in them, nor espouse the Romances for so little good as is in
them: It is sufficient to retrench and pare the one sort, but the other are to
be entirely thrown away.

IT MAY BE this my Opinion of them may be displeasing to some, to whom a Lie
appears more beautiful than Truth; and who can take no delight, but in that
which is unprofitable, and think the time cannot be well passed away unless it
be lost. Why (say they) is the Reading of Romances forbidden, when the Use of
the Poets is allowed? And what pretense can there be to believe that Fictions
are more dangerous in Prose than in Verse? What necessity is there, that for
trivial Considerations we should deprive our selves of the sweetest Pleasures
of Life? And what greater contentment can a man contrive for himself, than to
read in Romances so many different successes, where we find our Passions still
in motion according to the Adventures that are presented? Yea, and tho we know
very well that the Objects which affect us, never had a being in the world and
never will, yet we suffer our selves very often to entertain a true compassion
for feigned miseries, and dissolve into tears for imaginary Shepherds. They add
further, we ought not to throw away any Books because there is something of Ill
in them; as it is not reasonable to resolve never to go to Sea because there
are Shelves and Sands there, or because the art of Navigation is not infallibly
successful, as appears in that there are some that yearly suffer Shipwreck
either by misfortune or by ignorance. It is not at all just to abandon that
which is good, because it is sometimes mingled with bad. Prudence teaches to
separate the Vice from the Virtue, rather than to shun both together; otherwise
we must pluck out our Eyes that we may not abuse our looks, and never venture
to stir lest we should happen to fall.

Besides, why is it forbidden to Romances to present us with Lives of them that
never were, any more than to Painters to draw Imaginary persons, or to paint
according to their own fancy a piece of Grotesque? Why may not the one sort be
permitted to divert the mind, by their Writings, as well as the other to
refresh the Eye with their Pictures? Why is the Pen in this case to be
accounted, more culpable than the Pencil, and may we not describe in words what
we may by Pictures?

AND TO SAY truth, that we may answer to this Apology for Romances, I do not at
all doubt that if any one of them could be found that were entirely honest, it
were not Injustice to defend the reading of it. And provided one could find in
them any good divertisement without danger of corrupting the mind, there would
be no cause to complain of them, any more than of those recreations that
innocently pass the time, and refresh us after the fatigue of Study or
Business. But when I think of the very ill things which the most of Romances
are filled with, when I consider how many minds are debauched with these
poisonous Books, I should account my self very guilty if I did not show the
snares to those who apprehend no danger, and declare open war with these
corrupters of innocence.

And in truth, to examine this matter thoroughly, what satisfaction can any seek
in Romances which may not be found in History? May we not see there the
sucesses, the adventures, and the Events that are sufficiently pleasant or
sufficiently tragic, as well of Love as Fortune, to move, or instruct, or
divert? Can there be any thing more pleasant than to see the Birth, and the
ruin of Empires and Monarchies, and to know in a little time that which was
several long Ages in passing? Is not this a very commendable way to shorten the
time when it seems too long, and even to bring back again that which was past?
When we find there refreshment against weariness and remembrance to prevent
oblivion. What can be said to prove that we cannot divert without corrupting
our selves, or that the mind cannot be pleased unless we bring the conscience
in danger?

But if I grant that sometimes there are good Instructions to be found in
Romances: Yet what engagement are we under to conform our course of life to an
imaginary Representation; or how shall we bring our selves to imitate examples
which we know to be false? Do we miss of excellent Patterns in History, or do
we need Painted and feigned Stars to serve us in the stead of those that adorn
the Sky? This is a very great Error: And if Bees are not able to gather Honey
from Flowers in a Picture, as little is it possible to us to receive advantage
from a History which we know was invented to please.

I may grant too that there is some pleasure in the reading of Romances: But is
there not often an agreeable relish in the food that is poisoned? We must
abandon that which pleases, to avoid that which would hurt, and renounce a
great pleasure to avoid a little danger. Otherwise, to propose to our selves
the separating what seems to be good in Romances from what is truly evil there;
or to take pleasure in the relations without being defiled with the uncleanness
which they convey under a disguise, and which throws out a thousand Hooks with
the pleasant Lines to catch the fancy of the Reader; this were to throw ones
self into a conflagration that we might rescue something from the flames that
is of little worth or importance: It were to propose to our selves the
separating of Wine from the Poison, as we drink, after we had mingled them
together. And indeed since we may find divertisement joined with instruction in
a History, why should we separate the profitable from the pleasant which we may
enjoy together? To entertain the mind as well as to preserve the body there is
no need that we separate the pleasure of the Palate from the usefulness of the
Food; since reading as well as eating ought to strengthen at the same time that
it pleases.

It is not only superfluous and needless to read these Books, but extremely
dangerous too: And how much pains soever we take to defend our selves from
infection, yet we take it. The mischief enters insensibly into our Soul with
the pleasing words, and under the charms of those adventures that affect us.
Whatever Wit a person has, however innocent he is, yet as our bodies do without
our consent partake of the quality of the things we eat; so our minds espouse,
even in spite of us, the Spirit of the Books we read: Our humor is altered
while we think not of it; we laugh with them that laugh, we are debauched with
the Libertine, and we rave with the Melancholic. To that degree are we
influenced as to find our selves altogether changed with our reading of some
Books: we entertain other Passions and Steer another course of life.

The reason of this is not difficult to be found out: for as teeming Mothers
cannot look intently upon some Pictures without giveing their Infants some
marks of what they observe, why should we not easily believe that the
Lascivious stories in Romances may have the same effect upon our Imagination,
and so leave some Spots upon the mind? I grant indeed that we know what we read
to be mere fiction; yet it fails not for all that to give real motions while we
read it; the inclination that we have to evil is so strong that it improves by
examples of evil, tho we know them to be false ones. As the Jvy mounts and
supports its self by the hollow and dry Tree as well as by the sound and green
one: so our natural corruption and irregular Appetites carry us so strongly to
what is forbidden, that even a false and feigned History is sufficient to
encourage and animate us to the most wicked undertakings. As the Birds were
invited to peck at the Painted Grapes of Xeuxis, so our Passions take fire at
the Amors that are described in Romances.

The reading of so many wanton things in those Books heats a Person by little
and little, and insensibly destroys that reluctance and horror that should
always possess us against all that is evil. We grow so familiar with the Image
of Vice, that we fear not when we meet with the thing it self. And after a Man
has lost the modesty of his mind, he must be in a great deal of danger to lose
also that which his modesty alone could have preserved. As the Water infallibly
runs west when the Banks that restrained it are broken down, so our affections
escape with all manner of liberty after that this honest fear which should
govern them, is removed. This licentiousness indeed is not always formed in a
moment, nor do we become vicious all at once by this reading. The contagion of
these Books gains upon the heart almost by insensible degrees, it works in the
mind as Seed does in the Earth, first it spurts, then it shoots out, and grows
every day stronger and stronger, that it may bring forth at last the pernicious
Fruit of wickedness.

But this is not yet all the evil that attends the reading of Romances. But
after it has rendered us bold enough, and given courage to do ill, in the next
place it renders us ingenious and cunning: we derive from thence subtilty with
confidence, and do not only learn the evil we should be ignorant of, but also
the most delicate and charming ways of committing it. And to speak with reason
how can it be imagined possible to read some Paragraphs in those Books without
a great deal of danger? When we often see there, this Woman quitting her
Country and her Parents to run after a stranger, whom she fell in love with in
a moment: Or read how the other found ways to receive Letters from her
Gallants; or to give them their guilty assignations. These are nothing but
Lessons of Artifice and skill, to teach persons how they may sin with subtilty.
And for my part I am not able to apprehend with what appearance of reason any
can justify so dangerous a Reading.

On the contrary, the Lacedaemonians forbad the hearing of Comedies, because
they present sometimes Murders, sometimes Thefts or Adulteries; and because in
a well regulated Commonwealth nothing ought to be suffered that is contrary to
the Law, not even in fictions or plays. Why then are these Romances permitted,
where we read almost nothing but actions that are dishonest, examples that are
lascivious, and passions that are extravagant? Shall we dare to read those
things in Books which the Heathens forbid to be represented on Theaters? Shall
it be said that Christians have less love for Virtue than Infidels? And if they
were afraid lest the People should be debaucht by such sights, have not we
reason to fear that weak minds may be corrupted by so filthy reading?

Nevertheless some may accuse me of too much severity, who will be vexed to see
me ravishing from them their beloved Idols, in taking away their Romances: who
will be grieved no less for their losing of these bad Books than the Women of
whom the Holy Scripture speaks that were weeping for the loss of Jammuz. A
falsehood shall often have more of the Vogue than truth: and they will more
willingly read those Books that corrupt the manners than those that regulate
them; and there are many Ladies that learn to tell without Book the Stories of
Amedis, while they neglect those of the Holy Writ. Lastly, they take much less
pleasure in the best Sermon, than in a sorry Comedy; and go oftener to hear a
Buffoon than a Preacher. Straton complained very justly that he had fewer
Scholars than Menedemus; because there are many more to be found who seek the
School of Pleasure than there are that follow that of Virtue; and we love
rather those who flatter us and make us laugh, than those that make us sad, and
menace us tho for our advantage.

AND THAT I may conceal nothing that is to the purpose, It is extremely unhappy
to mankind, that it is enough to raise a curiosity for the Reading of any Book,
to know that it is forbidden, as we observe by daily experience. I think the
same Evil Spirit who deceived the first of Women possessing her to her
destruction with the pleasures of the Tree of knowledge, does still inspire
others after the same manner, promising their eyes shall be opened, and they
shall see admirable things in what is forbidden them, and making them believe
it is out of envy alone that such reading is forbidden them. This error
corrupts a great number of those who are persuaded by their Flatterers, that as
weak persons are always in danger even in the midst of things that are good; So
the most able Spirits are never in danger, no not among a multitude of things
that are bad: and therefore all reading is to be forbidden to the one sort, and
all is to be permitted to the other. But for my part I must needs think the
contrary, and declare that whatever measure of Wit any can have, they are not
withstanding always obliged to flee from danger. And I doubt there are very few
that have the strong constitution of Mithridates, to nourish themselves with
Poison, and live upon that which is mortal to all others. I approve no more of
the Poets, than Romances, when there is any thing of ill in them: In what ever
Period or Page I find any thing of Vice, it is my intention to make War with
that. And let the World think of this matter what they will, I will eternally
condemn these ill Books, which serve but as a School to teach persons to sin
with address, and which one may very justly call the Politics of the Vicious,
and of the Libertines. I declare my self an enemy to all that which is an enemy
to Virtue. And, to speak in a few words what I think of the Reading of good or
bad Books; It is very necessary that they who are not able to make a
difference, should follow the counsel of the most intelligent. And they who are
the most capable to discern aright, in this matter, should yet not suffer
themselves to be carried away with a curiosity to search into what is
forbidden, which seems to be a humor even natural to the most. It is without
all doubt that reading is both pleasant and useful; and if care be taken to
read such Books as are truly good, it will instruct the ignorant, reform the
debauched, and divert those that are Melancholy. It affords remedies to them
that are greatly afflicted, against the greater evil of Despair; and to the
happy and prosperous it administers antidotes against Insolence. It exhibits
examples fit to humble the one sort, and to encourage the other. It makes our
discourses the better when we entertain, and our thoughts when we are alone.
Without that it is impossible both to meditate or to speak well. But this
subject is too copious; and if I should pursue it as I might, instead of
putting an end to this discourse of it, I might begin and exhaust another.
There is then no doubt to be made but the reading of honest Books is a most
agreeable employment: But we should always remember, that it is not enough that
this be useful to the Understanding, unless it be so moreover to the
Conscience. As Virtue is of much more worth than Knowledge; the Ladies ought to
think, that it is of more avail to them to be good, than learned. And I fear not
to say, that if they have a true Modesty they would blush no less at the
reading of an ill Book, than if they were surprised alone, and shut up with a
debauched Man.

THUS MUCH I thought fit to say concerning the reading of other Books: But to
make now, as I promised, some remarks upon the reading of this of mine, I
believe it will be very useful to the Ladies after that I have shown them why I
make so much use of Fables, why I make a great part of the Subjects I treat of
to appear with two Faces; why I have not produced such general Instructions, as
would have served for the Men as well as the Women; and why I have not
descended to instructions so particular as the Vulgar could wish for, that they
might be touched the more sensibly. These are the four principal parts of this
Book of which, it seems to me I ought to give an account, for the rendering it
the more profitable to those who will take the Pains to read it.

AS FOR FABLES if I bring in some examples of them, I do this but to explain my
self with the greater clearness; I do it not to support my Arguments, but to
embelish them; it is not to render Truth more strong, but only to make it more
agreeable. All the World know that the examples of Fables divert us more than
those of History, because: they are contri'vd to please. The Historians recount
successes, Poets invent them. So that when I serve my self of these only to
recreate and not to convince, I have contented my self often to choose the most
diverting rather than the most probable. Besides; No one ought to think it
strange if I have endeavored to render the Metamorphosis profitable, since it
ought to be accommodated to the gust of those that are to be persuaded; and
there are many that love Fables, and that read them. If we cannot utterly
destroy Serpents out of the World, at least we have reason to make remedies of
their Poison; and if the reading of fictions be dangerous, we endeavor to draw
some profit from it, and to find good in that evil which we cannot hinder. Let
it be considered that the Ancients have concealed in a manner, all their
Morality and all their Divinity under Fables; and tho they could have served
themselves of Examples that were true, as well as of false; yet they sometimes
chose the latter, to make their instructions the more sensible.

AND AS I make use of Fables sometimes to render my thoughts the more clear,
and the more agreeable, it is for the same reason too that I treat of many
Subjects in the way of Problems. It is that the variety may gratify, and that
I may yield delight at the same time that I give instruction. I have
constrained my self to endeavor that I might Please while I Teach. I believe
that the Mind as well as the Eye is recreated with variety, and that men take
delight to see both what is evil and what is good in all things. And moreover,
since the best instructions ought to show at the same time both what we ought
to avoid and what to do; I have thought, that to succeed in both these things,
it would be good to make appear on every Subject what it is that is worthy of
our Love, and what will deserve our Hatred. And cannot every one see that there
is nothing, but the matters of Faith, which we may not view under diverse
aspects? If the Melancholy Humor has something that is Good, is it not also
true, that there is in it something Evil? If it be wise for deliberation, yet
it is not sufficiently strong to enterprise: It is a Paralytick that has good
Eyes, but the Hands are feeble, and it cannot move of it self. And may not as
much be said of the Gay Humor; which on the one side appears fit to entertain,
but on the other hand is found too much a Pratler to contain secrets, and too
light for designs of Importance. I might here repeat several passages of my
Book to demonstrates that if I have made use of Problems, it is because all
moral actions are full of circumstances, which give occasion to consider the
same thing under several visages, and make it now appear good, and anon to
appear evil. Tho I have always concluded, that virtue ought to be loved, I have
yet sometimes shown, that it has two Extremes, of which men ought to be aware:
Lest they run into the danger of being Prodigal instead of practicing
Liberality, or of becoming opinionative, while they aim at constancy, or fall
into impudence while they seek to be pleasant. This is that, I believe, which
deceives the Vulgar Readers, that while I present the excess and the defect, it
seems to them as if I did praise and did condemn the same thing. Who are to
understand that I am willing to show what it is that abuses us, and to discover
in every subject that which is worthy of our choice and of our aversion. If I
attack the Crafty and Deceitful, and after that condemn the Imprudent; If I
blame them that give too much, and then do not approve those that give too
little; it is without doubt that some gross wits may imagine that I mingle my
condemnations and praises; instead of acknowledging that this is the true way
of putting a difference between Good and Evil, to do it agreeably. That this is
not to confound but to separate; and these are not superfluous Problems, but
reasonable Distinctions.

LET ME SPEAK NOW to those who say that this Book might have been made
serviceable to the Men as well as to the Women; and that I have not descended
to circumstances sufficiently particular for the subjects that I treat of. I
own that a great part of my instructions, which are good for the one Sex, may
be also useful to the other: But what is it that they could wish I had found
out in particular for the Ladies, when they were to be taught the hatred of
Vice and the pursuit of Virtue? Is there another and a particular Morality for
them? Is there for them a distinct Christianity? Must we for them invent a new
Religion or a particular Philosophy? Do not the Preachers speak at the same
time concerning Virtues and Vices both to the one and the other Sex? Let these
persons consider what it is they desire; since we have together the same Law,
the Instructions may be common, provided the Examples be Particular. And this
is that which I have constrained my self to do through the whole, as far as the
matter would permit, and as seemed to me decorous; that I might not engage my
self too far in some certain matters, wherein I should have rendered my self
more Ridiculous than Useful.

IT IS TIME NOW to satisfy those who say that I disguise my Precepts under
Praises, and that I ought to have descended to circumstances more particular. I
wonder how they come to believe that the Ladies have need of Lessons so course,
and a conduct so sensible. They are only the Blind that we lead by the Hand, it
is enough to carry a Torch before those that have a good Sight. This is to do
wrong to their good Wit or their good Nature. They must have less understanding
to know what is good, or less inclination to practice it, to need this
treatment. I am assured that they who are of the contrary opinion are some
petty Regents in a Country Village, who would exercise a tyranny there where
they ought rather to submit themselves. They should consider, I speak not here
as a Master, but as a Counselor: That I do not make Ordinances or Laws, but
only, as I ought, I content my self to give advice. It is enough to me to
praise good things, and to blame the bad, to say that they ought to shun the
one and love the other. I should be ashamed to turn Legislator as some do, who
in like matters talk thus, I will, I mean, It must be, I approve, I condemn. If
the manner of their writing be observed, one shall see that it has no whit more
of force, but has less of respect. Their Style is not more strong, but more
uncivil. After all, I conceive that, there is no better secret can be observed
in Writing, than to render ones self the more agreeable, that one may be the
more useful. There is a way to instruct without disobliging; and, I believe,
they will not blame that Physician who had found an art to give good Medecines
without disgust and bitterness. We may speak of the manner of Teaching, after
that of Healing; and it must be believed that there is nothing done amiss, if
both the one and the other be done agreeably. Provided we can succeed on this
occasion, I judge it much better to use persuasions than Precepts. There is a
great deal of difference between the Laws of an Emperor and those of a
Philosopher: Casar and Seneca are not obeyed alike. The Commands of the one are
supported by Power, those of the other by the Address. But suppose I had all
this Power, what pretense can there be for my abusing it, so as to render my
self troublesome, and to treat with rudeness a Sex to which we cannot speak with
too great civility? And when it is said that I might give them Instructions more
particular toward the rendering themselves excellent, without violating the
respect that is their due; I answer, that this had not only been superfluous,
but indeed it is altogether impossible. If I would descend to Instructions very
particular, instead of one Book, I should have been constrained to compose many
Volumes. What? When I have said that an Excellent Woman ought not to be
Ignorant of what is becoming to her Age and her Condition; Must I needs then
come to show the way of playing on the Lute, or how she must Dance, or dress
her Head, or make her Courtesy? Must I do the Office of a Musick-master instead
of that of a Philosopher? I grant that these petty accomplishments are not to
be neglected; but they are no more than the Nails or the Hair of an Excellent
Woman: It is in Morality alone that these qualities are to be found which are
requisite to form such a person as I recommend. I endeavor above all things to
regulate the Mind and the Conscience. These are in my opinion the two parts the
most considerable in the person that ought to be esteemed Excellent. This is,
moreover, that which I have labored in, and I have not treated of any other
conditions of the Sex, either because it had been impertinent to my design, or
because they are of so easy attainment, as there is no need to lose time in
prescribing Rules for them. Thus I think I have said what I ought to these
things for the satisfaction of those that would not take the pains to read
Prefaces.

I CANNOT be advised to comply with those who say that there are many
Comparisons in my Book, and but few Connexions. I shall content my self to send
them to the reading of Plutarch or Seneca, to learn after what manner the
greatest persons have treated of Morals. And above all, if there are here any
thoughts that can please them, tho they have not so much of connection as they
could wish for, I entreat them not to cast them away for want of that; and to
consider that Pearls may be very precious, tho they are not strung.

Of Conversation.
AS THERE IS nothing more important to the Ladies, than to know how to choose
good Wits to converse with, and good Books to read; so there is nothing more
difficult than this: Because there are so many things evil which resemble the
good, that without a great judgment, or extraordinary good fortune they can
rarely make a good Election in these cases. It must needs be acknowledged a
thing too difficult to pass the time innocently and pleasantly too either in
company or retirement.

Indeed, if we were still in the times of the primitive simplicity, where it
were enough to succeed if we were only not dumb, and where, as yet, no other
fault in Society entered but that of falsehood: I own that an ingenuous plainness
alone would be sufficient for them, and that Prudence would be a thing
superfluous. But sinee we are fallen into an Age full of Artifice, wherein
words which were invented to express our thoughts, seem now to be applied only
to the concealing them with a good grace, it must be confessed that Innocence it
self has need of a Mask or Veil as well as their Faces, and it is no less
imprudent to lay open ones Heart to those that are always upon the guard, than
it were to march altogether naked among Enemies that are armed, whom we could
neither offend, nor defend our selves from them.

If it were enough to take and give delight and pleasure in entertaining, and
there were no better end of it than to pass away the time; there were not so
much difficulty to perform it commendably, for this alone would be sufficient
for that purpose; Not to be born Melancholy. But since the principal aim of
Conversation, with the world, is to make ones self pass for a good Wit and a
very judicious Person: It is for this reason that something else is necessary
to them besides a good humor, and they ought at least to have as much of
Address as of Virtue. It is very difficult to render ones self complete in this
matter, and the Wisest persons have confessed, that there is not yet a School to
be found where we may learn to manage well according to occasions, our
discourse and our silence.

How many perfections are necessary to render one's self agreeable in
conversation? How many qualities are requisite to be able to please many? Since
even the most Excellent persons have diverse inclinations, and Good sentiments
are also different among themselves, as well as the good and the bad are
contrary to each other. If plainness causes contempt in some; subtilty again
will raise suspicion in others. If any deride those that are frank, others will
mistrust those that are not so. This Lady wants a good Grace, the other wants
to have Read more: One Sense is persecuted, while the other is contented; and
you shall not dare sometimes to open your Eyes and your Ears together unless
you will venture to be incommoded.

When Xeuxis would draw a perfect Face, he proposed for his Pattern five of the
best Faces in Italy, that he might take from each the Charms and the Features
that he judged most powerful. And to draw a Character of the Lady that should
be able to please in all Conversation, there would need no fewer of charming
qualities and rare conditions: Yea, It would not be too much for this purpose
to have all that Nature can give, and Morality can teach. It is in this subject
that we have need of all the most beautiful Ornaments of the Civil Life. And
none ought to think it strange, if I speak here of those other excellent
qualities that I recommend in the rest of this Book; for they all terminate in
Conversation as in a Center; and it is not easy to touch this Point without
touching at the same time upon the Lines that meet in it.

TO SAY THEN that which, at present, seems to me most necessary, I will content
my self to wish the Ladies those three advantages which Socrates was wont to
desire in his Disciples; they were Discretion, Silence, and Modesty. These are
so amiable qualities, and so necessary to their conversation, that to judge of
their importance we need only represent the absurd Vices which are contrary to
them; as Tatling, Imprudence, and Impudence, the first of these defects brings
with it usually the two latter. And it frequently comes to pass they who
delight to talk much and give themselves leave to do so, They have not enough
either of Prudence or Modesty. It must not be thought however that I have a
design to take away the use of speech instead of regulating it. It would not be
at all handsome to attempt to compose a conversation of Persons that are dumb.
But to make a strenuous opposition to a Vice that is the most troublesome and
dangerous in company, I only beseech those Ladies, that cannot find themselves
disposed to talk but sparingly, that they would consider: That if there be a
time to say, something, and a time to say quite nothing there is never a time
to say all. That they who talk much are not only in danger often of saying that
which is false, but also of saying some things that are true, but unfit to be
said; and so they would offend either Prudence or Truth, and many times both of
these together: That they who talk so much with others, do in a manner never
discourse themselves; that they see not their Thought till it has escaped them:
That they apprehend too late in their repentance, that which they ought rather
to have apprehended by foresight; and that regret and shame always follow very
soon after that discourse which Prudence did not go before. Lastly, that the
greatest part of their Sex need less pains to speak well than to speak but a
little: and that Discretion is more difficult to them, and more necessary too
than Eloquence.

It seems then to me that the Great Numa showed not less Judgment than
Religion, when he erected an Altar to a tenth Muse, whom he styled Tacita: To
show, that when all the Sciences together have their habitation in any one
person, They are all unprofitable there without silence, and that it is in vain
that any one has learnt the Art of speaking, unless he has also the Faculty of
holding his Tongue. And in truth as it is much more easy to be an Orator than
to be Wise, so Morality has much more difficulty to teach the Rules of keeping
silence, than Rhetoric has to infuse those of Discoursing. Although what we
know, were, without this, unuseful, and even without ornament; Yet we may also
most justly place Silence among the most necessary Arts, and may say with that
Wise King of the Romans, that the Nine Muses have not their Luster entire
without the addition of this for a tenth.

Silence gives, I know not how, a charming Grace even to discourse, as the
Shadows do to the Colors in a Picture; and there is nothing more true than
that Intervals well chosen in a discourse, do like the Pauses in Music, set
off and show more evidently, whatever is truly fine and agreeable. When we
speak none but the best things, yet even then is not Silence entirely
superfluous. It relieves those that speak, or those that hear. It serves to
prevent both sterility and tediousness, that the Speaker may not be too much
exhausted nor the Hearer tired.

There are some however that think every one that puts in a word does them
wrong, and takes something from them in conversation. But those that speak so
much in Conversation themselves, do not deserve to be heard, because they
require a civility that they will not pay. As they are incapable to speak what
is fine themselves, so they are to understand it when spoken by others. And it
must be beliv'd they would not speak so many ill things if they would give
themselves more leisure to hear those that are good.

And however there are too many to be sound who affect and are proud of this
impertinent Tattle, who think it a sign and proof of much Wit to speak much,
and a disgrace to listen with silence to the discourses of others: Yet I fear
not to say to them a truth which may be very useful, tho it be not very
pleasant. Those of this Humor are incapable of any trust, they can keep
nothing secret of their designs or business. That which is only in the thoughts
of the Wise, is in the Mouth of the Imprudent. And no otherwise than as they
say of the Dead Sea, that nothing there will go to the bottom, and whatever is
cast upon it, instead of sinking down, floats at the top of the Water. It is
just after the same manner with some tatling humors, they can keep nothing to
themselves; instead of concealing wisely what is important, they make all
appear both in their looks and discourses.

See here the unhappiness of those that talk much in an entertainment: Let them
consider as much as they can their discourse, it is next to impossible but that
in saying a great many things some of them will be such as ought not to be
said. As it is difficult in removing the hand often, not to lay it sometimes
upon the part that is ill; so it is as difficult in speaking much, to avoid
touching sometimes upon our most secret and important designs. And if
unthinkingly we many times lay our hand upon a place that is in pain, we as
unthinkingly let our Tongue run into the predominant Passion of the Mind.

I know well enough there are those who promise themselves, they will never
discover their Secrets, tho they do give themselves leave to talk much in
Company: Imagining it is enough for the avoiding this to put themselves upon
general matters, and to propose the speaking of things indifferent. But there
is no manner of safety in this sort of Conduct; for tho they think themselves
speaking only of Common things, they that have any measure of Wit above a very
low degree, will easily remark some traces or shadows of their thought. The
secret meaning appears through this Veil. And as we see the Needle touched with
a Loadstone, tho far distant from the Pole, yet turning that way, and pointing
toward when it does not touch it; so our Speech has always I know not what of
our Thought, and will show it in the most distant Harangue, and among the
matters that are the most Universal.

Let us set our selves as much as we will to dissemble and feign; after we have
fluttered a while about the secret of our Hearts like a Fly about the Candle,
yet at last we shall there burn our Wings. We lose our selves, like them, there
where we trifle and play. I am extremely in love with this Comparison, because
those Women that are so much addicted to talk, do mightily resemble those
little Creatures, who are made up altogether of Wings, who have no solidity of
Body, who have nothing but Color to derive to their young ones, and discover
their weakness even by their lightness.

But if the Arguments I make use of do seem to be weak, I will give them a most
excellent Example, which perhaps will have more effect than all the Precepts of
Morality. For let them cast their Eyes but a little on her that ought to be the
Rule as she is the Ornament of their Sex, they will perceive that the Holy
Scripture does not mention her speaking more than four or five times in her
whole life. It may be this will seem to them very difficult; and I believe it
were a miracle in some, if they could only hold their peace with discretion so
many times as the Blessed Virgin is said to have spoke, and if they did abuse
their speech but as seldom as she made use of hers. They are alas, too far from
arriving at this perfection: Instead of an imitation of it, in not speaking but
out of Charity or Modesty as she did, they hardly ever speak but to say
something ill of others, or to boast something good of themselves. Their
Discourse is all made up of Condemnations or Praises that are both unjust: It
is nothing else but Vanity or Evil speaking.

There is no doubt then to be made but that many must be at great pains with
themselves, to restrain, as they ought, the Liberty of their Tongue. From
whence it is very hard for them to succeed well in entertaining; and the
indiscretion of their discourse does very often expose them to the railery or
hatred of the Public. It is also the unhappiness of those who have not
prudence enough to examine their own speeches, that they are yet less able to
consider well what they hear said by others. Their liberty is blind, and utters
upon all manner of occasions, and in all companies. Yet I do not design to say
in this matter, that there are not certain rencounters wherein they may speak
with more freedom than in many others.

BUT IT OUGHT to be very well observed to whom we discover our sentiments, when
there is danger in having them published. And it would be to us an occasion for
a most bitter repentance, to find that in the mouths of all the World, which
ought never to have fled from our own. It seems to me therefore that the remedy
for this mischief, that you may not be continually subject to the alarms of
other peoples obloquy, nor yet forced to live always under a violent
constraint, is this; to choose well those whose company you intend mostly to
frequent, and not to make acquaintance indifferently with all sorts of persons.
And to speak my thoughts concerning the Election that ought to be made of the
Wits or Humors capable of your Conversation: I find there are two sorts of
persons whom you ought absolutely to fly; they are the Vicious and the
Ignorant. Because the Conscience is not safe with the former, nor the Mind
contented with the Latter. The entertainment of those who want Religion or
Knowledge, ought to be entirely suspected: and we have reason to judge that it
must have some grand design, to excuse two so great defects as Impiety and
Ignorance.

This Evil Choice offends the Virtues either Moral or Christian. For is it not
true that in communicating as freely with the meanest Spirits as with the most
excellent, we oblige neither the one nor the other; because the latter are
offended at this, and the former will deride and abuse it? This is imprudently
to afford matter either to Hatred or Railery; you will in this way obtain the
approbation of no body, while you think to merit that of every one. And in
truth, I never see those Women which have a humor so universal, as to gratify
with the same aspect, indifferently, all the World, but it puts me in mind of
that Ridiculous Image of the Romans which they called Citeria, which was
carried about to Feasts to pass away the time and make the Company laugh. We
may see in such persons, as in this Pleasant Statue, the Looks, the Smiles, the
Reverences, the Affectations that are altogether ridiculous.

But this that has been mentioned, is not the greatest of their Infelicities;
their ill choice carries them insensibly into the extremest dangers. One may
see in them, that it was not without great reason said by the Philosophers,
that Prudence is a piece the most necessary for a pattern to humane actions.
When they are without conduct, they are also very often without Virtue; They
become many times evil, tho they have not a design to be so, and even without
thinking of it, when their complaisance is so unhappy as to engage them in the
company of those that are debauched. After this, Vice slides in by little and
little into the Soul, so that they perceive not the remedy 'till it is mortal
and uncurable.

This is the most important part of the present Discourse: For since a
diversity of humors cannot long subsist in Conversation, you must needs at
length either imitate the Vicious or hate them; you must be like them, or be
their Enemy; you must (do what you can) in communicating with them, either
espouse their Wickedness, or defend your self against it. But tho one were
assured of the Victory in this case, yet what need is there to give ones self
the trouble of the Combat, since there is always much less danger and
inconvenience, in the shuning of Temptations than in resisting them?

Whatever can be said, we cannot dwell amidst Wickedness and Vice, but we must
needs be infected. Example has a great deal of power, even upon the strongest
minds. Alcibiades made profession of Virtue, while he kept company with
Socrates; but he gave up himself to Voluptuousness when he was amongst his
Lovers. The Soul defiles it self insensibly while we converse with the Vicious,
as the Face tanns, without our perceiving it when we travel in the hot Weather.
It is our unhappiness that we are more apt to receive evil than Good, that
sickness conveys its self more easily than health; that the Conversation of
Wicked Persons has more power to corrupt the Good, than that of the Virtuous to
correct the Debauched.

It may be I may seem too severe, if I should propose to them for a Rule to
their Converse, the Example of Mary the Egyptian, who would not hold
communication with an Hermit that was a most virtuous Man, but when they had a
River between them. I doubt not but those that are good may be seen much nearer
than that, and without danger. But as for those that are Vicious and
Licentious, you should keep as far from them as you can: Their hatred will do
you less harm than their Conversation; and these are Enemies that will do you
more mischief by Peace with them than by War.

And in truth the Unhappiness of the first Woman ought to make all other the
more fearful, for they may see in her fall the common cause of their own. What
advantage can they have in talking too privately with the Serpent? In being
bold in the Company of Devils as Eve was, instead of being ashamed in the
company even of Angels, as was the Blessed Virgin? And to suffer the
Conversation of Licentious Wits which are full of the Old Serpents Fatal
Poison, and have none but ill designs against their Innocence.

LASTLY, THE second sort of persons, whose company they ought to shun, are the
Ignorant and Stupid; because the Conversation of such is shameful, unpleasant,
and unprofitable; and that of good Wits and Understanding Persons is
honorable, pleasant, and fruitful. Indeed we daily experience sufficiently,
that the persons which have had no improvement from Study and Reading, have
always something that is rude in them; and if they produce any thing, it is as
those wild Trees that are never grafted nor dressed, and which bear no Fruit but
what is Insipid, or Harsh and Sower. And, to reflect a little upon another
Error that deserves a public complaint: Is it not a strange thing to see that
the Sciences, and especially the Art of Reasoning are not to be found but in
Colleges? And that we dare not degrade Philosophy so as to make it the subject
of Conversation? As if it were impossible or unjust to strip it of perplexity,
that it may be made speak with a better grace. As if it were a matter of
Conscience to turn it into a Vulgar Language; or as if we ought to be
reasonable but in Latin only; or as if the rarest Secrets, or the brightest
things in Nature might not be expressed in our Mother Tongue.

This can no one believe without being in an Error: We have Terms in our own
Language that are fit to express whatever is of greatest force, or is most
subtle in reasoning: And if the most solid knowledge did sometimes serve us for
the subject of our Discourses, it would be experienced, that there is more
pleasure as well as more of profit in entertaining one another with serious
subjects, than in talking of the Tippet in fashion, of Peticoats, of the News
of the Place, or of Amorous Intrigues. To speak sincerely, I cannot excuse
those Women that will make a dozen wise persons hold their Tongues, to listen
to a paltry Violin: Who give their Ear more readily to a company of Scurrilous
Jests, or Malicious Slanders, than to the most excellent and important things:
Who make a great scruple of spoiling a Song with the least noise, and make no
Conscience of giving a thousand interruptions to the best Discourse one can
entertain them with: And who are ravished with the Company of the most
Impertinent Fops, provided they be but finely dressed, and treat them with the
titles of Queen or Empress.

They would utterly deride these persons nevertheless for their Complements
instead of esteeming them, if they could but understand how much it calls in
question their own Wit, to approve, and take so much liking to those that have
none. For as we judge those Stomachs weak, that cannot digest any but the
lightest Food; so we may very justly question the strength of their Wit, who
can relish nothing that is solid: Their humor appears by their approbation;
and one may know what they can best do, by what they love. This defect is, in
truth, a very great one: But since I have a design to touch also upon some
others which are no less observable in Conversation; having spoken of those
Women that despise knowledge and good discourse, let us speak next of them that
profane and abuse it.

FOR AS THE Ladies that are utterly unacquainted with Study, and great
strangers to Reading, are most truly barren; so they that have been conversant
in these, are oftentimes a little confused and troublesome. There is nothing
but disorder in their thoughts and conceptions, and constraint and affectation
in what they say. It seems as if their Wit had not heat enough to digest that
which their Reading furnishes them with; And one may see in the inequality and
confusion of their Discourse, even at the same time that they speak of
excellent things, that to have Marble and Porphiry and the most excellent
Materials by us, is not enough for the building a beautiful Palace, if one be
not a skilful Architect to dispose them. These persons are mightily subject to
Repetitions; for having tackt their Idea to particular words and phrases, and
filled their thoughts with some particular matters and Subjects, their Spirit
is not at liberty to invent other when it is necessary. They are so enslaved to
their Memory, that they can make as it were no use of their Judgment.

It is for this reason that they cannot speak but by common Place; and that
they enlarge themselves so much when they are upon a subject wherein they have
some advantage, that they are ready to speak all, even to the Margins, Leaves,
Quotations and other superfluous circumstances. I could as willingly find my
self among the Conferences of the Ministers of State, when they are disputing
the Place of Congress, the Day, the Matter; and the Arbiters. To deliver these
Women from the defect, it were best to send them to the Theater of Humane life,
or some other large and Voluminous Book in which they might read all that they
have a mind to speak of.

Their Repartees and their Complements are Orations; when they have begun a
discourse, before they can make an end, they must exhaust their Chapter; they
cease not to speak till they have no more to say. They much resemble those who
recite Plays on the Theater, who are not able to add to, or diminish in the
least from their Lesson without putting themselves out and forgetting the rest.
It is true, they make themselves admired in some Rencounters; but this is more
by chance than that they can be at all assured of it. And to speak the Truth,
that they may seem able persons, they have need to speak to those that are not
so.

If by misfortune they are led from what they have some knowledge of, and are
made fall upon a Subject that is unknown to them, and where Reasoning or
Judgment is more requisite than Memory, you shall then at the same time
perceive their Weakness and their Vanity, in that they can neither hold their
peace, nor speak with any good Grace. The force upon their Looks shows that
they have not Modesty enough to keep silent, nor Ability to discourse; either
they are silent with regret, or speak with disorder.

These are the Principal Vices of Conversation, which I thought necessary to be
observed, that the good qualities might appear the better after I had painted
out the bad. So that now to make an Abridgment of my Thoughts in this matter, I
judge that there is nothing more Important and conducing to our Conversing with
good success than to know well our own humor that we may duly regulate that;
or to know the Humors of others, that we may please them, or defend our selves
from them. Knowledge, and a sweet Temper are the two qualifications most
necessary for an entertainment: Without the former the Conversation will be too
trival, without the other too rude and tiresome.

Those Women that speak little, as well as they that speak much, ought to
consider that Modesty is necessary to Silence as well as to Discourse; as it
frees the one from Contempt and the other from Affectation. And whatsoever
Humor they are of, that they may avoid the danger of being persecuted or
debauched, it would be good for them never to seek the Conversation but of two
sorts of persons: That of the best Wits, because such will excuse most easily
their defects, and can best apprehend and acknowledge their merits: And that of
the most Virtuous; for when the Licentious can do no harm to their Conscience,
yet they will do it to their Reputation, and will render them but Infamous, if
they cannot make them Vicious.

Of the Cheerful Humor and the Melancholy.
THERE IS NOTHING more necessary to the Ladies for Conversation, than to know
well their own Humor; that they may Reform it if bad, or Polish it if it be
good. This is the foundation of all that which is of any Importance in this
matter. But as there are two sorts of Humors that may both succeed well, each
of them in their several way, I think fit at present to make a comparison of
them in this Discourse, that they may the better remark that which is good or
which is evil, in the one and the other. And to describe in the first place
that which is of greatest esteem in Society; It must be owned, that the Gay and
Cheerful Humor has here by much the advantage of the Melancholy, which truly
is not unfit for Knowledge, but is a little too heavy for Discourse, and too
coarse for the Genteel Carriage or Repartee. The merry Humors have a much
better Grace, and more liberty in all they do; and so they are much better
received in Company, as being the more natural in their Affections, less
constrained in their Deportment, and the most innocent in their Designs.

Whatever some say in Favor of the Melancholy; If their Meditations are
commendable in some things, it is certain they have their bad as well as good
effects; and they that call it the Mother of Wisdom, ought to acknowledge that
it is very often the Mother of Extravagance. They would persuade that such
Spirits discover many things, and that they go far in Contemplation; but their
Voyage is often so long too that they never return again: Or if they do return
again, this is as the Pilgrims, who abandon their own Country to run needlessly
into strange ones, without any other advantage, than to bring back from thence
Poverty and Weariness. Musing is a Labyrinth wherein they lose themselves
easily, and from which they get out with difficulty.

Nevertheless they name Melancholy the Element of Good wits, thinking to excuse
their Weakness by giving it a specious Name: But as the Lame do not gain any
Glory when they spend a great deal of Time and Labor to make but a little way;
so these poring Spirits do not deserve any praise, for being long in finding
out that which others of stronger parts could better find and with less pains.
Those that are more subtle have the same advantage over them, as Birds that can
fly, have over Serpents that can only creep, or such as Angels have of Bodies
and material things.

Upon the whole, I do not at all comcomprehend, why they make a boast of their
speaking but little; for their Silence proceeds rather from their Barrenness
than their Discretion; and if they hold their peace on many occasions, it is
not so much to choose words, as to seek them. These persons would need take but
little pains to become good Disciples of Pythagoras: Were it not that while
they hold their peace but merely out of necessity, they are not capable to
learn how to speak with address. They want a School quite contrary to that of
Pythagoras, where they may study that Readiness which they want; they have more
need of Medicin than Precept; and to cure them it is not only necessary to read
Lessons, but also to work Miracles.

As it seems much more easy for the Fire to descend than for the Earth to
mount; so it is possible that they who have a ready forward Humor, may moderate
it by reading and experience: But they that have the gross and heavy Souls, let
them employ themselves in whatever study they will, have a great deal of
difficulty to render them more lively or more subtle. The Birds have Wings that
enable them to fly; yet they fold them up when they will to refresh themselves:
And the most transcendent Spirits can do as much as they, either for action or
repose. But when the Melancholy set themselves to animate their faintness, they
put themselves into the danger of Icarus, who was too dull and had not enough
of Address, to fly upon the Wings of Artifice: Their Discourse and their
behavior are altogether unhandsome when they force themselves to express and
show in them a heat that they have not in their nature. They resemble those old
Men, who run, when they think only to go, or mend their pace but by chance; and
then they lose their breath all at once after the least effort, because they do
not wisely accommodate their pace to their weakness.

Whatever some say in commendation of their Coldness; To Imagine that this is
of excellent use in business, I think a Man had need to be possessed with the
same humor. If they suceed in that, it is more the effect of Chance than of
Knowledge. If the forward Spirits are to be accused for taking Occasions too
soon, and snatching them before they be ripe, the Melancholy are in danger of
coming always too late and of staying till they are rotten; and if the former
do not attend till they present, the later think not of them many times but
when they are past. They are too subject both to Fear and to Despair. As they
are without heat, they are without action; and their Icy humor represents all
things impossible, whether they are what they should avoid or what they should
undertake. Their Senses are stupefied with a Lethargy, and cannot be roused but
by cutting or burning them. They seem to want a resurrection rather than an
awakening, and are a sort of Sick persons that must be made to die, to teach
them that they are not dead. If they have Judgment to deliberate, they have
almost no Confidence to resolve, and yet have less of Courage to execute. This
is a Paralytick Virtue that needs to be spurred upon occasions, and remains
always Languishing with remedies at hand, without being able to make use of
them, if it be not stirred up with great endeavor.

It were indeed too great an offense to believe that there is not a great
number of very wise and excellent persons of this temper: But also it ought to
be allowed they would be too injurious to Wisdom and Virtue that should make it
always musing and reserved; as if they who have nothing to fear or desire out
of themselves, ought not at all to show a smiling Countenance for a Testimony
of the satisfaction of their Conscience. On the contrary, if Serpents breed in
Standing Waters, so do ill Thoughts enjoy themselves in this muddy Humor: And
if the Spirit of such persons is fit to invent what is wicked, their Face is no
less fit to cover it.

When a Rust is gotten among the Wheels of a Clock, there is no more any Rule
in the motions, or any certainty in the Dial of it. And when a profound
Melancholy has mingled it self with our Thoughts, the Spirit is full of
Inquietude, and the Visage of Grimaces. What Light or what Reason can be
expected where a multitude of black Fumes from Melancholy infect the Brain?
Just as the Demons have sometimes mingled themselves with a Storm to kill the
Men, or burn the Temples; so they often serve themselves of this gloomy Humor
to possess the Soul with Superstition, Despair or Hypocrisy. Caesar well
testified what we ought to judge of these Melancholy Humors, when he openly
declared, that he feared a great deal more, those that were Melancholy, as
Brutus, than those that were Merry, as Dolabella.

It ought not to be taken ill if I, to describe this Melancholy Humor, do say
some of those things that it produces, that we may the better observe the
nature of the Cause in that of the Effects. There are then some Hypocondriacks
to whom Mirth and innocent freedom are no less displeasing, than Daylight to
an Owl: and as their Visage shows always I know not what of Fatal in it; so one
cannot choose but have an Aversion for their sad Mein.

Nevertheless, if their Coldness is only an effect of the Temperament, it
deserves either Excuse or Compassion: But if it proceeds from Artifice, it
cannot be exempted from Suspicion or Blame. So that to examine well the
difference that is usual between these two Humors; The Modesty of the Native
Plainness is all in the Heart; that of the Labored and endeavored Persons is
all on the Forehead and the Outside. The One in truth are not Good, nor the
Other Bad, but in appearance. I grant the Casuists have some reason to say of
Sports and Pastimes as the Physicians judge of Mushrooms, That the best of them
are good for nothing: And yet I am not willing so absolutely to decry those
pleasures that are indifferent in themselves, and which the Intention alone can
as well render Good as Bad. St. Elizabeth of Hungary did not refuse sometimes
to dance, yet nevertheless her Good Humor did not hinder her from being
Canonized. Those that lay so great restraint upon the Usage of things that are
honest, are usually very free in the enjoyment of what is forbidden, when they
can avoid the having a Witness to their Actions.

And nevertheless it is the Unhappiness of these Times, that people live under
so much disguise and endeavor, that one hardly can laugh without giving
occasion of suspicion to weak minds, or of slander to those that are wicked; as
if a cheerful humor were a certain sign either of a light Spirit or a small
Judgment.

We ought rather to deride such a Censure, than be troubled at it. And those
Ladies that would preserve their good humor, without putting constraints upon
themselves out of regard to this Vulgar Error, they ought also to forbid
themselves as much as may be, either desire or regret, as being two of the
greatest Tyrants of our Repose; since the one carries us away to the time to
come, and the other makes us return to that which is past; Taking away from us
the liberty of making the present time happy, while we desire those things that
are not yet come, or unprofitably regret those that are past. The abler Spirits
do easily resist and defy this Tyranny. As when a Ship is tossed in a mighty
Tempest, tho the Mast be broken and the Sails torn in pieces, yet the Needle is
always pointed toward the Polar Star; so ought we always to demonstrate a
steddiness of Mind in the most tragic misfortunes, and to show a temper equal
amidst the greatest inequality of Affairs. And as the Winds can easily drive
the Ship besides the Port she designs for, but not the Needle from pointing to
the Pole: After the same manner when some Obstacles retard our pretensions,
they ought not for all that to drive us from our Reason, or make shipwreck of
our Constancy.

NOW I HAVE SAID what there is of good that may be found in the Gay and
Cheerful Humor, it is time to examine what evil may be met with in it. And
since we have remarked the defects which many attribute to Melancholy, let us
betake our selves a while to mention its good effects and just praises. This is
that which renders the Mind subtle for the Sciences, indefatigable for affairs,
serious in Conversation, constant in Designs, modest in good Fortune, patient
under Bad, and judicious and reasonable in all Things. It is of this just and
equal Temperament that Virtue serves her self to appear with all her Ornaments:
This Nature has been wont to choose when she would form Conquerors or
Philosophers: And this is that, which Grace it self has always employed to give
to the World the most extraordinary persons. It seems as if the Persons of this
Humor were born Wise; that Nature had given them more than Study and Endeavor
can procure to others: And that without falling under the inconveniences of Old
Age, they possess in good time almost all its maturity. It Is true, they
reproach it with this, that their Meditation is of more worth than their
Discourse: But they ought to know, that as the Judgment of such persons is
solid, so they commonly disdain that superfluous ornament, and show which the
slighter Wits make so much use of, to procure credit among the Vulgar. In this
their Modesty they resemble the Eagle in the Apocalypse, that had Light within,
and had Eyes under his Wings: Whereas the great Talkers have them only upon the
Feathers, as the Peacocks on those of their Train; being no otherwise
reasonable, but in Color and Appearance.

I do not at all deny but the Gay and Cheerful Humors have something of
pleasantness, but they are also subject to very great defects: For as much as
the Railery and Jesting which they often engage in, tho it be agreeable to
some, yet it usually does offend more than it pleases. And one shall often see
this sort of Wits, among themselves, begin in Jest, and play, like Puppies, and
soon end in Earnest and quarrel. But especially when Religion or any ones
Reputation is their Subject; it is the easiest thing in the World for them to
fall into Impiety and Slander. And since we cannot rally the Great without
Imprudence, nor the Miserable without Cruelty; and then in doing this, we
should always contradict either the Rules of Policy, or the Laws of Nature: The
graver Spirits have a great deal of reason to abstain from that which makes
them, who profess it, pass for Buffoons or for Enemies, and which often gives
themselves in the end an occasion to weep, after that they have provided for
others something to laugh at.

For my part, I think it no disparagement to Melancholy, to own that it has no
inclination to so ridiculous a quality, which supposes always a lightness of
Spirit, and very often a great liberty of Conscience. It was this giddy-headed
Temper which was that of the foolish Virgins, and of the same are they who have
more Wit than Judgment: Who nevertheless seem for the present to have some
Light, but it is an ignis fatuus, or such as, like a Spark, shines but a moment
e're it goes out. They let themselves be imposed upon, for want of being able
to foresee far enough into Affairs of Importance; whereas the Wise are never
drowsy when they should prepare themselves for good, or dangerous occasions,
for fear they should afterward be obliged to Repentance and Shame.

And to speak of things as they are: Since the Spirit and the Sense have a
quarrel which will last as long as life, and the Soul is not strong but in the
weakness of the Body, as in the ruin of an Enemy; There is some ground to say,
that when the Humor is so brisk and so free, that it is become the more
strong; and on the contrary when it is Humbled and Melancholy, it is become a
Slave to Reason; like a Maidservant that shows discontent in her looks, when
she is hardly treated by her Mistress.

The Joy which arises from the Conscience has marks that are altogether
particular; it is the purest that is, and resembles the unspotted brightness of
the Stars, which always cast forth an Equal Luster: But that which comes from
the Body or the Temper, is like the Comets, which have there nourishment from
below by the exhalations of the Earth, which presage none but dire Events, and
which seem to dance in the Air, while they run after the Vapors that feed
them, but go out as soon as they are destitute of that Matter. The Passion of
the Melancholy has nothing parallel to these Tragic Meteors, either in their
formation, or in what maintains them: Their Amity has no Aim besides the Goods
of the Mind: And as the Fire of their Affection is most pure, so it loses
nothing of its ardour, it endures always in an equal state, like that which
some Philosophers fancied to be under the Orb of the Moon.

I readily acknowledge, as to what regards Friendship, that the Gay Humors are
therein more forward and free; but then the Melancholy are more discreet in it,
and fitter to be trusted. These adhere constantly to their designs, while the
other change every moment their Passions, and lend themselves out to every
Object that presents. A very little matter serves either to overcome or
persuade them. Inconstancy is almost inseparable from this Humor, and if they
are not capable of corruption through malice, at least they are liable to it by
weakness. But if their Plainness merits some Favor, I cannot for all that
count it reasonable, that we ought to esteem so very much a Natural Goodness,
which is rather an effect of the Temper, than the Choice. When a Person cannot
be Bad, there is no such great glory in being Good: And if the Simple do not
much mischief, they are not to be thought the less culpable for that, since
notwithstanding they may do all that they know.

And if it be said, that tho they are not better, yet they are more happy than
the others, because their mind is without inquietude as it is without design:
In truth, it were the greatest injury that could be done them, to speak of them
in this manner: For this were to found their Felicity in their Defect, and to
own that they are no otherwise happy, but because they are Stupid or Ignorant.
If a Marble Stone feels nothing of pain, we do not say for that reason it is
very well: We do not account it in health, but unsensible. It is after this
manner that the thoughtless are not unhappy; for it is the wanting of a sense of
it that hinders them from being so: And this is no very honorable advantage to
them, that they are free from care and trouble, as Stones are free from
Sickness, or Beasts from Remorse of Conscience.

If the Stupid are found sometimes at the same point with the Philosophers in
the tranquillity of their Mind, it is yet with a great deal of difference between
them; in that the latter surmount what the others are ignorant of. The Serpents
under the Earth are not less safe from a Tempest, than any persons that are
above the Clouds: The meaner Spirits, like them by creeping, find their safety
in their weakness: But it is much more glorious to be above the Storm than
beneath it, and to have it under our Feet than over our Heads.

Since the true Felicity cannot be acquired without Virtue and Morality, the
Happiness of the Simple is of another Nature than that of the Wise: And, in my
Opinion, they are no otherwise happy in this World, than those in a feigned
Limbus in the other, where they stay between good and bad, without being
touched by either of them. The Melancholy do not live in this indifference,
they owe not their felicity to the Ignorance, but to the Goodness of their
Minds; and it would be too shameful a happiness to them, and such as they would
complain of, if it were necessary to them to be insensible of Good, that they
might be so of Evil.

To know how much the Melancholy Humor excels all other, it ought to be
considered, that they who are forward and light are no less incapable to defend
themselves from Misfortunes, than to taste the true Pleasures: Their Heat
precipitates them into extremes: They do nothing but in Frolic, as if they
were made up only of Sulphur and Gunpowder; they need but a mear Spark to set
on Fire both their Actions and their Thoughts: And of this there is no other
remedy but to wait for the end of their Impetuosity, which often tires its own
self, and of it self the Fire goes out. The Spirits that are without Conduct in
their Enterprises, are also without Courage in their Afflictions: They are a
bad sort of Soldiers that use well neither the Sword nor the Buckler; and the
same lightness which makes them very rash in their onset, does also render them
weary and impatient when they come to suffer or defend themselves.

On the contrary, the Melancholy have always the Spirit equal: They are free
from Insolence in a Good Fortune, and from Despair under an Evil One. They
endure what they cannot overcome, they surmount the Maladies of the Soul by
Strong Reasoning, and those of the Body by Invincible Patience.

And if heretofore a Man could find himself bold enough to assault the person
of a Duke of Milan in the middle of his Guards, in the face of his Court, and
even in a Church, only for the having practiced several times upon the Picture
of this Prince; What boldness ought those Wise Men to have who are of this
Temper, what can they find of new in any Events that may be able to put them in
a Wonder? Instead of being surprised, they discover things to come at a
distance by their foresight, that they may in good time accustom themselves to
them. They render things as easy to them by Meditation, as they become to the
Vulgar by long experience.

It ought not to be strange, if the Melancholic are very constant; and one can
never see them troubled, even when they are constrained to give way to Force,
since they always reserve a secret place within themselves where the Storms of
Fortune know not how to arrive. It is thither that the Soul withdraws her self
to maintain an eternal Serenity; there she gains an Absolute Empire over her
Opinions: And there she entertains her self alone, even in the midst of
Company, without suffering any interruption of her repose and silence by the
Throng or Tumults of the World. It is in this solitude and abstractedness of
the Superior Part in us that the Spirit fortifies it self, that Morality is
learnt; and that some possess beforehand, even without a multitude of years
and a long experience, the Prudence of Old Men, and the Wisdom of Philosophers.
Lastly, It is in this place that we shall have always the means of having
pleasant Thoughts, if we preserve in our selves the Images of those things that
are agreeable: For if the present Objects displease us, we may by entering into
our selves render our Minds easy and content, while our Senses are under a
persecution. We may entertain our selves with the thoughts of a beauty, at the
same time when an ugly Face is before our Eyes.

But who can ever enough commend this Noble Contemplation of the Melancholic?
Since it is by this that the Soul seems to quit, when it will, the troublesome
commerce of the Senses. And we may consider with an Attention the less
distracted, what we are, when our Imagination represents us to our selves;
which it does more clearly and with less danger than the foolish Narcissus is
said to have seen himself in the Fountain. I do not wonder at all that the
Poets feigned he destroyed himself, because he fought himself out of himself:
It is in truth impossible we should find our selves but in our selves; by all
that is besides, we meet with nothing but our appearance and shadow. Insomuch,
that without the Use of this Noble Meditation, to which the Melancholy Temper
is disposed, a man seems to have his Reason imperfect and even unuseful. For as
the Bees must retire themselves to the making of Honey, after they have been
collecting Matter for it among the Flowers: So it is necessary, that after we
have viewed a diversity of Objects, we should retire within our selves to
derive the fruit of our Observation, and to make the Consequences it will
afford. Without this, whatever Study or Experience we have, it will be nothing
but a confusion and medly of things; we may gather good things, but shall be
very ill Managers of them; our Actions will appear without Conduct, our
Thoughts wit^out Order, and our Discourse without Judgment.

The greatest part of the grosser Spirits have a sentiment quite contrary to
this, and cannot bring themselves to imagine, that there is any other
contemplation but that of Fools, and such as are distempered. And in truth this
Meditation in them, would cause no less hurt than it does fear of it; it would
be as contrary to them as it is unpleasing: It dazels the Spirits of those that
are wicked; the one sort it Blinds, and others it severely Scourges. It is not
to be imagined, that they who have nothing but Darkness in the Mind, and Guilt
in the Conscience, can take any delight to enter into themselves, or to search
there for satisfaction or repose. But to despise Contemplation, because there
are some that may lose themselves in it, is not this as great an Error as if
one should find fault with the Sun because the Owls cannot bear his brightness;
without considering that the Eagles can stedsastly behold it; and that we
should not tax this glorious Star, for that our feeble Eyes are dazzled by his
Rays, and we find Darkness even in the Source of Light it self.

I have now said enough concerning these two Humors: Having thus compared them
together, there is not a person who may not easily judge what ought to be her
usage of both, that she may succeed well in Conversation. If the Cheerful
humor seems most agreeable, the Melancholy seems most solid; the one is the
most beautiful, the other the most rich. They have both of them something of
Good, and something of Evil; and indeed, to speak my Opinion, I judge that as
the mixture of hot and cold is the support of our lives, so all the force of
agreeableness and a good Grace is derived from the tempering of these two
Humors, when it is so done, that the one serves for a remedy to the other. And
if the Romans esteemed those the best of their Tribunes, who testified the most
inclination to the Senate, and those the wisest among the Senators, which most
favored the interests of the People; in like manner, I think, we may say that
the most excellent among the Cheerful Persons, are they who approach nearest to
the Melancholy; and among the Melancholy, they are the best who have most
Gayety of Mind. For being thus tempered, the first shall be the more Discreet,
and the latter less Austeer and Imposing.

Of Reputation.
BE IT SO THAT Reputation is a Mighty Treasure, and that it serves no less to
Virtue, than Daylight does to a Picture to make it appear: Nevertheless, if it
be well considered after what manner some lose, or some possess it in these
days, we might rank it among the Goods of Fortune, in which the Foolish have
many times a larger share than the persons of greatest Merit. If there were
Wise and Just Judges to distribute this, it were enough to be Virtuous for the
obtaining a Reputation and Esteem among Men: But it does frequently depend upon
so very ill Arbitrators, that if it were not for this, that we are always
obliged to avoid, as much as we can, the giving of Scandal; it would really
become those that are Wise to content themselves with the Testimony of a good
Conscience alone, without any further care for the Opinion of the Imprudent,
which a mere Chance may render either Good or Bad. This is a thing that depends
too little upon our selves, to be that which can render us happy: And this were
a Felicity but very ill secured, which the Ignorance or the Malice of an Enemy
can take from us.

A Renown or Great Fame is many times an Effect which seems to have nothing of
a Cause, and which rises like those groundless Alarms which put sometimes a
whole Army into a Pannick Fear and Disorder, while they can no ways find out
what should be the subject or occasion of it. I must also approve the opinion
of those who compare it to the Winds, because it rises and falls as lightly as
they, and above all, because there is no one knows certainly the Original of
them. And since it is then so uncertain a thing, why should any man labor,
with great unquietness of mind, to know how he stands in the opinion of others,
and afflict himself for the Error of the Vulgar, as if it were but now, that
the Ignorant had begun to mistake or lie?

I have taken occasion to wonder, with Aristotle, that the Ancients gave more
recompenses to strength and force of the Body, than to the abilities of the
Mind, distributing their Laurels to a bulky Wrestler, and not to the Wise or
Prudent. It cannot be but that Ignorance and Poverty must have hindered them
from putting a Price upon Virtue. Ignorance might do this, because Virtue being
a thing that is hid in the Heart, men are often abused in the judgments which
they make of it: And Poverty might cause it too, because when they were forced
to acknowledge its excellency, they had nothing in the World sufficiently
precious to make Rewards or Garlands worthy of it. Now then if Human Judgments
are so full of uncertainty, what advantage or what wrong can Virtue receive
from their Error? In truth they cannot recompense it, since they cannot know
it; they are not knowing enough for this, nor rich enough O what Blindness and
what Levity is in the World! May we not see some persuading themselves there is
great Virtue there, where there is truly nothing but Vice; and some, on the
contrary, that give base and unworthy names to excellent things? Like
Astrologers, that call some of the Stars the Bull or the Scorpion, which have
nevertheless nothing either of Fury or Venom, but only Purity and Light.

I could heartily wish that they who meddle with judging of things without
knowing well the nature of them, might be Punished as Midas was. This Ignorant
Judge preferred the rustic Sound of Pan's Pipe before the ravishing Harmony of
Apollo's Lute, giving his Vote to that which made the greatest noise. And his
fit condemnation was to wear Asses Ears, having but an Asses Head and Wit
before. His Judgment was very like to that of a great many, who esteem things
only by their Color and Mein; and they are no less worthy of long Ears for a
mark of their stupidity. And indeed to make more account of the Appearance than
the Truth of a thing, Is not this to prefer Pan to Apollo, a Pipe before a
Lute, and a Noise before a Harmony? There is a great deal of Brutality in an
Opinion so barbarous. And nevertheless there are of such as these a great many
in the World; and these are they who give a bad repute to those that merit only
a good one. I shall therefore reserve my Resentment for those who can give just
condemnations or praises; and I shall not be at all of the mind to suffer my
self to be uneasy at that which I ought to deride. There are very few persons
that judge with any soundness, of that which they see: The mind of the most
does not penetrate far, it stops as the Eyes do at the Color and Surface.
Their Opinion is of very little Importance, and I think; that, without scandal,
it is enough to avoid their slander, without seeking their approbation.

We live in an Age of Pomp and Ostentation, wherein Morality is overthrown; and
the Virtues of the Time consist only in the excess and extravagance. To gain
the reputation of a Devout person one must run even into Superstition and
Hypocrisy: And the Politic Spirits do by Christianity just as the Stoics did
by Philosophy; to abuse the Vulgar, they framed Imaginary Virtues to which
humane Nature could never attain. It is a mighty unhappiness that Honesty is
not to be found in Commerce, nor Purity in Religion. And that we must in common
life as well as at Court, demand often more than we can hope for or deserve,
that we may gain Reputation and Credit.

BUT TO GIVE my Opinion as a Philosopher as well as Casuist; It ought not to be
concluded that we may neglect a Reputation, because it is ill distributed This
disorder does not at all dispense with our Duty; and it would as ill become us
to render our selves infamous for this reason, as to commit Murders or Thefts
because there are some Thieves absolved, and perhaps some that are innocent
punished for that Crime. Since all Women are not very Prudent, and there are
many that govern themselves more by Example than Reason, the wiser part ought
at least to consider, that Reputation is then a public Good, and they ought as
much to endeavor the remedying an ill Repute, as to extinguish a
Conflagration, or to purge a common Contagion.

In truth it is worthy to be laughed at, that any should give themselves all
manner of liberty, as we may see some do, because Vile Slander puts sometimes
the most Virtuous in the rank of the greatest Debauchees, to give them an ill
Repute; and sometimes the most vicious with the best Men, to give them a good
one. This is wholly to prefer Imposture to Truth, and Opinion to a good
Conscience. As if a King should cause Torches to be lighted up at Noonday,
because the Sun shines upon Peasants as well as upon him; or as if he should
choose to be sick and lose his Health because, his Subjects are well. We ought
not to become vicious because of the ill Opinion any have of us, but rather
endeavor always to live so much the better, that we may force them to have a
good one. When one cannot be so happy as to gain this, yet he should
incessantly endeavor to practice so much Virtue as to deserve it. The
Testimony of the Conscience is more to be esteemed than all this report of us.
When there are neither Friends nor Enemies present to praise or to blame, those
that are Fair find always enough to satisfy themselves in their Looking-glass,
and those that are homely, see there enough to afflict them. The Conscience
does as much for Vice and for Virtue, as the Glass does for the Visage. The
Insolent are far from troubling themselves for a good Reputation, since they
rather do all they can to obtain a bad one. To judge rightly of the Lives of
some Women, it seems as if they would imitate the Lesbia in Martial, who was
wont to seek for Pomp and Clamor, that she might show her self debauched, and
who took more pleasure in the Spectatours than in the Adulterers. She was for
her brutish Pleasures as the Sophists were for their Virtue; They could not do
what was good, nor she what was bad, but upon Theaters.

NEVERTHELESS, since it is not enough to be virtuous, but we must satisfy Men
that we are so, we ought to take care what appearance and show we make, and to
take away pretense from Slanderers, who are wont to make Men criminal, when
they do not find them so. I grant that Socrates had no love for Alcibiades but
such as was altogether Honorable, and that his Affection was not contrary to
his Philosophy: Nevertheless when he made him his Bedfellow, he ought at least
so to have managed his coming in and going out, as to take from them that
should see him going away in the Morning, all pretense to ground a Slander upon
the time and the place of this Young-Mans Visit. Though the Oracle published the
Wisdom of Socrates, yet the Imprudene of his Conduct in this Friendship cannot
be justified. Prudence and Love can hardly consist even in the best Wits; and
it is for this perhaps that the Poets have feigned Cupid to be always a Child;
for let Love grow never so old, it never arrives at years of Discretion. His
Childhood endures as long as himself, for fear he should be ashamed of the
wanton Tricks of his Sports and Pass-times. I wonder not at all if Love makes a
Man lose his Reputation, since it makes him lose his Wit; and since Socrates
himself with all his Wisdom and Virtue could not defend himself from the injury
of reproach in a simple Friendship

Among the Romans, Claudia the Vestal was innocent; and yet she was accused of
having lost her Honor, only because she ordered her self with too much Art and
Curiosity: And they thought it cause enough to condemn her, because she took a
little more pains about her Habit and Discourse than was well suiting with such
a Votary. It cannot be said but this was a very slight ground for the forming
of her Process; but certainly she had never been saved but by a Miracle: When
she drew a Ship along with her Girdle, which many Engines, and many Men had not
been able to stir.

In truth we are obliged to do all that we are able, to take away all matter of
Slander and to avoid Scandal: But the most Wise and even the most Virtuous
often labor in this matter in vain. For let them do or not do, there are no
Rules or means Infallible for the preserving a Reputation; and since it depends
upon the Opinion of others, it follows Fortune more than Prudence. It ought not
to be believed that Innocence with a good conduct are sufficient for this, when
the Son of God himself, who is the Source of all Goodness and Wisdom, saw his
Reputation slur'd for a time by the Impostures of his Enemies, who made him
pass for a Glutton and a Wine-bibber. This Example alone does abundantly show
that there must be some other thing than Address and Virtue to maintain a
Reputation.

Moreover, there is I know not what Infelicity that follows persons of worth,
which exposes them to Obloquy they know not why; and this happens more often to
the virtuous than to others; for as much as their refusals create them Enemies,
and they often put themselves in danger, like Susanna, of being accused of that
crime which they would not commit. There are even some sorts of Visages that
contract a Slander, and this proceeds sometimes from hence, That Foolish People
imagine a Man cannot laugh without being Vicious, and that there is no
Innocence where there is not Grief and Melancholy. This is the Judgment of the
Ignorant, who believe that Virtue ought always to weep, and who know not that
it ought to guard it self as much against a dull Humor as against Cloudy
Weather, and that of all sorts of Wits those are the best, that have some
Gayety. And it is necessary that persons be very heavy, to believe that we
cannot have a good Humor without an evil Conscience.

And besides, if there were no Malice, or a Man had no Enemies in the World,
there is almost nothing so assured or evidently true to which Men may not give
several Faces: If we consider our Actions well, it will appear that they are
all liable to a different interpretation. Who can certainly judge (where there
is no Christianity,) of a Man that gives his Alms in public, Whether this be
for a good Example, or out of Vanity? May it not be said of a person that is
Patient, that this is a sign he has little Sense, as well as that he has this
Virtue? How know we whether a pleasant Humor be a Testimony of Licentiousness
or of Freedom? Those that are serious, may they not pass for stupid or vain
persons as well as for modest? The Interpretation does all; and tho the things
are not indifferent, yet we speak of them more according to our Sentiment, than
according to their Nature. After all this, Those that are Wise ought to seek
their consolation in their own Mind; and after they have done all they can to
merit a good Reputation, they ought then to disdain a bad one.

The disdain of Injuries is the death of Slander, but the resentment revives
it. This is to acknowledge the force of its Arms, when we confess it has been
able to hurt us. And they who are hurried into an excess of concern when they
find themselves injured, satisfy the designs of those that sought to offend
them; for this is to render our Enemy pleased when we give him Testimony that
he hinders us from being so.

Tho our Reputation may be stolen from us, or retrencht in some measure* yet at
last it will return again; As our Hair grows again after it is cut, provided it
have but a Root, and our Innocence and Patience do remain. In every case if
they blame us unjustly, we ought to feel more consolation in the Truth than
trouble for the Imposture. The Innocent should no more afflict themselves when
they are said to be guilty, than if it should be said they were sick when they
are in a good state of Health. It is from hence we may learn why the Virtuous
are less revengeful when they are blamed than the Vicious. For as those that
are not beautiful, would yet be often esteemed so with their Disguises: So the
dishonest persons endeavor by their Artifices to gain the opinion of being
very wise.

It is for this that such Women are so very troublesome, and that one shall not
dare to touch them in the least where they are hurt, but presently they are
extremely disordered. All the World knows that Lucrece, when she killed her
self for the Violence which she suffered from Tarquin, said as she was dying,
she had two Testimonies of her Innocence that were unreproachable, the one was,
her Blood in the sight of Men, and her mind before the Gods. But I am almost of
the Opinion of a great Author, who accuses her of not having been always so
chaste as she would fain be reputed. And if she had not been at all Criminal,
she might without doubt have found more remedy for her trouble in her
Conscience than in Death. They say she resisted more out of humor, or some
secret considerations, than out of Virtue; and having passed away the time with
other Galants of less quality than this Tyrant, she feared that all her other
faults would be discovered by this; and this fear they say made her resolve to
leave the World by her own guilty Hand, rather than to see her helf outlive the
loss of her Reputation.

I declare that it is of more worth to be good in Effect, than in Appearance;
and that an honest Woman ought to esteem Virtue beyond Reputation: But I
believe too, that if one be very sensible of the Importance of her Fame, she
will with the more care avoid the danger of losing it: Since they who have a
true sense of Honor, ought to esteem themselves unhappy when they are put to
the trouble of justifying themselves, and that when they are not guilty: They
ought always to have before their Eyes that which was said by Julius Caesar,
when he divorced his Wife Pompeia, and that even after she had made her
Innocence appear: It is not enough, said the Emperor, that the Wife of Caesar
be Innocent, but she ought also to be free from Suspicion.

Of the Inclination to Virtue, and of Devotion.
THEY WHO Imagine that the Piety of Women is nothing else but the tenderness of
their Complexion, and the weakness of their Spirit, are not at all of our
Opinion: And they offer them no less affront in their endeavor to take away
this Divine quality, than if they had attempted to Rob their Faces of their
Eyes. It must be believed that they who desire a Woman without Devotion, do
also wish her to be without Modesty too. And after they have taken from her all
Sentiments of Piety, they design and intend next to ravish something else. This
is an old Error, which begun with the World it self: And the Libertins do
nothing else in this, with the Women of the present Age, than what the Devil
practiced upon the first Woman, whom he first deprived of the fear of God, to
the end he might afterward persuade her to all manner of Liberty.

But it evidences a great want of Judgment for any to seek the Reputation of a
good Wit in the contempt of Religion; and that especially during a Reign, and
in a Court where Religion and Piety are so much reverenced by the greatest.
None can now observe the common Rules of Policy while they Violate the Rules of
their Religion. And it is a very happy necessity which renders the looser
Spirits of the Court without excuse, when at this day they may see, that if
they will not render themselves ridiculous, they must seek their Salvation
together with their Fortune.

It is then necessary that the Ladies, who would testify that they have
Inclinations to Virtue, should gratify more those that make profession of
this, than the Others; for fear lest it be believed, if they favor the
Licentious or the stupid, that there is some resemblance that has contrived a
secret correspondence between them. They that show a hatred or coldness toward
Persons of worth and Religion, declare by the aversion they have to Good
things, that they are not born but for Evil. The weak Spirits have not Credit
enough to be able to publish their Virtues, nor enough Discretion to conceal
their Defects.

And Nevertheless we may often see that they who are vain, or designing, do
seek among the foolish their Admirers and Confidents; as if this were not a
choice that is altogether blind, to take so ill Judges of their Merit, and so
bad Secretaries of their Pastimes. Ignorance and Simplicity are two Confidents
that are very unsafe. Interest and persuasion easily make them speak of the
things they are acquainted with: And Imprudence even when it is not solicited,
will often speak of that which ought to be buried in Silence. The Physician of
Midas foolishly addressed to the Reeds, that he might keep a Secret from the long
Ears of his Master. He had a great deal better have made use of an Honest and
Wise Man than of this Plant: And the stupid, as well as he, prove at their cost
that there can be no true Fidelity there, where there is no Wit nor Reason.
There are to this purpose more Histories than Fables, and we need not return to
the Times that are past to seek Examples there, of what we may see every
moment, in a sufficient number, to afford Matter for many Tragedies.

AND AS FOR Piety, If any Imagine that it takes away good Humor, and renders a
Woman too Melancholy for company; In truth I do not approve of those who put
their Devotion upon the Rack, to force it to make wry Faces; as if one could
not be saved without making one's self terrible. When the Grace of God is in a
Soul, the Visage is sensible of the sweetness, and does not at all carry the
Lines and Colors of the Damned or of Demons. The Weather is clouded when it is
disposed to a Tempest; and these dejected Looks prognostic something fatal in
the Thought.

They that have no design to commit any thing that is evil, nor remorse in the
Soul for any that they have committed, have not this sad Humor, which we
account to be as contrary to Devotion as it is to Decency. We do not take any
thing from Repentance for this: The Summer has Rain as well as the Winter, and
Love may no less be turned into Tears than Fear. Joy weeps as well as Sadness;
and the remembrance of our sins will give us no more Grief than the return of
Gods Favor which attends our Repentance, will give of Joy and Pleasure. As it
does sometimes Rain, even while the Sun shines, so Repentance often makes Tears
fall from a smiling Countenance.

Whatever the Libertins say, Devotion is not contrary to Civility: If the Bees
gather their Honey from the Flowers without doing them any wrong when they touch
them; Devotion does much more in whatever profession it is found, by
embelishing it and rendering it more agreeable. As Jewels cast into Honey, get
there a greater luster, each of them according to their natural color: So
there is not any condition in the World which does not become more beautiful
and more estimable when it is accompanied with Piety. It is for this that Divine
Wisdom has said, the Righteous are the Excellent of the Earth. It renders those
that retire, more cheerful, and those that live more in the World, less
insolent; it moderates the pleasures of the one sort, and sweetens the
austerities of the other. Marriage is hereby the more commendable, War the more
just, Commerce the more faithful, and the Court the more Honorable. Is there
not a great deal of Ignorance and Tyranny to say, that this ought no where to
be found but in a Cloister, and that it cannot be mingled with the Affairs of
the World without making some encroachment upon the Carthusians or Capuchins?

OTHERS THERE are that have a Sentiment quite contrary to this. We are in an
Age wherein many make no account of this, unless it be excessive in the
Exterior and show; Insomuch that many content themselves with the decency of
Devotion alone, or rather with a Humane Religion. I can never see this
Monstrous Devotion but it puts me in mind of the famous Trojan Horse, which was
full of Enemies within; and to which nevertheless under the pretext of Piety,
they did not merely open a Gate, but even broke down a part of their Wall, that
they might receive with the more solemnity this Present dedicated to Minerva.
Nevertheless, let us content our selves to have not approved this Appearance of
these Times, for fear we should fall into some mischief, if we undertake to
oppose it. Laocoon, who took his Lance in his Hand to make a search with it
into that Machin, was punished for his Curiosity, tho it were just. If we should
venture to make War with the Hypocrites, we should have too many Enemies to
encounter, and might be more assured of their Hatred than of their Amendment.

It is true, that those Women who use so much Ceremony, and practice so much
Subtilty, that they may deceive some Eyes with pretenses to conscience, do
resemble those Spiders who employ a great deal of pains to make Nets, wherein
themselves at last are Entangled; without any other advantage by their Labor
and Art, but that of catching a few Flies. The smaller Wits admire this
Artifice; but the great despise it. And for my part I am not able to conceive
how the excellent Woman can take Dreams for Revelations, or suffer her self to
be imposed upon by such Illusions and Ravings. Those Women that are most
excessively caressing when they are Married, have often a desire to deceive
while they flatter; insomuch that heretofore those Ladies were suspected for
the death of their Husbands, who made excessive Lamentations over their Tombs.
In a private life as well as in public Pretense is blamable, and this great
ostentation is altogether suspicious at least, if it be not vicious. As for
what concerns Conversation, the best Artifice is to have nothing of
Dissimulation; for it is more easy to be good indeed, than to be so in
appearance only; and there is very often less difficulty to regulate the
Conscience, than the Mein. And to say the truth, is it not a blindness that is
most extreme, to expect from the hands of Men a recompense of the service which
we render to God, and to seek for another Approver of our Actions besides him
who is truly the Sole and Final Judge of them? It is to have very wrong Notions
of Piety; to practice it because some commend it; or to renounce, because
others blame it: These are Motives too humane for so Divine a thing.

THE SUPERSTITIOUS have more scruple at the commission of a small sin, than of
a great one; and are like the Jews, who made more Conscience of entering into
the Judgment-Hall, than of condemning Jesus Christ; and of omitting to wash
their Hands, than of persecuting the Innocent. It is true, that such Women have
derived this from the first, who made more Ceremony, and testified more Fear at
touching the Forbidden Fruit, than at eating it. These Questions, these
Accounts, these Scruples without Reason, give no trouble at all to the
Excellent Persons; who follow the example of Alexander, while they virtuously
cut the troublesome Knots, rather than incommode themselves to untie them, as
the Vulgar do, to whom the true Devotion is very often unknown.

Nevertheless, for fear we fall out of one extreme into another, we ought so to
behave our selves in blaming Superstition, as they that burnt the Houses in
Asia in the time of Xerxes. They did not dare to touch those Buildings that
were adjoining to Temples, not only to prevent those Sacred Places from being
burnt, but also for fear they should suffer the least blemish. In like manner
we must pardon in this case many things, which we might blame without injustice
to them, but yet not without danger of carrying weak Spirits thereby even into
Impiety. When Superstition proceeds from Simplicity, it seems worthy of pity or
of excuse: But when it comes from Artifice, it does deserve to be punished. The
Ear that covers the Grain, or the Leaves about the Fruit, are not at all made
in vain: Nature has given them these, either to preserve, or to adorn them. The
Ceremonies are of the same use in Religion: And as Devotion is inseparable from
Love; it sometimes borrows the transports of that, and makes the Servants of
God run beyond their bounds, as well as the Profane, who honor their
Mistresses even to their Hair and the Letters of their Names. It is very
reasonable that Divine Love should testify more ardour in its effects than the
worldly. And it is for this reason that a great Author did very handsomely say,
That if the Cupid of the Poets has two Wings, our Seraphims have six.

Of Chastity, and of Complaisance.
IT IS BUT reasonable that we join together these two amiable qualities, to
reduce them both to a perfect temper; since there are some Women render
themselves unsociable that they may keep themselves Chaste; and there are others
refuse nothing that they may be complaisant. This is in truth to be of too
good, or too bad an Humor; and is no other than the changing one Vice into
another, instead of shunning Vice. If the Virtue has two extremes that do
equally transgress the rules of it, we ought not to make use of one of these to
defend our selves from the other: As if a man ought to be Covetous, for fear he
should be Prodigal, or throw himself into the Fire to save himself from the
Water. Morality does not at all approve this Conduct, that does not teach to
choose Sins, but to shun them, That we may rest in Virtue alone, which is
difficult to be found, because the excess or the defect conceal it from the
Eyes of the Ignorant. Those Women that think they cannot be strictly honest and
yet sufficiently obliging, understand but ill the Nature of these Virtues: For
in truth they are not contrary, they are only diverse, and their correspondence
is too natural for them not to be able to subsist in the same Subject. When
they are both of them there in a just degree, they have a much better Grace in
each others company than either of them would have alone. Hence it is that
Theodosius was the most commended of all the Emperors, in that he seemed to
have good qualities contrary to each other to raise his esteem: His sweetness
and gentleness took away nothing from his Majesty, nor his Severity from his
gentle Condescension.

THERE ARE SOME that have a Countenance ridiculous rather than smiling, they do
so much constrain themselves to be agreeable; and others are so much under a
constraint to put on Gravity, that they have the Aspect of furious Persons or
School-mistresses. However it be, to give a true account of these two Humors,
it must be said, that they are usually suspected either of Artifice or
Stupidity: In that, if there be no Design in them, then there is no Wit; and if
there be Design, the one feign themselves grave that they may deceive, and the
other feign themselves easy, only to be deceived: The latter believe the World
will ascribe their Familiarity to their Humor, the former imagine that their
cold behavior will be accounted an effect of their Virtue. These disguised
persons can never succeed long, especially with those of good wit; among whom
the very best means to appear Chaste is really to be so.

As the greatest Hypocrites are the least devout, so the most Reserved are
often the least Chaste. Hecuba might have a handsome Mask, and Helen an ugly one;
but this Deformity and that Beauty would impose upon none but those Eyes which
saw no farther than the outward appearance. It will in the end be discovered
what we are in truth. And as Innocence falsely accused, does become afterward
more glorious when it appears in spite of its Enemies: The Vice which is
unjustly commended, appears to us the more shameful, as soon as we are
disabused.

BUT TO SPEAK some of the Praises of Chastity, it must be that this Quality is
Divine, since even its proper enemies make great account of it; and the most
debauched have less respect for her that yields, than for that resists. We may
learn from the Poets, that Daphne, while she fled from the guilty embraces of
Apollo, was turned into a Laurel, from which ever after he took the Garlands
that he wore: But on the contrary, when Io had consented to the Will of
Jupiter, she was changed into a Cow. How different were these two
Metamorphoses, and how much more glorious marks had the Refusal than the
Consent! Respect accompanies Desire, but Disdain always succeeds Possession in
these Cases. And it seems those Women are no longer Amiable after they are
become Amorous.

The God Pan being ravished with the Beauties of a Nymph, employed Violence when
Entreaties had failed him: She ran even to the brink of a River, where she was
just ready to throw her self in, that she might save her Honor with the loss
of her Life; there the God took pity on her and turned her into a Reed, of
which he made a Pipe for the Honor of her Resistance; and that he might have
her every moment between his Hands and his Lips. Those that are gained, are not
treated after that manner, for as much as they have not that Honor now, which
made them sought and desired with so much care and pains.

Those Women that promise themselves they will never go so far, and give no
favors but such indifferent ones as Civility will permit, after they have
suffered more than they ought, are carried on further than they thought to be.
I could wish that the Imprudence of many Ladies did not often give a truth to
the Fable of Europe. This young Princess was innocently walking on the
Seashore, where she viewed her Herds as they were grazing by her; she sees
among them a Bull that pleased her more than all the rest; she approaches to
stroke and play with him, she mounts upon his Back when she sees him so gentle,
but she found her ruin at last there where she sought only diversion. He enters
by little and little into the water with her, and so far at last that she
beheld in vain the brink of the Ocean without being able to return to it. She
saw her self at that time between two frightful dangers, one of which she must
needs fall into: She could not quit him without the loss of her life, nor
commit her self to his conduct without the loss of her Honor. She was
transported to an Isle, where she sadly knew to her cost, that this Bull was a
God thus disguised to surprise her.

See herein what will happen to those that will play with Beasts, when they are
more free or more familiar with Stupid Persons than with Good Wits. Europe was
more bold with a Bull than she would have been with Jupiter, if he had but
declared himself: He made his approaches more easily under the Hide of a Beast,
than under the appearance of a God. The most cunning persons, after his
example, will counterfeit themselves silly and ignorant, to arrive with the
more ease at what they design: They pass from small Favors to great ones, and
always advance their design, till they change their Entreaties into
Threatenings, and their Soothing into Violence. And it is from thenceforth that
such acknowledge, too late, that the true Simplicity is ill treated when it
entertains it self with the false one.

The fear of losing their Reputation, after they have given some advantages,
does corrupt many: But they deserve to be punished for their easiness, that they
may learn, at their cost, that there is no great safety with persons that are
disguised, and that those Spirits that are least dissembled, are the more
virtuous, and the more capable of Friendship. Those that would disparage the
Ladies, say that the Foolish are more fortunate and happy with them than the
most Worthy Persons: Because the Violence of the one sort succeeds better than
the Persuasions of the other; and because they are less ashamed to let Favors
be wrested from them, than to bestow them, to the end they may excuse their
consent by the force. But these are Opinions that deserve rather to be despised
than credited, and which no less contradict the Sincerity, than the Virtue of
the Ladies; who ordinarily do not fall into any evil, but by reason that they
have not artifice enough against that of their Enemies.

BUT THAT WE may blame Affectation after we have commended Plainness: It is not
very easy to employ so many inventions, as some do, that they may appear
amiable, without having some design in so doing. They that give Love for their
pleasure, are often forced to receive it by necessity. Those Women would work a
Miracle, in carrying so much fire in their Eyes, without having any kindle in
the Soul; and how resolved soever they may be, their Looks have not the
privilege of the Sun, who burns all below without inflaming his own Sphere.
These are ill Weapons, these of Love, that one can rarely make use of them to
hurt others, but first or last she shall hurt her self.

I have heretofore a long time mused upon the Statue of Venus, made by Phidias,
under the feet of which, he placed a Tortoise. I judge that the greatest
Mystery that can therein be discovered is, that the Tortoises go but very
little, or if they remove themselves sometimes, they are always armed and
covered, carrying their House along with them. Venus despises the Solitary and
the Cautious: Those Women that seek with so much Passion all sorts of
Conversation, do please her more for the increase of her Empire: And above all
things, she has always affected Nudity, because it was that which gained her
the Apple.

Those Women that are so much pleased to find themselves often in the midst of
their Enemies, have something of a desire to be overcome. And in truth, how
good soever a Company may be, yet Distrust is always better than too much
Boldness: And since she who ought to be the Pattern of her Sex, was confused at
the presence of an Angel, who appeared to her in the likeness of a Man; The
Women also ought always to testify some bashfulness in the company of men, tho
when they are under the form of an Angel: Unless it were so, that they having
no other than his design, the Women also would have no need of her fear.

IT IS DOUBTLESS ill asserted to say, That Timerousness restrains more Women
than Virtue: If their inclination were bad, would they want to be solicited?
Experience shows sufficiently, that if they have any apprehension, it is rather
of being Vicious, than of being blamed. Tho the Men that have written Books and
Proverbs, have writ all things to their own advantage: Yet they have declared
that Chastity does particularly belong to the Women; for as much as they, who
have lost this, are taken for Monsters. It would not be thought so strange if
this Quality were not natural to them. There have indeed some Men been found
that have possessed this Virtue; but this has been upon such occasions, as
wherein some Considerations, or Constraint have taken away all the merit of it.
Alexander testified some reservedness with the Women of Darius's Family: But to
show that this was more out of Policy than Virtue, what did he not do with the
Amazons?

Scipio, while he was yet a Young Man, sent back a very fair Woman to her
Husband, after his Soldiers had presented her to him: But Glory was stronger
in him than Love; because he had lost his Credit with the Spaniards if he had
accepted that Offer. What praise did Xenocrates deserve for not meddling with
the Woman whom they brought to him? His coldness proceeded from his Old Age; he
was Drunk, he wanted to Sleep. And if he had not been either Feeble or Drowsy,
yet it was in public; in which case the most Debauched had been ashamed as
well as a Philosopher. There is no need of a long Discourse to prove that
Chastity does not belong to Men; they themselves too freely renounce any part
in it, and believe that they should encroach upon the profession of the Women,
if they should put in practice the Precepts which they themselves give to them.

Is not this a Custom altogether worthy of blame, to see the Men take all
manner of Liberty, without being willing to give the least degree? One would
say when one beholds this Tyranny, that Marriage sure was instituted for
nothing else but to put Women under the Custody of Goalers. There is herein a
great deal of Ingratitude as well as of Injustice, to make claim to a Fidelity
which they will not return, especially when they themselves are no less obliged
to preserve it. The Women have enough of Wit and of Conscience, to believe that
a Revenge would cost them too dear, if they should lose their own Virtue to
have satisfaction for the Vice of their Husbands. Octavia did not cease to love
the Lewd Mark Antony, even while he made Love to Cleopatra; and abandoned a
great Beauty at Rome to possess one that was far a lesser one in Egypt. Those
Women that have this Constancy, are worthy of Admiration; but those that have
it not, find pretexts for their weakness: The Example serves them for a Reason,
and they cannot imagine that Crystal can resist those Bodies, which are able to
break Marbles or Diamonds.

IF WE MAY be permitted to give some advice after we have been commending:
Since the Son of God himself had a more tender affection for one of his
Disciples, than for any of the other. There may be particular inclinations
allowed without any offense to Chastity, which does not banish the Affections,
but only regulate and moderate them. However, we ought to take care that if
Friendship, in its own nature, be a Virtue, it does not become a Vice in our
practice. That it may not be therein abused, we ought to examine the end and
design of it as soon as it commences; and to assure our selves it is dangerous
if we pretend to any thing else but Affection.

And above all, to preserve the more assuredly this Virtue, it is good for them
to betake themselves always to some commendable Exercise. Evil Thoughts have no
less advantage of an idle Spirit, than Enemies have over a man when he is
asleep: And I am of the same opinion with him who called this languishing
Repose, the burying of a person alive: Because that as Worms breed in the Body
when it is without the Soul; so bad Desires and Passions from themselves in a
Soul that is without employ. And if dishonest Loves are the trade of those who
do not spend their time in something that is commendable; It ought to be
believed, that Chastity will be preserved by the help of employment, as it is
corrupted by Leisure. Her whom the Ancients held for the Goddess of Love, they
also took for the Mother of Idleness: Diana followed the Chase, and Minerva
Studied; but Venus did nothing.

Of Courage.
IT SEEMS to the Men, that Courage is a Quality that should be peculiarly
affixed to their Sex; without their producing any other Title to it than only
their own presumption: But he who made so much difficulty to imagine that there
was one strong and courageous Woman in the World, he made the Sex a very
honorable amends for so great an injury: And tho he was esteemed the Wisest
and the Ablest of all Men, he nevertheless lost this high advantage among the
Women, and became so shamefully feeble, and was so far conquered by them, that
they obliged him to sacrifice to Idols. Histories are full of their generous
actions, which they have performed to preserve their Country, and out of Love
to their Husbands, and for the Religion of their Ancestors.

BUT TO SEE whether our Praises are true or false in this matter, it is
necessary to examine what is the opinion of the Wise, and what that of the
Vulgar concerning the true nature of Courage. There is nothing then more true
than this, That as the strength of the Brain appears in walking over the
highest places without fearing a fall; that of Good Spirits consists in the
seeing a danger without being troubled at it. And nevertheless the Stupid have
no advantage in this matter, while they wait till occasions come without
concern, nor have the rash any that seek them: It is only the Wise that defend
themselves from misfortunes, without being precipitant or insensible. Since
Courage ought always to be joined with a free deliberation, and that it is not
a Virtue, either wholly constrained or purely natural; I cannot persuade my
self to account those to be generous who have a Temper so light that it is
raised without good Cause, nor those that have a Nature so heavy and dull, that
one cannot provoke them, tho by ill treatment and injury. Here is either an
excess, or a defect of resentment, which may better be termed Levity or
Stupidity, than Courage. If Judgment should be found in all the Discourses of
an Orator, Prudence ought to be met with in all the Actions of a Wise Man:
Without that let Polyphemus be as strong as he will, he shall not fail to lose
first his Eye, and then his Life. And tho Ulysses was much weaker than he, yet
the bulky Giant could not defend himself from him with all the force that he
had in his Arms.

AFTER WE have seen wherein the true Courage does consist, those that know the
temper of Women, must allow that they have a great disposition to this Virtue:
For they are not so cold as to be unsensible, nor so hot as to be rash. We do
not see that the most Courageous among the Men do precipitate themselves upon
all sorts of occasions, as if they had as many Lives as there are Hazards and
Misfortunes in the World. Whatever good Face they may put upon it, the most
understanding persons have some difficulty to resolve upon a thing that depends
upon Opinion, and have regret at the committing such a fault, in the loss of
Life, as can never be repaired. This would tell us, that this Virtue ought to
have Eyes as well as Arms, and Prudence as well as Vigor. And therefore they
who know Morality well, will never give the name of Courage to Anger, nor to
Despair; and I am not able to believe, that the Men have Reason, when they call
the Women Timorous, only because they are not Hasty or Imprudent.

But if any say that I have made an Apology for Cowardice, they must not take
it ill, if I accuse them of recommending Brutality. What glory has a man by
cutting his own Throat? And what advantage, bating the brutish custom, in
making Ostentation of a Trade, where the Barbarous Goths and Vandals have been
the Masters, and of which they gave us the cruel Rules and Examples? What is
there more easy, than for a man to let himself be transported into Fury, and
to follow the Motions of his Passion? Those whom the Vulgar call Courageous,
resemble the Glasses which we cannot touch almost without breaking them. They
do not know that the Minds of Men as well as their Bodies, are always there
most sensible where they are most weak. For if this be brave and generous to be
provoked, or to complain every Moment, then the sick are more so than the
sound, the Old than the Young, and the Vulgar than the Wise. Since Fear and
boldness are both reasonable, they are not contrary to each other; The one
opens our Eyes to discover Evils before they arrive; and the other animates us
to repulse them when they are present.

BUT LET US leave off reasoning, to come to Examples; and in truth we have
admirable ones of this kind. Has not Titus Livius left us a History much to
their Advantage, which he writ, as himself confesses, with Astonishment and
Love? After that Philip King of Macedon had put to Death the Principal Lords of
Thessaly, many to avoid his Cruelty, fled, and betook themselves into other
Countries. Poris and Theoxene took their way to Athens, to find that security
there, which they could not have in their own Country. But they Sailed so
unluckily, that instead of advancing, the Winds drove them back again into that
very Port whence they had set Sail: The Guards having discovered them at the
rising of the Sun, advertised the Prince of it, and labored to deprive these
unhappy Creatures of that Liberty which they had more in Esteem than their
Lives. In t^is Extremity Poris employed his entreaties to appease the
Soldiers, and even to invoke the Gods to his succor: But Theoxene seeing
inevitable Death was approaching, and not being willing to fall into the Hands
of this Tyrant, she saved her Children from Captivity by an Extraordinary
Resolution. She presented a Poniard to the Elder of them, and a Cup of Poison
to the Lesser, and thus bespoke them. There is now no further help either for
our Liberty or our Lives; and since we must expect and propose to our selves
that we shall die, let us take Courage, my Dear Children; it is better for us
to choose a Death than to receive one from the Hands of those that will insult
over us. Those that are strong, let them make use of the Sword; those that are
more weak, let them drink off this Draught. Her children obeyed their Mother,
she threw them half Dead into the Sea, and then embraced her Dear Poris to cast
him Headlong with her self after them; this she did in the sight of the
Soldiers, who could not forbear to lament the Loss, and to admire the
Resolution of this Lady. Must we not own that Courage and Constancy appeared on
this Occasion with a marvelous Luster? Can we find among Men any thing more
great, or even comparable to this?

Without dissembling I must declare, that I think we cannot see an Action more
Courageous: The Despair of her Husband, the Tears of her Children, the Threats
of her Enemies could not shake her Constancy: And in the sight of so many
misfortunes, she showed an Aspect as free from Fear as it was from Pity; she
had none but generous Sentiments, there where many Men would have had none but
Cowardly ones.

But if the Courage of Theoxene did thus appear in the defense of her own
Liberty; That of Megistone for the sake of her Country, was yet more
remarkable. After that Aristotimus had usurped the Sovereignty of Elis, he
drove away the better part of the Citizens, who entreated him that at least he
would permit their Wives to bear them company in their Misfortunes. This Tyrant
consented, in appearance, to their Demands; but so soon as he perceived and
knew that the Women disposed themselves to depart, and that they preferred the
company of their Husbands to all the Conveniences of their habitations in their
City, he put to death a great many of them upon the place, and commanded the
rest into Prisons. Nevertheless, for as much as Tyranny does no less harm to
those that exercise, it than it does to those that suffer under it, and there
cannot be much Safety where there are as many Enemies as subjects; Aristotimus
begun from thenceforth to fear his own fall: News was brought him that the
Banished Citizens had formed a Body, and were coming back to lay siege to Elis.
This desperate Barbarian not being able to find a more ready remedy for his
danger, went with a mighty fury to the Prison, to command the Women that they*
should call to their Husbands in order to appease them. Megistone disdained his
Commands, and without fearing any effects of his unjust power over them, she
made this Answer in the name of the rest. You show very sufficiently that you
are as destitute of Judgment as you are of Courage, when you come to pray to
those Persons whom you have basely abused, and hope for Favor from those to
whom you have showed none. These places horrible for their Darkness, and the
Threatenings of Death that you come with, are not able to render us so Cowardly
as to betray our Country; for which we will steadily lose our Lives after the
loss of our Liberty. Aristotimus his rage was more inflamed rather than
diminisht: He commanded that they should bring the Son of Megistone, and put
him to Death before the Face of his Mother: But when he could not be
distinguished by the Messengers, in the Company of other Children, Megistone
called him by name, with a protestation that she had rather see him die than be
Captive in the Hands of Aristotimus. Dureing this disorder the Tragedy was at
an He was besieged from without, they conspired against him within the City,
where he was murdered in the Marketplace. Megistone left the Prison, and to
show her self as compassionate as she had been generous and brave, she
prevented the Violating the Daughters of Aristotimus, remonstrating to the
People who mutined against her, that they ought not to render themselves guilty
of the Crime that they punished, nor commit Cruelty upon the Children when they
executed Justice upon the Father.

Euripides admired the Countenance, the Discourse, the Resolution of Iphigenia,
when she was to be Sacrificed to Diana for the Hind that Agamemnon had killed.
Why weep you thus (said she to her Father) for her who dies contented, since
it is by the Command of the Oracle, and for the Good of Greece? If the
prosperity of your Arms is fastened to the Loss of my Life, I accuse not my
Destiny; I regret nothing but this, that I have not more Lives than one, that I
might purchase for you, by the Loss of them, as many Laurels as I desire you.
At least your Victory shall be as pleasant as your Sacrifice is, that must be
the Price and the Omen of it. This young Beauty in the midst of the public
Tears, died with as much Sweetness as Constancy, and made no more resistance to
the Sacrificer than a Rose does to him that gathers it.

BOTH HISTORIES and Fables are full of such Examples. But, to say that which
seems to me of greatest Importance concerning the Use of this Virtue; It is
necessary to be considered well on what occasions any serve themselves of it.
It is here that the Vulgar have great need of a Guide, because if they separate
Prudence from humane Actions, then Ignorance, Despair or Rashness will have
even the same effects and the same appearances as Courage.

To speak rightly of this matter, this is an Infallible Rule, That those Women
who testify a great Resolution in any evil Design, they are in a manner always
Cowardly in any Virtuous Enterprise. And for this Reason the Ladies ought to
take great care, that they be not more bold for their Passions than for Virtue.
And in truth I can by no means approve of them, who resemble Thetia the
Corinthian, who had so great a fear of Flies, that she would never endure any
light in her Chamber, lest she should thereby see them; and yet had Resolution
enough to kill her own Husband. Was not this to abuse both Fear and Boldness?
To be afraid of Flies, and yet commit a horrid Murder with so much Confidence?

And to give a touch at the Principal Vices which are contrary to this Virtue.
Those Women that kill themselves, are not courageous, but desperate; this is to
give way, instead of defending our selves: It is to yield our selves to an
Enemy, without putting him to the trouble to conquer us. There is no great need
of Resolution to lay hold on Death for a rememdy to it self: There is no great
strength of Spirit to practice upon our selves the Office of an Hangman. It is
better to seek the end of a Disease in good Medicaments than in Poison;
otherwise this is not a resistance, but a flight; this is not to seek a remedy,
but to render our ruin the more Infallible. As we count the Body weak, when it
sinks under a small Burden; so we ought to believe the Mind cowardly when it
faints under an Affliction.

It is indeed upon this ground that many accuse the Women: But the Men have no
Reason to Reproach them for a Vice which themselves are often guilty of. As
Lucretia killed her self for the Loss of her Honor; Cato did the same thing
for the Loss of Liberty. And why should they blame a young Lady for that which
many have so highly commended in a Philosopher? And to say the truth, though
some have set themselves to invent Slanders for the disparagement of the Women;
it ought to be owned that they are more firm to their designs than the Men. At
least, let us learn from the Holy Scripture, that upon an occasion which
required the greatest Affection and Courage toward the Service of God; One
might have seen three Mary's under the Cross, where there was but one of Twelve
Disciples.

Of Constancy and Fidelity.
THOSE THAT HAVE been possessed with a belief, that Levity is natural to Woman;
when they read this Discourse which undertakes to prove the contrary, they will
perhaps think that we pretend to find Stability in the Winds, a good foundation
upon the Waters, or strength in Reeds. But setting aside their Opinion, since
it is not our Design or Commission, to rectify all those who are in an Error,
we will make it appear that as to what concerns Inconstancy, that Sex are more
in danger to be injured by it, than to be guilty of it. And that their distrust
is very just in an Age when the Friendships that are promised with a great deal
of Ceremony, are without Truth, or but of a Moments Duration. Constancy is not
used but in good things, and Obstinacy in those that are evil; otherwise
Wickedness would be Eternal, and Repentance should be forbid for fear of a
change. When an alteration is just it is a matter of Choice; when it is not so
it proceeds from Levity. As it is not reasonable that they who are sick should
remain always in that condition that they might not be inconstant; so likewise
I do not think there is any more fault in forsaking an ill Opinion, than in
getting rid of a Fever: And I believe that to Repent may be as necessary to the
Mind, as Medicines are sometimes to the Body. What danger is there in
preferring a greater merit to a less, or to own that the Sun has more of light
than the Stars? Otherwise the first things that we shall happen to see in the
World would put a Shackle upon our Liberty, even to the taking away from us the
right of Choosing, or to the making us love that which may be worthy of Hatred.

Those that highly esteemed Nero while he managed himself wisely in the first
five years of his Empire; Were they obliged for this to love and Honor him
also when he was become a Tyrant? After he had cashiered all his Virtue, must
they still owe him Friendship? I did love this Man for his Merit, this Face for
its beauty, this Flower for its Color; this Man is debaucht and become
vicious, this unhappy Face is grown ugly, this fine Flower Alas, is withered;
why would you have me to be still fond of an object where the lovely Qualities
are no more to be found? And can the Building stand when the Foundation is
taken away? If this be a due preserving of these Melancholy Laws of Constancy,
They who love a curious Picture would be obliged to admire the Cloth too, after
that the fine Draught were defaced. There is no Religion in that Love which
obliges to pay an Honor to such Relics, any more than as our Affection may be
changed into Pity with the decay of the Object, or unless it were to avoid
Ingratitude rather than Inconstancy. It is for this reason that they who love
nothing but the Beauty of the Body, have a great deal of difficulty to live
long in Love: It is only the Beauty of the Mind and the never fading Charms of
Virtue that can lay hold of us for ever. Faces, as well as the Years, have
their Seasons: How agreeable and lovely soever a Spring may be, we must expect
to see the Flowers withered away, and to endure a Winter after the fine days.

NEVERTHELESS there is no ground to condemn so noble a Virtue, and a quality so
necessary to the World, as Constancy; without which all the Love in it were but
Treachery and Deceit. Let it then be taken how it will, whether as Men are wont
to do, or according to reason, I say the following Examples will show that the
Men are very injurious when they give the Names of Vices to the Virtues of the
Women; when they will needs call them obstinate or fickle tho they have reason
to change or not to change. Sinorix being deeply in Love with Camma the Wife of
Synattus, he employed all his Arts to win her consent to his Passion: But when
all his endeavors, together with the Luster of his Quality, were not of force
sufficient to shake the Resolution of this Woman, he imagined that if her
Husband were but taken out of the World, he should then easily possess what was
now refused him: He killed him; and after that Cruelty, he so importuned the
Parents of this Widow, that by their influence she at last consented, in
appearance, to the Marriage of Sinorix. When they were come then to Celebrate
the Marriage, and that they must go to the Temple of Diana, This Chaste Lady
brings out a Cup of Wine, of which she drinks a good part to Sinorix, and gives
him the rest; he received it joyfully, and drank it all, not imagining in the
least that it was poisoned. Camma seeing her design now accomplished, she threw
her self upon her Knees before the Image of Diana, to whom she gave her thanks
and made her excuses after this manner. Great Goddess, thou know with how
great a Constraint, and with what Design I have consented to marry with this
Murderer. If Grief would kill as often as it is extreme, I should not have been
now in this World; where nevertheless I have not refused to stay a while, that
I might take vengeance on this perfidious Man, whom thou see here, who
believes that I am able to love him after he has ravished from me my Dear
Synattus. Think with thy self Barbarous Man, and acknowledge how much right I
have to Sacrifice thy life to that thou have taken from my Husband. I do not
value at all my own, for I deferred to put an end to it only that I might give
to Posterity one more remarkable Testimony of my Love and of thy Cruelty. Camma
was happy in this that Sinorix died before her, tho he drank last of the fatal
draught: The Gods gave this satisfaction to her Fidelity, and she ended her
life calling still upon Synattus, that he would come and accompany her in her
departure from this World. Can any of the Men give a more noble Example of
Constancy than this? And was it not a Philosophic Madness to maintain in
public, that among a thousand Men one should hardly find one constant, but
amongst all Womankind not one?

After this it is easy to judge, whether the Prince of Philosophers had reason
to compare Woman to the first Matter, because that has always a desire to the
changing of its Forms; and tho it has gained one that is altogether perfect,
yet it still retains a general inclination for all other. He had a design to
show by the Parallel, that the Women are as unsatisfied and unconstant toward
the Men, as Matter is toward the Forms. But this is a Comparison too
injurious, and such as would agree better a great deal with the Philosopher
himself, than with any the most unconstant Woman that could be found: For he
forsook one Mistress for another, to whom he made his devout Addresses, that he
might Testify with the more solemnity that he himself was guilty of a Crime of
which he had accused the Women. In truth they have more reason to complain of
the Men, than they have to fear their Reproaches. How are credulous Spirits at
this day ill requited for their simplicity! Whatever assurances many Men do
give, they ought rather to be reckoned Deceivers than Inconstant; because at
the same time that they promise Fidelity, they are forming a Design to violate
it: There is no alteration in their Resolutions, but there is in their Words.

THIS VICE does not haunt those Minds that are above the Common Rank: One may
be assured of them, and their least designs remain firm in all sorts of
occasions, and under the greatest storms of Fortune. Levity comes of Weakness,
and Constancy from a strength of Spirit. After that Affection has bound
together two Generous Souls, the Separation of them must be impossible: For
since Love is in its Nature Immortal, when it can cease to be it must be
acknowledged that it is not true. St. Augustine said, that his Friend and he
seemed to have between them but one Soul both for Life and Love: That Death had
not so much Separated two, as divided one. And that after the Loss of this
Confident he had a fear of Death and a horror at Life: Because without him he
was but half alive, and nevertheless he saw himself obliged to preserve the
rest, that his Friend might not entirely die. There are but few so constant as
this great Person was: The Friendships of these times are no longer so firm.
And if we consider well, those between whom the affections they had for each
other are ruined upon the slightest occasions, we may believe that the Union is
very often without strength, when the Separation is so often made without
regret.

AFTER WE have spoken of Inconstancy, we shall encounter Perfidiousness, which
is ordinarily inseparably adjoined to it. And in truth, I am not able to
comprehend how it comes to pass that any are Perfidious, when the whole World
has so great an abhortence of this crime, and it does so infallibly procure
Enemies: They that make use of it ought to fear it, and they whom it has hurt
will seek to be revenged on it. But that which is worthy of astonishment is
this, Tha the very Aspect of such Persons testifies that while they set the
whole World against them, they are not in a very good agreement with
themselves; thus declaring without words, the horror which themselves are
filled with at their own wickedness. It is not necessary to be very well
skilled in the Rules of Physiognomy, to observe upon their Faces the wickedness
and the torment of their Minds. It must needs be that these are the greatest
Criminals in the World, since they themselves form their own Process in their
own Consciences, and that even to the executing it too upon themselves
sometimes with their own Hands. The forlorn Wretches practice a new form of
Justice upon themselves, where they alone are Judges and Executioners, Accusers
and Guilty. Although naturally we love our selves, yet such can show themselves no
Mercy, and they show by those their fatal Looks, that none can absolve them
while their own severe Consciences do condemn and torment them. This is the
most horrible and the least excusable of all Crimes, because those that attempt
this, are at the cost of so much trouble to commit it, and they must do so much
harm to themselves to do it to others. Faithfulness on the contrary is always
cheerful even among difficulties; and Perfidiousness is always musing and
melancholy even in the midst of Divertisements. A Mind that is faithful does
not resent its Afflictions; but that which is treacherous has no taste of its
Pleasures; Their Sentiments are very differently taken up; for the Vice makes
the one sort weep even among Delights, and the Virtue helps the other sort to
laugh even among their Evils and their sufferings. When a Soul is sullied with
this Vice, it is capable of all the wickedness that can be imagined, and
especially does Avarice follow it very near. And when once a Woman is become
Covetous, she has a great deal of difficulty to be faithful; there is nothing
that she will not do and that she will not sell to be rich. This is the most
infallible mark of a clownish Spirit and of a Soul debauched. The Ladies ought
never to testify that they have any inclination to to this, lest they fall
under the Fate of Procris; who after she had resisted both threatenings and
submissions, yet she yielded as soon as she saw the Money told down.

BUT THAT WE MAY see this Vice in all its Aspects; The Credulous and the
Ignorant are no less in danger of falling into this than any other: They are
persuaded to many things, which their Easiness afterward makes them suffer
contrary to their Honor. It seems, to say the truth, that these Women are
neither Faithful nor Perfidious; for they have not the Design that should make
them Perfidious, nor yet Strength enough to be faithful. It is this simplicity,
as the Poet speaks, which is worthy of excuse, provided that one does not take
pleasure in being deceived. The Politic are liable to do by Wickednesses that
which the Simple do by Misfortune. Subtilty often times makes Snares in which
its self is entangled. There are evils where flight is better than resistance,
and the good Swimmers are the most frequently drowned, because their skill
tempts them to cast themselves into the stream, from which they are not able to
disengage themselves again.

THERE IS NO NEED of proofs to show that the Women are much less and not so
frequently perfidious as the Men; We have but too many Examples of this, and
Experience alone does sufficiently discover that they have more need to defend
themselves from the perfidiousness of the Men, than to correct their own. Do we
not see among the Heathen Ladies, that the Generous Paulina caused her own
Veins to be cut, when she saw her Husband Seneca condemned to that punishment
by Nero? refusing to live after the death of him that had taught her to love as
a Philosopher, that is, constantly. They closed and stopped her Veins against her
Will; but she always testified from that time, by the pale color and
discontent of her looks, that this cure was altogether troublesome: And that she
remained in the world with regret, since she could see no longer here the Man,
of whom she had learnt to despise both Life and Death, to testify the
constancy of Love. The Wife of Mithridates, seeing the affairs of her Husband
growing desperate, she took the Garland that was about her Head, and twisted it
about her Neck, to strangle her self therewith* But when it broke with the
first attempt, she took the remaining piece in her Hand, and fell into the most
passionate complaints, for that such things could only serve to be the
Ornaments of a good Fortune, but were not able to afford any relief in a bad
one.

And to show a most admirable effect of their Constancy, among the Women that
have embraced the Christian Religion, in the most noble occasion of Courage
that could ever be presented; Do we not see a Penitent Woman perfectly resolved
to attend her Master through all hazards, even at the time when his Disciples
forsook him, tho they had all made, too, a thousand protestations that they
would never abandon him?

Of Prudence and Discretion.
THE LADIES ARE but humane in their Beauty; but they are, as it were Divine if
they are Prudent: When their Beauty procures them Love, Prudence renders them
worthy of admiration and respect. This is the Virtue that is most necessary to
them, and which gives them the greatest Authority: Since without this all their
other fine qualities are without Ornament, or at least without Order, like the
scattered Flowers which the Wind carries confusedly about. With this the most
Vicious preserve a little while their Reputation, (if it be fit to call their
Cunning by the name of Prudence) and without this, very often, the Virtuous
lose theirs. For this cause it is very necessary to the Ladies to direct them
in what they do, and in what they let alone. And as the Architects have always
a pair of Compasses in their hand to measure every inch of their Works; so she
that will be Wise, ought to have every moment the Rules of Prudence before her
Eyes, that she may render all her actions the more reasonable. But if we should
go about to speak all the good effects of Prudence, we must recount all the
good that there is in Morality or in Politics: As the Poets feigned, that the
fire of Prometheus was divided into many parcels for the animating of several
Creatures; so we may say when we consider this Divine Virtue, which regulates
all others, and which is necessary even to the least designs, That whatever it
is we call either an Art or a Science, it is nothing else, in truth, but a
fragment of Prudence.

THE SLANDERERS accuse the Ladies, that they have no Address but where they
have a Passion; that they have no Subtlety but for very small or very evil
Enterprises: That like the Spiders, all their Art is Impoysoned; and that they
spread their Nets but for the catching of Flies. But this is an Imposture more
worthy of a Punishment than an Answer: It is also a Tyranny and a Custom that
is not less unjust than it is old, to reject them from the Public Government,
as if their Minds were not capable of Affairs of Importance, as well as those
of Men. The Honor of her Sex, who now deserves and possesses the Partnership
of a Throne, is alone a sufficient confutation of this Calumny; whose admirable
Conduct we have lately seen, worthy, not only of the Thanks, but of the
Imitation of a Senate. And the Examples following shall further testify, that
the Praises we give them are not without foundation; and that we have reason to
assert, that they have often produced remedies for the most desperate and
sinking conditions of Estates and Provinces.

When the Latins demanded liberty of intermarriages with the Romans, with Arms
in their Hands to take vengeance on the refusal; The Senate found themselves
mightily at a loss what Answer to give them; for they saw that to refuse would
bring upon them a certain War; and they knew that to consent would bring their
Estates in danger, for as much as this Alliance was but a pretext in the Latins
for the making themselves Masters of Rome. Tutola, a very young Maid, presented
her self to give them her Advice; and having observed a great irresolution and
uncertainty what to do in the Discourses of so many Old Senators, she no sooner
proposed her Counsel, but it was approved by them all. She showed them they
must agree with these Strangers in what they demanded, and cause the Servant
maids to be dressed in the Habit of Brides: That so the Sabines being amused with
the pleasure of those Guests, might be diverted from the design they had of
making a War.

This succeeded according to her Opinion; and these Slaves when they saw their
pretended Husbands fallen fast asleep, they stole from them their Arms, and
gave notice to the Roman Soldiers by a lighted Torch, that they might come and
surprise their Enemies when they were unable to defend themselves. We cannot
sufficiently praise the Courage, the Conduct, and the Affection of Tutola, who
found means for the safety of the Commonwealth, when the Wise Senators were at
uncertainty what course they should take.

Let what will be said of the Imprudence of the Women; If the Men would
sometimes take their Advice, as God has given them for a help in the management
of their Affairs, perhaps they would succeed the more happily: And it would be
acknowledged that they are mightily in the wrong, who despise them in a matter
where there is need of Address, and Prudence.

When Theseus was exposed to the Min^taur in a Labyrinth, who gave him the
means to escape, but Ariadne? Without the Clue of Thread which he received from
this Princess, had he ever been disengaged from its windings? This Labyrinth is
a resemblance of Occasions or Affairs that are difficult; Theseus represents a
man entangled; the Thread is Prudence, and Ariadne that gave him it, represents
to us those Judicious Ladies, that often withdraw their Husbands from those
extremities, out of which they were not able to help themselves. When Jason was
to have become a Prey to those furious Bulls that guarded the Golden Fleece,
was it not Medea that enchanted them, and made an easy way for this Prince to
carry off that which no man before durst attempt? By these Bulls we are to
understand those dangers that often hinder the getting possession of excellent
things; by the Fleece, is meant the designs of men, and what they pretend to;
by Medea the Women of Wit and Spirit, who know to charm these dangers, without
making use of any other Magic for this purpose, but only that of their
Prudence and Conduct; to the end they may deliver those that resemble Jason,
that is to say, such as have more Boldness to undertake Business, than Address
and Skill to succeed in it.

The Ladies are not only capable to know what is of Importance in Business or
Trafick; but even to apprehend whatever is most Subtle or Solid in the Highest
Wisdom. If the Oracle of Apollo declared Socrates the wisest among men;
Socrates himself afterward freely confessed, that his Diotima had taught him
that Prudence which the Gods themselves had thus judged Incomparable. It is not
a little to the Advantage of that Woman to have instructed a Philosopher, whose
life was so full of Virtue, and whose Morality agrees better with Christianity
than any other. And we cannot see more to this purpose, either in Histories or
Fables, than experience daily shows to them who are willing to judge without
Passion.

BUT IT IS NOT enough to prove that they are capable of this Virtue; it is more
Important to them to know the means to preserve it. After we have seen how
natural it is to them, we must show also how necessary it is too. After we have
shown the excellency of it, it will be good to examine its Use and Effects.
There is nothing then more true than this; That Prudence and Fear are, in a
manner, always inseparable: And that as Rashness often puts the most able
persons into great danger, so Distrust sets the weakest in safety.

The Pallas of the Poets, who ought to be an example of Wisdom to the Women,
was always armed, to show those of her Sex that it would be best for them to be
every moment upon their Guard: And that because they have so many Enemies, they
have always need to defend themselves. The Women have no less cause to tremble,
like those that are covetous, even at the shadow of a Reed, that is, for a very
little matter: Since they carry a Treasure that is very easy to be lost, and
very worthy to be preserved. And certainly, how deserving soever they may be,
she that is without Fear is as a Town without a Wall, as easy to be taken as
it is difficult to be kept. I do not here speak of the fear of those that are
distracted, which is a much greater evil than any which that threatens them
with: But I speak of that wise Fear which proposes Misfortunes to us without
hurting the temperament of the Body, or the repose of the Conscience.

I do not at all design that Prudence should put us always in a fright; There
is a certain Path between Fear and Temerity, which this Virtue shows, that we
may prevent or avoid the Misfortunes that are impending. And in truth there are
some that are too credulous or too distrustful; there needs but a mere Phantome
to fright them; they fear as impertinently as they hope: We may see their
weakness no less in the credit they give to Good, than in that they give to
Evil: And these both proceed from the same Error; which is, that they know not
how to examine well either the one or the other. Since Prudence shows the point
of Mediocrity for other Virtues, so it ought to show in this what is the Excess
or the Defect: But, not to dissemble, it seems to me, that Distrust is more
often joined with Wisdom than Credulity; and that if the former is not more
Reasonable, yet at least it is more Safe.

This Virtue appears no less in the choosing of Good, than in the fear of Evil.
And although we see nothing more common at this day than bad Elections, whether of
Freindships or Fortune: Prudence is that which repairs this Defect, as it is
particularly employed to deliberate and to choose. Without doubt a great many
have need of this Virtue, and they ought not to wonder if Repentance follows
their Affections, when Knowledge and Choice did not precede them. When this is
wanting to them, these Affections of theirs are merely Brutal, their
Conversations are Dangerous, and their Confidences very Ill Assured.

In this, as in every other occasion where a good Conduct is required, there is
a certain Consideration which must examine all the Circumstances of a Design:
And if Prudence is the Eye of the Soul, this discretion or discerning of things
is as the Apple of that Eye; this is the Flower of that Plant, the Point of
that Arrow.

BUT TO EXAMINE one of the Principal Effects of this Virtue: Commonly those
Women that would seem to be Wise, are not so at all. The best Wits ought to
conceal the secret Springs of their Conduct, lest people should be cautious of
confiding in them, and lest they rather defend themselves against, than rely
upon them. This is a Treasure that we may enjoy and use as long as we hide it;
like the Sepulchral Lamps of the Ancient Romans, which would give light a long
time if they remained under the Earth, but go out of themselves as soon as they
come to the Air. This great Ostentation is usually joined with Levity of Mind:
And those Women that boast of so much Sufficiency, very often have little of
it. They resemble those Apes, who are never more truly and remarkably Beasts,
than when they are disguised under the Habits of Men. What Reason had the Holy
Scripture to require the joining of the Wisdom of the Serpent with the
Simplicity of the Dove! That the former might be without Poison, the latter
without Folly; that the one might not deceive, nor the other be deceived. In
truth, these are two Companions that ought always to be inseparable, since the
one of them mightily recommends the other: And because Prudence may take the
Charms of Simplicity, to render it self the more Amiable, and Simplicity may
use the Conduct of Prudence to render it self the more assured. And to speak
rightly; If Address without Honesty is nothing else but Wickedness; Simplicity
also without Prudence is nothing else but Folly.

Of the Learned Women.
I AM NOT ABLE to refrain from laughing, when I think of the Error of Francis
Duke of Britain, who testified an extraordinary Passion for Isabella, the
Daughter of Scotland, when he undestood that she was an utter Stranger to
Study; persuading himself that a Woman had Learning enough when she could put a
difference between the Shirt and the Doublet of her Husband. The Opinion of
this Prince would be very ridiculous in those Countries where People go Naked,
or as well among those Nations who make the Shirt and the Doublet all of a
piece: The Esteem which he had of the Ignorant and Simple, does oblige me to
believe he might have made a Vow that he would love none but those that were
like himself.

The Emperor Theodosius made not so great account of the Ignorant; He married
Athenais only because she was Learned, and of a good Wit, without any regard to
this, that she was Daughter to a Father of but mean Extraction, who left her no
other Dowry but the Beauty she was born with, and the Philosophy of his School.
They that will distrust a Woman when she knows a little more than ordinary, are
certainly such weak people as deserve to fall under what they fear, and who
found their Suspicions upon the very Reasons themselves which ought to give
them Assurance.

Moreover, the Ladies that have some Knowledge and Learning, do of all others
afford the greatest pleasure in Conversation; and they receive no less in
solitude when they entertain themselves alone. Their Thoughts have wherewithal
to content them, while the Ignorant are subject to Evil Thoughts, because they
know nothing commendable to employ their minds about: As their Conversation is
tedious, so their Musing can be but extravagant. They that say the Women have a
great advantage in their Ignorance, do they not give too much honor to the
untaught simplicity of the Village, which is commonly much in danger when it
meets with Importunity and Occasion? Or if this Sentiment be good, why may we
not say as well, that the Blind are great gainers in the loss of their Eyes, if
it were enough to shut the Eyes for the avoiding of a Precipice? In the Court,
as in the Ocean, it is necessary to know the Shelves if we would avoid the
making Shipwreck; and if the Ladies do that which is evil, after they know it
to be so, we ought to place the Cause of their Misfortune in their Design, not
in their Knowledge.

And nevertheless I will maintain, as Reason does oblige me, That a Lady ought
to be Learned, that she may make a figure in Conversation. It may be that this
Sentiment will at first sight offend that of the Ignorant and Stupid, who
persuade themselves, that they should find their own dear resemblance every
where; that a Woman cannot study nor read without becoming Vicious, or at least
without being suspected. But they that judge so rashly in this case, do despise
that which they ought to desire, as if they were obliged to hate all the
accomplishment which they have not themselves, or as if they ought not to make
account of any but very little Spirits: Whereas they ought to represent to
themselves, that those Women who have not Judgment enough to know Vice, they
have not enough neither for the choice of Virtue; or to know how, according to
the Occasions, they should prefer Truth to an appearance. Also they who
understand ever so little of Morality, cannot be for this Advice, since we are
daily taught by experience to acknowledge, that the light of our Reason is, as
it were, a natural Virtue which disposes to do good, almost without any Study;
and that we really see a very good Wit without a good Conscience. The
assistance of Learning fortifies the good Inclinations, and they that persuade
themselves the reading of Books is only a School to teach them to commit Evil
with Address, might more decently believe that the Ladies may find there more
to correct than to corrupt them.

Reading and Conversation are absolutely necessary to render the Wit and the
Humor agreeable; and as the one collects for us matter for Discourse, the
other by use teaches the method of unfolding it gracefully, that we may join
together Readiness and Abundance; without this, our Conversation is nothing
else but an insupportable Tyranny; and it is impossible without putting ones
self upon a Rack, to stay long with these Women, who can entertain us with
nothing but the number of their Sheep, if they be of the Country; or if they be
of the Town, then can talk of nothing but the Heads and Petticoats in fashion.
It ought not then to be imagined, that in speaking of this accomplished Woman,
whose Character we are framing, we do intend to describe a Mother of a Family
that knows well how to follow her Servants, or takes care to comb her Children.
Tho we do not condemn these things, yet we must declare that skill in Music,
History and Philosophy, and the like accomplishments, are more agreeable to our
design than mere good Houswifry. And there can be none so much Strangers to
Common-Sense, as not to own that without these good Seize, tho the Women
may have an excellent Wit, yet they will be apt to have their minds filled with
things very Evil and very Impertinent. Their good Nature and their good
Inclination remain without effect under the want of Reading and Conversation,
when the Tyranny of their Mothers or of their Husbands, or else some other
misfortune hinders them from attaining those excellent qualities which they are
born capable of.

FOR TO SAY that the Sciences are too obscure for the Ladies, and that they
cannot comprehend the Arts, even in their Principles, because of the Terms that
are too hard to be understood: This in truth is a very strange Error. It is an
opinion altogether extravagant to think that the Sciences cannot as well be
expressed in English as in Greek or Latin. These Disputers that through Ignorance
or Malice, have obscured the Arts under Terms that are rude, as under ragged
Clothes, and who will not unravel the Confusion that we may still have recourse
to them as to an Oracle; They do them no less wrong in forcing them to appear
in an Apparel so shameful, than the Libertins do to Virtue, when they describe
it as terrible and inaccessible, that they may deter others from venturing upon
it. But the Worthy Persons know how to take away this Mask. It is an Imposture
that gives no trouble but to the Spirits of the Vulgar. I easily allow, that as
for Philosophy and Theology, one may find in them some words that seem not to
be purely English: I grant that when other Arts have their peculiar Terms which
are not usually softened and explained, to be accommodated to them who do not
make profession of those Arts, it is not reasonable that two of the noblest
Sciences in the World should make themselves more familiar than the others. I
own too that in strong reasoning there are sometimes words used which are a
little mysterious, because they express the truth somewhat better than those
that are more Polite. But after all, where there is not this necessity, what
need have we to affect Obscurity in our Discourses and Writings? As if
Clearness would render the Sciences less venerable; or as if the Darkness
served them for Ornament and Luster; as if the Force and the Dignity of
reasoning were necessarily tackt to the Rudeness of Terms. On the contrary, we
no more diminish their price in taking away the Veil that conceals them, than
it lessens the value of Gold to dig it out of the Entrails of the Earth, to
refine it, and make it serviceable to Commerce. I judge that they who clearly
explain the Sciences, do discover to us true Treasures, and that they merit
some part of the Glory of Socrates, who brought Wisdom down from Heaven to
Earth; that is, he rendered it easy to be understood by those minds which
seemed to be the most incapable of it. There is then nothing more true than
that when the Sciences are well and rightly conceived and understood, they may
also be expressed even in any Language whatever; and the Ladies are then capable
to understand them.

ON THE OTHER SIDE, tho some say that all the hindrance lies on the part of
their Minds, as not being strong enough for Learning: It seems to me that this
is a very wrong Judgment of their Temperament, which according to the
Physicians, being more delicate than ours, it is also more disposed to the
study of Arts and Sciences. Whatever can be said, they are capable of these as
well as the Men; and if they quit sometimes what they might pretend to, this is
more out of Modesty or Consideration than out of Weakness. Do we not see in
History that the Ancient Gauls divided with their Women the glory of Peace and
of War; that the Men reserved the Arms to themselves, but left to the Women the
Establishment of Laws and the Preservation of their Republics? This could not
be done out of Ignorance; and it may be judged from hence what Esteem they had
of the Women, when the Part allotted to the Men was the Exercises of the Body,
and they committed to them the matter of Conduct, and the exercises of the Mind.

What Science so difficult can be imagined wherein they have not excelled at
least as far as the Men? Was not Aspasia judged worthy to teach Pericles, who
yet was able himself to give Instructions to all the World? Cornelia the Mother
of the Gracchi composed Letters so excellent, as that her Sons afterward
derived from them all their Eloquence, which was also great; and these Letters
of hers did Cicero himself admire. Pamphila wrote so many as an hundred and
three Books of History, which all the Learned Men of that Age highly esteemed.
And as for the Sacred Sciences, Does not St. Gregory himself acknowledge that
his Sister served him for a Tutouress, and that she gave him the knowledge of
the best Learning? But it is not necessary to search the Ages past for Examples
of this kind; We have in our own some Instances so extraordinary as may be
compared with any the greatest in Antiquity: We have Ladies that know how to
write upon the most serious and the most difficult Subjects. In truth I cannot
choose but believe, that the most obstinate Persons would yield the cause, if
they would only take the Pains to read the Homilies that Madam the Vicountess
of Auchy has Composed upon St. Paul. She has not undertaken those places that
are more plain, and where she might most easily have succeeded: She has
bestowed her pains upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, which contains, as every
own knows, the most secret and the most lofty Mysteries of our Religion.
Nevertheless in a matter so Elevated there is nothing can conquer the force of
this great Spirit; she marches over Thorns as another would do upon Roses; her
Style has nothing forced or affected, it is sweet and pompous both together;
and the nicest Persons would admire in this Work, that which one shall rarely
find in the same Author; there is Clearness joined with Vigor, and Sharpness
with Politeness. There is that will instruct the devout, and satisfy the
curious: The learned and the delicate will there find things that do deserve to
be considered with Attention; and they that persuade themselves a Woman cannot
write well, would confess their Error after the reading of that Book.

What need is there to enumerate a great many more? To mention those amongst us
that have excelled in Poetry, to that degree, as to force Applauses from their
Competitours in Fame. This Subject is too large to be followed through. And tho
the Men have been very sparing and cautious in writing the praises of Women,
yet they have not been able wholly to refrain from bringing Testimony to this
Truth, and many of their Books have afforded room for their Commendations. And
if it may be permitted us for this purpose to appeal to Fable for our
assistance, we may learn, that if the Men have an Apollo for the Author of the
Sciences, the Women have also a Minerva, the Goddess of Wisdom, who Invented
the better Learning, and who gives them a just right to pretend to the same. If
I did not fear to support so known a Truth upon Fictions, I should content my
self to send them that yet doubt in this, to the Famous Nine Muses of the
Poets, to whom all the Ancients ascribed the Invention of Arts.

Of Habits or Ornaments.
IT IS CERTAIN, that in whatsoever Fashion we can possibly cloth our selves,
we shall very hardly please all sorts of persons; either the Old or the Young
will find in our Habit something or other to find fault with: And it is next to
Impossible that we should avoid falling under either the Derision of the one or
the Censure of the other. There are some melancholy Spirits that cannot endure
we should do any thing according to the Fashion, and who will infallibly find
out something unlawful in our Dress, if we cannot prove that it has been a
thousand Years invented and used. This is to disdain altogether the present
Time, that we may give too much Honor to that which is past: Without
considering that we must bear with that which cannot be hindered, and that
there may often be less Vanity in following the New Modes than in adhering to
the Old ones. It is true, that the Foolish invent them; but the Wise may
conform too, instead of contradicting them. The Habit, as well as the Words we
use, ought to be conformed to the Time we live in. And as they would take him
for a Madman who should talk in the Court the Language used in the time of King
William the First; so we ought not to think better of them who would cloth
themselves as he did. Those who blame, without a distinction, the alteration of
our Fashions, would better become themselves in quitting their slavish
Sentiments. Who would forbid the seeking our Convenience or Decency, for fear
we should not be habited like our Ancestors? Were it not in truth an indecent
Confusion to see a Boy in the same Dress with his Grandfather? I would
willingly learn of those, who would not have young People (at least) follow the
Custom, of what date the Habit should be which they would allow? For if
Antiquity alone will serve them for a Rule, we must return back even to our
Great-Great Grandfather Adam, and cloth our selves with Leaves and Skins, that
we may render our Fashion the more venerable by being the more ancient.

They who say that Reason and Custom are like the Sun and the Moon, have not
made their Guess altogether amiss; for we must needs make use of the light of
these two Stars according to occasion, tho the one be much brighter than the
other. Excess is blameable throughout; but especially in Novelty: It is Folly
to disdain it, and Vanity to addict our selves too much to it: As I do not
approve those Women who seek with too much curiosity after the newest Fashions;
so neither can I much esteem them who have still a regret at those that Custom
has a while introduced. This Obstinacy comes from the love of themselves; and
they seem to deserve punishment no less than they who would pass away old
Medals for good Money in Trade, contrary to the Laws of the Prince and the
Custom of the Country. They render their Age ridiculous, who run after the new
Fashions when they themselves are old, and use a great deal of Ceremony to make
Men observe in them the ruins of Time and the defects of Nature. It is true,
that the care and the time that Women use in dressing, do make them blameable,
when this is extreme, or when their intentions are evil: But without this abuse
I do not believe that there is more danger in adorning the Face, than in the
enchacing of precious Stones, or the polishing of Marble. We lay Azure upon a
Cieling, we guild a Sword, we trim our Clothes, we adorn all things, even to
the Churches themselves; why should we forbid Women their Ornaments when they
are honest, and when their designs are not evil, when these are permitted to
every thing else? St. Jerome writing to Gaudentius concerning the Habit of the
Young Paula, seems to excuse the Innocent Curiosity of those Women, who adorn
themselves according to what becomes their Condition.

Their Sex is so curious of Ornament; and does so naturally desire even a
sumptuous Habit, that one may see many even of the Chastest and most Virtuous
Ladies dress themselves with care, without having any other end or design in
it, but only their own particular contentment, and out of I know not what
complaisance which is altogether innocent. This Inclination is so natural to
them, that heretofore many Ladies have put their Ornaments in their Coffins,
that they might carry with them out of the World, what they have so much loved
when they were here. Those that do not approve these indifferent things, which
only the Intention can render either good or bad, do think they have great
advantage against the Women, when they call them the Instruments of the Devil;
without considering, that although those evil Spirits do make use of their Actions
or Habits to make them temptations to the vicious and foolish, the Women
themselves are in that case no more guilty of the evils they occasion, when
their own designs are honest, than the Thunder is guilty when the Spirits of
the Air direct it to fall upon Men or upon Churches.

NEVERTHELESS this discourse does not extend it self at all to the justifying
of Excess, or the defense of Vice. Let not any think that I would herein excuse
Painting. Modesty is a most powerful Charm; without it Beauty has no life nor
Soul: And if the other Virtues are worthy of Admiration, yet this only merits
Love. The Ornaments that are deceitful and dishonest, do add nothing to Beauty,
nor diminish any thing from Deformity; since according to the Sentiment of the
Wise and good Pythagoras, an homely Woman painted makes Heaven laugh and the
Earth mourn. After all, They have nothing but what may be found in the Shops,
they glory in a Stolen Feather: Whoever considers them well, sees the daubing,
and knows they abuse the Eye, like those Images, whose outside is gilded and
fine, but under that they are only Worm-eaten and rotten Wood.

BUT IS IT NOT a thing yet more shameful; To see the Men some of them more
addicted to this superfluity than the Women? Hortensius the Roman Orator spent
one half of the day to consider and adjust himself, instead of Learning his
Oration. And without returning back so far, we are in an Age wherein the Men
make profession of this blamable Curiosity more than ever. I am certain that if
the insupportable Affectation of some Gentlemen were well examined, they would
have the Title of Aristagoras put upon them, who took so much pains to make
himself pretty, that at last they called him Madam. In good truth, they are
herein as much estranged from the Design as from the Decorum of their Sex; for
as much as they are never less agreeable than when they too much force
themselves to be so. This great care is odious to all them that observe it, and
Negligence were to them much better than all their Ornaments and Affectations,
which are things really unworthy of Men.

I find also that the Poet very handsomely observed, that Theseus was not at
all adorned when Ariadne gave him the first proofs of her Love. There is reason
to fear that the Ladies too manly are not so modest as they should be, and the
Men that are too spruce are without Courage. The young Cavaliers of the Romans
in whom Pompey placed all his hope, turned tail in the Pharsalian Field to keep
their Faces from being hurt: They were less afraid to see themselves conquered,
than a little disfigured with a Scar; and to preserve I know not what Imaginary
beauty, they abandoned their Honor, their Liberty, and their Country. And the
Ladies may indeed justly apprehend that these delicate Fops are conscious to
themselves they are no otherways capable of pleasing them.

NEVERTHELESS, to return to that which belongs to our design: Caesar having
seen his Daughter Julia Augusta too well set out, he star'd on her a good while
without speaking a word; to testify his discontent with her Dress by his
silence: The next day seeing her more modestly clothed, he said with a smiling
Countenance, this Habit becomes much better the Daughter of Augustus. The
Repartee of this Princess was not less considerable than the Admonition of the
Emperor; Yesterday (said she) I was dressed for my Husband, and to day I am
dressed for my Father.

Certainly as the most wise, will not be at all offended, if the Ladies are
constrained to please many, that they retain one; so it must be acknowledged,
that if they did always adorn themselves only to secure their Husbands, there
would not be that Excess that there is; and we should not hear so many
complaints as now go abroad, of those whose Luxury brings Poverty and Jealousy
into their Families. They often carry three or four Manners hanging at their
Ears, and with this specious pretext spare neither Pearls nor Diamonds: But in
truth it is not without reason that such are suspected by many Persons, and it
is not these Ornaments that entertain the Conjugal affection; and there is
ground to believe that the wantonness of their Dress is rather contrived for
their Gallants than their Husbands.

Of Beauty.
THEY THAT ADORE or that despise Beauty, do defer too much or too little to the
Image of God. It is one of the rare presents that Heaven has made to this lower
World; but we ought to attribute all the worth of it to the Power and Bounty of
him that has gratified us therewith. In the Opinion of Plato it is an Humane
Splendor amiable in its own Nature, that has power to ravish with pleasure the
Mind and the Eye.

And certainly this ought to be a sign of the inclination that we have to good.
For as much as Heretofore the Priests that were deformed were excluded from the
Temple, let us not have an ill opinion of Beauty which God himself did judge
necessary to them that were to approach his Altars. The Judgments that we make
of the Beauty of the Mind, by that of the Body* are not often the worst
grounded. The Soul, like a Queen, makes the richest preparations where she
intends to appear with the greatest luster and advantage. And in truth, if
Virtue be necessary for the establishment of Sovereign Authority, it seems that
Beauty is at least as necessary to grace it. If we find sometimes the fine Wits
in ill contrived Bodies, these are like Relics ill enshrined, to which a great
many will not pay so much Reverence as they would if they were covered with
Gold and Pearls.

This Lovely Quality is worthy of Empire, in all places where there are Eyes
and Reason. It has Enemies no where but there where it meets with the blind and
the stupid. The only glorious Countenance of Scipio Africanus made him conquer
several Barbarous Nations even without drawing his Sword; and Heliogabalus
himself, from being Priest of the Sun, became Emperor of the whole World as
soon as his Mother had showed him to the Soldiers. Thus do the whole World,
pay their Respects to those to whom Nature has given this advantage; and
however they sometimes blame Beauty, yet at least they pity it too.

THE VULGAR believe that if there is not Evil covered with Beauty, yet at least
Misfortune attends it; and there is danger in it, if Sin be not found with it.
But, to say the truth, when this is an occasion of evil, it is often an
Innocent that makes the Criminals; and they who complain of it do as unjustly
as they who should accuse the Sun for dazzling their Sight when they have been
staring too steddily upon that Star. That is but hardly kept (says
Theophrastus) which a great many love and desire, and there can be no great
assurance or safety in the possession of that which the whole World aspires to.
Sometimes they will lay so long Siege to those Cities, and attack them on so
many sides, that at length they will make themselves Masters.

The Authority of this Great person does no prejudice to Beauty, since it is
impossible to say any thing more to its praise, than to own that all desire
this as an Object the most pleasing to them. And if the Fair sometimes suffer
themselves to be won upon, this complaint must be directed to their Minds
rather than their Faces. A Place is not the less strong, because they have
yielded it up who ought to defend it; the default is in the Captain rather than
in the Citadel. Be it as it will, the Homely have no advantage in this
reproach: For since they are never solicited, there is no resistance there to
give a judgment of their strength. They are at more cost and pains to defend
themselves from disdain than pursuits, and Patience is the Virtue which they
have rather most occasion for.

THERE ARE SOME will accuse the Fair of being scornful: But if this be well
considered, it would be acknowledged that their Disdain comes often from the
goodness of their Conscience rather than from their Vanity; because they know
not how to endure those Idolatrous Addresses, and excessive Praises, which
enamored Fools or crafty Pretenders make use of to catch them with. As wise
Kings deride the Complements of depending Courtiers, as knowing that it is
Interest more than Affection that inspires them: The Ladies also ought to
deride the Respects of such Gallants, for as much as with all their cares and
all their labors they seek nothing still but their own pleasure, and the
destruction of those that give ear to them: All their labor and endeavor aims
at, and is confind to, their own pleasure and the ruin of the imprudent. There
is not so much Presumption in the most Fair as there is of Cowardliness in
those Men who put themselves into the Fetters; the Services which they pay, and
the proud Names they give the conquering Mistress, do discover as much their
own weakness and extravagance as they do their Passions: Is there any ground to
call that Empire Tyrannical, where the Vassals are so Voluntary and so much the
Enemies of their own Liberty?

YET I DO NOT intend for all this to make an Apology for those that are really
Vain but only for those that ingenuous and plain. Those Women who persuade
themselves that the great number of their Gallants adds something to their
Beauty, and who please themselves so much in the submissions and respects that
they pay them; these give a great advantage to their Enemies, and show that
they may be conquered at an easy rate, since that there is nothing necessary to
this but a few Respects and flattering Commendations. These are things of which
the Men will be no less prodigal than the Women can possibly be desirous of
them. But the Women ought to believe, that when plain Ingenuity makes a bargain
with Craft and Artifice it can never make it to advantage. It often comes to
pass, that if the Women are fair, those that praise have a design to deceive
them; if they are not fair, they intend to deride them: For this reason they
have all of them great occasion both for Wit and Virtue, in order to defend
them selves from danger and contempt.

THERE ARE that scruple altogether the praising of Beauty, because it fades in
a little time, it endures but like the sudden flashes of Lightning, and that
very often it forebodes no less than the approach of Storms and Tempests. It is
a Flower, say they, which is gone almost as soon as it is blown, which the
Winds tear in pieces, the Sun withers, and the Rain beats down, and which is of
so delicate a constitution, that even without the help of Enemies, it perishes
by its own Weakness. But what do they herein say of this, which may not also be
said of other things in the world, which also are not able to last always? If
they complain of Beauty, it is because this has not the duration of the Stars,
as it has the Value and the Brightness of them. And nevertheless it must be
acknowledged, that the most Fair may find an excellent remedy against Vanity
and Pride, if sometimes at the age of sixteen or of twenty years, they would
present to themselves the defects, and inconveniences of Old Age. Whatever fine
Feathers nature or art now affords, they would be as much ashamed as the
Peacock is when he views his black Feet, if they would foresee a little so
great alterations and ruins. I do not make profession here of Preaching the
four last things that men must come to; but it seems to me that none ought to
afflict themselves for a thing that Time will take away from them insensibly,
yea which diminishes every moment in spite of all the Art that can be used to
preserve it.

It is true, that Cato had so great an esteem of Beauty, that he said
publicly, that it was no less crime to injure it, than to rifle a Temple. But
he spoke of that which is Natural, not of that which is Studied and affected.
Sulpitia, among the Romans had so beautiful Eyes, that those of her time could
not look upon her without being ready to adore her. The Neck and Breasts of
Theodora, the Athenian, were so agreeable, that Socrates himself became in love
with her. These are the Features or Charms that ought not either to be sought
by Artifice, or possessed with Vanity; Nature has favored some persons with
these things with design to please the Eye; and to elevate the Mind to the love
of him who is the source of all human Perfections. The forced and feigned
Beauties luckily fail in the view of all the world, just after the manner of
those false and seeming Stars, which after they have a while abused our Eyes,
do demonstrate by their fall, that we took a Vapor for a Star.

How much Art and Pains do many fruitlesly employ to cover the defects of
Nature, as if it were not better worth their while to have recourse to Virtue
than to Disguise; or as if it would not be much more to their advantage to
repair what is wanting in the Face by the qualities of the Mind? Their design
succeeds extremely ill, and must do so, because their Vanity appears with their
Homeliness, and they are not the more excusable hereby, but more ridiculous.
They would think it very strange if they were treated after the fashion as
Phryne did with those that came into her Company: As soon as this Courtisan
appeared, she defaced the luster of all the Ladies at the Assembly, leaving
them no other Color than what Shame and Jealousy could afford. She invented a
Play to make them merry, wherein every one commanded by turns in their rank.
She commanded Water to be brought, and that every one should wash her Hands and
her Face. As soon as they had obeyed her Commands, there was discovered all
their Paint and Disguise, there was not a person could be known, they had quite
other Faces all full of Blemishes, and Features that were frightful. This Sport
would not be at all less troublesome to many of our Age, than it was
advantageous to that extraordinary Beauty. It was also by her that the
Areopagites themselves lost the reputation of being incorruptible Judges, for
they did not believe her Innocent; nevertheless after they had seen her, they
were not able to judge her guilty. Hipperidus pleaded unsuccessfully against
her, tho he was a most eloquent man, for as soon as she appeared, her Presence
served her for an Apology, and she needed but to show that she might defend her
self. It is not only now-adays that the Fair carry the Cause. After that
Justice has lifted up her Vail to see them, let them plead as little as they
will, their Cause will succeed well for them.

Of Curiosity and Slander.
CURIOSITY is not very often at a good agreement with Silence; those that are
desirous to learn abundance of News, are not usually resolved to conceal it,
and Slander does infallibly make waste of that which an Imprudent Curiosity has
collected. The Mind of these Curious Women resembles the Barrel full of holes
which the Danaides were condemned to fill, which still let out the Water as
fast as it was put in: That which enters by the Ear, goes out immediately at
the Mouth, because the indiscretion which lets them hear no less
inconsiderately than they speak, does no more refuse the opening to Lies, for
their going out, than for their coming in.

I do not blame at all that Divine Curiosity of the Philosophers, and the great
Wits, which reveals to us the Secrets of Nature, and has afforded us the means
to govern the Passions of the Soul. I condemn only that Curiosity which carries
us after the knowledge of things unprofitable or vicious, and leaves us
strangers to the knowledge of our selves.

And to say the truth, I have no less shame than compassion, when I see several
that amuse themselves with the little stories of the place they live in, and
who know nothing but what is impertinent and troublesome to good Companies.
They seek to adorn their Minds as the Chinese do to beautify their Cabinets,
I mean with some antiquated outlandish Trifle or sorry Pedlary. I would advise
those of this humor, who are for spending all their time about things
unuseful, to learn themselves the Anatomy of little Flies, or the Art of
numbering the Atoms of the Air: And that they may treat their Bodies as ill as
they do their Minds, I would have them live upon such things as Cray-fish,
where they may find more employment than nourishment. This inconsiderateness
gives but an ill credit to their Wit, and no better to their Conscience: We
shall judge hereupon, that they do not employ their Time only to hear
superfluous things, but also to hear evil ones: And above all, the readiness
they have to believe a fault in another, is a most certain sign of that which
they have to commit as much themselves.

THERE ARE THEN some that listen with delight to all manner of Slanders; that
cannot endure one should speak to the advantage of any; and who think that
while their Company are finding fault with all the World besides them, they
make an Apology for their faults in showing them many like themselves: As if
the number of Criminals could authorize their Wickedness. When they hear the
Virtues of some rewarded with their deserved Praises, they sit as sad and
uneasy, as the Ugly are wont to be when the Fair are complemented in their
presence. And if we should examine well their thoughts, we should find here yet
a much blacker source of evil. They are glad to have Companions in the Infamy,
but they would not have any partake with them in the Pleasure; they have more
of Jealousy than of Shame, and persuade themselves, that those who make use of
their Pastime do steal something from them. They are of the humor of the
Emperor Tiberius, who sent his Officers about the City of Rome to discover and
condemn the Adulterers, that there might be none but himself alone.

The Virtuous excuse Faults rather than publish them; And on the Contrary, the
Vicious are always unmerciful toward those that are like themselves, to make
show as if that Crime were unknown to them. But the effects give the Lie to
their words, and this Artifice succeeds so ill to them, that they disgrace,
instead of defending themselves. The Honest and Good Women chase Vice out of
the World by their Charity, and the Licentious banish Virtue by their Slanders.
But if I grant that some do not utter Slanders themselves; yet nevertheless
when they listen and give credit to these, their two Ears are no less guilty
than the Tongue of the others: And if Calumny is a Murder of the Reputation,
these are at least to be accounted Accessories.

It is easy to know a Woman that is Chaste from her that is not so: The latter
will examine all things even to the least circumstances; their own Wickedness
serves them for pattern to judge of evil by; their own experience and design
make them put bad interpretations upon innocent things. After Procris had been
treacherous to her Husband, she was always a distrustful Spy upon upon his
Actions; she could not without difficulty believe him innocent in a thing
wherein her self was so guilty* The Vicious are always in an Alarm, they fear
that others should abuse their liberty; and cannot persuade themselves that a
Walk or a little Conversation can be innocent. They apprehend that others will
do as much ill as they themselves have done, or as they were willing to have
committed if they had had as much power as wickedness. And nevertheless, in
truth, they have no better way in the World to conceal their own sin, than to
make show of astonishment and displeasure when they hear others condemned. For
in refusing to give credit to Slanders, people would be ready to judge of them
that they are far from being guilty of a Crime, of which the very Name is
Odious to them. But if they testify their repugnance but by halves, and their
Look permits what their Tongue forbids; this will give Courage to the Vicious,
who are very glad to have to do with those that will not use them roughly.

BUT TO EXAMINE the Vice well, it will be convenient to see wherein Flattery
and Slander are alike or different. The one assaults us with Poison, the other
with a Sword. But considering the thing well, it seems to me that there are
more to be found who resist Slander than Flattery: because the love of our
selves, which fortifies us against Blame, renders us weak when we are assaulted
with Praise. It was a Sentence derived from Divine Wisdom, which Solomon has to
this purpose; As a fi^ing Pot for Silver, and the Furnace for Gold, so is a Man
to his praise. I put these two Vices together, because they are in a manner
always inseparable, and we may ordinarily find, that those given to Slander are
as much addicted also to Flattery. The one and the other comes from Cowardice;
in that this is a want of Courage for a Man not to dare to speak the truth
freely, and not to be able to reprove the things that are Faulty to their Faces
who commit them. But to say truth, if there be weakness of Spirit in them who
exercise Slander, there is no less in those who cannot conquer and deride it.
For what necessity is there that we should be sick when the pain and the sense
of it depends upon our selves? There is not a necessity for Patience here, it
is enough to despise; we ought not to receive the Wounds of Slander, when we
have it in our power to hinder them from reaching to us.

There are some that use great Art in venting their Slanders, who are not
willing to hurt but with gilded Weapons; they disguise their disparagement of
another under an appearance of Praise. If they speak any thing that is ill,
they will pretend it is with regret that they do so: But this is to imitate the
Archers, who draw the Arrow toward them, but it is that they may the better
send it to the Mark they aim at. How much Error and Vanity is there in our
Judgments and Discourses! since even between the Morning and the Evening we
differ more from our selves than perhaps we do from others? How can we be
assured that she who yesterday was involved in Pleasures, may not to day be
choosing Austerities? But supposing that our Judgment were not false, we cease
not for all that to sin against Charity, though we do not against Truth.

Those that have as yet committed but one Fault ought not to be denominated
Vicious: those that have done many, it may be, will continue in them no longer;
the former have perhaps corrected, the latter have changed themselves. And in
truth there can be no great assurance that we can speak any sort of ill
concerning any Person without being in danger of a lie, since there needs but
one moment or one thought to alter her who is called by an ill name, and to
make her a Penitent or a Sinner. After all, it is no small Consolation to
Innocence to think that Calumny even at its first birth had the Impudence to
assault the Pure and most Holy God; and that through all Ages this has been the
base Enemy of Virtue. This is a forcible reason why we should not be troubled
at it. But that you may not be guilty of it, the grand remedy is to avoid
Idleness, and to believe that there is no time more proper and fit to speak
evil in, than that which we do not employ in doing Good.

Of the Cruel and the Compassionate.
WHATEVER the most of Men think of the Fury of Women, yet is Pity so natural to
them, and their Inclination is so strongly carried to Mercy, that the Furies
themselves could not forbear to weep for the Misfortune of Orpheus when he went
down into Hell, to beg that his Wife Euridice might be returned to him. But if
those merciless places, where it is said horror continually reigns together
with implacable Cruelty, could not possibly stifle the motions of Compassion to
this miserable Person; may not this Fable alone make us judge, that Gentleness
and Pity is a quality inseparable from the Ladies; if we had nothing else to
incline us to this belief, as indeed we have a great number of Examples, and
most true Instances in History that may dispose us to it. Does not this Fiction
show that even the worst of the Sex have always, I know not what, tenderness in
them that they cannot wholly put off; and that they never are wholly destitute
of Compassion for the Unfortunate, nor of Clemency to the Guilty?

Nevertheless many accuse them of being extreme in their Passions: They believe
that if a Woman defers a while to take Vengeance for an Injury, she does this
only to render it the more Violent when she takes it: and especially that she
will very rarely pardon any that injure her in her Love or her Fortune. But
although this mistake is more worthy to be passed by with Disdain than to be
particularly answered, I will nevertheless say this to it; That if any will
give themselves the trouble to examine their Inclination, they shall find it as
innocent in this matter as their Enemies have represented it guilty, and
altogether worthy of excuse at least, if not of Praise. The indifferent sort of
Wits are moved easily, and easily appeased again; for their violence tires it
self, and it comes necessarily to pass, that their Passion weakens it self, if
it continues a little while, because it is neither natural nor reasonable. But
when a Passion is just, it always augments its self the longer it endures; for
the Thought and Meditation preserves it, and gives it force, while a Person
muses the more deliberately upon the reasons that gave it birth. The
resentments of the Feeble and the Strong Spirits resemble Fire, which goes out
almost as soon as it is kindled in Flax or Tow; but maintains it self a long
while in Iron or any such more solid Matter. The Ladies are not of that light
Temperament as to be transported without reason: They are as well hard to be
appeased as to be provoked; they are equally hard to be brought either to War
or Peace.

They would deceive themselves not a little, who should imagine for this that
my Proofs are as unreasonable as unartificial: I always submit my Morals to
Christianity; and I own that I should make of them rather a School for Vice
than for Virtue, if I would justify Revenge to oblige the Ladies; which were
also to affront both Religion and even their Humor which is not addicted but
to Gentleness and Civility. I praise only their Constancy in designs when they
are just, otherwise I should offend instead of obliging them, if I should
defend a sin so prejudicial to themselves, and which makes them pass for
Monsters. They have so little Inclination to this, and are so unfit for it,
that it is not only unbecoming them to be Cruel, but also even to be Severe;
and of the two parts there are of Justice, they seem to be contrived for the
exercise of that which is the least Rigorous. And, to say the truth, it is no
less shameful to see a Woman without Pity, than a Man would be without Courage.

AND nevertheless that they may not deceive themselves in this part of
Morality, I must say they ought not to be prodigal of their Compassion, nor to
throw it away upon all sorts of re-encounters. Anaxarete, in Ovid, was not at
all Cruel when she saw the desperate Iphis die before her Gate without offering
to prevent it. Her refusal was just, because his demand was not; and he was a
Criminal that executed Justice upon himself for his own Rashness. The Honest
Woman ought to fear less the Ruin of a Troublesome Person, than the loss of
her own Honor: and it would be a sign of very little Judgment, if a Woman
should be Cruel to her self, in order to the being so impertinently pitiful to
the insolent or foolish.

BUT OUT of this occasion where Gentleness were a Crime; and beside this
Honesty which makes severity absolutely necessary, the Ladies ought always to
represent to themselves, that Cruelty comes from Weakness of Spirit, that they
who are destitute of Compassion want also Knowledge and Courage. Most
certainly, the most Generous are the most Pitiful. Those Ladies know it is more
Glorious to conquer their Passions than their Enemies: and that to give a life
when it is in their power to take it away, is, as it were, to raise the Dead
without the working of a Miracle. The Proud and the Vicious Women seem
incapable of this Virtue, because, while they find a great many Enemies to
their ill designs, there is not a wickedness so black and horrid but their
Passion may inspire them therewith, for the ruin of those who hinder them from
enjoying the Pleasures they desire, or the Fortune they aim at. Aphrodisia the
Wife of the Emperor Diocletian tried all sorts of ways to make her self
Beloved by her Son-in-law Erastus: but after she had used a thousand
Insinuations, in a private Chamber too, where she thought the opportunity would
help her to a Conquest, he still most virtuously refused, and that refusal
created in her no less hatred than shame. She went all confused and disordered
as she was to the Emperor, her Husband, to accuse this Innocent Prince of that
Crime which she could not persuade him to commit. It is the Custom of those
that are Debauched to change their Love into Hatred when their desires are not
satisfied as soon as they discover them: For they are willing to preserve their
own Reputation, though by the Ruin of those who were Witnesses to their wicked
Intentions, and would not be accomplices with them. There was some ground for the
Philosophy of Chilo when he publicly maintained, concerning such Women, That
it is the last and the greatest evil any Man can wish his Enemies, to fall
under the outrageous Anger of a Woman: And it seems indeed to be an
incomparable Masterpiece, and such as hardly any Man could ever learn the Art
of Performing to appease a Furious Woman.

BUT THAT we may most forcibly assault this Vice of Cruelty, and make this Sex
conceive yet a greater horror against it, I suppose this further Addition may
suffice; To say, as is most true, That this is as contrary to Beauty and a good
Face, as it is to a good Conscience, and wrongs it as much: Though Tears have
something of Charm and Gracefulness upon the Countenance, yet Anger has not the
same Privilege with Sadness. Though we may often see a Melancholy Person very
beautiful, yet I could never hear any one say that a Woman looked lovely in her
Fury. I grant that for the resistance of other Passions they have need of some
Philosophy; but for the cure of this, methinks, they should need only a
Looking-Glass; they should need only to see that they might be persuaded to
correct themselves: and it is perhaps for this reason that they commonly dare
not view themselves in this Condition, for fear they should be ashamed at the
sight.

This Passion is too violent not to confound and deface the most beautiful
Features of any Countenance, the Eyes by little and little change their
pleasing Charms into Terror; the Vexation of the Soul paints it self upon all
the Behavior; and this may come to that degree of Horror as to put a Man to
his Prayers when he approaches them, and to make them as frightful as
Demoniacks, while their Rage puts them into the Postures and Looks of those
miserable Creatures. The Head of Medusa, which gave so much fear to all the
World, had only the Hair of it turned into Serpents: These Women by right ought
to have their Eyebrows of the same sort, that they might be entirely
frightful. And it must needs be that the Devil who inspires them with so much
Fury, must cast, as it were, a Mist before their Eyes, and confound their sight
when they behold their own Faces in a Glass, since they are not afraid of
themselves; and instead of being contented that Men endure them, they are
ambitious of being loved. They require Caresses, and in truth do hardly deserve
our Patience. Let Hell keep the Infernal Furies to it self, these are enough to
this World to commit or persuade Crimes that are more black and horrid than
those that have fetched Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, or have caused the Earth
to open and swallow up alive the committers of them.

Of a Good Grace.
THE SOUL is not more necessary to Life, than a Good Grace is to Pleasing: It
gives Luster to the Beautiful, and cures a great deal of the Defect in those
that are not so. As soon as any are possessed of this amiable quality, all that
which they undertake is comely and agreeable. There are many sorts of it; every
Humor has its Charms, as every Star its Influences; Hearts may be wounded, as
well as Bodies, with different Weapons: The Looks, the Gate, the Discourse, the
Actions, the Voice, and even the Silence have their diverse attractives: and so
far does this truth go, that some are to be found who never appear more lovely
than when they are Weeping; As Panthea who had so much Grace in her Melancholy,
that Araspes was constrained to fall in Love with her Tears.

In truth it seems as if this agreeable quality were even natural to the Women,
and that they possess it without any Labor or Study: Nevertheless, though
Birth does contribute very much to it, and the force of a Good Grace is much
easier felt than it can be expressed; yet it must be acknowledged, that some
Rules may be given, in order to the rendering it the more perfect. It must be
declared in this place, That the Beauty of the Body does in some measure depend
upon the Wit, and that the Laws of a Good Grace are joined to those of
Morality. Wickedness has necessarily those Remorses that the greatest
dissimulation cannot long conceal. Rage, Cruelty, Love, and Restlesness appear
on the Forehead; the Countenance does depend upon the Passions in its Serenity
or Trouble, as the Dial depends upon the Motions of the Clock for showing of
the Hours. Insomuch, that for the preserving a Good Grace, it is necessary that
you know how to regulate the Motions of the Mind as well as those of the Body.

AND TO BEGIN with that which is of most importance, there is nothing that
ought to be avoided so much as the Artifice that is constrained. They must not
aspire after the Excellence that is impossible; Art cannot employ too much
endeavor any more than Nature, without forming a Monster. It often comes to
pass through the extreme desire they have to please, that they cause a hatred
and distaste instead of liking and love. When they employ too much Care in
their Discourse, instead of a natural and plain expressing of their Thoughts,
they disturb and confound themselves. They resemble those Vessels that have a
very narrow Mouth, out of which nothing can come, though they be full, but with
noise and violence. As constraint disgusts in the brightest Actions, so a
plainness pleases even in the meanest. That Woman has Charms which no one can
resist because they proceed from Innocence; and Affectation is never without
some Imperfections, or without a too great self-love.

What an unreasonable thing it is, not to dare to laugh, for fear of making the
Patches fall off; or lest they should change their Color at any other time of
the day than in the Morning when they are dressing? This is nevertheless the
Fashion of those who will not endure a Glass that does not flatter them, nor
like the Day, but in a false Light; and tho they pretend to be very devout, yet
they will not come to Prayers but by Candlelight: What a real Persecution it
would be to these Ladies to bring them to Mass, and force them to undergo the
sprinkling of Holy Water, whereby their Paint would be diluted, and the ill
Features of their Faces discovered. But their Design appears with their
Deformity hereby, in that while they endeavor to hide their Defects, they
render them the more conspicuous.

A good Grace is so much an Enemy and Stranger to this Slavery and Racking,
that if we can always do well, I cannot tell whether we can always please; we
must allow of frequent Intervals to relieve the Spirits. Art in this case ought
to conform it self to Nature, that has not stuck the Stars so thick in the Sky,
nor planted Flowers so in the Meadows as that there is no Space between them.
And although the Flowers are not comparable to the Stars in Beauty or Value;
yet nevertheless we commonly look upon them with more Pleasure and Attention,
because their duration being of so short continuance, they always leave us with
an Appetite and a Desire to see them again. The Spirits may come to distaste as
well as the Senses, and may have need of Repose, and some Release for the
digesting of their Pleasures.

Yet it is not my Intention in saying this, to persuade that they should study
Faults, but that, provided they be light ones, they may be sometimes so happily
committed that they shall become advantageous; forasmuch as the shamefacedness
which ordinarily attends them, and which appears on the Countenance, is an
infallible Testimony of an innocent Soul, and such as is far from the
conceiving of great Evils when it is so sensible of small ones, and that even
when they are but imaginary ones too. If then a good Grace observes to do all
things as it were naturally and without Study, it follows that Plainness is
much better than Constraint. All the World does well enough know that there is
difficulty in doing every thing that is rare. Address is not used to show that
we perform with Difficulty; an untaught Villager can easily do as much as that;
but it is to serve for the concealing that difficulty cunningly, without
letting the Artifice be discovered.

PLAINNESS is not less desirable in Discourse than in Actions; the Words that
are most common, are the most excellent, and every Word that is obscure is
forbidden. That Philosopher that always wept when he considered Mankind,
perhaps would have had some inclination to laugh, if he had heard some of those
Women talk, who have a mind to be thought more learned than they are: They are
always using in discourse the most uncommon and unknown Words, and such as far
better express their extravagant Folly than their Thoughts.

THIS EXCESSIVE Desire to please which we have condemned, is almost continually
joined with a Fear that they do not. And from hence it comes to pass, that when
these two contrary Passions meet together in one mind they must needs cause
great inequalities and remarkable alterations; because, if the Desire excites
us, the Fear again damps us; when the one animates us to the speaking of a good
Word, the other interrupts us and obliges to Silence. We may judge from hence
how much wrong this Fear does to a good Grace as well as Vanity and Constraint.
It ordinarily comes to pass, that those Women who are always in alarm, and
every moment fear they shall mistake, do almost nothing else but mistake: An
Extreme Apprehension disposes the Mind to Error as well as the Body to
Distemper.

And to make a right Judgment of this troublesome Passion, it seems to me that
if we enquire well into the Cause of it, we shall find the Education
contributing no less to it than Temper and Birth. Those that are brought up in
Slavery know not how to do any thing with Liberty; they dare not look up with
that honest assurance which should give a good Grace to their Actions; their
Thoughts are always mean, and whatever good Inclinations they may have, yet
their Shame and Ignorance hinder them from succeeding in all their Enterprises.

Those Women that have seen nothing of the World are liable to be astonished at
small Matters, because the constant Distrust which they have of themselves
makes them fear and admire every thing. For the most part after their
Reverences they have no other Complements but those that are used at the ends
of Letters. They would have found out an excellent Remedy for this if they
would but persuade themselves that they ought not so easily to admire things;
and that if they would give themselves leisure to examine that, which at first
sight amazes them, they would often find after the conversation of an hour's
length, that what was the Subject of their Admiration ought to cause their
disdain. But this Resolution is not acquired without Labor: It is very
Difficult, even to the best Wits, to have Address without Experience, or
Readiness without Practice: Actions breed a Habit with some difficulty; but
when the Habit is formed, then that produces the Actions with Ornament and a
good Grace. Nevertheless when I condemn the rustic Shame, I have no Intention
herein to recommend Impudence; since both of them have Issues and Effects that
are unjust; forasmuch as the one transports us beyond our Power and what
becomes us, and the other detains us below them both: On the contrary, the
Modesty that I desire, is placed between these two vicious Extremes, that it
may keep us at a Distance from too good or from too ill an Opinion of our
selves.

The Debauched or Lewd Woman.
THERE ARE perhaps but few Palaces that resemble the Isle of Chio, where it is
said the Ladies preserved inviolate the Laws of Chastity and Honor during the
space of seven hundred Years. I know not whether this was an Effect of their
Skill, or of their Virtue; but be it as it will, this was a Chastity of a long
Duration, and which deserves Admiration and Praise as much as the Corruption of
the present Age deserves Reproofs and Punishments. It may be this Discourse
will not be at all pleasing to those Women to whom I desire it should be
useful; but if the Vicious are not disposed to receive our Remedies for their
Cure, at least they must expect to undergo our Affronts for their shame. I
speak boldly to all; for if they be debauched, I desire not to be in any Favor
with them; and if they be honest, I do not fear that I shall hereby incurr
their Hatred. The one sort will applaud my Censure, and the other will do me
honor in not approving my Discourse any more than I do their Life. However I
shall always lie under this Inconvenience, That whatever Horror I can help any
to conceive at this Crime, it must be more obscure than injurious in such a
matter. It is necessary to conceal, through Modesty, that which Hatred and
Truth would require to be published. It is herein that this Crime has a great
advantage, in that, while it is worthy of Reproof, the Filthiness it self
nevertheless serves it for a Defense, and one is constrained to spare it more
out of shame than pity.

IT IS VERY TRUE then, that the Passion of the debauched does no way deserve
the Name of Love; it is some other Disease which cannot be cured but by a
Miracle: and one may well say to the reproach of those that are infected with
it, what the Poet said of Myrrha; that it was not Cupid that enkindled such a
Flame in her, but rather one of the most enraged Furies. This is a Fire from
Hell, which has for its Smoke a black and dismal Blindness, for its gloomy
Shine a horrid Scandal, and for its Ashes Infamy and Shame. And how can their
filthy Desire be called Love; when instead of Election there is nothing in it
but a brutal Universality? For in loving all, to speak properly, they do not
love any; since this is a Fire which mingles with all sorts of Matter, even to
the burning in the Water: I mean it can entertain for its Objects such as are
worthy of the greatest horror and detestation.

AND NEVERTHELESS, though they have the Conscience full of Crimes, these are
often they who would pass for Saints: As the most deformed have most need of
Paint and Disguise; so these Debauchees do sometimes seek the most
industriously the Appearance of Virtue. It is for this Reason they live with so
much constraint; and that there is nothing equal or natural in their
Deportment; that they appear this day insolent according to their humor, and
to morrow carry themselves modestly according to their Dissimulation and
Hypocrisy. They who say the Vicious resemble the Sirens, perhaps do not know
all the Mystery of this Comparison. One of these Monsters was named Parthenope,
that is to say, Virgin; having a smiling Countenance to allure Mariners withal,
and make them split upon those Rocks that were covered by the Water. The most
Immodest will sometimes endeavor to appear the most Chaste, but with all their
Disguise they are but infamous Gulphs where none but the Imprudent and the
Desperate make Shipwreck.

They make a show of Candor and ingenuous Freedom, to the end they may the
better deceive those who are simple enough to believe they do those things only
out of Humor or very innocently, which they really do with Design to catch
some Fool or other thereby. They do nevertheless even herein acknowledge the
worth of Virtue, since they borrow the Appearance of that for the putting off
their Vice. But herein their Design succeeds ill, whatever address they have,
their Artifice renders them suspected: And as we know that is counterfeit Gold
which bears too bright a Color; so we may discover their disguised Virtue, by
it is making too great a show. After all, the true Chastity does not seek so
much to set off it self as that which is feigned; the Caution and Reservedness
of an honest Woman is very different from that of her who is not so; the one is
plain and natural, the other is constrained.

But to say the truth, it is not in this, that the Debauched seem to me most
blameable; as yet they give some Honor to Virtue, when they take pains to
counterfeit it. It seems that their Artifice is an effect of their Remorse, and
that as the homely, in using paint, do own the Defects of their Faces; so the
vicious, while they dissemble their Crime, have still some horror at it, not
being able to endure that it should appear quite naked. But there are some
Impudent Creatures who boast of their Filthiness, and make their Sin publicly
appear; who love not the Conversation of any but those that are most
licentious; and who entertain themselves always with the most shameful
Discourses.

WHATEVER some say to excuse this Liberty, I must needs think that it is neither
Genteelness nor good humor that gives such an Easiness; that Complaisance does
not at all extend hitherto; and that it is impossible any should live in such
Looseness, without Offense to Modesty. Shamefacedness is always severe when it is
entire and true; it is corrupted when it becomes softened. If the Widow of
Sigismond had been the most chaste of all Women; yet had she not put a Slur upon
her Virtue, when she answered to them who counseled her not to marry again;
That if she were to take an Example from any of the Birds, she should rather
choose to imitate the Sparrows than the Turtles? Though she had been never so
innocent, this bold Discourse would have made her accounted guilty. If there
was no wickedness in it; yet at least there was Impudence. But that I may
dissemble nothing in this matter; it must be said that the true Modesty will
not only restrain a Woman from speaking what is dishonest, but even from
hearing, and giving her self leave to understand it. After Helen had opened the
Letter which was sent her by Paris, she thought her self bound to refuse him
nothing. When they have granted some Favor they engage themselves afterward
to do more than they intended. They who have indeed no Desire to be conquered,
ought to take away at first all Hopes from those that assault them; for fear
lest they should take a gentle Refusal for a disguised Permission.

THE DEBAUCHED are not only Impudent, but also Slanderers; persuading
themselves by a false Politic, that they have justified their Sin if they can
make it be thought universal. What Error, what Blindness is here! If they
slander the most Virtuous, they also hate those that are like themselves: So
that the Conformity which produces Friendship in all other Professions, breeds
nothing but Hatred among these. Is not this to be at Variance with all sorts of
Persons; when the Presence of the Virtuous seems to reproach them with their
Crimes, and the Company of those that are like them, does something diminish
their Divertisement?

Lastly they add Cruelty to Impudence and Slander. And that we may not engage
in an impossible Task in undertaking to reckon up all the ill that is in such
Persons; it may suffice to say that we must reckon up all that there is of
Wickedness and Crime in the whole World, to express all that which is among
these abject Creatures. The Salvation of these hardened Wretches is almost
desperate, their Repentance ought to be placed in the rank of Miracles; and
whatever purposes they make of Conversion, they always relapse into the same
Hell. It ought not to be a Wonder if they have sometimes in this World as much
of Prosperity as of Sin; and if they are as happy as they are guilty, it is
because the Righteous God deferrs their Punishment, to render it the more
extreme: He is not willing that they should encroach at all in this Life upon
the Punishments which he prepares for them in the other.

I acknowledge, that in this Age, as well as in that of Phryne, there may be
found too many fair Debauchees. But if we could well consider a great many of
these infamous Sinners, and had compared the Lines of their Faces with those in
their Consciences, we should often enough find in them an equal Deformity. They
do not think what must needs be the ugly Horror of their filthy old Age; since
many of them have given their Nurses some fear almost from the Cradle. They do
not consider that the wrinkles make a reckoning of the Years upon their Faces,
as the figures do of the Hours upon a Dial. If one had painted the Portraicture
of these wretches to the life, and any could persuade themselves that the
Devils do resemble them, I believe the more among Mankind would take care not
to damn themselves, and that this frightful Object would beget in Men a greater
fear of Hell than the severest Preachers are able to do.

But that I may be as short as obscure in a matter so unpleasing, I shall
finish the Character of the Debauchee after the same manner as Appelles did one
of his Pictures. After this admirable Limner had considered, with abundance of
Pleasure, the Features and Charms of Compaspe a Mistress of Alexander, he was
so in Love that he was not able to finish the Copy of so lovely an Original. I
do that out of Hatred which he did out of Love, and I find so many horrible
Lines in the Pourtraicture of these Infamous Wretches, that the Pencil falls
out of my Hand; having too much Anger, and too few Reproaches, to finish this
Piece with Colors that are black enough.

Of Jealousy.
WE ALWAYS lose with great regret what we possess with Love and keep with Care.
It is for this reason that Jealousy is not so unjust as many imagine, since it
only makes us fear least another should ravish from us that which we think
should be ours alone. Is there so great an Offense in watching for the safety
of that which we love, especially in a time when Fidelity is so rare that there
are not so many who live in no fear of being deceived, as there are that expect
to be so. If the Goods of Fortune and of the Body yield to those of the Mind,
then also is the loss of these the most sensible: and when any rob us of those
Affections in another which we were possessed of, and think we merit by our
own, they take from us the greatest Good. And, to say truth, that we may
Philosophize rightly, we must say, Love is like an Empire or Kingdom Ruled by
two Persons only, where the Dominion cannot be extended further without
detroying it; and where Obedience and Sovereignty are reciprocal. It is a
Niggard that can be willing to lose nothing, not so much as a glance of the Eye
or a little Hair of the Head.

In truth it is no less foolish to believe that there is no longer any Love in
the Mind of one that is jealous, than it would be to think that a Man has no
Life in him when he complains he is sick. On the contrary, as the grief and the
sense of Sickness are not found in those that are Dead, so Jealousy can never
be met with where there is really a Hatred and Indifference. And it may well be
that this Passion may have an appearance of Reason for it, since God himself
heretofore permitted to the Husbands a trial of the faithfulness of their Wives
with the Water which was called the Water of Jealousy or Probation. If the
suspicion of this sort had been a thing extravagant and unjust, God had
forbidden it directly, instead of appointing so solemn a remedy for the cure of
it, and had testified a Hatred rather than a Compassion for this Malady.

Also they deceive themselves grossly who think they have rendered Jealousy
altogether Criminal, when they have said, That it makes us have too bad an
Opinion of our own Merit, or of the Fidelity of the Person whom we love. If we
examine well this Passion, we shall not find that it comes often from a
distrust of our selves, and that we do not cease for that to believe our selves
Amiable or others Amorous. It is a fear that does not so much discover our
weakness, as it does declare that the Merit of what we love may make it sought
after. And what do any in this which is not done by all for a Treasure or any
other valuable thing, which it is not possible for us to love without having
some fear of losing it? As they that believe very firmly may receive something
of doubt, so the most assured in love are capable of some suspicion. The
strongest Trees are moved with the Winds, though the Roots are fast, when the
Branches and the Leaves are shaken.

One would perhaps be very willing to throw off an ill Opinion, but the
likenesses and conjectures solicit and shake us till we are forced to conclude
rather on the side of fear than assurance. During this irresolution the Mind
suffers much, and the appearances give a great deal of pain, when we cannot
certainly judge whether they be true or false. There are good and bad Examples,
either to make fear or to cure it: but ordinarily we fix our Thoughts more upon
those Examples that persecute than on those that may comfort us. Such an one as
that of Penelope affords comfort, when one represents to himself that she was
twenty five Years faithful, during the Absence of Ulysses so long. But that of
Messalina torments and awakens suspicion, when one thinks of her Infamy and
Filthiness. Our Spirit wavers between both sides: and it is an unhappiness that
conjectures having alarmed us, we find or we invent, by much examining,
something to change our doubt into a belief.

And if it be said that we ought to be at rest, after the experience that we
have made of a Person who has testified her Affection by many effects: It seems
to me that these Proofs cannot hinder but that we shall have a great deal of
Trouble, because the fear that sometimes is not in our power, will put the
worst Interpretation upon the least appearances, even to the busying it self
afterward with false Objects when it has not true ones. Whatever Fidelity we
have proved, when Love has no more to desire, it begins to fear all. This is
the natural course of our Passions which always threaten a change when they are
extreme; and which fall of themselves, without a true cause to do so, only
because they are mutable and humane. Hippocrates has given us a Maxim to be
observed, That our Bodies are in danger of a Disease when they have too much
health and strength: A Poet has made an handsomer one concerning the alteration
of those Minds that have too violent an Affection: The Will, says he, deserves
a Wheel of Inconstancy for its Passions, as well as Fortune does for her
Favors: when we are raised to the top we cannot long stay there, either out of
our infelicity or our weakness.

Those that are arrived at the most eminent degree of Love, are like them that
stand upon a very high building or hill; their Brain is confused, and though no
Person thrusts them, they stagger and even fall of themselves through the mere
fear of falling. When the Sun is arrived at the height of Noon he begins to go
downward; for that not being able to get above that pitch, he retires and
withdraws himself into another Hemisphere without being driven by any Person to
it. Our Minds seem to have the same Motions; a disgust follows the pleasure by
an order no less natural than that which makes the Night succeed and take place
of the Day. We find our selves insensibly wearied with pleasant things; and
though the Soul be Immortal in its Nature, yet in its Actions, which have the
Body and Animal Spirits for their Instruments, it fails not to testify a Youth
or Old Age with the Body.

Socrates said, That the Gods had endeavored to mingle together Pleasure and
Pain; but when they found this could not be done, at least they would needs
fasten them by their Tails, to the end that one might succeed the other, so to
hinder in us both Insolence and Despair. This comes to pass sometimes when we
contribute nothing toward it voluntarily; and as we pass from Joy to Sadness,
so we often perceive that our Love changes it self either into coldness or
indifference. The Distempers of the Mind, as well as those of the Body, do very
often form themselves without our consent: we lose the Rest of the Soul as we
do our Health, all at once; sometimes without having foreseen this change, and
without being able to find either the Cause or the Remedy of this Passion, any
more than we can that of a Quartan Ague.

BUT I HAVE too long spoken against my own sentiment as well as against truth
it self, in favor of a Passion that ruins our Love, our Reputation, and the
Quiet of the Mind; Reason begets Love, and Love Jealousy: but both the one and
the other of these prove what some, sorts of Worms are to the Subject in which
they are bred, that is, the Destruction of it. The one kills the Father, the
other the Mother. Let this Passion be moderated as it can be, it is always
dangerous; and for this it is necessary to to commit an Injustice, in taking
away the use of it for the sake of the abuse, because the one is too much
fastened to the other. As there is not any Serpent so little but it has some
Poison, so there is no Jealousy so well regulated, as not to engender a great
deal of Mischief. They that compare it to the Ivy have made a handsome
Comparison; for ordinarily that grows only upon old and ruinous Buildings: in
like manner this Passion chooses out of all the rest of Mankind the most absurd
and ill-natured Spirits. We may see the Ivy flourishing and green upon a Tree
that is withered and dry; and by so much the more old a Man grows, by so much
does this Passion grow more vigorous and young; so that it becomes more strong
in those whom Age or want of Wit render more feeble or stupid. Other Plants
have their Roots only at the foot of them, the Ivy has roots every where, and
even more than Leaves; Jealousy also roots its self more every day, and
renders it self more inseparable from the Soul than the Ivy is from the Trees
or Walls that it grows to.

They are none but the indifferent sort of Wits that are capable of this
Contagion the excellent are above and the very small ones below it. These
latter are ignorant of the occasions for it and observe them not, the former
surmount and despise them. It is in this that Stupidity attains the same pitch
with Wisdom, and the Rusticks are as happy as the Philosophers. On the other
side, they that afflict themselves for a misfortune which has no remedy but
Patience, make their error the entertainment of the World, and are Lunatic,
having the Moon whole in their Heads, while they think they have the horned
half of it on their Foreheads. This is not to have a great Spirit to incommode
ones self without obliging any body, and to damn ones self in this World that
we might be sure not to miss of it. If the distrust of the Jealous be known, it
increases the evil instead of bringing a remedy to it; if it be not known, it
is superfluous to them. And it is an evil which when it is hid, silence and
modesty render it more insupportable.

I do not wonder at all if the Jealous are very meager, their Passion feeds its
self only with Shadows and Phantasms. The good Wits knows how to restrain their
Curiosity, while the indifferent ones give it an entire liberty, to learn that
which it ought not to know; not minding that in the Trade of the World the most
exact Persons have not always the best satisfaction in their Affairs. If we had
well regulated our Opinions, we should have subjected many Enemies. Melancholy
and Musing maintain Jealousy, divertisement and forgetfulness destroy it: the
Spirit tires it self as well as the Eye when it is fastened too long to one
Object. In such cases as this, we must gain our Victory as the Parthians did
theirs, that is by flying; and must divert the thoughts rather than too
obstinately fix them. It is an Enemy whose Weapons are poisoned, and to
approach us is enough for it to conquer us. After that the memory has received
it, the reason comes too late to make a resistance: It may be hindered from
entering, but it never goes out till it has ruined them that entertain it.

Cydippus among the Romans having taken a great deal of Pleasure in seeing a
Combat of Bulls, he mused so much upon it all night, that in the morning he
arose with Horns upon his Forehead. This Spectacle had pleased him, it had
entertained his fancy, and at last his Imagination did him this evil office.
It is after this fashion that many disorder their own Heads, without
considering that their restlesness or their curiosity is always hurtful to
them. For if they learn that their suspicions were false, they would be obliged
to repent of them; if they find them to be true, they become miserable by
having been too curious. They that say the sin of the Angels was Jealousy or
Envy, seem, in part, to justify those that entertain this Passion, in that the
Angels were capable of this, with all their light, which far surpasses the
darkness of our Minds. But we may also learn by this example, that it was this
which made Hell, and which daily renders Men miserable in the midst of
Pleasures, even to the making Lovers lose their Paradise, if so imaginary
contentments can yield one.

There is not a Wickedness so black but this Passion renders us capable to
commit it, while it gives address to the most Clownish, and debauches the
Virtuous under pretense of having satisfaction for an Injury. Circe being
Jealous of Scylla, and fearing that Glaucus was in love with her, poisoned the
Waters where she was wont to bathe her self, that she might turn the Beauteous
Nymph into a Deformed Monster. Murder, Poison, and Magic are but Sports to
it, and it has no other bounds in its Inventions and its Crimes than
Impossibility. It is a strange thing that those Women who spend their time in
Divertisements themselves, cannot forbear to be jealous of their Husbands, and
violate the Law of Nature as well as the Law of God, in that they will not
endure to receive the same usage that they give. They are very often Debauched
themselves; for they practice what they fear others guilty of, and their fear
arises from their experience. The jealous Minds never own their Error but when
it is past remedy. All the World knew the suspicions that Herod had of
Mariamne, and the occasion of them was nothing else but that she was beautiful;
having no other ground to believe her guilty, but only that he thought her
worthy to be sought after. But what Fury and what Rage was there in this! When
he had put to death this Innocent Lady, he would call to her as if she were not
dead, and thought to find her in his Palace who was conveyed to her Tomb: This
Tyrant might well commit such a Crime every Month, since he could forget them
so soon, and had a Memory as short as his Judgment. Jealousy does carry us
away from our selves; we have some reason then to disown the effects of it when
we are recovered, and when we consider the Malice and Extravagance of it. We
oftentimes, after his example, oblige the Persons whom we love to die with
grief by our suspicions, and then afterward we regret this unprofitably; we
give them Reputation by our Repentance, but cannot restore the Life which their
Melancholy has taken away: we condemn our blindness too late to justify their
Innocence. The reports of Slanderers rendered Procris jealous of her Husband
Cephalus; she imagined he had a Mistress whom he went to meet in the Woods,
instead of going to hunt there: she hid her self behind a Thicket to hear his
Discourse when he should rest himself in the shade, and to discover the Object
of his Meditations: he heard the noise of her, and believing it was some wild
Beast he drove an Arrow into her heart and killed her, crying out Cephalus.
This word made him understand that he had taken his Wife for a Beast, and it
may be he was not much deceived: It is want of Wit to give Credit so lightly to
small appearances, and to find bad Interpretations for good things. An honest
Liberty is of more value than such a Constraint; Liberty extinguishes the Fire
that Restraint kindles. When the occasions to transgress are common, they will
be despised: but when they are scarce, they will be eagerly laid hold on out of
fear that they will not return with so much advantage.

IN ALL CASES, how extreme soever a Jealousy may be, I think the Example of
Vulcan may serve for a remedy to it. When he was Jealous of Mars and Venus he
laid Nets to catch them in the sight of all the Gods; but what did he get at
last by his Curiosity and Cunning, but only to be declared infamous with the
more solemnity, and to be cast out of Heaven, and break a Log with the fall?

Nevertheless that none may deceive themselves in this matter, I desire they
would take notice of this Distinction; That Jealousy respects Love, Envy the
goods of Fortune, and it is Emulation that follows Virtue. The goods of Fortune
are too gross, those of Love are too slight for our Minds, there are only those
of Virtue that can deserve to be the Object of it. It is only in the pursuit of
this that Competitors can endure one another, as well as many may agree to
serve themselves of the Light of the Sun or the Influence of the Stars.

Also we may see among the Ancients, that the three Graces hold each other by
the Hand and are united in the Alliance of Virtue, while the Goddesses are at
strife for the Honor of excelling in Beauty, and the Famous Triumvirate fell
out about the Possession of the Universal Empire.

And if we may add for this purpose any thing of Christianity to our Morals,
that we may find a remedy for the greatest Persecutions of Jealousy, let us
observe the Example of the Blessed Virgin and her Husband Joseph; where we may
find that the most Chaste of all Women yet gave some Jealousy to the most
Honest and Sincere Man. There is in this sometimes more of Misfortune than of
Malice; and therefore those that are liable to be Jealous should like him
despise the slight appearances of ground for it; and those that are wronged by
Jealousy should like her suffer patiently the suspicions of it. It would be no
small Consolation to think, that after all the Proofs, and all the Witnesses
that might constrain us to judge ill: it is better in this extremity to believe
a Miracle than a Sin, and to own the Power of God than the weakness of a
Creature.

Of Friendship, and the Love of Inclination, and that of Election.
SINCE there is no Pleasure in Life without Friendship; and the greatest
Prosperity is tedious, and the least Affliction without this is insupportable;
it is not fit I should forget this Divine Quality of Amity, wherein the Ladies
have, at all times, greatly recommended themselves. It is not reasonable that I
should pass by this lovely Virtue, to which they have even erected Altars among
the most Barbarous Heathen Nations, and which exercises an Empire most absolute
over the Hearts of Men, in all places where there is any Sense or Knowledge of
it. There is then no need of long Proofs to make it appear, that Love and Amity
are necessary to the World: It is of more importance to show how it is
dangerous. It is more profitable to show the Use than the Worth of it. Most
certainly if any know not how to distinguish well what is worthy of their Love,
they must be very unhappy; for the imprudent and ill-placed Affections
ordinarily prove a cause of the greatest evils that afflict our Lives. The
disposal of Love is truly a source of Misery if not well directed, as well as
it is of Felicity if it be so. For this reason we ought to examine our Love and
Amity from the very birth of it, since all the Passions and all the Motions of
the Soul depend on this. For as heretofore among the Romans when they had
chosen a Dictator, they did at the same time depose all those that had any
other Office, to the end that a new Lord might be attended with new Officers;
so also when we change our Love all the other Passions change their nature;
they all follow this first mover. If we hope or if we fear still, yet it is not
for the same end, as it is not for the same Object. And in truth, when I think
with my self that this Passion not only gives motion to all the rest, but also
that it constrains us to espouse the qualities of those whom we love; and above
all, that it never ends but as it were with Life: I declare that it is in this
more than in any other concern, that our choice is of great importance, and
that we know not how to employ too much care and prudence to examine well
whether that which at first we esteem worthy of our Love, does not indeed
deserve our hatred and aversion. This choice is not less difficult than
necessary. But since they commonly say that Love has two Eyes, that of
Inclination, and that of Election; I think that, to speak of this subject with
some method, it will be convenient to show with which of these it may see most
clearly that which is Amiable.

AND TO BEGIN with the Love of Inclination which many esteem the best. What the
Poets said of Achilles may give us a great light into it: For as we learn from
Fables, that this great Captain had but one place in all his Body that was
capable of receiving a Wound, and that every where besides neither Dart nor
Arrow could injure him: In like manner it seems to me, that the only part in
which our Soul is most sensible is that of Inclination; and that they who have
found out this fatal place, as Paris did the Heel of Achilles, need only to
touch that that they may wound and conquer us. Without finding this, let any
render the best services they can, they will all be unprofitable to them; or if
they succeed sometimes it is with great difficulty and hazard. One only look
with Inclination has more effect than without this the devoirs of many Years
can obtain. It is violent and yet constant; though it is excited in a moment,
yet it fails not to endure a long time. It sometimes finds in one instant its
birth and its perfection. It was that which rendered Dido in Love with Aeneas
from the very first time that she beheld him; she begun to love as soon as she
begun to know him: without taking any notice that this was a stranger whom a
Tempest and not Love had cast upon the Coasts of Carthage. It is true that
reason and consideration at first, as it was with this Queen, will endeavor
sometimes to stifle those Sentiments that the Inclination gives birth to: But
these are very uneffectual efforts, and we with difficulty resist the love that
pleases: Reason it self takes its part, and becomes as complaisant as was the
Sister of that Princess; even to the devising and trying means to succeed in
our desires. Inclination has no less of Skill and Cunning than of Courage. It
can Enchant and Deceive even an Argits with his hundred Eyes. It can give Wings
to convey us from a Labyrinth. There is nothing that it will not endure, that
it will not undertake. And if it be said we may see some that can surmount
this, and make themselves Masters of their Inclination, it must in truth be
acknowledged that this is very rare; it must rather be believed that such were
never seized with this Malady, than that they are cured of it. Whatever any
feign, all that which proceeds from our selves is very agreeable to us; we
yield our selves to be carried easily away with the Stream of it; we can refuse
it nothing: and when this Eve presents us with even a forbidden Apple, yet to
comply with her, we forsake all our Interests. Neither should any wonder at
this, since she was taken from our own Side, and is even a part of our selves.
Though she sometimes may seem to us but evil; yet our Reason does not domineer
over her but with regret. When we go about to combat this, we resemble those
Fathers that are constrained to make War with their own Children, and who have
as much fear even to gain the Victory as to lose it. But in truth, what ground
is there that we should be willing to hinder the effects of our Inclination,
when they are so sweet and so natural? What reason is there why this should be
idly barren, and that so pleasant a cause should produce nothing? Can there be
a better Amity or Love than that which comes from thence? Can there be a more
faithful or more constant one? It is as pleasing as it is strong; it has no
less sweetness than duration. We take no more pains to love an Object that
Inclination carries us to, than a Stone does to fall toward its center, or the
Fire to mount upwards toward its Sphere. If the Elements are neither heavy nor
light in their natural places, and there is need of violence to draw them from
thence; so neither can we divert our selves but with pain and trouble from the
Object that we love out of Inclination. It is here that our affection finds its
repose, and its most pure delights. There is some reason to say, That the Love
which proceeds from Consideration does resemble the Fire that we have here
below, which has always a need of nourishment, and which goes out if it be not
always affixed to some combustible Matter; but on the other side, the love of
Inclination is like that above in the Sun, its proper Element, which endures
always equally, and maintains its self. This is the most natural as it is also
the most noble. This Love is not mercenary at all, it does not nourish it self
by any shameful pretentions; it proposes to it self no other end but only Love.
I do not wonder at all if the Love of Consideration endures but a little while,
and if it is stronger while it hopes, than when it is in possession; since it
fastens upon us by Interest, and has no other bond but that of Pleasure or
Profit. It holds us but by rotten Cords, which need but a little misfortune or
sickness to break them. And if we are to judge that Amity the best which is
able to endure the longest, we ought to account that of Inclination the most
excellent, which as it is the most pure is also the most constant and lasting.
There are some nevertheless who think it enough to disparage this to say, That
it proceeds from the Love of our selves; but it seems to me that this Argument
makes much for its Commendation, since one would conclude from thence, That
it is almost as impossible to separate us from that we love with Inclination, as
to separate us from our selves: and at least, that it will continue a long time
if it comes from such a source. And if it be said, That we may also judge
hereon, that this Love is blind as that commonly is which we bear to our
selves: In truth I must return, That I am not able to see how this Opinion can
maintain it self; I cannot comprehend why so many will have it, that
Inclination is blind: We believe it has not Eyes because we do not see them;
and if sometimes we cannot discover the causes of it, we choose rather to say it
has none, than to own that they are unknown to us. It is true, we cannot so
well judge of the resemblance of Humors as of that of Faces. But nevertheless,
if any would give themselves the trouble to search well into the Original of
our Inclination, they would often find it: If they would give themselves
leisure to Philosophise a little upon the Perfections of the Object that
pleases us, they would infallibly find out wherein it is amiable.

It is from this Inclination it comes to pass many times, that of many who look
upon a beautiful Face, there shall not be, it may be, more than one of them
that has any lively feeling of its Charms: and those that deserve best find
oftentimes more admirers than Servants: We do not love all that we commend: the
Will does not always take the part of Reason: and we give sometimes our
Approbation to a thing when we deny our Love to it. Many may have the same
judgment, but it is not so easy that they should have the same Inclination:
and though I grant that several Persons may love the same thing, yet this
seldom comes to pass by the same Reason. As we have not an Appetite for all
sorts of Meats, not even those that we may judge to be good: so we cannot have
Inclination for all sorts of Persons, not even for those sometimes whom we
judge to have a great deal of Merit. As there are diverse relishes in the sense,
so there are different Inclinations in the Soul.

But why should we not follow Inclination in Love, when we follow it almost in
all other things? In the choosing an Office, in the learning of a Trade, or in
the studying of a Science, we have regard to the Humor and Temperament. Why
then may we not do this as much in our love which is the most Important thing
in the World? And in truth, if we examine our Nature and Complexion before we
addict our selves to Learning or any other Exercise? Why shall we not also seek
for a Disposition to love as well as to study; since there is nothing more true
than that as we cannot succeed in the Arts in despite of our Nature; so neither
can we any better succeed in an Amity when it is against our Inclination. It
must be acknowledged, that as the same Earth is not proper for all sorts of
Seeds; so the same Heart is not capable of all sorts of Affections. It ought
not to be a Wonder if we have Inclination for one thing and not for another,
any more than to see the Lodestone draw the Iron rather than Copper or Lead.
And if we have a Love that is a little contrary to our humor, how do we
entertain an eternal Sedition within our selves? We cannot be happy but by
halves; our Inclination is upon the rack while our Reason is satisfied. It is
true that is said of Love, that without Inclination it cannot long subsist:
Without this an Amity has not an entire Satisfaction, nor even Confirmation. It
is a Building without Foundation which needs but a Touch or Blast to throw it
down. But to finish this Argument with the strongest Proof of all. Since Love
ceases to live when it ceases to reign, and that it cannot divide its Power
without losing it: That we may sufficiently prove the Love of Inclination to be
the most Sovereign and the most Legitimate, it is enough to show that it is the
most single, and that it will never permit that we should love more than one
thing. As we can have but one Sympathy, we cannot love perfectly more than one
Object. On the contrary, as we can seek our Interest in several Persons, when
we find it not in one alone; so this Love of Consideration may be divided; it
may seek what is profitable in one, and what is agreeable and pleasing in
another. After all, if Consideration and Inclination were to dispute before a
Wise Judge, that he might determine to which of the two Love does most lawfully
belong, as heretofore the two Mothers pleaded before Solomon for the living
Child, Inclination would at length have the advantage: He would give Love to
that, since it can endure no Division of it, as the other can, and because it
will possess it or lose it entirely.

AFTER WE have seen the Reasons which are given to prove that Inclination is
the more strong in Amity; it is time to examine those which may be brought to
show that Election is the more assured and safe in such an important Concern.
It shall then suffice, at the first, to make it appear how much Inclination is
dangerous, to show how blind it is. For as the Dawn precedes the rising of the
Sun; so Knowledge ought to go before Love; and however Sympathy does act
without Choice and Light, yet that which it does in a Moment, causes oftentimes
the repentance of the whole Life. Election is not so forward nor ready, it is
true, and also it is not so unfortunate. And I think Zeuxis returned a very
prudent Answer to those that reproached him, for that he was long in finishing
his Pieces: I, says he, a^ a long time in drawing a Picture, because what I
draw is to endure a long time. One may say for a firm Affection that which he
said for an excellent Picture: It is necessary that a long Experience should
precede a true Amity, for fear lest a long Regret should follow an Election too
lightly made. This of Sympathy is an Agreement very suddenly made; it often
obliges it self without knowing to what Conditions; and commonly signs without
having looked upon the Articles. The Example of Dido alone sufficiently shows
the tragic Effects of this Lightness: The Poet had reason to say that her Love
was blind, and that it consisted of a Fire that had more heat than brightness.
And in truth I find in this Fable, the Infelicity as well as the Blindness of
this Love. If Dido had an Inclination, Aeneas had none at all; as she was
imprudent, he was ungrateful. History and Experience afford us Examples enough
of this sort; and when I make use of Fable I do this for Ornament to my
Discourse, not to give it greater Strength. But to say truth; is not this a
very weak Reason to persuade a Woman to love me, to say that I have a great
Inclination for her? The same Argument I bring to persuade Love, may serve her
for the refusal of giving it. If I say I follow my Inclination in loving such a
Person, may not she say she follows hers in not loving me? Is not her Aversion
as well founded as my Sympathy? If I wish that she would renounce her Humor to
satisfy mine; has not she right to pretend to the same advantage over me? In
truth, I extremely love what the Poets say of this matter. They feign that
Cupid has two sorts of Arrows; the one of Gold, the other of Lead; the former
gives Love, the latter Hatred: With the one he inflamed Apollo, with the other
he chilled Daphne. Was not the Flight of this Shepherdess altogether as just as
the Pursuit of the God? If he sought her because of an Inclination to her; she
shunned him because she had an Aversion to him.

Besides, what Assurance have we, that any have an Inclination for us; what
Marks that are sufficiently certain can any give whereby to know it? It is
true, that we may well perceive our own; but whereby can we infallibly observe
that of others? This can only, if at all, be done by the means of Reason, which
ought to examine, whether that which we take at first for true, be not an
Illusion or Fiction. And to speak rationally of this thing, when the
Inclination surprises, as sometimes it does, our Reason, so as to make us too
easily fall in love with an Object. Reason then is found like a Servant
interested or corrupted that will engage her Mistress to her Disadvantage: The
Sen^^ herein would often debauch the Spirit; they are Servants that are
traitorous or ignorant, and bring false reports to their Master. I^ it not then
a great deal better that we love for the amiable Qualities that we see, than
for an Inclination that is hidden from us? Why should we entertain a Love for
which we know neither Cause nor good Reason? This is, in truth, to love by
chance; here is nothing but Uncertainty. There can never be an entire
Satisfaction in our Love, while we shall be in pain to know whether the
Sympathy be equal on both sides. We perceive a Wound, without knowing the Hand
that struck, and are enslaved by invisible Chains. And I assure my self that if
we would be curious to examine well that which has arrested us, we should soon
acknowledge our Error and Imprudence. If we did but light up a Lamp as Psyche
did, perhaps we should find, with her, that this Love is but a Child, who fears
to be seen, lest we should know and despise his Weakness. It is a great
unhappiness that we have some Difficulty to undeceive our selves. Though the
Sentiments which are most natural are not the most reasonable, yet as the Earth
cherishes best those Weeds that it brings forth of it self, more than the
Plants that the Gardener sows in it: So we seem to entertain more carefully the
Affections that come from our natural Corruption, than those that proceed from
our Reason. Nevertheless we ought to consider that as the Physician corrects
the Appetite to make it relish what is wholesome nourishment: So we ought also,
if we will be wise, to regulate our minds that we may direct our Affections to
right Objects. We must of necessity treat our selves like sick Persons in this
case; there is nothing we ought so much to forbid our selves as that which
pleases us most; our Inclination is no less depraved than their Taste; it
proceeds from a poisoned Spring, it comes not from Nature sound and well; but
from that which is corrupted. I approve mightily the Opinion of them who
compare the Amity of Election to the Sun, and the Love of Inclination to the
Moon; for the former is always equal, and the latter is commonly unconstant,
full of Error and of Spots. The Moon of her self has no Brightness;
Inclination alone has no Conduct. It has need to borrow that from Reason. And
above all, after the same manner as the Moon appearing sometimes with the Sun,
does not make the Day for all that, nor contribute any assistance toward the
Enlightening of the World; so when by good Fortune the Love of Inclination
meets with that of Election, it ought not to govern us, or make it self our
Master; but on the contrary, it ought to borrow all it is Light and Direction
from the other. But to improve this Comparison a little further, I could wish
to this purpose, that the Ladies would imitate Her whom the Holy Spirit
describes in sacred Writ, as having the Moon under her Feet, and being all over
environed, and as it were clothed with the Sun. I mean, that they ought not
utterly to throw away Inclination, but to conquer and moderate it: that there
should be in Love a little of Humor, and a great deal of Prudence: That Amity
has no need of Inclination, but in its Birth; but has need of Consideration as
long as it endures. If it be necessary that the one be the Mother of it, it is
so too, that the other be the Nurse and Mistress. And in truth, Inclination is
like an imprudent Mother, who loves her Children too well: They must be wrested
from her Bosom as soon as they are brought forth, for fear that in Caressing
and Embracing she should stifle them.

After all, this Inclination is nothing else for the most part but a Phantasm;
the most learned find it difficult to express the Cause or the Nature of it. It
is so occult and hidden, that many not being able to comprehend the Love that
it gives Birth to, they say, it is they know not what, which forms it self,
they know not how; and which conquers by they know not what sort of Charms.
There are some that teach, upon the Foundations of Plato's Philosophy, That
Inclination comes from Remembrance, and that our Souls, having viewed each
other in another World before, it seems that this is not the beginning of a
Love, but the continuance of (...). That this is not properly the Birth of an
Affection but the awakening of it. Insomuch that, according to their Opinion,
our Souls call to mind their former Alliance; no otherwise than as two persons
that have mutually loved heretofore; when they see each other again after a
long Separation, they are surprised at first sight; while the Imagination and
Memory are at labor to discover and recollect those that touch them. There are
some others that attribute an Inclination to the Stars; and who will have it,
that the same Cause which produces Flowers in the Bosom of the Earth, produces
also the Sympathy that is in our Souls. Some again ascribe it to the four
Qualities that they fancy are mingled in us; namely, Heat and Cold, Dryness
and Moisture. And others make short Work of it, and ascribe it to Destiny. But
that I may not trouble my self or the Reader with the Opinions of all those
that deceive themselves, and who seek the Original of the Inclination there
where it is not; it seems to me (that we may philosophize rightly) to proceed
only from the Love of our selves. We love all that which resembles us, even to
our Pictures; we cherish our Image in all things where we see it. We love all
that which comes from us: Fathers, for these reasons, love their Children;
Painters their Draughts; Artificers their Work. It is from hence, that we may
learn the great danger there is where the Love of Inclination engages us; for
since we very often love our selves on that side where we are most Imperfect,
and we embrace even our very shadow like Narcissus: It follows from thence,
that we are in danger to love the Imperfections of others if it happens that
they resemble our own. If the love of our selves be blind, that of Inclination
is so likewise; this is an Effect that must carry the resemblance of its Cause.

But if this Love of Inclination were not so dangerous, and so full of
darkness; what need is there of this Sympathy, or natural Conformity? And why
may not Love place it there where it was not? Love as well as Death equals all
things, and makes a likeness where it does not find it. In loving as well as
dying, both Kings and Shepherds find themselves at the same point. Herein they
are both Men equal, in respect of Affection and of Weakness. Love is like a
Fire which can kindle another any where: It does not only transmit it self into
the subject it burns, but also has power to dispose that to receive it: It
removes the qualities contrary to its own, to put in others: It drives the
Enemy from the place it lays Siege to, before it does render it self Master of
it. And to say the truth, as there are hidden Forms in the Bosom of Matter
which natural Agents are able to excite and produce; so there are hidden
Inclinations in our Souls, which Conversation and Familiarity may give birth
to. There needs no more but to seek well after them, and if we find them not at
first, yet a little time usually produces them. How often do we see some
Persons that distaste us at the first, and who nevertheless, after a little
Conversation, do highly please us? And others again who ravish us at the first
sight, and afterward displease us as much? Love may succeed to Aversion, as
well as Aversion to Love. Experience sufficiently shows this; and as those
Trees that are of different kinds being well grafted, do not fail to bring
forth Fruit; so the Amity that is formed between two Persons of different
Humors may not fail to succeed well. Plato had some reason to say, That Love
is a Teacher of Music; for as much as an Affection may breed as well in an
inequality of Humors as a harmony may be made up of unequal Voices. And indeed
what sort of Conformity can we find between the young and the old, who yet
nevertheless do often mutually Love and Caress each other? What proportion or
likeness is there between the Loadstone and the Iron? If the one drew the other
out of Sympathy and Resemblance, would not Iron be rather attracted by Iron
than by the Stone, to which it has a great deal less likeness?

But to the end that we may the better see how shameful and unjust this Love of
Inclination is, it is enough to consider that they who love us only out of
Inclination, do affront us: they do not love us at all for any Merit in us,
since very often they love before they know us, and become amorous before they
can well know whether we are amiable or not. This is an effect of their Temper
rather than Choice, and in my Opinion, we have no great Obligation to them for
the doing that which they cannot hinder.

HAVING thus shown what there is of Good on of Evil in these two sorts of
Amities, it will be very easy to observe what will be the best life of them*
It is not necessary to divide, but only to regulate them: It is true that these
are to our Minds, like the two fansied Poles to the Heavens on which they turn;
these are the Poles of our Thoughts and Actions. And as the one Pole of the
Heavens is under our Feet while the other is elevated above our Heads; so it
seems fit that we have less regard to Inclination than to Election, and this
latter ought to serve us for a Star to guide our Love and Friendship by. They
say the Great Alexander had two Favorites whom he obliged after a very
different fashion; He loved Ephestion tenderly as the Companion of his
Pleasures, and Craterus strongly for the government of his Estate and Affairs:
As Emperor he esteemed the one, as Alexander he loved the other. It is
necessary to join these two sorts of Love together to make a perfect one, lest
Love, being without Inclination, be constrained, or being without Election it
be too Imprudent. If there be no Consideration, Love is without Conduct: If
there be no Sympathy in it, it is without much Pleasure and Sweetness. In truth
it seems as if these two Loves are in one Soul after the same manner that those
two Twins, of whom the Holy Scripture speaks, were in the Womb of their Mother.
These are two Brothers of which the one is foremost in the Order of Nature, but
nevertheless he must not have the advantage of this. The one is the more
violent and impetuous, the other is the more gentle and prudent. And it is the
unhappiness of our Minds, as it was of their dying Father, to incline more to
the side of that love which is the more natural, and which proceeds from
Sympathy. But as the Mother of Jacob gave him means to supplant his Brother, i^
ought also to be, that reason should direct as how to regulate Inclination, to
the (...) that Election may be the Mistress of it.

After all, if any should demand of me the Rules that are most necessary to be
observed in our Amity; as well for the satisfaction of the Conscience as of the
Mind; in my Opinion there is no better than this; To believe that our Affection
is unjust whenever it is contrary to that we owe to God. As the Ark was between
the Cherubims, so it is necessary that God be present between two Hearts that
mutually love: This ought to be the Knot of our Loves, that we may render them
strong and reasonable. And to say, as that Reverend Bishop who has writ so
Divinely on the Love of God; Love is the more commendable on Earth, by so much
as it is the more like that which is between the Wise and Pure Inhabitants of
Heaven.

Of the Complaisant, or Pleasing Humor.
IT IS TRUE that there is nothing of more importance than to know the Art to
Please, and to make ones self beloved in all Companies: As we have all an
Inclination, toward Society, we ought to enquire after the means to succeed
well in it, and to gain the Affection and Esteem of those we meet, when we are
in Conversation or in Business. It is true, that among all the Qualities
necessary to this, there is not one that seems more requisite than Complaisance
or Courteousness, since without that, all the other are without Gracefulness
and are as it were dead. But it is also very certain, that the Use of this is
very difficult: Most easily does this offend either in Excess or Defect. If it
be not attended with a great deal of Judgment and Discretion, then the Ladies
that are too Complaisant pass for Loose or Affected: and if they are not enough
so, they shall be thought to be Disdainful or Uncivil: There is not less danger
in receiving this, than in giving it. Those Ladies that render too much
Complaisance, are liable to be troublesome, those that receive too much are in
danger to be seduced. There are those that will mingle Flattery with
Complaisance, to bring them into Error; as Wine is mingled with Poison to draw
down the deadly Draught. There is therefore danger lest many should take the
Poison for Food, and lest they drink the Flattery while they think themselves
receiving only a simple Complaisance. Commonly the one of these is so strictly
joined to the other, that there is need of a great deal of Prudence to be able
to separate them. And that we may the better succeed in this, it seems to me
convenient to examine, in the first place, what there is of Good or of Evil i^
the Complaisant Humor, to the end we may learn, with the better method and the
greater facility, wherein the Use of this is allowed or forbidden to us.

AS THE Complaisance which I must condemn is nothing else but the Art to
deceive pleasantly, it must be acknowledged, that the most pernicious of its
Effects are that it makes an appearance pass for truth, and a feigned
Friendship for a true one. Those Spirits that are most dissembled, constrain
themselves to appear Genuine and Sincere, to the end they may gain the Credit
of Confidents and Friends: But it is herein, that their Artifice is discovered;
and it comes to be known that they have not that Freedom and Ingenuity they
pretend to, in that they over-act their Pretenses to i^. Though Patr^^lus made
use of all the Armor of Achilles, and some of his Weapons, yet he would not
venture to use his Javeline, because this was of such a sort as that Achilles
alone was well able to manage it. In like manner, though a dissembled Person
does take all the appearances of one that is Virtuous, yet she should not dare
to meddle with the pretense to Freeness or ^^genuousness of Temper: This is a
quality that cannot possibly sit well upon her, she cannot counterfeit
Pla^^ness without betraying that she w^^^^ it. As the C^^^leons take all sorts
of Colors from the things they lie upon excepting only the white; so ^^^se
disguised Souls will take all sorts of ^^^pes, will appear under all forms of
Countenance: but after all their Artifice, it will be always observed, That it
is impossible to serve themselves well of a pretense to Freedom and Candor. As
upon painted Faces we may commonly see both the Paint and the ugliness too; so
we may see at the same time upon the looks that are too Complaisant the plain
traces of Dissimulation and Knavery. The Ladies have but too much experience of
this; as their Good nature renders them credulous, so it does as often make
them miserable.

What a deal of difficulty is there in Complaisance! How much mischief does
this carry i^ it against others! There is no Humor so wicked and ill, with
which this evil Complaisance will not testify a Sympathy. They ^eep with the
Unfortunate, they talk ill with the Slanderers, they laugh with them that are
pleased, and rave with the Melancholy. They know how to vilify Virtue, and to
palliate Vice they have Ointments for all sorts of Wounds, and Paint for all
sorts of Faces. To the end they may surprise and impose upon weak Minds, they
will make show sometimes of reproving severely, but their Censure is nothing
but (...), their Counsels have no (...), as they have nothing of Sincerity or

Truth: To speak of them as they deserve we may say, they resemble much the
Hercule upon a Theater, who holds in his Hand a mighty Club, but it is Hollow;
It is made but of Past-board and painted Cloth, and may strike a Man without
making a Wound, and almost without making it self felt.

Certainly if the Holy Scripture calls the Complaisant Preachers by the name of
Adulterers, we may say the same of seeming and disguised Friends, who do not
speak so as to be useful to us, but only that they may be agreeable: who do not
talk to do ^s a pleasure but to receive one from us.

Let a Man suffer himself to be enchanted as much as he will with the
Complaisance of another, and rely upon it, and appear to do so, yet he shall
commonly find the Promises false, and the appearances deceitful: Those of this
sort who make show of an Affection for all the World, have indeed none for any
body. As we see nothing upon the Sepulchers of the greatest Princes, but only
Names and mere Titles of their Grandeur: so likewise the visages of these
Persons carry as it were only the empty Names of Friends. And as there is
nothing to be found within those Gilded Tombs, but only Dust or Rottenness, so
there is nothing but Treachery and Inconstancy under so Complaisant a Mien. Let
us elsewhere seek for truth and not please our selves with the embracing of a
Phantasm. This sort of wits are always somewhat selfish in their Designs, they
constantly follow Fortune, and turn about with the Motion of her Wheel. When
Helio^^balus commanded these fawning Flatterers to be tied to a Wheel and
thrown into the Water, he seemed to have a very right Opinion of them, and to
have condemned them to a very suitable punishment; in making them to be cast
into an Element of which they themselves have the pliableness, and in tying
them to a Wheel of which they have the Inconstancy. It would be no wrong to
them to compare them to the poor baffled Ixion, who believe and rely upon these
Complementers; inasmuch as they experience that after all their Promises, if
they come to the proof of them, they can find no effect in them, they embrace
in them but mere shaddows. To embrace a Complaisant Person, is to embrace a
Cloud instead of a Juno.

HAVING thus taken Notice of a principal Effect of this Humor, let us now
observe one of the principal Marks of it. The Complaisant aim at nothing but
Ostentation, and Show: And as when we see the most Paint upon a Face, we
believe most largely of the Defects of it, judging the height of the Malady by
the Quantity of the Physic: In like manner, the more Study and Endeavor, and
the more Constraint we perceive in a Person's Actions and Demeanor, we may
very well conclude we shall find in the same Proportion, that their Designs are
wicked; and that the greatest Wickedness often seeks the fairest Mask for it is
Disguise. A Flatterer will make more Offers than a Friend; and the false amity
often glitters more than the true. The Reason of this is not at all difficult
to find. It is because Art is more prodigal than Nature, and Fiction* than
Truth. Fiction willingly produces nothing but Appearances; and Truth lays hold
of nothing but Substance. Men, as well as Trees, commonly bring forth more
Leaves than Fruit, and have a great deal more of Show than Effect. The Art of
Limning and that of Complementing do not much differ from each other; both the
one and the other employ themselves only about Colors, and helabour nothing
but Surfaces. I do not at all think it strange to see the complaisant Persons
prodigal of Complements; a Man will be more liberal of Counters than of Angels;
and it costs a great deal less to gild the Statues which are made of Lead or
Wood, than to make them of solid Gold. The most beautiful Roses have not the
better Smell, they that have so much of Color have the less of Scent. Nature
her self divides her gifts, and, as if she were covetous or poor and feeble,
she seems to find a Difficulty is making the same thing very beautiful and very
good. We may say as much as this concerning the Truth and the Appearance of
Friendship: It is often found that the one is separated from the other, and
known that they who show so much Affection upon the Forehead, have sometimes
none in the Soul. To speak the truth, they are like those Cushions we lean
upon, that are on the outside some costly Stuff, perhaps, but have nothing
within them but only Chaff or Flocks. These are Bats that fly not but in the
Twilight, that love neither the Day nor the Night; but a third Season composed
of both. They are Peacocks which carry very lovely Feathers, but have the Feet
of a Thief, the Head of a Serpent, and the Yellings of the Devils. They are
Reeds that comply with every Wind, and accomodate themselves to every Humor,
but they grow in the Mud, they are weak and hollow; they break under the Hand
that leans upon them, and wound it too.

COMPLAISANCE is not only Excessive, but also Defective too, and in both Cases
Degenerates into Flattery. It is Excessive in praising, and Defective in
reproving; it speaks either too much or too little; it equally abuses both
Discourse and Silence. It is like a Perspective that shows a thing great or
little; and sets it as at a distance, or very near, as one will. It ascribes a
great deal to the least Virtues; it takes much away from the greatest Crimes;
it laughs and it weeps when it pleases; and Aristotle says, it is no less
excessive in Pretenses to pity than to Love. There is no sort of Part but it
can act: Now it shall be defending Vice; afterward it shall be accusing
Virtue. One while it gives beautiful Names to things that are most ugly,
calling Rashness Courage; Covetousness Thrist and good Huswifry; Impudence a
good Humor; and then turning up the reverse of the Medal, it will give the
most infamous Titles to that which is highly commendable; calling Eloquence
Babbling* Modesty Foolishness; and an ingenuous Freedom, Insolence.

It is after this manner that it abuses both Reproofs and Praises, and makes
the Laws either severe or favorable as it will. It throws Oil into Fire, it
foments and inflames yet more the most debauched Inclinations; it encourages to
the committing of evil, those that as yet boggle a little at it; it lets loose
the Reins to the most wild Desires, when a just Fear had restrained them. It
speaks to us as the accursed Julia to her Son Bassianus: You can do whatever
you will. This young Emperor being become most monstrously in love with his
own Mother, when at a certain time he saw her with her Neck and Breasts
uncovered, and sighed in her hearing, without daring to tell the Cause; the
Motions of his lascivious Love not having yet entirely stifled those of his
Respect and Fear. This complaisant Courtisan took away from him all
Apprehension; she hardened him in his Passion instead of reproving him: She was
not ashamed to have her own Son her Gallant; and to be Mother and Mistress to
the same Person.

What is there so horrid and impious, but Complaisance can advise to it? It can
dispense with any thing; there are no Passions so extravagant, but this can
breed them in the Soul, or maintain them there. When the vile Myrrha fell in
love with her own Father, she found a Compliance in her Nurse, who afforded her
Means to succeed in her infamous Design, instead of diverting her from it. When
Dido was passionately in love with a Stranger, her Sister, too complaisant in
the Case, added to the Flames, instead of striving to quench them. Complaisance
approves all that which we will, and takes but little care to persuade, though
without Eloquence; since it advises only to that which pleases. The Ills that
Concupiscence causes only to bud in us, Complaisance makes them increase and
bring forth Fruit. If Concupiscence be the Mother of Wickedness, this is the
Nurse of it; it finishes and exalts that which the other left but low and
beginning.

It finds Excuses for every thing: It said to the Wretch Bassianus, when he was
in love with his Mother; that the Will of Kings ought to be their only Rule:
And they being above all others, there is no reason they should be deprived of
the Pleasures they desire, by submitting themselves to the forbiddings of
another Man. This said to Myrrha, that the Gods themselves had no Regard to
Nearness of Blood; that Juno was the Sister, and Wife of Jupiter; and that the
Motions of Love do not at all oppose those of Nature. It told Dido, that the
Dead do not mind at all what the Living do; that there is no Fidelity due to
him that is not any longer; and that Sichaeus was not jealous in his Tomb of
that which Aeneas might do at Carthage. This has in it a readiness to undertake
the most horrid Enterprises; this was the Sister of Dido that corrupted her;
this was the Nurse of Myrrha, that led her to the fatal Precipice; this was the
Mother of Baessianus, that debauched her own Son. It encourages those Women
that hesitate and tremble; it teaches those that are ignorant; it hardens those
that are scrupulous, and fortifies them that are weak.

It is for this Reason, that Complaisance is so well received when any have ill
Designs; because, instead of contradicting or reproving these, it gives the
Means to carry them on and accomplish them. It is from hence that the terrible
Guards about the Persons of Kings cannot hinder this from entering into Palaces:
It is for this that it is every where received with such a gracious
Countenance, and especially in Courts; where there must be nothing used but
supple Cringing, and where Licentiousness will not be reproved. It is lastly
for this Reason that the Amorous and the Courtiers strive to keep the Fair, and
the Princes in Error, to the end they may maintain themselves in their Favor.
Let us not dissemble in this matter, and while we are speaking of this base and
cowardly Complaisance, let us not render our selves guilty of the Crime we
condemn. The Complaisant, round about a Man that is in favor, are as Shadows
about a Body in the Sunshine. If one removes ^^mself, they are stirred with
the same Motion; if one sweats, they wipe their Faces; if one be a cold, their
Faces are frozen; if we speak, these are but Echo's to repeat our Words. They
are Shadows which have no Solidity, and fly from us when we think to lay hold
on them; Voices without a Soul, which Interest, and not Truth, drives from the
Breasts of Flatterers. How unprofitable to us is such a Complaisance? Have we
any Assistance from a Shadow that follows us? Have we any Consolation from an
Echo that pities us? But alas, how dangerous is this Complaisance! If you speak
Blasphemies, this Echo will answer them; run to any manner of Wickedness, this
Shadow will follow you. This Echo repeats the Speeches of the Impious as well
as of the Just; and this Shadow follows the Bodies that are Sick as well as
those that are sound. Unhappy Compassion! that knows very well how to destroy
us in a good Fortune, but knows not how to comfort us as it ought under a bad
one.

Deceitful Complaisance that stays with us but only while our gaudy Days last,
and flies away like the Birds that change their Country when the Winter
approaches. May we not after all this say, That Prosperity as well as
Adversity, has but few true Friends; since as the one wants them that should
comfort it, the other is no less in want of those that should admonish. As the
Miserable have none to show them some grounds of Hope; so they that are Happy,
are no less destitute of such as should warn them to fear. If Compassion be
dumb in the presence of the Afflicted; Complaisance is so in the presence of
the Vicious; the one is careful, not to keep at too great distance from a good
Fortune; the other sometimes fears to approach an evil one. See here that
Complaisance is the Poison of the Great, the Enchantment of the Court, the
Enemy of Truth, and Mother of all Vice.

AND NEVERTHELESS, how much Mischief soever it does, we have no small
Difficulty to defend our selves from it; it is an agreeable Murderer, the
Wounds of it please us, and when it kills we cannot tell how to complain. I
grant there are some that have Remedies, as well as Ulysses, against this fatal
Siren, who smiles to make others weep; and wracks those Vessels that she has
allured to her by her Songs; and who appears beautiful, but is indeed a
Monster. Certainly if there be some that are Enemies to Complaisance, there are
a great many more that suffer themselves to be enchanted with it. If there are
some few that resemble Theodosius in this, that they are invincible to their
Commendations; and that they choose rather to endure Slander than Flattery:
There are many more like Antipater, who are willing to dissemble their
Imperfections, and will be painted with but half a Face if they want an Eye.
There are more that suffer themselves to be caught with the Charms of it, than
there are, that defend themselves from them. Complaisance is an Enemy that is
resisted only by flying from it; it has poisoned Weapons; it needs but to touch
that it may Wound, and to come near, that it may conquer us. It has Charms that
are of great value, even to the most grave and serious. We cannot repulse them
without Regret; we shun it only that it may seek us, and if we refuse it
Entrance, it is only in jest and pretense; and as to a Mistress, against whom
her Lover shuts the Door, only that she may thrust it open. As soon as this has
gained the Ear it wins the Heart, and to defend our selves from it, we must be
either very wise or very insensible. Especially the more it pleases, the more
it hurts us; it is by so much the more dangerous, by how much it is agreeable.
It was for this Reason that Artemidorus said to his Friends, That there was
danger of seeing a Flatterer even in his sleep, and that there can be no safety
even with his Shadow or Picture. You may judge from hence of the Malice of this
Enemy, since his very Picture is mischievous and deserving our Caution. This is
not but too true at this time. We live in an Age wherein Complaisance is more
in Vogue, and has more of force than ever. We are in a time when they who know
not how to Flatter are accounted Clownish; and those who will not be flattered
are esteemed Dull. At this day they who have not the Art of Flattery know not
how to Please. In the present Age as well as in that of Saint Jerome they take
Flattery for an effect of Humility, or Good Will; insomuch that they who
abandon this shameful Trade, are held for Envious Persons or Proud.

BUT certainly if we examine well those whom Flattery corrupts, we shall
commonly find that it has no power at all but upon the smallest Wits. The
Pyramids of Egypt are said to cast no shadow, notwithstanding that they are
very high; and the good Wits will not suffer about them this Complaisance or
Flattery. They are no more dazzled with the Rays of Truth than the Eagles are
with those of the Sun. Antisthenes his Comparison seems to me most admirable,
when he said that the Complaisant Persons resemble Courtisans in that they
desire all things in their Servants excepting Reason and Prudence. These are
things greatly wanting in those who love to Complement, those that have good
Judgment abhor such cringing; and the excellent Wits had rather be troublesome
than dissembled; and much rather may I say, they had rather be troubled than
flattered. Those that are wise are neither willing to be deceived, nor desirous
to deceive; they are not willing their Judgment should commit an Error any more
than their Will. If we do not see the Artifice of the Complaisant it is our
Ignorance, if we do discover this and yet endure it, it is an intolerable
Ambition. This compliance is proper only to the looser Souls, and freedom is
natural to the generous. If the Hypocrite is thought the most guilty of all
Sinners, the Flatterer may be deemed the most pernicious of all Enemies; for as
the former would impose upon the Eyes of the All-knowing God; so the latter
would also abuse the Eyes of them that are Wise. And as God abhors a false
Devotion, so a wise Man ought to detest a false Amity.

BUT IF this Complaisance were not dangerous, yet it is infamous, both in those
that receive, and in those that practice it. It is a sign of weakness of Spirit
to let it corrupt us; and the Ladies that have a good Judgment cannot be
pleased with this fashionable trick, of finding Vices and Virtues where ever
one will.

Aristippus said, That the only fruit he had received from his Philosophy was
to speak plainly to all the World, and to tell freely his Thoughts of things.
The good Minds should have no other aim but this, nor any other sense of things
but what they declare; though the Vulgar may perhaps endeavor only to conceal
what they think. I esteem very much that other Philosophy which taught the
Disciples of it this one thing as conducing enough to a good Life alone, which
was, That they should always observe the Sun, to the end they might thereby
learn, that, as that Planet scatters even the smallest Mists, so a good
Conscience will dissipate all manner of disguise and constraint. All this
Artifice is a sign either of Wickedness or Cowardice, and of a Spirit very
feeble or very ill disposed. As Prudence and Courage are inseparable, so Policy
and Weakness are always together. Reeds yield more to the Winds than Oaks do;
and Foxes are more crafty than Lions, the fearful than the generous, and the
little Spirits than great ones. The best and wisest Minds ordinarily hate
tricks and cheating, and if at any time they make use of Artifice it is only as
a counter-poison; it is never to do evil but only to avoid it, it is not to
assault any others, but only to defend themselves. It is one of the most noble
effects of Magnanimity to love and to hate only openly. Besides, those that are
wise must be always equal, but the Complaisant are under a necessity of
changing every moment; there is nothing certain or steady in their humor, any
more than in their looks, because that as well as the other depends upon the
humor of the Person they would please. They are forced sometimes to condemn in
the same hour that which they have before commended, or to extol to the Skies
the same thing which they had before damned to the bottomless Pit. Complaisance
then has commonly attending upon it these two shameful qualities, Cowardice,
and Inequality or Unconstancy.

I speak nothing in all this but what the Complaisant themselves will own; and
so those that are most expert at this Trade will not address themselves to any
but the untaught, and meaner Wits: They are like those Mountebanks that produce
their sorry Medicines only before the Ignorant Vulgar. They that have but a
small measure of Knowledge can lift up the Mask and deride the Cheat; they will
more regard what these Persons are in effect, than what they are in the Opinion
of others. And if we understand this matter rightly, we shall know it is from
hence that they who mightily love themselves do also love those that flatter
them; for it is very seldom that we can find together much knowledge and a
great admiration of our selves. They that well know themselves and what they
are, will give no heed to the Complements, that ascribe to them what they are
not. They therefore that Idolize their own Opinions have an Aversion for all
those that contradict them: They, like Ahab, love none but the fawning
Prophets, and they care not if one does deceive them, provided he flatter too.

Certainly there are too many of the Ladies like Jezebel in her Hatred of
Elijah, I mean that hate those who reprehend their faults; like the Apes that
endeavor to break the Looking-glasses wherein they see themselves, because
these discover their Ugliness. Nevertheless I wish they could understand, that
a good Admonition, or a Reproof well given, is of much more advantage to them
(as Solomon says) than the most costly Pendants at the Ears. I confess, that
when ever a Reproof is given, it should be softened as much as is possible that
it may not give the receiver too much pain: But yet it must be said, That if
there be some smart in it, the Ladies ought to resolve that they will endure
it, since it may be useful to them, and serving to their Honor; and a
seasonable Correction may contribute more to the ornament of the Mind than
Jewels at the Ears can do to the adorning of the Face. But on the other side,
if any do so love and admire themselves as that they cannot bear the truth when
it shows them their defects, such a Humor shall easily be conquered by
Complaisance. As they make it a very easy and short Work to a Besieger who
give up the place they ought to defend, so it is not difficult to conquer that
Person by Flattery whose self-love betrays him. Complaisance has no difficulty
to surprise our Minds when it has an intelligencer within us of this follish
self-admiring humor. It is like those Thieves that have their correspondents
in the House they design to Rob that shall open the Doors for them in the Night
when People have no thoughts of defending themselves. As when Eve was gained,
Adam himself followed soon after; so when the Inclination is corrupted by
Flattery the Mind is not long before it yields. This Comparison seems not to be
much amiss, since the Complaisant have the shifting Tricks of the Serpent as
well as his Poison, and easily slide themselves quite in there, where the least
part of them is admitted; and in that they accost our humor to debauch our
Reason, and make the former present the Apple to the latter.

They therefore that perceive that their goodnature carries them to the Love
of Complaisance, ought to be always upon their guard: They must never be
drowsy or careless least the Flatterer like the Serpent should seduce this Eve
It is in this Case that the Ladies are in a great deal of danger, if they do
not take good notice, that Complaisance will show them such Fruits as promise
Life, but will give them Death. Certainly they ought to consider well this
Example, wherein they may see how much mischief this thing did to the first
Woman, in giving her Courage to Sin, in permitting her that which God had
forbidden her. Those of her Sex ought to remember that they have Enemies that
flatter, to destroy them, and accommodate themselves to their humor that they
may ensnare their Judgment.

IN MY OPINION it were an excellent remedy against the mischief of this, for
the Women to consider seriously what they are when any praise them for that
they are not. To judge whether these Painters have drawn our Picture true, we
must confront the Copy and Original, and observe whether the Pourtraicture
drawn for us be according to our Nature. There is nothing so contrary to
Complaisance as Conscience: this does very often condemn us even while that is
commending. But as the Slanders of the Malicious do not hinder but that we may
be very good; so notwithstanding the Applauses of Flatterers we may be very
blameworthy. Complaisance then is the Capital Enemy of Conscience, it would
extinguish this Divine Light, it would lull this careful Sentinel asleep, it
would silence this inward Monitor which ought to have a constant liberty to
speak to us, and who lashes us with remorse if we deserve it, while the
Complaisant are flattering us with Praises.

What is there then in Society so pernicious as this? when it hinders us from
acknowledging our faults, and would have us continue in them and make our
errors the Discourse of the World. It is for this reason better that we undergo
Censure than Complaisance; because it is less dangerous to be accused than
praised falsely: The Wounds of a Friend are of more worth than the Kisses which
a Flatterer gives us. If we must needs commit an Error, and take our selves to
be what we are not in truth, it is better far to have too bad an Opinion of our
selves to the end we may be humbled thereby, than to flatter our selves into an
Opinion of more worth than we have. It is less dangerous to fly from a Shadow
than to let an Enemy come within reach of us: it is better to fear an apparent
evil than not to fear a true one; our fear is herein much less dangerous than
our boldness.

IT IS TRUE that Slander and Flattery do both equally make War against Virtue,
but as the one assaults it with a Sword, the other does this with Poison: for
which reason they ought to have more fear of Flatterers than of the Slanderers;
as they would more industriously shun those Enemies who hide their designs than
those that openly make their War. But let us see what in the end becomes of the
Complaisant, with all their falsehood, with all their disguise and dawbing. As
soon as their Artifice is discovered, they are held in abhorrence, they remain
ever after suspected by all the World; they are never loved any longer than
till they are known. And, to say the truth, the content which Complaisance
affords, and the distaste that is ever caused by a freedom, are both equal, but
of short continuance. At first the Candid and Sincere are repulsed, and the
Complaisant are approved, but experience changes the Sentiment: and
Complaisance at the end gains the same Aversion which the freedom met at the
beginning. As Solomon says, He that rebukes a man, afterward finds more
favor than he that flattereth with his tongue. The one begins with a short
sweetness, to end in a long distaste and bitterness; and the other begins with
a slight disgust, but it is to continue in a satisfaction the more solid and
durable. The one is like a Medicine which does not distaste us but to give us
Health, the other like a Poison which is sweetened that it may kill. Hence it
comes to pass that herein Complaisance has effects quite contrary to those of
the truth that corrects us: In that all the World esteem and seek this truth
before it appears, and when they see it, it makes their Eyes smart, and
offends. On the contrary, all the World blames the Compliance of Flatterers,
but when it comes near it pleases and bewitches us. We cannot hate the latter
nor love the former, but only during their absence from us.

NOW THAT WE HAVE THUS SEEN What there is of Evil in Complaisance, let us next
examine what it has of Goodness or Usefulness in it. Whatever some may say of
this, it may be as far distant from Flattery, as Prudence is from Craft, and
Courage from Rashness. And if it should be said that at least it is very
difficult not to run out of one into the other, this were to deceive ones self
as much as if we should think that a Person cannot be Liberal unless he be
Prodigal, or that we cannot possibly separate a Mediocrity from an Excess.

I readily own there is often a Compliance that is base; as when Cynethus
commended Demetrius Phalereus for that he kept time in spitting when he was
troubled with a Cough. I own that the Flatterers may abuse this excellent
Virtue, but what one is there that they do not abuse? What is there so
Beautiful or Divine, as that the Ignorant or the Wicked cannot profane it? May
they not even do ill with truth? Those that boast themselves of a good Action
they have done are not they guilty of Vanity though they tell no lie in the
case? We ought not therefore to condemn Complaisance, for that there are many
that do not know the right use of it. It is extremely good in its nature,
though commonly it is very bad in men's practice and use of it. And that this
may the better appear, is it not true that this great freedom which many praise
does very often proceed not from an Integrity of Manners in the Man's own self,
but from Conceitedness rather, and from Vanity and Imprudence. We take pleasure
to contradict, sometimes, because the fear of being overcome makes us loath to
confess even the truth it self. Nevertheless though I should grant that this
sharp reprehending humor does not come from a bad Principle, yet at least it
must be said of it, That it is a bad effect of a good Cause. Those that are so
rude and uncomplaisant are Objects of Compassion, though they be Learned and
Virtuous. One may say of them what Plato said of Xenocrates, That
notwithstanding his Knowledge and his Honesty, he had need to sacrifice to the
Graces. If this rudeness be unbecoming a Philosopher, how shall it be
commendable in a Lady? As gentle sweetness is natural to their Sex, so
Complaisance ought to be inseparable from their Actions and Discourse. It Is
true I do not approve of that which appears affected and constrained when it
endeavors to Please: but also I cannot excuse those Women that put on so much
Gravity as to become Morose. Sweetness and Severity are not contrary, but only
different things; and Prudence may put them into so perfect a Temperament, that
the one may give Luster to the other. Also I do not mean, that to render
themselves Complaisant, they should universally approve all things; these are
two extremes equally blamable; to take upon one to complement or contradict
indifferently in all sorts of Rencounters. Those Spirits that contradict every
thing, are sour or presumptuous; those that approve of all, are ignorant or
cowardly. Those Women that make Profession of Contradicting all things, do this
either out of Inclination, or with Artifice: if this be from Inclination, it
shows the ruggedness of their Humor; if from Artifice, they are vainly proud
of a little Wit. Certainly let it proceed from what it will, it cannot always
succeed, it is always joined with a vicious Temperament, or an imprudent
Design; and is in Persons ill born, or ill instructed.

How troublesome are these Women in Conversation! If they did but regard the
public Good so much as they do their own private Satisfaction, they would vow
an eternal Solitude and Retirement; and would never show themselves but when
People wanted Mortification. Let us do what we will, or forbear to do, it is
impossible to content them. If the Company do not agree to their Sentiment,
they are vexed; if they follow their Opinion, then they themselves begin to
have another quite contrary, on purpose that they may contradict without end.
If any others commend a Virtue, they will detract and condemn it. If any
condemn a Vice, it is presently their Part in the Scene, to excuse or defend
it. They value and mind not what their Opinion is of any thing, provided it be
contrary to that of others. If you praise them, they will accuse you of
Flattery; if you do not commend them, they will condemn you for ungrateful; if
one speaks before them, one is a Babbler; if one does not speak, he is
disdainful. They will find something to blame, both in our Discourse, or in
Silence; they will condemn both Conversation and Solitude.

To speak rightly of this Matter; we must say that the Women of this Humor are
almost always proud there, where the Complaisant are commonly humble: For, to
describe a true Complaisance rightly, we must say it is nothing but a patient
Civility, or a civil Charity. As the Love which Christianity teaches, endures
all things; so the Complaisance of Morality, after a sort, does as much:
although the Motives of these are different, in that the one proceeds from a
Desire to please God, the other from a Desire to please Men. After all, we
should find it no difficult thing to be complaisant, and to bear with the
Infirmities and Imperfections of others, if we would but consider, that we do
no more herein than what we often have need of for our selves. But this is the
Unhappiness of some, that they can neither show Mercy to others, nor suffer
that any others should do Justice to them, or use them as they herein do
deserve.

Those Women that have not so much Complaisance as to bear with the least
Faults, have neither the Humility to endure that any one should reprove their
greatest Crimes. They believe others will always abuse Reproof as themselves
do; and that it will not be used to instruct, but to injure. They despise the
Opinion of all the World, and would have all Men adore theirs: They are as well
Impatient as Insolent; and have as much Vanity as Rudeness. And if at last
either their Ignorance or the Evidence of Truth obliges them to consent, or
hold their Peace, yet their Mien and Looks contradict still: and after that
their Mouth has made a Peace, their silence still continues the War. What can
there be more troublesome in Conversation than this Humor? Certainly this
Quarrelsome Temper were much better in the Schools than in Conversation. I do
not at all deny but we may some times reason and argue together, the better to
find out truth; and that we may render Discourse the more agreeable by the
diversity of the Subjects that are spoken upon: But yet there should be some
fear and caution lest we be disordered or fall out: At least it should be
always remembered that Dispute in Conversation is a War where we ought not to
combat with Obstinacy, nor to overcome with Insolence. Provided Complaisance
be mingled with the Debates, there is nothing so agreeable, and there will no
more injury be done by a Disputation of that sort, than two Persons would do by
throwing Flowers at each other.

The same that have the Humor of Contradicting, have also a perpetual
Inclination to Correct, and reform all Matters: but they are as unprofitable as
troublesome; they know not how to testify a Good Will in their reproofs, no
more than a good Spirit in their Disputes. All that which comes from their
harsh Humor is displeasing; though they speak that which is true they do it so
ungracefully, that instead of making People good, they make them their Enemies.
As soon as such Persons are seen they are distasted; after that we have an
aversion for them, at last an abhorrence: they are generally the Objects either
of Hatred or Laughter.

Complaisance succeeds much better, since as it commends without Flattery, so
it reproves without Injury. This knows the Art of curing pleasantly, it takes
from the Medicine its bitterness without robbing it of its strength: It is a
Sun that does not diminish his Light to make it the more tolerable to sore
Eyes; it refrains from dazzling with its Beams, but not from enlightening. If the
Lodestone has not only the Virtue to attract Iron, but also to show the Pole,
Complaisance Charms the greatest Spirits, as well as the small ones.

It enlightens those that have Eyes, and attracts those that have none; They
who know and understand it see its force, they that do not, yet feel it. In
truth, it has a secret Virtue for the conquering of Hearts, it is a Loadstone
that draws even Iron, I mean the most Clownish and Barbarous.

It insensibly wins upon us even when it reproves: it does not fall with an
impetuous violence like Hail, but as gently as Snow. Though the Snow be cold,
yet it wraps up the Earth as in a Mantle of Wool (to which the Holy Ghost
compares it) to the end it may cherish and keep warm the Seed that is in it. In
like manner though Reproof be in it self somewhat disagreeing, yet it fails not
to make good Designs and virtuous Undertakings bud and sprout in our Hearts.
Complaisance obliges while it reprehends. And if this strikes it is but with a
Rod of Roses; where it strikes it leaves a Flower instead of a Wound. Without
this the best Advice seems but a Reproach; without it, Correction is Injurious,
Praise is disagreeable, and Conversation troublesome.

Complaisance is not a blind Virtue, it has Eyes as well as Hands, it does not
strike blindfold: There are some faults it reproves, and some it bears with: it
endures what it cannot hinder and prevent. And in truth, excepting the
brotherly Correction to which Christianity obliges us, what matter is it to us
if many Err, or if they have ill Opinions, unless it be in matters of
Conscience or that concern their Salvation? As we do not undertake to heal all
that are Sick, we are not bound to endeavor the undeceiving of all those that
are in Error. We should have no less trouble and difficulty in becoming the
Correctors of all the ill Opinions in the World, than if we should go about to
heal all the Distempers that are in it. We have not this in charge, this care
appertains to the Providence of God and not to us.

Besides what need is there that we should speak all our Sentiments, or make
known every where all that which displeases or contents us? One that is wise
ought well to consider always that which he says, but he is never bound to say
all that he thinks. There is no need that for the avoiding of a lie, he should
fall into Indiscretion. To be free, he does not need to be Uncivil; we do not
injure Truth every time that we do not speak it. We are always forbidden to say
that which is false, but we are not commanded to say always all that is true.
There is no Law that obliges us to speak all our Sentiments, or to discover all
our Thoughts

On the other side, this great liberty of speaking is not only-unjust or
troublesome, but also dangerous; this Imprudent plainness provokes the most
mild Persons, when the true Complaisance would soften the most rugged. Clytus
lost the love of Alexander by speaking too freely. Scipio won the Heart of
Syphax by having treated him with gentleness: The one by Complaisance preserved
his Life in company of a Barbarian; the other by using an indiscreet freedom
lost his by an intimate Friend. Daily experience affords us examples enough of
this sort, so that we need not seek for them in the Histories of past Ages: we
sufficiently find every day, that without Complaisance, we become odious, and
intolerable to all the World. Where there is no Complaisance there can be no
Civility, and without these two lovely Qualities, Society cannot be but very
troublesome. Especially let the Ladies observe, that as their Faces cannot
please without Beauty, so neither can their Conversation without Complaisance.

BUT THAT WE may say what yet further concerns them: After we have seen how
Complaisance ought to be practiced, let us now take notice how they should
receive it. Let us learn the difference there is between a Complaisant Person
and a Flatterer, for fear the Ladies should take the one for the other. The
Example of Panthea seems to me sufficiently famous to make a good Discovery of
this. This Lady was no less Modest than Fair; she despised praises as much she
deserved them. Lucian describing the Perfections of her Wit and her Face,
compared her to the Minerva of Phidias, and the Venus of Praxiteles. Panthea
would not accept of the praises that seemed to her excessive, nor endure that
they should compare her to the Goddesses. Lucian to give an answer to this, and
to justify the Comparison he had made, shows, in a very few words, the
difference that there is between the praises of an Orator and those of a
Flatterer.

We ought not (says he) when we would praise a thing, to compare it to that
which is below it, for this were to abate the merit of it: nor to that which is
its equal, for that were to do no more than if it were compared with its self:
But the Comparison ought to be made with something that is more excellent, to
the end that what we praise may have the more of brightness and luster. A
Hunter (says he) will not compare a good stout Dog to a Fox, when he would
commend him, because this were too mean a Comparison; nor to a Wolf, because
this is a thing too like him: but rather to a Lion who has more of Force and
Courage. If Praises are without Foundation they are Flatteries: If they are
without Ornament, they are injurious. Those who can join Ornament with merit in
doing this are just and allowable in what they do. It were Flattery to praise
one that is crooked for her fine Shapes, or one that is bald for the fine Hair
she has. It may be seen according to this reasoning of Lucian, That in praising
what is little may be elevated to indifferent, and what is indifferent to
excellent. A commendation ought not to lie, but it may amplify: It ought not
to be prodigal, but may be liberal. There is a great difference between a mere
History and a Panegyric; it is not enough for this latter that it do barely
describe, but it ought likewise to carry in it some Ornament and Pomp.

The Ladies may judge from hence that there is more difference between praising
and flattering, than there is between dressing and painting the Face. We may
plainly see in the example of this Orator, how praises ought to be given; and
in the example of that Lady we may see how they should be received. Lucian
shows that he understood well the Laws of his Rhetoric, and Panthea testified,
That she was not ignorant of those of Decency and Modesty. I grant there are
very few that like her do make a Conscience of receiving the praises that are
given them, though they be entirely excessive. I know that the vanity of many
is no less Sacrilegious than Saucy, when they receive from their Idolaters the
names of Angels and Divinities without any Scruple: I know too, and grant that
there is more occasion to exhort to restraint than to liberty in this matter.
Nevertheless they ought to consider that they must not violate the Laws of
Decency in observing those of Modesty. It is necessary that Prudence should
show them a certain way between Insolence and Incivility. If Christianity does
oblige them to despise all sorts of praises and even those that are most just,
nevertheless it is convenient sometimes that Complaisance do approve these
praises in the Countenance, even when Humility does despise them in the Soul.
Herein they owe always their Conscience to God, and sometimes their Mien to the
World and Custom.

But to finish this Discourse on that part which is of greatest importance: If
they perceive themselves moved with the praises that are given them, they have
no more to do but to look into themselves, that so they may find a remedy for
this in their own Conscience. As we are the less afflicted when we know the ill
imputed to us to be false; so we shall be the less proud for our Commendations,
when we find that the good ascribed to us is not truly in us. We must therefore
defend our selves from Flattery as from Slander, by the knowledge of our
selves. For as Conscience may comfort us against false accusations by showing
us our Innocence: so it may humble us, while we are flattered, by showing us
our Defects. And if it be not enough for this purpose to consider our own
Imperfections, let us consider moreover how much Treachery and Deceit there is
in others! How much Falsehood there is mingled with the Affairs of the World!
They who have the looks of admirers, have sometimes the Hearts of Murderers;
oftentimes they who praise us in their Discourse, disparage us in their
Thoughts.

The Ladies, like the Eurydice of the Poets, are liable to find Serpents under
the Flowers; As their Sex is carried naturally to Gentleness, their Enemies put
Poison in what they love, and lay Snares where they are sure they will pass.
The Flatterers would do them less harm, if they would take more heed to the
Designs of such Men than to their Discourses: They would the better know those
who disguise the truth if they would represent to themselves that there are
three Conditions necessary to the speaking well; that there must be Resolution,
Prudence, and Friendship. When Resolution is wanting, they will palliate and
dawb: when Prudence and Amity are absent, they are Injurious. The Cowardly
Spirits dare not speak; the Imprudent know not how to do it; and Enemies will
not. Lastly, That they may give and receive Complaisance the more Innocently,
she that is wise must consider, that this is in all those cases forbidden,
wherein we have more care to please Men than God. It ought to be considered,
that oftentimes the Righteous God condemns those Actions that Men praise; and
that he who entertains Flatterers to exalt and puff him up, while God threatens
him in this World, shall not have them to defend him when God shall condemn him
in the other.

Of Birth or Nature, and Education.
IOWN that Plato had good Reason to say that three of the happiest and most
necessary Principles in the World, are Nature, Fortune, and Art: Since Nature
gives Life; Fortune, Goods; and Art, Knowledge. I own too, that Nature and Art
have sometimes no luster without the Goods of Fortune; and this serves like a
Theater or Ornament to the other two. But certainly I cannot approve that
Opinion of the Philosopher, when he said, That the greater things are done by
Nature, and by Fortune; and the lesser by Art. Nature makes Men; Art can make
but the Pictures of them; Fortune gives Sceptres; and Art can give but Talk and
Science. Plato seems to me more the Humane than the Divine in this Opinion: The
Works of Art are so precious, that Nature and Fortune have need of them in all
that which they do, that is most admirable: The one and the other is blind, if
Art does not open their Eyes: Without Art, no one can well live or reign. How
many great Fortunes do we see overthrown for want of Conduct? How many do we
see, whose good Parts lie barren for want of Education? I shall not speak here
of what Fortune can do; but only of Nature and Art, or rather of Birth and
Education, that it may be seen, which of these two ought to have the greater
part in the Lives and Actions of the Ladies.

IT SEEMS in the first place, that a good Birth is more requisite to them than
any other thing; since, with this Advantage, they do that which is good, as it
were naturally, and without Difficulty. An happy Nature has no more need of
Rules than a good Constitution of Medicines: A good Birth succeeds better
without Education, than an ill one can with the best Education. As there is not
the least Star in the Sky, but is of far greater worth, and has more of Force
than the most glorious Sun in a Picture: So it must be acknowledged that the
Advantages which Nature gives are none of them so little; but that they deserve
more Esteem than all that can be acquired by Art and Study. An endeavored
Gracefulness must yield as much to a natural one, as a painted thing to a
living one. And if the Ladies were all assembled before a Judge, as heretofore
the three Goddesses were before Paris, I believe he would give the same
Judgment that Paris did, and that he would declare the more naked, I mean the
more native, to be the fairest.

Though a Face be not adorned, we may see Beauty in it, if it be there; so though
good natural Parts are not cultivated, yet they will make their Strength and
Excellency to be observed. Suppose Pearls be cast into the Mud, we may yet see
something of their Luster, even in the middle of the Filth; and though a Person
that has good natural Parts be brought up in Obscurity; yet her good Birth will
always dart out some Rays, and make some Signs of Virtue shine in her Looks.
Those Women that have this Advantage do all things with the better Grace, and
succeed with more Equality in all their Enterprises.

The Virtues to which we have an Inclination endure much better than those to
which we have none. We entertain more easily that which is in us by Birth, than
what we have by Art and Endeavor. Nature herein resembles Step-Mothers, who
always take more care of the Children which themselves have brought forth, than
of those of another Woman: She does as the Earth, which better cherishes those
Plants and Flowers that its self produces, than those which the Husbandman or
Gardener sows in it. The Effects of Nature are like those Streams that run of
themselves, without any Labor about them to make them pass along: But the
Effects of Art are like those Pipes that belong to Fountains which are always
wanting something or other to be done to them. That which comes from Nature is
the more equal and the more assured.

And if there may be many found, who love rather to follow their Nature, than
to renounce it for the Affectation of somewhat else, though it may seem better: I
think their Opinion is very reasonable; for in truth, we shall succeed better
in cultivating that which is indifferent in our selves, than in imitating that
which is excellent in others. If David fought better with his Sling, than he
could have done with the Weapons of Saul, and struck his blow surer with the
Equipage of a Shepherd than with that of a Warrior: So likewise we may do more
with Nature on our side, than with all the Endeavor in the World; if the
exactest Method, and the most pompous Style do not suit with our Temper.

How superfluous and unprofitable is that Labor, that would acquire a
Perfection which is contrary to our Humor, when that which is but indifferent
is not worth our Imitation; and that which is excellent is above it? That which
is most excellent in all things, is what cannot be acquired by Art. As for
Eloquence, who can acquire the Vigor of it? As for Disputing, who can acquire
the Subtilty, and readiness necessary to it? As for a good Grace, who could
ever acquire that native and powerful Charm, which Painters know not how to
draw, nor the Poets to describe; and which is felt much better than it can be
expressed?

Besides, what need is there to light up Torches when we have the Sun shining
upon us? And what need to receive the Light of Art, when we have that of
Nature? This is not only superfluous, but also shameful and more difficult. And
in truth, whatever good Rules, or whatever fine Examples we follow; there is
sometimes more Difficulty to do as another does, than to do more; it is less
hard to surpass than just to equal them; because it may be, to do more there
needs nothing but Force or Courage; but to do just so much, there must be
Measure and Proportion. It may be much easier to out-go a Man by running, than
if we are confined to that sort of Pace which he uses; since in the former Case
we depend upon our selves; but in the latter we must regulate our going by his.

Would there not in this be a great deal of Constraint and Weariness? Would it
not then be better to follow our own Humor, provided it be not contrary to
Reason? Were it not best for us to examine our Temperament, and be guided by
that to choose the Perfection we endeavor; as men regard the Nature of the Mold
in which they plant their Trees or sow their Seeds? Certainly, whatever they
say of Art it is nothing but a Labyrinth that confounds us: We ought to take
wing and fly up above it rather than vex our selves with searching the way out
among so many windings, where vulgar Souls are wont to lose themselves. It is
true that excellent Wits as well as the Birds may sometimes walk in Paths; but
also they sometimes fly up above all; they use their Wings as well as their
Feet; they follow the force of their Genius as well as the Rules that Art
prescribes.

If we did but well know how to discover the force of our Temper, we should
have it less difficult to succeed in any thing we had a mind to undertake. When
we renounce our own humor to imitate that of another, we resemble them who
forsake a good Patrimony to go and seek their Fortune: We do like Mark Antony,
who might have loved a most excellent Beauty in Rome, and yet he went as far as
Egypt to seek one far inferior. Certainly to renounce our own humor that we
may take up another, is like the leaving an Octavia for a Cleopatra; it is to
despise what is our own, as that Roman Prince did, though it be very excellent;
to love a strange thing though that be but indifferent. Let the Ladies take
notice, That they shall much better succeed in all that they do or forbear, if
they know how to discover and learn the excellency or worth of their
Temperament.

Here is the scource of the greatest disorders. While we are ignorant of what
Nature can do, we would fain be acquiring what it cannot. A cheerful humor
would fain affect the Gravity of the Melancholic, and the Melancholic would
affect the Vigor and Fierceness of the Choleric. Instead of finding out what
there is of good in our Humor, we quit it whole, and go out of our selves to
follow an example that is inconvenient to us, and that hinders the raising our
selves to any higher point of Perfection. If we could but observe the Seeds of
Virtue that Nature has scattered in us, we might, without doubt, render our
selves the more perfect, and the more happy. We should become the more perfect,
because we should have less labor to acquire a perfection conform to our
Humor: and we should be the happier, because our Actions would be without
constraint, and we should employ none but suitable and agreeable means for the
attaining that Felicity.

But it is an Unhappiness (says Cicero) that we suck in error as it were with
our Milk. That we may obey Custom, Truth must give place to Vanity, and Nature
to Opinion. We are so confounded in the Variety of Opinions, and Impressions
that they give us from the Cradle, that we cannot retrieve our selves even when
we are at an Age sufficient for the making this Reflection. We are Ignorant of
the Capacity of our own Genius, and take more notice of what others do than of
what we our selves are able to do. In this we are like those unnatural Mothers
that caress and show kindness more to the Children of others than their own,
and love better an adopted Child than one born by themselves. This is from want
of considering that if we would go where Nature calls us, we should more often
come near to perfection and happiness; and from the want of considering too,
that whatever we do which is contrary to our Humor, it can have neither
Freedom, nor a good Grace.

I DENY NOT for all this but there are bad Inclinations: and there is often
that which needs reforming in our Humor; but we have herein great Evidence of
the Power of Nature, in that it is so difficult a thing to correct the Defects
of our Temperament, or to overcome the Vices we are naturally addicted to. And
this is not only true of particular Persons, but also of whole Nations. There
are Vices naturalized to Countries, so as that they cannot be rooted out but
with a great deal of difficulty and labor. Let us do what we can we shall
never get a perfect Victory over natural Inclinations. If this Man be a lover
of Learning he reads Books to the point of Death: If the other be born with the
Gift of Rallery, he jests even to the last moment of his Life. To have a desire
to conquer entirely ones Nature, is as if a Man would sain leap away from his
Shadow, or be separated from himself. We may mortify our natural Passions, but
we can never utterly kill them; we may hinder them from domineering, but we
cannot hinder them from rebelling. If they are ruled, yet they will be
troublesome; we may stop and restrain their ^^urse for a little while, but
afterward t^^^ will break out like an Impetuous Torrent, and carry away all
that stands in their way. At the beginning Nero could be wise for a few Years,
but at last, the Conduct of Seneca must give place to his Temper, and the
Person he acted be changed for the Person he was.

We return to our selves: There will always something of our Humor escape us,
notwithstanding the Efforts of Reason or the Precepts of Philosophy. If our
ill nature does continue tamed for a while; yet it will do at length like the
Bear in Martial that fell upon his Master and devoured him, even after he had
been tamed many Years. How strange are the Effects of Nature! There are some
who perhaps show not the Vices of their Temper but toward the end of their
Days. Pliny had reason to say, That as among the Indians there are some
Countries where the Hair of the People is white while they are young, and grows
black with Age: so we see some Persons that are much restrained and well
governed while they are young, who in a riper Age give themselves to nothing
else but Sports and Liberty and Debauchery. There were in them the Seeds of
Evil that did not sprout nor put forth till the Autumn of their Lives.

Nature will have always its Course, and what Education soever may be employed
to correct it, yet in the end it will make appear what of Good or Evil it has
in it. There is an instance sufficiently famous among the Ladies to demonstrate
this, that is, in the two Daughters of Augustus: They were both brought up in
the same Court, they had the same Instructions, and the same Examples, and
nevertheless Livia never cared for any but Licentious Company; and Julia always
loved the Conversation of such as were sober and wise. They were seen at the
public Shows, the one surrounded with Lewd Courtiers, the other with
Philosophers. Tho these Princesses had the same Education, yet they were very
different in their Course of Life; and while they both followed their
Inclination, the one was Virtuous, the other Debauched. Thus we see what a good
or bad Nature can do: Let us now observe how absolutely necessary it is to have
a good Education.

WHATEVER IS said in favor of Nature or Birth it still seems to me that
Education is yet more requisite. The former depends upon Chance, and the other
upon our Endeavor. Education is necessary to all sorts of Persons. It makes
those Women that have a good Temperament become the more perfect, and those who
have a bad one, it renders the less insupportable. It gives Luster to the one
sort, and repairs in some measure the Defects of the other. As Lead was more
valuable when formed by the Art of that Excellent Statuary Phidias, than an
unshapen Lump of Gold; so an indifferent Nature will succeed better with an
excellent Education, than an excellent Nature with an ill Education.

We have mentioned in the beginning of this Discourse the Three Principles of
Plato, but here we must place the Three Principles of Plutarch. We can do
nothing with any Perfection (said he) in Virtue or in the Sciences without
Nature, Knowledge and Use. Nature gives the Capacity, Reason shows the Rules,
and Use gives us Exercise for the acquiring a readiness and habit. Knowledge
without Nature is rude, and Nature without Knowledge is blind; but both the one
and the other is still imperfect without Experience. We may see then how
necessary Education is, since it includes Art and Experience; and in that it
polishes and compleats what Nature had but begun. If Nature gives Matter, it is
Education that gives Form and Beauty.

It is for this reason that our Ancestors were of Opinion, we are indebted but
little less to those that teach than to those that have begotten us; since if
the latter have given us Life, the other give us Knowledge, without which Life
would be but troublesome and unpleasant. It was for this reason that the
Lacedaemonians chose one of the wisest and most able Persons among their
Magistrates for the Instructing, and bringing up of their Children. It was for
this reason that E^eocles would needs have old Men given in Hostage to
Antipater rather than young Persons, fearing least their youth might be
corrupted in a Foreign Country. It was lastly for this Reason the Pythagoreans
were wont to say, That the Education of Children is the Foundation of
Commonwealths.

And in truth they were not in the wrong, when they believed that the Happiness
of Estates and Provinces depends much upon the good Education of Children; for
it is no easy matter to retain the People in due Subjection when they are
brought up with Principles of Rebellion. Moreover, Nature only gives us a sense
of private good and advantage, but Education teaches us the sense we ought to
have of the Public Interests. Nature carries us to Liberty, but Education
keeps us within our Duty.

Good Education then is altogether necessary to both Sexes, whatever good
Fortune they have in their Birth: How good soever the Mold is, yet there must
be an Husbandman and there must be Seed to make it bring forth a Crop of Corn;
so though our Nature be excellent in its self, there must be added moreover
good Instructions and good Examples for the making it bring forth good Fruits:
I may well say further, That as the best Mold bears nothing but Briers if it be
not cultivated, so the best Natural Parts produce but very ill things if they
are left without Discipline. Nature employs all her force toward ill things,
it is necessary then that we retrench our Inclinations, as the superfluous
Branches of Trees are pruned away, that so the Sap may be all spent upon those
which must bear Fruit. I confess that we must sometimes have regard to temper,
for that as every sort of Land will not bear every sort of Seed, so every
Humor is not capable of all sorts of Impressions. If Nature without Art has no
certainty; Art without Nature has no strength nor sweetness: It must needs be
then that in this case the Form must have Matter to sustain it, and the
Accident must support it self by some Substance.

I CONFESS that Nature is somewhat necessary to our succeeding well, but it
must also be owned that it may be constrained; and that there is no less labor
necessary to the excelling in a Virtue to which we have an Inclination, than
for that to which we have none at all. In truth this Point of Morality is not
less agreeable than necessary. That we may not abuse our selves then in this
matter, it is convenient to observe that Nature does not give us an Inclination
to Virtue so much as to the extremes about it. It mounts to an Excess or falls
even to Defect, if it be not fastened in the point of Mediocrity by the means
of Education and Art. Nature needs either a Bridle or Spur, it either freezes
or burns, it passes from one extreme to another, if Education does not show it
the Middle where Virtue dwells.

Upon the whole, when Nature carries us to any excess, as to Rashness or
Prodigality, we are thought to have an Inclination to some Virtue there, where
in truth we do only incline to a Vice. It is for this reason that Morality has
much more difficulty to cure the Distempers of the Soul, than Medicine has to
heal those of the Body. Physic hardly heals those Distempers that proceed from
Want, and Morality can hardly conquer those which proceed from Abundance.
Physic more easily retrenches what is superfluous, than it can repair what is
wanting; Morality does more easily repair than retrench. So much truth there is
in this, that we have sometimes most difficulty to do well even on that side to
which our Inclination most carries us. It is harder for a Prodigal Person to
become rightly liberal than for one that is covetous. It is more easy to raise
a Defect up to a Mediocrity than to bring an Excess down to it. Behold the
reason of this: It is because the Excess allures us with more of Pleasure than
the Defect; and though the two Extremes are equally Vicious, nevertheless we
carry our selves more freely to that which is excessive than to that which is
defective. We rather choose what is too much than what is too little: We love to
be swollen and puffed up with Fat, even till we grow unwieldy, rather than to be
meagre and lean: It seems to us as if there were more Courage and Excuse for
Transgressing by Prodigality than by Avarice, and by Rashness than Fearfulness.

It is certain then that Nature gives us nothing of Regular; it only makes us
Prodigal, or Rash; it is only Art or Education that can teach us how we must
govern our selves to be rightly liberal or courageous. It is not difficult to
judge from hence that they who seem to have the best Nature, have need of the
best Education, to the end they may retrench or regulate that which Nature has
given them. Let us declare the truth: A Lady born with the faculty of Speaking
readily, will, without Education, become a mere Tatler: A serious Humor will
become Morose; A Prudent Wit will grow crafty and deceitful. Nature wanders if
we do not conduct and guide it; even the force and vigor of it becomes
prejudicial, if we have not Art and Light for it to make use of.

BUT IF I suppose all that which I have been last speaking may be false, and
that it is more easy to become exactly Virtuous in that to which we incline
than in that which we do not incline to, what praise then would be merited
hereby? What great matter is it for a Man to be good, when he cannot be bad?
What honor can we pretend to deserve in being Virtuous there where we cannot
offend but by constraint, and endeavor? If there be good fortune in this, yet
there is no glory due to it. It is no more a matter of Praise to have a Virtue
so natural than to be born with a fair Face or a robust Body. And, to speak
rightly concerning this matter, it must be said, Those Virtues which are
natural to us proceed very often from an ill Principle; the Patience that is
natural comes from Phlegm and Stupidity; the Boldness that is allied to the
Temperament, comes from Ignorance or want of Wit. And especially since there is
no liberty nor choice in the matter, there can be neither any glory or merit.

But if I grant there is some knowledge and choice attending the practice of
those Virtues; yet certainly where there is so much easiness to do what is
done, it must be reckoned to deserve the less Praise. It was not so much a
matter of wonder to see Demades become a good Orator as it was for Demosthenes
to be so: I say Demosthenes, because Nature had seemed to deny him both Tongue
and Lungs; and yet he rendered himself so admirable in Eloquence, that his
Example alone is sufficient to show that there is almost nothing impossible to
Art, and that there is hardly any defect which we may not correct, as he did
his, by labor and study. It is in this that we merit the greatest glory; when
notwithstanding a natural repugnance and aversion that we have to do well in
any case, yet we do not fail to acquire a habit of doing it. Certainly to raise
a Virtue in a Temper that is contrary to it, is to do as those Kings, who, to
show their Power, cause Palaces and places of Pleasure to be made in Deserts
and upon Rocks. What a glory was it to Heraclides to become a Philosopher, when
he had so very little Inclination to Wisdom? and for Socrates to become a good
Man, who had so little Disposition to Virtue? What a glory is it to see a
Person Chaste while Nature makes the Blood boil high in the Veins? How glorious
was it to see a Philosopher drag a trembling Body to the Wars, and to see a
Spirit bold while the sense is weak and fearful? In truth, I love better the
Courage of Cato than that of Ajax. I like the Boldness that is founded in
Reason, rather than that which proceeds from the Blood. I do not wonder at all
that the Blind make nothing of Lightning, or that the Deaf are not terrified at
Thunder. In the same Proportion that there is a want of the knowledge of an
evil, there must be, without doubt, a want of the fear of it. That only amazes
me, to see so many great Persons who have acquired the Habits of many Virtues,
when they had not the least Disposition toward them.

There is then a much greater Glory in conquering the Repugnancy that we have
to Good, than in only letting our selves be carried on with the Inclination
that we have naturally to it. And upon this account it is, that Education is
altogether requisite; since this polishes yet further a good Nature, and
corrects the faults of a bad one. It is for this Reason, that there is not a
Person so unhappy in his Birth, who may not with some hopes aspire after
Perfection; since we have the Examples of so many great Spirits, that have
surmounted the Wickedness of their Temper, and conquered the natural Aversion
that was in them to Good. For this Reason we ought to have a great Esteem of
Education, since it will serve us as our Occasion requires, both for Food and
Physic: It heals Distempers, and it maintains Health: It improves what is
Good, and corrects that which is Evil.

LET US PROCEED to that which is of most Importance. That we may succeed well
in this Matter we must begin betimes to render our selves capable of true
Goodness, by the Means of a religious Education; since whatever the natural
Repugnance may be, that we have to any Evil, there is still enough of Virtue to
be acquired, and of Imperfection to be overcome, to give us a great deal of
Labor. Observe here the Advice which seems to me of more than ordinary
Usefulness. We cannot set our selves too soon to learn the Hatred of Vice, and
the Love of Virtue. I cannot approve of the Opinion of Hesiod, who forbids to
teach Children any thing before they are seven years of Age. And I like that of
Crysippus much better, who maintained, That in the short Life of Man, there
could be no Time well afforded to be lost. Can we begin too soon to heap up
those good things in which we can never become rich enough? Can we study too
early any Science, in which we can never be sufficiently perfect.

Men complain of the Length of Art, and the Shortness of Life. But if we would
acknowledge our Error herein, we should own, that this Unhappiness comes not
from hence, that our Life is too soon at an end; but from our Beginning in
Virtue or Learning too late. We might render it much the longer for the
Knowledge of good things, if we would begin to live and to study together. They
that do not awake till Noon, have no right to complain that the Day is too
short: They might have retarded the Evening by making a diligent Use of the
Morning. Since we cannot set the Period further off, at least let us begin the
sooner: Let us advance the Beginning, since we cannot keep back the End.

When is it then that they ought to take care about the Education of Children?
Certainly they cannot begin too early to teach them that which they ought to
practice through their whole Lives. As Lalius among the Heathens taught his
Daughter from the Cradle the Laws of Eloquence, that she might know how to
speak well: So S. Jerome taught Pacatula the Laws of Christianity from the very
Breasts, that she might know how to live religiously. What is there we ought
rather to know than Religion? and wherein can we more worthily employ the first
Fruits of our Reason, and the first Essays of Speech, than to acknowledge and
adore him who has given us one and the other of these?

Josephus says, that the Israelites, by the Commandment of Moses, knew the Law
before they knew their own Names. It is thereabouts that we ought to begin our
Christian Education. It ought not to be said, that at such an Age we are
capable of so serious a Knowledge. Certainly Childhood is capable of learning
the Laws of Religion, if it be not of putting them in Practice: This Age is
capable of the Functions of the Memory, if not of those of the Judgment.
Therefore the Poets feign, that the most ancient of the Muses is Mnemosyne,
that is to say, the Memory; to show that this is the first Thing whereof we are
capable. For, as there can be nothing expected from a Field that is never sown;
so there can be nothing hoped for from all our Endeavors, if this Mother of
Arts and Sciences lies barren. It ought therefore to be rendered fruitful
betimes by an holy Education, to the end it may produce wholesome Effects, when
we shall have the Use of Reason and Understanding. Children are capable to
receive, if they are not to produce. They are capable of Impression, if not of
Action.

The Knowledge of Good, forms it self in the Soul, just as the Seed shoots in
the Earth: There is a time when they are hid; there is another when they
flourish, and wherein they bear Fruit. Ah, how happy are those Women, that know
Heaven before Earth; and learn Devotion before Vanity! This divine Foundation
can never be ruined: What is imprinted at first in this clean Paper, can never
be got out again. The holy Scent with which the new Vessel is perfumed, will
abide in it a long time. For this Reason, it is highly important that they
should have Impressions of Good made in them, before they be exposed to those
of Evil. And if Quinctilian wished, that even the Nurse should be Eloquent for
the making an Orator, and for the better Forming of the Speech of Children;
there would be reason also to desire that she were devout for the better
Forming of the Conscience, and to lay betimes the first Foundations of Virtue.

I do not intend herein, that we should begin all at once to make Children
learn the highest Mysteries of our Religion: We must accommodate Instruction to
their Minds, as we need to do Food to their Stomachs; and give them first Milk
before we give them any solid Nourishment. I know well enough we cannot
reasonably attempt to make the little Creature sensible of the Grandeur of the
Eternal. Glory, which would desire a Sugar-Plum more; or to teach the Worth of
Obedience to her that lifts a little Hand to strike her Mother. I know well,
that the Knowledge of Christianity has, as Tertullian speaks, certain Degrees,
and even several Ages, wherein to grow and raise it self by little and little.

But after all, supposing that Children cannot comprehend that which is so
elevated, must we therefore not teach them any thing but what is superfluous
and idle? Why is it, do we think, that they are always in Action, and play so
many Tricks? Is not this as a silent Complaint of the Time which they are
suffered to lose? Is not this a sign that they want better Employment; and that
even already they might be busied about something else than in Play, and about
Babies? I do not herein desire that any should fasten themselves upon my
Opinion. I have not so great an esteem of my own Thoughts, as to be willing to
impose them for a Rule to all others. But let us observe what S. Jerome says
concerning the Education of the young Pacatula; and which may be of great use
to those of her Sex.

As soon (says he) as She shall have passed the Age of seven Years, let her
learn the Psalter by heart, and let the holy Scripture be all the Treasure of
her Soul: She ought to begin to be instructed (he adds) as soon as she begins
to blush. As soon as they are capable of Shame, they are capable of Discipline.
From the Time that they show the Marks of their Conscience upon the
Countenance, it ought to be believed that Remorse has taken place of Innocence;
since they already know to put a Difference between Good and Evil. See here the
Opinion of that holy Man, which perhaps, may seem too severe to a great many.
But let the World think of it what they will; the Corruption of Education which
we commonly see is an unparalleled Disorder: When we may see Young Persons
allowed all manner of Liberty; and that they are praised for that which they
ought to be corrected for; and as if there were a Fear that they should not
learn to sin soon enough; they are accustomed to see and to do Evil, to the end
they may have the less Fear, when they shall be arrived to a riper Age.

THAT NONE MAY accuse me of too much Severity, I declare, that too great a
Restraint is often very dangerous; and the Danae, whom the Poets tell of, was
corrupted in that Tower where her Parents had shut her up, to keep her safe.
This Solitude was more dangerous to her, than Company might have been. I own,
that as Waters pent in, rush with the greater Violence when they get loose; so
those humors that have been too hardly used, fly out with the greater License,
when they can meet with a favorable Occasion. Lastly, I grant that there ought
to be Moderation used in this Matter: That they ought not to have all things
permitted, nor all forbidden them; that Prudence should show us a certain Path
between Licentiousness and Tyranny; and that we should manage wisely our
Promises, and Threatenings; our Sweetness and Rigor.

BUT HOWEVER, in my Opinion, Restraint is more safe for this Age than Liberty:
And if one has not a very good Understanding, the Chains of Fear hold us to our
Duty much better than the Cords of Love. Gentleness is good for those who have
some Knowledge and a good Wit; but to those that want these, it is very
dangerous. If they have a good Nature, Liberty may corrupt it: If a vicious
one, they want nothing but Occasions or Opportunities to do ill. It seems to me
convenient to treat young Persons as they do those that are sick: We must have
regard to what is profitable to them, not to what would be most pleasing. There
is too great Hazard in committing them to their own Conduct: Distrust in this
Case is one of the fittest Parts of Prudence; which ought not only to regard
the Evils impending, but also those that are possible, so as to make Provision
against them. By keeping them at a Distance from Temptation and Opportunity; at
least, we take from them the Effects, if we take not the Desires: If the Venom
stays with them of a vicious Inclination, it is hindered from hurting. And that
we may the better make it appear how far the Fear of Danger ought to extend,
let us observe, that S. Jerome did forbid to the young Pacatula, not only the
Company at Balls and Comedies, but also even the Assemblies of the Church, when
there was Danger. These, in truth, are Holy Places; but there are in them
sometimes Spectators and Occasions that are Profane.

BUT IF WE enquire further into the Original of Evil, we shall find that the
greatest Danger of Corruption for young Children, is very often Domestic. And
if many Daughters have the Vices of their Mothers; this is by Imitation as well
as by Resemblance in Disposition. A bad Example has no less Power and Influence
in the Matter of Education, than the Blood has upon the Birth. I blush when I
consider the Disorder of the Age. How is it possible, that this Child should
not be addicted to Gaming, who has, perhaps, hardly ever seen his Father
without the Dice or Cards in his Hand? And how can this Daughter be Chaste, who
knows her Mother daily sighing after her Gallants; who sees her, every Moment
receiving LoveLetters; and never hears her speak but of Walks, and Assignations
that are suspected? Besides this; How can we reprove them for a Vice, who have
seen us committing the same? To speak the Truth; Whatever Menaces, whatever
Lectures we give them, still the Example shall have more Power to carry them to
Ill, than Corrections or Forbiddings can have to withhold them from it. As the
Vine lifts it self upon the first support it can find; so Childhood conforms
its self to the first Model that it sees: Not being yet able to act by reason
it moves by Example. Childhood receives the bad Impressions easily, but they
cannot be defaced again, but with a great deal of Difficulty. And if the
Apostles seemed to find it difficult to drive out a Devil from one that had
been possessed from his Youth; we ought to believe this a Miracle very rare,
The Conversion of a Person debauched from his Childhood. Whenever the Education
is bad, Vice gets so deep rooting in our Souls, that it is in a manner
impossible to get rid of it. And let it be judged what Hope there is of saving
a Person, when a vicious Habit is added to a vicious Nature. To oblige Mothers
to think the more seriously of this Matter, we have many Examples, as well
sacred as profane, which might be produced; but I shall content my self, to
show them that of the Eurydice in Plutarch. This illustrious Lady being now
well advanced in Years, made her self be taught the Arts and Languages, to the
end that she might be able to teach them her self to her Children. She did not
at all think it sufficient to give them Life by bringing them forth, if she did
not also render them virtuous by their Education. How lovely is this Example!
From hence we may learn that the Mothers who have no Merit nor Goodness, ought
to acquire it, at least, on purpose for the Instruction of their Children. And
if a Heathen had so much Care for the teaching of her Children to speak well,
how much more should the Christian Ladies have for the Instructing of theirs to
live well?

Of an Equal Mind under Good and Bad Fortune.
IT IS NOT a small difficulty to determine whether the Women are more capable
of Moderation in a good Fortune, or of Patience in a bad one. Whether they are
more subject to Despair under Affliction, or to Insolence when they are
Prosperous; since, to speak the truth, both Grief and Pleasure sometimes do no
less harm to our Spirits than Frosts or great Hearts of the Sun do to Flowers;
and as a Flame goes out by either too little or too much of the Matter that
feeds them, so the Spirit is lost by too little or too much of Contentment. If
our Fickleness be well examined, it will be found to proceed from these two
sources. Fortune assaults us with Sword or Poison: It destroys us either with
the Face of a Siren, or with that of a Fury: and for fear least we should avoid
the mischiefs she intends, she will employ even that which is good to the doing
of us harm.

Let us not dissemble our weakness; we waver both in one and the other Fortune.
And as the Painters observe, the same wrinckles of the Face serve both for
laughing and crying; so certainly experience shows that we laugh and weep very
often like Children for the same cause. I will say somewhat more; The same
Persons who rejoice too much in what favors them, are also too sad under evil.
The defect as well as excess causes inequality in them; and as those Bodies
which are very sensible of heat, are alike sensible of cold, so those Spirits
that suffer themselves to be too much overtaken with Grief, do also suffer
themselves to be too much transported with Pleasure; they are commonly the same
Persons who are subject to Insolence and Impatience. There are few Persons who
know how to regulate their Resentments, and who can show a strength of Spirit
on great occasions of Joy or Grief. There are few that are like Socrates in
this, who always showed a Countenance and Mind equal in all sorts of
Occurrences. We suffer our selves to be carried away with the Stream; Occasions
command us; We are like those Birds that are swimming upon the Water during a
Tempest, that are exalted or abased by the Wave that carries them.

LET NOT ANY imagine now that to describe an equal Mind I will make a stupid
one. I desire the Lady to be Prudent not Unsensible. I do not mean that she
should quite rid her self of Passions, but that she should tame them. This
would be no less unjust than impossible. But if this were a thing that could be
done, were it not a very inhumane Philosophy that should renounce Compassion
and Mercy, or Love and Hope? A great Person of the present time had reason to
say, That to think of taking away the Passions entirely, were to propose the
turning of a Man into a Rock, or a God, by putting him either too much above,
or too much beneath resentment. The Opinion of Epictetus in this matter seems
to me admirable. We ought not to be without Affection (says he) as the Brutes,
nor without reason as Fools, but we ought to be so sensible as still to know
how to oppose Reason to Grief; because when we live after that manner, we show
that we can be Sick, and can cure our selves; that we have both a sense and
wisdom. Or otherwise we should not have an equality of Mind, but a stupidity:
and it were to show that we have either no resentment, or no reason to govern
it.

And in truth, I cannot approve of a Mind constant after the Stoical manner.
The Wise Person they would frame, resembles the Caeneus in Pindar, who had a
Skin so hard that it could resist Arrows and Darts, though he were perfectly
naked.

Their Insensible Philosopher seems to be composed of Adamant; he is shut up
close, but will not acknowledge himself a Prisoner; though he grows old, yet he
does not think himself wearing out; he is Ugly, but very agreeable however; he
is a King, but enjoys nothing but his Arguments; he possesses all things, but
begs his Bread; his Fancy serves him for a Horn of Plenty, even in Poverty it
self; and, to say truth, he is not happy, but only because he is unwise.

This Stoical Spirit will not suffer itself to be touched with Joy any more
than with Sorrow. To be of an equal Mind according to the Mode of this Sect,
one must not put ones self to any trouble if a Friend be Sick, or Unfortunate.
We ought not any more to rejoice at a Good Fortune, than to make our selves sad
at an Evil one: A state of good Health should no more render us content, than
that of Sickness. We must even pass from one to the other of these without any
resentment of the change.

See here the equal Mind of the Stoics! But is not this a very extravagant
Morality? Must it not be said, That those who maintain this Doctrine might more
fitly call themselves Poets than Philosophers? And are not their Wise Men like
the Mighty Knights in Romances, that stop Rivers, and encounter the Stars
themselves, and carry away every where Prodigious Victories? It is not at all
of this sort that I desire a well composed Mind to be; I do not seek for an
imaginary force of Mind, and such as would destroy Humanity instead of
regulating it. I desire only a Wisdom that is possible and reasonable. I
declare, That there are times and occasions wherein one may very justly weep or
laugh, and may be joyful or sad. Also I judge, that when Euphrante had lost an
Excellent Wife, he had reason to complain of his Philosophy; for that it
commands us (as he said) to love that which is good, and yet forbids us to be
grieved when we have lost it.

Since we ought to express a joy when we have with us an Object that pleases
us, may we not also testify some regret when we have it no longer? That which
any possess with love, they cannot lose but with grief. It is no less natural
to be sad for the presence of Evil, than to be joyful for the presence of good.
Provided there be no excess in these things, it is but a mad Philosophy that
would forbid us the having resentments so natural and reasonable. To be joyful
in the Morning upon good Tidings, and sad in the Evening for bad News, this is
not a Vicious inequality, this change is just: and as our Taste is diversely
affected with that which is bitter or with that which is sweet, our Mind also
must be moved with that which is good or evil. What danger is there in owning
that our Soul is capable of joy and sadness, as well as our Senses are of Pain
or Pleasure? In truth it may be said, That Reason is not contrary to Nature,
and it is possible to show our selves wise and sensible both at once.

Let us make this Error yet a little more manifest. There are some that think
it a great effect of Constancy to make no Complaints of any evil that they
endure: but certainly there is sometimes no less danger than blindness in so
doing: It is a Vanity that has cost many Ladies very dear, while they have
increased their ill by being desirous to conceal it, and because they would not
shed a few Tears, they have been seen to Die suddenly upon the place. Since our
Lord Jesus himself willingly testified his Grief by weeping, and surely none
can accuse him of having an uneven or unconstant Mind; we may declare That
Weeping and Complaint do not always testify Impatience, but only they show
that we are not utterly insensible. Let us declare, That if God himself was
pleased to show that he was indeed Man too by sadness, and tears; we ought not
to be ashamed to confess our selves such likewise by the same signs and
appearances. However it be a sign of weakness to do thus, yet is this so
universal in this World that there is no more blame due to a Man for being
liable to Grief, than for being subject to Die? We are no more unsensible in
this Life than we are Immortal.

After all, what advantage is it to be sullen in our Griefs? Were it not better
to diminish our displeasure by weeping, than to be hardened into a Pillar of
Salt, instead of letting this bitterness drop out by the Eyes, or of breathing
it off with a few Complaints? A great Poet had reason to say, That the Tears as
well as Waters have a right to a passage, and we ought to moderate only, not
forbid the use of them. Grief is sometimes like a Stream, it swells if it be
resisted; it slides away and is spent in the less time if we give it way.
Provided we can overcome this Enemy, what matter is it whether we do this by
flying or fighting him? But certainly I fear I may be accused for want of
Judgment, for my insisting upon this matter, in as much as it seems no way
necessary to allow Women the liberty to complain of their Grievances, and the
most part of them seem to understand the trade of that but too well. They
mightily extol the Constancy and Strength of Mind that was in Isabella, Queen
of Spain, because she did not so much as complain under Sickness, and the
extremest Pains. And nevertheless they find at times enough of their Sex who
have a Vice quite contrary to her Virtue; such who do not only complain with
Reason, but with Artifice too; and who would seldom be long ill, if Complaining
were enough to cure them.

However that be, we may learn from what has been said, that to have an equal
Mind it is not necessary that we always abstain both from laughing or weeping.
It were a Philosophy too Stoical, that would not permit any but the same
resentment to events, that are favorable or deadly. I judge that according to
the occasions that present whether they be Good or Evil, a Wise Man may be
joyful or grieved; yea, I believe that he may complain when he has cause
without being guilty of Cowardliness in so doing: and that he need not be too
much a Philosopher as Possidonius, who would needs appear well when he was
really Sick. Let us proceed further, and having seen wherein the equality of
Mind does not consist, let us observe wherein it does; and having overthrown
the Opinion of the Vulgar, let us examine that of the Wise in this Matter.

I grant then, that as there are many sorts of Winds upon the Sea that can toss
the Ships, so there are also many sorts of Passions within us to trouble and
shake our Minds: But it must be owned that among all these Movements there are
but two principally which cause the most remarkable changes in us; I mean, when
the presence of Good gives us too much joy, or that of Evil too much Grief.
There are some Passions that make the Blood fly out too much to the extremes of
the Body, there are others that cause it to retire and throng too much about
the Heart; and then that dilates or contracts it self too much. As it may be
seen that fair Weather envites us to walk, and a Storm drives us into the
House: In like manner, the Occasions of joy make us go too much out of our
selves, those of sadness make us retire too much within our selves. The Excess
of the one and the other hinders the due equality of the Mind. It remains then
only at present that we show which of these two Passions gives us the greater
trouble and disorder; and to see whether there be more danger of being too
joyful in a Good Fortune, or of being too sad in a Bad one.

CERTAINLY there are more die of Grief than of Joy, and there are more
Shipwracks in Tempests than in Calms. Prosperity destroys less than Adversity.
And it is not to be imagined that Good should do as much Evil as Evil it self.
Though all the Passions are able to cause some inequality in us, yet there is
none more capable to destroy us than Grief: This appears sufficiently even in
the Color of the Face in those that are afflicted, and in the disorder that it
brings into the Thoughts of the Wisest Persons. I do not wonder at all that
those Women who are possessed with Grief are also pale and dejected, as if they
had no Life remaining in them: since, to speak the truth, Grief is no other
than a long Death, and Death is no more than a short sadness. And indeed Grief
keeps us too long under Punishment. It would seem a very favorable blow that
should put an end to our sufferings though together with our Lives. We never
see any that kill themselves because they are too joyful, but there are many do
that fatal Office for themselves because they think themselves too much
afflicted; and who take Death for a Remedy to their Grief. How much mischief
does this Passion do both to Body and Soul? It dispirits the Blood, it infects
the whole Constitution, it gives Diseases to the Body and Inequality to the
Mind: It weakens the Instruments first and then the Reason: It has sometimes
need of Physic as well as Philosophy to heal it. I own that there are seasons
sometimes wherein Afflictions quicken us, and open our Eyes; but if we examine
them thoroughly, we shall find that they dull the Spirit more frequently than
they awaken and excite it.

And, that we may not dissemble the truth, how many women may we see who in
their Adversities become like the Niobe of the Poets: who lost all sense in her
misery and was turned into a Marble Statue? How many are there that grow
stupid, and Immovable as she was, who testify neither Wit nor Courage, who
abandon themselves to their Grief, and are to such a degree disabled, that they
cannot make one Effort either toward the comforting or defending of
themselves? It ought not therefore to be thought strange if sadness does so
much destroy the Wit, since as this is ordinarily accompanied with despair, it
makes no resistance, it stands with the Arms across, it gives up its self a
prey to the Enemy. One may judge from hence how much more dangerous this is
than Joy, for that Moderation depends more upon us than Patience. It is much
more difficult (says Aristotle) to support ones self under Grief, than to
abstain from pleasure. Temperance has its dependence on our Liberty, but
Toleration depends upon the Malice of our Enemy. If Joy persuades, sadness
constrains us: While the one solicits, the other carries us along. It is much
more in our power to defend our selves from the Songs of a Siren, than from the
Impetuous Violence of a Tempest.

It is for this reason that there were some Philosophers who were of Opinion,
That Patience was the least Voluntary of all the other Virtues; since to bring
that into the World, it must be that some commit Injuries and others endure
them, and there must be Tyrants that there may be Martyrs. But whatever they
think there must be much liberty and freedom of our own Wills in our Patience,
since it is capable of a Reward; and if there be some Pains necessary for the
putting on this Virtue, this is that which augments the worth of it: For all
the World know well enough that it is more easy to resolve the taking our
Pleasure, than the enduring of Evil. After this, ought it not to be owned, that
Sadness has more power to destroy us than Joy; and that we have more of
difficulty to preserve our Minds, even while we are in Adversity, than during
our Prosperity? Is it not true that we are less in danger under an evil when
the remedy depends upon our selves, than when it depends upon others? And must
it not be confessed, That we are much more excusable when our Enemy kills us,
than when we kill our selves?

And that we may show yet further that Sorrow is much less subject to our will
than Joy; it must be said, That we have much less Inclination to this than to
the other. The Tears which we shed when we are coming into the World, testify
that we are rather born to weep than to laugh. We are born in Tears, we live in
trouble, and die in grief. Therefore Themistius spoke to the purpose, when he
said, That if we naturally weep it ought not to be a wonder, forasmuch as that
when Prometheus was holding the Clay in his Hands, of which he was to Form Man,
he would not temper it with any other Water than that which came from his Tears.

The Fable herein conceals a Truth which Experience discovers to us every
moment. But if this be true of both the Sexes, it is yet more particularly so
concerning the Women; to whom Sadness seems to be rather more natural than to
the Men: For as their Temper has much less Heat, so it is also much more
capable of this Passion, in Proportion as it is more moist; Melancholy lodges
there as in its proper Element; and upon every the least cause for weeping,
they are able to shed Tears in abundance. As the Worms breed rather in that
Matter which is tender, than in that which is more hard; so Sadness forms it
self more easily in an Effeminate Complexion, than in one that is more
Masculine and Strong; This natural softness or delicacy is the most sensible of
Grief. In so much that if that Sex would defend themselves from sorrow, they
have not only Fortune to Combat in the case, but even Nature it self. This is
an Enemy that they have so much the more reason to fear for that it is
Interior and Domestic.

All this is but little yet toward the discovery of that Mischief which
Sadness may do them. the Ladies ought to consider that this Passion is not only
capable to craze the Constitution, to disfigure the Countenance, to trouble the
Reason, but moreover also to debauch the Conscience. It is for this Reason that
the Casuists forbid it as well as the Philosophers. And that they cannot say
Adversity shows us Heaven, when Prosperity would hide it from us. Certainly if
there are Rich Men that are Impious, there be also Poor that are Blasphemers:
If there are those that are Ungrateful for good, there are others impatient
under evil: If there are some Insolent in their Prosperity, there are others
desperate in their Misery.

Let not any object to me that God makes himself be acknowledged better by an
evil Fortune sent to us than by a good one: If any see this sometimes come to
pass, they must ascribe it to our error and weakness. For what reason is there
to think that God should be more visible to us in a Privation, than in that
which is true and solid? And how can this be that he should engrave the Image
of his Divinity in the Evil that he has not made, rather than in the Good which
is his Work and Creature. Besides why cannot we as well bless the Hand that
bestows Favors, as that which smites us? I grant that after it has pleased God
to attempt the making us love him and it has proved in vain, He is as it were
constrained to make us fear him. But must not the Cause of this be reckoned
only our own Ingratitude and Ignorance? Would he ever make use of Severity, if
we would suffer our selves to be attracted with the Charms of his Love?

Let us declare the Truth: We are no less liable to offend God under an excess
of Evil, than in a great Prosperity; the Conscience is no less in danger in
Affliction than in Felicity; the Miserable may conceive designs as dangerous as
the Happy; and if some are refined like Gold in this Furnace of Affliction,
there are many more that are like Chaff consumed in it. Lastly, that we may
speak with a great King to this case; We do not see that they who fall into the
Bottomless Pit do praise God any more; they murmur even in Hell, but they adore
and worship in Paradise. It is not the Mouth of the Dead, but that of the
Living that praises and publishes his Grandeur and Power; see then the mischief
that Sorrow does when it is excessive; see how it takes away Fervor from Piety,
Vigor from Action, Health from the Body, Light from the Reason, and Repose
from the Conscience.

NOW AFTER THAT we have seen how much the Spirit is in danger under an Evil
Fortune, let us see how much more it is so under a good one. I desire to begin
to do this on that side which is most important. A good Fortune makes us Proud,
Misery renders us Humble. The one makes us go out of our selves, the other
makes us retire and dwell at home. This conceals our weakness, the other makes
us know it. Alexander learnt much better that he was Mortal when he saw his own
Blood flowing from him, than his Father Philip did from the Message of his
Page, who had it in charge to tell him every Morning, That he was but a Man.
The Son understood better our Humane Misery by his Wound, than the Father could
do it by a Complement and Message. It is sometimes very hard for one to know
her self rightly in a great Prosperity. Vanity and Flattery hinder us from
seeing rightly what we are. It is for this reason we have elsewhere said, That
a Good Fortune has no more true Friends than an Evil one; because if all the
World shuns this for fear of the Charge of Succor, no one will approach the
other, but only to destroy it.

Prosperity is not only Blind, but also Insolent; as it hinders us from seeing
our Defects, it does not permit us to acknowledge with Equity the Merits of
others. Whatever respects are paid to it, still it believes that it merits more
than it receives. One would never be much concerned to oblige such Persons by
any Service, since they will hardly believe that we have well discharged our
selves. Without doubt there are many could not forbear to blush if they would
represent to themselves, as they ought, how often it comes to pass that the one
possesses what the other deserves; and that Fortune is sometimes liberal there,
where Nature is more sparing of her Gifts.

What a deal of Blindness is there in the World! How much do we see it in the
Ugly and Stupid, who nevertheless let themselves be persuaded that they are
Beautiful and very Knowing; and they can never be undeceived, neither by the
Glass nor any knowledge of themselves? See here the mischief that Prosperity
breeds in the Mind: But this is not all, it not only obscures the Reason, but
it also corrupts the Conscience, and effeminates the Courage. The Soldier of
Antigonus, and he that served Lucullus, were bold only while they were hurt; no
sooner were they cured, but they would no more expose themselves so freely to
Danger. The Voluptuous are without Courage as well as without Steadiness; Venus
is as unconstant as the Element she came out of: She, to be sure, will not stay
long there, where any thing is to be endured; no sooner had Diomedes wounded
her, but she fled from the defense of the besieged Troy.

I declare then, That if there are some who destroy themselves when Fortune is
contrary to them; there are yet a great many more that debauch themselves when
she is favorable. They say Fortune has two Hands with which she fights us; but
it must be confessed, That if there falls one thousand by the left Hand of
Affliction, there falls ten for it by the right Hand of Prosperity. Also
experience daily shows us, That Prosperity needs much less time to conquer us
than Adversity: This latter laid siege a long time to Troy without being able
to take it; but the other in one Night made a Prey of it. This City preserved
its self under all the Calamities of a ten Years siege, and at last lost her
self in one Night of Mirth and Debauch.

Pleasure corrupts all. Whatever there is of greatest strength in the World, it
grows effeminate in the Bosom of this Wanton: She weakens the strongest, and
blinds the wisest Persons. Even they sometimes who have for a long while
resisted Grief, have let themselves be vanquished in a moment by Pleasure. She
does not caress but to deceive us; she does not lift us up but to precipitate
us with the greater fall. And to say she does us no harm when she is kind and
soothing, is as if one should say, That a Flatterer is not an Enemy, and that
he who kills one with a perfumed Poison is no Murderer. However it be, there
are very few that can defend themselves from it; and for my part, I esteem much
more those that use Moderation in their Pleasures, than those that practice
Patience under Sufferings: It seems to me that there is more ease in rendering
ones self Victorious over Grief than over Pleasure.

They who have read in S. Jerome the Constancy of a young Man, who was laid
bound upon a Bed of Roses, and exposed to the unchaste Allurements of a
Beautiful Curtezan, who endeavored to corrupt him: Would they not own to me
that he endured more evil upon this Bed of Flowers, than if he had been thrown
upon a heap of Thorns? and that he had suffered less under the Hands of an
Executioner, than he did from the Filthy Embraces and profane Assaults of this
Lewd Woman? This was new kind of Martyrdom; others suffered under Torments, he
suffered under Pleasures. He was more impatient at the suffering of Pleasure,
than others in the enduring of Pain.

How powerful is this Example! This Christian Soldier was in part a Conqueror,
and partly conquered. His Reason carried away the Victory which his Sense lost.
But that we may well comprehend this matter, we need but to represent to our
selves, how difficult it is to defend our selves from an Enemy that pleases. In
the combating Pain or Adversity our Sense joins with the Spirit; but when we
must make War with Pleasure, the Sense takes part against the Reason. The Man
whole and entire resists Pain; there is but half of him that makes any
resistance to Pleasure.

See how difficult it is to all to maintain an Equal Mind in all opportunities
of Pleasure; and especially is it so to the Ladies: For it seems that
Moderation in what pleases them is much harder to them, than Patience under
Evil; the delicacy of their Constitution seems to render them an easy prize to
Voluptuousness, and Joy seems to put them in more danger than Sorrow: They say
that Sex have Moisture to maintain this withal, but not Heat enough for the
other; that their Heart becomes deprived of Blood, upon every little Joy that
makes it dilate its self. And in truth it has been seen that many Women have
died with the excess of this Passion. Polycrita returning from the City of the
Naxians was so overcome with Joy after having raised the Enemies siege from it,
that she suddenly died amidst the public Acclamations. This has sometimes
happened to Men, but more frequently to Women; because they are more capable of
resisting Affliction than Prosperity, they are more liable to Insolence than
Despair, and their Spirit becomes more unequal in Joy than Sadness. And how can
it be said that an excessive Joy does not diminish the equality of the Mind
when it is able even to take away the Life? How can it be said to make no
change, when we see it can kill?

HERE I MUST REPROVE the Levity of too many: If we consider their Inconstancy
well, and the unevenness of their Humor, we may compare them to the Beast
called the Hyaena, of which it is said, That it is not of a certain Sex, but is
sometimes Male and sometimes Female: These Persons are like the Lake of the
Troglodites where the Water is said to change its taste every moment, being one
while sweet and after bitter. There is nothing certain neither in their Actions
nor in their Thoughts. They have their Feet always upon the Boul of Inconstancy
as well as Fortune, who is of the same Sex with them, and are always ready to
alter as she is, and to overturn that which they have set up. Of all the
Virtues it seems as if there were none to which they have less Inclination than
to Perseverance. One may see them changing every moment, either their Affection
or Opinion, there is no certainty in their Esteem or Love.

They cannot deny this: And if they would give themselves leisure sometimes to
make Reflections upon their Unsteadiness, they would confess that when the
Poets invented their Chimera, they had a design to draw their Picture; since,
to speak the truth, there is as prodigious a variety in their Sentiments as in
the feigned Body of this Monster. In truth it is just matter of wonder, that
the same Mind should be capable in so little time of so different Thoughts,
even to contrariety sometimes. If many of these Women had a Painter hired to
take every day a Draught of them according to their different Resolutions; I
assure my self, that there would appear every night under their Hands a mere
Landscape of a Wilderness.

We may see some of them that will on this day appear mighty Chaste, and on the
next they are Lewd; now they show themselves Covetous, and anon Liberal. It
would be well for them that they could forget this shameful variety, and that
they were without Memory as well as without Steadiness: For the little Memory
they have, however little it is, will make them ashamed of their Judgment. I
could wish to them, that which Epictetus requires in a Wise Man; that is, That
they knew the Art of Regulating their Opinions, and of Subjecting them to
Reason. They would herein have conquered many of their Enemies, and appeased
those Winds which ordinarily cause all the Tempests of their Life.

But when is it that these Women are more subject to this Ridiculous
inequality, than when they are elevated with a High Fortune; since from that
time every one worships their Opinions, even the most Extravagant of them, and
their Imperfections are praised, and their very Vices termed Virtues; since
also they have then all things, so much at their Wish, and are sometimes so
weary even of Delight, that their own Disgust, which arises from their being
cloyed, causes their Inconstancy? Having tired themselves with true Pastimes,
their sickle Minds busy them with Imaginary ones. It is for this Reason that
Prosperity and Levity are very often lodged together.

Let none deceive themselves in this Matter, nor think that to render any
Steady in their Minds I have a Mind to make them Obstinate: It is not always
blameable to change, there are Seasons wherein this is not contrary to
Prudence. It is as great a fault altogether, to adhere to an Opinion, when it
is an ill one, as to change from that which is good. Obstinacy and Inconstancy
both are equally contrary to Election; because the one is Immovable when it
ought to change, and the other changeable when it ought to be fixed. That we
may be Steady or Constant, there is nothing more required than that we
persevere in Truth and Equity. Besides, I know very well that the Minds of the
wisest Persons may be moved at the first in some Re-encounters: Aulus Gellius
says, That the Stoics themselves do not deny but their Wise Man is capable of
some change; because, say they, the Emotion is not in our Power, but the
Consent to it is. And, to speak in the Terms of their Sect, the Visions do not
depend upon us, but only the Approbations. I blame then the Unsteadiness which
proceeds from our selves, and not at all that which is joined to the weakness
of our Sense, and is not in our own Power.

I HAVE a Mind to discover yet other Causes of the Unevenness of the Mind. I
suppose then, that even knowing Persons may have sometimes their Mind uneven,
and, as it were, irresolute; because the greatness of their Light does, as it
were, dazzle them, and make their Election waver; and while they look upon the
same Object under various Appearances, they cannot easily determine themselves;
but do find some probability, as it seems to them, even on all sides.
Nevertheless it must be owned that this Uncertainty is yet more common to the
Ignorant, for that while they know not the true Nature of Good or Evil, there
is more of Hazard than Assurance in their Choice; and by so much the more as
their Spirit is weak, they are unconstant.

SEE AGAIN a Cause of this of another Kind: There are some who have truly some
Wit and Knowledge; but they have nevertheless also, I know not what natural
Easiness of Temper, that renders them susceptible of all sorts of Opinions.
Their Spirit has some Light, but it has nothing of Force; it knows how to
propose, but has need of Assistance toward the making a good Conclusion. There
are but too many of this Sort, who see the Truth, but are not able to follow
it: Who set sail toward the right Port; but, every the least Tempest casts
them upon another Coast; and who suffer themselves to be carried away with a
Persuasion, as Ships are by the Winds, and Stream of the Tides. As they are
Credulous, they are Unsteady.

AND IN TRUTH, may we not see some that have a certain Distrust of their own
Sentiments, though they are not bad; and that cannot go without a Guide, though
they are not blind? Paschalius says, that Women ordinarily believe very lightly
when they are in great prosperity; and that it is from hence that they appear
so uneven. He brings the Example of Procris, in Ovid, to show, that they very
easily believe what they fear, or what they desire; since she her self was so
credulous to the Reports of Slanderers, and yielded so readily to the Offers of
Cephalus her Husband, when he was disguised, that she became as lightly Jealous
as she was Amorous. And in truth, those that are in a great Fortune let
themselves easily be caught with Flattery, or moved to Revenge. And as there
is no injury so small, for which they will not insist upon a Satisfaction; so
there is no praise or Commendation of them so excessive as that they will not
receive it. It is their constant Misfortune to give Credit to Flatterers and
Slanderers.

LASTLY, to find out the more ordinary, and dangerous Source of Unevenness, we
may observe, that we shall find none more capable of this, than those Women who
have no Design, or those that have bad ones. There are some careless Wretches,
that do not propose to themselves any end at all; who live in I know not what
sort of Indifference; like those Archers that let fly their Arrows into the Air
without aiming at any Mark; or as Mariners that should let themselves wander
upon the Ocean, without steering toward any Port. It cannot be, but such must
be very unconstant. But those that have any ill Design, must needs be yet more
so, because the frequent Remorses that gripe them, cause their minds almost
every moment, to change their Opinion, as they do their Faces to change Color.

So that, to have a steady constant mind, there is nothing more requisite than
to keep it Innocent. And to this purpose, I have a most admirable Rule, which I
took from a Person very knowing and religious. To preserve (said he) an
Equality of Mind in all our Designs, and in all our Sentiments, without giving
our Consciences any Reason ever to reproach us; we ought to take care in all
our Pretensions, that Justice do seek, Prudence find, Strength revenge, and
Temperance do possess. There ought to be Justice in the Affection, Prudence in
the Understanding, Courage in the Effects, and Temperance in the Use. The
Practice of this excellent Advice would confirm the most unconstant Thoughts,
and happily determine those that are most true: For, that none may flatter
themselves, it must be said, that the true Evenness of Mind is inseparably
joined to Purity of Conscience.

LET US FINISH this Discourse too with that which is of Importance, Whatever it
is that happens to us, that is strange or deadly, what need is there that it
should mightily trouble us? Certainly there would be many more that would
endure well, and constantly, the Evils that befall them, if they could
represent to themselves, that it is God who tries us; and that Patience is a
Virtue so lovely, that, in the Exercise of this, Men are apt to think well of
ones Actions, though they are none of the best. There are many more would
defend themselves from Sadness, if they would but consider, that this Passion
is no less unprofitable than dangerous. If, I say, they would consider, that in
the greatest Extremities, either there is a Remedy, or there is none: If there
be one, why should we not employ all possible means, without admitting so great
a Trouble of Mind, till we see how they shall succeed: If there be no Remedy,
we must resolve to suffer, as we must to die; since as the one is inevitable
according to the Laws of Nature; so we see the other to be so according to the
Laws of Necessity. After all, How superfluous is Sorrow and Grief! It cannot
find again, that which is lost; nor call to life, what is dead; it cannot
hinder, but that Evils will come, nor can it cause the good things that are
gone away, to return. And nevertheless, as if this fatal Passion could not do
us harm enough alone, we help it to persecute us: There are some that do not
put forth the least Endeavor toward the helping of themselves, who seek
Solitude, for fear they should be diverted from their Grief; and who fly from
Comforters as if they were Murderers. What a Blindness is it to do ones self
so much Mischief without any appearances of Advantage! If we examine this Case
well, we shall find that we are not so unhappy in any thing else, for the most
part, as we are in our Grief and Trouble of Mind: Or that we are not so truly
sad, because we are unhappy, as we are unhappy in that we are sorrowful and sad.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The ARTS of EMPIRE, and Mysteries of State Dis-cabineted, in Political and
Polemical Aphorisms, grounded on Authority and Experience; and Illustrated with
the Choicest E^^mples, and Historical Observations: By the Ever Renowned Knight
Sir Walter Raleigh. Published by John Milton, Esquire; Printed for Joseph Wats, at
the Angel in S. Paul's Churchyard.


