THE EXECUTION OF TWO PERSONS AT TYBURN For the murdering of Sir Edmund-bury
Godfrey one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex,
late of St. Martins in the Fields.

VIZ, Robert Green and Lawrence Hill, Who were executed on Friday the 21th of
this Instant Frebruary, 1678/9. with an Account of their Deportment at the
place of Execution, and several other remarkable Circumstances.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for D.M. 1679.

The Execution of the Prisoners who suffered at Tyburn on Friday the 21th day
of February.
WITH what horror and Amazement, must a serious thought be Startled; when it
reflects upon the heinous Crimes Committed, by the Villains of our Age: whose
Cruelties are as Boundless as the Infernal Mansions from whence they first
assumed their Beings: no modern Times have known such gross Impieties as these,
which have so lately been transacted in our Land, all dyed in Crimson Shapes,
who gaped with thirst of slaughter to destroy the innocent, and with dire
Massacres unhinge the settled State, depose if possible the long continued
peace our quiet Realm injoys, lay Crowns and Scepters in the dust, and trample
upon Majesty. Monsters in the shapes of men, who dare to arrogate such thoughts
as these, or ponder with themselves upon the fatal Ills; but just is the
righteous God in all his works and wonders, and in the midst of darkness can
reveal what secret Plots are lodged: no cunning contrivances, nor crafty
Snares, escape his narrow searching Eyes: but Murder is a Crime whose rending
voice does usher vengeance down, and lets in horror to the guilty soul; all
hopes of quiet vanish from the loaded thoughts that toil beneath the mighty
weight of that oppressing sin, they lose themselves as in a pathless maze, and
know not where to turn, on one hand fear, on the other danger lies in ambuscade
to trap their silent steps, who trace like wondering Ghosts the unfrequented
ways, and dread the shadows of approoching harm; then sure it must be miserable
to those wretched Miscreants who were themselves the Authors of such attending
woes, and heaped upon their Heads the dreadful storms of an offended power, the
just desert of what themselves have done. But among all the Cruelties that
wicked men could put in Execution, or all the Sicophants of Hell could plung
their thoughts in, or cruel Papists, and most bloody men, could invent, this,
the Narration of which I am purposed to relate (for which two of the barbarous
Actors most deservedly have suffered) may equal sure, if not exceed. -- And
thus I shall explain it. The parties that suffered were Hill and Green, who
upon his Majesty's Proclamation were discovered, and apprehended, and Committed
to Newgate, as Persons accessory to the inhumane Murder of that truly Loyal
and worthy Gentleman Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, one of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace, for the County of Middlesex, late of St. Martins in the Fields; a
man so generally beloved, and of so sound a Judgment in State Affairs, and for
the promoting the good of all Civil people, and depressing those by his
Authority who sought to disturb the public quiet, and raise Commotions in the
Land: but for this he was looked upon with envious eyes, and fell a Sacrifice
to Popish rage, for which the Parties aforesaid were Arraigned at the
Kings-Bench-Bar, in Westminster Hall, on Monday the 10th of this instant
February, where about nine or ten of the Clock the Jury being pannelled, the
Prisoners were brought, where it was proved against them by very credible
Witnesses, that they were actually concerned in Strangling the said Sir Edmund
with a Hankerchief, and dragging him into a secret place to conceal the
barbarous Crime, with many other Circumstances too tedious here to recite, for
which they were found guilty, and the next day being Tuesday, the 11th of the
same instant, Received sentence to return to the place from whence they were
brought, and from thence to the common place of Execution; and there to be
strangled till their bodies were dead: the which on this 21th of February was
put in Execution. In the Morning they were brought down Stairs, where the Cart
and Sheriff's men waiting for them: and an innumerable Crowd of Spectators, who
lined the ways, and thronged from every quarter filled the Lanes and Streets,
to see those miscreants of whom they heard so much, the Windows likewise
twinckled with eyes of gazing mortals, who sent forth shouts, as pleased with
what repaying Justice had so justly doomed, whilst the dejected pecants passed
by, perhaps more concious of their Crimes than heretofore, for death that
ghastly King of terrors, when as he makes his near approach looks dreadful, and
amazes those who bold in Sin never feared his distant frowns: but did suppose
them only sounds to rouse the drowsy Soul from its securer slumbers. And so
indeed it is, to make men serious, and incite them to beware of ills that taint
the faculties, and poison the depraved soul with base-bred inclinations,
especially that of murder, cruel murder; that bloody Crime, so hereditary to
all the Popish Faction, whose eyes delight in blood and humane Sacrifice: nay
the very foundation of their pretended faith, by Cruel Jesuits compiled, is in
obedience to perform the most desperate Villainies (if so commanded) for the
propagation of the Romish Cause; that the baleful accidents of time from their
most sullen natures can give scope unto, or witty horror dares invent, as may
be evident in this, when they had barbarously misused and murdered this worthy
Gentleman, to hide the Guilt and avoid the Suspicion, they carried the murdered
Corpse by Night unto a remote and pathless way, not taking any thing from him,
(but thrusting a Sword through as it is conjectured before murdered Corpse) his
Gloves and Cane were decently in order laid. But to the purpose from which I
too long have swerved: they came thus guarded and attended to the place of
Execution: to receive the reward of those black Crimes their fatal hands had
done; for which their forfeited Lives must make an expiation to offended
Justice, who is not satisfied till Blood for Blood be paid, especially that
Blood that has most wrongfully been shead.

They were drawn in a Cart with dark colored Horses, and guarded by a number
of Constables and Watchmen. Green was very much in years, supposed to be sixty
or upwards, and Hill not supposed to be above forty: They were attired in
Campain Coats, with black Hats and colored Hatbands, and white Gloves. Hill
having a large Book in his hand: They seemed to be very penitent, often lifting
up their hands and Eyes, with often repeated Ejaculations, the which drew
charitable thoughts from the beholders. Thus they continued, till they came to
the appointed place of Execution, where they said little or nothing to the
purpose; but much bewailed their unfortunate ends, and that they hoped to find
mercy at the Tribunal Seat of their great Creator, before whom but a few
moments divided their appearances; asking pardon of all men for the injuries by
them committed against them: And then the Executioner did his Office. They were
afterward brought back, and buried.

And now one would think the miserable End of those wretched men, so deservedly
suffering for their notorious Facts, should remain as the Trophies of offended
Justice; and be as a warning to all those Bloody minded men, whose stifled
Malice swelled with tides of mischief, struggles to get vent: but the Almighty,
whose Omnipotence can pound them into dust, and tumble down their lofty
thoughts, that Weave among the Clouds: he only it is that can preserve us from
their cruel rage, and turn their Fury back, destroy their secret Plots, and
save his people from the mouth of slaughter, whose providence is
all-sufficient, and whose goodness never fails those who for their safety trust
in him.

FINIS.

