THE Experienced Jocky, COMPLETE HORSEMAN; OR Gentleman's Delight.

Containing plain and easy Directions, in Breeding, Feeding, Keeping and
Managing Horses for all occasions, as War, Raccing, Hunting, Travel, etc.

Directions for the Buyer to prevent Cheats: Rules whereby to know the State of
Horses Bodies together with approved Remedies, or unquestionable Cures, for all
internal and external Distempers and Grievances incident to them.

Also the nature of Simples, manner of making Unguents, Salves, Poltisses,
Drenches, Cordials, and whatever is requisite in Physical, or Chirurgical
operation.

Likewise, the Art of Shooing, Bloodletting* Roweling. The Artifices, Devices
and Che^^^ of the Jockies, etc.

To which are added, plain and easy directions for the Breeding, Feeding,
Managing and Curing distempers in Bulls, Cows, Calves, Oxen, Sheep and Swine;
useful and necessary for all persons who expect Pleasure or Profit by any of
the forementioned Animals.

The like before not extant.

London, Printed for Will. Whitwood (...) door to the Crown T^^^^ (...)

depiction of a horse surrounded by a numbered list of names of ailments The
itch i The disease of the rump 2 Wringings in the small guts 3 The navell gall 4
Asore back 5 The hornie swelling 6 The garrot 7 The poll-evil 8 The strangles 9
The viues 10 The nail in the eye 11 The cataract 12 The staggers 13 The
glanders 14 Cold in the head 15 The spreading worm 16 The lampas 17 Bloody
rists in the mouth 18 The tongue wounded or hurt 19 The disease of the tongue
20 The Barbs 21 The disease of the breast 22 The hard swelling on the knee bone
23 Along hard swelling under the knee 24 The splent 25 Windgales 26 The spots.
27 Riccioti. 28 The Iavar. 29 The secon^ kind of Clo^ing 30 The swelling called
For^melle 31 Enchevestre 32 Spenochia 33 The first kind of Cloying 34 Another
disease of the foot 35 The sole grown from the hoof 36 The frothie hoof 37
The fig 38 The quitter bone 39 The mole 40 The fashions ring worm or running
frush 41 Aprick or stroke 42 scab 43 The sop 44 The swelling of the stones 45
Stireling 46 The Draught gut fallen out 47 The Curb of the hoof 48 The fistula
49 The Canke 50 Rist and clefts 51 The Iavars 52 Long rists or Chops 53 Over
thwa^^ Chops 54 Spavins 55 Warts on the out side 56 The Curb 57 The bonie
swelling upon the hough 58 The langie of the tail 59 The falling of the hair
of the tail 60




THE CONTENTS.
THe first consideration in relation to Pasture for Horses, etc. Page 3
Directions and Rules adout the choice of Horses. p. 4 How to oblige a Mare that
is unwilling to take the Horse, to be covered; when, and in what manner she
ought to be covered, and how afterward to be used. p. 6 To make a Mare be
covered, when you perceive she has not conceived of the former: The time best
for covering; what diet is best for the Stallion, to prepare him for covering;
how to use your Mare when she is with Foal. p. 7 What time your Stallion will
conveniently serve for covering. What years in the Horse and Mare produce the
best Colts, and when it is most convenient to wean Colts. p. 8 Provender most
convenient for Colts after two years old, till they become fit for service. The
reasons why English breed ought not to be taken up so young, though more
convenient for their Masters. How to handle and break wild and headstrong
Horses, and to use them after they are made Gentle. The best feeding in the
winter for Mares and Colts of two years old, and what age is best to handle
them. p. 10 How to know what Colt will make a true shaped Horse. To help Mares
that are difficult in foaling. To order Colts upon weaning. Separating and
gelding of Colts, etc. p. 13
THe Complete Horsemans true Directory: or the Rules and Methods for managing
Horses at all points, after they are brought up and fitted for the Saddle, by
the care and industry of the Breeder: as in the foregoing Treatise of his
Office, is expressed. p. 16 Experienced Rules for Saddling and Mouthing, etc.
p. 17 Rules to be observed upon the first backing your Horse. p. 19 Rules to be
observed in the Management of a Horse to bring him to perfection. p. 20 How to
bring your Horse to the Management of the Ring. p. 22 How to stop in a full
Career, to Advance, Retire, etc. p. 23 How to oblige your Horse to retire, and
to endure all manner of Bitts. p. 24 Turnings and strait Turns, what they are.
And Rules to manage your Horse in that affair. p. 25 Approved rules to bring
your Horse to a swift and smooth Amble, Trot, or Gallop, upon the least motion.
p. 29 The most approved and experienced way to make a Horse amble true and
complete. p. 35 What time the Tramel may be altered, and when it is most
convenient to mount his back to journey, etc. p. 39 Rules to be well considered
and exactly observed by all that undertake the care of good Horses. p. 43 How
to order your Horse when you design him for Sport, or Travel: And how in and
after Travel, Sport, etc. p. 45 Rules to be observed in preparing and ordering
your Horse designed to run, according to the condition he is in, and the temper
of his body. p. 48, 49 The manner of the first fortnights diet for a Horse that
is fat and foul, or upon his being taken from soil or grass, and what is
necessary therein to be observed. p. 50 Rules to be observed in giving your
Horse heats, during the time of his preparation. p. 57 Rules to be observed in
the second fortnights keeping, etc. p. 59 Of Horses Muzzels, their use and
goodness. p. 62 An account of what further remains to be done the second
fortnight. p. 63 The Receipt how to make the first scouring, etc p. 66 Rules to
be observed in ordering your Horse, after his taking the aforesaid Potion.
ibid. Diet for the third Fortnight, how it must be made, etc. p. 69 To make
Cordial balls, etc. p. 70 Rules to be observed in the fourth or last fortnights
keeping, as well in relation to his Diet as usage. p. 71 Things to be observed
in running Horses, as to the state of their bodies, in relation to sickness and
health. p. 77 How to know the State of a Horses body by his Dung. p. 79 How to
know the State of your Horses body by his Urine. p. 80 How to know the State of
your Horses body by his feeding; and of Lameness. p. 81 What is to be observed
from the state of your Horses body. p. 82 How to know the State of your Horses
body, from the privy parts, etc. p. 84 From his Limbs, Observations to be
taken. ibid. In Watering, Observations to be taken. p. 85 From your Horses
Sweat, Observations to be taken. ibid. From your Horses Hair, Observations to
be taken. p. 86 Advice to the Buyer, or certain and unerring Rules, whereby to
understand the perfections and imperfections of any Horse, in a short time, if
not upon the first sight. p. 87 What is to be observed as to the Breed. p. 88
Observation of Colors. p. 89 Observation to be taken from Pacing, Trotting or
the like. p. 90 What motion in your Horse is to be observed, upon diverse
occasions. ibid. Of Ambling. p. 91 Of Racking. p. 92 Of the Gallop. ibid. Rules
to be observed, in the Stature of a Horse; Marks whereby to know his goodness.
p. 94 Observations on the Pasterns. p. 99 Observations on the Hoof. p. 100
Things to be observed in the setting on of the Head, Crest and Maine, etc. p
101 What is to be observed in the Back-ribs, Fillets, Belly and Stones. p. 102
Observations to be made on the Buttocks and Hinder thighs of your Horse. p. 103
What is necessary to be observed in the hinder Legs, Tail and Cambrels. p. 104
Infallible Rules, whereby to know the age of any Horse or Mare. p. 105
Observations to know his age, by his Mouth. p. 108 Age to be known by the Hoof.
ibid. Age to be known by the Tail. p. 109 Age to be known by the Eyes. ibid.
Age to be known by the Skin. ibid. Age to be known by the Hair. p. 110 Age to
be known by the Bars. ibid. Of the Office of the Farrier, and what is chiefly
therein to be considered. p. 111 To what end Phlebotomy, or bloodletting
serves. p. 113 What seasons are best to let blood in. p. 116 Of the bones of a
Horse, and how placed. p. 117 Of the four Humors sympathising with the four
Humors incident to all Creatures. p. 118 How to know by the Color of a Horse,
to which of the four aforesaid Humors he is most inclinable, and how thereupon
to order him for the prevention, or curing such distempers as he is most
subject to. p. 119 Things to be observed, to keep a Horse in health, and make
him long continue so. p. 122 Of Sickness, dangerous to Horses; and its
Original. p. 123 How to discern by diverse symptoms any mortal sickness in a
Horse. p. 125 The Drink to be given before Grass. p. 128 How to order your
Horse, upon taking him up from Grass, to prevent sickness. p. 129 Directions to
cleanse your Horse, after taking up for comeliness and healths sake. p. 130 How
to prepare your Horse for any Medicine, in case you find the distemper has
effectually seized him. p. 131 What purgations may be given with the least
danger. p. 132 Strong purging Pills, how to make them. p. 133 A gentle Drink or
Drench, to prevent sickness, or cure it. p. 134 An excellent Drench to open the
body of an Horse, and cleanse it. p. 135 Diatessaron, or an excellent Drench
for curing Pestilential distempers. ibid. If at any time you have not Diapente,
give him this drink. p. 136 Signs of sickness in general. p. 137 Things to be
observed in Physicking a Horse. p. 138. Exercise to be observed upon the
Reception of Physic. p. 139 What is to be observed in raking your Horse who
cannot dung without pain. p. 140 What further is to be observed in Phlebotomy
or blood-letting. ibid. How to know when it is necessary to bleed your Horse.
p. 142 Observations on outward sorrances, a description of them, and how they
are to be ordered. ibid. The five principal things to be be observed by a
Farrier. p. 146 How many Diseases are incident to a Horse. p. 147 Of the
Sickness called the Antecor. ibid. Of the Attaint upper, and nether, what they
are, and how to cure them. p. 148 Of the Anbury, what it is, and how to cur it.
p. 149 Of the Palsy and its Cure. p. 150 Of the Vives and what they are, and
how to cure them. p. 151 Of Rat-Tailes, a kind of scratches: And the cure for
them, etc. p. 152 Of Aches or Numness in the joints; and their cure. ibid.
Things generally good for Aches, Numness or the like dispondences in the
joints. p. 153 For the bloody Flux, an excellent Remedy. p. 154. Barbs, what
they are, and how to cure them. p. 155 Of the Blood Spavin, what it is, and how
to cure it. ibid. The Bone Spavin, what it is, and how to cure it p. 157 Of the
Pricking and Itching blood, the occasion and cure. p. 158 The Botts or Worms,
what they are, and how to kill them. p. 159 Of bunches, Warts, Knots and Wens;
Cramp or Inflammation, and their cure. p. 160 A Remedy for the Windcolick, or
Stone. p. 162 Of bloodshot Eyes, and other diseases or impediments of the
sight, their cause and cure. p. 163 To preserve the sight, a good expedient. p.
165. How to take off the Pin and Web, with ease and safety. ibid. An approved
Receipt for taking away a Film or Skin that covers the sight, etc. p. 166 To
take away the Rheum in a Horses Eyes, and clear the sight; an approved Receipt.
ibid. To cure swollen Eyes. p. 167 To stay the Rheum in a Horses Eyes, a most
excellent Receipt. ibid. A Second approved Remedy for taking away the skin or
white Film from the Eyes. p. 168 A Particular Receipt for Moon Eyes, Dim sight,
or Eyes afflicted with any pain. ibid. A second particular receipt for the cure
of soreness in the Eyes, and taking away the Pin, Web, or any infirmity
happening to the Eyes by Bruise, Brush, or the like. p. 169 An excellent
receipt for taking away any spot in a Horses Eye. p. 170 To take away a Wart on
the inside or edge of a Horses Eyelid, etc. ibid. For the clearing and
restoring foul or sore eyes, when the fight is in most danger, an excellent
cure. p. 171 The cause of a Horses often bleeding at the Nose, and how to
prevent it or stay it, etc. ibid. Of the Botch in the Groyne, and how to cure
it. p. 174 A second remedy for the Botch in the Groine, or imposthumation. p.
175 Of Blisters, and their cure. ibid. The Canker, its cause and cure. p. 176
Of Clifts and Cracks in the Heels, and their cure. p. 177 The cause of the
swelling in the Cods and Stones, with directions to assuage the same. p. 178
The Cord, a grievance so called, what it is, and how to remedy it. p. 179 The
Colic, its cause and cure. p. 180 The Colt Evil, its cause and cure. p. 181
Consumptions in a Horse, the cause and cure. p. 182 The Cold or Poze in a
Horses Head, its cause and cure. p. 184 Another excellent remedy to the same
effect. p. 186 For a Cold newly taken, a most excellent remedy. ibid. For a
long taken Cold, Cough, Shortness of Breath or Pursiveness, an excellent
remedy. p. 187 If your Horse be troubled with a stopping in his head, voiding
thereby filthy matter, take this following advice. p. 188 For the Glaunders an
excellent Remedy. p. 189 Costiveness, the cause and cure. ibid. Another to help
and cure this grievance. p. 190 Of the Cramp or Convulsion in the Nerves or
sinews of a Horse, its cause and cure. p. 191 The Camery or Frounce, what it
is, together with its cause and cure. p. 192 Of Casting, the cause and cure,
etc. p. 193 Crest fallen, what it is, and how to cure it ibid. Crick in the
Neck, its cause and remedy. p. 194 Of the Canker in the Eye, its cause and
cure. p. 195 Of the Dropsy in a Horse, whence it proceeds, and how to cure it.
p. 196 Chops, Rifs, and Clifts in the Palate of the mouth, how they are caused,
and how to cure them. p. 197. The Bony Excretion, its cause and cure. p. 198
Kibed heals, the cause and cure. p. 199 Kernels under the Chaul, the cause and
cure. p. 200 Lasks, Looseness, or open flux of a Horses Body, the cause and
cure. p. 201 Leprosy, its cause and cure. p. 203 The cause and cure of the
distemper in a Horse called the Low-worm, and the symptoms by which it may be
known. p. 204 The defect in Horses Lungs, the cause and cure. p. 205 The
Lethargy or Sleeping evil, its cause and cure. p. 207 Moorfoundred, what it is,
and how to cure it. ibid. Mattering of the Yard, how to cure it, as also to
prevent shedding of the Seed. p. 208 To cure the Melancholy in a Horse,
commonly called the Stagger or the Stavers, an excellent Receipt. p. 209
Imposthumes, their cause and cure. p. 210 The Mallender, what it is, and how to
cure it. p. 212 The Mange in Horses, its cause and cure. p. 213 The Mourning of
the Chine, what it is, together with its cause and cure. p. 214 Madness and
Frenzy in Horses, from whence it proceeds, and how to cure it. p. 215 The
Malt-long or Malt-worm, what it is, and how to cure it. p. 216 The Nightmare,
what it is, and how to cure and remove it. p. 217 Planet struck, what it is,
and how to cure or prevent it. p. 218 Pissing Blood, its cause and cure. p. 219
The Palsy or Apoplexy, its cause and cure. p. 220 Restilence, Murrain or
Gargat in a Horse, what they are, the symptoms whereby they are known, and how
to cure them. p. 221 Pursiveness, its cause and cure. p. 223 The Pains, a
Sorrance so called, what it is, its cause and cure. p. 224 How to know when a
Horse is pricked, and how to cure it. p. 225 Quinsie or Squinsie, its cause and
cure. p. 226 Rupture, Vncording or Burstenness, their cause and cure. p. 227
The Stone in Horses, it is cause and cure. p. 228 The falling out of the Mares
Womb, or Horses Fundament, the cause, and how to prevent them. p. 230
Wind-Galls, what they are, and how to cure them. p. 231 Wolfe-teeth, what they
are, and of other Teeth troublesome to Horses. ibid. The Wart or spungy
excretion, and Wenn, their cause and cure. p. 232 Strangury or Strangullion,
it is cause and cure. p. 233 Shoulder pinched, what it is, it is cause and cure.
p. 234 Shoulder wrench or strain, Shoulder splaiting or torn, and shoulder
Pight, their cause and cures. p. 235 Navel Gall, the Sorrance so called, its
cause and cure, and of Lice, Flies, etc. p. 237 Red-Water, Overreach, Salender
and stinking Breath, their respective causes and cures. p. 238 Ring bone,
Rottenness and Rheumes, their cause and cure. p. 240 The Yellows and Falling of
the Yard, and Sway-back, their cause and cure. p. 241 Quitterbone and
quick-scab their cause and cure. p. 243 The Haw in the Eye, its cause and cure.
p. 245 Excellent Receipts for any inward sickness that afflicts a Horse. p. 246
Salves, useful for all manner of Sorrances, how to make them. p. 248 Another
Excellent Ointment for wounds or other Sorrances. ibid. Another excellent
Ointment. p. 249 An excellent Salve for any Wrench, Strain or weakness in the
Limbs. ibid. An excellent Salve for Old or New sores, how to make it. p. 250 An
excellent Salve for curing of any wound, whether by Sword, Fire, Gunshot, or
any other accident. ibid. An excellent Salve for Wounds, Ulcers, Bruises, or
Strains, how to make it. p. 251 Glisters convenient to be used upon diverse
occasions. ibid. Cordial Powders and Cordial balls, Receipts to make them, and
their use. p. 253 Purgations, Perfumes, Baths, Suppositories, Charges,
Drenches, and Causticks, what they are, how to make and use them upon sundry
occasions. p. 255 Baths, their use, and how to make them. p. 256 Perfumes for
purging the Head, how to make and use them. p. 258 Suppositories, what they
are, their use, and how to make them. ibid. Charges, what they are, their use,
and how to make them. p. 260 Most excellent Drenches to cure all inward
diseases, as Fevers of all sorts, Plague, infection, etc. p. 261 Causticks and
Corrosives, what they are, and how to be applied. p. 263 Hot Simples, what they
are. p. 264 Cold Simples, what they are. p. 265 Hoofs, how many sorts there
are, their perfections and imperfections. p. 266 The perfect Hoof on the
forefeet, how to pare, shoe, etc. p. 268 Of the Brittle and Rugged Hoof, Long
Hoof, Crooked Hoof, Flat Hoof, Broad Frushes and narrow Heels, what they are,
and how to be used. p. 270 Paring and Shooing the hinder feet, false quarter,
and interfering of diverse sorts of shoes, etc. p. 274 Roweling what it is, and
the Benefit that accrues thereby. p. 276
THe Jockey in his proper Colors. The Intreagues, Artifices, Overreaching
deceits, and cheats of those Dealers in Horseflesh, known by the name of
Jockies. p 278 The Jockies device to cheat the Buyer, with a blind or lame
Horse. p. 279 The Jockies art in putting of a dull old Jade, and by what means
he makes him appear mettlesome and young. p. 285 The Jockeys Art in managing a
Restiff Horse, suddenly making a lean Horse fat, and reclaiming a Horse that
has got the vice of lying down in the Water, etc. p. 286 The Jockies craft in
making Horses seemingly lame or dangerously sick, and the cheats he puts upon
the unwary, with false Eyes, false Ears, false Manes, Tails, etc. p. 291 The
Jockies art in making of Stars, Snips, Blazes, etc.
A Treatise of Cattle. Their Ordering, Cure, etc. p. 298 Diseases and Sorrances
incident to this kind of Cattle, and their Cure, and first of Scabs, Itch,
Mange, eating sores in the Neck, Aposthumes, Boils, Ulcers, Headache, Rheum and
Hidebound, on the Legs, Ribs, etc. p. 303 Diseases incident to the Eyes of this
sort of Cattle, and direction in order to the Cure. p. 306 Cures for any
distemper in the Lungs, or therefrom proceeding, as Cough, Cold, Consumption,
difficulty of breathing, etc. as also for Agues, Fevers, Sickness occasioned
through swallowing a Horse-leech, or venomous Grub, pains of the Belly, and
Wind-colick p. 308 Looseness, Bloody Flux, pains in the Loins, pains of the
Reins, or Brawns, Inflammation, and pissing blood, their respective Cures. 311
A Treatise of Sheep. How to choose your Ram and Ewe for breed; when the Ewe
ought to be covered, and how ordered during her pregnancy, and upon her
Yeaning, etc. p. 315 The Headache, Giddiness, loss of Cudd, diseases in the
Eyes, Agues in Lambs or Sheep, Rheums, Catarrhs, diseases in the Eyes or Teeth,
Boyls, Aposthumes, and Ulcers; their respective cures. p. 317 Saint Anthonies
Fire, Rot, or Plague, Diseases of the Lungs, Scab or Itch, Cough, Swallowing
Spiders or any venom, and Belly swelling: their respective cures. p. 320 Lame
Claws, Maggots, and Lice, broken or bruised joints, etc. how to order. p. 322
A Treatise of Swine. The Marks whereby to know a good breed, and how to
procure it. p. 323 When the Sow ought to be covered; the time of Spaying and
Gelding, and how with little charge to make Swine fat. p. 324 Sickness in
Swine, how to know it, and the cure for Headache, Swine-pox, and the distemper
called the eating Yarrow. p. 326 Diseases in the Eyes of Swine, Agues Fevers,
Measels, Rhumes, and Catarrhs, their respective Remedies. p. 328 Plague or
diseases in the Milt, Imposthumes or swellings in the Throat, Neck swelling,
their cure; as also an excellent Remedy to prevent vomiting. p. 329 Colds or
Coughs, Belly-Ach, Lameness, Diseases in the Gall, and Flux, their Cure, etc.
p. 331 To kill Lice, prevent Thirst, and an excellent Receipt for an Ointment,
to be used in case of fractured bones, dislocated, or swelled Joints, etc. p.
333
THE Introduction.
SEeing diverse have undertaken to treat about Horses, etc. those most excellent
of Animal Creatures, I have not thought it amiss from long experience, to lay
down (as I well hope to the satisfaction of the skilful reader) such perfect
Rules and Methods, to order and manage Horses in all their useful capacities,
as have been hitherto but lightly touched by such as have made essays in the
like nature; for as the Horse may worthiliest challenge place, as the noblest
and goodliest, the necessariest and trustiest Beast that we use in our service:
and since he serves to so many ends, notwithstanding much may have been spoken
on that Subject, yet it is not doubted, but in that, as on all other Subjects,
where so large a Field is given to treat, something material may be omitted by
those who have travailed therein, that may occur to the memory and deliberate
judgment of those that come after them. For as all Arts are bettered by long
Experience, and improved by time and industry, this amongst the rest, worthy
the Studies and Labor of the most industrious, must needs admit of variety,
and afford new matter of discovery: Therefore, Reader, I shall no longer
trespass upon your Patience, but to satisfy your expectation, open the
Cabinet, wherein are contained such rarities, as are worthy the notice of the
most Experienced and Learned upon Earth: and since Horses serve for sundry
purposes, as Pleasure, Profit, and War, in Racing, Traveling, Hunting, servile
labor, Charging in the Field and the like; I shall first declare how they
ought to be bred, and at first chose, as most fit and promising, to the uses
they are designed for, and so proceed to each particular, relating to
mannagement, Ordering, Cure, etc.

THE Complete Horseman, OR, Gentleman's Delight.
The first consideration in relation to Pasture for Horses, etc.
THe first thing to be considered in Breeding is the commodiousness of the
Ground, wherein the Horses, Mares and Colts are to run, which must in no wise
be too rank of Grass, nor over sparing, but a firm, sweet Soil, situate in a
wholesome Air, somewhat ascending; enclosed with Quicksets and spreading Trees,
the better to shelter your Beasts from the wind or heat of the Sun: Nor let
your Mares, Colts or Horses continue long in one Pasture, but put them into
fresh Pasture, and let the vicissitude be so often as occasion requires, or as
you find them uneasy, which will appear either by their carelessness in feeding,
attempting to leap the Hedges, Ditches, or making continually toward the Gate,
and looking through it or over it: The Summer Pastures must be shady as
aforesaid, and those you intend to winter them in, accommodated with a Hovel,
Hay-rick, Barn, Stable, or some convenient house to shelter them from the
stormy blasts, especially the Colts, who are by nature tender the first year.

Directions and Rules about the choice of Horses.
THe next thing to be considered, is the choice of Stallions and Mares; First,
let your Stallion have hoofs hard and sound, round and hollow, to keep the feet
from the Ground, his Legs even and straight, his knees round, flexible and
small, his Thighs large and well brawned, his Breast great and broad, his neck
soft and broad bending Arch-wise, his Main thick, and for the most part falling
on the right side, his Head small and lean, for a great head betokens a dull
and heavy Jade, his Mouth ever moist, his Eyes great and bloody, or rather
fiery, standing as it were, out of his head, which is a sign of quickness and
liveliness, his Ears short and standing upright, his Nostrils wide, his
Shoulders large and straight, the sides turning inwards, the ridge bone over
the shoulders being somewhat high, his Sides deep and well knit behind, his
Loins broad, his Belly gaunt, his Buttocks full of flesh, his Tail long, brisly
and curled: these being the tokens of a good Stallion, and indeed of a good
Horse for all services; the contrary properties denoting badness: And now I
shall proceed to the description of a good Mare for breeding; first, observe
she be not subject to diseases, nor above three or four years old, let her have
a fair forehead, lively eyes, standing ears, a large womb, a bright color, and
well metled, gentle and easy to be handled, for wild Mares are too apt to
destroy their Colts in their bellies, and when foaled will not easily brook the
weaning of them.

How to oblige a Mare that is unwilling to take the Horse, to be covered, when;
and in what manner she ought to be covered, and how afterward to be used.
IF your Mare be backward to take the Horse, which will appear by her biting
and kicking at him, then turn to her a stone Horse of small stature, who by his
nimble running about her and playing with her, will soon woo, or oblige her to
gentleness, so that she will suffer her self to be covered, which willingness
perceived, take away the said Horse, and the next morning about Sunrising, put
to her your Stallion having been well provendered, but suffered to drink
little, put him to her in a close fenced ground, where she will in a short time
permit him to cover her, the which when he has twice or thrice done, let her
graze, but keep her from water; taking the Horse from her, whom you must rub
down and well provender till Evening, at what time turn him loose to your Mare
again, and let him cover her as often as he pleases, unless you perceive him
too robust or furious, that thereby he may su^tain injury.

The Mare thus covered, unless she be greatly desirous of his company a third
time, you need not put him to her again, but lead the Mare into the water above
the belly, and there let her drink, though no great quantity, after which turn
her to the Stud of Mares, not permitting any Horse to come at her for the space
of one month.

To make a Mare be Covered, when you perceive she has not Conceived of the
former. The time best for Covering; what diet is best for the Stallion, to
prepare him for Covering; how to use your Mare when she is with Foal.
IF you conceit your Mare or Mares have not conceived by their being covered,
and yet decline taking Horse, put among them a Mare that is desirous to be
covered, and then turn in your Stallion, who by covering the Mare last put in,
will provoke the others to suffer themselves to be covered. The most convenient
time to suffer your Mares to be covered, is in May, and the beginning of June,
for then the Colts by not coming too early in the Spring, will find warm
weather, and green Pasture to nourish and preserve them. When you intend your
Stallion shall cover your Mare; the best way is to let him feed on Grass, for
by that means his Limbs will be more pliable, and his Wind the longer; when as
hard meat will not only make him somewhat Restif, but subject him if he much
over-strain himself, to break his wind When your Mare is fourteen or fifteen
days gone with Foal, take her up from the other Mares; and with one gentle Mare
or Gelding put her into rank and well enclosed Pasture, which will render her
lusty, desirous again to be covered, the more easily to bring forth her Colt,
and store her with milk for its nourishment.

What time your Stallion will conveniently serve for Covering. What years in
the Horse and Mare produce the best Colts, and when it is most convenient to
wean Colts.
A Good Stallion proportioned according to the aforesaid description, if
moderately used, will serve well six or seven years, to cover yearly six or
seven Mares; and may in the intervall be put to such labor as you think
necessary, unless extraordinary travel in a long journey, whereby he may be
greatly wasted and impaired. From three years old till ten, good Mares will
conceive Colts; and a good Stallion, from four or five, till ten or twelve, get
them. The best time to wean Colts is Shrovetide, or Candlemass; and for the
three first years, have great care of them, but especially the first year, when
they take no great delight in themselves, for moaning after their Dams; and if
you neglect the years aforesaid, to well Winter or Summer them, they will
scarcely prove good Horses: the best way to order them, is to keep them out of
the Neighing of their Dams, pinned up fourteen days after their weaning: after
which days let them out on Sunshiny days to play in little Pingles, or warm
enclosed Pastures, putting them up again so soon as you perceive them dull and
heavy; and so continue them with good feeding till May; then the weather being
warm, let them run in good Pasture, neither too rank nor too low; but such as
Milch Kine are usually Pastured in, but be sure it be into soil that produces
sweet Grass, and in this manner continue them, till they have forgotten their
Dams.

Provender most convenient for Colts after two years old, till they become fit
for service. The reasons why English breed ought not to be taken up so young,
though more convenient for their Masters. How to handle and break wild and
headstrong Horses, and to use them after they are made Gentle. The best feeding
in the winter for Mares and Colts of two years old, and what age is best to
handle them.
BE sure to observe that your weanlings of the age aforesaid be not put to
winter in cold wet Moorish ground, nor in Summer to feed in over rank Pasture;
for the one subjects them to all watery diseases, and the other to the
Glanders, Colds, and the like. Therefore let your Colts range in dry, short and
warm pastures, that they may find enough to suffice them, and too much. And
lest their growth be obstructed by covering any Mare, keep them from so doing,
till they are five years old at least.

Many are of opinion that English Horses are taken up so young, because, that
if they should come to their full strength ere they are broken, they would
hardly be tamed, though this does altogether prove a vulgar error: for by often
using young Horses to seed them by hand, will make them tame, at any year, and
to lay light weights upon them, which will in no wise hinder their growth, will
prepare them to endure backing: Therefore it is my opinion that English Horses
may be broken and brought to hand, at any time, as well as those of other
Nations: And that the taking them up before they come to their strength and
growth, is for that their Masters are covetous of their service, and will not
permit them to be idle and chargeable any longer than needs must; and this is
the reason why English Horses fall short many times in goodness, or at least in
esteem, to those of other Nations. For certain it is, that England is as
capable of as good a breed as any Nation whatsoever; and that by watching and
keeping a Horse hungry, he at any age may be made tame or broken in a months
time.

If a Horse be headstrong, suffer him to have no provender, but what he takes
out of your hands, in a stable or close yard, and so within a while he will
come acquainted with you, and suffer you to take up his feet, and by degrees to
back and handle him at pleasure.

Observe that when you have rid your Horse, keep him upon his Bridle, or gently
moving till he be cold, and in no wise ride him hard upon a full stomach, and
it will preserve him from Sickness, Lameness and the like, unless some
extraordinary thing befall him.

In winter time keep your Mares and weanling in a warm pasture, where a Rack
being placed, you must put thereinto, at diverse times, sweet Provender; and if
it prove wet, misty, raw weather, they must be sheltred in a Stable, Barn or
Hovel, but if clear Frosty weather, not too extreme, they may be left abroad.
Let your pasture be near your house, and about Shrovetide shift it, and let
them continue in fresh pasture till May, at which time the Grass will be
sufficiently sprung in most places, and that time is the only time in all the
year to produce hunger bane, and render the young Mares so lean that they will
not be capable of bringing forth their Colts.

Take not up your Colts till they be four or five years old; for if sooner,
they will greatly suffer, by untimely riding, and become stiff, diseased, and
unserviceable before they be twelve years old, when otherwise they will
continue serviceable twenty four or twenty five years: and the reason why the
Spanish Horses are so soon past their best, is for that they at two or three
years old at the most, take them up for want of ground to feed them in.

How to know what Colt will make a true shaped Horse. To help Mares that are
difficult in foaling. To order Colts upon weaning. Separating and gelding of
Colts, etc.
AT six months old the shape may be discerned that he will be of at six years
old, if he be not wronged or spoiled in keeping and bringing up; the defects
are also to be seen at the same time.

The shin-bone being long and large from the Pastern to the knee, denotes the
Colt to prove a tall Horse. And what space is found in a Colt new foaled,
between the Withers and knee, double that space will appear when he is full
grown. Observe the activeness, lively spirits, and striving for mastery over
their fellows amongst Colts, for such denote they will prove well mettalled,
and serviceable Horses; when dullness foreshews the contrary.

If a Mare be distressed in her foaling, the ready way to make her bring forth,
is to stop both her Nostrils with your hand, that so she may be the better
obliged to strain her self, or if that fail, take Madder to the quantity of a
Pigeons Egg, boil it in a pint of ALE, and give it her warm.

If her Secundine, after foaling, come not away, take a handful or two of
young fennel, boil it in running-water, or spring water if you can get it, half
a pint of which mix with as much Malmsie, and a fourth quantity of Olive Oil,
and put it blood warm into the Nostrils of your Mare, and hold them close, or
in defect of this, give her green Wheat or Rye to eat, but the former medicine
is best, and will answer the end for which it was given. Observe that your Mare
in no wise eat her Cleansing, for it is not only unwholesome, but a great
obstructer of her producing milk.

When a Colt is weaned, put him out of the hearing of his Dam as aforesaid, and
the sooner to make him forget her, give him Savin and Butter, which will effect
it. Put him not to hard pasture, till the second or third year after his
weaning.

Separate your Mare and Stone Colts at a year at furthest, for the Stone Colts
being high fed and of much metal, will attempt to cover the Mare Colts at the
end of a year, which if permitted, proves the spoiling of them both. Nor is it
amiss but altogether convenient, to separate each years breed by putting them
into diverse pastures.

To geld Stone-Colts, the convenientest time is (and with the least danger) at
nine days old, if the Stones come down; if not let some days more pass ere you
attempt it: In this case, the time of the Moon and the signs are to be
observed: The best time is when the Moon is in the Wain, and the sign in Virgo,
or Aries. And the best time in the year is the Spring and Fall: but although
these are the safest and convenientest times, yet this work may be done by a
skillful hand at any time, as well on full grown Horses as young Colts. And
thus much I have thought fit to lay down for the instruction of the Breeder,
which is the chiefest Office relating to a Horse; for if he be spoiled in the
breeding, all labor, cost and care bestowed upon him will prove fruitless, for
he will never be a complete Horse.

The Complete Horseman's TRUE DIRECTORY: Or the Rules and Methods for managing
Horses at all points, after they are brought up and fitted for the Saddle, by
the care and industry of the Breeder: as in the foregoing Treatise of his
Office, is expressed.
A Horse of never so good a breed, and carefully brought up to the Saddle,
falling into the hands of an unskillful mannager, is like an unstrung
instrument, or a Ship without a Rudder. Therefore I have not thought it at all
unnecessary, but altogether convenient to reveal this part or mystery of
Horsemanship, that every man, without being beholding to others for advice, or
putting himself to the charge of a Horsebreaker, may manage his own Beast to
such advantages as he sees fit, or best approves of, which I shall lay down in
these following Rules.

Experienced Rules for Saddling and Mouthing, etc.
YOur Horse taken up, and with feeding by hand and handling made somewhat
familiar, hang the Saddle and Bridle always near him, and often offer to put
them on, till at last he will suffer you to do it; then girt him about, though
not too hard, but rather put small wisps of Hay between his body and the girths
for his ease, and let your Bridle be as easy as may be, though strong and well
put on to prevent his headstrongness if he attempt it. Then in a fair day carry
him abroad into a plain field or other convenient place, and make him trot
round you, sometimes cherishing him with your voice, and at other times
striking him with your switch as you see occasion. Hang with your weight upon
the Saddle, shake the Stirrups, strike them against his sides, and strain the
Crupper, with all such matters as will happen in riding, till he is familiar
and seems well to brook them.

Your Horse by this means being pliable to the Saddle, take off the slight,
loose and easy Bridle. Gird the Saddle hard; then washing his mouth with ALE,
you shall put into it a full mouthed Trench, formerly used, and drawing the
Reins over his head, lay them upon the Saddle, drawing them now and then, that
he may have a feeling of the Trench, which will induce him to Champ, and play
with the same, and thereby make him more familiar with it; after which having
your Martingal in a readiness, fasten it from the Chaulband to the Girths, but
with some slackness, unless your Horse is apt to toss up his head upon starting
wantonness, or a col^ (...) he has got.

This done fasten a broad pecie of Leather about his neck at his withers, and
before the middle of his weasand, about six inches beneath his Throple, between
which and his neck let the Martingal be drawn, to prevent his ducking down his
head: for by that means the Cavezan being placed upon the Gristle of his nose,
being the tenderest part about him, will when he throws down his head, hurt
him, at that rate, that he will soon leave of that ill custom of ducking or
thrusting his head between his legs, and make him carry it Archwise bending
like a Swans neck, which will add much to his comeliness; and thus use him for
eight or ten days before you back him.

Rules to be observed upon the first backing your Horse.
YOur Horse being become patient of the Saddle and Trench, lead him in a
Morning or Evening into some ploughed or other loose ground; and after diverse
turns essay to mount him often, till you find him patient of your burden. Then
having one to hold his head, advance by degrees, shaking and moving your toes
and body with equal motion, so that your Horse may perceive you, and so do
diverse times, cherishing and heartning him, till at length you dare trust him
without any one to lead him: but venture not too quickly to ride him far, but
make him more and more familiar by giving him bread, grass, and other provender
out of your hands; and by often mounting and dismounting, and so continue him
without much intermission till he will advance, stand, or turn at your
discretion. Then lay by all but the Cavezan, Trenches and Martingal, and ride
him forth, another riding on a Horse before you, and from a slow walk, trot or
pace him according as you find him disposed; letting his lesson for the most
part be either advancing fore-right, or standing still, sometimes suffering him
to follow the Horse, and at others to ride equally with him; for having regard
to the other Horse he will imitate him in his paces and carriage, in which you
must be sure to manage his head to the best advantage: for as he at first is
used to carry it, so will he continue to do afterward.

Rules to be observed in the Management of a Horse to bring him to perfection.
THe first thing to be considered is, to what end you design your Horse, either
to one particular service, or to all in general; the former is plausible, but
the latter judged by most impossible, for that no one Horse can perfectly
retain so many lessons as belong to all exercises, as Hunting, Racing, War,
Travailing, etc. Yet in all these it is requisite that your Horse have a good
mouth, Amble smoothly, Trot freely, and without much provoking to it, lifting
his legs neither too high nor too low, that he gallop strongly and be in motion
swift, ridding ground apace, being ready to stop, advance, retire, or turn
about upon all commands and occasions without any force or compulsion: But
above all, Horses for the Wars ask most care and diligence to prepare and bring
them to good order. Yet as to all sorts (reader) I shall give the best advice
my judgment and experience is capable of laying down; but ere I proceed to the
main points, and extraordinary rules to be observed by the most accomplished
Horseman, I shall take such Gradations as may the better enable the reader to
discern and rightly understand my methods.

In mannagment of untaught Horses these seven things are to be observed and
used, as occasion requires, either to correct or cherish your Horse, viz. the
Whip, the Spur, the Stirrup, the Calves of the legs, the Curb or Snaffle, the
Ground and voice: all which I leave to be used at the discretion of the rider
as occasion offers, there being no certain rule for the use of them, though
they are all much conducing to the mannagement of a Horse, unless the ground
which ought for breaking of Horses to be soft; and for Racing, Hunting, etc.
firm and even.

How to bring your Horse to the Mannagement of the Ring.
YOur Horse thoroughly tamed and learned to advance, stop and turn without any
seeming unwillingness; then riding him to some sandy or gravelly place, where
the print of his footsteps may plainly be seen, incircle the ground by trotting
for the space of 50 paces in compass, which done three or four times, rest on
the right hand and cherish your Horse; then by moving him upon the Ring of the
Circle, stop him upon the left hand, and let him rest, still encouraging him,
and by often changing your hand and mending your pace, you will soon make him
perfect, but upon every full stop make him retire a pace or two in the same
manner, if you can, as when he trots forward.

Thus doing, your Horse will be ready upon all turns, and with little labor
brought to understand your meaning in most things, and especially to gallop the
Ring by degrees till he is capable of performing it at full speed: Observe in
turning about the Ring upon the gallop, whether your Horse when he leads to the
righthand, leads with his left forefoot, and in gallopping to the lefthand his
right forefoot advances before the left; which if it so happen, then he will
soon be expert at the Ring, and many other difficult exercises. Which some
Horses not doing, it had bred an opinion in Jockies and others, that it is not
convenient to gallop the Ring; and their reason is for that by raising up his
forefeet he gallops painfully; which is not, but when he carries them even: for
if he set one before the other as aforesaid, it is easily performed, and if the
Horse at first or second time do not observe it, yet in the end, for his own
ease, he will practice it, and having practiced it, continue it, etc.

How to stop in a full Carreer, to Advance, Retire, etc.
TO stop your Horse on all occasions, whether upon Amble, Trot, or full Speed,
you must observe suddenly to draw in your bridle-hand strait and steady, hard
and sharp, and by that means you will make him stop firm, close and even; but
if he turn sideways, or move forward, after you have drawn in your hand, then
put him to it again, till he obey your will. After you have taught him to stop,
attempt to make him advance upon your stop, that is, rise with his forelegs,
which you may do by suddenly clapping the Calves of your legs close to his
sides, and not touching him with spurs, and at the same time shaking your
switch or whip over him, which will add much grace to his stopping; if at first
he understands you not, try him again, and in five or six times trial he will
perform your desire.

How to oblige your Horse to retire, and to endure all manner of Bitts.
TO make your Horse retire, you must with a steady Rein draw him back, so that
with his legs lifted up as when he Trotteth forward, he must retreat three or
four paces, which in a War-horse is extraordinary necessary, and indeed
commendable in all Horses brought up to the Saddle; but you must observe to
make him do it in a direct line, not turning to one side or the other, nor
suffer him to shuffle in his retiring, but take his legs cleverly from the
ground.

Your Horse perfected in the lessons aforesaid, if you design him for a War
Horse, take away his Trench and Martingal, and leave only the Cavezan to be
used of three or four pieces or joints, viz. a joint in the middle, and to it a
strong Ring fastened, and on each side a joint with Rings before them, to which
diverse Reins being fastened, you may use them to command your Horse as occasion
requires, or if this be too hard for him, put into his mouth a Cannon-bitt made
up with a French check, fitted to the proportion of your Horses neck, for if it
be not proportioned, there can be no true mannagement; for the long check
elevates the Horses head, and the short one pulls it down. These are the
material lessons at first to be learnt, which being perfected, are an
Introduction to what remains, and renders it less difficult.

Turnings and strait Turns, what they are. And Rules to manage your Horse in
that affair.
THe turnings are, when the face of the Horse is kept fixed on the Center or
post, bearing about in circumference with his hinder parts, opposing his face
to the face of his enemy.

The strait turns are when your Horse moving, keeps his posteriors inwards,
and close to the Center or post, and bearing about makes the circumference,
with his fore part advancing a little toward the enemy, that would avoid him.

The first strait turn is to be managed thus, to the Ring in the middle of
your Cavezan fasten a rein, about three yards or somewhat more in length, and
to the other two Rings two reins, somewhat shorter. Then his bit and Saddle put
on, bring him to the post, and there put the reins and bit over the
Saddle-bolster and all, and so fasten them at such straitness to the Pummel,
that he may feel them both. Then if you are desirous he should turn to the
right, take the short rein on the left side of the Cavezan, and bringing it
under the Saddles fore-bolster, up to the Pummel, fix it there, at such a
straitness, that his head may be rather swayed from, than to the post, his eyes
looking to the right, at what time let some one of your attendants hold the
rein on the right side of the Cavezan at the post, moving it so that the
forepart of your Horses body may turn about at full. Then in your own hand
take the long rein, causing him to bear his hinder-parts inwards, which you
must do by striking him gently on the outward shoulder, and outward buttock, as
you see occasion, causing him to turn about the post; his hinder parts being
the Center, whilst his fore-parts move the circumference: and thus use him on
the one hand, till he is indifferent perfect; then by changing the rein on the
other outward ring of the Cavezan, cause him to do it on the other hand, after
the same manner. And so you must exercise him morning and evening, till by a
touch of your rod he couch his posteriors to the Post, and swiftly Trot round,
still in his motion, placing the outward fore leg over the inward, and so by
degrees in his wheeling oblige him to mend his pace, swiftly, and distinctly,
and in as direct a compass as can easily or conveniently be performed; till at
last he fly with such Celerity that his fore and hinder-legs move equal.

Your Horse having learned this lesson perfectly, mount his back, whilst your
Groom holds the long rein, and another the short one, then with the motion of
your hand upon the left rein of the Cavezan and bit, bearing his head from the
post, and by the motion of the Calves of your legs, and your switch upon his
outward thigh, causing him to bear his hinder parts to the Post; exercise him
till he performs it as well with you upon his back, as he did before. Then
taking away the Cavezan, exercise him with the short rein only, and so by
degrees having brought him to be perfect at the Post, you may exercise him
without a Post in any open place, and this motion will prepare him for all the
following ones.

The straight turn is to keep his face to the Post, as if he were facing his
enemy, swiftly flying about with his hinder parts: His head being the Center;
the reins both long and short, must be used as before, only you must not give
the short rein such scope, but drawing it nearer to the post; still as he moves
about, follow his hinder parts with the long rein, and observe whether he bear
his hinder legs in his motion one over the other, as is expressed by his fore
legs, with the help of your rod, making him bring his hinder parts swiftly
round the Post, as is before said; and when he is perfect, mount his back, and
cause him with the foresaid usage to turn swift or slow, as you see occasion:
then leaving the Post, exercise him in an open place, till he is perfect and
expert in either turn, which will not only accomplish him for the Wars, but for
Hunting, Racing, and all other matters that can be required in a Horse

Approved rules to bring your Horse to a swift and smooth Amble, Trot, or
Gallop, upon the least motion.
Diverse opinions, and diverse ways are there to bring a Horse to a true and
graceful Amble, though indeed many or most of them fall short, it being a
lesson not learnt by any Horse without great difficulty; to Trot and Gallop
well and graceful, being far more easy: But howsoever I shall direct you what
courses to take, whereby it may the soonest be obtained. But before I give you
my own opinion, I shall recite and confute the errors of those, that have
deceived themselves and others, who have taken their measures, etc.

First, Then diverse are of opinion that the only way to bring a Horse to a
perfect Amble, is to trace him to and fro, in a new ploughed field, where the
Mould is dry and soft; wherein they say he cannot with ease do any thing less
than Amble: yet let me tell them, his Amble in such a case, will be rather a
shuffling, than a true Amble; besides, it toils him so much that when he comes
upon plain ground, remembering the slavery he was put to, he will rather fall
into any other pace, and forever after be put out of love with Ambling.

Secondly, There are some who hold it the best way to oblige a Horse to fall
from a gallop into an Amble, upon a sudden stop, made by checking with your
bridle, and bearing forward, clapping the Calves of their Legs close to his
sides: but this rule is altogether uncertain; besides, by such stops, they not
only spoil their Horses mouths, and so lose the command of their rein upon
diverse occasions, but endanger their Horses; indammaging them by over
straining, spraining their sinews, breaking their Hoofs, or the like.

Thirdly, Some, again, are for setting on shoos of an extraordinary weight,
which makes a Horse interfere, and strike short; often indangering him with
lameness, and for fear of striking, so slow is his pace, that he can never by
that means be brought to a graceful Amble. Others load their Horses
Fetlock-pasterns, by wrapping Lead about them, which is more hurtful and
dangerous than the former, often creating strains, not curable, and by crushing
or bruising the Crownet, cause Crown scabs, Ring-bones, Quitter-bones, and the
like, to the utter disabling of the Horse. Others are of opinion that loading a
Horse with ponderous weights cross the Fillets, will oblige him to Amble. But
let me tell them, also and experience teach them, that if they often use that
course, it will undoubtedly disable any Horse, by rendering him sway-backed,
and weak in the hinder parts.

Fourthly, Many give their opinion that there is no way like teaching a Horse
to Amble by hand after this manner: bring him, say they, to the side of a
straight wall, Pail, or Rail, and having moved him a little, a walking pace
till he begins to be warm; then with your bridle-hand, you being on foot chock
him, and at the same time with your rod fitly strike him on the hinder Houghs,
and under his belly when he treads false, causing him to pace by degrees: But
this Rule is uncertain, for it rather hares and frights the Horse, than any
ways makes him understand what he is to do, obliging him to flounce, fly back,
spraul, and rear himself on end, etc. which often used he will retain, and ever
after, upon the least occasion, start and fly out, or very hardly be induced to
leave them, or should he by this means be brought to any perfection in Ambling;
yet when you are mounted on his back he will be far to seek, and not understand
your motions, so that it will prove but time spent in vain.

Fifthly, Many there are that hold a Horse may be brought to Amble, by having
shoos clapped on his hinder feet, with long plates before the toes, by which
means at every step the hinder foot may reach the fore foot; but this is not
only incommodious, but dangerous: for in the first place the Horse must go
shuffling, and can be put into no true Amble; in the next place, if he strike
hard, he will cut, bruise or strain the sinews on the back of the forefoot,
still beating the forelegs forward; which frequently causes halting and
lameness not curable, there being no part about a Horse more tender.

Sixthly, Fine Lists, some hold best to Amble, which in this manner they
propose; take say they, a fine List, twist it in the nature of a Cord, and
drawing it strait about your Horses Cambrel, where Farriers are wont to garter
them for a stiff strain, turn him to Grass, which cramping of his sinews will
for his ease make him know no other pace but the Amble; and perfect him in it,
in a fortnight or three-weeks. This is altogether uncertain, for the Horse
finding himself cramped, will only draw his legs after him, and shuffle unless
he be forced, and if the lists are drawn too strait, when they are taken off,
the sinews will be so numbed that he will be only capable of crambling and
cringing; and moreover it will greatly subject him to the string-halt, and
often twitching up his legs.

Seventhly, There still remain some that say there is no way like using your
Horse to the Tramel, to oblige him to Amble, which indeed is the best method;
yet since there are many errors and over-sights in it, I shall not think it
amiss to lay them down in order, and then proceed to give such rules as I
conceive, and experience has proved, the best and readiest way, to bring your
Horse to an easy, comely and graceful Amble.

The first error is their not observing the fit and just length of the Tramel;
for if it be too long and not capable of giving a stroke or too short, and by
that means gives a false stroke.

The former makes the Horse move shuffling and after a confused manner,
altogether improper and indecent; and the latter by the sudden twitches it
obliges the Horse to make, subjects him to the string-halt, and other indecent
motions of his feet.

The Second error is in those who without a due proportion of their Tramel,
will place it out of order, viz. fasten it above the knee of the foreleg, and
about the fetlock of the hinderleg; when if it be too long, the foreleg cannot
command the hinder to follow; and if it be too short and strait, so that the
sinews and Ligaments are pressed and girded, and that the foreleg and hinder
must of necessity have equal motion, then will the main sinews be greatly
injured in the hinder leg, as also the veins and Ligaments of the fore thighs,
to the utter disabling of your Horse for a time, if not for ever: nor can he
then move, but in a crambling, shuffling and halting posture, altogether
undecent and unprofitable; besides, it will by long chafing bring down the
humors, etc.

The Third Error, relating to the use of the Tramel, is when they that use it,
make it of such course hard stuff that either by girding it too strait, or
leaving it too loose, it will either so gird or gall, that both skin and hair
will be taken off, and so the Tramel rendered insufferable, and not answer the
expectation of him that put it on.

The Fourth and last Error I shall expose to view, is the opinions of many,
that the Tramel is altogether unnecessary, alleging Ploughed land most
feezable, which is more an error in those that assert it, than the Tramel is
useless or erroneous; for the Tramel in my opinion rightly applied, is the only
means to bring your Horse to a true Amble, the use of it being made as
follows.

The most approved and Experienced way to make a Horse Amble true and complete.
WHen you design to teach your Horse the true Amble, first by leading him a
racking pace in your hand, observe to what motion he is most inclinable:
whether Trot, Running, Bastard-Amble or other, then mount him, and racking him
deliberately, force him to advance by the help of his Mouth-Weeks, with his
Snaffle, which must be full, smooth and large. Press him gently on both sides
with the Calves of your legs, and now and then a gentle touch with the Spur, if
by that means you can oblige him to strike into an Amble; but above all be sure
you do not by too much chafing, or too strong a hand disorder, or force him to
distort either his Mouth, Neck or Head; and if he do fall into an Amble, as it
were of his own accord, though not perfect, yet; it is greatly promising that
he will soon be induced to a pleasant Amble by the help of Art, and cause him
with more patience and less danger to endure the Tramel, by reason the motion
without stumbling, flying out, or the like, becomes natural. And now the next
thing to be considered is the form of the true Tramel and its use, diverse there
are that make them of Leather, some of Canvas, and others of Lists: but all of
them are uncertain and incommodious, by reason the first will deceive the Horse
and the Rider by stretching; the second disable the Horse by galling him, and
the third does stretch and hang loose, by reason of its softness: therefore the
best way, though many ways there are in use, besides what I have mentioned, is
to make your Tramel of strong packthred, twisted into a cord, about the
thickness of a Jack-line, hard and well dried, of which form your Tramel thus:
let your side cords be so firm that they will not give the least way; let the
hose, or part fastened about his legs be close, soft and immovable; the
backbands light and somewhat broad, the better to avoid hurting your Horses
fillets, the length of the side Ropes must be just 36. inches; or if the Horse
be of a long reach, an inch may be added but no more, and so equal in length
they must be, that the difference of a straws breadth must not be perceived;
the hose must be placed on the small of the foreleg and upon the hinderleg,
just above the fetlock, made of Girth-web, lined with Flannel, Cotton or some
such soft matter, fastened with Neats-leather Tabs, made supple by tallowing,
of an even length, in which diverse holes must be punched at an even distance,
to pass through the nooses which are to be on the side ropes, so that by
buckling them with strong buckles; the said ropes may be drawn up or let out at
pleasure, the Tabs not to exceed 10 inches, nor the holes in them four inches.

This done, let your back bands, whose use is to hold up the side Cords (if you
Tramel all your Horses legs) be made of Girth web, lined with Flannel or the
like, to prevent galling; but if you Tramel but two of his legs, Filleting or
strong Tape will serve; but you must be careful that it maintains the side
cords in an even line, without either twitching it up, or suffering it to fall,
for these are gross defects and great hindrances, for rising shortens the side
cord, and falling makes it apt to entangle the Horse.

This being the manner of making the right Tramel: I shall now proceed to give
my Reader a description of its perfect use; as thus, bring your Horse into an
even place, not too hard or stony, and there putting on his hose on the near
legs before and behind; fasten to them the side cords, as aforesaid, the Horse
standing as even as possible, not straining forward nor crimpling inward, but
to his just and due proportion; lay the side ropes fastened by Girthweb or Tape
to the Saddle, then laying your hand on the Bridle, oblige him by straining his
head gently to move forward, or if you perceive it requisite, let another
assist you in forcing him forward, whiles you compel him to Amble about the
ground, for that purpose chosen, as leisurely as possibly, using him with all
gentleness and often cherishing him with your voice, till he feel the Tramel,
and begin to understand what he is to perform: And although he stumble or fall
now and then, at his being brought to the Tramel, yet in a while he will grow
perfect, if you be not too harsh toward him: But when he falls, rather cherish
him, by permitting him to rise at his leisure, than seem harsh toward him; for
by that means he will find out his own failings, and amend them, and soon
understand the motion he is designed for; and in your hand Amble to your
liking, though it is not amiss if at first, when he begins to learn, that you
permit the side ropes to be longer than the measure, before specified, to
prevent the sudden twiches, till he is used to the Tramel; but when he begins
to be perfect, be sure they be of a constant length, lest the over length
render him a slow Ambler, or the under length cause him to halt or shuffle.

What time the Tramel may be altered and when it is most convenient to mount
his back to journey, etc.
YOur Horse being brought perfectly to Amble by hand, you may change the half
Tramel, removing it from one side, and placing it on the other, and as you see
occasion put on the whole Tramel, till he run swiftly without the motion of
snappering or stumbling, after which try him upon uneven and uncertain ways, up
and down hill, over clumpers and false footing, that so he may in his Amble
answer all Roads; for diverse Horses there are that will Amble smoothly and
decently upon even ground, but when they happen upon rough and stony ways, fall
into a hard trot shuffling or an ill favored pace, out of which it is very
difficult to force them.

The Horse being thus tried and no difficulty appearing, mount his back or set
another to do it, whilst your self by staying his head, keep him from any ill
convenience, and take a narrow view how he treads his steps; after which, your
self mounting him and often cherishing him, may oblige him, to mend his pace,
till he move with as much agility as you can desire: yet forget not between
whiles to put on sometimes the half Tramel, and at other times the whole
Tramel, often shifting them from one side to the other, lest your Horse should
forget his pace; and in so doing twice or thrice a day, you will bring him in a
Month or six weeks to the height of perfection.

Thus far having proceeded, you may without any Tramel ride him upon the road
for three or four miles, not picking or choosing your way, but taking the uneven
with the even, and if you perceive him to baulk his Amble, then having the half
Tramel about you, put it on, which will soon put him in mind of what he is to
perform; but if you perceive any impediment that caused him to forsake his
Amble, remove it, and then try him again without the Tramel; for there is
nothing belonging to Horsemanship that is not requisite to be used on this
occasion, or to be left off as occasion requires, viz. the chain, Headstrain,
Cavezan, Musroul, Martingal, Bit, etc. And thus much touching what relates to
instruction for Ambling shall suffice, it not being in the least to be
questioned, but if these rules are observed, the Reader will have his desire.

As to Trotting and Galloping, they are paces so ordinary and so easy to be
attained, that I need not much enlarge on them, as for the Trot, it is of two
kinds, viz. the Lofty or Prancing Trot, and the common or Running Trot. To
oblige your Horse to the first of these, you must perfect him at the Post, as
is before recited; after which putting on a strong Curb-Bit, by bearing him up,
shortning your rein by twisting it about your Bridle hand, oblige him to bend
his neck Archwise, not any ways inclining it to one side or the other, but
foreright; and by using him to it, he will at length keep his head and neck in
the same posture when you ride him with a Snaffle, after which fasten a strong
strap to his Girth under his belly, and bringing it between his forelegs,
fasten it pretty strait to the Curb, or Chain of the Bridle, and then mounting
your Horse, hold the reins with a steady hand and cause your Horse to move
forward, sometimes striking him upon the hinder thighs with your rod, and at
other times cherishing him, at what time feeling his head straightened, between
the under and upper rein, he will lift his forefeet high, treading short in a
proud prancing manner, which by often usage will make him perfect in it; when
the under rein is taken away. As for the other Trot, the grace of it being when
it is swift and smooth, the only way is at the first breaking of your Horse, to
set a full bodied man upon him, whose weight will so balance him, that he
cannot let his feet fall from such a height, or with so strong a spring to jolt
the Rider, by reason he will not be capable of lifting them so high. Another
way to oblige him to an easy Trot, is by loading him at his first bereaking
with heavy shoos, which will make him Trot more deliberately, and with less
shaking his body, to offend his Rider.

As for Galloping, it is divided into two kinds, viz. Hand-gallop, and
Fullgallop, or Full-speed, to either of which a skillful rider, by the
mannagement of the rein, and use of Whip or Spur, may oblige a free Horse at
his pleasure: Wherefore I shall no longer insist on them, but conclude this part
of Horsemanship, the most material of all others, and from it I shall proceed
to advise the keeper what in his place is most convenient to be done, both for
the credit of himself and the advantage of his Master.

Rules to be well considered and exactly observed by all that undertake the
care of good Horses.
AMongst other things appertaining to a Horse, good looking to is not the
least, for if he fare never so well, if he be not carefully looked after, at
all convenient seasons, he will not thrive; therefore for their better
understanding, to whom such offices appertain, I shall lay down these following
Rules.

First, Rising in Summertime about Sun rising, and in Wintertime by break of
day, enter the Stable, having overnight prepared three pints or thereabouts of
dry Oats well sifted, and added to them a pint of split Beans, give them your
Horse, the which when he has eaten, fall to dressing him, currying him over
with your Iron Comb, leaving no part undone, then with your dusting cloth dust
him over, or for want of that with a Horse tail, after which with your French
brush beginning at his forehead, proceed by degrees to rub every part of him
leaving not so much as the breadth of an inch untouched throughout him; then
dust him again, and with your wet hand lay and smooth his hair, then drying
your hand, dry the wet places with the same, not forgetting to cleanse his
Sheath, Cods, Yard, Tuel, Forebowels, Ears, Nostrils, and all other places that
are subject, to sweat or filth; this done, with your hair-cloth rub him over in
all parts, but especially his Head, Cheeks, Face and Eyes, the top of his
forehead and between his chaps, then with a woollen Cloth kept clean for that
purpose, rub him over again in all parts, and lastly comb down his Main and
Tail.

The Horse thus put into good order, Saddle him and lead him out of the Stable,
where mounting his back, ride him gently to water, but so that you may a little
warm his stomach: then having permitted him to drink a considerable draught,
Rack him gently ere you bring him into the Stable; having done that, though not
made him sweat, bring him into the Stable, having his clothes ready; as soon as
you have rubbed him down, put them on, and so let him stand for the space of an
hour, at which time give him two quarts of Beans and Oats mingled as aforesaid,
which being eaten, toss into his Rack a hard knop of hay, and let him bite upon
it till noon; noon being come, furnish him with the like quantity of Beans and
Oats and the like knop of Hay, if the former knop be eaten, or else not.

Evening being come, carefully dress him, after the same manner as in the
morning you did, and so ride him to water, warming him before you permit him,
to drink, as likewise afterward bring him into the Stable, clothing him and
rubbing him down without any alteration, and after an hours standing give him
Beans, Oats and Hay to the quantity aforesaid; that is three pints of Oats one
of spelt Beans, and a knop of Hay, and let him stand till Nine of the Clock at
night, at what time renewing his Bait, and tossing up his Litter, leave him
till morning.

How to order your Horse when you design him for Sport, or Travail. And how in
and after Travel, Sport, etc.
WHen you intend to take a journey, see the day and night before, that your
Horse have his due proportion of meat, and be well rubbed down, clean Littered,
and served with warm water in the Stable without leading him abroad; and either
with Trotters, oil Neatsfoot-Oyl, or Dogs Grease, which it behooves you to have
in a readiness, supple the joints of fore and hinderlegs, it being warmed over
a fire, which will not only make him nimble in his Travail, but hold out much
better than otherwise he would. In the morning let him have his Beans and Oats,
but no Hay. If you find him lively and mettlesome, give him no water before you
ride out, but being mounted ride him a mile or two, a racking pace, and when
you find him well heated, ride him as you please, either Amble, Trot or
Full-speed, you cannot hurt him; but be sure to observe when you come into your
Inn, that you with your Glazing Knife ere you rub him down, take off the sweat)
the knife so called, is made of an old Sword blade or a piece of a Scithe)
after which rub him down, and cleanse him as you have been formerly showed.
Then he having eaten his allowance of meat, which must for conveniences sake
be double what at once you are to give him when he stands idle; you must if you
find him any thing hot, give him warm water, but if he be indifferent cool,
cold water will not prejudice him.

Having after a journey, heat, or the like, brought home your Horse, hot or
tired, bring him not into the Stable till he be pretty well dried, and cooled
by moderate walking; when being entered the Stable, and tied up to the Rack, rub
him down as you have been showed before, and girt his clothes fast about him:
Tucking some dry wisps between his body and the Girths, and when he has stood
on the Bridle for the space of two hours; toss a knop of Hay into the Rack,
whilst you prepare your Oats and Beans to the quantity of two quarts, amongst
which it will not at all be amiss, but rather profitable, if you mix half a
pint of Hempseed well cleansed; and at night when he comes to receive his last
bait, give him warm water mixed with a small quantity of fine Oatmeal, and so
tossing up his Litter let him rest till Morning.

As to washing and walking your Horse after a journey; I hold them both
dangerous; the former occasioning surfeits, and the latter contagious colds
turning into the Glanders, and other both troublesome and noisome infirmities.
But if he be extraordinary dirty, take a pail of warm water, and having first
scraped off the dirt, rub him with a wet brush till he become clean. If he be
hot and not fitting to be Stabled, then ride him gently up and down, till you
find him temperate and cool; but in no wise walk him in your hand, lest the
dullness of the motion conspiring with the cold diseases damp his courage, and
by that means subject him to diverse infirmities. And thus much for our Keeper.
Now I shall proceed to give instructions to the Feeder; though indeed the
Keeper and the Feeder are in a manner one and the same: But since much remains
in that nature, in order to prepare a Horse for Racing, Hunting, etc. I shall
lay down Rules and Methods apart, such as will not only (if rightly observed)
save great charges, but more speedily than what has yet been publicly known)
fit and prepare Horses for all Noble recreations. And First, for Racing or
Running Horses.

Rules to be observed in preparing and ordering your Horse designed to Run,
according to the condition he is in, and the temper of his body.
THe chief thing, when you have matched your Horse, or are about to match him,
that is requisite to be observed, is the state of his body; but especially
whether he be Foul, Fat, or newly taken from Soil, or Grass; whether through
excessive riding or other hard usage, he be reduced to leanness or afflicted
with any infirmity; or whether he is in a good and likely condition, through
kindly usage and gentle breathings: and according to these observations,
proportion your time, in order to fit and prepare your Horse to perform your
desire. Two months being the longest time you need desire, be he in the worst
of the conditions aforesaid, if the following instructions be exactly observed,
the worst of which is his being Foul and Fat, etc. by reason the Grease must be
brought away, before he can be fit, for this extraordinary exercise; six weeks,
if he be lean, for then his feeding and exercise need not be distinct in days,
but every day both of them put in practice, as for a Horse in good case, and
free from infirmity: I hold that a month is sufficient, if he be carefully
looked after to prepare him.

These things considered, the next is to observe whether your Horse, if fat, by
extraordinary exercise, is so tender that he loses his flesh and falls away; if
so, you must be more moderate in your exercise, and tender over him; but if you
find him hardy, and of a free spirit, then you must keep him up to it, and he
will prove the better. Again, if your lean Horse be of a free temper, and
feeding upon all meats, will get his flesh up apace, and not lose it by
exercise; then you need not be so tender over him, and the like must be
observed by your Horse in the middle state, always taking special notice of
their Limbs; that there harbor no defect; for if so, your labor will be
greatly hazzarded, if not altogether lost.

Having thus far proceeded, I shall now lay down Rules for dieting your Horse,
in preparing for your match, and by reason that all the three before mentioned
may be said to be contained in the fat Horse; I shall first begin with him.

The manner of the first fortnights diet for a Horse that is fat and foul, or
upon his being taken from soil or grass, and what is necessary therein to be
observed.
YOur fat and foul Horse, made so by either standing at soil, or running at
grass, too high feeding or the like: If you have matched him, or intend so to
do; when you have brought him into your Stable, to prepare him for the Race,
rising early the first fortnight, you must first of all, having roused him, if
he be laid, wash his Bridle in Beer or Ale, tie it to the rack; and cleanse the
Stable of the Horses excrements, and then exceedingly well dress him. For the
manner whereof, to avoid repetition, I refer you to be guided by those Rules, I
have laid down in the Office of the Keeper, in the Chapter of this book, unless
what is necessary to be added, as being in this case necessary, though in the
general way of dressing, not greatly material, which principally relate to your
Horses clothing. For by reason the Heats in preparing your Horse for this
exercise, must be more, and frequenter than upon any other occasion: So
therefore must the care be great, to prevent his catching cold; falling into a
surfeit or the like. When you have well dressed him in the morning, and
cleansed him from filth, leaving no part about him untouched, as aforesaid,
having a large body-cloth made of strong warm Kersie, if the weather be cold;
or if hot, Cotton, or other light soft stuff will serve: Fold it about his
body, and putting on his Saddle, let his foremost girth be girded close, but
the other loose, thrusting in large soft wisps of Straw near his heart, that so
the slack girth may by the help of the wisps be made strait as the other: then
put on a warm breast cloth, so that it may cover his shoulders. When having
spirted about three or four sponfulls of beer into his mouth; then leaving one
to prepare the Stable against your return, lead him forth, and after a turn or
two in your hand, mount his back, and rack him gently, for the space of a mile
or more, upon plain and even ground, till you can, if possible, come to some
steep Hill, ascending gradually, up which gallop him moderately, and being come
to the top, or so high as you think convenient; Rack or walk him down again,
that, by that means he may cool as much in descending, as he heated in
ascending; and having after this manner pretty well exercised him, it being yet
early in the morning, lead him or ride him a moderate pace to some pleasant
River, Spring or other sweet running water, and suffer him to drink as much as
he pleases, but if he altogether refuses to drink, then moderately exercise
him; as aforesaid, but if he refuse to drink, warm him by riding gently, to
provoke him to thirst.

When your Horse has drank his fill, rack him gently homewards, so that he may
come into the Stable without a wet hair; the stable being fresh littered with
Wheat-Straw (for Barley, or Rye Straw are both naught: the one causing heart
burning and the other scowring) by whistling and stretching your Horse upon the
cast out Litter, endeavor to make him void urine, the which if he at first
decline to do, yet at last, by often usage, he understanding what is required
of him, will do it freel, and by so doing preserve the stable clean, and render
it more healthy: this done and your Horse entered the Stable, keeping his head
in the bridle, tie it up to the Rack, then with hard wisps, rub down his legs
with all your strength; then taking off his brest-cloth, rub his head, neck and
breast, with care and diligence, with a dry cloth, after which take off his
Saddle, and hang it up, rubbing the place where it sat, as likewise all the
other parts of his body. His body cloth being taken off, and when you have
sufficiently rubbed him, leaving no place untouched, cloth him again, first by
spreading a Linen cloth over him, and girding it about him; upon that a warm
housing cloth, and over both the Woollen body-cloth, which in winter must be
lined with Cotton, or some other warm stuff; but in Summer it matters not
whether it be lined or no, for the Kersie will then prove sufficient. This done
wisp him round with soft wisps, though large, that so when he is disposed to
rest, he may lie easy. From this proceed to pick his feet, and having cleared
them of the Gravel or dirt, stop them with Cowdung; and throw into his Rack a
small bottle of Hay, not exceeding three pound, and let it be well dusted, the
which let him eat, and stand upon the Bridle for the space of an hour and half;
then cleaning the Manger of dust and Hayseeds, take about a quart of large
white Oats, commonly known by the name of Poland Oats, or cut Oats, these above
all others being the wholesomest, the rest some being unsweet breed
infirmities, othersome being moist breed Worms in the belly; new Oats occasion
swelling, and Black-Oats worst of all cause ill digestion and bad humors,
thereby so discoloring the dung, that the state of the Horses body is not
thereby to be known.

The quantity of Oats aforesaid, well dried, put into a Riddle or Sieve, called
a reeing sieve, so big as it will permit the small and light Oats to pass
through, and retain the large and solid ones; and by reeing them after they are
thoroughly cleansed, give them your Horse to eat in the Manger, it being made
clean, as aforesaid. If he eat them heartily, and seem desirous of more, you
may then give him another like quantity so ordered, and then permit him to
stand or lie down at his pleasure, till about Eleven of the Clock. At which
time, coming to visit him, rub down his Head, Neck, Face and Chest; and give
him about three pints of Oats ordered as before; and then making the Stable as
close and dark as you can, leave him for the space of two hours, for the closer
the Stable is, and the darker the Horse stands, the better will he take his
rest, and digest his food: Therefore many hang their Stalls round and over head
with Canvas, or other thick clothes. Nor is it amiss, for it not only darkens
the place, but prevents any noisome thing from falling into their Provender, as
Lime Spiders, dust, and the like.

The two hours ended, accost him again, with the like quantity of Oats as
before; dressed and prepared, after the same manner, rubbing over his Head, Face,
Neck and Breast with a clean cloth; and if he has dunged, carry it forth, and
cast up his Litter, which done, cast a knop of Hay into his Rack, leave him for
three hours more; if in Summer; but if in Winter two hours, or two and a half;
at the expiration of which time, visit him again, and without giving him any
meat, wash his Bridle in Beer, and put it on; taking off his clothes by
degrees, and rubbing him all over in the manner as has been formerly showed;
then clapping on his Saddle, bring him forth, and endeavor to make him empty
himself upon the old Litter; and so mount his back gently, Racking him for an
hour, or thereabout, and then if possible give him his breathings, along the
side of some pleasant River; but do not gallop him up any hill, for that upon a
full stomach, will endanger his Wind; so that observe to let his evening
breathings be in smooth solid ground as you can choose: and heat him both before
and after water, as in the Morning, letting him smell to all the old or new
Horse dung you find in the way, which will not only provoke him to empty, but
sharpen his appetite, and so continuing him abroad till night approach, (for
early and late Airings are the most proper to diminish the foulness, and
disperse the gross humors) bring him home, and having caused him to empty at
the Stable door, draw his Bridle, cleanse the Manger, and at all points dress
him, and rub him down as in the morning, and then giving him a like quantity of
Oats; let him stand upon his Bridle till about nine of the Clock, then visit
him again, when rubbing him down and tossing up his Litter; give him another
quart of Oats well sifted, and a knop of Hay, and so let him remain till the
next morning, at which time use him as you did the morning already specified,
and thus continue him without adding or diminishing ought for the first
fortnight, which will put him into so good a temper that in the beginning of
the second fortnight, his foulness being dispelled, you may give him
considerable heats without offense; but if you perceive his fatness and
foulness, not to be wasted and gone, use him the more moderately, for the space
of four or five days longer.

Rules to be observed in giving your Horse heats, during the time of his
preparation.
OBserve that two heats in one week are as much as are convenient for any
Horse, of what state or temper of body soever.

That one of these heats be given him upon the day he is to run the match, is
most requisite, as thus; if your match be to be performed upon a Tuesday, then
let Tuseday and Saturday in every week be your heating days, and observe that
on Tuseday, you give him the greatest heat, for two reasons; first because it is
the day whereon he is to run for the wager; and for that there are three whole
days respite between, and so proportion your day to this space and observation
of whatever day the match is to be run, unless by reason of Rainy Slabby
weather; for if it rains, you must defer to heat him till the Rain be over, and
the weather clear up: and in this case, where you are to make a virtue of
necessity, you may change the hours of your heats, as the weather will permit.

In dull dripping or damp weather, when you ride abroad, you must put your
Horse on a warm Linen hood, with ears, and the nape of the neck thickened with
a lining, to keep out the rain and cold damp; as likewise a cloth to keep the
wet from falling upon the Fillets of your Horse; for nothing will more subject
him to infirmity than wet in the ears, upon the nape of the neck, and on the
Fillets.

The next and last observation relating to heats, is that in seasonable
weather, every morning by day spring, you have your Horse abroad; but not
before, and especially on those days you are to give your heats.

Rules to be observed in the second fortnights keeping, etc.
THe first fortnight thus over, the first day of the subsequent fortnight visit
your Horse early, as before, toss up his Litter, cleanse his Stable, rub him
down, and dress him at all points, as you have been instructed: With this
difference, that before you bridle him, you shall give him somewhat upwards of
a quart of Oats before you put on his Bridle, and give him no Hay at any time,
but what he eats out of your hand, whether it be one, two or three handfuls at
a time, according as he is disposed to eat it, it matters not; when he has
eaten his Oats, bridle him, and ride him forth: then let his airing, waterings
and his being brought home be nothing different from his usage in the first
fortnight, and when you return with him, give him another quart of Oats, or if
it be near three pints, if his stomach serve him to eat them, it matters not,
and let him take the Hay out of your hand, as aforesaid, then toss up his
Litter; dress him at all points, letting him stand on his Bridle an hour and
half before he is rubbed thoroughly. And now in his feeding, this more than
formerly must be observed, take a stale loaf of bread of three days old at
least: The manner of making of it is thus.

Grind three Pecks of Beans, with one Peck of Wheat into fine flower or Meal,
dressed through an indifferent fine range, and made up with sweet Yest, and a
little spring water, kneaded very painfuly and thoroughly, and suffer it then to
lie in the trough a space to rise and become light; then knead it again, and so
make it into loaves, as big as sixpeny ones, and let them soak well in an Oven;
then taken out hot turn them the up side down, and suffer them in that manner
to cool.

Three days after the baking and not before, for fear of surfeiting your Horse,
you may cut the bread into thin shivings, and laying it a while to dry, put in
amongst the Oats, crumbling it small, and give it your Horse, not exceeding
more bread than a pound and a half at a time, the Oats you mix it with being
carefully sifted. This Bait given in the morning first of all, you may about
Eleven of the Clock give him another portion of Bread and Oats, not differing
from the former, and use the like ceremonies in dressing and rubbing him; never
forgetting to cleanse the Stable, if occasion require it

This done, let him rest for the space of two hours, and then again visit him,
and give him a like dose, and so the fourth meal, etc. nothing being omitted in
his dressing, Airing, Watering or Heats, unless the latter be prevented by the
weather as aforesaid.

On the heating days observe that before you lead your Horse forth, you must
only give him his quantity of Oats, without either Bread or Hay, and be sure to
cool him well before you bring him into the Stable, and when he is in, let him
be well dressed, and warmly clothed; standing upon his Bridle an hour ere you
give him his Oats, which being well ordered, must not exceed a quart; after the
eating of which having a Muzzel ready washed, put it on, and so without any
more ceremony permit him to rest till about nine in the evening: and about nine
coming to him after you have dressed and tossed up his Litter, give him a quart
of Oats; but no Bread nor Hay. Then tucking him up with soft wisps, let him
rest till the morning following. Now since it is come to my turn to speak of
the Muzzel, I shall for the better satisfaction of my Horse-keeper discourse
something relating to them, as to their use in general, and goodness in
particular.

Of Horses Muzzels, their use and goodness.
THe use of the Muzzel, is to prevent the Horse from feeding upon his Litter;
biting or gnawing the boards, Rack-staves or Manger; licking Loamwalls, eating
of Hen-dung, or any filthy or noisome thing that may impair his health or
hinder his feeding.

As for Muzzels, there are diverse kinds and diverse fashions, some useful and
profitable, and others exceeding hurtful; of these in their order.

The Muzzel made of Leather, and stamped full of holes, for diverse reasons
ought to be rejected. First, forasmuch as it is noisome and offensive, be it of
what leather it will. Secondly, if it be made of Allomed Leather, as often it
happens, it causes pains in the Horses head. Thirdly, if it be liquored, the
grease causes dullness, and makes the Horse loath his meat, rendering him sick
and uneasy, preventing his rest, and to his prejudice making him retain his
dung longer than otherwise he would.

Another Muzzel there is made of Packthread knit indifferent close at the
bottom, and widening upwards, to the knitting about the nape of the neck, and
this if it be made of sweet and well dried, and twisted Packthread, is the most
proper, best and commodious for Summer.

The third and last sort which I shall here mention, is made of double Canvas,
having a round bottom bared over with small Tape, in the manner of a chequer,
leaving square holes about a quarter of an inch each way for the Horse to take
Air at, and fastened by loops and strings to the nape of his neck; and this is
most proper for Winter, but observe, that both this and the Packthread one must
be often washed and made clean, lest they become noisome and unsavory.

An account of what further remains to be done the second fortnight.
THe discourse relating to the Muzzels, occasioned my abrupt breaking off
before I had finished my second fortnight: waving that digression I shall
proceed.

The first heating day past, the second morning after coming to the Stable, if
you find your Horse laid, permit him to take his ease; but if on his feet, rub
a quart of Oats between your hands, having first diped them in Bear or Ale, and
give them your Horse, but not too moist.

Having eaten the Oats, uncloath and dress him as has been showed, then hanging
up his Muzzel, put on his Bridle, permitting his breast and body cloths to
remain on, drawing his head aloft, and putting into his mouth a new laid Egg,
which you must oblige him to swallow, and after it about half a pint of Beer or
Ale, then lead him forth, causing him to empty himself upon the cast Litter, or
by smelling to old dung. When taking his back, rack him gently for a mile or
two, then put him to a harder pace, as a hand-gallop or the like, and bring him
to the starting post, if there be any one appointed, or if not to some other
post near the place, where you are to perform your Race, and there alighting
take of the body and breast clothes, putting on the Saddle again, without them,
and mounting him agin make him smell to the said post, as likewise to the
weighing post; and then run him at three quarters speed, from the beginning of
the intended Race to the end, if you perceive he will hold it without pain or
loss of wind; but if you perceive it troublesome to him, then slacken your
pace, and so by degrees you will oblige him to perform that with delight, which
otherwise would prove irksome to him, and above all observe narrowly upon what
ground he best delights to run, whether it be smooth, hilly, soft, hard, dank
or dry, and on that manage both before and at the Race, if the course will
afford it, to your best advantage.

Having coursed your Horse sufficiently, bring him under some Hay or Corn Rick,
Hedge, Pit or dry-ditch, and there having taken off the sweat with your glazing
knife, and rubbed him pretty well, put on his clothes, and on his back clap his
Saddle fast girded; then without permitting him to stand longer, still gently
gallop him till he grows cool, now and then rubbing his head and such parts of
his body as you can reach without alighting, and so continuing sometimes
Racking, other times Galloping, till you come to the Stable door, and there,
observing him to be cool, entice him to empty, which done lead him in and tying
his head up to the Rack, having this scouring or purging potion in a readiness,
give it him in the form and manner following.

The Receipt how to make the first scouring, etc.
THe Ingredients must be an ounce and six grains of clarified Roach Allom, a
pint of Cannary, into which put the Allom when beaten into fine powder, and add
to them three ounces of Olive Oil the best you can get, brewing and beating
them together, with an ounce and an half of brown Sugar Candy pulverized, all
which though roughly mixed, set upon a gentle fire till they are pretty hot, then
letting them stand till they are bloodwarm, give them your Horse upon his
return from his first heat, by pouring it down his throat with a
drenching-horn, his head being drawn close to the Rack, and this will
infallibly bring away the Molten-grease, and such other bad humors or
obstructions as remain in his body.

Rules to be observed in ordering your Horse, after his taking the aforesaid
Potion.
THe scouring Potion taken, rub him well, especially his legs (his cloth being
taken off and proving dry) with a curry-comb all over the body, after which
follow with your brush, and then dust him well, and let all his body again be
rubbed over with dry clothes, then putting his clothes on again, truss him on
either side with warm wisps, and cast over him a loose blanket, after which
give him nothing more for the space of two hours, all which time you must watch
him, and as near as you can, keep him in continual motion, it being dangerous
to permit him to stand still, or sleep upon the reception of this potion, and
besides, it will not so well operate upon the crude gross humors, unless the
Horse be still moving.

At the end of two hours, or if you see occasion, somewhat more, give him a
handful of Wheat ears, such as are not bearded, if you find upon your handling
him on his Fillets, near his Heart, under his Ears, etc. that no new sweat
arises, but that he is in good temper; but if the contrary, then forbear to
give him ought; for then the foulness appearing by the swift beating of the
heart, the new sweat and other symptoms are mightily stirred up, it is
convenient they should operate without the least molestation, though your Horse
thereupon appear to be sick and faint; to ease which, you may take off his
Bridle, toss up his Litter, and leave him to take his rest for the space of two
hours or thereabout, at the end of which his sickness will vanish.

The wheat ears eaten by five or six at a time, give him a knop of Hay, rubbing
him again, especially his head; about an hour after mix a quarter of Oats, a
pint of spelt-beans and three shivers of the aforesaid bread, well chipped and
small crumbled and give them to him, letting him rest after the eating them for
the space of three hours.

The three hours expired, visit him again, and before you dress him, give him a
like quantity of Oats, Beans and Bread, and then dressing well, put on his
clothes and ride him not far, neither suffer him to drink; but about an hour
and a half afterward wash three pints of Oats in Ale or Beer and give them to
him to cool him, which will be a great means to repel the inward heat; and
feeding at his usual times plentifully, and leaving a knop of Hay in his Rack,
you may suffer him to rest till morning, when rising early you must dress him
at all points, and ride him forth to water, giving him a gentle breathing, and
upon his return to the Stable give him Oats and spelt Beans well sifted
together with the Bread, to the quantity of two quarts permitting him to have
but little Hay.

Thus having ordered him diligently, observe the three other heating days, upon
each of which after he has performed his, heat still improving his speed and
readiness, give him the aforesaid scouring potion, which will infallibly carry
away the foulness, and gross humors, rendering your Horse pleasant and
lightsome, and thus having laid down rules and instructions for the first and
second Fortnight, I shall proceed to the third.

Diet for the third Fortnight, how it must be made, etc.
MIngle together half a bushel of the best Wheat, and a like quantity of Beans,
grind them as small as may be, and dress the meal finer than the former, even
as fine as possible, and make it into Dough, with sweet yest, and rising
kneading it so well that a knot or kop may not be found in it, and bake it
thoroughly, cooling it, the Loaves proportionable to those before mentioned,
with the bottoms upward, and at three days old chip it; that is, cut away the
crust, and so with a like quantity of Oats, Beans, and of the said Bread, as
formerly has been prescribed, feed your Horse; and as you did in the precedent
fortnight; so in this let your measures in every respect, be one and the same,
barring these following exceptions.

First his heats must be more moderate for fear of too much straining him, and
the bettter to let him take pleasure therein.

Secondly, Omit the scouring, not giving him any more after his heats, lest his
body by this time freed from the gross humors being too much opened by the
operation of the purgation, contract cold and watery humors; but having
moderately heated him, bring him home, cooling by gentle racking; and having
caused him to empty himself, bring him into the Stable, tie him to the Rack,
give him a Cordial ball about the bigness of a French Walnut, or Tennis ball,
if he can swallow it. The receipt to make them is as follows.

To make Cordial balls, etc.
TAke Anniseed, Fenegreekseed, Carthumusseed, Cuminseed, Coltsfoot and
Elecampane-roots, of each two ounces, bruised and siersed: The husks and gross
part being separated from the rest, add to them two ounces of Brimstone-flower,
an ounce of the Juice of Liquorish put into half a pint of White Wind, then
take an ounce of the Chimical Oil of Anniseed, Sugar, Syrrup and Salad Oil, of
each half a pint: these ingredients thus prepared, mix with them so much
Wheat Flour as will mould them into a past, and make them up into balls as big
as Walnuts, Hen-eggs or the like, and keep them in close earthen Pots for your
use.

These balls are good to cure any violent Cold or Glaunders; to prevent
sickness at heart caused by infection or ill digestion, to purge away all
Molten grease, to recover a lost stomach, to keep the Horse from fainting with
exercise, and to fatten a lean Horse to admiration: And thus much as to the
third fortnights diet.

Rules to be observed in the fourth or last fortnights keeping, as well in
relation to his Diet as usage.
IN this last Fortnight you must be more circumspect than in the former, and
the first thing to be observed, is in making his bread a degree finer after
this manner.

To three pecks of fine Wheat well sifted put a peck of Beans cleared from the
hulls, and grind them together, dressing the flower through a Bolter as fine as
possible, making it up with sweet Ale-yest or Barm, and as much Ale as will wet
it and make it pliable; then add the whites of twenty Eggs or thereabout,
together with new milk, not putting any water into it, then knead it again, and
having make it into reasonable big loaves, bake them well and cool them with
the under-crust uppermost.

These loaves baked and cooled, after three days cut off the Crust, and with
Oats well dried and rubbed between your hands, being also winnowed and sifted,
and a quantity of the best spelt Beans; bait your Horse, cutting the bread, and
observing the quantities of each as in the foregoing fortnights.

In the first week of this fortnight, you shall observe the heating days as
before, but in the last week you must bate one heat, not permitting him to take
any heat for the space of five days before the match is to be run, yet may you
give him considerable Airings to keep up his wind, observing that you do not by
any means give him a scouring, but the better to expel the fumes or vapors
that may offend him, burn in the Stable Storax, Albanum or Frankincense upon a
Chafing Dish of Charcoal or small coal, in the scent of which he will take
great delight. If at any time in this fortnight you design to moisten his meat
as it is every five or six givings convenient, then let it be done with
Muscadel, in which the whites of Eggs have been beaten, and it will the better
hearten him to perform his course; as for Hay give him none, unless a small
quantity after his heatings, which you must give him out of your hand, let it
be well dusted and exceeding good.

The second week of the last fortnight, unless your Horse be a very foul
feeder, you need not use the Muzzel till three days before the Match is to be
run, but if he be a foul feeder and covet to eat his Litter, bite the
Rack-staves, or the like, then put it on the beginning of the week and let it
continue on at convenient times till the time he is to run.

Observe to feed your Horse well, both before and after Airing; the morning
before the day you design to run for the wager, let his waterings be as
formerly; but as for his meat let it be scantied a fourth part, both before
noon and after.

Before your Evening Airings, and after be sure to feed as at noon, but be sure
stay not abroad till Sunset.

Let him be this day, being the day before the Match, well shod, cooled, and
all other things requisite, that on the day he is to run, nothing may be left
to do, thereby to trouble or disturb him, though some hold that the Horse being
dressed and shod with light shoos will be so sensible of what he is to perform
the next day, that for pride he will neither eat nor sleep; but this
understanding can only remain in an old Horse-Racing Horse, who has been often
used to the sport, and not in any other; therefore in that case it is my opinion
the offices are better deferred till the morning of the day he is to run; but
if otherwise, let them be done overnight, as aforesaid.

The breading of the Tail, by many is held both an ornament and a help to the
Horse in his running, though according to the opinions of the most inquisitive
into that affair, it rather hinders than furthers his speed, by reason that in
straining the twists, drawing the roots of the hairs, put him to pain, and
create an unusual heaviness, which makes him suppose that a weight or something
else is fastened to his tail, therefore unless it be exceeding long and large it
would do better to hang loose.

On the morning of the day, your match is to be performed, come to your Horse
pretty betimes, and having taken off his Muzzel, rub his head well, as likewise
his Neck, Shoulders and Legs; then take a quantity of Oats, Mash them in
Muscadel, and give them to him to eat, the which if he refuse, then moisten
another quantity with Whites of Eggs, but if those will not go down with him,
then give him Oats well dried and sifted, mixed with a small quantity of Wheat,
or a shiving or two of your finest Bread well crumbled with them; but no Beans,
let the quantity be very small, lest it hinder his running. If he be an evil
emptier, then lead him to such places as he usually empties at, and provoke him
thereto: but if he is not subject long to contain his food, but will empty
freely, then you need not move him out of the Stable to empty, but there expect
notice when to bring him forth to the Match.

When you receive the warning, wash his Snaffle in Muscadel, and having taken
away the Muzzel, put it on: if you perceive any wind to move in your Horses
belly, by reason of his emptiness, give him four or five mouthfuls of the meat
last spoken of; and then pitching your Saddle and Girths with shoomakers wax,
put it upon his back, gently girding it on that he may scarcely feel it, or at
least, not so as in any wise to straiten him: over his Saddle put a white
Linen cloth; upon that his ordinary clothes; and over all, the better to set
him, and make him proud of himself, you may lay a Counterpain or piece of
Arras: and so giving him a dose of Muscadel, in a small drenching horn, proceed
to the place intended for starting.

In the way permit him to smell to any Horse dung, new or old, to provoke him
the better to empty, which will be a great advantage to him in his running: If
he refuse to empty, then lead him amongst Rushes, Brakes or Sedge, and thereby
whistling provoke him to it: but if that prevail not, then take out some of the
wisps he is trussed with, and break them under him.

If in your leading him, any foam or froth arise in his mouth or elsewhere,
wipe it away with a clean Linen Cloth, and wash it with dipping it in water,
which you shall carry with you for that purpose.

If you are to ride with any person, who by reason of his being lighter than
your self, or that gives you any advantage, so that there are weights in the
case to make both equal, or otherwise, as the agreement is, then observe that
he carries not those weights in his Saddle, but somewhere about himself, for if
he carry them in the Saddle, they will neither hinder him nor prejudice the
Horse, but be as if he did carry none, and then you had as good ride with him
on equal terms: but if your agreement be that he shall carry them about him,
then is the advantage much on your side.

As to the ground you must likewise have special regard, which you must take
from your heats and breathings, that is, take notice whether your Horse affects
high or low ground, hard or soft, and if you can possibly without any signal
disadvantage, keep him to such ground in his course.

These things consider, and all things brought to a point; when you are arrived
at the starting Post, uncloath your Horse, rub well his legs with wisps,
cleanse his feet, and spirt cool water into his mouth, then mount your rider.

Then starting fair, force on without control,
And if your Horse be good, never doubt the Goal.
Things to be observed in running Horses, as to the state of their bodies, in
relation to sickness and health.
REader I have already given you directions, how to order your Horse for a
Match; I shall now lay down Rules and Methods, whereby you may keep him in
health, and fit for your purpose at all times, by such demonstrative tokens, as
you may be continually sensible of the state of his body, drawn from the
observations following.

When you come to take a view of your Horse, narrowly inspect him, and if you
perceive him heavy and dull of countenance, Loose, Costive, Short-breath,
Loathing of meat; his Eyes glazed or dim, his Hair staring, his Hair strangely
discolored, if he stagger in his pace, be troubled with rattling or short
Cough, Dizziness in his head, Yellow under his upper Lip or in his eyes. If he
be troubled with cold sweats, often lying down, and restless when he is down,
often looking on his body, alteration in his carriage and going; not casting
his Coat in due season, or being hidebound. If I say, you perceive any of these
symptoms in your Horse, then is it your care to inquire from what cause it
arises, and apply the cures which for the distempers before mentioned, I shall
hereafter prescribe.

How to know the State of a Horses body by his Dung.
I If your Horse dung be crisp, neither too hard nor too soft, of a pale
color, smell strong, something savouring of the ordure of a man, sound and in
good health, then it is a sign your Horse is lusty and in health, clean and
well fed.

If it be well colored, yet if it fall from the Horse in round hard balls, as
near as may be of a bigness, then it denotes your Horse evilly fed, having too
much Hay, too little Corn, and permitted to feed too much upon his Litter.

If it fall in round knops, hard, and of color black, or brown, it denotes
excess of heat in the body of your Horse; if it appear greasy, it denotes
foulness, and that in him remains Molten grease, that cannot find a passage
out: If with his Dung he voids grease, that is white and clear, then it denotes
that the Molten, and foul grease will kindly come away; but if you perceive it
putrified or corrupted, which you may by its yellowness, then it betokens by
reason of the length of its continuance in the Horses body, corruption and
putrefaction, the which if it be not timely removed by scourings, will cause
dangerous distempers. If his Dung appear red and hard, then it betokens that
the Horse has been too much put to it in his Heats, and Coursing, and if he be
not kept warm and well dyeted, Costiveness will follow. If his Dung be pale and
loose, it betokens cold, occasioned by moist feeding.

How to know the State of your Horses body by his Urine.
IF his Urine be of a palish yellow thick, and smell strong and sharp, then is
the Horse in health. If the Urine be of ruddy complexion tending somewhat to a
thick blood color, then it denotes the Horse to have been injured with
excessive riding, or too early ridden after his being taken up from Winter
Grass. If it prove of a high color, clear and as it were sparkling, then it
denotes an inflammation, or extraordinary heat in the body, occasioned by
surfeit.

If the Urine after it has stood a while appear to have a white Cream, or Scum
upon it, then it denotes the Horse weak in the Loins, and that his Seed is in
Consumption. Urine with bloody specks, or streaks denotes an ulcer or some
corroding distemper in the Kidneys.

If the Urine be black thick and of a cloudy or dusky hew, then it donotes
great sickness, if not death to the Horse.

How to know the State of your Horses body by his feeding; and of Lameness.
IF you perceive your Horse to refuse his meat, and seem to loath that meat he
formerly loved: when you are sensible he by course must be hungry, it is a sign
of heart sickness, occasioned by cold distillations, or foulness of stomach,
occasioned by surfeit, got by over heating, which you must remove by gentle
purgations, many of which I shall hereafter insert, and to bring him again to
his stomach, you must use him gently, not forcing it upon him, but giving it
him by degrees, as he pleases; and to whet his appetite, spirt Verjuce into his
mouth, and hang up by him a Sponge dipped in them, or for want thereof dip a
crust of bread in Vinegar, and tie it up in a cloth, where he may smell to it,
and when his stomach comes to him, mingle fine and course diet together, till
he be brought to eat the latter alone as occasion serves.

If your Horse by standing too long idle, or therwise become Lame, or Restif,
then the best way to recover him is to heat him well upon a smooth Down, or in
a plain and soft field.

What is to be observed from the state of your Horses body.
IN the outward appearance of a Horse, there is nothing more common than for
some men to be deceived: Therefore it will not be amiss, if I lay down some
rules worthy of observation.

First, then there are some Horses round, plump, and to appearance fat and well
fleshed, when they are nothing so, the cause of which delusion arises from
their being short from Head to Tail; well set, large buttocked, well
shouldered, and full sided.

Secondly, there are some Horses that although they be in good case, yet they
will to the eye appear lean, and their Ribs appear bare, nay when they are fat,
foul, and full of grease and gross humors; and thereby many skilful Jockies
have been deceived, as likewise Farriers, who supposing them to be in good
case, have neglected to apply those remedies which were needful, till such
time as the humors have ingendered diverse diseases.

Thirdly, Many Horses will appear to be fat and foggy, by the outside, when
inwardly they are clean and in good order, and so on the contrary, a Horse that
appears lean will often be gross and foul within, as is said. Now to Remedy
this oversight, handle your Horse diligently on the Ribs, and more particularly
on his hindmost short-ribs, and observe well that if the flesh feel loose and
soft, that your fingers dent in without much stress, then conclude your Horse
to be foul; if it prove firm and hard on all other places, the hinder Rib
excepted, then is he more foul and full of Molten grease, and evil humors,
which must be voided by scouring and exercise, the latter to dissolve it, and
the former to bring it away, though the Horse to the eye appear poor and ill
favored.

If you upon search find your Horse to be fat, thick, and to feeling, as it
were, close between the Chaps, or his Jaws appear to be over fleshy, bearing
out, it denotes much foulness, in both head and body; but if he be thin, clean,
and here and there lumps or kernels are to be felt within his chaps, it only
denotes cold newly taken, by being overheated, standing in the rain, or in a
damp Stable.

How to know the State of your Horses body, from the privy parts, etc.
IF you observe your Horses stones to hang lank, and find the sinews to be
limber, or hanging long from the body, then your Horse is not in good temper,
but altogether out of order, occasioned by grease, or other foul humors, but
on the contrary, if they be close knit and drawn near to his body, even round,
and well couched, then he is in good and perfect health.

From his Limbs, Observations to be taken.
IF after a heat or the like, you find your Horses Limbs weak or stiff, it is a
sign that he is tender in his joints: to remedy which, anoint them with Dogs
grease, Hogs grease, or Trotter Oil, making it as hot as can be well endured,
chafing it in with your hand, and although you anoint the joints but once, yet
after it, rub and supple them with your hands diverse times, and so shall you
bring them not only to be pliable, but prevent stifness for the future.

In Watering, Observations to be taken.
IF your Horse be in his feeding Fortnights for Racing, give him the first
fortnight after Breathings or Heatings no water; the other three fortnights,
you may give it him lukewarm, about six in the Morning, and six in the
evening, but no great quantity, always observing to let him fast about an hour
after it, and if you perceive the weather to be rainy, flabby or cold, then
your best way is to water him in the House, putting a third part of hot water
to two parts of cold; into which as you see occasion you may throw wheat-flour
or fine wheat-bran or Oatmeal, fine and well sifted from the husks.

From your Horses Sweat, Observations to be taken.
IF you perceive your Horse to sweat with little or no motion, then is your
Horse filled with gross humors, fat and foul; but if he sweat with
extraordinary motion, as heats or the like, then observe his sweat; if it be
white, and frothy like a Ladder of Soap, then is he internally foul; but if the
sweat stand in watery Pearls, or trickle off like drops of Rain, then is your
Horse in health, and a good State of body.

From your Horses Hair, Observations to be taken.
IF the Hair of your Horse neck and forehead be smooth and slick, not any ways
staring, distorted or discolored, then is your Horse in good health; but if
staring, rough and distorted, shaggy or disordered, after an unusual manner,
then conclude him to be distempered, either by a Surfeit, Looseness or
extraordinary cold, and thus far having proceeded, as to the feeding, and State
of a Horses body: I shall now pass on to instruct my Reader, how to know a good
Horse in all his capacities, and not to be deceived in buying, either by Jocky
or any other pretending to Craft or Subtilty in that affair, to which for the
better instruction and Caution of the unskilful, I shall add the many
Artifices, and Cheats of the Jockies, and other dealers in Horseflesh, as
also, how to avoid being cheated, or drawn in by such wiles, as many use to
trapan or bubble the ignorant with.

Advice to the Buyer, or certain and unerring Rules, whereby to understand the
perfections and imperfections of any Horse, in a short time, if not upon the
first sight.
It Is certain there is no greater cheat than buying of Horseflesh; then to
avoid the deceit, it is not amiss if you observe these following Rules, the
which if you do, you may not only secure your self, but as occasion offers,
deceive the deceiver.

First, Consider to what end you buy, or to what use you design your Horse,
whether for War, Hunting, Racing, Drawing, or any other use, for to these ends
serve different Horses according to Proportion, Strength or Beauty; therefore
if you purchase, in these cases, the lineaments and proportion of the Horse
must above all be taken notice of; as likewise inquiry be made into his Breed,
a strict survey of his color, and a more narrow inspection than ordinary into
his paces or going, with many more, which in their order I shall lay down; but
first, of the three I have mentioned.

What is to be observed as to the Breed.
IF you desire a sound serviceable Horse, you must have great regard to the
Breed, for if he be to appearance never so fair, and well shaped; yet if he was
gotten by an old or infirm Stallion, or brought forth by a Mare subject to any
infirmity, or disease, for certain it is that such a Horse, promise he never
so well, will be frequently subject to diverse the like distempers. Another
thing worthy of observation, is what Country breed the stock descended from,
the which by these tokens you may guess at. The Neapolitan breed is known by a
bending or Hawks nose. The Spanish breed by dry, small, neat Limbs. The Barbary
breed by his fine small head, well carried, and well set on, as also his deep
hoof. The Dutch breed by the roughness of the legs. And the English breed by
their being strong set, well knit, large Neck, wide and open Nostrils, and
Brawny Thighs: And so of the breed of diverse other Countries.

Observation of Colors.
CErtain it is there are good Horses of all Colors, though I must confess some
Colors are better than othersome, both for beauty and the disposition of the
Horse; and of these in their order. For beauty the Daple-gray is accounted the
best; for extraordinary service, most approve of the Bay-Horse, as also of the
Brown. The Black, with some Silver hairs, for swiftness and courage,
especially, if he have one white-foot, or a blazing-star in his forehead. As
for the Sorrel; the Black without any white about him, and the unchangeable
Iron-gray, they are accounted Choleric. The Bright-bay, the Fleabitten, and
the Black with white marks are of a Sanguin constitution. The Black, Pybald,
White, Kite-colour, Yellow or Dun are of a Phlegmatic constitution. The
Chestnut, Mouse-dun, Red-bay, and Blewish-gray are Melancholy. And thus I have
deciphered the particular colors; of which in the Series of this Treatise I
shall have further occasion to speak.

Observation to be taken from Pacing, Trotting or the like.
THe greatest ornament, both for pleasure and profit, as to your own ease and
health, as likewise to your Horse's, is his going, which the buyer above all
things must have a special regard to, espeially in these times, for such are
the cheats of the Jockies, and other dealers in Horse flesh; that therein they
will deceive the most curious, but as to particularize their diverse Artifices
and inventions to impose upon the unskilful, I shall defer it till I come to
expose their cheats, which in the end of this Treatise I intend to do.

What motion in your Horse is to be observed, upon diverse occasions.
THe Paces incident and most convenient for any Horse, is either Rack, Amble,
Trot or Gallop and to diverse ends they serve: if you design your Horse for the
Wars, then a lofty Trot or Prancing is best, as likewise if he be designed for
Running or Hunting, and whether he be well addicted to this motion upon all
occasions, you shall perceive by his cross moving his Limbs, as when the near
hinderleg, and far foreleg move together at one and the same instant, and in
this motion the nearer your Horse takes his Limbs from the ground; the opener,
evener and shorter is his tread or pace: but if he take them up uneasy or
slovenly, after a shuffling manner as it were, then it denotes stumbling,
lameness or some such like imperfection. If your Horse tread narrow, or cross,
it signifies he is subject to interfering and can never tread sure; if he takes
his step askew or uneven, it signifies he is given to tire and faint, and will
never perform any long journey or hard service. If he tread long, that denotes
him subject to strains, sprains and over-reaches: but as to the other motions,
in particular.

Of Ambling.
IF for ease and pleasure you choose your Horse, then the motion he can be
subject to, is the Amble, which is opposite to Trotting. As thus, both the feet
on one side must have equal motion, that is, the far foreleg, and the far
hinderleg, which must move just even, large, smooth and withal swift; for if
your Horse-tread awry or false, it takes away the easiness of his pace; and if
he treads short, he rids no more ground than if he went a round foot pace; if
he treads rough, it denotes rouling in a shuffling manner, and is a false pace,
which by some unskilful mannager has been taught him, and so it is that he
will soon fall out of into a Trot, or in a short time forget it.

Of Racking.
RAcking is a convenient and necessary pace for Buck-hunting, Riding-post or
the like, being between a pace and Full-gallop, by some called the running
speed, yet little differs from Ambling, only is more swift, and of a shorter
tread, though the ground is better ridded in Ambling, yet this pace is more
easy, and by some highly approved; but for it, there is no certain rule, it
being a motion natural to most Horses that are brought to the Amble.

Of the Gallop.
THe Gallop is a motion exceeding necessary, and is most appropriated to
Trotting Horses, because that falling out of their Trot, they have no other
pace but the Gallop, as likewise a Horse well used to Racking, will naturally
take this motion: but the Pacer above all is the most awkard to be brought to
it, though in a while with good usage and gentle instructions he will take it
exceeding well: the cause why at first he is averse to this motion, is, for
that he having been trained to a set pace; when he is forced to a swifter
motion somewhat of the like nature, he by straining to swiften his pace,
scambles with his legs, but when he understands the alteration, which he will
after a months usage, he will be prone enough to take it upon all occasions;
yet too much Gallopping will prove prejudicial to his Pacing, and render it
more hard by reason of straining; therefore, in my opinion it would be best for
them that can afford it, to keep a Horse for every motion. In Gallopping
especially, these things are to be observed, that from the ground he raises his
feet nimbly, but not too high. That he neither rouleth nor beats himself; but
that stretching out his forelegs, his hinderlegs keep time cleaverly and
swiftly, that he neither cutteth under his knee, neither crosses nor strikes
one foot against another, but with his far sore-foot still leads. If he have
these virtues, he is a true thoroughpaced Gallopper. If your Horse Gallop short
and round, raising his forefeet, it denotes him strong, but not swift, and is
most fit for the Wars. If he Gallop slow and sure, then appropriate him to
Travail; but if you perceive he handles his feet confused, and seems to Gallop
painfully, it denotes his sinews shrunk, and he will never prove a Gallopper,
but will be subject to lameness: and thus much shall suffice as to the motions
of Horses.

Rules to be observed, in the Stature of a Horse; Marks whereby to know his
goodness.
THe Buyer in the Stature of a Horse must consider his ability, according to
the employment or use he designs him; the biggest and strongest are fit for
laborious employments, as Drawing, carrying of burdens, double carriage, and
the like. The Horses of a middle Stature are fittest for the Saddle of
pleasure, and the smaller for such uses as they are capable to serve to. As for
the Marks to be observed by the buyer, either of goodness or badness, they are
many, and so numerous are the defects in Horses, that they cannot without great
curiosity and narrow observance be deciphered. Therefore I shall lay down
diverse general Rules, the which being well observed will prevent many deceits.

First, Then if you design to purchase, after you have satisfied your self in
his breed, color, stature, and motion, by the Rules aforesaid. Then his Saddle
and clothes being off, stand just before him, take a strict view of his
Countenance, and the cheerfulness of his Face, for according to the
cheerfulness or dullness thereof is your Horse to be valued, the one presaging
his goodness, and the other his badness.

Secondly, Observe his Ears, if they be sharp, thin, pricked and small, always
standing or moving, or if they be somewhat long, well set on, well carried, and
no ways lolling, then is it a mark of beauty, comeliness and goodness; but on
the contrary, signs of dullness, indisposition, and of a surly temper.

Thirdly, If his face be lean, his forehead bearing or swelling outward; the
Mark or Feather in his Face set high above his eyes, or set on the top of his
eyes; if he have a Star of white in his forehead, or a white streak, a snip of
white on his nose or lip, it denotes goodness in the Horse. But if his face be
dull, heavy, cloudy, his forehead flat, and his head big and fat, and have none
of the beforesaid marks of goodness, then he is naught; and although he have
those marks, yet if his Star or streak stand awry, and where the snip is, or
should be; his nose be bald or the like, then is he notwithstanding of an evil
Breed and defective.

Fourthly, Observe that his eyes are large, round, black, sparkling, and that
the black of the eye fills the pit of the outward circumference, so that little
white is visible, then it betokens beauty and goodness; but if his eyes are
uneven, look askew, wrinkled or small, dull, heavy and not quick moving, it
signifies not only defect as to the uncomeliness; but also a distempered and
imperfect Horse, of an evil breed. If his eyes be Red, Fiery, take heed of
Moon-eyes, which are not much distant from blindness, if for the greatest part
White or Wall-ey'd, then it signifies weakness in the Horse, a weak sight, and
subject to start at every object that swiftly is presented to his view. If you
perceive white specks in the eyes, then it denotes that he is in danger of
having the Pin and Web, Pearl or the like infirmity, tending to blindness; if
watery and bloody, then subject to hot Rheumes: if mattery, it is occasioned
through excessive riding, surfeit, festered Rheumes or strains. If his eyes
appear dead, dull or hollow, sunk as it were in his head, then is he inclining
to blindness, and will not long continue his perfect sight; or is gotten by an
old Stallion on an old Mare. If his eyes are most white, and the black but
small, so that the white appears much in sight as the balls move, it denotes
weakness and an evil temper.

Fifthly, Observe his Chaps or Cheeks, and if you perceive the bones thin,
lean, and between them a wide space. The Throple or windpipe big, no knots nor
kernels near it, and the Jaws so great that the neck lies as it were between
them, it denotes the Horse to be sound and to have a good and long wind, as
likewise to be of great courage; but on the contrary, if his Chaps or Cheeks be
seeming fat or thick, the space between them closed with tumid flesh; and the
Windpipe small or encumbered with kernels, then is the Horse short-winded,
subject to the Strangles Glaunders, and diverse other distempers. If his Jaws be
strait, insomuch that his neck bears over, or swells above them, unless by some
distemper occasioned, then it signifies foulness, pursiness, and that the Horse
is subject to colds and surfeits. If the swelling be long, close, and feel
hard, then will he be subject to the Winds or impostume.

Sixthly, Observe his Nostrils, the which if they prove wide, large, open and
dry, so that upon any snorting or straining of the Horse, the inward redness
appears, his Muzzel small, and he deep mouthed, his lips equally meeting; then
is he a Horse of good wind, good metal, and of a sound constitution: but if
the contrary, then is he subject to diverse distempers, and will never prove a
good Horse.

Seventhly, Observe his breast, the which if it be broad, swelling out hard,
well boned, and the like, it denotes strength, comeliness and continuance: but
on the contrary, if it be narrow or bending inwards, it denotes the Horse to
be apt to stumble, of a weak spirit, and altogether unfit for the performance
of any great labor; as likewise much deformity.

Eighthly, Observe from his Elbow to his Knee, that his thighs be well brawned,
clean and solidly fleshed: for if strong Ligaments are wanting, and the flesh
feel soft and spungy, then it denotes weakness in your Horse, as the other does
strength.

Ninthly, Take especial notice of his knees, that they are of due proportion,
not one higher than the other, well joynted, sinewed and strongly knit, lean,
even, which betokens strength and comeliness; when on the other hand, if they
be Gross, Gouty, Scared, want Hair in some places, it denotes weakness,
stumbling and a disproportioned Jade.

Tenthly, Observe his legs; if they appear, upon handling, lean, rather flat
than round, full of sinews, bending inward, without seams or hair broken: It
denotes a sound substantial Horse, and one that will endure much labor. When
marks, on the contrary, as fleshy legs distorted, bending outward or the like,
denote a weak unserviceable and tyring Horse.

What has been before spoken of, being narrowly observed by the Buyer, let him
also take particular notice of what as yet remains untouched; which in their
order, for his better instructions, I shall set down.

Observations on the Pasterns.
WHen you buy, or would know the well going of a Horse for many years, observe
the Pastern joint, and Pastern. The first of which being clear and well knit
together, and the last short, strong and upright, denotes a good firm and
substantial tread, but if the former appear big or puffy, seeming somewhat
swelled, then is the Horse subject to sinew Strains and Gourdings, or if the
latter be long, weakly knit, and bending in and out in the motion, it denotes a
weak Horse, and one soon tired.

Observations on the Hoof.
THe best Hoof is the black smooth and tough Hoof, rather inclining to long,
than round and well hollowed, subject much to sounding. As for the white Hoof
it is tender, and will not well bear a shoo. The Hoof that is rugged and full
of seams or wrinkles, denotes Old Age in the Horse that he came of an old
decayed stock, or has been addicted to over-heats. As for the brittle Hoof it
is worst of all, for it will carry no shoo. If the Hoof be more than ordinary
round, the Horse will be apt to trip and stumble, especially in deep ways; or
if he be but put to an extraordinary motion. If the Hoof be flat and Pumiced,
it denotes foundering. The Hoof that is hollow and empty, betokens the inward
decay, by reason of some founder bruise, or wound not thoroughly searched or
cured. Take likewise notice of the Crown of the Hoof, and if you perceive the
flesh flat, and the hair smooth, then is all in good order in that part; but if
the Hair be rough, rising, the flesh swelling, full of knops or scabs, scared
or broken, then it denotes a Ring bone, Quitter-bone, or Crown-scab.

Things to be observed in the setting on of the Head, Crest and Maine, etc.
HAving viewed your Horse narrowly before, come to his right-side, and there
take especial notice that his head be placed neither too high nor too low, but
that it stand as it were in a direct line, evenly carried, and for his Neck,
let it be small at the setting on of the head, long, and still growing deeper,
as it descends toward the shoulders, with a high strong and thin Main, long,
soft, and indifferently well curling, which denotes the Horse not only of a
good breed, but are greatly ornamental; for if the Head be ill set on, though
in it self it be well shaped, it is a great blemish to the beauty of the Horse.
If you perceive any rising or swelling in the nape of the neck, it is a symptom
of the Pole-evil or a fistula. If your Horse have a short thick neck, or if it
be fat and falling at the Withers; if the Crest be low, thick, falling, and
weak, they are tokens of dullness in the Horse; as also does an extraordinary
thick Maine: little hair on the Maine, denotes fury, but if it fall off, then
is it occasioned by the distemper called the Worm in the Maine; the Itch or
Manginess, which there are breeding, though perhaps not apparent by any other
symptoms.

What is to be observed in the Back-ribs, Fillets, Belly and Stones.
TAke special notice that the chine of the back be broad, strait and even; the
Ribs strong, well composed, at equal distance, bending out Archwise. That his
Fillets be upright, strong and short; and that the space between the last Rib
and the Huckle-bone exceed not a handful. As for his Belly, let it fall down
indifferently well, descending as it were by degrees, from his loins to his
foreparts; and his Stones carried even, and not hanging down, or swagging. All
these denote perfection in a Horse; but if the Chine be narrow, he is naught
for the Saddle, and if put to it, very much subject to gauling; to be
Saddle-backed, Sway-backed, or have the back bending, denotes weakness. Flat
Ribs betoken hide-boundness. Hanging long or weak Fillets, denote him not
capable of clambering, or journeying in hilly Countries, nor of carrying a
burden. If his belly be clung, or over gaunt, his Stones uneven or dangling,
they are symptoms of sickness, foundering or dullness, and unaptness to labor.

Observations to be made on the Buttocks and Hinder thighs of your Horse.
OBserve that the Buttocks be plump, round, level with the body; or if long,
then take notice that they rise well behind, spreading decently at the setting
on of the Tail, both which are marks of beauty; as on the contrary, a narrow
Pin Buttock, Hog-rump, or falling down, are marks of deformity, neither fitsor
to carry Pad, Foot-cloth or Pillion.

If the Thighs or Gaskings be even, and let down well, to the middle joint,
full of sinews, thick and brawny, they are signs of Beauty and strength, but if
they appear Slender or Lank, it denotes deformity, and weakness in your Horse.

What is necessary to be observed in the hinderlegs, Tail and Cambrels.
LEt our buyer observe that the hinder legs be clean, lean, and full of strong
sinews, somewhat inclining to fatness, for if they be fat, fleshy, and tumid,
it denotes the Horse not capable of hard labor, and that the grease is Molten
in them. If you perceive any scabs above the Pasterns, then it denotes him to
have the scratches, or if a chop appear there, then is he afflicted with the
Rheumes.

As for the setting on the Tail, it is worthy only of this observation, that
where there is a good Buttock, the Tail cannot be evilly set on; and where
there is a bad Buttock, it cannot stand right: A Tail well set on ought to
stand broad, high, and flat, couching somewhat inwards.

The observations necessary to be made on the Cambrels of your Horse, are
these; first, observe well the middle joint behind, and if there you perceive
it replenished with firm smooth skin-bones and sinews, a little bending, then
is that part of the Horse sound and beautiful. Secondly, If in making a narrow
inspection, you do perceive Sores, Chaps, inward bought or bending, then it
denotes the Horse to be troubled with a Sellander: but if all over the joint,
you perceive it tumid or swelled, it is a sign he has received some blow or
bruise; yet if it be a particular swelling in the hollow part, Pit, or proud
and full on the inside of the vein; and the swelling be soft, then is it a
Blood Spavin; or if hard, a bone Spavin: but if it appear behind, before the
Knuckle, then conclude it to be a Curb. And thus far having supplied the Buyer
with infallible directions to prevent all frauds, if they be narrowly observed,
I shall proceed to lay down infallible Rules, whereby a Horses age may be known.

Infallible Rules, whereby to know the age of any Horse or Mare.
THe first thing herein to be observed, is his Teeth, the which when the Horse
has his full number, are 40 viz. six great Wang-teeth above, and 6 beneath, on
either side making in all 24 and are properly called his Grinders: in the fore
part of his mouth he has 6 above, and the like number below also called
Gatherers, and 4 Tushes, two above and two below, which in all make 40. the
latter 4 are called the Bitt-Teeth. Now the observations whereby to know the
Horses age, are these.

The first year his Foals or Colts teeth called Grinders or Gatherers only
appear, and these are small white and smooth.

The second year he changes two of his fore teeth, one above, and the other
beneath, each in the middle of the Rows, of the Gatherers, which come up
browner and larger than the other.

The year following, he changes the next to those aforesaid, leaving no direct
Colts-teeth before, unless on either side two above, and two below, which are
small and bright.

The fourth year no Foals teeth, except one on either side are left him, he
changing what otherwise remained.

The fifth year he changes all his foremost teeth, having his Tushes complete,
and those that come up in the place of the last Foals teeth he casts, will be
hollow with small black specks in the midst of them, by the continuance of
which the Horses age is to be known to the eighth year.

The sixth year his new Tushes put forth, at the bottom of which young flesh
will appear, the Tushes small, white, sharp and short.

The Seventh year his teeth will be all of perfect growth, and the Mark in the
mouth more visible than ever.

On the Eighth year all his teeth will be plain, smooth, full and in their
perfect shape, at what time the black specks will diminish, being not after the
expiration of that year to be perceived, the Tushes will likewise change
color, becoming more yellow.

The Ninth year, the Mark being vanished, the fore teeth will be longer and
broader than usual, and change their color to a yellowish paleness, his Tushes
losing much of their sharpness.

The Tenth year, the holes in the inside of his upper Tushes will be filled up,
which till that time you may with your finger feel like hollow pits, and the
Temples of the head appear crooked, and begin to hollow.

The Eleventh year will produce his teeth of a great length, yellow, foul and
distorted.

The Twelfth and last year to know a Horses age by his teeth, you will observe
them long, exceeding yellow, and that the upper teeth will hang over the under
ones, and though some are of opinion that his age to the thirteenth year is to
be known, by the wearing of his Tushes close to his chaps, and the blackness of
them, yet according to the observations that have been made, this is no certain
Rule, for so they frequently are the twelfth year.

Observations to know his age, by his Mouth.
IF his lips and upper teeth over-hang, and seem unseemly, uneven, unless it be
occasioned by a cold, surfeit, or extraordinary riding, it denotes the Horse to
be Old. Another thing in the mouth worthy of observation, is to observe whether
he be not too deep burnt of the Lampus, and that the bars and flesh lie even
and smooth; for if the hole be too deep burnt, Hay and Provender will stick
therein, to his great hindrance in feeding.

Age to be known by the Hoof.
A Rugged and seamed Hoof, crinkled and drawn as it were in heaps, denotes an
old Horse, as also a crusty crumbling Pumice Hoof; when on the contrary a
smooth moist hollow and well sounding Hoof betokens a young Horse well in
health, and condition for Travail.

Age to be known by the Tail.
IF you by feeling the Tail close to its setting on, perceive the joint there
to rise on either side, or stand out to the bigness of a Hazel-nut, or
thereabouts, then it is a sign the Horse is young, not exceeding three years
old, but if no such knop appear, but that all the joints are plain, then he is
above Ten, and may exceed Twelve or Thirteen.

Age to be known by the Eyes.
WHen you take a view of your Horses Eyes, if you observe they be Round, Full,
Staring, and standing out, and that the pits be full and even with the Temples,
then it denotes the Horse to be young; but if the Eyes be Sunk, Dim, Hollow,
Pitted, the Temples wrinkled or crooked, then it denotes old age.

Age to be known by the Skin.
IF you would know whether your Horse is old or young by the skin, you must
take it up between your thumb and finger, and suddenly letting it fall,
observe whether it immediately returns smooth to the place, which if it does,
it denotes him young; but if not, but that it is long in falling, and wrinkled,
then is he old.

Age to be known by the Hair.
VIewing your Horse well, if you perceive any grizly hairs growing about the
Eybrows; the Horse being naturally of a dark color, or that the like hairs
grow underneath the Main; or if your Horse is naturally white, and he become
Mannelled with Black or Red Mannels in most parts of his body, then is he an
Old Horse, and will not be long fit for service.

Age to be known by the Bars.
IF the Bars of your Horses Mouth feel hard and rough, and are great and deep,
then be assured, the Horse is old; but if tender, shallow and soft, he is
young. These directions well observed, will prevent all deceits, and render the
buyer capable to lay out his money to the best advantages, though indeed there
are many Artificial cheats used by Jockies, that may deceive the most curious,
of which amongst many other curious mysteries, I shall hereafter treat; and now
proceed to the office of the skillful Farrier.

Of the Office of the Farrier, and what is chiefly therein to be considered.
HE that will be accounted an experienced able Farrier, must not only be
skilled in shooing, and dressing, but in all the parts of a Horses body,
thereby to know from whence proceeds the original cause of any distemper, how
and by what means it was generated, and the more effectually to apply such
remedies as may remove the distemper, and work a perfect cure: to do which,
note these following considerations.

First, That the seat of life is in the Brain, Heart and Liver, from whence it
operates in, and disposes every member; and for that end, those by many are
called the three principal members, to which some would add a fourth, viz. the
Stones, but that addition by the wisest practitioners has been rejected.

Secondly, The sinews which are these, two white sinews or Tendons, which begin
at the Nose, and passing through the neck and back, branch into the forelegs,
and end in the hinderlegs, taking their ligaments in all the four feet. Two
sinews called the Main sinews, which descend from the Brain, and passing down
the cheeks, fasten the Jaws. Three, from the Shoulder to the first joint of the
Arms, or forelegs, besides two other great sinews; four great sinews from the
knees to the Pasterns, with the same number in the hinder part above, as well
within as without the forepart of the breast, are ten sinews great and small.
From the Reins of the back to the Stones are four great sinews or Ligaments,
and another great sinew which runs to the end of the Tail: To conclude, a Horse
has great and small sinews 29. or as some will have it 30.

Thirdly, As to the Veins in a Horse, through which the blood circulates the
whole body; they are many, yet seeing they all center in the Liver, the seat
and fountain of blood, distributing it into every part: diverse are of opinion
that a Horse has properly but one vein, which is called the Median, and that
when ever the blood is corrupted, or that vein is afflicted with wind or any
infirmity, it dispensing it through all the branches, afflicts at once the
whole body of the Horse. Those branches, that ascend to the head and upper
parts of the body, are called ascendants, and those that run down into their
legs and nether parts of the body descendants, and through these branches,
whether the beast sleep or wake, the blood continues its course, as indeed it
does in all creatures, whose bulk admit a free passage, Ebbing and Flowing like
the Ocean, by the course of the Moon. Now the things herein chiefly to be
considered, are the Branches from whence upon sundry occasions, it is most
proper to take blood; which indeed are many consistant to the distemper: for
the branch is to be opened, as it either affects the blood, or is seated in the
body of the Horse.

But the Veins most convenient to be opened, are these, viz. in the Neck, in
the weeping veins under the Ears, and about the head in six other places, as in
the Palate-veins in the Tongue, in the Flank-veins, in the breast, and
Spur-veins, in the four members, viz. the Legs, Thighs, Pasterns and Feet, and
indeed in most veins, according as the distemper is seated, by bloodletting,
being great, as in the following chapter will appear.

To what end Phlebotomy, or bloodletting serves.
THe opening the Temple vein eases pain in the head, caused by cold Rheumes,
Fevers, Drowsiness, Stavars, yellows, Frenzy, Sleepy-evil, Falling-evil or any
grief afflicting the Eyes or Brain. The opening of the Weeping veins, is
exceeding good to prevent blindness, and to cure the distempers in the eyes, as
Waterings, hot Rheumes, Haws, Pin and Web, Pearls, blood-shotten and the like.
The opening the Palate-veins, cures or pervents the Lampass, or inward
sickness, as Stavars, Anticor, Yellows, Drowsiness, Surfeits, Tirings, and many
times cures the Strangles, Quinsie, Swelling of the kernels, Pustles,
Inflammation, or Glaunders, especially, if you cause him to drink the blood
mixed with a little Bay Salt. The next veins opened help the Yellows, Farcins,
Stavars, Mangies, Agues, Feavours, Surfeits, Scabs, Glaunders and the like; and
often prevent sickness in your Horse or Mare. The opening the palate, or breast
veins, prevent or help the Anticor, Moore-foundering, occasioned by molten
grease, contracted in the body by hard riding, it likewise preventeth diseases
in the Liver, Lungs and other internal parts, is convenient to be done upon any
hurt or sprain in the Shoulder, to prevent Lameness. The opening the two thigh
veins, helps foundering in the forefeet, Splint, Screw-ringbone, Mallender,
or the like infirmity. To bleed the four Shackle veins before, is good against
the Crown-scab, Quitter-bone and the like distemper incident to the feet of a
Horse or Mare. To bleed the Spur-veins is excellent good for the Moore-founder,
Farcine in the side, swelling under the belly or the like. The Toe-veins being
opened do help Frettizing, foundering, Hoof-bound or any grief, occasioned by
the Horses beating his Hoofs upon hard stony way: Bleeding the two thigh-veins
behind, eases the grief of the kidneys, swelling in the hinder legs,
Foundering, Scratches, pissing of Blood, occasioned by overstraining, or the
weakness of the Reins, Back or Belly, and infirmity in the Guts; as likewise
the Curb, Spavin, and such other distempers or griefs, as proceed from rankness
or impurity of Blood. To open the Shackle veins behind, is exceeding good to
prevent foundering, or any pain the Horse is subject to have in his feet. To
open the Flank-veins, is exceeding good in case of a Feavour, Swelling in the
Stones, Poverty, or the Felt-worm. And lastly, to bleed the Tail-vein often,
prevents the Mange, Scabs, Itch, and falling off of the Hair. So that the
number of veins that are usually opened upon diverse occasions are Thirty: the
opening of which greatly contribute to the health of the Horse or Mare, not
only by preventing distempers, as has been before said, but frequently without
any other application, by taking away the effects, cause the grief to cease, or
at least prepare the body of the Horse, the better to receive such effectual
medicines as will work his cure, and dispose outward wounds, bruises and the
like, to such a temper that they heal without much difficulty.

What seasons are best to let blood in.
IF the Horse be in great danger, you need not expect the critical times, but
let him blood presently; but if otherwise, observe these following days, viz.
the third and fifteenth of January. The fourth and ninth of February. The
seventeenth and eighteenth of March. The tenth and sixteenth of April. The
first and thirteenth of May The fifteenth and twentieth of June. In July and
August, forbear letting blood, unless upon some urgent occasion. In September
bleed him on the eleventh and twenty-eighth day. In October, on the eight and
twenty third. In November, on the fifth and sixteenth. In December, on the
fourteenth and twenty sixth, these days being by all the experienced Farriers
holden the best for sundry regards, but especially in respect to the signs,
which are these, and thus govern, viz. Aries the head, Taurus the neck, Gemini
the shoulders, Cancer the stomach, Leo the heart, Virgo the guts, and belly,
Libra the reins and buttocks, Scorpio the privities, Sagittarius the thighs,
Capricorn the knees, Aquarius the legs, and Pisces the feet; from which note
that it is not at all safe to let blood in that part, where the sign is
predominant.

Of the bones of a Horse, and how placed.
IN the body of a Horse, the Bones are these, viz. 40 teeth, his head Bones
comprehending the crooks, and handles of his Scull, although they are compiled
of part and parcel of other Bones, likewise two flat handles, which from the
Palate and Fork, or Throat have five, his breast bone, and fifty two bones in
his Chine, his Ribs, short and long are thirty six, his fore legs and fore feet
are composed of 44 Bones, and the hinderlegs and feet of 40, so that the whole
structure of his body, as to Bones is computed to consist of 157. or as some
say one hundred fifty nine.

Of the four Humors, Sympathising with the four Humors incident to all
Creatures.
IT is not the least part of the Farriers Office, to consider and well
understand the nature, and qualities of the four Elementary Humors, that go to
the composition of all creatures. And first as the four Elements, viz. Fire,
Air, Water and Earth, give life and Nutriment to all living creatures. So the
four Humors, viz. Choler, Blood, Phlegm and Melancholy are the principal
Agitators in the bodies of all Creatures, and as it were compose them, or at
least preserve them; for without either no creature can subsist. Choler, by
reason of its heat, being alluded to Fire; Blood, by reason of its heat and
moisture to Air; Phlegm, by reason of its coldness and moisture to Water; and
Melancholy, by reason of its cold and dryness, to Earth: as for Choler, its
seat is in and near the Liver, which by reason of its heat and dryness accords
with the blood, which has its fountain in the Liver, and from thence disperses
it self throughout the whole body, nourishing and preserving it in all parts:
Phlegm has its chief seat in and about the Brain, that seat of life, altogether
affecting Cold. Melancholy occupies the Spleen, being the gross and
excremental part of blood and choler, descending from the Liver. As for the
Offices or dispositions of these humors, they are four, viz. Choler causes
concoction, and voiding of Excrements. Blood nourishes the body. Phlegm gives
motion to the joints. And Melancholy disposes to appetite, creating a good
stomach.

How to know by the Color of a Horse, to which of the four aforesaid Humors he
is most inclinable, and how thereupon to order him for the prevention, or
curing such distempers as he is most subject to.
TO know the better to prepare your Medicines, necessary to be given upon
sundry occasions; it is first necessary that you know which of the four
aforesaid humors is most predominant in your Horse, which cannot better be
discerned than by his Color or complexion: note then if he be cole-black
without any white, a bright Sorrel or an Iron-gray unchangeable, that will
neither turn to a Flea-bitten, White, or Daple gray, then is he most subject to
Choler, by reason of the great heat in him, often incident to inflammation of
the Liver, Yellows and Pestilential Feavours; and in that case you must, to
prevent these distempers, give him medicines to purge Choler, but let them not
be of a quality too much operating, lest they impair his strength to that
degree, that he never after recover it: for all choleric Horses, though they
be fierce and fiery, are but of small strength. If your Horse be colored
either Bright-bay, or Dark-bay, neither scouling countenance, maughy mouthed,
or white flanked, or a white Fleabitten, white Lyard, like silver, or black
with a white Star, white Rash, or white foot, then is he Sanguin; and the
diseases to which he is most subject, are the Glaunders, Consumption of the
Liver, Leprosy or such other distempers as are caused by infection. As for the
Horses of a Snguin complexion, they are for the most part of a strong
constitution, and will endure strong medicines, without impairing their
strength, if the medicines be not compounded of extraordinary hot ingredients,
to over-heat the blood.

If your Horses color be Milk-white, Py-bald, Yellow, Dun, Kite-colour, or any
the like colors, in mixture, then is he Phlegmatic, being slow by nature, and
apt to lose his flesh, subject to cold Rheums, Headache, Cough, Staggers, and
indeed all distempers proceeding from cold or watery distillations, and
therefore must have hot medicines, that is, simples of a hot and strong working
nature that may operate upon the Mass of Phlegm, which generates the distempers.

If your Horse be of a Dark-bay color, having long white hairs like Goats
hairs on his legs, Russet, Chestnut, Ash-colored, Gray or Mouse-dun, then does
Melancholy abound in him, and the distempers he is most subject to, are the
inflammation of the Spleen, Dropsy, Frenzy, and such like dull and Melancholy
distempers; and therefore require cold and moist medicines, those of a dry or
hot quality being altogether hurtful and unprofitable. Their strength is
greater than it appears to be, and for the most part they are fit for servile
labors, and thus much of the four Elementary humors: now there are diverse
Horses mixed with all the aforesaid colors, or some three or four of them; in
such a case, note that those Horses have those humors most predominant, of
which their color is mostly, according to what has been said, and so
consequently ought the medicines to be prepared with regard to the nature of
the sickness for; if it has continued long, and the Horse be infeebled thereby,
then you must not give him over strong potions, but if he be young and lusty,
not having languished under the force of the distemper; then any well composed
suitable medicine will not be amiss, but as to medicines in particular I shall
speak at large hereafter.

Things to be observed, to keep a Horse in health, and make him long continue
so.
IF you would have your Horse continue in health and live long, twelve things
are to be observed. 1. Let him moderately feed. 2. See that he have good
nourishment and be of a quick and clean digesture. 3. Let him labor
moderately. 4. If he be not too much subject to sleep. 5. If he be not
permitted often to leap Mares, 6. That in all journeys moderation be used, not
Travailing too far without resting, or baiting. 7. That he be kept in wholesome
Air. 8. Not to exercise him too soon after Grass. 9. That he be kept from raw
green meats. 10. Not to suffer him to eat or drink after exercise, or a
journey, before he is thoroughly col'd. 12. With his Provender give him wholesome
simples, for the most part dry, the nature of which being such as is good
against such distempers as your Horse by his complexion may be or is inclinable
to, as Anniseeds, Fennelseed, Fennegreek, Bay Berries, Brimstone, Alum,
Hempseed, Elecampain, or the Roots of Polipodium of the Oak, Savin, Rue,
Hyssop, Colts foot, Hore-hound, Marshmallows and the like; if you have them
not dry, you may by chopping them small give him them green; but if dry, for so
they are best, crush them to powder and sprinkle them amongst his Oats, or
Beans, or amongst Hay cut short, and they so taken will prevent obstructions by
purifying the blood, thereby rendering the whole body in sound and perfect
health.

Of Sickness, Dangerous to Horses; and its Original.
THe main cause of most Internal distempers in Horses proceeds either from over
violent heats in exercise, as when the Horse has his grease molten, or the
heart over charged with vitiated blood, so that the Pores or passages are so
stopped, that the Vital spirits dispersed throughout the body, cannot return
turn to their center, nor the heart be exhilerated for want of an intercourse
with the Liver. These obstructions, I say, excluding the Vital Spirits, the
Organs of the body cannot rejoice, which occasions mortal sickness.

Another cause there is, which proceeds from cold occasioned through the
negligence of the keeper, in not regarding him before and after a journey or
exercise, as he ought; which once taken, troubles his head with pains and
dullness, making him look heavy and dull eyed; the root of the Tongue being
often inflamed and swelled. The Lungs tickled, and offended with Rheums,
causing strong and tedious Coughs, which greatly indispose and offend him,
whiles noisome filth proceeds from his nostrils, etc.

A third cause there is comes by unseasonable eating or over eating, which
frequently begets a surfeit, especially if he eat unwholesome food. If he eat to
excess, it many times proves mortal, by reason it creates unwholesome vapors,
noisome fumes and the like, which ascending from the stomach to the brain,
poison and infect it, or if the Horse escape with life, yet seldom misses to
have Stavers, or Frenzy: if the food he has eaten be unwholesome, raw or out of
season, then it breeds diseases by producing corrupt vitiated blood or
infectious watery humors, from which proceed the Yellows, Farcines, Fevers,
Manginess and the like, which infecting the heart, stopping the free passage of
the stomach, and dispersing throughout the body, leaves no member free from
affliction.

A fourth cause there is, which we may call accidental, which is when a Horse
takes in poison with his food, or receives a wound, or extraordinary bruise,
which inflames the blood, and makes each part become hot and feverish, the
which by degrees turns to many evil distempers that end but with the life of
the Horse; therefore on this occasion, there is nothing more necessary than to
apply pertinent medicines in time, ere the malady has taken root.

How to discern by diverse symptoms any mortal sickness in a Horse.
HAving laid down the original causes of most mortal sicknesses, I shall now
proceed to let you understand how they may be known by the sundry symptoms that
forerun, or attend them according to the opinion of the most expert
practitioners in this Art. If the sickness be occasioned through immoderate
heats or journeying, then it is signified by the heavyness of his countenance,
swelling of his legs and other limbs, but his hinder legs especially by the
looseness and scouring of his body, at the beginning of the sickness, short and
hot breath, and a loathing or forsaking his meat. If the sickness proceeds from
cold, then it is known by a downcast Countenance, Drowsiness, and desire of
sleep; Pustils or hard knots under the Caul; and many times by the
inflammations of the Kernels, and swellings as high as the roots of the Ears,
attended by a moist and inward sounding cough, and the like.

If the sickness be occasioned by a surfeit taken after the manner aforesaid,
then the signs or symptoms are violent pains in the head, so that he will not
by reason of the dullness it occasions, be able to hold it up to the Rack: His
Eyes will likewise appear dull and sunk in his Head, his Ears pricked up, and
the tops of them cold; as also his upperlip and sheath; Reeling and Staggering
as he goes, the which if it be delayed will turn to Madness, and that Madness
be known by his eager biting the Manger, or Rackstaves, and often beating his
head against the Wall; you may likewise know whether the distemper has tainted
the Brain, by the yellowness of his Eyes, Lips, and Tongue.

The symptoms to know accidental sickness occasioned by wounds and the like,
are unusual Sweats, tremblings, a sweat or Froth at roots of his Ears, upon the
Flanks behind, the Shoulders, and against the Heart, at othertimes glowing and
burning in the Temples, against the Heart, and inside of the forelegs, and of
the hinderlegs, dry and hot in the Mouth, inflammation in the Tongue, a
loathing of meat, and desire of cold water, in which after he has drunk his
fill, he will be desirous to hold his mouth.

Now to prevent any of these sickness, if you find him a little distempered, or
any thing inclining to be out of order, let him blood, and for three mornings
successively give him a Diapente-drink, and keeping him warm, let him fast for
three hours after, then give him a Mash of Beans, Bran and Oats, and a little
knop of Hay, but if it so happen that you are unprovided with Diapente, which
no Farrier ought to be, then take a handful of Celendine, wash it well, roots
and leaves, adding to it Wormwoord and Rue, half a handful of both, boil them
in a pottle of ALE or Beer, till they come to the quantity of a quart, to which
well strained put half a pound of sweet-butter, and two ounces of Treacle,
which ingredients well mixed, give him blood warm.

If you would fortify your Horse against any distemper, then observe all the
twelve rules before laid down, relating to health and long life or continuance,
and moreover, if you intend to put him to Grass, after he has long stood in
the House, then having let him blood every day, abate of his clothes, till you
have brought him to none, thereby to render him hardy, and able to endure cold,
but be sure you put him not into wet Pasture, where damp and noisome Air arise
from Ditches, Rivers, Fens or Quagmires; and before you turn him out of the
Stable, for three mornings successively give him drink made as follows.

The Drink to be given before Grass.
OF Aristolochia, Bayberries, Myrrh, Gentian and shavings of Ivy, take of each
one once, bruise them severally, so that they may be sierced through a fine
sieve, and then weighed to a just and equal quantity, the which you must give
him in Muscadel, Mallago, or for want of them, warm A L E or Beer, viz. In a
pint and a half of the two former, put three spoonfuls of the powder, or the
like quantity into a quart of the latter.

How to order your Horse, upon taking him up from Grass, to prevent sickness.
OBserve when you take up your Horse, that he be thoroughly dry, not damp,
either by rain, cold dews or sweat, and let him not stay abroad longer than St.
Bartholomews day, unless the weather is exceeding clear and warm, and if so,
you may suffer him to run the first of September, but not longer, for after
that cold dews fall, raw damps arise, and the heart of the Grass fails, if
you through neglect take him up wet, it will subject him to manginess, and if
you suffer him to continue abroad longer than the times specified, the grass
instead of nutriment will breed could Phlegmatic humors and putrefied blood;
and for a week or more after he is taken up, give him no immoderate heats, nor
Travail, lest thereby you melt the grease within him, his fat gotten at grass
being so tender, that the least extraordinary motion dissolveth it, whereby if
the blood happen to be inflamed, it will endanger his falling into a mortal
sickness, which happening, often ends in Death; when you have him in the
stable, let him blood upon the next blooding day, according to the blooding
days prescribed; then being well shod give him the drink, the same with what
you gave him at your putting him out, and let him be kept in a clean warm
Stable, and well looked to, both as to his dressing and diet.

Directions to cleanse your Horse, after taking up for comeliness and healths
sake.
THe day being fair and warm, three or four days after your Horse is taken up,
lead him abroad, and gently rubbing him down, to take of the loose hairs,
anoint him with soap, and then with warm water wash him all over, rubbing him
with a Sponge or Linen Cloth; but beware no soap gets into his Mouth, Eyes,
Ears or Nostrils: After you have indifferently well cleansed him, rub him hard
with a dry Woollen-cloath; then soaping him over again, rub him as aforesaid:
which done, take Buck-Lee and a hard wisp and wash him clean from froth or
foam, and afterward with a Woollen-cloth exceeding dry leaving no wet hair
about him, lead him into the Stable, clothing him by degrees till you have
wrapped him up in all his clothes. This way is many times used, as well to
conceal stolen Horses, as for the Horses health, for by so rubbing, the Horse
is so altered in color, slickness and shape, that the owner without
extraordinary prying cannot directly challenge him.

How to prepare your Horse for any Medicine, in case you find the distemper has
effectually seized him.
OBserve that two days before you intend to administer the potion, whether
Pill, Powder or Drench composed of simples; that you permit him to eat neither
Hay nor Straw, or indeed any hard meat, not admitting of easy digesture,
thereby to hinder the operation of the Physic, and for twelve hours before
keep him from all manner of meats, for emptiness gives a free operation to the
purgation, when fullness by obstructing it may turn the force thereof upon the
vitals, and thereby do much harm to the Horse. The safest meat to prepare him
is either Rye or Wheat-Bran mixed with splent-beans, or Bread made of Bean and
Wheat Flour, mixed with clean Oats, and his drink warm water, with a little
fine flower or bran shaked into it.

What purgations may be given with the least danger.
THe gentlest and most effectual purgations are Pills, but in giving Physic
you must consider the state of your Horses body, whether he be strong or weak,
or rather the end for which you purge him, in relation to the distemper for
which he receives the dose. To make the gentlest Pills, good aginst any
infectious or pestilential disease take these directions, viz. peel 20 Cloves
of Garlic, bruise them and temper them with a pound of sweet butter, and
rouling them up into balls as big as Hen-eggs, put four or five of them down
the Horses throat, and they will work out the pestilential humors, if they
have not seized the heart, brain or Liver. Another sort of gentle pills may be
made after this manner: take a quarter of a pound of red Saunders, and the like
quantity of fresh butter, mix them well together, and making them up as the
former, give them your Horse in like manner. Another harmless purge may be made
of Rosemary leaves bruised and mixed with butter; and lastly green figgs
bruised and made into pills or balls with sweet butter and given him, have
almost the same effects: All of them gently purging, mostly by Sweat and Urine.

Strong purging Pills, how to make them.
IF your Horse be of a strong constitution, and the nature of his distemper
require it, make and give him these Pills according to the following
directions, viz. Take Hoggs lard, steep it well in water, then without any skin
put a quarter of a pound of it to the powders of Aniseed, Fenigreek and
Liquorish, of each an ounce and a half, adding to them an ounce of Aloes beaten
to powder and sifted, as likewise of Agarick half an ounce, all which being
well tempered, make them up into balls or pills, as big as large Walnuts, and
give him four at a time, or if you find him inclinable to weakness, three, for
this is a strong purge and will work extremely.

A gentle Drink or Drench, to prevent sickness, or cure it.
TO make this drink, take the roots of round Aristolochia, wash and scrape them
well, then take unexcorticated Juniper Berries, and excorticated Bay Berries,
ten or twelve drops of the Oil of Myrrh, and of Ivory shavings a quarter of an
ounce; pulverize all but the Myrrh, and sierce them, and then add to them the
Myrrh, the which given, viz. an ounce of the powder or confection in half a
pint of white wind; it is Sovereign against all manner of infection, Internal
or biting of Venomous beasts, External, Purfying, Cleansing, suppleing the
body, dissolving gross humors, removing distempers that afflict the Liver, or
Stomach, helps digestion, and cures cold, Consumption, Phlegm, Staggers, and
most distempers in the head, preventing Tiring, Weariness, Cramp, Convulsion,
and Scurvy; dissolves the Stone, opens Internal obstructions, cures the
Yellows, Gargil and dropsy, likewise diseases of the Lungs, as Glaunders and
Rottenness, which occasions noisome breath, eases the Wind-colick, provokes
Urine, and kills Worms, etc.

An Excellent Drench to open the body of an Horse, and cleanse it.
MIx together Honey, Olive Oil and new milk of each 8 ounces, six yolks of
Eggs, and an ounce of London treacle, to which add Liquorish, Sugar-candia and
Aniseeds beaten fine, of each an ounce, the which being well mixed and given
him in a quart of warm ALE, and he afterward kept warm and fasting, it will
open all obstructions, give the blood free passage and inliven the body though
never so dull and drowsy.

Diatessaror, or an excellent Drench for curing Pestilential distempers.
TAke the powder of Diapente, or five Simples, viz. Gentian, Aristolochia,
Bay Berries, Myrrh and Ivy shavings, of each a quarter of an ounce, bruise them
in a Mortar with clarified honey, to the quantity of a quarter of a pint, which
being wrought into a confection, may be given your Horse for any violent
distemper in a pint of Muscadel or Canary, though not above half an ounce at a
time, for if more, unless the Horse be of a strong constitution it may greatly
injure him: It is an excellent Antidote against all poisonous distempers or
infections, occasioned through ill airs, causing heart sickness, and diverse
sorts of fevers: to cure the latter, observe to bleed him before you give him
the drink.

If at any time you have not Diapente, give him this drink.
UPon urgent occasions, when such ingredients as before are mentioned cannot be
got, then use these following ingredients, which will in a manner work the self
same cure, viz. two ounces of Tarr, one ounce of Honey, two drams of black Soap,
and half a pint of Bay Salt, all which being well mixed together, put them into
an Egg-shell, broken only at the top, so that the white and yolk may be taken
out, and then oblige your Horse to swallow it, and afterward give him warm
ALE, to the quantity of a quart, then ride him moderately, not suffering him to
stand still for the space of two or three hours, after which you may suffer him
to drink, which the medicine will easily provoke him to, but be sure it be warm
water, then cloth him well, and for three or four days after give him Mashes
with hay sweet and good, well dusted.

Signs of sickness in general.
ALthough I have already discoursed on this matter, yet seeing it is the hindg
on which the whole Series turns; it will not be amiss to discourse of the cause
of sickness in general, as thus, if you find your Horse dull and heavy, his
countenance louring, and head hanging, his body more than ordinary loose, his
breath short, and he loathing his meat, how good soever, his Eyes dull and
seldom winking, his Hair rough, stairing and unnatural colored, with a dry and
rotten cough, his pace staggering, his behavior frantic, his Eyes yellow, and
his body covered with a faint or cold sweat at diverse times, his coveting to
lie down, beating himself or looking upon his body, alteration of qualities or
gesture, delaying to cast his Coat in due season, Hide-bound or lean suddenly,
are all apparent symptoms of distempers, and especially of internal sicknesses.

Things to be observed in Physicking a Horse.
IN all Drenches or Glisters, let the heat not exceed the warmth of blood, for
if it does it will prove offensive, nothing being more obnoxious than things
administered too hot or too cold; let what you administer be given not over
hastily, lest if it be given down his throat, you choke or overcharge his
weasand, and by that means cause him by coughing or straining, to cast it up.
In giving him balls, you must if they be any thing large, draw forth his
Tongue, that he may swallow them easily and not be obliged to strain himself,
thrusting them down as far as you can before you let go his Tongue, the which
being suddenly dismissed will force them down: Ever observe to administer your
potions when the Horse is fasting, either by the space of one whole night, or
three hours at the least, unless the suddainness of a distemper prevent such
convenience: for upon an empty stomach the physic will have the more effectual
operation, and the better eradicate the gross and vicious humors, which
generate most distempers, likewise be sure upon what occasion soever he takes
physic, that he fasts two or three hours after its reception.

Exercise to be observed upon the Reception of Physic.
IF you are desirous the Physic should work, then as soon as your Horse has
received it, course him about moderately, not exceeding a Pace or Trot, or if
he be weakened by any distemper, then walk him gently under some warm hedge for
the space of a Mile, then bringing him into the Stable rub him down with dry
clothes, and clothing him warm, let him stand the time aforesaid, before you
give him any meat; all the while you or your Groom observing his postures, and
how the Physic operates, by which you may discern what his distemper is, and
whether it afflicts him more or less.

What is to be observed in raking your Horse, who cannot dung without pain.
WHen your Horse is troubled with any obstruction in the Fundament, you with
your hand must often draw away the dung which he through its hardness or his
weakness cannot otherwise avoid without great pain, the which when you do, you
must anoint your hand with Oil of Olives, or Neats-foot Oil, which will
greatly allay the heat, and for the future render him more capable of casting
his dung; or if to make him laxative, in such a case you give him a Glister,
anoint the quill or pipe with Olive Oil or Hogs Lard.

What further is to be observed in Phlebotomy or blood-letting.
IT is to be observed that you ought to take a due proportion of blood from the
Horse, according to his age, strength, or the quality of the distemper. If he
be a strong Horse, full grown, take from him four times the quantity from him,
as you take from a Colt of a year old: but if he be an old Horse and weak of
constitution, twice the quantity. If he have a Pleurisy or any violent
distemper, occasioned by rankness of blood, then you may let him blood, if you
see the distemper threaten his life, three days together, but not suffer him to
bleed excessively at one time. The causes for which Horses ought to bleed, are
either to preserve health by diminishing the superfluity of blood, that burns
or heats the veins; to divert sickness, or cheer the vital spirits, by giving
the blood a free and uncontrouled passage, after which you must moderately
chafe or walk him, to make the blood fill those veins or branches that were
emptied, and to make him bleed the freer; suffer him to drink warm water before
you open the Vein.

If he bleed not freely, it is a sign that he is pursie, fat, or the blood
stagnated, then to oblige him thereto put your finger in his mouth, tickle him,
and cause him to move his Jaws, thereby to press the vein to a more facil
evacuation, and having bled sufficiently, take part of the blood mingled with
salt, and pour it down his throat, with a Drenching-horn, and with the other
part bathe his body whilst it is warm, which is excellent in a consumption,
moist cough, or weakness of the Limbs.

How to know when it is necessary to bleed your Horse.
IF your Horse be rank of blood, his eyes will be red, his veins strut, prick
and itch, especially in his Tail and Main, so that he will be often rubbing
himself, his Hair shedding at unseasonable times, the roots of his Ears pill,
and the place where his headstal is fastened become bare, his Urine will be of
a high and reddish color, his Dung black and hard, or little bumps red and
fiery appearing on his back, faulter at his meat: if the whites of his eyes be
yellow, or the inside of either lip, of the same color, then is it apparent
that he is over charged with blood, or that his blood is watery and full of
evil humors.

Observations on outward sorrances, a description of them, and how they are to
be ordered.
THese grievances called Sorrances have in their particulars diverse names,
according to their being placed in the body, but in general are taken two
manner of ways, viz. either an evil state and composition of the body, which is
to be discerned by the number, quality or sight of the members evilly affected,
diseased, or otherwise it is a loosening or division of any unity, the which is
thus in general divided, and chancing diversely, have diverse particular names,
according as is aforesaid, to the parts of the body, in which they happen: for
if such a loosning or division happen in the bone, then it is properly termed a
Fracture, if in the fleshy part a wound or Ulcer: in the Veins, if it happen,
then it is called a Rupture: If in the sinews, the Cramp or Convulsion: if in
the skin, excoriation. Now the things chiefly to be observed in curing
Sorrances are these.

First, Observe that in burning or cauterizing with a hot Iron or with Oil, or
making an incision with a knife, that it be neither upon a vein or sinew, but
somewhat higher or lower, or on one side.

Secondly, Observe that you never apply to any joint or sinewey part violent
corrosives, as Resalgar, Arsnick, sublimate Mercury, Oil of Vitriol or the like.

Thirdly, That in cauterizing you rather lance with a hot Iron than with a
cold, and that it is better to cauterize than to cut.

Fourthly, observe if the Horse be Sanguin, his blood produces a white thick
matter, but if Colerick, a waterish salt and thin matter, though in quantity
small. If Phlegmatic, great store of watery gelly, as it were; but if
Melanchly, dry Scabs only.

Fifthly, observe as I have before hinted, never to bleed your Horse but upon
the days prescribed, and not then for fancy sake, but in case of some
distemper that requires it, or to prevent a sickness imminent by reason of bad
or boiling blood, which afflicts the Veins.

Sixthly, Observe in all Imposthumes or swelling Sores, called Tumors,
diligently to note the place where the grief began its increase, state and
dangerous consequence, as likewise its declination and ending.

Seventhly, Take notice, that if in the beginning of every swelling Imposthume,
you cannot eradicate it, use Repercussive medicines; if it be not too near the
vitals or some other principal part of the body; if it be, you must forbear the
use of such Medicines or applications, lest thereby you endanger the Horses
life, but rather use softening and suppling medicines, till such time as the
Imposthume, Tumor or swelling be ripe, and then with a Lancet let out the
corruption, and by degrees dry it up with cleansing and healing medicines.

Eighthly, All soft or hard swellings ought to have different applications
according to the part of the body where they happen, or the cause from which
they proceed; as for hard swellings, they are for the most part corrosive, and
the soft unless well regarded, of long continuance. Now to know whether a
swelling has been of long standing, especially in the legs, press it with your
finger, and suddenly taking it away, if you perceive the flesh immediately to
fill the dint, then the swelling is newly taken, but if it stand hollow, then
is the swelling of a long standing, proceeding from some old hurt, and will not
be removed without difficulty.

Ninthly, If Sores matter moderately, then it denotes they cure a pace; but if
the putrefaction increase more and more, it often times denotes inward
rottenness.

Tenthly, Observe that Cauterizing with hot Irons, always straineth things
enlarged, dissolveth gatherings or hardness; dries up mosture, draws to one
place dispersed humors, and helps old griefs, by causing them to ripen
speedily, and avoid the mattery humor they contain; in cauterizing take notice
also that you burn sometimes under the sore to divert the humor, and sometimes
above to defend and keep back the humor: as for burning, it is done two ways,
the one called Actual, and the other Potential. The former being done with hot
Irons, and the latter with hot Oils, Waters, and other Causticks, and
Corrosives, etc.

The five principal things to be observed by a Farrier.
1. TO what diseases Horses are inclinable.

2. From what cause the Internal or External grievance proceeds.

3. By what means the causes do accrue, that create the distemper.

4. The tokens by which any distemper is to be known.

5. How to apply apt remedies for the cure of any distemper.

Without the knowledge of which no Farrier, whatever he pretends, can be a
Crafts-Master in the art of Farrying, which indeed is one of the chiefest and
most useful arts, yet known. Therefore according to my skill, and I hope to the
satisfaction of the studious in this profession, I will endeavor to lay down
the remaining part, in the best, plainest and easiest method imaginable, that
thereby not only the nurslings of Apollo may profit, but the unlearned may draw
from thence such instructions as may turn greatly to their advantage.

How many Diseases are incident to a Horse.
THe Diseases and Grievances, Internal and external, incident to a Horse, are
accounted by most to be no less than sixty, and some reckon more. The names of
which I shall give you, as also what they are, how they happen, and how to know
and distinguish them, and afterward how to cure them.

Of the Sickness called the Antecor.
THis Antecor or heart sickness, is situated near the heart: and is known by a
swelling in the middle of the Breast, and is caused by excessive feeding,
without any considerable exercise to cause digestion, as also by the Horses
being over strained, in immoderate journeying, heating or coursing, or after a
heat by taking cold for want of diligent looking after and good dressing,
corrupting the blood thereby, and destroying the Horse, unless speedy and
effectual Remedies are applied. Now to cure this distemper, after the swelling
appears, whereby you must distinguish it from other distempers: First let the
Horse blood on both sides the neck, taking thence a good quantity, and give him
diapente, or the powder of five simples before mentioned, in ALE or Beer,
adding thereto an ounce of brown Sugar Candy pulverized, and half an ounce of
London Treacle, which will remove the infection from the heart; after which to
allay the swelling, take Barrows-grease, and Basilicon, of each three ounces,
and having well tempered them, anoint it with the said unguent, rubbing it hard
on with your warm hands till the swelling become soft, then with a Lancet open
it, and having let forth the corruption, anoint or wash it with Copperas-water,
and taint it with a taint dipped in green ointment: to make which I shall
hereafter show you.

Of the Attaint upper, and nether, what they are, and how to cure them.
THis grievance is a swelling of the back or master sinew, near the Pastern
joint, and for the most part comes by overreaching, though sometimes by cold
or wet standing. To cure which take of Venice Turpentine one ounce and melt it
well in half a quartern of Brandy, which done anoint the place grieved
therewith three or four times, as hot as may be, or else take Sanguis Draconis
three quarters of an ounce, of Bolearmoniack an ounce, three spoonfuls of Olive
Oil, three ounces of Suet, and an ounce of of Mastick, which being well heated
and tempered together, with it anoint the place grieved, as with the former,
and this will cure the nether strain or attaint; the difference between which
is no other than that the one is above the Fetlock joint, and the other
beneath, both happning in the same place.

Of the Anbury, what it is, and how to cure it.
AN Anbury is a kind of Wen, or spungy wart full of blood, for the most part
growing upon diverse parts of the Horses body: To take of which, tie it hard
with a thread, or three or four strong twisted hairs, till you can pull them no
harder, and leaving it, it will of it self fall off, in five or six day; then
kill the root with powder of Verdigrease, and heal it up with suppling
Ointments; but if it so happen that it be flat, and you cannot tie it up, then
cut it away with your Incision-knife, or burn it with your Cauterizing-Iron;
and to kill the fire, or cure the wound, melt Turpentine and Hog's Grease, and
apply them plaisterwise; but if it happen to grow on any sinewy place, that it
cannot without impairing the sinew be cut or burnt, then eat it of with Oil of
Vitriol, and heal it up with supplements.

Of the Palsy and its Cure.
THe Palsy is occasioned by too much moistness afflicting the Brain, as
likewise a dizziness occasioned by ascending vapors from the stomach, known by
the Horses nodding, wrying his neck, and continual motion of his head, dullness
at one time more than another, and the like: to cure which let him blood in the
neck and Temple veins; anoint his back all over with oil of Petrolium, and with
wet haybands swadle over his neck, even from his ears to his breast, and so
doing for four mornings together; give him every morning a pint of Muscadel,
mixed with three spoonfuls of powder made of these ingredients, viz. three
ounces of Storax, two ounces of Opponax, three ounces of Gentian; of Manna and
Succory, each an ounce and a half, of Myrrh one scruple, and of Long-Pepper two
scruples, all beat together, finely sierced and well mixed.

Of the Vives and what they are, and how to cure them.
THese are diverse flat kernels hanging like clusters of Grapes under the Ears,
creeping or spreading thence into the throat, where they will strangle him by
stopping his wind, if not speedily cured: they are for the most part caused by
cold or pestilential Airs, and differ little from the Murrain. The cure is
Tarr, tried Hog's Grease, Baysalt, Frankincense, of each three ounces melted and
well mixed together, and every morning as hot as he can endure it, applied to
the place grieved, stuck on with Linen rags, and bound fast about his head and
neck, till the inflammation become soft and ripe, at what time open it, with
your knife, and let out the water and infectious corruption: Then heal it up
with an Ointment made of Verdigrease, Hogs-Lard and Turpentine boiled together,
and stirred till cold.

Of Rat-Tailes, a kind of scratches: And the cure for them, etc.
WHen you perceive he is troubled with this grief, which will appear by the
breaking out of knops; Ride him pretty briskly, even till by his heating the
vein swells, then let him blood in the Fetlockvein, on either side suffering
him to bleed indifferent well; washing the sore the day following with warm
water; then clipping away the hair, anoint it with Ointment thus made, viz.
Verdigrease, and green Copperas, of each two ounces, and four ounces of honey
well pounded and mixed together, and by often using it, it will effect the cure.

Of Aches or Numness in the joints; and their cure.
AChes and Numbness in the joints, are mostly occasioned by cold gotten by
excessive labor, or standing unregarded in damp or watery places, to cure which
take Accopium mixed with Mallago, and heating them hot, chafe them into the
place grieved with your hands, and in three or four times so doing it will
remove the pain: or for want of the aforesaid things take Brandy or Aquavitae,
and Pepper finely sifted, and bath the grieved place as hot as may be, and then
bind rags dipped in them, hard to the Ach or Numbness, renewing them as often
as they dry. And Aches come sometimes by Sprains, Hurts, and stretching of the
Nerves or Sinews, it will not be amiss to set down things good in general for
their cure.

Things generally good for Aches, Numbness or the like dispondences in the
joints.
FOr Swellings, Aches, Numbness, or the like proceeding from Heat, Cold or any
other cause, these following things are exceeding good, viz. Oil of Almonds,
Aquavitae, Archangel, Allheal, Balsum, Burgundy-pitch, Burnet, Bay Leaves,
Brandy, Oil of Chamomil, Cumfrey-roots, Chickweed, Mallows, or Marshmallows,
Cowslips, Mullen, Mugwort, Purslain, Peneroyal, Burdocks, Saxafrage,
Gander-Tansie, English-Tobacco, Mother-Time, Flower de Luces, Sow-Fennel,
Turpentine, Ragweed, Accopium, Pepper, Safron, Garlic, Rosemary, Myrrh and
Sciatick-creses, which may be used altogether, or some of them at a time
pounded and mixed according to your discretion.

For the bloody Flux, an excellent Remedy.
THe Bloody Flux is a dangerous distemper proceeding from the overflowing of
the Liver or vessels of blood or pestilential distempers, and is known by
voiding of blood in Dung or Urine: to stay which take an ounce of Saffron, two
ounces of Myrrh, an handful of Southernwood, the like quantity of Rue or
Herbgrace, of Spittlewort and Hissop, each half a handful, and of Cassia an
ounce, the which being bruised small and tempered well, must be with Chalk-dust
and Vinegar made into a past, so that little cakes may be thereof made, the
which dried in the shade, dissolve of them to the quantity of three ounces at a
time in three pints of Milk, from kine fed with barley straw; or for want of
that, dissolve them in a juice called Ptisane, and give it the Horse to drink
morning and evening, and after it a quart of warm water, and it will not only
stay the Efflux of blood, but any pain in the belly or bladder, unless the
stone or gravel.

Barbs, what they are, and how to cure them.
THe Barbs are common to most Horses, and are to be perceived by two Paps under
the Tongue, and seldom do they disadvantage the Horse, unless they are inflamed
with corrupted or putrefied blood, proceeding from crude humors, which corrode
them and constrain them to stretch beyond their usual length, causing them to
become exceeding troublesome to the Horse in his feeding; to ridd him of which,
with sharp Scissers, clip them away, and let the roots bleed a considerable
season, as likewise let him blood on the second bar, and having made a mixture
of Bolearmoniack, Vinegar and Salt, wash his mouth therewith, observing that no
hay nor hay dust stick therein, upon his feeding thereon.

Of the Blood Spavin, what it is, and how to cure it.
THis grief is occasioned by (and indeed is no other than) a soft swelling
growing through the Hough, commonly filled with blood, being largest on the
inner side, by reason of its being fed by the master vein descending to the
Pastern, and has its original from the corrupted blood that settles there, by
hard riding or immoderate, labor: Especially when the Horse is young, and his
Hoof tender, if it harden it is more difficult to be cured than otherwise. To
cure it, having shaved away the hair on either side the swelling, take up the
thigh vein, and bleed it well, tying the vein above the place you strike, which
will extract the blood gathered about the Spavin, after which slit the
swelling, and prick it likewise on either side the Hoof where the Spavin is,
that so the medicine may operate with more ease, and to better effect than
otherwise it would do; and when the corrupted blood and water is well pressed
out, then lay a plaster to the grievance made of Bolearmoniack, and whites of
Eggs, the which, after one days continuance, remove and wash the place with
this bath or supplement, viz. Take Mallows, tops of Nettles, and boil them in
Spring water, till they are soft, after which bath him therewith; whereupon
take Brancha, Ursian, Wax, Oil, Mallow roots, and French-wine, of each a
proportionable quantity, and having boiled them, bind them about the place
grieved with a linen cloth, as hot as he can endure it, the which continue for
the space of three or four days, stroaking it gently with your hand every day,
to cause the corrupt blood to avoid; after which make a plaster of
Stone-pitch, Carana and Brimstone; of the two former an ounce of each, and of
the latter a quarter of an ounce, adding to them half an ounce of Turpentine,
and apply it, being spread upon Leather, to the place grieved, binding it hard,
and permitting it to remain till it fall off of its own accord.

The Bone Spavin, what it is, and how to cure it.
THis grievance is at first a tender gristle, on the inner side of the Hoof,
which by long continuance hardens, till it becomes hard and crusty, sticking
close to the Bone, and is occasioned by extraordinary riding in dirty ways; or
Hereditary from the Dam or Sire, who were infested with the like grievance,
placed in the Hough, to cure which, take up the vein that feeds it; whether
Spavin or Curb, as well below as above, bleeding it sufficiently, and clapping
thereto a plaster of pitch, heated and stuck upon flax: Dulcifying the
sorrance four days after with Oil of Pampillion and fresh butter as hot as he
can endure it, and when the Scar shall be obliterated, apply a medicament,
called Blauco or White made of Iessoe, and suffer it to remain until it is
whole.

Of the Pricking and itching blood, the occasion and cure.
THe Itching all over a Horses body, is either occasioned by inflammation of
the blood, by heating or suddenly taking cold, by which means the salt watery
humors get between the flesh and skin, which occasions the Horse to scrub and
rub himself against Posts, Trees and Bushes, so that if it be not timely
heeded, it will turn to the Mange, and by that means insect such Horses as
accompany him. To prevent which, and cure the former, let him blood in the neck
vein, and rub him all over with a hard brush or hard wisps; then take
Staves-acre, Elecampain roots, Chickweed and leaves of Brambles, of each a
handful, boil them in Cow piss, and add to them the powders of
Sublimate-Mercury dried; Briony, and Red dock roots, Arsnick, Resalgar, with
which wash him all over, but especially in the place you perceive him to rub
most; or for want of these take Hog's Grease, Mans-Urine, Tobacco leaves or
stalks, Brimstone, Verdigrease, Train-Oyl and Alum, with which well concocted
anoint the body of your Horse.

The Botts or Worms, what they are, and how to kill them.
THese Insects breeding in the body of a Horse, are of three sorts,
distinguished by the names of Botts, Truncheons and Mawworms, the first for the
most part breeding in the great guts near the Fundament, the second in the Maw,
out of which if they be not speedily killed, they will eat their passage, to
the destruction of the Horse, the third and last called Mawworms, or plain
worms, breed in the guts as the first. The Botts are small worms with little
tails and great heads. The Truncheons are thick and short, and have hard heads.
The Mawworms are long and slender, of a reddish colourm, any of them being as
long as a man's finger, and these worms are generated from raw gross and
Phlegmatic humors, occasioned by foul feeding. To know whether your Horse be
troubled with them or not, you must observe whether he kick at his belly with
his feet when he stands still, turns his head toward his tail, looking upon
his body, Groans, Wallows, Frisks his tail often, or forsakes his meat, all
which are signs of worms in his body: To cure which, take a quart of New-milk,
four ounces of honey, which being made warm, give it him fasting in the morning,
and suffer him to fast after it two hours, then dissolve an ounce of black soap
in a pint of beer and give it him, and an hour after ride him hard, and the
worms will either come away alive, or dye in his body; or for want of these
take Savin stamped to the quantity of a handful, and put it in a quart of Beer
or a quart of Brine, and it will destroy them.

Of bunches, Warts, Knots and Wens; Cramp or Inflammation, and their cure.
THese grievances come diverse ways, as by foul feeding, Eating unwholesome meat,
Hard riding, too much labor, Bruises or the like, which putrefie the blood,
and cause it to turn into evil humors: To cure which take the powder of
Diapente, mix it with Linseed or Olve Oil, and making it into an Ointment,
apply it to the place grieved, especially for the Cramp, or Inflammation.
Again, take Whitewine, Oil and Tarr, of each a considerable quantity, mingle
them together; and apply them hot, and apply them plaisterwise to the Knots and
Warts, especially if on the joints, and the cure in six or seven days will be
effected. Again, take Mustardseed, Baysalt and Hog's Grease, mix them together,
adding to them half a pint of Wine Vinegar, and it will sink the Wens or
Bunches. Again, take Figgs, the roots of Fern, and Rochet, mingle them with
Hogs grease and Vinegar, and apply them plaisterwise, for any of the aforesaid
Sorrances: or lastly take an ounce of Galbanum, two ounces of Pitch, Lime an
ounce, Bitumen three quarters of an ounce, Wax the like quantity, all which
being well mixed and heated over a fire, apply them to the Sorrance
plaisterwise.

A Remedy for the Windeolick, or Stone.
TAke of Whitewine a quart, four ounces of Fenegreek, of Bayberies and Pepper
four ounces, of Ginger an ounce, Water Cresses a handful, and the like quantity
of Red-Sage, one pound of Sene-green, and a handful of Mint, all which being
well bruised and mixed together, boil them, and afterward straining them, add
two ounces of Honey, and give the liquor to your Horse to drink: or for want of
these things take Cloves, Pepper, Cinnamon, of each of them an ounce beaten or
ground into fine powder, and putting them into a quart of Cannary, suffer it to
boil a while upon a gentle fire, then adding to it one spoonful of Honey, give
it the Horse bloodwarm; Clothing him up, and storing him with clean Litter, in
which having stood or layn the space of four hours, give him a knop of Hay, and
after the fifth hour a Mash, or a good draught of white water.

Of bloodshot Eyes, and other diseases or impediments of the sight, their cause
and cure.
THis prejudice of sight happens (as likewise all other distempers of the Eyes)
through two causes, viz, either internal or external, the internal cause
proceeds from cold rhumes or fiery salt humors that fall upon the sight; and
the external cause from a blow, hurt by Lightening, fire or the like. To cure
which, take these directions. To clear and take away the bloodshot, or settling
of blood in the Eyes, takes juice of Sowthistle, by some called our Ladys
thistle, and spirit it into his eyes once or twice a day, for diverse days
together; if your Horse be dimsighted, or have a thin Film over his eyes, take
the juice of Cabbage or Colewortstalks, boil it with a small quantity of honey,
and spirt it into his eyes, and in so doing six or seven times, it will consume
the Film and clear the sight; nay, take away the Canker in the Eye, if it be
not too far gone. To take away the Pin and Web in the Eye, spirt into it the
juice of Celendine, the which is likewise exceeding good to clear the sight, as
likewise does the juice of ordinary Centaury: if your Horse be troubled with
Moon Eyes, put into them Alehoof or ground Ivy juice, and it will restore him
to a perfect sight. If your Horse be troubled with salt fiery humors or Rhumes
in his Eyes, wash them with the juice of Houseleek, and by so doing often, it
will allay the heat and drive back the Rhume; the juices of Germander and
Eyebright, consume the Pin and Web in the Eyes, and greatly restore the sight.
Alehoof, Daisie flowers and Snap-dragons being bruised and strained with a
little Rose Water and fine Sugar, dissolved in the juice cure all manner of
Itching, Smarting, Inflammation, Spots, Webs and the like, restoring the sight
when almost lost. The juice of Tree Ivy leaves, after they have been
sufficiently steeped in water eases presently; and in process of time takes
away all smarting and pain of the eyes. The juice of Endive clears the sight,
and so does the distilled water of Groundsel, and the juice of Melliot with
many other Herbs in general: but for brevities sake waving them, I shall now
come to the particulars, more narrowly observing the cures for most, of all the
Eye distempers.

To preserve the sight, a good expedient.
TAke Maidenhair, Enface, Endive, White Rose Leaves, Smallage, Hillwort,
Succory, red Fennel and Cellandine, of each half a quarter of a pound, wash
them clean, and steep them well in Whitewine, after which distill them, and the
first water will be like Gold, the second like Silver, and the third like Balm,
all which frequently one after another will wonderfully preserve his sight, and
restore sight when almost lost.

How to take off the Pin and Web, with ease and safety.
TAke the powder of White-copperas finely sifted half an ounce, and the like
quantity of White Sugarcandy pulverised and siersed, and with a quill blow into
the eye grieved, every morning, as much as will lie upon a groat, till you see
the Pin and web begin to wast, at what time use it every second day, and within
a while after, every third day, and in so continuing, it will in twenty days
take it clean away.

An approved Receipt for taking away a Film or Skin that covers the sight, etc.
TAke the powder of Alabaster, grind it to powder, sift it well, and blow it
into his eyes, morning and evening, and it will eat off the skin: or for want
of that take Bay salt and briuse it in a Mortar or between two Trenchers, and
make it up with sweet butter into pellets as big as Pistol Bullets, one of
which put into the eye grieved, and close the lid upon it, holding it close
with your hand till it be melted, and in so doing for ten days successively the
Film will disappear.

To take away the Rhume in a Horses Eyes and clear the sight; an approved
Receipt.
TAke butter well salted and mix with it the juice of Houseleek and making it
into pellets, put it into the Horses Ear, on the contrary side, and it will
draw back the Rhume and cause the effects to cease, but you must hold, tie or
sow up his Ear, or he will shake it out.

To cure swollen Eyes.
IF the Eyelids of a Horse are swelled extraordinarily, so that the inside
turn outward, you need do no more (unless his eyes are perished, or afflicted
with Rhume) than muffle him up close and keep him warm, anointing the place
grieved once or twice a day with Rose water, in which Sugarcandy and honey have
been dissolved, and the swelling will abate: after which let him blood in the
Temples, but by no means clip the bladders) if any happen on his eyelids) but
suffer them to fall off of themselves.

To stay the Rhume in a Horses Eyes, a most excellent Receipt.
BEat Bolarmoniack into powder, and blow it with a quill into your Horses eyes
morning and evening, but if he refuse to suffer it, then mixing it with fresh
butter and the powder of White Sugarcandy, make it into pellets, and put it
into his eyes morning and evening, holding the lids fast till it is dissolved,
the which doing five or six days will drive back the Rhume.

A Second approved Remedy for taking away the skin or white Film from the Eyes.
BUrn to ashes the roots of black Sallow, adding to them the powder of White
Sugarcandy and grated Ginger, both well siersed, and blow them well mixed
together into your Horses eyes morning and evening.

A Particular Receipt for Moon Eyes, Dim sight, or Eyes afflicted with any pain.
HEat Lapis Calaminaris red hot, and afterward quench it in Plantain water or
Whitewine, the which, after you have in the same manner done eight or nine
times, bruise into powder, and putting it again into the water or wine it was
quenched in, add to it half a dram of Aloes, and a quarter of an ounce of
Camphire reduced into powder, which water drop often into his eyes, and
therewith wash his eyelids.

A second particular receipt for the cure of soreness in the Eyes, and taking
away the Pin, Web, or any infirmity happening to the Eyes by Bruise, Brush, or
the like.
ROast a Pullets Egg new laid till it become hard, then cutting it in sunder
long ways, take out the yolk, and filling the empty place with white Vitriol
beaten into powder, close the shells together, binding them about with a paper,
and again put them into hot embers, till the Vitriol be dissolved, then putting
them into a Mortar, beat and bruise them to mash, then strain what remains
liquid through a fine cloth, and with it wash the Eyes of your Horse twice a
day; or instead of Vitriol, you may use the powder of Myrrh, hang the Egg up,
and suffering it to drop by degrees, both of which being exceeding good and
most approved remedies for the grievances aforesaid.

An excellent receipt for taking away any spot in a Horses Eye.
HAving roasted an Egg, into which you have put fine Ginger and Salt, and it by
the fire made exceeding hard, beat into powder, at what time having washed the
Horses Eyes with eybright water, or the juice of Alehoof, otherwise called
Ground Ivy, with a quill blow into the eye grieved, as much of the powder as
will lie upon a two pence, and in so doing five or six times, the spot will
vanish.

To take away a Wart on the inside or edge of a Horses Eylid, etc.
MIx burnt Alum, and unburnt Copperas beaten into fine powder, and well
sierced, which apply to the head of the Wart, and it will cause it to fall away.

For the clearing and restoring foul or sore eyes, when the sight is in most
danger, an excellent cure.
MElt Pitch, Rosin, Mastick and Tachamahaca, of each two ounces, then dipping
Flax or fine Wool into it, lay two parcels plaisterwise to the breadth of half
a Crown on either Temple, then with a round Iron upon his cheek bone under his
eyes burn three or four holes, suppleing them then with sweet butter, after
which having washed a good handful of Cellendine in Whitewine, bruise and
strain it, adding to the juice a third proportion of Woman's Milk, sweetened with
white Sugarcandy, well pulverized and sierced, and with it Morning and Evening,
wash and cleanse his Eyes, and the putrefaction will not only cease to flow,
but the sight be wonderfully restored.

The cause of a Horses often bleeding at the Nose, and how to prevent it or
stay it, etc.
AMongst young Horses, bleeding at the Nose happens by the large quantity of
blood they contain, which swells and frets the veins that end in that place,
till it either open them, or force its passage by breaking them, which proceeds
from a corroding humor in the blood, which pierces or eats the vein in the
thinnest place. It is likewise occasioned by a stroke, cut, or any think
forcibly thrust up the Nostrils, too much straining and the like: To prevent
which, before it happens, or stay it when it flows. To prevent bleeding at the
Nose, often burn Frankincense, or Assa fetida under his Nose in a Chafingdish,
and squirt up his Nostrils juice of Houseleek, or juice of Garlic: To stay
bleeding, the juice of young Nettles, sweetened with Loaf-sugar, and squirted up
his nostrils, is a sure expedient; or if that fail, take a hank or skien of
black thread, in a pair of Tongues, when lighting it at the lower end, to
prevent its flaming too fast, make it dampish with Whitewine Vinegar, holding
the burning thread under his Nostrils, so that he may conveniently receive the
smoke into them, and it will infallibly stay the efflux of blood: New Horsedung
tempered with whitewine Vinegar and chalk beaten small, and applied to the
nostrils will stench the bleeding, as likewise bleeding at any other place
occasioned by a wound or so, and in case you have not the aforesaid things in a
readiness, burning of silk, the of juice Corianderseed, Hogs dung, a new cut
Turf, juice of Sage, or Hysop, the young shoots of green Hawthorn bruised, or
the blood of a Horse dried, and beaten to powder, blown up the nostrils, or
laid upon the wound, are all good to stay bleeding, as likewise are the juices
of Parsley, Periwinkle; the Coame of a Smiths forge laid to the wound, or mixed
with Vinegar, spirted up the nostrils, the herb called Shepherds Pouch,
distilled into a water, and given him to drink fasting in the morning, the
which water stays internal bleeding, whether gotten by a bruise or coming
naturally.

Diverse other things there are that are excellent against bleeding, as the
powder of the stone Emachile blown up into the nostrils, or applied to any
broken vein or wound.

The roots of Rubarb dried, and pulverised, the powder blown into the nostrils
of the Horse; and lastly Bettany bruised with Baysalt, and mixed with Vinegar
put into the nostrils, cause the veins to cease from further efflux.

Of the Botch in the Groyne, and how to cure it.
THis Sorrance proceeds from humors ingendered by hard labor, which
assembling in the Groyne, occasion the Botch, as likewise in diverse other parts
and places of the Horses body, known by the swelling of the hinder thighs,
Cambrils, and knots in the flesh, the which, if upon feeling, they prove round
and hard, will come to a head, and become troublesome to the Horse: Therefore
to cure them you must take Turpentine, Honey and Wheat Flour, of each a pound,
and with them make a stiff plaster, renewing it daily till the sorrance either
break or become soft, abounding with corruption: if it do not break, lance it,
that so the matter may avoid; then take a linen ragg, and having dipped it in
Turpentine and Hog's Grease molten, taint it with the said ragg, and so renew it
daily, till the poisonous matter is quite voided: Then heal it up with
Beeswax, and Occicrocium melted, and laid plaisterwise, anointing it with
ointment of Tobacco.

A second remedy for the Botch in the Groine, or imposthumation.
THe swelling perceived, according to the aforesaid symptoms; take a piece of
Allomed Leather, and spread thereon a ball of Shoomakers wax, applying it
plaisterwise to the grievance, till it break or grow soft: if it break not, you
must lance it, and extract the corruption, washing it daily with water, wherein
a considerable quantity of Roach Alum has been dissolved, and dipping a ragg
in Egyptiacum, an ointment so called, suffer it so to continue till it become
whole.

Of Blisters, and their cure.
BListers are risings between the flesh and the skin, occasioned by watery hot
humors, or from any Burn, Scald, or chafing: to take them away, rub them in a
Sunshiny day, till they break or bleed, after which take the roots of Ivy,
bruise them well, and mix them with Tarr, Alum and Brimstone, boil them
together, and spread them plaisterwise upon the grieved place, and it will cure
it.

The Canker, its cause and cure.
THis is a loathsome and dangerous Sorrance, proceeding from corrupt blood or
vicious humors, caused by unwholesome or immoderate feeding, and many times by
Salt and fiery humors, coming of extraordinary cold, rendering the Horses
breath unsavory. This Canker fretteth and gnaweth the flesh, still incroaching,
so that if it happen on the Tongue, as sometimes it does, it will eat it in
sunder. If upon the nose, it will eat through the Gristle: It Is known by the
rawness and often bleeding of the place where it happens, and sometimes by a
white scurse growing over it. The cure take as follows.

For the Canker in the Mouth or Nose, take the quantity of a walnut of
Roach-allum, the like quantity of Bay Salt, a spoonful of English Honey, Rue,
red Sage, Bramble leaves, and Ribwort, of each half a handful, boil them in
whitewine, so much as will suffice, till a quarter is consumed, then strain and
press them well, and with the liquid part wash the mouth or place grieved, in
whatsoever part of the body, with a clout fastened to a stick, etc. doing so
twice a day or oftener, if time will permit, and it will both stay and kill the
Canker.

Of Clefts and Cracks in the Heels, and their cure.
THese Sorrances are occasioned diverse ways, as by excessive riding,
extraordinary labor, heats, surfeits or the like, as also through the
indiscretion of the keeper by washing him, when he is hot, or suffering him to
cool suddenly, which corrupting the blood, obliges the gross humors to
descend and settle in the heels, causing them to be chopped, broken, and become
raw, mattery, and extremely offensive to the Horse, especially if he travail
upon rough ground, or in wet ways: To cure which, cut away the hair, rub off
the scabs with Chamber-ly, as likewise the blood that follows; and keeping him
dry, take flower of Brimstone mixed with sweet butter, and anoint the place
grieved therewith, once or twice a day, binding his feet close, to keep out the
air or dust: If this should fail to effect the cure, as past doubt it will not;
then take Soot, Salt and unsleckedlime, of each a handful, boil them in
Whitewine Vinegar till they become thick, then add to them Hogs-lard, and work
them into an Ointment, and anoint his Sorrance therewith until its healed,
which will be in a short time effected.

The cause of the swelling in the Cods and Stones, with directions to assuage
the same.
THese swellings are sometimes occasioned by the stinging of venomous insects,
other times by bruises received by fighting with other Horses, overstraining,
corruption of blood, settling, too much plenty of Seed, or after sickness,
surfeiting by cold and the like: To cure which, take Oil of Turpentine,
Marshmallows, Groundsil and Cammomile, stamping the three latter small, and
boiling the juice thereof with the former; and with it as warm as he can well
endure it, anoint his Cods morning and evening, and the swelling will abate.

The Cord, a grievance so called, what it is, and how to remedy it.
THis cord is a sinew in the forelegs, which ascends from the sheckle vein to
the gristle in the nose, between the lip, a beans length in breadth, or two
strings like threads fastened above the knee, and passing through the body to
the nostrils subjecting to stumble, and pitch upon his nose, which amongst
young Horses is frequent. This grievance may be known by the stiff going of the
Horse, and stumbling without any visible Sorrance: to rid him of which, slit
him upon the tip of the nose, and with your Cornet take up the two great
sinews, which you shall perceive, and cut them in sunder, healing them up with
ointment of Earth worms, or Marshmallows, and he will not for the future be
subject to stumble; and indeed it is necessary that most young Horses be so
served.

Another in the like case to be observed, is, when to prevent stumbling, you
slit the tip of some Horses noses, between the nostrils, you will find a white
flat gristle, which being taken up; twist till you perceive him draw his
hinderlegs close in a manner to his forelegs, then with a sharp knife cut of
the gristle and heal up the Incision with green ointment.

The Colic, its cause and cure.
THe Colic is occasioned by wind in the bowels, and from thence it takes its
name of Wind Colic, causing terrible pains, wringings and gripings, which you
may perceive by the Horses often striking at his belly with his hinder feet, as
also by his lying down, tumbling, beating with his feet, and loathing or
forsaking his meat: To cure which, take a quart of Whitewine, four ounces of
Fenegreek seed, Bay berries and Pepper, of each four ounces, of Grains and
Ginger, each an ounce, Water Cresses, Sage, Senegreen and Mint, of each a
handful; bruise the herbs, and beat the spices small in a Mortar, and having
well boiled them in the wine, strain them well, and adding two spoonfuls of
Honey, or so much as will sweeten the liquor, give it him pretty warm, and so
doing three mornings and evenings will expel the wind, and make the pain to
cease.

The Colt Evil, its cause and cure.
THis distemper is as well subject to a Horse, as a Gelding, and to the Horse
it happens, through the extraordinary swelling of the Yard, occasioned by too
much windiness in the Sinews, Arteries, or pipe of the Yard, which causes the
Yard to swell extraordinarily, or too much rankness of seed, and to a Gelding
for defect of natural heat, to expel the seed generated; to prevent which take
the juice of Rhue, mixed with Honey, boiled in Hog's Grease, with Bay leaves, and
powder of Fenegreek made into an ointment, and with it as warm as may be anoint
the sheath. If this fail, twice, thrice, or four times using, take the leaves
of Bettony, powder of the herb Anit, and stamping them small, mix with them
Whitewine, and anoint or lay them plaisterwise to the place grieved, having
first washed it clean with Vinegar, made warm over a gentle fire, as likewise
his Cods and Yard; and soon after ride him into deep water, moving him to and
fro to remove the heat of the Genitals, till the swelling is abated; or if you
cannot get these things, then put him to a Mare, and afterward bathe his Cods
and Yard with juice of Housleek, Senegreen, or the water wherein Rhue holm has
been boiled; but if through the hardness of the swelling the making water prove
impossible, or exceeding difficult, give him a Drench made of new Ale, and
Black Soap, and wash his Cods with butter and Vinegar made warm, or the juice
of Hemlock, making a plaster of Bean flower and Bolearmoniack tempered with
Vinegar, or for want of them, with wine lees, stamped Housleek and Bran, and
apply it to his Cods and Sheath.

Consumptions in a Horse, the cause and cure.
OF Consumptions there are two kinds, the one a dry kind of a Malady, and the
other a Consumption of the Flesh; the former being occasioned by violent heats
and colds, with excess of vicious corroding humors, descending from the head,
and falling upon the Lungs, known at first by a thin matter flowing from the
nose, which by degrees becomes gross and thick, the which if not prevented will
cause a leanness and decay of flesh, making his belly become gaunt and clung,
as if he was famished; forbidding the hair to fall off in due season, and
obliging him to continue a husking wheesing cough, being a distemper difficult
to cure, if not taken in time. The latter is a more particular Consumption and
wasting of the flesh, caused either by violent heats, or immoderate labor;
watering your Horse when he is hot, or negligence in the keeper, in letting him
stand after a journey wet and dirty: To cure which, take Horehound,
Wood-bettony, Juniper berries, Leeks, Frankincense, Bayberries, Brank-ursin,
Chian, Dandelion, of each a like quantity, bruise them well, and boil them in a
quart of Cannary till a fourth part be consumed, then strain and press them
well, adding to the liquid decoction half a pint of Oil Olive, and pour it down
his throat with a Drenching-horn, for six days morning and evening; or if the
season permit, you may give him a scouring, and put him to grass, and before
you put him forth, give him this Mash made of the broth of a Sheepshead boiled,
wool and all, and in it half a pound of clarified honey; or for want of it
Loaf-Sugar, Cinnamon, Conserve of Roses, Barberries, and conserved Cherries, of
each an ounce, and although he be abroad, yet visiting him once a day, give him
this drink, and afterward chase him to and fro for the space of half an hour,
but not too hard, and give him water to drink, wherein some Wheatflower or fine
Bran has been scattered: and if you perceive he mend not upon this, then taking
him up again, give him often change of wholesome meats, Mashes and warm waters,
and as you see occasion, Cordial powder, or Cordial balls, and in a short time,
unless the distemper have too much consumed him, he will return to his pristine
strength and vigor.

The Cold or Poze in a Horses Head, its cause and cure.
THis infirmity proceeds from gross humors and cold distillations, according
to the proportion of cold taken, or moisture of the Brain: if the cold be
great, upon search you will find great kernels under his chaule, about the root
of his Tongue; but if new taken and small, then little kernels. It Is a sign
likewise that his cold is of no long continuance, if he rattle in the head, his
eyes and nose venting thin mattery humors. This cold may be likewise perceived
by his holding down his head in the Manger, his water when he drinks running
out at the nose, or between his teeth, he chews slimy or nauseous stuff; but if
you perceive him void foul stinking and thick matter out of his nostrils, and
cough strongly, then signifies it that the cold, if not turned, is turning to
the Glaunders, or consumption of the Lungs: To cure it either new or old then,
take these directions.

Take Moss growing upon a felled Oak, to the quantity of a handful, root of
Elecampanum, green and sliced, and a stick of green Liquorish, boil them in
three pints of red Cows milk, till the liquor be reduced to a pint and a half,
to which add a quarter of a pound of sweet butter, an ounce of Treacle, and
four or five figgs pared and cut small, then suffering it to be lukewarm, give
it him in a Drenching horn: And this medicine you may likewise give him for the
Stavers, Frenzy, Bloody Flux, Consumption of the Lungs, Shortness of Breath,
Glaunders, or any cold or cough, wet or dry; and for want of milk, you may boil
them in new ALE, but milk is better: give it him every Morning fasting for a
week together.

Another excellent remedy to the same effect.
TAke Brimstone flower an ounce, sweet butter two ounces, temper them together
very well, then with them anoint the butt ends of two Goose wings, and thrust
them up his nostrils, fastening them in with packthred bound over his pole, and
thereupon riding him gently, he will snort, and avoid an extraordinary quantity
of matter and filth that offends his head, but after you have taken them out,
be sure you keep him warm in your Stable, and feed him with warm Mashes,
burning under his nose in a chafingdish a little Storax, thus you may do to a
Horse that is designed for Racing, or Hunting, when you dare not give him any
purgation or internal Drench, by reason of the days near approach.

For a Cold newly taken, a most excellent remedy.
MAke a little hole in the crown of a new-laid Hen-egg, at which extract the
white and yolk, filling the concavity with fresh butter and Tarr, of each a
like quantity, causing your Horse morning and evening to swallow it in the
shell, by drawing forth his Tongue, giving him after it some warm Ale, wherein
Rosemary has been boiled, and in so doing three days successively the cold will
vanish; for if this cure it not, then is it of long continuance: To cure which,
take the following medicine.

For a long taken Cold, Cough, Shortness of Breath or Pursiveness, an excellent
remedy.
HAving dried Elecampain roots, beat them into powder, to the quantity of two
ounces, adding to them an ounce of Anniseeds bruised, and the like weight of
Liquorish and Sugarcandy pulverized, when putting to them half a quartern of
the Syrup of Colts-feet, temper them with three or four ounces of fresh butter,
making the ingredients up into balls, and give him three of them as big as
Pigeons Eggs fasting, riding him afterward for half an hour, letting him come
warm into the stable, and clothing him well, giving him Oats washed in hot
Ale, and no cold water for four hours after: or for want of this, you may give
him conserve of Elecampain roots, thus made, viz. Take the roots, and candy
them with sugar, keeping them from all moisture, and so having done, take an
ounce thereof, and add to it, being broken small, two ounces of Syrup of
Coltsfoot, and as much fine sugar as will make it into a conserve, then
dissolving it in a pint of new Mallago, give it warm to your Horse, ordering
him after it as aforesaid.

If your Horse be troubled with a stopping in his head, voiding thereby filthy
matter, take this following advice.
HAving mingled Coltsfoot with Auripigmentum, both of which pulverized, not
exceeding four drams, take as much Turpentine as will make them into paste,
which done lay them on a Chafingdish of coals in small pieces, covering them
with a Tunnel, and by putting the small end into the nostrils of your Horse,
suffer the smoke to ascend, holding his head to it, and in so doing five or six
times the congealed matter will dissolve and come away.

For the Glaunders an excellent Remedy.
TAke the leaves of a Box-tree green, bruise them and add an ounce of Liquorish
powder, the like quantity of Anniseeds bruised, steep them well in Beer or Ale,
to the quantity of a pint and a half, then take four ounces of Treacle, and
four ounces of Olive Oil, the which all mixed and well heated, give him the
whole dose in a Drenching-horn; and thereupon ride him moderately, and at his
return, put on his clothes, give him a warm Mash, and keep the Stable close,
and in so doing three mornings together, the Horse will be rendered well as at
first.

Costiveness, the cause and cure.
THis grievance happens when a Horse without great pain cannot void his dung,
proceeding sometimes from excess of Provender, at other times from too much
feeding upon dry meat, which dries up the moisture of his body, as Beans,
Tares, Pease and such like; not but that they are wholesome and convenient, but
that by excessive feeding on them, the Horses body is over heated, which drying
his Excrements, shuts up the Office of nature, and sometimes this grievance
happens by tedious fasting; and the Horse being dyeted for Hunting, or Racing;
to remedy which, take a piece of Castle soap, to the weight of two ounces,
dissolve it in Whitewine on the fire, after which, having bruised an ounce of
Hempseed, put it into the liquor, sweetning it with an ounce of Brown
Sugarcandy, and give it him as hot as he can endure it, after which, walk him
up and down for the space of an hour, and then bringing him into the stable; if
you find him sick, let him lie down, and pour down his throat a pint of warm
milk, feeding him as at other times, and his bowels will be loosened, and his
Excrements come away.

Another to help and cure this grievance.
Boil a handful of Mallows in running water, to the quantity of a quart, to
which add half a pint of Olive Oil, and half a pound of Butter, an ounce of
Benedicta Laxativa, and making thereof a Glister, force it warm up his
Fundament, holding his Tail close to it, to keep it in for the space of half an
hour, then giving him a sweet Mash, leave it to work of it self.

Of the Cramp, or Convulsion in the Nerves or sinews of a Horse, its cause and
cure.
THis Malady proceeds from the sinew cut, some wound in the Horse, or too
sudden cooling after an extraordinary heat, too much straining, or excessive
purging, and is known by the forcible contraction of the Sinews, Veins and
Muscles, insomuch that the whole strength of man is not many times capable of
bending the joint; this grief seizes, and by his being lame and well in a
moment. There is also another Malady proceeding from cold, loss of blood,
windiness in the veins, or numbness of the sinews differing from the first in
pace only, as having its seat and operation in the Back, Reins, and neck of a
Horse, known by the distortion or wryness of his neck, hollowness of his eyes,
dryness and clamminess of his mouth, rising of his back in the middle and the
like. To cure which, take Primrose leaves, Chamomile, Cowslip leaves, Crowfeet,
Mallows, Fennel and Rosemary leaves, with the stalks of Pimpernel, steeped and
boiled in spring water for a considerable space, then once or twice a day bath
him with the liquor hot all over, and apply the herbs to the grieved places,
binding them on with Hay-bands or woollen clothes, anointing them first with
Oil of spike mixed with Petrolium and Nerve Oil.

The Camery or Frounce, what it is, together with its cause and cure.
THis Sorrance is composed of small Warts or Pimples arising in the Palate of
the Horses mouth, being sore and soft, and sometimes seen upon his Lip and
Tongue, occasioned by eating of Hay, on which or amongst which any vermin have
dunged or pissed; by licking up any venomous Worm or herb, many times by
feeding upon Hay, amongst which are sharp Thistles or seeds, which fret and
fester the tender parts of the mouth: The cure is to let the Horse blood under
the Tongue in the two great veins, washing the place grieved with Bay salt and
Roch-Alum, dissolved in Vinegar; or with a hot Iron you may burn them on the
head, if you perceive the former things cure them not presently, and afterward
rub them with Ale and Salt.

Of Casting, the cause and cure, etc.
THe cause of a Horses casting his drink out of his mouth proceeds from the
effects of a cold stomach, or cold contracted in the head, ingendering thick
phlegm or slimy humor, which lapping about the root of the Tongue, hinders its
office, as also straitning the passage of the stomach: To cure which, take a
quart of Malmsie, or Canary, put into it an ounce of Cinnamon bruised or beaten
into powder, an ounce of Cloves, and the like quantity of Anniseeds, and give
them him at twice pretty warm, anointing his Temples, Breast, and under his
chaps with Spike Oil, Oil of Cyprus, and Oil of Pepper mingled together,
smoking his nostrils with Gum Ellumi.

Crest fallen, what it is, and how to cure it.
THis deformity is when the flesh whereon the Main grows stands not
upright, but declineth to the right or the left, and for the most part
proceeds from evil keeping, and want of convenient Provender, or when by
reason of internal sickness, a well fleshed Horse falls away. To raise the
Crest when fallen, take it in your hands and setting it upright, permit one
that stands by to pull abroad the bottom of it, upon which with a hot Iron sear
the skin that hangs loose on either side, then clip it away and sow the skin,
pulling it close with silk, as near as you can to the color of the Horse,
starching up the Crest on both sides, with Shomakers wax, spread upon stiff
Leather, anoint the places you have made sore with Turpentine, Honey, and
Beeswax, tempered into an ointment, or with a piece of grease, but, if the
Crest be not extremely fallen, good keeping and looking to will cause it to
rise of it self without any application.

Crick in the Neck, its cause and remedy.
THe Crick in the Neck is a kind of a convulsion in the nerves, hindering the
Horse from turning his neck at pleasure, or taking his meat from the ground,
but with great trouble, and is occasioned by over much heating, and thereon
taking sudden colds, or by cold humors falling into the neck from the head: To
remedy which, take a hot Iron, and pierce the skin, and part of the flesh in
diverse places, still observing not to touch any sinew, and in the Orifices, put
Horse hair in the nature of Rowels, anointing them with Hogs Lard, suffering
them though with daily moving to keep open the holes, to remain there for the
space of thirteen or fourteen days, or if you think not good to serve your
Horse as aforesaid, then rub his neck all over with Oil of Spike, and Oil of
Peter, clothing him exceeding warm, and next to his neck lay Litter, that
smoaks with the heat of his dung and Urine.

Of the Canker in the Eye, its cause and cure.
THis Sorrance is caused by corrupt and rank blood, descending from the head,
which settling in the corner of the Eye next the nose, creates a worm with a
black head, like a Pismire, so that if you do not timely destroy it, it will
eat into the head of your Horse and destroy him; now to know whether he be
afflicted with this Malady, is to observe whether his eyelid be knopped or
pimpled within and without, or whether his eye be full of corrupt matter, the
which symptoms or any of them appearing, take burnt Alum and fresh butter,
bruising the Alum into powder, and mixing it with butter, put it into his eye
as near as you can upon the head of the worm, and by closing the eyelid, hold
it in tell it is dissolved, and in so doing three or four times, it will kill it
and render the eye sound, especially, if you after the opening it spirt
Lime-juice, and the juice of Houseleek into it.

Of the Dropsy in a Horse, whence it proceeds, and how to cure it.
THe Dropsy is known by the swelling of the body, through the abundance of
water that gets between the skin and flesh, when as the Buttocks and Flank will
appear withered and dried, the bones plainly appearing, and if you press any of
the swollen part, the dints will plainly appear, for as much as the flesh
wanting natural heat, cannot immediately return to its place; this distemper
makes him heavy, dull, and evil colored, proceeding mostly from evil
nourishment, and want of good digestion which concocteth Melancholy and vicious
humors, sometimes it proceeds from the Liver, where the blood by reason of
failure of heat, is turned into watery humors. This distemper perceived, let
him blood, and then rubbing his body well with warm clothes, to dissolve the
humors congealed, boil a Gallon of Ale, often scumming it; put into it the
tender tops and leaves of wormwood, and Rue, or Herbegrace, of each a handful,
Bramble leaves, Mayweed and Smallage of each a like quantity, boil the Ale till
three parts is consumed, then dissolve into it three ounces of London-Treacle,
adding thereto long Pepper beaten, and Granes, of each an ounce, stir them well
in the concoction, and give it the Horse six mornings together bloodwarm,
anointing his body with Train or Neatsfoot Oil, and if the weather be
seasonable after you have fed him a while with Mashes and white water, turn him
to grass, and the water will fume away.

Chops, Rifs, and Clifts in the Palate of the mouth, how they are caused, and
how to cure them.
THese Sorrances are occasioned by the Horses eating hard and dry Hay full of
Thistles and prickly things, or foul Provender, full of sharp seeds, which
grate of and fester the tender part of the mouth: To cure which, take water and
salt, washing the rough of the Horses mouth till it bleed, then with Alum and
Honey indifferent warm, anoint it, and in so doing for a week together every
morning, it will cure it, if in the mean while, and for a considerable time
after, you give him soft meat as Bran, Grass, Mashes, and soft Hay.

The Bony Excretion, its cause and cure.
THis Malady is frequently caused by corrosives, laid to the wounds that happen
near the bone, which corrosives piercing, by their sharp and operating quality,
the bone, many times, to the Marrow, and causes the excretion to grow upon it,
although the wound is cured, which in the Farriers is a great defect; for he
ought to be very wary in burning the flesh with hot Oils or other applications
too near the bone or any sinew, sometimes also this Malady happens through the
gauling and fretting of a fetlock: To cure it, upon the top of the excretion
make a slit a quarter of an inch, then raising with your cornet the skin from
the flesh, hollow it round about the place grieved, into which hollowness
thrust Lint, dipped in the Oil of Origanum, and upon it lay a plaster of
Paracelsus, suffering it to continue till it rot, and nature cast out both the
Lint and Core; or opening it, if you lay roasted Elecampain roots to it, it
will take away the grievance.

Kibed heals, the cause and cure.
THis Sorrance is known by a Scab, breeding somewhat above the under joint
overthwart the Fettlock, and is diverse ways occasioned, as by your Horses
running in cold ground, after a hard journey, immoderate labor, or neglect of
the Keeper in not cleansing his feet and legs of the dirt contracted in the
joints, which causes the legs to sweell, especially in winter when the ways
are deep: To cure this, take the tender tops of Elder buds, Blackberry
bush-buds, ere they bloom, boil them in the wort of new Ale, adding thereto the
whites of two new laid Eggs, and half an ounce of Alum, with which wash the
place grieved morning and evening.

If this should fail, take tried Hog's Grease two ounces, the like quantity of
Gunpowder, and mixing them well together, daily anoint the place grieved, for
the space of six days, and it will effect the cure, if you be careful to keep
your Horses feet and legs from Rain or other wet.

Kernels under the Chaul, the cause and cure.
THis grievance incident to Horses, is occasioned by heats and colds, mostly
taken by the neglect of those that have the Horse in charge, the which if not
timely prevented turns to the Glaunders: To cure it, give your Horse a
convenient scouring, the dose being made of Alloes, fresh butter, and the
powder of Agarick, giving him at once a ball thereof as big as a Pigeons Egg,
and afterward trot or amble him a mile or two, and then bringing him to his
Stable, cloth him and keep him warm, permitting him to fast two or three
hours, at the expiration of which give him a knop of Hay, or if you can procure
it, a Mash of Malt very warm.

Lasks, Looseness, or open flux of a Horses Body, the cause and cure.
THis distemper incident to Horses, frequently rendering them weak and infirm,
is mostly occasioned by cold unseasonably taken, though some times by Choleric
humors descending; upon the Liver, or the overflowing of the Gall, which
penetrates the Bowels by insensible ways, at other times by drinking excess of
cold water upon a full stomach, which generates evil humors, or by drinking
cold water when hot, or travailing too hard, eating Hens dung, or with the
Provender licking up Feathers, Spiders, or any nauseous thing: To cure which,
take flower of Garden Beans three ounces, three ounces of Bolearmoniack and a
quart of Stale-Beer, to which add a quarter of a pint of red wine, and making
them pretty hot, and mixing them well, give the Horse grieved to the quantity
of a pint morning and evening for six days successively.

If the Lasks be violent, use this medicine, viz. of Alum, and Bolearmoniack
pulverized, each an ounce, put them into a quart of new-milk, brewing it to and
fro till it be sufficiently curdled, and then making it blood-warm, give it him
to drink.

If the scouring be violent, take the intralls of a Pullet, omitting nothing
but the Gizard, dipping them when smalled by shreading in Oil of Spicknard, and
so thrust them down your Horses throat by degrees, and it will not only stay
the scouring, but the bloody flux; notwithstanding, if the bloody flux be
predominant, take Saffron one ounce, two of Myrrh, three of Southernwood, one
of Parsley, three of Rue, two of Spittlewort and Hyssop, one of Cassa, and
adding to them a quart of wine Vinegar, and half a pound of the powder of
Chalk, bruise them well, and then boil them till they come to a thickness
sufficient to be made into little cakes, which cakes give your Horse dissolved
in Whitewine, or Stale-Beer well warmed morning and evening, and in a day or
two it will cause the Efflux of blood to stay, and ease the pain in the bowels
or bladder, which is occasioned for want of staling.

Leprosy, its cause and cure.
THis Loathsome distemper is known by a running Scab, or Manginess spreading
all over the body, occasioned by Melancholy humors, corrupt blood, so made by
excessive heats, surfeits, or unwholesome Provender and this grievance for the
most part is first seen about the neck, which becomes raw thereby and unseemly,
being altogether infectious, insomuch that it is extremely catching.

To cure this distemper, take an ounce of Alum, eight ounces of green
Copperas, an ounce of cut Tobacco, free from stalks, and boil them well in a
quart of spring water, till the water is near half consumed, and then as warm
as the Horse can suffer it, supple with the remaining part of the liquor, the
place grieved having first rubbed off the scabs, and so do twice a day letting
the Horse stand at the Rack a considerable time after.

If the Leprosy be inclinable to Mangie, which it mostly is, if occasioned by
a surfeit, then let your Horse blood, and having rubbed off the Scabs or
scurfe, put together two ounces of Verdigrease and eight of Vinegar, a pint of
Cows Stale, and a like quantity of Train Oil, and having bruised a handful of
wild Tansie, put it amongst the liquids, adding moreover four ounces of
Brimstone flower, the like quantity of Roachallum, and of Bolearmoniack,
boiling together all the ingredients, and putting amongst them about a pint of
the Horses blood, wash the place grieved with the liquor, as hot as he can
endure it, and afterward cloth him warm, and in so doing six or seven times
the cure will be perfected, unless the infection has reached his internals; the
which if it has, you must give him Diapente drink, which will render him more
liable to be cured.

The cause and cure of the distemper in a Horse called the Low-worm, and the
symptoms by which it may be known.
THis distemper is by many taken for St. Anthonies fire, or the Shingles, but
indeed is caused by a worm in the back of the Horse, bred between the flesh and
the back bone, often running along the neck, till it tainteth the Brain, at
what time the Horse frequently falls mad, which many Farriers mistaking for the
staggers, apply frequently the wrong medicine, even to the destruction of the
Horse. The symptoms by which it may be distinguished, are these, viz. After a
long journey the Horse will refuse his meat, be troubled with sickness, and
sudden pains in his back, which will cause him to shrink it up, and again to
stretch at his length, as also to strain in making Urine without any effect,
and at other times to bite the Rack-staves, or what ever is within his reach;
to remedy which, take two ounces of Garlic, four ounces of Acrement, a handful
of Rue and Tormentile, bruise them well, and put them into three pints of
Whitewine, then blood your Horse in the Tail, and dividing the liquor boiled
and strained, give him it in equal proportions six mornings successively and it
will effect the cure.

The defect in Horses Lungs, the cause and cure.
MOst diseases of the Lungs proceed from excessive heats, or their contraries,
occasioned by hard riding or evil looking to, and if the descending humors so
contracted, are not timely removed, they cause the Lungs to putrefie and rot:
to know which distemper observe his Flanks and Ribs, for if they rise slowly
and beat heavily, then are the humors contracted by cold, and must be speedily
removed, it is also to be known by his short drawing of his breath and slow
cough, as likewise by filthy matter, that will upon his lying down and rising
up issue out of his mouth and nostrils; then to remove the humors, take Horse
lungwort, by some called Mullet, a good handful, Fennegreek seed two ounces, of
Madder made into powder, an ounce; then having shred and bruised the Herbs,
boil them in new Ale or Beer, and give it the Horse grieved in a Drenching horn
for ten or twelve days, each morning fasting, feeding him afterward with
Mashes, and giving him warm water, with Wheat-bran scattered in it, and when
you give him his dose, at the same time anoint his Breast and Ribs with the Oil
extracted from a Snake, and in so doing he will be restored to health.

The Lethargy or Sleeping evil, its cause and cure.
THis distemper proceeds from Phlegmatic humors, which settle about the
Brain, and so numb it that it causes the Horse to be greatly desirous of sleep,
even standing or travailing; to redress which, let him blood in the neck vein
and palate of the mouth, and taking a gallon of Spring Water, boil therein
Camomile, Wheat-bran, Mother-wort, and put thereto a considerable quantity of
Salt and Vinegar, which done, add to it two ounces of Parsley seed, and as much
Fennel seed, then boiling them well, give the water clean strained to your
Horse to drink, anointing afterward the Palate of his mouth with Honey and
Mustard, and by striking or making a noise keep him for twelve hours space from
sleeping.

Moorfoundred, what it is, and how to cure it.
THis distemper according to the French, is no other than a foundering in the
Horses body by the melting of the grease, occasioned by excessive heats, or not
due cooling after travail: To cure which, having well raked his tail gut with
your hand dipped in Olive Oil, give him a Clister made of Camomile, Mallows,
Agarick and Baum, all boiled in new milk, and well strained: Then take a quart
of the best Malago, and setting it on the fire, put into it Cinnamon, Liquorish
and Anniseeds, of each an ounce, and three ounces of Honey, and give it him as
warm as he can receive it; then ride him forth a racking pace, for an hour or
more, suffering him to fast after it two or three hours, then sift him a pint
of Beans and a quart of Oats, after which, let him have a knop of Hay sprinkled
with warm water, giving him every other day a Mash of Malt and water, and four
days after his taking the aforesaid dose, let him blood and keep him exceeding
warm, and you will perceive the grease to come away in greater or lesser
quantities, proportionable to what is in the Horses body.

Mattering of the Yard, how to cure it, as also to prevent shedding of the Seed.
FOr the first take Roach-allum an ounce, Whitewine Vinegar a pint, and having
dissolved the Alum in the Vinegar, and made it lukewarm, with a syringe force
it into his Yard four or five times a day, for three or four days together, and
it will cure the Rawness, and bring away the cause of the grievance.

For the last, take the herb Aramanthus, the juice of Bistwort, and Plantaine,
as also that of Comfery, red wine, and Hogs dung, and boil them together in
Verjuice, sweeten the liquid part with Sugarcandy or Mollossus, and having
given it him to drink, ride him into cold water up to the belly, and suffer him
there to stand for an hour.

To cure the Melancholy in a Horse, commonly called the Stagger or the Stavers,
an excellent Receipt.
THe Horse troubled with the aforesaid distemper must, as soon as, by his
giddiness and heavy eyedness, you perceive it, be let blood; and then take
Hazel-nuts, Butter and Salt, of altogether to the quanty of a pound weight, and
having broken the Nut-shells, put the kernels into the butter and salt, when
they are hot over the fire, and add thereto half an ounce of Assa fetida, and
half a quartern of wine-vinegar, into which, well mixed, put small rags,
spunges or fine flax, and with them so dipped, stop his ears, sewing them up to
prevent his shaking them out, and in twenty four hours the distemper will
vanish.

For want of the former ingredients, take bitter Almonds two ounces, of Oxes
Gall two drams, the Roots of Black Helebore vulgarly called Bearsfoot, an ounce
dried and pulverised, the Grains of Castorum two drams, Vinegar a quarter of a
pint, Varnish a spoonful, and boiling them together, put them into the Horses
Ears, stopping them close; or for want of the aforesaid thing, use Garlic
bruised in Aquavitae.

Imposthumes, their cause and cure.
IMposthumes are diverse, though in quality they little differ, being for the
most part generated of evil blood and gross humors, the which at first cause
swellings, and if not then prevented, turn to running and loathsome sores, many
times they are occasioned by unfortunate blows, and sometimes by hurt received
from strait Halters and Harness, or taking cold, the symptoms by which they may
be discovered, are by the much running of the Horses Ears and Eyes, the heat in
his Ears and Temples, his unwillingness to be handled thereabouts, and
dullness, and must if they be far gone be brought to a head, and broke, before
they can be cured; to perform which, take the roots of Mallows and White
Lillies, of each three ounces, bruise them well, and mixing them with
Hogsgrease and Linseed Meal, boil them well, and upon Flax or Leather apply
them plaisterwise to the place grieved, and it will both ripen and break it.
Now there are hot and cold Imposthumes, the cold one will not break so soon as
the hot; therefore when you find it is come to a head, which you may perceive
by its throbbing, open it with a sharp hot Iron and let out the corruption.

To cure either hot or cold Imposthume, when broken or opened, take Dragons
blood, Gum Arabic, Beeswax, Mastick, Greek-pitch, Turpentine and
Frankincense, of each an ounce, melt them, and plaisterwise apply them to the
grievance, or for want of them take dried Southernwood, the yolks of new-laid
Eggs and Barly-meal, which well tempered and applied plaisterwise to the
grievance, will cause the filth to come away and cure the sore.

The Mallender, what it is, and how to cure it.
THis Sorrance is a hard dry scab full of Rifts and Chaps; and long staring
hairs growing upon the inward part of the foreleg, where if it be not looked to
in time, it will canker and corrupt the flesh and blood, making the Horse go
exceeding lame. It comes diverse ways, proceeding some times from corrupt
humors and overheated blood, at other times it is occasioned by the negligence
of the Keeper in suffering the dirt long to continue on the Horses legs, etc.

To cure the Mallender, take half an ounce of Gunpowder, two ounces of
Hogslard, a soft rowed Pickled herring, four ounces of common soap, and an
ounce of Roach alum beaten to powder, all which being bruised, heated and
tempered, that it may be applied plaisterwise, lay them upon the sore after you
have washed it with Urin, and clipped away the hairs, and by every day renewing
it for three or four days, the cure will be effected, especially if you anoint
it between whiles, with the Oil of Turpentine.

The Mange in Horses, its cause and cure.
THis Sorrance is a like loathsome and dangerous, and may be known before its
breaking out by the extraordinary desire the Horse has to rub against every
thing he meets, to allay his Itch; the hair falling away in many places, and
undecently staring, the skins scurfiness, etc. The cause frequently arises from
hard riding, cold and heats, excessive labor, bad humors and corruption of
blood: To cure it, take Mother of Saltpeter, and adding thereto wine Vinegar
and Oil of Turpentine, wash the place grieved, binding upon it afterward
bruised Chamomil and Hogs grease.

For want of the abovesaid Medicament, take Soap Lees, and steeping in them
Tobacco-stalks, wash the Sorrance after the scabs are rubbed off, and keep your
Horse as much as may be from rubbing himself against any hard thing.

The Mourning of the Chine, what it is, together with its cause and cure.
THis grievance is a kind of Glaunders caused by either excessive heat,
standing wet or travailing in deep and dirty ways, which if not in time taken
notice of, reverts its bad humors upon the Liver and Lungs, whereby they are
frequently so putrefied that the Horse dies suddenly. The cure is first to let
your Horse blood, and then to take Sallad-oyl, Whitewine Vinegar, of each three
ounces the juice of Sallendine, and the powder of Elecampain Roots, of each an
ounce, and put them into his nostrils, holding his head to the Rack, and
thrusting into them at the same time a Feather, dipped in Oil of Bays, to make
him sneese, after which give him an ounce of Rubarb beaten to powder in a pint
of Canary very hot, and so clothing him exceeding warm, let him lie or stand
as he best likes, and in so serving him five or six times it will bring away
the nauseous humors, by which the disease will decrease, and the Horse in time
recover his perfect health.

Madness and Frenzy in Horses, from whence it proceeds, and how to cure it.
THis distemper happens to Horses diverse ways, as first, when through the evil
operation of the veins, crude blood stays in the head, and by an insensible way
enters the Panicle of the Brain, which is known by the Horses heaviness, the
dullness of his Eyes, and his want of Appetite, his often turning round and
staggering; secondly, when the blood is vitiated, so far that it by its fiery
humor has pierced the film of the Brain and inflamed it, which puts him out of
all patience, insomuch that he goes quite mad, beating his head against the
Manger, Post, or whatever stands in his way, biting and stamping, kicking and
flinging, with many the like extravagancies. Thirdly, when the blood in the
stomach is by overmuch heat stagnated and corrupted, and turning upon the heart
infecteth it. Fourthly and lastly, the cause of madness proceeds from the
bloods being generally infected, insomuch that at once the Heart, Brain, and
Pannicles are afflicted, which is the worst of all, and commonly proves mortal:
To cure these grievances, let your Horse blood in all his four legs, to draw
down the blood that occasions it, and when he has bled sufficiently, take the
roots of wild Cucumbers, or for defect of them the roots and leaves of Rue or
Herbegrace, Mint, and black Helebore, of each a handful, with a like quantity
of the herb and root of Virgo-pastoris, all which being well bruised and boiled
in beer, give it him warm, and so continue to do for three or four days, if the
madness cease not. Man's dung, or Hens dung, in whitewine is good in this case
and has been often given with success.

The Malt-long or Malt-worm, what it is, and how to cure it.
THis Sorrance commonly happens above the Hoof of the Horse, almost in the
nature of a Crownscab, appearing in diverse little Knops and Bunches, both
Cankerous and venomous; which knops if not prevented will run into branches,
voiding salt watery humor, causing great lameness and spoiling the Hoof. To
cure which, take if you can get them, black Snails and Burdock roots, beat them
together, and lay them to the sore, renewing the plaster every morning for
five or six days: but if no Snails can be got, take the Soot or scrapings of a
Pot or Kettle, the inner rind of Elder, Garlic, Pepper and Honey, all which
bruised and well tempered, lay plaisterwise, and it will cure the Sorrance,
being received as aforesaid.

The Nightmare, what it is, and how to cure and remove it.
THis distemper by some is held for Hagriding, though indeed it proceeds from
Melancholy blood, which pressing to the heart dulls and benumbs the Vital
spirits, and thereby causes nature extremely to labor under it, till it be
expelled and driven thence, insomuch that at diverse times the Horse so
afflicted will be in a foaming sweat, not being capable of rest. To cure or
prevent which, take half a pint of Olive Oil, four ounces of common salt and
half a pint of Spruce Beer, boil them together, adding afterward three ounces
of Brown Sugarcandy, and give it him as warm as is convenient for two, three or
four Mornings successively, if you find he is so long afflicted with the
oppression of crude blood.

Planet struck, what it is, and how to cure or prevent it.
THis distemper incident to Horses, is known by a sudden defect of the Horses
members, insomuch that he often falls down or stands stiff almost without
any appearance of life or motion: it is caused diverse ways, sometimes by
excessive congealing of Phlegm about the Brain, at other times by cold
Melancholy blood, which instead of nourishing the Brain, numbs and sickens; it
likewise happens by evil digestion, which instead of blood fills the veins with
raw watery humors, and sometimes by too much fasting, by heat or coldness of
the breath, you may know from which of the two it proceeds, then to prevent or
cure it, take 14, 15 or 16 single Pyony seeds or more, if your Horse be of a
strong constitution, bruise them together with a Clove or two of Garlic, three
or four sprigs of Rue, and an ounce of Hempseed, all which boil in sharp
Whitewine, or Verjuice, and having strained them well, give him the liquid part
to drink four mornings successively, keeping him thereupon exceeding warm, and
it will answer the ends for which it was given.

Pissing Blood, its cause and cure.
THe cause of Pissing blood, often proceeds from excessive labor in Travail or
bearing more than he is conveniently able, by a stone fretting upon the
Kidneys, by a Vein breaking near the Bladder, or travailing him in cold weather
or foul ways, immediately after he is taken from Grass, before he is thoroughly
cleansed by scouring, or the humors worked naturally away. To take away any of
these causes whereby the effects may cease, take the roots of knot grass one
handful, Polipodium of the wall, and Comfry of each a handful, Wild and Garden
Bloodwort, and Shepherds Purse, of each a handful, all which bruised well, and
the juice strained into Stale Beer, the liquid body making three pints; boil
it, adding afterward Wood-soot and Spanish Salt, of each two ounces, and then
as warm as he can receive it, give it your Horse at three times three following
Mornings, and let him fast after it two hours; or for want of this medicine
take the Apples of wild-bryer, as many as will weigh two ounces, bruise them
and put them into a quart of Beer, adding an ounce of Irsh-slate beat into
powder, then making the beer hot, strain it and give it him very warm when he
is fasting; and by so doing a week together the blood will no more issue at his
Yard, let the cause be what it will, if you refrain to let him blood.

The Palsy or Apoplexy, its cause and cure.
THis distemper is caused by the Horses feeding in unseasonable weather in wet
Morish or Marshy Ground, where through the unwholsomeness of the Air and foul
feeding, Crude humors are ingendered, which causing raw digestion, the Brain
is thereby afflicted, and at other times it happens through some wound or
stroke in the Temples or upon the Pole, and of these Palsies or Apoplexies
there are two sorts, the one general, which is incurable, or at least very hard
to be cured, and is known when it afflicts all the limbs. The other is
particular to some one part, and mostly in the neck or Pole, which makes him
carry his neck a wry, going sideways, indenting and crooking his legs, and at
other times running backward hitting his head frequently against Posts or
Walls, yet greedy of meat and drink: upon the appearing of which symptoms, let
him blood in the Neck and Temple veins on that side that the bend of his neck
is outward, bathing his neck and back with Oil of Petrolium well warmed,
binding the former immediately thereupon with a wet Hayband from his ears to
his breast: Then take Opopanax two ounces, Gentian, Storax, Manna, and Succory
of each three ounces, Myrrh one Scruple, and of long Pepper three Drams, dry
them so that they may be beaten into a powder, and putting an ounce thereof
into a pint of warm Malago, Muscadel or Canary, give it him to drink fasting,
till all the powder is spent, and it will perfect the cure of the particular
palsy, and if not cure, yet at least give much relief to the general distemper.

Pestilence, Murraine or Garget in a Horse, what they are, the symptoms whereby
they are known, and how to cure them.
THese three distempers though different in name, yet in nature differ but
little, being dangerous and infectious, coming diverse ways, as by excessive
unseasonable riding, by Pasturing in Fenny, damp, unwholesome ground, through
noisome and infectious air when newly taken out of pleasant and serene air or
the like, and are known by the Horses swelling under the Tongue and roots of
the Ears, the heat and noisomness of his breath, swelling under the Chaule and
in the Cheeks, causing him to decline feeding, hanging down his head, his eyes
yellowish, a Boil appearing in his Groine: and Lastly, known by the unseemly
hanging of his Stones: upon observing of which symptoms or any of them,
separate him from your other cattle, for the contagion is catching, and having
brought him into a warm place, take Rue, Saffron, Walnut leaves (if you can get
them) or in their stead Balm, Juniper berries and Garlic, of each a like
quantity, Bistwort, Snakeweed, Angelica and Bay Berries, of each an ounce, the
roots of Elecampain beaten into powder, half an ounce, to which add an ounce of
Saltpeter, and boiling them well in three pints of Mallago, strain the liquid
part, and give him a pint at a time very warm, for three mornings successively.

If the aforesaid ingredients cannot be so soon got as necessity requires, take
Southernwood, London-Treacle and Bolearmoniack, of each two ounces,
Cuckow-pintle roots beaten to powder, and Gunpowder of each half an ounce,
Aquavitae half a pint, and Ale a quart, boil them together, and give him the
liquid part at twice and if the distemper abate not, give him the same medicine
oftener.

Pursiveness, its cause and cure.
THis disorder in a Horse is known by his shortness of breath, panting,
straining, and breathing as it were in pain, occasioned frequently by the
length and straitness of the windpipe, which gives not sufficient vent to the
Lungs, sometimes by phlegmatic humors, or too much fatness, by hard riding
upon a full stomach, unseasonable drinking, etc. and if not well regarded in
time is prone to turn to the Glaunders, or dullness in travail, continually
sweating upon the least motion, and the like: to Remedy which take Bay berries,
Oil of Frankincense, Fern roots, Nightshade, Anniseed, Liquorish and
Sugarcandy, of each an ounce, bruise and mix them well, then put them into a
pint of Frenchwine, and add thereto four ounces of Olive Oil, and having boiled
them well, give the liquid part to the Horse at three times, suffering him to
stand in the Stable a day and a night after each potion, and observe that he
take them fasting.

For want of the aforesaid medicine take Fennegreek and Elecampain roots,
Brimstone and English honey, of each an ounce, adding thereto an ounce of
Bolearmoniack and give them your Horse boiled in Whitewine, six or eight
mornings, each dose being a pint, which at every giving must be fresh made as
aforesaid.

The Pains, a Sorrance so called, what it is, its cause and cure.
THis Sorrance is an ulcerous scab, full of fretting watery humors, commonly
appearing in the Pasterns, between the Fetlock and the Heel, chiefly occasioned
for want of careful looking to, in not rubbing down after a dirty journey, and
is known before the scab breaks out by the swelling of the legs: To cure it,
rub off the scab till it bleed, then take seven or eight sprigs of dried
Rosemary, the like quantity of red Sage, a handful of Bay Leaves, and the like
quantity of Pellitory of the wall, adding to them half a pound of Alum powder,
then boiling them in Canary, and Ale to the quantity of two quarts, a fourth
part of the former only: with the liquid part wash the Sorrance Morning, Noon
and Evening, and it will effect the cure.

How to know when a Horse is pricked, and how to cure it.
THis Sorrance often comes by the negligence of the Farrier, by not well
pointing the nails, well clenching them, or driving weak nails that are apt to
start aside, and sometimes by stubs, needles, or rusty Iron getting into the
foot in travailing: to know which, observe the Horses halting, or pinch his
hoof round with pinsers, and when you come at the place grieved he will shrink
in his foot; or if you throw cold water upon the Hoof, that part where the foot
is grieved will be the soonest dry, the which, when you perceive, take off the
shoo, and having discovered the cause of the grief, draw it forth, and opening
the hole, take Alum, Salt and Copperas, boil them in Chamberly, then washing
therewith the grieved place, tent it with Hogs Grease, Verdigrease and
Turpentine, and putting on the shoo again, stop his foot well with Cowdung, and
by so doing five or six times the cure will be perfected.

Quinsie or Squinsie, its cause and cure.
THis dangerous distemper both to Horses or Kine, is occasioned by cold
Phlegmatic humors settling in the neck and throat, or many times through
excess of blood and not timely bleeding: To cure it after you have bled him, if
the swelling in his throat abate not, lay a Poultiss of Mallows, Chammomile,
Groundsil and Hearts Tongue under his Chaule, well beaten and fried with
Hogs-lard, the which having once opened the passage of his throat, take White
Dogs-turd, Roach-Allum and Honey, and dissolving them in Milk, give him them hot
in a drenching horn, and two or three hours after give him a horn full of the
juice of Cinque* foil or Cudweed, in which Hyssop and Figs have been boiled,
and after it a pint of sweet wine, the which by repeating three times a day for
four or five days together, will restore him to his feeding and health.

Rupture, Vncording or Burstenness, their cause and cure.
THese distempers differ but in name, being in nature all one, known when the
Film, Rim or Chaul, sustaining the Horses Intrals, break by excessive straining
leaping or other accident, insomuch that his Bowels fall into his Cod or Flank,
and is by many held incurable, and indeed for the most part is so, yet often by
this method Bursten Horses have been cured, viz. bring your Horse into a Barn,
and having gently thrown him upon soft straw, by drawing his four legs together
with Cords, then by throwing them over a beam, raise him from the ground with
his back downwards, and with butter and water, or Deers suet well warmed,
supple his Stones, taking them up between your fingers, and by degrees dividing
them from the Guts, putting the Guts in their proper places, and having so
done, tie the stones as near to the belly of Horse, as as may be, with a linen
string or soft list, but so that the string of the Stones may not be bruised,
then let him down gently, and putting him into a warm Stable, take Vallerian
Rupture-wort, the husks of Hazelnuts, Cross-wort, Cranesbill, Cyprus and Elm
leaves, or Bark Chammock roots, beaten to powder, and Corn-flag, of each a
handful, bruise and mix them well, and give it him to drink in Ale well boiled,
morning, noon and night, and suffer him not to eat over much for the space of
thirteen days: at the end of which take out one or both his Stones, if he be
bursten on both sides and not too old, and by carefully sewing up the Cod, and
healing it with Oil of Bays, and now and then throwing cold water on it, the
Rim will knit, and the Guts be retained in their due place, rendering the Horse
firm and fit for moderate labor.

The Stone in Horses, it is cause and cure.
THis grief much afflicting Horses, comes by sundry means, as by bad humors
that stop the passage of the Bladder, by excessive labor or over much riding;
foul matter descending upon the Kidneys, when purged from the Liver and Spleen,
vitiating the neck of the Bladder, causes hard knops to settle there, which
make him piss with pain, and many times by holding his urine too long, when
heated by travail, it condensates the humors, it first created, into hardness,
which by the operation of the kidneys in time becomes little Stones or Gravel,
and may be perceived by his often striving in vain to avoid his urine, but
cannot, at least not freely but in great pain: to dissolve and make him avoid
which, take the Roots of Nettles, Parsley, Sperage and Dodder, of each three
ounces, bray them well and boil them in two quarts of Whitewine till a third
part be consumed, then taking them off the fire, put thereto Goats-lard, Salt
and Olive Oil, of each three ounces; strain it, and give him a pint of the
liquor each morning, as hot as is convenient for six or seven mornings
together, and it will bring away the Gravel, etc.

For want of the aforesaid Medicine, take Radish-roots, slice them, as also
Onions and Parsly-leaves, of all three to the weight of sixteen ounces, an
ounce of London Treacle, and the like quantity of Eggshells burnt to powder,
and boiling them in a gallon of spring water, till a third part be consumed,
give it the Horse to drink seven or eight mornings successively, or at any
other time if the infirmity be grievous.

The falling out of the Mares Womb, or Horses Fundament, the cause, and how to
prevent them.
THe Womb of a Mare is subject to many defects, as Barrenness, Falling out,
Abortion, etc. mostly caused through intemperateness, creating too much
moisture and cold, or too much fevorish humor or heat, and the former of these
causes it is that makes the Horses Fundament to fall out; something relating to
which I have already laid down; but for the better and more speedy cure and
prevention, Take Leeks, Bolearmonick, Nitrum and Oil of Cammomil, boil them in
a pint of whitewine, and a quart of Ale, and give it Glisterwise, administering
it to either of them after the Womb or Fundament is well put up, and for
several days after give them water, wherein Fennegreek Seeds have been boiled,
permiting him or her to stand warm and dry.

Wind-Galls, what they are, and how to cure them.
THese sorrances are Bladders filled with salt watery humors gellied and
thick, growing mostly upon the Fetlock joint, on each side being troublesome
and painful, especially in hot weather, and the ways hard: they proceed from
the effects of hard labor, overheatings and unseasonable coolings, which cause
the humors to descend into the hollow joints, and engender the Sorrances
aforesaid. To cure which take Perosin, Tachamahacha and Mastick, of each a
quarter of an ounce, Stone-pitch, Brimstone and Turpentine, of each half an
ounce, melt them together, and spreading them plaisterwise upon Sheeps leather,
apply them to the place grieved, and in five or six renewings, the cure will be
effected.

Wolfe-teeth, what they are, and of other Teeth troublesome to Horses.
THe Teeth so called in a Horse, are two small ones growing in the upper Jaw by
the Grinders, paining the Horse, and hindering his feeding: to avoid which
there is no way but punching them out, and putting Salt in the places where
they stood.

The toothache or pain in the Teeth, comes by cold or hot humors falling into
the jaw: To cure which, wash the Horses mouth with Chalk and strong vinegar,
laying to the Temples at the same time Rosin and Mastick.

If the Teeth be loose, Lance the Gums, and with Sage, Elecampain roots, and
Salt boiled in running water, wash the mouth of the Horse once every six hours
and in so doing for a week together, the teeth will become fast and firm.

The Wart or spungy excretion, and Wenn, their cause and cure.
THe first of these for the most part grows near the eye, and is caused by a
Phlegmatic humor settling there, indangering the eye, if not timely taken
away: to do which let it bleed, and strew powder of Verdigriese upon it, that
failing cut it away or eat it off by tying a hair round it, and heal it up
after the root is taken away, by applying Verdigriese powder, with Greentreat.

The second Sorrance is a hard Tumor in the flesh, greater or lesser, as the
humor feeds it, by which it is ingendered, it mostly proceeding from the
effects of some stroke or bruise, being mattery and corrupt toward the root:
to sink which bath it with Soap lees, applying a plaster of Rye meal, and
Linseed-oyl, and new-laid Eggs, the Hair being clearly cut away.

Strangury or Strangullion, it is cause and cure.
THis distemper is caused by sharp and evil humors descending upon the
Bladder, which entering make raw the neck thereof, often ulcerating it, which
causes the Horse to strain often for urine without any effect to the purpose,
yet such drops as fall come forth with great pain, which is known by his
whisking about his Tail and stamping. To cure which use the same Medicine
prescribed for the Stone.

Shoulder pinched, what it is, it is cause and cure.
THis disadvantage to the Horse happens by over early laboring or straining
the Horse or carrying great burdens, and is known by the narrowness of the
Horses shoulders or breast, where the flesh seems continually to consume,
insomuch that the fore part of the shoulder blade will stick out further than
the flesh, leaving the Brisket hollow, etc. To remedy which, with a sharp knife
make a slit an inch long on both sides under the shoulder bone, and raising the
skin, blow with a quill first one shoulder, then another, suffering the wind to
gather into it even to the Withers, still raising it and smoothing it with your
hand, striking the wind equally into every place, the which when filled beat
with a switch, still loosening the skin with a flat instrument of Iron, then
Roweling the slits with two round Rowels made of the upper leather of a shoo,
having a hole in the middle for the water and matter to issue forth, and then
anoint his shoulders with Hog's Grease and Oil of Turpentine, by which means the
skin giving way, the shoulders will bear out in their due proportion.

Shoulder wrench or strain, Shoulder splaiting or tornn, and shoulder Pight,
their cause and cures.
THe first of these is a wrench that comes diverse ways, as by travailing on
uneven ground, strain or slip in running, etc.

The second comes by an extraordinary slip that breaks some sinew or ligament,
parting in a manner the shoulder from the breast, rendering the Horse exceeding
lame.

The third is when the point or pitch of the shoulder is dislocated, known by
the sticking of the sharp bone, and is got by some fall or extraordinary
wrench: To cure all which, keep the Horses so grieved in a Stable without the
least molesting them, then putting them on Pastern shoes; take of Dialthea one
pound, the like quantity of Olive Oil, Fresh Butter and Oil of Bays, of each
half a pound; the which melted and made into an Ointment, anoint therewith the
grieved part, suppleing it with your hands for three or four days, morning,
noon and night; at the end of which if the shoulder swell, as past doubt it
will, prick it with a Lancet or Phlegm or hot Iron, continuing to anoint it
with the ointment prescribed: but if the swelling come to a Tumor, that is,
gather a head, Lance it in the place where it gathers; anoint it with Green
ointment, to which the Table will direct you.

If your Horse be shoulder pight, swim him in a River or other deep water, and
with his striving the bone will return to its place, or if it be excessive
frosty weather sling him upon a Beam by putting soft Girths or bands under his
belly, and so by strength pull it into its right place, then letting him down
gently, suffer him to stand on soft straw, to rest a while.

When the shoulder is brought right, take two wooden pins of Ash or Elm, each
five inches long, anoint them with Hogs-lard or Deers suit, and slitting the
skin about an inch above the point of the shoulder blade in four places, thrust
the Pins in crosswise, gathering up as much of the skin as is possible, then
take strong Packthread or Whipcord, and fastening one end to the uppermost part
of the cross; for both the ends of the pins which ought to be flat, must appear
without the skin, twist it round as hard as is convenient; at what time anoint
it Hogs-lard and with Oil of Cammomil, suffer him to rest in a warm Stable,
giving him comfortable meats, permitting him to lie down or stand awry as
little as possible: at the end of which time if the bone keep its right place,
you may turn him out to Grass, always remembering every other day to anoint the
place with what is before specified till the pins are worked out by nature, yet
in the interim you may work him in drawing matters, but not in carrying heavy
burdens.

Navel Gall, the Sosrance so called, its cause and cure, and of Lice, Flies,
etc.
THis Sorrance is no other than a Pinch with the Saddle, right against the
navel: to cure which, take Oil of Bays, Fox grease, or Hogs grease, of each an
ounce, adding a handful of Earthworms, and a like quantity of Salt, boil them
all in a pint of Whitewine, then adding two ounces of Olive Oil, boil them
again, after straining the liquid part till it become an ointment, and
anointing therewith the Sorrance, laying over it lint or flocks, it will in a
short time render it whole.

Lice are occasioned by poverty, dropping of Trees, or the like, and known by
the Horses rubbing his Ears, neck and other parts, etc. To kill them, wash him
over with the decoction of Henbane, in Cowpiss, or with Tobacco stalks, and
Copras boiled in water, or man's Urine.

To keep your Horse from being annoyed with Flies, anoint him with Oil of Bays,
water wherein Rue has been sodden, or Linseed Oil, and no Fly will settle on
him.

Red-Water, Overreach, Salender and stinking Breath, their respective causes
and cures.
REd-water is an infectious water, which proceeds from most wounds occasioned
by the ill humors that flow from diverse parts of the body and greatly hinder
the cure. To extract which, or disperse the humor, rub him well all over his
body, but especially his belly, and giving him to drink water wherein has been
boiled the roots of Emanuel or All-good, a Herb so called, and Mustard seed of
each a pound, to three Gallons of water.

Overreach comes by a slip or strain, or by the Horses running beyond his
strength, and the cure is the same with the upper and nether Attaint, which
Receipt you may find in the foregoing part of this book, being directed thereto
by the Table.

Stinking breath is occasioned by the putrefaction of the Lungs, and is soon
discovered by those that have their smelling: to remedy which, take Colts foot,
Fennel, Anniseeds and Fennegreek, of each a handful, boil them in Beer or Ale,
to the quantity of three pints, and straining them, give him the liquor hot as
he can drink it, and in so using him ten or twelve days, if the Lungs be not
too much perished with the corruption which proceeds by raw humors descending
upon them through foul feeding or unwholesom air, the cure will be effected.

As for the consumption of the Liver, caused by some inbred distemper, there is
no certain cure: yet to preserve and perhaps restore it, give your Horse in a
pint of Mallagoe half a pint of Pigs blood, both as warm as may be, and so do
three days successively, feeding him in the mean time with black Oats, and
giving him to drink new wort, and the night before he receives the Medicine
permit him to eat nothing; or for want of this take an ounce of the powder of
Agrimony, a handful of Red rose leaves, and of Saccarum, Diarchadon, Disantelon
Abbatis, and Licorish, of each half an ounce, boil them in two quarts of
Malmsey, and give him a pint to drink four mornings successively, suffering him
to eat Mashes, and the like during the said days.

Ring bone, Rottenness and Rheumes, their cause and cure.
THe Ring bone comes diverse ways, especially two, the one is hereditary from
the Mare or Stallion, the other by a bruise, etc. and is a vicious humor which
causes gristly flesh upon the Coronet, till at length fastening to the bone,
it becomes hard as a bone, making the leg to swell, and the flesh higher in
that place than any other: to kill or take away which, take unslacked Lime,
burn it well, and beating it into powder lay it upon the bone to the quantity
of two ounces, binding it about with a linen cloth, and immediately put your
Horse into the water, then the Lime slacking will burn the core and kill it, so
that in a short time it will diminish.

Rottenness is a putrefaction of the Lungs and Liver, the which if far gone,
admits no cure; but if not so, take what I have before prescribed for the Lungs
and Liver, using them after the same manner. A direction to which you will find
in the Table, the which use also for the Rot that causes swelling like the
Dropsy.

Rheums falling upon the Jaw, etc. come by cold which so infeeble the Gums that
they shrink away leaving the teeth loose, staring out, long and uneven, greatly
hindering the Horse from eating: To cure which give your Horse Conserve of
Elecampain roots, two ounces in a pint of Mallagoe very warm, adding thereto
two new-laid Eggs beaten well, half an ounce of Anniseeds, and a Nutmeg grated
small, give it him warm four Mornings, and afterward wash his mouth with Sage,
Alum and Sugarcandy dissolved in Vinegar.

The Yellows and Falling of the Yard, and Sway-back, their cause and cure.
THe Yellows is properly the Yellow Jaundice, most commonly accompanied with
the black, though of different natures; for the Yellow is moist, and the Black
dry, the former proceeding from the over flowing of the Gall; and the latter
from the Spleen, being the most dangerous: the former is known by the
yellowness of the Horses Lips, Eyes, etc. and the Black by a black duskish
color, striving to master the Yellow, the which when it has done, it mostly
proves Mortal: To cure them, take the juice of Celendine; four ounces Turmerick
and Pepper bruised into powder, of each an ounce, the juice of Burdock roots
two ounces, bruised Anniseeds and Liquorish powder, of each half an ounce, mix
them together, and having set a quart of Beer over the fire, when it is boiling
hot, put them into it, adding six peny-weight of Saffron, half an ounce of
London Treacle, and two ounces of Butter, and give him half of it in the
morning fasting, and the other half in the evening, and so continue to do four
days successively.

The falling of the Yard happens through cold or defect in the Horse, through
the weakness of that Member, the Sinews or Muscles strained, and lastly through
weariness after great journies: To prevent which wash his Yard with Whitewine,
anoint it with Oil of Roses and Honey, and so putting it into his sheath bolster
it up, and in so doing once or twice he will afterward recover strength to
keep it up.

The Sway Back, which is both undecent and a great weakness in the Horse, is
caused diverse ways, sometimes by heavy burdens, other times by over straining,
or suddenly turning round, as also naturally, and is known by the rigling of
the hinder parts, by his frequent swaying backward or sideways, and trouble in
rising, when he is laid: To cure which, take the Oil of Pine Aples two ounces,
three ounces of Olibanum, four ounces of Rozin, of Pitch a like quantity, of
Bolearmonick an ounce, and of Sanguis Draconis half the quantity, all which
being by fire incorporated, spread them plaisterwise, and lay them on the place
grieved, and by twice renewing it, the grief will be at an end.

Quitterbone and quick-scab their cause and cure.
THe Quitterbone, a Sorrance so called, is a hard swelling upon the Cornet
between the quarter and the heel, commonly found on the inside of the foot,
occasioned by the long continuance of Gravel in the Shoo, a bruise upon the
hoof, Stub prick of a nail or the like, which for want of timely care fester
and break out above the hoof, and sometimes it has its original from evil
humors descending into the foot, etc. To cure it, take away the hair, open the
sorrance, and tent it with Hogs lard and Verdigrease well tempered, after
which, into the Orifice pour Deers suet extreme hot, plaistering it up with
Pitch and Beeswax, which will in twenty four hours, if not too firmly
grounded, make the bone rise, or at most by a double application; then with
your nippers take it out and heal it up with a Salve made of Bees wax,
Turpentine, Redwine, the juice of green Tobacco, or if that be not to be
gotten, the decoction of dry in a quarter of a pint of Aqua vitae, and half an
ounce of Birthworth Roots beaten or ground to powder. The Quick scab is a
Sorrance that will greatly injure the Horse, if not taken in time, by
putrefying and corrupting the blood and flesh, and breaking out much like unto
the Mange, caused by surfeit, got by unseasonable and excessive riding or
labor, still running from one place to another, not long continuing in one
place, but moves as the humor carries it: To cure it, take away the hair,
scrape off the scab, and anointing it with ointment of Tobacco, let it rest for
a time, and if it dye not at two or three anointings, take the decoction of
Mallows two quarts, Copperas, Verdigrease and Alum, of each an ounce,
Turpentine and quick silver well killed, two ounces of each, and having washed
the Sorrance with the decoction, anoint it with the following simple made into
an ointment by the help of fire, the which continuing to do six or seven days,
once a day and keeping him warm, the Sorrance will vanish.

The Haw in the Eye, its cause and cure.
THis grievance very troublesome to a Horse, is a Gristle growing between the
under Lid of the Eye, and the ball of the sight, and will spread over the Eye
if not timely remedied: The cause of it is phlegmatic humors descending from
the Brain, it is known by the much watering of the Eye, and the Horses frequent
winking; to remedy it if you can conveniently come at it, take it off with a
sharp knife blunt pointed, lest the Horse by starting put out his Eye, but if
it lie low, then blow into his Eye powder of burnt Roach-allum, and it will in
seven or eight times using, eat it off.

THus Reader having laid down the particulars of the most material distempers,
Griefs and Sorrances, incident to the generous Beast, of whom I am treating, I
shall proceed to accommodate you with general Receipts for inward sickness,
making of Salves, Vrguents, Glisters, Cordial powders, and Balls, etc.

Excellent Receipts for any inward sickness that afflicts a Horse.
Receipt 1. TAke of Fennegreek, Liquorish powder, Turmerick, Long pepper,
Anniseed, Cummin seed and Parsnip seed, of each half an ounce; Cellendine,
Hyssop, Thime, Rosemary, Rue, Southernwood and Pelamontine, of each two ounces,
boil them together in a quart of Ale, adding thereto a dram of Saffron, an
ounce of London Treacle, and two ounces of fresh butter, and having well-boyled
them, strain out the liquor, and give it him milk-warm, riding him a mile or
two after it, and suffering him to fast three hours, and this do three or four
mornings, especially in case of Fever, Cold, Yellows or Anticor.

Receipt 2. Take Anniseed and Cumminseeds, of each two ounces, Fenegreek an
ounce, Brimstone-flower an ounce and a half, Bastard Saffron two drams, boil
them in two quarts of Whitewine, a pint of Olive Oil, twelve ounces of Honey,
and as much Wheat flower as will make them into a past, after they are well
boiled being all smalled, make the past into balls as big as Geese Eggs, and
when you see occasion dissolving one of them in a Gallon of warm water give it
him to drink, and by so doing it will not only remedy diverse inward sicknesses,
but also preserve health and exhilarate the spirits.

Receipt 3. Take round Aristolochia, Ginger, Gentian, Anniseeds, Bayberry and
great Trisora, of each an ounce, all beaten to powder: Whitewine, or for want
of it Ale or Beer a quart, eight ounces of Olive Oil, and two Drams of Saffron,
put them together and boil them well over a gentle fire, which done strain
them, and give the liquid part to the Horse as hot as he can suffer it, riding
him gently for half an hour after; and when he has fasted three hours, give him
a Mash, and by so doing three mornings, it will cure most inward sicknesses,
and prevent such as come through infectious Airs, etc.

Receipt 4. Take a handful of wheat flower, an ounce or better, of Anniseeds,
six ounce, of Honey, two of the juice of Housleek, and one of Salt niter, and
two ounces of Olive Oil, give them him to drink boiled in Milk, or if the
distemper be in the bowels or back parts, you may give it him Glisterwise.

Salves, useful for all manner of Sorrances, how to make them.
TO make the Green Ointment greatly useful for Farriers, take refined Rofin an
ounce, the like quantity of Beeswax, melt them, and add half a pound of Hogs
lard, and an ounce or more of Honey, incorporate them well, and when they are
thoroughly dissolved, add more, half a pound of Turpentine, and an ounce of
Verdigrease, when they are well melted and of a perfect green, take them off,
strain them, and keep the Ointment well stopped in an Earthen pot for your use.

This Ointment is good in all sores and grievances, so that its praise cannot
be sufficiently expressed.

Another excellent Ointment for wounds or other Sorrances.
TAke Oil of Cammomil, Oil of Earthworms and Linseed Oil of each a quarter of a
pint, Bolearmoniack and Deers suet of each six ounces, Pitch and Beeswax, of
each two ounces, and half an ounce of Olibanum, incorporate them by melting;
and having strained them, keep the Ointment for your use, use it in case of
Strains, Pricks, Crown-scab, Wounds, Bruises, or the like, and it will answer
your expectation.

Another excellent Ointment.
TAke Myrrh an ounce, Storax half an ounce; of soft red wax two ounces, Olive
Oil half a pint, and Verdigrease an ounce, boil them together with four ounces
of Hog's Grease till they become an Ointment.

An excellent Salve for any Wrench, Strain or weakness in the Limbs.
TAke two ounces of Galbanum, Pitch and Turpentine, of each half a pound, Bees
wax a quarter of a pound, Oil of Cammomil and Bays, of each an ounce, Mastick
three ounces, and two ounces of Bolearmoniack, set them all over the fire in an
earthen pot, and incorporate them well, then spread them upon Leather or
Cloth, and having anointed the place grieved with Oil of Bays, apply them
plaisterwise.

An excellent Salve for Old or New sores, how to make it.
TAke Elder-buds, or the inner Rind four ounces, Storax an ounce, two ounces of
Wax, three drams of Myrrh, an ounce of Hogs lard, and two ounces of Rosin,
incorporate them with fire, and strain them, keeping the Salve for your use,
and apply it in case of any wound, Galled back, Gravel, prick with a nail,
Thorn, Spur-gall, or Fistula, and indeed to any Sorrance, if you use it with
the ointment following, viz. Take a pound of Hog's Grease, an ounce of
Verdigrease, half an ounce of Venice Turpentine and the juice of Mallows, all
boiled into an ointment.

An excellent Salve for curing of any wound, whether by Sword, Fire, Gunshot,
or any other accident.
TAke two ounces of Roach-allum, Whitewine-vinegar two spoonfuls, Verdegrease
powder an ounce, two ounces of Sublimate finely pulverised, and with fire bring
them to a Salve, and when occasion requires, lay it plaisterwise to the wound,
having first washed it with water wherein Copperas and Bay Salt have been
dissolved; it is also excellent at eating away dead flesh, etc.

An excellent Salve for Wounds, Ulcers, Bruises, or Strains, how to make it.
TAke Perosin and other Rosin, of each a pound, Beeswax, Frankincense and
Sheeps suet, of each six ounces, Hog's Grease twenty ounces, boil the Gums and
Wax in half a pint of Whitewine, then put to it your Hogs lard and Sheeps-suet,
adding an ounce of fine Turpentine, and mix well all the ingredients; keep the
Salve for your use.

Glisters convenient to be used upon diverse occasions.
IF your Horse be Costive and is greatly pained in his dunging, take the fat of
Beef broth a pound, of English Honey four ounces, of white Salt half a spoonful,
and having made them thin by fire, force them into his body, pretty warm,
holding afterward his Tail close to his Tuel to keep it in till it work, which
will be half an hour first, then trot him up and down the Stable, and give him
a warm Mash, and it will not only make him Laxative, but bring away much foul
matter contracted in the bowels, or for want of the aforesaid materials, boil
two handfuls of Mallows in a pottle of spring water, adding thereto after it is
strained half a pint of Olive Oil, or for want of it half a pound of Butter,
and it will have the same effects.

If your Horse be inwardly desperate sick, Take Oil of Cammomil, Dill, Violets
and Cassia, of each half an ounce; powder of Brown Sugar Candy three ounces,
Marshmallow leaves half a handful, boil them in running water, and having
strained out the liquid part give it him warm glisterwise, using him as
abovesaid.

If your Horse be afflicted with the Pestilence or Fever, take of the seeds of
Coloquintida half an ounce, three quarters of an ounce of Dragantium, of
Centaury and Wormwood each a handful, and a quarter of an ounce of Castorum,
boil them in three quarts of water, or small beer, adding three ounces of
Gerologundinum, half a pint of Olive Oil, and half a spoonful of Salt, strain
it and use it Glisterwise.

If your Horse be afflicted with the Colic or any pain in his bowels, take
salt water or new brine a quart, boil in it a handful of Cammomil or Groundsil,
dissolving into it a quarter of a pound of Castle soap, and having strained out
the liquid part, administer it as the former: in case of giving Glisters
observe to anoint the pipe with butter or Oil, Rake him well before you
adminster it, let him keep it at least half an hour, and suffer him to drink no
cold water that day nor the next, but let his drink be warm water, and his meat
be Mashes or fine Provinder, and observe to give the Glister fasting.

Cordial Powders and Cordial balls, Receipts to make them, and their use.
TO make an excellent Cordial powder for the Consumption of the Lights and
Liver or any internal wasting distemper, take Cinnamon and Loaf-sugar of each an
ounce, two ounces of Bolearmoniack, dry them well, and reduce them to a powder,
giving it to the Horse in a pint of Mallagoe.

To make an excellent Cordial powder or Electuary for a Horse that is sick,
weak, or out of case, take syrup of Lemons, syrup of Roses, and syrup of
Violets, of each half an ounce; an ounce of London Treacle and two ounces of
the powder of Elecampain roots, mingle them together, and put them in a Stove
till the syrups become exceeding thick, and as it were a hard Electuary, the
which as occasion requires, give him dissolved in warm Ale about an ounce in a
Pint.

To make Cordial balls to cure any violent Cold, Glaunders, Heart sickness,
recover lost Appetite, prevent fainting under moderate labor, bring away
Molten grease, or Fatten your Horse, take Carthamus seed, Anniseed, Fennegreek
seeds, Cummin seeds, the Roots of Elecampain and Coltsfoot, of each two
ounces, of Brimstone flower and Chemical Oil of Anniseeds, each two ounces, and
an ounce of the juice of Licorish, half a pint of Whitewine, and a like
quantity of syrup of Sugar, or Molossus, Olive Oil and Honey, of each a quarter
of a pint, and having boiled them over the fire, add as much wheat flower as
will stiffen them into a past, and making it up into balls as big as pullets
Eggs, give him four of them in a morning fasting, suffering him to drink
immediately after a quart of warm Ale.

Purgations, Perfumes, Baths, Suppositories, Charges, Drenches, and Causticks,
what they are, how to make and use them upon sundry occasions.
IF you would gently purge your Horse, give him three ounces of Turnesole in a
quart of warm water, or for want of that, Feltwort, Baldmony, Aloes, or Sea
Housleek. If you would purge out Choleric humors, boil S. Peter's wort, the
seeds of Tutsan or Park-leaves, of each a handful, boil them in a quart of
small Ale, and give it him warm. If he be troubled with watery humors, give him
Dodder that grows upon Savory, and Hedge-Hyssop, of each a handful, boiled in a
quart of water Scammony or purging Blindweed are great purgers, insomuch that
unless they are mixed with Aloes, they often prove hurtful to the body of the
Horse. If you would purge your Horse violently, give him three ounces of
Coloquintida in a pint of Canary, but it is not safe to use this purge, unless
in dangerous distempers, Black-hellebore, Hogs Fennel, or either of the
Polipodiums purge Phlegm and Choler: an ounce of Aloes made up in Butter and
given the Horse, purges away Melancholy. But if your Horse be very sick take an
ounce of Honey, half a pint of Olive Oil, Hempseed, Fennegreek seed and Cassia,
of each an ounce, boil them in a pint of Canary, and give it him warm. If you
would have your Horse vomit up any filthy thing which he has received, or bring
away the gross Phlegmatic humors, take the largest roots of Polipodium of the
Oak, steep them in Oil of Spike, and fasten them to the Horses nose with a
muzel, where letting them rest all night, next morning you will find your Horse
sickish, then taking away the Roots, trot him about, and if foul humors
afflict him, he will vomit extremely.

Baths, their use, and how to make them.
A Bath used for Horses, is no other than his being bathed with the concoction
of diverse simples exceeding hot to disperse the humors settled in any one
place, to dry up humors or refresh a Horse after Travail, etc. And of these in
their order. To disperse evil humors, take smallage, Ox-ey, of each two
handfuls, bruise them in a Mortar, and put to them man's urine, and Oil of
Turpentine, boil them, and as hot as the Horse can endure it, rubbing the place
exceeding hard, and afterward cloth him warm.

If your Horse be troubled with Gourdy-gouty legs, coming either by Farcins or
scratches, use this Bath. Take a quart of Chamberly, put into it a handful of
Baysalt, a quarter of a pound of soap, a handful of Soot, and Misletoe chopped
small, with all which well boiled bath the place grieved, and in so doing
diverse times, the swellings will vanish, and the Farcins be prevented.

If your Horse be subject to tire, or stiff, and out of order with hard
travailing, make a bath of Mallows, Sage, Mint and Rose-cakes, putting a good
handful of each into a Gallon of water, boiling the water till it is near
consumed, then adding half a pint of Olive Oil, and half a pound of Butter,
with the liquid part bath his legs, and keep him walking for half and hour.
These and such like are the natures and uses of baths.

Perfumes for purging the Head, how to make and use them.
IF your Horse be troubled either with the Glaunders, Colds, Pozes, Catarrhs,
or any the like distemper in the head, take Olibanum, Storax, Benjamine and
Frankincense, of each half an ounce, bruise and mix them well, then taking a
Chafingdish of coals, sprinkle it upon them, and having a funnel ready, cover
the Chafingdish therewith, that so the smoke coming out of the little end may
ascend into the Horses head, and it will comfort the brain, purge away filth,
and break the cold: or for want of these, burn the roots of black Hellebore and
Turpentine, or Burgundy-pitch, or Ducks feathers, dried Pimpernel and Rosemary,
and by so doing the effects will manifest their virtues.

Suppositories, what they are, their use, and how to make them.
A Suppository so called is no other than a preparative for a Glister, by
opening the Horses body and rendering him capable to receive it: in such a case
take a large Candle of five or six in the pound, cut off both ends, anoint it
with Oil, and having raked the Horse, thrust it into his Fundament, and there
suffering it to rest, trot him, and it will greatly loosen his belly. If your
Horse has taken a surfeit, take six ounces of Honey, an ounce of Salt-niter, and
the like quantity of Anniseeds, making them into a stiff past with wheat
flower, then make a ball as big as a halfpenny loaf, and thrust it into his
Fundament, keeping it in by binding down his Tail to the Girt: If you intend to
purge Phlegm, put a round piece of Castle Soap in his Fundament; if Choler,
take a handful of Savin, and a like quantity of Staves-acre, bruise them, and
put them into a like quantity of Honey, and boil them till they may be made into
a ball, then use it as the former: If melancholy, take a large Red Onion, and
peeling it, put it into his Fundament: If for Phlegm, make a suppository of
Honey and Oat flower, and in thus ordering your Horse, be sure he be fasting,
and that he drink no cold water that day: That he be kept warm, and well looked
to.

Charges, what they are, their use, and how to make them.
CHarges are no other than Plasters, or Poultesses laid to the place grieved,
and because I have already largely treated about the like, I shall now insist
on but two, which may be used upon any occasion, viz. Take two pounds of Wheat
flower, half a pint of Whitewine, a pound of Honey, half a pound of
Bolearmoniack beaten into powder, boil them on a fire, adding half a pound of
black Pitch, the like quantity of Turpentine, the seeds of Cummin, Sanguis
Draconis, and Fennegreek, of each an ounce; Bayberries and Oil of Bays, of each
an ounce, boil them to a Salve, and use it in case of any wrench, shoulderslip,
Hipslip, dislocated bone, stretched sinews, scratches, swelling, tumor or the
like, there being no better any where to be found.

The second Charge make thus, take of the Oil of Bays, a quarter of a pound; of
Cantharides, Orpin and Euphorbum, of each two ounces: and having made the
latter three into powder, mingle them with the former and spreading it after it
has been well boiled plaisterwise, lay it to the place grieved: it is excellent
in case of fractured or dislocated bones, joint slips or strains, weeping
wounds, to dry up humors, and also for any swelling of the Back, strain or
sinews, and indeed it may be applied with success to any Grief or Sorrance.

Most excellent Drenches to cure all inward diseases, as Fevers of all sorts,
Plague, infection, etc.
HAving let your Horse blood (especially in case of Fevers of all forts, which
are Tertian, Quartan, Quotidian, Hectic, and Autumnal Fevers, coming by
Pestilential air, Accidental Fever or general Plague, known by Trembling,
Panting, Sweating, Dull countenance, Short-breath, Faintness, decay of stomach,
Costiveness and the like) give him this drink, viz. Take the Roots of
Cellendine, as also the leaves a good handful, a like quantity of Rue, Balm and
Wormwood, Powder of Diapente half an ounce, and a pound of Fresh Butter, wash
the herbs, bruise them and put them into a quart or three pints of Ale; then
having boiled them, strain the liquid part, and give it the Horse to drink
three mornings successively.

Secondly, To the same purpose, take three or four new laid Eggs, beat their
yolks with as many spoonfulls of Brandy, put thereto an ounce of Diapente, and
a like quantity of Honey, adding half a pint of Canary, and give it your Horse
when the Fever or Ague is just coming on him.

Thirdly, Take Elecampain Roots, reduced into powder, an ounce; Liquorish,
Anniseed and Cuminseed a like quantity, Bay berries, Longpepper and Fennegreek,
of each a quarter of an ounce, beat them together, adding half a pint of Olive
Oil, or for want of it half a pound of sweet butter, set them over a fire in a
pint of Canary or Ale, and give him the liquid part in a Drenching horn.

Fourthly, Take Red Sage, Mint and Diatessaron, of each two ounces, boil them
in a quart of Beer, sweeten them with two ounces of Sugarcandy, and give them
the Horse; and thus observing in all hot distempers to administer cooling
things, and in cooling distempers hot things, your expectations will be
answered, if you do not apply them unseasonably.

Causticks and Corrosives, what they are, and how to be applied.
A Caustic is no other than a burning by application, making a wound where
none was before, in which case Lime, Oil of Vitriol, Aqua fortis, etc. are
applied: how to manage which upon diverse occasions I have before recited.
Corrosives are in the same manner applied, but of less force only used in
eating away dead or spungy flesh, hard knobs, Bony Excrescences, or the like:
they are used likewise in case of Farcines, Leprosy, Mange, and the things
used for the most part are burnt Alum, Redcoral, Mercury sublim. Verdigrese
and Copperas, of either sort, and often compounds, as Unguentum Apostolorum,
Aegyptiacum, Croceum, etc.

Another sort of this kind there is, called Medicines Putrefactive, applied to
swelling Tumors and the like, to bring them to a head, as roasted Sorrel,
White Lilly Roots, Ground Ivy, Butterflowers, etc. Thus far, Reader, having
proceeded, I shall close up the Medicinal and Chirurgical part of Farrying in
relation to Horses, etc. with hot and cold simples which a skilful Farrier
ought either moist or dry to have always by him.

Hot Simples, what they are.
ALoes, Agarick, Alum, Aristolochia, Asonteo, Asarabacca, Arsmart Anniseeds,
Archangel, Assa fetida, Angellica, Alexander, Alehoof, Garden Bassil, Balm,
Bayberries, Wild running-Bettony, Burrage, Brank Ursin, Briony, Broom,
Butter-Bur, Brimstone, Burdock, Cellendine, Chervil, Garden Clarge,
Clowns-woundwort, Coloquintida, Callamus, Cummin, Garden Chammock, Cinnamon,
Cloves, Long and round Pepper, China, Darnel, Elecampain, Fennel, Gentian,
Garlic, Germander, Stinking Gladwin, Golden Rod, Gramel, English Gallinga,
Ginger, Glasswort, Galls, Grains of Paradise, Hempseed, Galbanum, Garden
Hyssop, Juniper Berries, Honey, Saint John's wort, Jack by the Hedge, Ivy,
Rue-Holme, Irish Ladies-smock, Lavender cotton, Lavender Lovage, Leeks,
Mallows, Marshmallows, Garden Lillies, Marrygolds, Sweet-Marjoram, Wild
Marjoram, Melilote, Spearmint, French-dogs Mercury, Masterwort, Misleto,
Motherwort, Mouse ear, Mugwort, Mustardseed, Neesing Root, Nutmeg, Ragwort,
Restharrow, Wild, Wild Rocket, Rosemary, Garden Rue, Saffron, Sage, Sanicle,
Savin, Common Saxafrage, Burnt Saxafrage, Scabens, English Scurvy Grass,
self-Heal, Sopewort, Smallage, Southernwood, Sea Starwort, Staves-acre, Garden
Tansie, Time, Tutsan, Turmerick, Valerian, Wood-Vervaine, Diers-weed,
Fennegreek, Scotcheneel, and London Treacle.

Cold simples, what they are.
GRoundsil, Hawks-weed, Clove-gilli-flowers, Knotgrass, Hawks-weed, Howsleek,
Kidnywort, Lettice, Water Lillies, Common Liver-wort, Liquorish, Medlars,
Mony-wort, Tree-Moss, and unripe Mulberries, Mace, Common Nightshade,
Navel-wort, Orpin, Water and Land-plantins, Pomgranet, Queen of the Meadows,
Shepherds-purse, Common and Wood-sorrels, Sowthistle, Succory, Stone-Crop,
Strawberry-leaves, Starwort, Sphinack, Wild-Tansies, Sloes, the Bark and Root
of Black Thorn, Meadow Trefoile, both the Vervains, Hony-suckles, Vineleaves,
Violets, Viper-Bugloss, the Leaves, Flowers and Seeds of the Willow, Vinegar,
Yarrow, Antimonium, Alcanet, Garden Arach, Barberry-Rind, Barley, Bilberries,
Blew-bottle, Bucks-Horn, Plantain, Bolearmoniack, Comfry, Cranes-Bill,
Dentd'lion: All the sorts of common Docks, Ducks-meat, and Fumitory. Diverse
ways there are to preserve most of these simples in their primal virtue all the
year, but too tedious here to be inserted; some of which, likewise, are both
hot and cold, and may indifferently be used in hot and cold distempers: to
describe them I think it altogether tedious and unnecessary, for as much as
most of them are vulgarly known; and if any of them are not, and for that cause
some may pretend they know not how to find them, a Herbal will give them
directions, and rectify their understanding. And now I shall proceed to the
Shooing and Roweling, things worthy to be noted by all that have any thing to
do with Horses.

Hoofs, how many sorts there are, their perfections and imperfections.
OF Hoofs, there are diverse kinds, some perfect, and others imperfect: The
imperfect Hoof, is when any part is lacking; or if it be unseemly, spreading
broad, and being exceeding flat, that no shoe will sit completely upon it, for
such Horses for the most part are narrow heel'd, on which he for the most part
treads, rendering himself thereby unable for Travailing, subjecting him
frequently to cast his shoes, and subject to false quarters; and this is often
caused by the Horses being brought up in moist and Fenny ground. To shoo which,
not being as yet grown to too flat, the Farrier with his paring Iron must take
off as much of the Toe and sides as it is possible, still keeping it round, but
let him not touch the quarter or the heel, unless it be to make the seat of the
shoo plain, and let that be as lightly as may be, still anointing the Hoofs
with Hog's Grease and Oil of Baies, and within a while they will become round
thick and feasible: The shoo wherewith this Hoof must be brought to perfection,
must be made strong, with a broad webb, and broad Spunges, pierced from the
quarters to the hard Toe, but not to the Heel, the holes wider without than
within, and the foot diligently pared as aforesaid, from the Tallon nail
toward the heel, suffer the shoo to stand a straws breadth without the Hoof;
the better to save the Coffin, let your nails be made of good Iron, the heads
square, but not so broad above as below, that they may not only stand above the
shoe, but fill the holes, putting five nails on the outside, and four on the
inside, because in this case the Horse wears more within than without.

The perfect Hoof on the forefeet, how to pare, shoe, etc.
IF the Hoof be perfect, first pare the seat of the Shoe as even and plain as
may be, that the shoe sitting close may bear no more on the one side than on
the other, nor take more on the Toe than the Heel; for the Heels must be higher
than the Toes, but by reason all the weight of the Horses fore part presses
upon the quarters, and heels of the fore feet, those parts must be most
regarded, and as little of the Butteresses taken off as may be; for the heels
are naturally weaker than the toes: but this is meant by the fore-feet only,
for the paring of the hinder-feet is quite contrary, as will hereafter appear.

For the most exact method of shooing the perfect Hoof, observe these following
rules, viz. Let your shoe be of Spanish Iron, or other well tempered Iron, the
web broad, fitting it to the Hoof, the Spunges thick and more firm than any
other part, and somewhat broad that the quarters may stand somewhat beyond the
Hoof, to preserve the Coffin, and pierce it from the quarter to the hard toe,
but not backwards toward the heel, suffer the holes to be wider without than
within, that the pierced circle may be more distant from the edge of the toe
than from the edge of the quarter, because the Hoof is thicker forward than
backwards: thus having fitted the shoo, take nails made of the same Iron, the
Heads square, though not fully so broad beneath as above, that the nails may
fill up the holes, and the shoe be kept from stirring, suffering them to
appear somewhat above the shoe, and let the points appear in a just line, not
one lower than another, or in and out like the teeth of a Saw, and cut them off
so near that when they are clinched, by a little raising the Hoof with a Knife
they appear to be within it: but be sure, ere the shoe is fastened with any
more than two nails, see it stand right, by looking on the Frush, and suffering
the Horse to set his foot to the ground, whilst you hold up the other with your
hand; and if the shoe stand but a little awry, you may by striking the Hoof
with your Hammer bring it to rights; then with a Rasp pare the Hoof, till the
edges appear.

Of the Brittle and Rugged Hoof, Long Hooof, Crooked Hoof, Flat Hoof, Broad
Frushes and narrow Heels, what they are, and how to be used.
First, THe rough and brittle is rugged and full of crinkles or seams like a
Rams Horn, caused by the intemperature of the foot, either too hot or dry, to
remedy which bind it about with Hog's Grease, Marshmallows and Oil of
Earthworms, still chafing the legs to disperse the hot humors, and in so
doing, in a weeks time the hoof will be greatly softened, at what time with a
Rasp file off the ruggedness as well as you can, but come not too near the
quick; then having a shoe in readiness, neither too heavy nor too light, set
it on with nine nails, five without and four within, stop his feet with
Cow Dung, fried in Hog's Grease, and let him run in moist ground.

Secondly, The long hoof is that which causes the Horse for the most part to
tread upon his heel, going as it were on his Pasterns, which occasions
Windgalls, etc. To help which, pare away the toe and the buttresses answerable;
anointing it with hot butter, till you have brought it to the fashion of a
perfect hoof; then having a shoe round at the toe as may be, and if the foot
be narrow, let the shoe appear a straws breadth without the hoof, and pierce
the shoe the deeper, set it more backward than to other Horses is usual,
because Horses having such feet, do tread more backward than others, fix it on
with eight nails, and suffer not the hoof afterward to grow long.

Thirdly, The crooked hoof is when the hoof is broad without and narrow within,
rendering the Horse splay-footed, by treading inwardly, subjecting him to
interfering, and often lameness: in paring this hoof, observe which side is
highest, and then levelling it, pare the rest like the perfect hoof; let the
shoe in this case be strong, with a broad web, fitted to the foot, by paring,
setting the strongest part of the shoe to the weakest part of the hoof, and
fasten it on with nine nails, five without and four within.

Fourthly, The flat hoof is much of the nature of the imperfect hoof: in paring
this hoof you must take away the toe, till you can make the shoe sit complete,
as also the sides, the heel and ball touch not, but let them remain as strong
as possible: Then having a shoe with a broad Web, for the more it covers the
weak sole, the more commodious it is, permitting the Middle part of the web
that covers the Ball of the Foot to be much thicker than the other; where the
piercings are, and so hollow that it touch no part of the Ball of the Foot,
large enough in every part, so that he may go easily, piercing it round the
toe, to favor the heels, and fastened on with five nails on a side.

Fifthly, Broad Frushes are when the Frushes are broad, the heels weak and
soft, that they may be in a manner bent together, which makes him tread
gingerly or painfully on stony or hard ground: in paring this hoof you must be
very cautious, paring only the toe and a little the seat of the shoe, lest you
lame your Horse: The shoe must be stronger toward the heel than the toe, and
the Web in that part broadest: set on this shoe with nine nails, and in all
other respects use it as the perfect hoof.

Sixthly, Narrow heels are frequently tender and of no long indurance, in which
case you must pare the toe short, making the seat of the shoe fair and plain,
and open only, that there may be a little space between the Frush and the heel:
for the better it is, the less you take off the heel: The shoe for this
purpose must be light, the Web broad, and the Sponges almost meet: let the
piercing be all toward the toe, sparing the heel so much as you can, suffering
it to be long enough that way, and fasten it with eight nails. If the hoof be
over hollow, yet firm, pare it round about the edges, especially the seat of
the shoe, to the intent the hollowness within may not be so deep, always keep
it moist with stopping it, for fear of hoof-binding; and let the shoe be in
all points the same with that directed for the perfect hoof. And thus much for
the fore feet.

Paring and Shooing the hinder feet, false quarter, and interfering of diverse
sorts of shoes, etc.
First, OBserve that in paring the hinder feet, the toe is the weakest part,
and must be most spared; as for the rest you may use them as the fore feet, as
the perfection or imperfection admits: The shoe in this case must be exactly
fitted to the hoof, strongest at the toe, and pierced near to the heel, because
the toe is the weakest part of the foot; let the outside be made with a calkin,
not so high, but that the others sponge may be agreeable with it; this calking
is to keep the Horse from sliding, and must be rather blunt than sharp pointed,
and handsomely turned upwards.

The shoe for a foot that has the false quarter must be exactly fitted, and
tacked on to that side where the false quarter is. If he do not halt, then make
him a button or shouldering on the inside of the shoe next the soal of the
foot somewhat distant from the false quarter, near the toe, which will defend
the sore place, and make the Horse fit for Travail.

In case of interfering, the hoofs are higher on the one side than the other,
viz. the outside; wherefore it must be carefully taken off, and both sides made
even; or if it be possible let the inside be left somewhat the highest; and
fitting the shoe, let the inward part be the thickest, without any calking,
and the edges close to the hoof: but if the foot be hoof-bound, make him a
shoe like a half Moon, paring the toe as short as may be, and somewhat thin,
opening at the same time the heels.

Diverse other shoes there are in use, as the Planch shoe or Plauncelet shoes
with Calkins, Rings, Welts, Turning-vice, Patten-shooes, Joynt-shooes, and
shoes with swelling welts and borders, but seeing they are rarely used, and
most of them more hurtful and incommodious, than profitable or decent: I shall
pass them over, and only give you a touch of Roweling, which I hitherto
purposely omitted, and then proceed to the Jockies part in this Treatise.

Roweling what it is, and the Benefit that accrues thereby.
THe manner of Roweling, when you perceive your Horse grieved by the gathering
of evil humors, or in case of any violent sprain, Throw him upon soft straw,
and with your Lancet slit the skin a handful below the place grieved, through
the skin only let it be, and then with a Swan or Goose-quill, after with your
Cornet you have raised the skin from the flesh, blow wind into it as much as
may be, stopping the hole with your finger and thumb. Then having beaten the
blown place with a Hazle wand, let it go, and thrusting in your Roweling
needle, which must be seven or eight inches long, let it come out above the
place grieved, drawing after it Hair or Sarsnet to the thickness of a man's
finger, anointed with butter or Hogs-lard, stir it about, and every day dress
it with Lard, etc. The which will cause the corruption, though contracted deep
in the flesh or in the joints, to come away; but observe that you Rowel the
same way the veins run, and not cross, for fear of laming your Horse.

Another manner of Roweling there is, viz. opening a hole, and blowing it as
aforesaid; then having raised the skin from the flesh, put in a round piece of
stiff leather un-allumed, anointing it, and the leather having a hole in the
middle, it must be placed against the hole in the skin, that the corruption may
pass through: dress it every day as the former. The helps got by Roweling are
these, it disperseth, dissolveth, and brings away evil humors, loosening
those parts that are bound, and binding those parts which are loose,
strengthens the joints, and draws away cold Phlegmatic humors; it is
generally done in case of inward strains about the shoulders or hips, for hard
swellings, which will not be mollified nor corroded by outward applications;
with diverse the like attributes, which for brevity sake, and by reason they are
known to most Farriers, I shall omit.

THE JOCKEY IN HIS Proper Colors.
The Intreagues, Artifices, Overreaching deceits, and cheats of those Dealers
in Horseflesh, known by the name of JOCKIES.
THat the Jockey is the very Quintessence of Knavery in Masquerade, few that
have had to do with any of them can deny: an Animal he is, that lives by
deceiving, and it is not an easy matter to be a crafts Master in that
profession; for nothing but a prompt wit with an extraordinary stock of
impudence and long experience can go through stitch with those affairs:
wherefore diverse dealers in Horses are undeservedly called Jockies, or indeed
are but younger brothers in the profession, to make the elders Markets, as
Files are to the Diverse; but without any long detaining you, I shall open their
Arcana or Cabinet of false wares and devices, with which they gull the
ignorant, and at a dear rate make them purchase wit. But to the purpose.

The Jockies device to cheat the Buyer, with a blind or lame Horse.
IF the Horse be blind through age or accident, or with excessive riding, and
his sight irrecoverably lost, though no Pin, Web, Haw, Film, or the like be
apparent, but the defect is in the very center of the Eye, by the defect of
nerves, insensibly that convey the speculative sight to the twinkles. Then the
Jocky having dressed him up to the best advantage, keeps him two or three days
at high feeding, and still as he comes to dress strikes, him over the face and
eyes with his whip or wand, till the Horse with the least sudden noise,
fearing the coming of the whip or switch, tosses up his head, and winks, as if
he foresaw it, which deceives the buyer, in supposing he does so. Another way
the Jockey has in often blowing ground Pepper, Ginger, Salt or Alum into the
Horses eyes, which makes him always so fearful of being tormented in that
nature, that when the Jockey has brought him to Market, and his eyes are
questioned, he presently swears they are perfect (being seldom without a Budget
full of new minted Oaths) and thereupon tells the Buyer that with the least
motion of his hand the Horse shall start, mount his head, or shut his eyes;
which proves so by this means, the Jockey has always in his pocket small shot
less than pins heads, Rapeseed or the like, a few of which he unperceived of
the Buyer, holds between his finger and thumb, and upon the motion of his hand
fillips them into the Horses face or eyes, who upon the least feeling,
supposing that he is about to be tormented, throws up his head, winks or
starts: nay, he so orders it by buffeting him with his hat often when he has
him by himself, that when he feels the wind thereof, he will start: by which
the unskilful Buyer frequently deceives himself, whilst the Jockey laughs in
his sleeve. Another trick he has by touching the Horse on the knees, or under
the belly, to make him mount his head, which he brings him to by former
checking of a rigid curb bridle, fastened to those places; if you ask him to
ride the Horse, unless it be in a plain field or even Road, he will tell you he
would not have you put your self to that trouble, but he will call some poor boy
or other, and give him a penny to do it, that so he may the beter observe his
going: then has he sauntering up and down, or standing aloof, an arch Rogue of
his own, acquainted with all the infirmities of the Horse, whom he calls, as if
he had never before seen him, and he manages the Horse to the satisfaction of
the Jockey and Buyer: If there be any visible obstruction of sight, and the
Jockey cannot remove it, then having blowed powder of Tartar into his Eye or
Eyes, which will for five or six hours after cause him to wink, that the
Blemish cannot be easily discerned, he chooses to expose such a Horse to sale in
a gloomy day or by Candlelight. These and many more Artifices he uses, to put
off a blind Horse.

If the Jockey has bought a lame or foundred Horse for little or nothing,
pretending that he designs him for the Dogs, and indeed he is so incurable,
that he is fit for little else; then bringing him home, he alters him by
trimming, makes a Blaze or Star, where there was none, putting him on false
locks, or taking away Spots, Stars or Marks, so that sometimes the first owner,
not knowing him, has bought him again of the Jockey at a dear rate. The Horse
thus accoutered, he feeds high with Mashes and the like, washing his limbs with
the decoction or broth of Sheeps heads, Mallows and Smallage, bathing them with
hot Oils; if the lameness proceed from cold distempers, or if from hot or any
casualty, then with cooling ointments well heated and chafed, giving him a
scowring or two, then pricking his sides on the spurring places, he rubs in
powder of Glass, decently covering it with the hair, then stops the Horses feet
with flax dipped in Pitch or Tarr, and paring them every day, brings them into
good form and evenness, putting on exceeding heavy shoes, that by being used
to them he may be the more nimble when light ones are placed in their stead:
thus having used him, if he be a Foundred Horse he loggs him him with Lead,
placing plates thereof under his shoes, to support his hoofs, and make him
tread firm, but if subject to Aches, Sprains, Spavin, Ringbone, Scratches or
the like, washing his legs down, he binds them about with Lists till he comes
into the Market, and then in his Inn, or some Corner, taking them off, he sets
a light Lad upon him, having first rubbed hi^ Tuel with Cowitch or young
nettles, and then has he diverse to cheapen him, and seeming altogether
strangers to him, offer to strike him Earnest at a pretty round rate; which he
in a great heat refuses, wondering they will undervalue his Horse and their own
judgments: upon which they begin to handle him, and rubbing the place where the
glass has fretted, cause him to winch and caper, then having well viewed him,
they swear he is sound, Wind and Limb, and that he may be worth the money; but
he is to buy for a friend, and must not exceed his order, though had he
occasion for one for himself, against the world he would have a good one, and
so goes away: This sets diverse unexperienced buyers agog, who no sooner begin
to handle the Horse, but a fellow comes and whispers the Jockey in the ear, as
supposed to come from him that last bid money, with new offers, and then strikes
him Earnest, yet he refuses it: whereupon for fear the Horse should be bought
up, whom the Standers by suppose to be of singular goodness, one or other bids
money, which the Jockey seems to slight, standing at a great distance till he
has screwed up as high as he can, and perceives none else forward in bidding,
then all on a sudden he claps up the bargain, swearing he is too cheap, yet he
has no pasture or convenient standing for him, or else he would not sell him
for half as much more. And thus is the ignorant Buyer cheated, perhaps with a
Lame, Spavened, Foundred and infirm Horse, buying Dogs meat instead of a
serviceable Beast.

The Jockies art in putting of a dull old Jade, and by what means he makes him
appear mettlesome and young.
THe Jockey having bought an Old dull Jade altogether unserviceable, yet if he
be well limbed, and of good stature, he brings him home, feeds him high, gives
him every morning balls of Honey and Wheatflower, spirting into his mouth
Malmsey or Brandy, kembs him down, pleats his main, and clips his foretop in
form; when if the pits of his eyes be hollow, whereby his age appears he slits
the skin with a penknife, raises it up, puts into it a straw or Crow-quill, and
by that means blowing into it, the hollowness rises and fills the pit, when
upon the hole he claps a small plaster of Pitch, till the wind is settled, and
the hole closed; the like he does to his Flanks and shoulders, then he Rasps or
Files the hoofs, to take a way the ruggidness, and pares them smooth: which
done, with a Pumicestone he makes his teeth white, and with a hot Iron makes a
round black speck in his mark tooth, and uses him to hold up his head with a
strong Curb-bridle, starching his ears if he have any, and into them putting
two small Pease or Pebbles; then leads he him into the Market, where he has in
readiness a Saddle, in the forepart of which is a plate of Iron with two or
three holes, so that when he bears his body forward, sharp wyers that bear down
with a spring come through those holes, and pricking the Horse miserably in his
tenderest part, make him dance and caper: which the Buyer imputing to his
mettle, and perceiving no imperfection in him, cheats himself, whilst he gives
credit to the Oaths and Protestations of the Jockey.

The Jockeys Art in managing a Restiff Horse, suddenly making a lean Horse
far, and reclaiming a Horse that has got the vice of lying down in the Water,
etc.
THe Jockey has always his eyes about him, and when he hears any one has a
restif stubborn Horse, that he can bring to no good order either in Journey or
Working, then he sends one of his Accomplices to borrow that Horse if it be
possible, to ride 6 or 7 miles, who upon his return disparages him, swearing he
is not worth sixpence more than his skin, and that if he was his he would send
him to the Dogs, if he could not sell him: this and the like expressions make
the party have a mean conceit of his Beast, when soon after, the Jockey finds
some means or other to have a sight of him, and then as if ignorant of the
Horses defect, demands whose he is, and whether he will be sold: Then the owner
much out of love with him is wheedled in by the Jockey (who pretends himself
altogether unskillfull in Horse flesh) to sell him at a low rate, or swap him
away for some foundred Jade new vamped: The Jockey having gotten him into his
clutches, the first thing he does, sets one upon his back, and fastening a
Cracker under his Tail, sets fire to it, which makes the Horse run and caper
extremely; then having a Crupper with sharp needles in that part which goes
under the Tail, yet cannot prick by reason of a spungy woollen list they must
pierce through, unless the Rider pull the Crupper, then at the same time
smacking his whip, the Horse verily believes the Crakers are at his Arse again,
and so runs forward, then having perfected him, he day by day suples his
joints, and feeds him high, so that within a short time he becomes an excellent
Beast

If the Jockey buys a lean Horse fit for nothing to appearance but Dogs, so be
it he be any thing young and well boned, he first lets him blood, then dresses
him at all points with supple ointments, loosening his skin; after which he
gives him half a peck of Beans boiled in sweet Oil and Muscadel, and within two
hours after half a peck of Bran boiled in small wort, and in it two ounces of
Fennelseed, and as much Cumminseed, and powder of Liquorish, keeping him in a
warm Stable very dark, and often renewing his Litter. The watter he gives him
is for the most part warm, mingled with Milk or Whey, giving him often sweet
wort and Mashes of Malt, daily loosening his skin; and when he has brought him
into some case, then he makes a powder of Cummin and Fennegreekseeds, the Roots
of Mountain-Osier, Cloves, Nutmeg, Brimstone and Sugarcandy, which he moulds up
in a ball of wheat and Linseed Flower made into past with Milk and Honey, giving
him one morning and evening for six days, and between whiles boiled Oats, Bran,
and Splent Beans, in which Nettleseeds have been scattered, so that at the end
of ten or twelve days the Horse will be in good case: then the Jockey having
slit the skin of his Flanks and eyepits, with a quill, blows them up to the
best advantage, and so carries him to Market, where he sells him at a good
rate: when the Buyer carrying him home, and giving him ordinary Provender, his
fat which was hastily gotten and no ways solid, but rather windy and gellied
humor puffing him up, decreases almost as soon as gotten, and restores him to
his primitive leanness, which occasions many to believe their Horses are
bewitched, and to suspect their Neighbors in that case, when it proceeds from
the cheat and roguery of the Jockey.

If any person have a well made Horse who is in good case, but is subject to
lie down when he comes into any water, and for that trick the owner is weary of
him, the Jockey by one means or other insinuates himself into his company, and
finds occasion to discourse about Horses, when he after diverse discourses
swears he had once (but thanks God he has parted with him) a Horse that had the
worst of all vices, which was, that as soon as he came into any water, whether
deep or shallow, he would notwithstanding his utmost endeavor to prevent it,
lie down with him: so that he often endangered his drowning, and seldom or
never that he rode abroad with him in winter-weather, but he ducked him over
head and ears before his return. By this means he gets the party to confess
that he has a Horse troubled with the same vice, then begins he to disparage
and exclaim against him, saying, that he is fit for no use, and that it is
impossible to make him leave it; for that being foaled under Leo, a hot and
fiery sign, it is as well his nature as custom; then he tells him a sham story,
how he parted with his Horse for little or thing, only upon that account.
Having thus put the owner out of conceit with him, he soon after persuades him
to carry him to Market, and sell him; where the Jockey has always one ready to
buy him up, and when he has got him, he rides him into the water; then
suffering him to lie down, he having three or four to assist him, holds his
head so long under water, that he almost stifles him, whipping him in the mean
while severely, and by so using him three or four times, he so dreads the
water, that if it be possible he will upon all occasions shun it, and never
after venture to lie down in it. Thus not only upon these, but upon diverse
other pretenses he bubbles the unexperienced to his own advantage.

The Jockies craft in making Horses seemingly lame or dangerously sick, and the
cheats he puts upon the unwary, with false Eyes, false Ears, false Manes,
Tails, etc.
SEldom it is but the Jockey has one Horse or other standing at Livery amongst
diverse Gentlemen's Horses, and by frequently coming to visit his own, takes a
view of them, and understands unto whom they appertain; when marking out one of
them as best likes him, he, as near as he by inquiry can, understands the owner
is to ride forth, with certain hairs or fine silk, and a small needle takes up
the Fetlock vein, which soon makes the Horse halt down lame: then the Gentleman
being acquainted therewith orders the Hostler to carry him to the Farrier that
his feet may be searched, and the cause if possible found out, but in vain the
Farrier puzels himself in searching the foot, and so cunningly has the Jockey
smoothed over the cause, that without great curiosity it cannot be discovered:
whereupon it is concluded to proceed from an old Founder, a former Surfeit, the
effects of some Quitter-bone, Ring-bone or Spavin, not formerly cured, or the
like. Whereupon the Gentleman despairing of his Horses recovery, so soon as his
urgent occasions require it, fumes and storms at a desperate rate, when the
Jockey being at hand, as one ignorant of the matter, demands the cause of his
disturbance; then being told it, he pities the beast, and comforts the owner,
confirming the opinion of the Farrier, who freequently is of his confederacy,
offering the Gentleman rather than he shall be disappointed of his journey,
either to lend, sell or swap with him; of one of which he commonly makes his
advantage: but if he succeeds not in any of them; then pretending great skill
in Farrying, reckoning up many hundred Horses which he has cured of all
distempers and Sorrances, he undertakes to cure him for so much money, perhaps
half a piece or more, which he performs by taking away the needle, silk or
hair, and suppling the place with Oil of Baies; though that he may seem to
deserve his money, he uses many slipslops altogether useless and unnecessary.

Another trick the Jockey has to make a Horse in all parts appear as if he were
dying, which is to thrust down his throat a ball made with flower of Chestnuts,
and a mixture of six Grains of Opium, at what time he puts in as before, either
to lend, sell, swap, buy or cure: another way he has to make a Horse Tremble,
Sweat, Pant, Stair, and the like, whilst the Farrier in vain uses medicines to
cure him, which he does by thrusting a Stone as big as a penny whiteloaf, dipped
in Oil of Spike into the Horses Fundament: the former of these he antidotes
with the juice of Rue, and Olive Oil; and the latter he eases by drawing forth
the stone, anointing his Fundament with Hogs-lard, and whilst he causes and
cures, he frequently sends the Hostler for a pot of Ale, or about some such
frivolous errand, that he may not discover the knavery.

If the Jockey has a Horse with one or both eyes entirely out, he seeks for a
Horse newly dead; and taking forth his eyes, he steeps them a night in
whitewine, which makes them plump and bright; then he forces them into the lids
of the blind Horse, glewing together the further corners to keep them in, and
teaches the Horse to start, as before I have discovered them; having well
accout ed him he brings him to Market in the Evening, or in a very gloomy day,
and by that means cheats the ignorant buyer, supposing he has bought an
excellent penyworth; though the next morning perhaps through the Horses straining
he finds his false eyes in the Manger, which he imputes to the incantation of
some Witch, Wizard, Incubus, or envious neighbor.

If a Horse has lost his Main, and appears unseemly, the Jockey shaving it
close, takes the Main of a dead Horse, skin and all, and having well dried or
dressed it, sews it so artificially to the live Horses skin, that it must be a
curious eye that discovers it, by reason the upper part being glewed makes it
sit complete and fast: the like measures he takes to set on false Ears, false
Foretops, and false Tails; and some have gone so far that when a Horse through
age has lost his Teeth, they have set him in artificial ones, as the Teeth of
young dead Horses, and so deceived the Buyer.

The Jockies art in making of Stars, Snips, Blazes, etc.
IF the Jockey designs to disguise or beautify a Horse, then he first alters
them by making Stars, Snips, or taking out Saddle-spots: and all these ^hey can
do so artificially that if the Horse be stolen, the owner cannot know him
again. To make a white Star, Blaze or Snip in a Black or Sorrel Horse, he cuts
a piece of Lead, being before flatted proportionable to what he intends; then
shaving off the hair, he with a Lancet raises the skin and thrusts in the Lead,
being dipped in Oil of Tartar, suffering it to rest there four days, then
taking it out claps the skin close, so that the hair growing again, becomes as
white as milk.

To make a Red Star, Blaze or Snip in a White-Horse, he shaves away the hair,
and anoints the skin with Oil of Vitriol, Soot, and the juice of Hemlock. To
make a Black Star in a White Horse, he uses the decoction of Fern-roots, Soot
or Ink, and the wood of Oliander, the which when he has raised the skin, he
puts under, suffering it there to remain, and by so doing the hair immediately
becomes Black: nay if he has had a Horse often to the Market, and he has there
been blown upon, he will dye him a quite contrary color; and though he be
troubled with most dist^^pers incident to Horses, yet will he swear he has
neither Splint, Spavin nor Windgal, Scratches, Crepances nor Rats-tails, Mules
nor Cibil-heels, Sellender nor Mallender, Curb, Ringbone nor Quitterbone,
Houghbone, Sit-fast, Anbury nor Vives, neither Farcine, Founder-footed,
Broken-winded, Grease Molten, or Running Glaunders: but good Eyes, good Thighs,
and every thing answerable. These and a hundred more are the tricks of the
Jockies, which for brevities sake I shall at this time forbear to mention, and
proceed to treat of other Cattle, useful and necessary to man.

A TREATISE OF CATTLE. Their Ordering, Cure, etc.
HAving treated largely of the Horse, etc. I shall now proceed to satisfy the
reader in the management of other useful Cattle, and first of the Bull, Ox, Cow
and Calf. The Bull most fit to get a good breed, must be long bodied, of color
Red, broad shouldered, strong-boned, not over large of body, his breast broad,
his head short, and full foreheaded, his eyes black and full, his Horns smooth
and short, and his Tail long and Bushy. The Cow must not be too large nor too
small, rather long than short, her Rump broad, of color Black, with some
changeable spots of White or Red, her Windpipe large, her Womb the like, her
forehead flat and broad, her Eyes large and Black, her Horns long, but smooth,
and for the most part black, great Mouth, thin Cheeks, wide Nostrils, large
Dew-laps, long and thick-neck, broad Shoulders long Tail, smooth and even
Claws, long Teats, and broad Breast: and in making these observations in your
choice, you will seldom or never miss of a good breed, if you order them
accordingly, viz. put not your Heifer to the Bull, till she be three years old,
and suffer her not to bear Calves for store after twelve. The best time to put
her to the Bull is in May or June; and to know when she is desirous of him,
observe if the Claws of her feet be swollen, the which if they be, then is it a
sign of Lust in her, and that she is desirous to be covered, or by her
continual lowing, the same may be known; and that she may the sooner conceive,
keep her with spare diet, two or three days before you lead her to the Bull,
and the leaner the better, though the Bull at the same time must be in good
Case; if she refuse to take the Bull, or that the Bull be backward, burn
Harts-Tail under their noses, or rub the Cows Reception place with Nettleseeds,
or ground Ginger, and afterward with a Sponge, with which Sponge rub the Bulls
nose, and by so doing you will provoke them to desire: when the Cow has so
often received the Bull as you think convenient, put her into a warm house for
a weeks space, not milking her in that time, unless her Udders stretch, then
put her into an enclosed field, where she cannot leap out, nor run through
Bushes, suffering her often to drink clear water, and in so ordering her at ten
months end she will bring you a lusty Calf or two, if no casualty prevent it.

When your Cow has Calved, you must give her a comfortable dose, viz. half a
pint of Malmsey, four new laid Eggs, and a pint of Ale mixed together,
suffering the Calf to lie by her in fresh and warm straw: and as soon as you
find he has recovered any strength, put him to the Teat, at what time if you
perceive him bubble and rather mumble the Teat than suck, or if it be at any
time after, look under his tongue, and if you there perceive a white fleshy
substance growing over the Tongue, cut it away with a sharp pair of Scissars,
without wounding the Tongue, washing it thereupon with Water, Salt and the
juice of Garlic, and when the Calf begins to grow up, it you perceive he is
troubled with Lice, or afflicted with Scabs, keep him in fresh straw, and wash
him with urine, wherein Butter and Colewort-stalks have been boiled.

In gelding your Calf, that he may so be an Ox, the best time is at a year and
half Old, when the Moon is in the Wane, observing that the sign at that time,
be not in Libra, Scorpio, nor Sagittarius. The manner of gelding must be thus,
throw him on soft Straw, having good help to hold him, that he hurt not himself
with struggling, then taking one Cod between your fingers, slit it so wide that
the Stone may come forth, which being done, use the other in the like manner,
and drawing them forth, put the strings between a cleft stick, hold them hard,
and sear them off with a hot Iron, then melt beeswax on the heads of the
strings, and having anointed them and the Cod with warm butter, put them up,
and keep him in a warm house for two or three days, especially if the weather
be cold, giving him milk dusted with Bran, chopped Hay, and crumbs of Bread,
and in that time he will recover his appetite; and soon after give him a purge,
viz. half an ounce of Rubarb, and ten or twelve leaves of Spurg, Laurel boiled
in a quart of small Ale, or an ounce of Lupinseeds boiled in a pint of
Whitewine, and by so doing you will preserve him from sickness, and render him
strong and lusty.

Diseases and Sorrances incident to this kind of Cattle, and their Cure, and
first of Scabs, Itch, Mange, eating sores in the Neck, Aposthumes, Boils,
Ulcers, Headache, Rheum and Hidebound, on the Legs, Ribs, etc.
IF the Bull, Cow, Calf or Ox be troubled with the Itch, Scab or Mange: To Cure
them take the dregs of Oil Olive, Ox Gall, the powder of Brimstone and
Roach-Allum, of each two ounces, Vinegar half a pint, put them into a quart of
Chamberly, and having well boiled them therein, bath the places grieved with
the liquid part thereof, and the cure will be effected.

If afflicted with the eating neck Sore, take three roots of Garlic, an ounce
of Brimstone flower, sharp Vinegar a pint, six Galls, and a handful of Soot,
boil them together, adding three ounces of Hog's Grease, till the liquid part is
mostly consumed, and it becomes so thick that it may be applied to the
grievance, plaisterwise, and by renewing it once or twice, the Cure will be
effected. If afflicted with Aposthumes, take a handful of Marsh Mallows, two
ounces of Lineseed, two ounces of the powder of Gallnuts, an ounce of the juice
of White-Andoreu, and two ounces of Wood-Soot, boil them in a quart of
Whitewine, and laying them Pultiss-wise to the place grieved, it will not only
break the swelling, but bring away the putrefaction, and render your beast
whole.

If he be troubled with boyls, or mattering Ulcers, take an ounce of Leaven*
two roots of Whitelillies, of Sea-Onion an ounce, and a pint of Vinegar, bruise
the roots and Leaven, and putting them into the Vinegar, boil them well, then
let him blood in the neck vein, and apply the aforesaid simples pultess-wise to
the place grieved, and the Pultess so made, will not only disperse the humors,
but by often application cure the Sorrances, especially if you wash them with
Chamberly, at each renewing.

If with the Headache the beast be afflicted, take a root of Garlic, boil it
when bruised in half a pint of Whitewine, and having pretty well cooled it,
hold up his head, and pour it into his Nostrils, suffering him to keep it there
for a quarter of an hour, after that burn Storax dried, Rue and Savin under his
Nose, and give him a quart of warm Ale wherein Rosemary has been boiled, to
drink: and in so doing this afflicting pain will vanish. If he be troubled with
Humor or Rheum, which is known by the running of his Eyes, or Nostrils, want
of Stomach, or laving his Ears. Take Rue a handful, a a like quantity of Laurel
leaves, a root of Garlic, and a handful of Salt, boil them in a quart of
Whitewine or Beer, strain out the liquid part, and give it the Beast fasting,
perfuming his Nostrils at the same time by burning Assa fetida.

If he be Hidebound, having chafed the place well with hard wisps, take Oil of
Cammomil, Hogs-lard a pound, Olive Oil a pint, Whitewine a quart, boil them
together, and bath him therewith, as hot as can be endured, frequently
repeating it, and then bind him about with wet Haybands, and by this means the
skin will loosen and stretch, and the Beast which by reason of that restraint
was poor, will become fat.

Diseases incident to the Eyes of this sort of Cattle, and direction in order
to the Cure.
IF the Eyes of the Beast be swollen, take two handfuls of Wheat Flour, two
ounces of Honey, an ounce of the juice of Cellendine, and as much water as will
make them into a plaster, the which apply to the Eyes so swollen, and at the
same time let the beast blood under the Tongue.

If he be troubled with weeping or Rhumatick Eyes, take an ounce of
Bolearmoniack, two ounces of Wildparsniproot, an ounce of Eye-bright-water, as
much meal-flower, and a like quantity of Honey, add to them a quarter of a pint
of Whitewine, apply them well tempered together in the nature of a plaster,
and they will drive back the Rheum, or any flowing Humors.

If the Eyes matter, which is occasioned by the congealing of the humors
before they descend. Then take of Saffron two Drams, Frankincense an ounce, and
the like quantity of Myrrh, boil them in a pint of Whitewine, give him one half
up his Nostrils, and with the other anoint his Eyes, and the tough and vicious
humors will break, and avoid at the Nostrils, leaving the sight perfect as at
first.

If the Eyes be dark and cloudy, so that the sight is rendered imperfect, take
white sugarcandy, burnt Bone, and burnt Alum, beat them to powder, and blow
them into the beasts Eyes, and by frequently so doing he will be marvelously
clear sighted.

If there appear shales or nails, as some call them, on the Eyes, take an ounce
of Honey, half an ounce of Bolearmoniack, an ounce of Stonesalt, and a like
quantity of the juice of Baum or Mint, boil them into an Eye-water, in a pint
of running-water, and wash the beasts Eyes therewith, three or four times a
day, till you perceive the imperfection is vanished.

If any Spots, Pins, Webs or the like appear in the Eyes, Take Alabaster, beat
it to powder, and frequently blow it into the Eye, and afterward, that is
about an hour after each blowing, wash it with the juice of Housleek and
Strawberry-leaves, if you can get them, if not with Whitewine, wherein Parsley
has been concocted or boiled, and for what other distempers are incident to the
Eyes of this sort of cattle, I refer you to the cures prescribed for the like
defects in Horses Eyes, to which the Table will direct you.

Cures for any distemper in the Lungs, or therefrom proceeding, as Cough, Cold,
Consumption, difficulty of breathing, etc. as also for Agues, Fevers, Sickness
occasioned through swallowing a Horse-leech, or venomous Grub, pains of the
Belly, and Wind-colick.
MOst afflictions of the Lungs, proceed from foul or unwholesome lying, which
generating store of crude raw humors, they descend upon the Lungs, corrupting
and afflicting them: wherefore as soon as you perceive any defect therein, make
a Drench of a quart of Mallago, two ounces of Liquorish-powder, and a like
quantity of Anniseeds, Fennegreekseeds and Honey, give it the beast exceeding
warm: If the Cough have already seized him, take Wheat Flour a handful,
Poppyseeds two drams, two new laid Eggs, a handful of Bean-flower, and half a
handful of Mugwort, boil them in a gallon of Ale, and give him a quart at a
time for four mornings successively, during his being fasting. If the Cough be
old, add thereto Hyssop one handful, and half, an ounce of Alloes Pegging his
duelap or Ear with black Hellebore, vulgarly called Bears foot, and in so doing
you will cure not only Cough, Consumption, difficulty of breathing, and the
like, but all other distempers incident to the Lungs, if they are not wasted
too much.

If the beast be afflicted with the Ague, which you may know by his Melancholy,
the beating of his veins, dullness and swelling of his Eyes, driveling,
shivering, and the like, suffer him to fast twenty four hours, then let him
blood in the Neck and Tail, take a handful of Burrs or Burdockleaves, a like
quantity of Mayweed, half a pint of Linseed Oil, a pickled Herring bruised,
boil them in two quarts of Vinegar, adding two ounces of Mustardseed, and
having strained out the liquid part give it him warm, feeding him afterward
with green and moist meats, and in so doing five or six mornings, every other
day, it will cure either Ague or Fevour, observing that you let him blood but
once.

If the beast in drink has swallowed a Horseleech, or in eating licked up a
Grub, Spider, or any venomous Insect, by which his body is swelled and
distempered even to bursting. Take of Olive Oil a pint, Vinegar, or Whitewine
half a pint, dried Figs two ounces, Rue a handful, Milk a pint, boil them
together, strain out the liquid part, give it him hot, and keep him moving, but
if he swell through excessive eating of green Corn or Clover, you must not only
give him the aforesaid medicine, but a Clister made of the decoction of
Mallows, Chammomil, Liver-wort, and Groundsil, adding an ounce of Turmerick.
They must be boiled in new wort, and before you give it, Rake him well, dipping
your hand first in sweet Oil, or anointing it with Hog's Grease.

If the beast be troubled with pains in the belly or Windcolick, take an ounce
of Mithridate, a quarter of an ounce of Rubarb, the like quantity of the Oil of
Mace, boil them in a pint of Wine, give the liquid part to your beast hot, and
in so doing every other morning for five mornings, it will cure the grievance,
or for want of them give him beer, wherein Chammomil and Mayweed has been
boiled; but if the vent be obstructed, then boil in either of those drinks half
an ounce of Alloes, and give him before it a pint of Olive Oil.

Looseness, Bloody Flux, pains in the Loins, pains of the Reins, or Brawns,
Inflammation, and pissing blood, their respective Cures.
IF the beast be extremely loose, take of Nightshade a handful,
Red-rose-leaves, or cakes two handfulls, Turpentine an ounce, pursly a
handful, Turmerick and Alum, of each an ounce, boil them in strong Vinegar
and Whitewine, and give the beast the liquid part fasting, and in so doing
three or four times, the looseness will be staid: but if it become to the Bloody
Flux, then suffer him to eat little and drink less for the space of four days,
at the end of which take the stones of Raisins, Nutgalls, Mirtleberries, and
Old Cheese, of each two ounces, boil them in a quart of Claret, and give it the
Horse hot, and so do often till you perceive the issue of blood stayed.

If the Beast be afflicted with a pain in the Loins, take of Poppy flowers, if
they be to be had, if not, the seeds, one handful of Coleworts, or Cabbageseed
a like quantity, bruise them and boil them in fair water, and having strained
them, give him the juice to drink, and apply the seeds, etc. pultiss-wise to
the place as near as you can, where the grief is, and cover them with a
plaster of Greekpitch, Rosin and Collophonia mingled with a little Barly-meal,
and the humors that cause the pain will be dispersed: or if it is occasioned
by any bruise, it will be cured.

If the beast be afflicted with pains of the Reins, Brawns or Muscles,
occasioned by inflammation or otherwise, let him blood in the Tail or Thighs.
Boil in two quarts of Ale a root of Garlic, a handful of Rue, two ounces of
Sugarcandy, an ounce of Cinnamon, and the juice of four or five Lemons, give it
him hot to drink, laying a plaster made of Beeswax, Olive Oil, Turpentine and
Storax, upon the place grieved.

If the beast piss blood, keep him from drinking any water: take a Sea Onion,
two ounces of Linseed, an ounce of Treacle, a quarter of an ounce of Rosatum,
and the like quantity of Alloes a quarter of a pint of the juice of Nettles, an
ounce of Wood-soot, and the like quantity of Irish Slate, mix them with a quart
of Redwine or juice of Sloes, adding half a pint of Olive Oil, and the Whites
of two Eggs, boil them well, and give him them fasting, and so do morning and
evening for two days.

If he be troubled with the stone or cannot urine, take the powder of burnt Sea
Crabs, Cloves and Pepper, of each an ounce, Bolearmoniack two ounces, and a
like quantity of Parslyseed, boil them in a quart of Vinegar, and give them the
beast to drink very warm morning and evening, for four or five days, and it
will dissolve the Stone, and cause him freely to urine. And thus Reader having
laid down rules for Ordering, and Cures for the most dangerous distempers, and
left none untouched but such as are vulgarly known by almost every Husbandman,
or Cowherd: I shall procceed to give necessary instructions to the Shepherd, as
to the ordering and cure of his flocks upon all occasions.

A TREATISE OF SHEEP.
How to choose your Ram and Ewe for breed; when the Ewe ought to be covered, and
how ordered during her pregnancy, and upon her Yeaning, etc.
IF you are desirous to have a good breed of this sort of Cattle, which serve
to so many ends, let your Ram be tall, rather long than thick, his belly large,
and a good coat of Wool for his covering, the Tail long and bushy, his Eyes
black and round overgrown, as it were with Wool, his Stones large and even,
his Ears great, the undermost part of his Tongue speckled with black, his Horns
large, sound and well wreathed, let the Ewe be long with a great belly, large
Udder, long necked, white and shining of Color, and well woolled, Teats great,
Eyes large and shining, and her Tail long and well covered with Wool, etc.

Thus having chosen your Getter and Breeder, suffering neither of them to
exceed three years old, the Ew is best when two years old, nor let any Ews bear
Lambs for breed after seven years. The most convenient season for her to suffer
the Ram is in October, or the beginning of November, that she may bring forth
her Lamb or Lambs in the spring, at what time if her milk should fail, other
nourishments may be procured: during the time of her bearing, suffer her not to
lie abroad in cold Snow or extreme frosty weather, nor in excessive rains, and
sometimes with her water, give her a handful of Salt and Fennelseed; when she
has cast her Lamb, bring her into a warm house, and there keep her for two or
three days, that she and the Lamb may gather strength, giving her a Mash of
Oats and Bran each morning. Many are of opinion that if the Ewe is covered by
the Ram when she is feeding toward the North wind, she will bring forth a Ram
Lamb, and when toward the South a Ewe Lamb; though to it I give not over much
credit, nor to the tradition of knitting the right or left stone of the Ram to
produce the like effects, nor that other opinion held by diverse for Authentic,
that whatsoever color the Ewes tongue is of, when she conceives, of that
color the Lamb will be, whether White, Black, Speckled or the like.

The Headache, Giddiness, loss of Cudd, diseases in the Eyes, Agues in Lambs
or Sheep, Rheums, Catarrhs, diseases in the Eyes or Teeth, Boyls, Aposthumes,
and Ulcers; their respective cures.
THese sort of creatures are subject to diverse Diseases, occasioned by
infection, evil digestion, wet and unwholesome feeding, eating noisome herbs
drinking dirty stinking water, the droping of trees, or being abroad in
immoderate showers.

If the Ram, Ewe, or Lamb, be troubled with the Headache, which is caused by
damp and unwholesome feeding, burn Storax under his nose, and give him the
juice of Sage and House-leek boiled with half a pint of Whitewine, adding
thereto a dram of Saffron.

If afflicted with giddiness, which frequently happens in the Summer season, if
the weather be excessive hot, let them blood as soon as you perceive them
stagger or turn round, by slitting the nose vein a cross, then take a handful
of Baum, Mint and Rue, boil them in a quart of small beer, and suffering the
liquid part to cool, give it the beast to drink, and so do morning and evening
for two days successively.

If there happen a defect in the Cud, take a handful of Wheatflower a spoonful
of Baysalt, and as much sharp Vinegar as will make the flower into little
balls, two or three of which thrust down the beasts throat fasting, and in so
doing twice or thrice the Cud will be restored.

If with the Ague (being a Ram or Ewe) blood him or her between the Claws, as
well behind as before, not suffering any cold water to be drunk for Twenty four
hours, at the end of which boil a Root of Garlic, an ounce of Pepper, and a
handful of Bettony and Wood-forrel in a pint of Whitewine and a quart of
spring water, then straining forth the liquid part, give it the beast lukewarm,
and so do for three or four days, and the Ague will vanish, but if it be a
Lamb, give him a pint of the Ewes milk, wherein Polipodium of the Oak, and
Chubebs have been boiled.

If with Rheums or Catarrhs, caused by abundant humor in the body of the
beast, then burn under their noses Assa ferida, the bark of Elder and Tamarisk,
giving him Ale wherein Licorish and Rubarb have been boiled, and suffer him not
to be abroad in the wet.

If the Sheep be troubled with specks, Films, Rheums or the like in the Eyes:
Take a handful of Eyebright, an ounce of Lupins, three or four sprigs of
Cellendine, and half an ounce of Bithwort Roots; boil them in Ewes milk, and
strain the liquid part, with which wash the grieved Eyes, after you have blown
into them the powder of burnt Eggshell and Alum.

If with pains in the Teeth, bleed the Gums or upper lip, rubbing the place
with Salt and the juice of Sage.

If afflicted with Aposthumes or Ulcers, draw them to a head with Riemeal,
ground Ivy and the yolks of Eggs, Lance them when ripe, and put into the hole
burnt Alum and salt covering them with a plaster of Burgundia pitch.

If with Boils, melt Brimstone, Pitch and Beeswax, boil them in Vinegar, and,
adding powder of Gall Nuts to them, lay them plaisterwise to the Sorrance.

Saint Anthonies Fire, Rot, or Plague, Diseases of the Lungs, Scab or Itch,
Cough, Swallowing Spiders or any venom, and Belly swelling: their respective
cures.
SAint Anthonies-fire called the wild fire, is very hurtful to sheep. To cure
which, take Bolearmoniack, Turpentine, Deers suet, Soot, and the juice of
Housleek, and after having boiled them or melted them, wash the Place with
Goats milk, and apply them plaisterwise, giving him at the same time water
wherein salt and butter have been boiled.

To cure the Rot or Plague, take a handful of the herb Melliot, as much Comfry,
Polipodium of the Oak, Rue, Vervine, and Walnut-tree-leaves a like quantity,
boil them in a quart of water and a pint of Aquavitae, adding an ounce of
Mithridate, giving the Liquid part to the beast so afflicted.

For the Scab or Itch: Take Soot, the stalks of Tobaco, Brimstone-flower, and
Fern roots, boil them in Chamberly, and wash the Place grieved with the liquid
part, Morning and Evening.

To cure the disease in the Lungs: take a handful of Sage, a like quantity of
Coltsfoot, as much Parsley, and Purslain, a Root of Garlic, an ounce of
Mithridate, and two ounces of Honey, boil them in a quart of Whitewine, and give
them to the grieved beast lukewarm at twice, viz. Morning and Evening.

To cure the cough or shortness of breath, take Cuminseed, Fennegreekseed, and
the powder of Liquorish, of each two ounces, a handful of Coltsfoot, three
ounces of the Oil of sweet-Almonds, boil them in a quart of stale-bear, and
give the liquid part to drink in the morning fasting to the afflicted beast.

If the Sheep have swallowed any venomous thing, which causes them to swell,
warm strong Vinegar, and Olive Oil and pour down their throats.

If their bellies swell, which is mostly occasioned by eating unwholesom herbs,
let them blood under the Tail, and give them to drink water, wherein Rue and
Chammomile have been boiled.

Lame Claws, Maggots, and Lice, broken or bruised joints, etc. how to order.
IF the Claw be lame, overgrown or broken, you must pair it, and apply to it a
plaster of Beeswax, Rosin, unslacked Lime, and Hog's Grease; and binding it up
warm, it will soon recover.

To kill Maggots, or Lice, use water wherein Tar, Burdock and Briony roots have
been boiled. And to any broken or bruised joint apply a pultis of Chammomil,
Marshmallows, Bettony, Bugloss, and Honysuckle leaves, stamped and fried in
Hoggs-grease, apply it hot, and bind it up warm. And thus much for sheep, those
most useful and necessary creatures in feeding and clothing mankind.

A TREATISE OF SWINE.
The Marks whereby to know a good breed, and how to procure it.
THe Bore that is capable of getting a good breed, must be chosen by the
following Marks, viz. his mouth drawn upwards and long, his breast thick and
broad, as likewise his shoulders, his Thighs great and short, his color white
with sandy-spots, being near as thick as long, his bristles thick and stiff,
and his stones well and even hung.

Let your Sow designed for a breeder have a long body, a large and lank belly,
many Teats, broad Buttocks, long and broad Ribs, her Head little, Snout long,
and legs short, hair white and soft; and in thus choosing, your breed will in
all things answer your expectations.

When the Sow ought to be covered; the time of Spaying and Gelding, and how
with little charge to make Swine fat.
WHen by the mark aforesaid you have stored your self with a good Sow and Bore,
the former being a year old and upwards, and the latter between three and four
years: put them together in the increase of the Moon, having first driven the
Sow into water up to the belly, suffer the Bore to serve her three times or
more, if she take it not kindly at the first, after which take the Bore from
her and keep her in a warm yard or house, if it be in the winter time giving
her Granes, Bran, Mast, Pease, Beans, and now and then Roots and green-leaves:
the most convenient Month for her to take Bore in, is February, that so the
Farrow may come in warm weather, for those that come in Winter, are either
stunted or troubled with diseases. Geld your Pigs at two or three months old if
you would have the Bacon extraordinary sweet, but the Hog will be of a larger
growth, and much fatter if his Stones continue with him till a year old, and
the best Gelding time is when the Moon is in the wain, either in the Spring or
Fall: to do this take the Pig or Hog and slit his Cods one by one, drawing
forth the Stones as far as may be, then putting the strings between a cleft
stick sear them asunder with a hot Iron, and melt on the tops of them Beeswax,
or Rosin, anoint them afterward with butter, and put them up, keeping the
Swine so gelded exceeding warm for a month, after giving them warm Pollard, and
ground Beans. The Sow-pigs must not be spaied till eight or nine months old at
soonest, and then it must be done with great caution, especially in cutting the
slit, and sowing it up after the Matrix is taken out; for if the Guts be
touched in cutting, or stitched to the side in sowing, the Sow will either soon
dye or pine away.

If you would have your Hog suddenly fat, put him up in a close Stie, suffer
him to lie dry, and have as little light as may be; give him half a peck of
Pease morning, noon and evening, or for want of them Beans, Mast and Acorns,
after each quantity let him drink warm water, into which wheat-bran has been
scattered; or if you are not stored with the aforesaid meats, give him Pollard
and Carrots; but by no means Offal or Garbidge, for that renders the flesh
unwholesome and in so doing your Hog will be very good meat for Pork in ten or
twelve days, and for Bacon in sixteen, but as all countries are not alike
stored with food for Swine, other meats than what have been expressed must be
given them in like manner.

Sickness in Swine, how to know it, and the cure for Headache, Swine-pox, and
the distemper called the eating Yarrow.
THere are few beasts more subject to distempers than the Swine, though their
distempers are not so many. To know when they are sick, the hanging of their
Ears, dullness of Countenance, want of Appetite and the like, are certain
signs; but a more certain than these, is suddenly to draw half a score or more
Bristles out of the Hogs back, and if the ends or roots appear white, then is
the Hog in good health; but if black, bloody or spotted, then is he afflicted
with some internal sickness, or has received some great bruise.

To cure the Headache, commonly called the Sleepy-evil, hold open his mouth
with a Gagg, and with a Penknife, or Fleam blood him under the Tongue, after
which boil Savin, Rue and Cropel-stone in fair water, of each a proportionable
quantity, give it him to drink, being strained, or if he refuse to drink, put a
quart of Malt into it, and he will receive it.

For the distemper called the Swine-pox, give him an ounce of Mithridate boiled
in a quart of water sweetened with an ounce of English Honey; or if that fail,
give him a pint of Lambs blood warm, adding thereto a quarter of a pint of
Olive Oil, and an ounce of beaten pepper.

There are diverse herbs dangerous to Hogs, as Mad-chervil, Millfoil and the
like, of which if a Hog eat, he presently becomes sick: To remedy which boil
Wild-Cucumbers and Anniseeds in water, and set it before the Swine lukewarm,
that by drinking it, he may vomit up the infectious humor, generated by eating
those unwholsom herbs, and restore his health.

Diseases in the Eyes of Swine, Agues Fevers, Measels, Rhumes, and Catarrhs,
their respective Remedies.
If your Swine be afflicted with any specks, spots, Rheums, or blood-shot in
his Eyes: for the specks or spots, Take burnt-Allum and the powder of
burnt-eggshel, and blow into his eyes, and afterward wash them with juice of
Bettony and Housleek, or for want of them with the juice of Rue, or Herbagrace:
if with Rheums, take an ounce of Bolearmoniack, beat it into powder, add to it
a like quantity of grated bread, and of the juice of Cellendine, Eyebright,
and Whitewine as much as will make them exceeding moist, when blowing into his
Eyes the powder of round Bithwort-roots, or for want of them the powder of the
yolk of an Egg, apply the aforesaid ingredients to the Eye or Eyes,
plaisterwise, and by renewing it twice or thrice the grievance will vanish, you
must bind it hard on, or the Swine will soon throw it off.

If the Swine be troubled with Ague or Fever, let him blood in the Tail, and
give him water to drink, wherein Tree-foil and Wood Sorrel have been boiled,
and keep him close.

The measels come through excessive or unwholesome feeding, and are discerned
by knots or pimples under the Swines tongue and weakness of his hinder parts;
at what time let him bath in Sea water, or water made excessive salt, give him
that water and bruised Garlic with his meat, also the Husks of Grapes and
Gooseberries, if they may be had, or the Peels of Lemons or Citterns.

If your Swine be afflicted with Rheums or Catarrhs, burn Brimstone under his
nose, or Storax, if you can get it; then bruise Garlic well, make it up into
Pills with salt and Butter, and oblige him to swallow two or three of them.

Plague or diseases in the Milt, Imposthumes or swellings in the Throat, Neck
swelling, their cure; as also an excellent Remedy to prevent vomiting.
IF your Swine by eating Carrion or other nauseous meats be afflicted with the
Plague, or Milt swelling, which is known by his dullness, uneasiness, burning
and the like, take new Honey two ounces, Turpentine an ounce, Brimstone-flower
an ounce, juice of Garlic a quarter of a pint, boil them in a quart of small
beer, and give it him as hot as he can well endure, and afterward keep him
close in his Stie.

If your Swine be troubled with Imposthumes or swellings in the throat, make
him a drink of Chammomil, Mallows, and May-weed, boiled in Vinegar, sweetened
with brown Sugar, and give it him warm, laying to the swelling a plaster of
Tarr, Salt and Rieflower; or for any Imposthume in the body: you may use the
same Medicine, for any swelling in the Neck or Throat; if you cannot presently
get the aforesaid things, let him blood.

If your Swine be addicted to vomiting, occasioned by eating Hemlock,
Hens-dung, or the like, or through two much moisture; let him fast a day, then
give him Bran and water, wherein Dillseeds, and Alum have been boiled, and it
will close up the mouth of the stomach, and prevent for the future his vomiting.

Colds or Coughs, Belly-Ach, Lameness, Diseases in the Gall, and Flux, their
Cure, etc.
IF your Swine be afflicted with Cold or Cough, which indeed is troublesome,
and does greatly impoverish those creatures: Take six or seven ounces of live
honey, a quarter of a pint of the juice of Lemons, a handful of Coltsfoot and
Lungwort, an ounce of the powder of Liquorish, and half a pint of Olive Oil,
boil then in a Gallon of beer or fair water, and give him the liquid part to
drink very warm morning and evening, three or four days successively, not
exceeding a pint at a time.

If your Swine be afflicted by the Belly-Ache, which is occasioned either by
much wind or evil feeding: Take of Black-Pepper an ounce, Honey two ounces,
Anniseeds two ounces, boil them in a quart of Whitewine, and give it him hot,
and in twice so doing, provided he take the dose fasting, it will cure him.

In case of Lameness, by Sprain, Stroke, Ulcer, Thorn, Stroke, or the like;
when the bone is rightly place, the Thorn, Splint, or Stub, etc. pulled out,
take a quarter of a pint of French-wine, half an ounce of Turpentine, the like
quantity of Oil of Roses, an ounce of Honey, and the like quantity of Mutton
suet, boil them till they come to a thickness, and spreading them plaisterwise,
apply them hot to the place grieved.

If your Swine be afflicted by the overflowing of the Gall, take of
Bolearmoniack an ounce, a like quantity of Honey, and Turmerick beaten into
powder, a dram of Saffron, and of the seeds of Mellions half an ounce, boil
them in two quarts of sweet wort, and give him a pint for four mornings
together.

If he be afflicted with the Flux or looseness, take a quart of Whitewine, a
handful of Rosecake, half a pint of Milk, an ounce of Galls, and an ounce of
Ginger, boil them together, give him the liquid part, suffering him to feed for
two or three days upon dry meat, as Pease, Beans, Bran, or the like.

To kill Lice, prevent Thirst, and an excellent Receipt for an Ointment, to be
used in case of fractured bones, dislocated, or swelled Joints, etc.
IF your Swine be afflicted with Lice or Ticks, anoint with Linseed Oil and
flower of Brimstone, if with Maggots in any sore place, use Tarr and Soap.

To prevent excessive Thirst, which through the heat of the Swines body causes
Fevers in Summer time, suffer your Hogs to bath in cool water, driving them
thither often for that purpose.

To make the Ointment for fractured bones, etc. Take sheeps suet three ounces,
Venice Turpentine, and Beeswax, of each half an ounce, Galb^num and Storax, of
each a dram, Oliv^ Oil half a pint* boil them in^^ an ointment, and use them as
you see occasion. And thus, Reader I have performed my promise, as I well hope,
to your satisfaction.

FINIS.

