THE EXECUTION AND CONFESSION WITH THE Behavior and Speeches OF Capt. Thomas
Walcot, William Hone, and John Rouse, who according to the Sentence pronounced
against them at the Old-Bayley, on the 12th Instant, were this 20th of July
Drawn, Hanged and Quartered, for Traytorously Conspiring to Assassinate and
Murder the King in his return from New Market, and the Established Government
to Subvert, etc.
Entered according to ORDER.
A Hellish conspiracy of diverse wicked and desperate persons against the Kings
Life and Government having been sometime past discovered, upon the Issuing out
of His Majesty's Proclamation, amongst other Traitors and Conspirators these,
on whom Justice has deservedly fixed Her severest mark, were apprehended, viz.
Thomas Walcot, William Hone and John Rouse, Men wholly bent to shed innocent
Blood, and lay their Country waste, not in the least bogling to engage
themselves solemnly to Murder the King, his Royal Brother, and after that; all
such as should oppose their Monstrous and Tyranical proceedings; but being
prevented by Providence, even to a miracle, all their pernicious devices
vanished into Air, and themselves rendered dreadful Examples to posterity, and
fully opened the eyes of such as would not be persuaded, but this sort of men
were men of harmless principles, and that what had passed in the Days of
Ignoramus, were but Shams to amuse the people. But to particulars:

The Prisoners aforesaid being in sundry places apprehended, order was given
for their Trials at the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, holden at the
Sessions House in the Old Baley, etc. where Walcot being Arraigned, Pleaded Not
Guilty to his Indictment, in which were specified the Treasons of which he
stood accused, as his designing the Murder of the King, and a miserable
slaughter of his Subjects, to leavy War and Rebellion, etc. whereupon the
Evidence being called, the principal of which were Colonel Rumsey, Mr. West
and Mr. Keeling, who having declared the manner of the Conspiracy, and to what
intent it was carried on, charged the Prisoner with being at diverse Consults,
where the death of the King and the Duke of York were resolved upon, and that
upon their return from New Market; at what time Walcot was appointed with a
Commanded Party to fall upon the Guards, whilst Rumbold the Malster was to
Assassinate his Majesty and Royal Highness, and others to Kill the Postillian,
Coachman and Horses, and that they styled him the English Gulin, saying, he
would be such when at the head of an Army. And it was further witnessed against
him, that he had provided himself Horse and Arms, and went to take a view of
Rumbolds House near Hodsdon, and did approve of its commodiousness for the
perpetration of the Villainy, which was to have been done whilst an overthrown
Cart had stopped His Majesty's Coach; and that the Prisoner was tempted to
undertake the actual Assassination, but he refused it, saying, he would not
kill a naked man, but would undertake Fighting the Guards. These and other
Treasonable Conspiracies being proved against him, and a Letter produced which
he had sent to Sir Leoline Jenkins, therein promising to make a more perfect
discovery of the Hellish design, both in England and Ireland, than what as he
believed others were able to do, if he might thereby hope for any mercy at His
Majesty's hands; as likewise an other Letter taken from him in Prison, drawn up
in order to be sent to a Friend of his, to entreat Colonel Rumsey and Mr. West
to be favorable to him in their Evidence, he was found Guilty; and two days
after, viz. on Saturday last received Sentence to be Drawn, Hanged and
Quartered: At what time he only desired that his Friends might be permitted to
visit him during his continuance in Newgate, which was allowed; and so, as a
Man not seeming much concerned at what had befallen him, he was conveyed to the
place from whence he came.

William Hone succeeding Walcot in taking his Trial at the Old Bailey for
conspiring the Death of the King, Leavying War, and procuring Arms, with many
treasonable Expressions by him uttered, he at first denied the Indictment in
general, and pleaded Not Guilty; but better considering with himself, he
desired to retract that Plea, and plead Guilty as to the Conspiracy against the
Kings Life, but would not confess his procuring Arms; yet upon his Trial, it
was plainly proved that a Horse and Arms were provided, and that he was to be
one in the Assassination, that he had been at several traitorous consults, and
maliciously spoken diverse Treasonable words, most of which he owned in Court,
seeming greatly troubled that he had consented to so great a Wickedness,
declaring to God and the World, that Richard Goodenough had seduced him, and
persuaded him to enter into the Hellish Conspiracy, as also some others of the
Conspirators, by insinuating the pretended grievances of the Nation, and laying
before him the advantage that would accrue thereby.

John Rouse this time failing of an Ignoramus Jury, having been upon his Trial
at the Old-Baley found Guilty of diverse Conspiracies, and Traiterous
Contrivances against the Life of His Majesty, contrived and and committed,
according as it was given in Evidence against him, both before and since his
being a Prisoner in the Tower, was Sentenced for High Treason, together with
Walcot and Hone; the Sentence being, That they, and either of them should
return to the place from whence they came, and from thence be drawn upon
Hurdles, or Sledges, to the place of Execution, and there be Hanged up by the
Necks, then cut down alive, their Bowels taken out, and Privities cut off to be
burnt before their Faces, their Heads cut off, and Quarters divided, etc. Upon
which, Rouse made a long Preamble about his being Innocent, as to many
particulars, yet declared he was willing to submit to the Law, etc.

The Trials over, and Sentence as is specified, they were carried to Newgate,
where, for the most part, they were kept assunder, yet had diverse of their
Friends came to visit them, and many godly Ministers to give them advice for
their Souls health, laying before them the heinousness of the Crime; and the
rather, becacause they had sinned against such goodness, and agravated the
Crime in Conspiring against the Life of a Prince, under whom they did and might
have Lived happily; but seeing Divine Justice had overtaken them, and no hopes
of continuing long in this World, that they would bethink themselves, and spend
the few moments that were left them to the advantage of their Immortal Souls,
and not through neglect render themselves doubly wretched: To this and such
like Ghostly advice they were observed to be very attentive, especially Hone,
who expressed abundance of sorrow for the greatness of his offense, saying,
that by reason of his former Sins, and his refusing to be reclaimed, God had
suffered him to fall into this great Temptation, desiring, the Prayers of all
good men, saying that if he might Live, all the business of his Life would
prove insufficient to expiate so great a Crime.

Walcot and Rouse appeared more retired and reserved, the former seeming for
the most part willfuly, obstinate or moross; yet in his countenance appeared a
remorse and regret for what he had Acted, seeming rather to confess then deny
the horrid design, etc.

Rouse was observed for the most part to be greatly dejected, often Lamenting
his wretched state; and thus continued these Miscreants, whom Malice, hope of
Gain or Preferment has brought to ruin and a shameful, though deserved end, on
this 20th. of July, on which day they were drawn upon Sledges to the place of
Execution, where after they had expressed a sorrow for the henious Conspiracy,
and treasonable Crimes intended against the Life of the best of Kings, etc. and
said some short Prayers, they suffered according to the Sentence aforesaid.

The Executioner Imboweling and Quartering them, the Quarters we are informed
are by His Majesty's Bounty restored to their Relations: And thus fell those
miserable men the sad Example of offended Justice, having brought themselves to
shameful ends, by designing the blackest of Crimes; but it is often apparent,
that those who act against the Lives of Sacred Kings, frequently fall into the
Snare themselves have laid, as it was observed by the inhumane Monsters that
Traitorously, barbarously and Villainously Murdered His Majesty's Father of
Blessed memory, and indeed in all Ages wherein such wicked designs have taken
Birth: For God has declared, He that spils Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood
be spilt. And certainly to contrive and design it by Hellish and Diabolick
Conspiracies, is no less heinous in the sight of the Just Creator: Therefore I
hope this timely and most Miraculous discovery, together with the punishment
inflicted upon the Traitors will prove a sufficient warning to deter others
from the like inhumane undertaking.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham. 1683.


