THE EXECUTION OF Mr. Rob. Foulks, LATE MINISTER OF Stanton-Lacy In SHROPSHIRE.
With some Account of his most Penitent Behavior, Confession, last Speech, etc.

Let him that stands take heed lest he fall.

LICENSED, 1678/9.

LONDON: Printed for R. G. 1678/9.

THE EXECUTION OF Mr. Rob. Foulks, Late Minister of Stanton-Lacy IN SHROPSHIRE.
MR. Robert Foulks received Sentence of Death at the last Sessions, for Killing
a newborn Child in November last, in York-buildings in the Strand, from whence
the same Morning he went out of Town: But after the Discovery of the Murdered
Infant, being pursued, was apprehended in the Country, and was brought up to
Trial as aforesaid. The Fact was too apparent, nor did be after Conviction
offer to deny it; but rather made it his business to give Glory to God, by an
open Confession of his Sins, and declaration of his Sorrow and Self-abhorrency
for them.

And that he might the more effectually accomplish this, Authority was
graciously pleased to allow him some longer time than commonly is granted, to
fit himself for Death.

These few days so charitably indulged, he failed not to improve, but husbanded
them with Diligence to the best advantage. Confession of his Sins, with all
their Aggravations, bewailing them with bitter Tears, and begging Forgiveness,
as well for the Guilt as Scandal of them, was his continual Employment.

He was visited by several of the most Eminent, Learned, and Godly Divines
about the City, who at diverse times came to give him their Advice, and afford
him their Christian Offices and Prayers; which he received with all
Thankfulness, so that they departed much satisfied.

Let not therefore either the right or left hand Enemies Triumph, or cast
Reflections and Reproaches on this occasion; -- Crimine ab uno
Disce omnes --,
is but Poetical Logic; the Charity of Divinity will never allow any to Brand
or Stigmatize a whole Party for the Lapses of any single Member, when the Body
gives no Connivence or Approbation to such Excesses. The Doctrine and
Discipline, the Orders and Canons of the Church of England, every way fitted
for promotion and encouragement of Holiness of Life, Sobriety, Chastity, and
all kind of Christian Virtues, and practical Piety, are sufficient to justify
her to all the considerate World, against such ignominious scandals and
undeserved Obloquies. And as her Principles are the soundest and purest, so,
through Gods grace, she is furnished with as Learned and Godly a Clergy in
general, as any Nation under Heaven; able both by their Doctrine, and by their
exemplary Lives and Conversations, to put to silence such malicious Cavillers.

As this poor Gentleman, led away by the Temptations of Satan, and his own evil
Nature, for want of keeping a due watch over his heart, and turning away his
eyes from vanity, came to fall, like David, into those blackest of sins,
Adultery and Murder: So we have good grounds from his late Behavior, in the
judgment of Charity, to hope and believe, that he has imitated that Royal
Penitent too, in contrition and hearty sorrow for those Crying crimes; and that
by the Grace of God, and Merits of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
he may be washed and purged from those, and all other pollutions; and clothed
with Robes of the Lambs Righteousness, may be admitted into the blissful
Regions of everlasting Glory, where nothing impure may enter.

As for the particularities of his Deportment, Penitent Carriage, and Religious
Conversation, since the time of his Condemnation to that of his Dissolution,
all that visited him (amongst whom are many Worthy Divines, as aforesaid) can
bear testimony: And farther, that he might glorify God in his Death, whom he
had dishonored so much in his Life, endeavoring, if possible, to make his
Repentance and acknowledgment of his sins, as public as the scandal of them
had been; he employed the few moments he had to live, in writing down his
Meditations, and giving a warning to sinners, by his sad, but remarkable
Example, and directing several Letters to his Wife, Children, Parishioners, and
other Friends; which being all completed under his own hand, and delivered to
very Worthy and Reverend persons, are to be made public. A Work which (with
the Divine Blessing) may prove of great use and advantage to Souls.

Some few days before that of his Execution, he humbly received the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, and kept several private Fasts. The day before he suffered
(being the Anniversary Fast and Humiliation for the horrid Murder of King
Charles the First of Blessed Memory) he was, at his own request, solemnly
prayed for in most of the Churches of London and Westminster; and expressed
great rejoicing in his Spirit, that his days were lengthned out so long in the
land of the Living, contrary to his expectation, that he might have the
opportunity of enjoying the public Prayers of so many good Christians.

On Friday the thirty first of January, 1678/9. about ten of the clock in the
forenoon, he was brought out of the Press-yard, and in a Coach conveyed to the
place of Execution, where he made an excellent Confession and Speech to the
People; a Copy of which (having it ready written with his own hand) he there
delivered to a Minister present, to be faithfully Printed with the rest of his
Papers, which are now in the Press, and within very few days will be made
public.

And so having prayed very affectionately, freely submitted himself to the
Execution of the Sentence.

His Corpse were brought back in a Coach, and that Evening decently (but
privately) Interred at St. Gileses.

FINIS.

