An Expostulatorie (but friendly) Adhortation to that part of the Ministry of
England, who (being true to the Doctrine) are not yet reconciled to the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church.
I Have passed a double score of years in a Station that afforded me some
opportunity to discern, and with inclinations that suffered me not to be
unconcerned, for what befell the Church of God in this Nation. There has
nothing been (all along) my business more, than to understand, both the
positions and demeanure of the Old Puritan; betwixt whom, and the Hierarchy,
the differences were then conspicuous; but not as I conceived of much scandal;
for during the first fourth part of that time, there was scarce, either the
Denomination of Nonconformity, or the practice. Their Doctrinal Tenets were
never arrain'd as discrepant from our Established Articles, whatever their
private Notions (as to Ceremonies and Forms) were, they exhibited thereto more
than passive Obedience; and an utter abhorrence of Common Prayer they were so
far from; that (on the ordinary Holidays) when there was no more enjoined but
the using of it, and calling the people to together for that end) they thought
it not out of season to be instant with their Auditors in other parts of the
Ministerial Office, and added Sermons to the Service. They were content (though
perhaps they would not have chosen them) to put on the enjoined sorts of Habit,
and Dress, rather then not preach the Gospel of Christ. It Is true, when that
Book which gave the Rein to the Vulgar (who are too apt to take Head of
themselves) and some Liberty (yet no Command) for Recreations, on the Lord's Day
was to be published; sundry of them quitted their present charge, quietly
withdrawing to beyond the Seas: but I remember not, that they gathered
Churches, or maintained (publicly) any worship (within the bowels of this
Kingdom) by Law prohibited: Others of them (who were no less tenderly
conscientious than the former) weathered out that storm, kept their stations,
and by the humility of their deportment, or candidness of their Address, found
means not to come under the wrath of the Magistrate; except, some three or
four, that (for certain immoderate, and ill-timed publications) were somewhat
roughly dealt withal. I am fully persuaded (in the general) they only lifted
up their hands with Prayers and Tears (the Christians best weapons) to the God
of Heaven, for the removal of such things, as (they judged) were burdensome:
And, that they had never lifted up an Arm of Flesh, in opposition to the power
set over them by Heaven; if a fatal co-incidence of temporal, no less than
spiritual concerns, had not melted down the Resolutions of those Times, so as
there came out (beyond expectation) a Parliament, Exodus 32.24.
a Parliament, which claimed (even at first dash) a right of dividing (at
least) the Empire with our Caesar: And indeed, those praetensions (supported by
a jealousy, which a connivance toward all, and the activity of some Romanists
had occasioned) were so managed, as might lessen the wonder, if some persons,
even of sincere intentions, were Conscientiously led into a mistake of Duty. I
speak it knowingly many of you would have parted with your right-eyes (when the
dismal consequences of that breach were within view) to have obviated the
mischief; And when the appointed time was drawing on, wherein God had
determined to bring home our King, you were not behind with you seasonable and
vigorous Assistances: Though you could peradventure have been well pleased, to
have understood the length and breadth of that Universal regard held forth
toward tender Consciences; yet when you did not find it praeviously
ascertained, you would not leave the main work at a stand for all that, but
helped it forward by all possible and proper means: Notwithstanding the many
Invectives which have been thrown (at random) against you, I cannot think that
Hacket and Cartwright (in remoter days, or Peter's and Calamy in our own) acted
upon the same principles; nor that the Original of those woeful dissentions
(differing sentiments I would rather term them) took birth merely from
obstinacy; for our Reformed Religion was but lately planted here, and the Law
for Uniformity (however fit) could not have spread its root so far and deep, as
that (like the Laws of God) it should oblige all (English) men, at all times
and in all places; nor was it yet become (like those of the Medes and Persians
unalterable; when Doctor Coxe, who could have no Jurisdiction over his poor
exiled Contrymen (taken in at Franck ford about a year before, under a
condition that they should not vary from the French Church for fear of
divisions) would needs rule alone there, and force the English Liturgy upon
them; a thing, that Dr. Story (though himself a Bishop) thought not fit to
attempt; hence animosities and heats, which in more then the lapse of an
hundred years cannot be allayed or cooled: I find Doctor Coxe every where (...)
charactered, as a vessel well fraught with Learning; and Piety, but, a little
over-hung with the sails of an high-rustling Spirit, which rendered him
obnoxious to the violent gusts of his own passion; and probably the
intemperance of his actings, drew from Calvin, those Diminutions, he put upon
the Common Prayer Book, which had else never been heard of: yet note we here in
passing, that most of the passages in it, whereon he thought sit to fasten the
term of Inept (only ('it is likely) because he apprehended them unapt) have
since, upon review, been taken off to so good a degree, as his successor Beza
found nothing in the substance of it, or the Dependent Rites; whereto the
intervention of the Magistrates Command, ought not to oblige (even the
conscience) by actual obedience. It was a truly Christian frame the
Geneva-English put upon themselves, when they observed, God (by drying up the
Red Sea of blood, which had flowed here) to be opening a way for them toward
their own land, by Letters to their Brethren dispersed throughout Germany, they
sued for reconciliation, and ensued peace, even with those who had supplanted
them at, and drove them from Frankford; Nay, I can (me thinks) easily pardon
the importunities wherewith after their return, they solicited our Governors,
whilst the things in controversy might seem to be (yet) sub Judice, and under
Debate: But, now, the case is so much altered, That there is, 1. No reason but
to Obey: 2. No necessity of Disobedience.


Consider (I beseech you) whether, All you have said, or writ to justify your
separation, can signify any thing, unless what you take offense at, were
proposed, either 1. As, Essential parts of worship, or, 2. As, Conferring Grace.


Truly, I have all-a-long (without prejudice, nay, with inclinations tending
toward you) consulted some of your persons, and most of your Books, yet am
altogether of this mind, that the falling-short herein has unpointed all your
Arguments; The very Imposers themselves having made (a thousand times) as ample
and as clear Declaration (in reference to both) as can possibly come from the
mouth of man, That, 1. To Ordain such a multitude of Ceremonies, as would
employ most or our thoughts or care, in time of Divine Service, how to do them
aright (which seems to have been the very state and posture of the days St.
Augustine lived in, yet he brake down no gap, nor leap't out from the fold)
deserves really the name of superstistion. 2. To make any of them an essential
part of Worship, or attribute to them the power of obtaining pardon for Us, or
working Grace in Us, were direct Irreligion. 3. To make the Apostolical, or in
themselves necessary commands, that bind the Conscience so, as all the Laws of
God do, were downright presumption.


They readily grant, that to Constituted a new object of worship (suppose, by
invocation of Saints or Angels;) That to institute a new part of worship
(suppose by addition to the number of Sacraments) is not in the Churches
prerogative. All they affirm of Rites or Ceremonies, is, but that they may be
occasional motives, or remembrancers of Devotion; and what can remain (after
such Concessions) worthy so fatal an opposition? If others find them so, why
may not I (if a Minister) use them? (If a Layman be present at them? though I
find not, they have that tendency upon my Spirit. Nay, I will go one step
further, and affirm; It Is possible that the Governors of the Church may be
culpable in the Season, Manner, Measures, or nature of their injunctions, and
yet the members of that Church indispensibly bound to a compliance. Seriously,
I would not bespeak (for this sort of things) in any bodies apprehension a room
beyond their due value; but to me it is very clear, that there is no less (yea
more) of superstition, in saying, They may not be used (upon the account of
Conscience) then in saying; They shall be used (merely upon the account of
Order, Decency, and Obedience.) In their own nature they are (by Calvin's
judgment) tolerable; in Beza's (being stamped with Authority) Obligatory; and
since owned no otherwise, than as Ordinances of men, they may seem to be the
direct aim of those two Texts, Romans 13.5. and 1 Pet. 2.13. Doubtless, the
Spouse of Christ would be no less lovely, if some abatements (according to your
deire) were made; but, will you scratch and wound her face, because they who
have the care of her Attire, esteem those as beauty-spots; which you think only
black patches? or because, they judge those well-suited ornaments, which cannot
(in your opinion) pass for better than gaudie, will you make an irreparable
rent, in that garment which should have ^o seam? Certainly, if (in some cases)
we ought to part with much for peace-sake, we may (in this) retain much ^oo,
especially, since our Duty is apparently super-added to conveniencie. And he
has taken upon him that Honorable Function (to which a woe is fixed, if he
preach not) quits not himself like a man (nay comes not off like a good and
faithful servant) if he get into the Cellar, when he should be on his watch at
the house top; or whisper in some corner, when he should lift up his voice like
a trumpet. I know many of you, whom I dare not but think to be men of Holy
sincere intentions, and yet I am (verily) persuaded, sin lies at your doors
upon this very account: If it be true (which I do not say not think) That the
most part of the Conforming Clergy are remiss, negligent, dry, perfunctorie in
their offices; whey, then (by the mercies of God, by the bowels of Christ) be
entreated (nay take heed how you do it not) to put in your sickles into the
harvest; and suffer not the Lords people to perish for want of food; which you
cannot (in the posture you have chosen) dispense unto them without
disadvantage, without scandal, without crime: Thus you will disappoint all
those (many) that have evil will to Zion; Thus you will frustrate the
expectation of all such, as could find in their heart, that your voices should
never (more) be heard in this land; And, whereas (now) they speak evil of you
as of evildoers, they will (then) be ashamed that falsely accuse your good
Conversation in Christ; doubt not but in whatsoever (necessary things) the
present settlement has come short; the great and wise disposer (above) will
find means (when we are ready for so great a mercy) to perfect all that
concerns his own, or peoples interest, without engaging any of them to do evil
(or what has the appearance of evil) That Good may come thereof.

I wish my Pen were enabled (before I conclude) to release you from an
infirmity (under which, some of you have been bowed down, for almost Thirty
years;) I mean, the Covenant: And (verily) I have heard great Casuists affirm,
That, if the matter of the Oath be unlawful, not within our own (just) Power,
or imposed by an Unjust Authority; There needs nothing, but the suppleing
waters of Repentance, to dissolve its bands.

It is not (I suppose) of any importance, whether this Address be at all
Subscribed or no; yet (being not willing to impose upon the Reader a fictitious
Name, and altogether indifferent, whether mine be known) I shall leave him to
his choice, whether he will give himself the trouble of unfolding, what a
Reverend Minister (now with God) took the pains to lap-up in an ANAGRAM, Our
Christ will help.

He Is ours, and therefore will, He Is Christ, and can
Help: when, in vain is all the Help of Man.

FINIS.

