Plain and Exquisite Scripture Proof, That St. John Baptist and the blessed
Apostles, and all the Primitive Baptizers, did baptize by sprinkling, or
pouring water upon the person or persons they baptized, and not by dipping the
person into water.

Proving

1. That St. John Baptist did intend pouring upon, or sprinkling with when he
said, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost. 2. That he did not intend
dipping when he said, I indeed have baptized you with water. 3. Proving, That
he did intend sprinkling or pouring upon, when he said, I indeed have baptized
you with water, Matthew. 3.11. 4. A further clearing of the Truth by the
Synonymous Terms in Scripture, with the answering of various Objections. 5. A
Scriptural discovery of the proper and constant signification of the Greek word
(...) in the New Testament; Proving, that it only signifies pouring upon, or
spinkling with, in the New Testament; but never dipping the person into water.
And this is proved by the Evidence of a great Jury, viz.

1. St John Baptist, the first Baptizer. 2. Our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. 3. St. Peter, the great Preacher to the Ci^^^^cision. 4. St. Matthew
the Evangelist. 5. St. Mark. 6. St. Luke. 7. St. John, who were the Recorders
of this Word. 8. St. James. 9. St. Paul, the great Preacher to the Gentiles.
10. The believing Church of the Jews 11. The believing Church of the Gentiles,
how they did understand it. 12. The Malicious and Implacable Scribes and
Pharisees, and their Adherents, the unbelieving Jews, how they did understand
it.
Also some Observations upon Mr. Keach's Reflections upon my late Treatise,
Entitled, Plain and express Scripture Proofs, That John Baptist did as
certainly Baptize Infants in the Church of the Jews as the Adult; With the
Confirmation of the Truth reflected against by him.

By JOSHVA EXELL, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Thom^^ ^^^^hurst, at the
Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside; and by William (...) Bookseller in
Warmister, 1693.

Some Observations upon the Reflections made by Mr. Keach upon my late
Treatise, Entitled, A serious Enquiry into and certain produceing of plain and
express Scripture Proof, That John Baptist did as certainly Baptize Infants
when he administered Baptism to the Church of the Jews, as the Adult.
ALL that have took any observa io^ of what has been brought against Infant
Baptism c nnot but kno^ that one of the things ^ll^dge^ for their exc^u^^^n
from external Baptism, h^th been, that Infants are no expressed in the
Commission, etc and therefore they are not to be Ba ^ised, because ^e read ^or
of their Baptism, a^ particul rly expre ed.

Now the Anabaptists were not expressed in my small Treatise, and ^et th^^, or
some one of them appears in public with Reflect^^ns g^inst i^; by which they,
or h^ for the rest does declare, that they believe themselves there intended,
^ho not expre^sed, although Infan^s must no^^^ intended, if not expressed. If the^
or any for them ^^y, it is because the Matter di^ concern them, tho they were
not expressly name^.

Ans. So does the matter of the Promise and Covenant concern Infants as much as
an^, and therefore must be there in^ended, as much as any Souls whatsoever, tho
no more expressed than others. So that the thing owned as a principle h^th been
forgo^^^^, ^r no^ kept ^o, to m^ke any re^lections upon my Treatise, and I
suppose ^s little reg^rd will ^e f^und to be had to the word of God in the
matter an^ manner of the Reflections.

For first, I desire all the thinking and impartial persons that Mr. Keach does
appeal to, and call in to be judges; that the greatest of the proof brought or
any thing rej^cted by this man, that I have said, or to confirm what he says,
is not thus says the Lord, or thus it is written. But, I deny, I affirm, I
challenge, it is denied, we deny, we do not say. I have showed, therefore say I,
etc.

Which way of proving things, or denying thing so abundantly proved by
Scripture in ^y Treatise, tho it may be best pleasing to them, and also
sufficient proof to them, that have found fault with too many Scripture
quotations. Yet it is not becoming them that have rejected all that others have
said, but what express Scripture can be produced for. And let the impartial and
thinking, judge whether it can be sufficient warrant for, either to beget, or
nourish a Divine Faith in any Soul that believes this man's Assertions, or
Negations.

But a little more particular: A well as this is the most part of the proof in
general, so my Conscience is apprehended in particular, in the first place; for
giving a book such a Title, as being beyond his knowledge; and if it is not
within the reach of his knowledge, who is so capacious, i^ must needs be very
vile, with the Witness: His words are, p. 35. Who calls himself a Minister of
the Gospel; but with what good Conscience a man of his Fun^tion can give a Book
such a Title, I know not. And all the reason why my Conscience is thus Judged,
is, because none ever saw, nor found out those proofs till now. I would desire
all to take notice that it is not, because there is not that proof in
Scripture, or because I have not produced Scripture for it; but because none
other took notice of it before. So that it must be the Symptom of an evil
Conscience, for any one to t ke notice of that from God's word that none ever
did take notice of before. How certain a truth so ever it be, and how clearly
so ever the proofs in Scripture are produced for it.

2. He says, p. 35. But I will appeal to all thinking and impartial persons,
whether, or no, this new and bold attempt of this man's does not give cause to
all people to doubt of all the former pretended Arguments and proofs for Paedo,
or Infant Baptism, since new ways are thought necessary to evirce it.

Observe m^ new way is charged to give cause to all people to doubt of all
former pretended Arguments and Proofs, not of any real ones: So that truth and
reallity is like to lose nothing by my new way, by this man's judgment. And what
Arguments was but pretended could never be made better. But if all that
fai^hful Ministers have said, are by this man accounted and condemned as
pretended Arguments and Proofs; Observe how all the f^ithful Servants of Christ
are condemned as them that have deluded Souls with pretended arguments, and
defended God's Ordinances with pretended proofs. And why he should call mine
new, when it is as old as the first Administration of Baptism, and as old as
before Baptism was administered to the Gentiles; and the thing Argued for is the
same subjectively considered that ever any of God's servants argued for; and
for the boldness of it, I know no more boldness than what God's Servants have
showed, and than what the Scripture does bear them out in; and the things
produced by me, are as much confirmed by Scripture as by many others, and in
such abundance to offend some. And why this should give ground to any, and then
much less to all people, to question all the rest, I know not; except it be,
because they do not see that the cause is not given up for lost; and that it is
not wanting of Scripture warrant, in that there may be more of the Scripture
produced than ever yet was Produced; and that God does not withdraw his
assistance in the study of it; in that, things new as well as old may be
^^oduced in this case.

3. Observe that he a^^erts that such who read over my plain Scripture proofs,
etc. will certainly conclude that the title contains a grand untruth. B^ which
it is clear that he concludes it a grand untruth And yet not in the least
proved it an untruth, But confirmed the truth of all of it. And is it not
strange, that he should draw his conclusions, without proving the premises. And
to conclude too, tha^ such as read it over will do so too; Indeed some that
never have read it, that are enemies to Inf^nt Baptism, have been of his mind.
But none that have read it, that I know of, have been of that mind. But if any
had read it, and had been of that mind* would that be a sufficient warrant to
prove it, or for he to print such an untruth, to assert, that such as read it
will certainly conclude it a grand untruth. All the proof alleged, to prove it
an untru^h, is, that such as read it will certainly conclude so, thi^ need not
trouble any with too many Scripture proofs.

4. Observe, Before he dismisseth all the thinking and Impartial persons that
he has appealed to, as Ju^ge^, he Intimates to them what Judgment they shall
bring in, and what verdict they shall pass; And that is, to ^peak no worse, It
argues, these men a^e strangely left to themselves, or to blindness; (...)
shall undertake to affirm for Doctrine, without Scripture Demonstration, or
solid Reasons such things which are nothing but their own fancies. I Pra^ you
that are thinking and Impartial, take notice who he Intends by these m^n. It
must include all that have written any of the pretended arguments f^r Infant
Baptism, for they are expressed in the plural Number and without any
lim^t^tion, or restriction so as to exempt any one of them, of an^ generation.
And the sentence past upon them all indiffinitely is that they are strangely
left to themselves, or to blindness. If to themselves, it must be b^indn^ss,
for we are all in darkness by Nature, Ephesians. 5.8. And these men are left to it,
which is all one with being given up to it. And this leaving of them to
blindness, must be by man, or by God. By man, none can Imagine, that this
Gentleman Intends; for it is not in man's power to leave or give up any to it.
And therefore it must be by God. And he does not say they are blind in the
concrete, or left to be blind, but le^t to blindness in the abstract. And it is
not limited in what thing or things it is in. And if he had done that, that
would not have mended, or abated the sentence, for blindness must respect all
the whole course and state. And it respects all that shall undertake to offer
for Doctrine, without Scripture demonstra^ion, or solid Reasons, such things
which are nothing, but their own fancies. Now had he, or all those of his
opinion, proved that all that has been offered in pulpit, or in print, had
been without Demonstration of Scripture or solid Reasons, Then I should have
past it by without observation.

But for Mr. Keach to pass this Judgment upon their personal state, as left to
blindness, and their labors as their own fancies, and without Demonstration of
Scripture or solid Reasons, Who can but make a stand, and view this dreadful
doom, And this not as the worst. But to speak no worse. No worse, what could
have been worse? If left ^o blindness, whither are all gone that are departed?
Our Savior says the blind leader of the blind, will and shall fall into the
Ditch, and the blind that are led, by them too, Matthew. 15.14. And as all
^aithful Ministers and the people that have been led by them, must be all
Damned, fallen into the Ditch of hell, so all that are alive must all be going
thither, and all that hearken to them, must come to the same and. He looks upon
all their hearers, not only ^s deceived. But such as are willing to be
deceived. For he says, such as are willing to be deceived let them be
deceived, page 35. By which it appears that he does not only Judge all faithful
Ministers as left to blindness, But also as ^ceiver^, And all the r hearers as
deceived. And if these things be true, What a condition are all faithful
Ministers in, and all their hearers both dead and living. And if this man's
words be true, who would ever hearken to one Minister more? And it is not
limited, in any thing; for being left to blindness or deceiving, cannot be
limited They that can limit blindness as to any time, or action, may if they
can. And put a more favorable construction upon this man's Expressions, and all
the thinking and Impartial persons are appealed to in the case to pass
Judgment. And if this man did think as he did write, What is his apprehensi^n
of all that are not of his mind, and how far from all peace with them, or any
Inclination thereto? And if his thoughts were as he did write, How dare he, or
with what conscience could he bring in the sayings of Mr. Cotton, and Mr.
Baxter, and several others, to prove and confirm his Interpretations of
Scripture, and as the only proof of his assertions, and glor^ in what a cloud
of Witnesses he can bring of them, to confirm his matter, when he Does not
offer one text of Scripture, or of Gods word, to prove it, p. 40. Did he think
as he writ, and would he confirm what he says of so weighty a thing as
Confession is, in his apprehension, with the words and writings of they that he
affi^ms are left to blindness, and are deceivers; and they that are led by them
are willingly deceived; which shows that their deceivings are to notorious
that they might see it if they would; and yet bring these men's sayings for his
proof. How contemptible must he treat the great Truths, nay, the precious
truths of Christ, p. 54. He styles it; And yet bring only blind men's sayings
and writings, wherewith they have deceived people, to confirm it. O you
thinking and Impartial persons, Judge of this man's course, in his proof of his
precious truth. And what regard has h^ to the ^aith of his c^edu^ous ^ea^^^s,
o^ ^^^^ers, of such prec^ous truth as he maintains and c ntends for, and offer
only blind men's sayings for the Interpretation he gives to texts, and the
probation, and confirmation of his assertions. When he aff^^ms that the^ that
have believed them, and been led by them, are willingly deceived. And all the
while offers them nothing for the foundation of their faith, in what he says.
But what these have said and written, did ever any one of the true Prophets of
the Lord confirm what they said to the people with what those they had declared
to be deceivers, and false Prophets had said or did say or write? Did Moses
confirm what he asserted with the sayings of Jannis and Jambris, who deceived
the people? Or did Phillip confirm his Doctrine he ^aught the people of
Samaria, with what Simon the sorcerer said, who deceived the people! Acts. 8.
This man does Imagine he follows Phillip's way of Baptizing, And why should
he not follow Phillip's wa^ in proving his matter of Doctrine, nay that which
he calls the precious truth of Christ, and yet brings n^thing of Gods word to
confirm it, B^t only the sayings of them which he affirms are left to
blindness, and deceives the people, I appeal to all thinking and Impartial
persons, whether it is any ransgression in me, if I take no notice of those
sayings quoted b^ this man, as su ^icient proofs, or his matter, he having
Judged it invallid and deceiving. Whatever esteem and veneration I have
otherwise for those famous and Reverend servants of the Lord Jesus, quoted by
him. And if he did mean as he did write, How could he call them, or style them,
the learned, and all the learned, p. 50.

5. We may observe one Grand untruth more in the Porch of this man's building.
And that is. That he shall make some short reflections upon my proofs. p. 35.
But let all the thinking. and Impartial Judge, Whether he does not pass over
all the proofs to the oath p. of m^ book at one step, and b^gins to quarrel with
the Interpretation of the term All? And he says he would make some short
reflections upon my proofs, and yet affirms in p. 16. That I give neither
scripture nor reason to demonstate what I say is true. And yet he says he
would make shor^ reflections upon my proofs, which could never be if there was
none.

After we have viewed the Porch of his building, and found so much of Notorious
bitter censuring and falseness, let us take a little observation of what is
within in the Chambers of his Imagery; for if one half page contain so much,
what is there in near twenty full pages.

6. Observe that in p. 37. he says, The Ministration the word belongs not to
Infants. And for proof of this, quotes Deuteronomy. 11.1, 2. For I speak not with your
Children, etc. tho the matter contained in this text, he says at other times
belongs to the old Covenant of Works, as he calls it; and so cannot extend to
the proof of their exemption from the new Covenant, nor be a sufficient proof
of it.

Yet to take a litlle observation of this assertion of his by the Ministration
of the word that belongs not to Infants, he must intend the Ministration of it
by the immediate and extraordinary Officers; as the Prophets; or else he must
intend the Ministration of it by ordinary Officers, as the explainers and
interpreters of the words the Prophets delivered. If he intends the immediate
Officers, and the Messages that they delivered, that it did not belong to
Infants; then Infants wherever they are mentioned in the Messages of the
Prophets must be blotted out of all their writings and prophesies; or else all
the Prophets must be judged as false witnesses; and that they put infants Names
in their expressions and mess^ges from the Lord when i^ belonged not to them.
And so Moses must be condemned for saving, The Covenant was m^de with them that
day, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, and in Deuteronomy. 32.25. The sword without, and terror
within shall dest^oy both the young man, and the virgin, the suckling also with
the man with gray hairs. And the Prophet Joel must be condemned likewise for
p^tting Infants among them that were called to the fast and the solemn
Assembly, as well as the Elders, Joel 2.16. And so also Jer. in the
Lamen^ations, for it belonged not to them, they are not spoken with, in it; nor
must they be chaff or wheat in ^he floor; nor to be cast out, must neither be
gathered into the Garner; nor burnt up with unquenchable fire; nor must John
the Baptist intend them in that Text, Mat. 3.10. Nor must the Prophet intend
Infants by the godly seed, Mal. 2.15. See also Isa. 11.8. But if he intends the
Ministration of the word by ordinary Ministers as interpreters of the word,
then the meaning must be, that no one Minister must meddle with the
Interpretation or Application of any of those texts where Infants are mentioned
expressly; nor with the Interpretation of any of those general scriptural
expressions, wherein they are included with the Adult, as Nations, Genesis 17.4.6.
and Seed, Genesis 17.7. so Offspring, Issue, etc. And House, in 1 Samuel 22.19, 22.
and then how dare he Interpret that Text, Mat. 3.10. to be meant of the cutting
off of Infants; and therefore they must be in still; and all that is
interpreted to cast them out must be false; because, as th^s man says, the
Ministration of the word belongs not to them. And Christ's praying for them and
blessing of them, must not be acts of his Ministry, or else what this Man says
must be false, M^rk 10.13, 14, 15.16.

7. He says in p. 33. That there is no account given of any Infant that was
Baptized. How notorious an untruth is this, when none can tell exactly the
thousands that were Baptized in that Baptism mentioned by the Holy Ghost, 1
Cor. 10.2, 3. Neither is there any Adult particularly mentioned in Mat. 3.5, 6.
And therefore they must not be there neither.

8. ^e ^ai^^ page 3^. Th^^ tha^ is ^or^idden which is not commandm^^^. And
(...). The casting out of Infants from the Church of God is not commanded,
Therefore it is forbidden. The exclusion of them from being subjects of the
ministration of the word is not commanded, Therefore it is ^orbidden. The
gaining of a right to Baptism by a verbal confession, or the requiring such a
confession is not commanded, Therefore it is forbidden. The hearing of such
confessions, and determining of persons right by such confessions is not
commanded, Therefore it is forbidden. The excluding all that cannot come upon
their personal natural feet, and that cannot make such confessions is not
commanded, Therefore it is forbidden. Dipping is not commanded, Therefore it is
f^rbidden John Baptist his cutting off the Jews from the covenant made with
Abraham, and calling it a covenant of works, is not commanded, therefore it is
forbidden. The taking away of all their privileges as children of Abraham is
not commanded, Therefore it is forbidden* The calling of all (...) the flesh i^
seed is not commanded, therefore it is forbidden. I wish that this man does
believe, and that he ^ill but own his own assertions in this case* The giving
in confessions in writing to satisfy the Baptizor that persons are true
converts is not commanded, therefore it is forbidden.

9. He says p. 38. That Infants cannot be said as such to be receivers of
Christ, nor rejectors of him, Beca^^e they are capable to do neither. And yet
he says God may sanctify some elect Infants, in page 38. And demeth it again
in page 39. And says Infants are not capable to repent. And in page 49.
Affirms that God may sanctify some elect Infants. And can these things be all
true? How blind soever some are Judged to be, yet some have not such wide
throats as to swallow these dreadful falsities. Gods word gives us warrant to
believe that one dry bone is as capable to receive the spirit of life as
another dry bone, Ezekiel. 3^. 3, 4, 5. And Isaac and Jacob was as capable to be
said to live in Infancy, though in their blood, as Abraham when adult. Ezekiel.
16.4, 5, to 14. And free grace can of the same lamp make one vessel to honor,
and another to dishonor. And who can be a vessel of honor but by free grace?
Romans 9.16, 22, 23. And that the carnal mind is enmity against God and is not
subject, neither indeed can be to the law of God. Romans 8.7. And that all the
world are haters of Christ by nature, in John 7.7. And if they were not, then
they need not Christ to slay the enmi^y, nor to reconcile them to God. O what
dreadful things are these things! That this Gentleman ass^r^s. They that are
capable of Election are capable of all things else to which they are elected,
or else the election must be lost. Romans 11.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And this man does
acknowledge that there are some elect Infants. p. 49. And if there were not,
there could be none of the Adult elect. See one blessed scripture that he
gainsayeth, Isa. 65.20, 21. And if grace be a lively principle, is not s^n too,
to oppose every thing of Christ? Romans 7.23.

10. He says, p. 3^. That Baptism Depends, as to the right to it, upon the
positive commands of Christ. And I believe so too. Or else it must be
will worship, and the Apostles did nothing, nor were to teach any thing but
what was commanded. Matthew. 28.20. And then how dare he to affirm that it was a
verbal confession that gave them right? He must find them that the command or
authority of Christ does not extend to, where the Gospel comes, Before he can
have warrant to deny them right to Baptism, and that as a commanded duty, And
their sin to neglect or reject it, Luke 7.30. John 17.2.

11. He says p. 38. We deny that Infants have the habit of faith. Answ. The
scripture says, that all men have not faith, and I never thought nor writ that
all Infants had. But some Infants have had the habits of faith as well as some
men, Witness Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, Sampson, Jeremiah, John Baptist. But he
says who is able to know that? Answer. So he says in p. 34. Who knows who are
in a true spiritual sense in covenant with God? And then by the force of this
man's reason rendered the Adult must not have the habits of faith neither,
Because it cannot be known. And then what is his confession worth, if persons
will believe his own words, and Judge of his confession by what himself says.

12. Observe that until he has proved that all that John Baptist Baptized were
every person of them true converts. And that they made out the truth of their
repentance by their confession of sin. And that this confession was verbal, and
also that it was a commanded duty. And that John required it of them. And this
to satisfy him. And that this confession did gain their right to be baptized,
etc. To be admitted church members. Not one of which things can be proved by
Gods word. But till he has proved this, and proved it by express scripture,
his few poor pretended Arguments must go for his own fancies, without either
demonstration of scripture or solid Reason.

13. Observe that his Imagined Interpretation of Mala. 4.1. To prove John
Baptist to purge the floor of any, and much less of all Infants in the Jewish
church, is Notorious false, as may be cleared from the expressions in the
context; Because John Baptist was to be sent before that day of the Lord came,
Mal. 4.5. And the subjects threatened in verse. 1. And the proud and those that
do wickedly. And this Mr. Keach cannot Make Infants, Because they could not at
that age commit (...) And he says Mr. Cotton understands it of the Scribes and
Pharisees, p. 40, 41, etc.

14. Observe he says, that he has shewe^ that the Gospel dispensation has
overthrown the Mosaical constitution of the church of the Jews. And that Christ
has unto ^n out the fleshly seed as such, that is, no Infant is to be member
of the Gospel Church. I pray all you thinking and Impartial men to observe his
proof. A d that is he has showed, and that is as true as f he should say he
had turned night to day, or day to night, as to say he had or could show that
when John the Baptist Baptized them, the Church of the Jews was destroyed. An^
that all Infants are the fleshly seed, and that no Infant is or was to be
member of the Gospel Church. For then he must make all the Infants that were
singled out by especial prediction of Gods word, to be Martyrs, to be none of
the Gospel Church. Matthew. 2.17, 18, 22, 23. Contrary to Christ's own words that
declare sufferers for him to be of his family or household, Matthew. 10.25. 2.
Then they that Christ pray^d f^r, and blessed, must not be of the visible
Church. 3. This contradicts the express words of Christ, For of such are the
kingdom of God. Mark 1.13, 14, 15, 4. Then the all in the Church must never
receive the kingdom of God, if they do not receive it as they that are not to
be of the church receive it, Luke 18.17. 5. Then they were the greatest
instruments to stop the mouths of the Scribes and Pharisees, and to make known
Christ's power and praise that were not to be of the visible church. Matthew.
21.15, 16, Do you fee^ your church with such falsities as these?

15. He says Infants Baptism does them no good, p. 40. There being no promise
of ble^s^ng made to them in their Baptism. Observe how contrary this is to the
express words of the spirit of God by Peter, Acts 2.38, 39. The promise is to
you and your children. And to the Promise declared by John, Matthew. 3.11. If
Infants are not expressed no more are Adult.

16. He says, What appears not is not, p. 40. and then God must have no
church, when he said he had reserved seven thousand to himself. Their grace did
not appear to Peter, in Acts 2.37, 38. by their confession, therefore it was
not. Their grace did not appear to John, Matthew. 3.5, 6. For else why did he bid
them bring forth fruits. Ergo v. 8.

17. Observe he says, that the subjects of John's Ministry and ^f Christ's were
all one. Then John did not curse and cast out Infants because Christ blessed
them, and that because they were of the kingdom of God they were to come to
him. Mark 10.13, 14, 15.

18. He says that John left some, nay more people to Christ and his Disci^les
to Baptize than he baptized, p. 42. And that John Baptized but few
comparatively. When the ho^y Ghost expressly says, that they of Jerusalem, all
the region, all Judea were baptized of him. A d our Savior condemns them that
were not, Luke 7.30. Hear O heavens. If John left any it must be the good or
bad, or both. If the good only, that must be injustice to cast out the good. If
the bad onl^, then his church must be pure and Christ's Impute. And how then
should he make them Mr. Keach his living stones for Christ. And if he refused
the bad, why did he threaten them, or promise Christ to baptize them. If he
left bad and good it must be injustice and partiallity. And the confession then
did not gain them a right. And if he left them for Christ and his disciples to
baptize, why should he cut them down, or strip them of their privileges, as
Mr. Keach says he did, upon Matthew. 3.9, 10.

19. Observe, He says p. 42. That John Baptized them as such that believed in
him that was to dye. This is contrary to the express word of God, Acts 19.3, 4.
which says, Verily John baptized them, saying to the people, that they should
believe on him that should come after him. That is, on Christ Jesus. And the
spirit of God does expressly say, that they believed in Christ afterward, John
10.41, 42. And yet this he affirms them to be all true penitents, in p. 38. 39,
41, 42. And this he had the conscience to say in the face of all the express
scriptures from John's own mouth, and also from Christ's himself, and
unanswerable arguments to prove it in my treatise, p. 52, 53, 54, 55. And he
brings not one text to prove they were true penitents. If they had been true
peniten^s when baptized, in verses 5, 6. why should Mr. Keach dare preach to
his Church and print to the world, that John took away their privileges, and
cut them down, in v. 9, and 10 of Matthew. 3d.

20. Observe he says, p. 45. That by my argument all the world may be
baptized; when I argue only for the Baptizing of them that had God for their
God. Deuteronomy. 29, and they to whom the promise did belong. Acts 2.38, 39. Matthew.
3.11.

21. Observe, he says that the covenant made with Abraham, with his fleshly
seed, was a carnal covenant, and this John the baptist cut them off from, in
Matthew. 3.10. and by this the right of Infants for admission to be church
members was all put an end to. Ans. All that this Gentleman says, or any
other, to prove the covenant of circumcision to be a covenant of works, must
all go for nothing but his or their fancies, till he or they have proved that
Infants at eight days old are capable to know as much of a law of God contained
in the word of divine revelation, a^^ to do as much as the adult, and their
works to be as valued in law, and deserve as good a reward as the adult parent,
as it is discovered in my treatise, in p. 66, 67, 68, 69, 70. and which Mr.
Keach knew well enough was too hard for him to prove, and therefore passed it
by in silence. But all he says of this covenant to (...) ^^^^nant of works is
nothing, till he has proved the infant capable of such a covenant. And if he
could do this, yet this wou^d but render them the more ceatainly capable of the
covenant of Grace. And this Imagin^tion about the covenant of circumci^ion
being a covenant of works, is one of the dreadfullest falsities that ever
entered into the head of mortals. For if it was a law of God. The carnal mind is
not subject to it, neither indeed can be. Romans 8.7. And a notion that the
vilest S^dduces either had no^ received, or had not the face to mention, in
Matthew. 22.30, 31. W^^n our Savior brought Gods being the God of Ab^aham, Isaac
and Jacob, to prove the resurrection, they did not say, that that was a
covenant of work^ for the land of Canan only.

And for Joh^s cutting them down from such an Imagined covenant, in Matthew.
3.10. Was never the like heard of. For if they were out of the covenant of
Grace, What had J^hn to do to judge them, 1. Cor. 5.1^. And if he should cut
them off from this covenant, It must be in Judgment or mercy. If in Judgmen^,
then they must Immediately be turned out of the good land, and all other their
mercies. If in mercy, Then he must make it a privilege not to have these
mercies, and the good land. And then it was given to them in Judgment, and took
away in mercy. And it must be of all or some. If of all, it was to make the
good as the bad, or else there must be none good. And they must be cut down as
they that had broken the covenant, or kep^ the covenant. If they were
circumcised, they kept that covenant And then it must be injustice to out them
down; and none could do it by that covenant. And if they broke the covenant, to
take away the covenant, was to take away the law, and so make them no
transgressors, and to free them from all obnoxiousness to punishment. And was
ever tree cut down with laying the ax to the root of it, and not strike one
stroke? Or did ever mortal cut a tree down and then bid him bring forth good
fruit? Let heaven and earth Judge of this Doctrine.

22. Observe he says, that John denied them their privileges, Matthew. 3.9. p.
43. 48. And why then does the holy Ghost tell them of their privilege of being
the children of the Prophets, Acts 3.25. Was not Abraham one of these Prophets,
Or were others higher than him?

23. Observe he says, p. 47. That a command is sometimes attended with a power
to charge the soul. And if baptism be a commanded duty, how dare he say, that
no Infant had ever any good by baptism?

24. Observe p. 46. He says, I make baptism a very Insignificant sign, And
yet at another time that I make it a converting ordinance, either of which I
never did.

25. Observe his command that he brings for his confession, is Matthew. 3.8. Did
not John require it when he said bring forth fruits. And did not Philip require
it, Acts 8.37, 38, etc. Answ. That command was after baptism. Compare Matthew.
3.5, 6. with 8. And after the confession was made and received. And to the
Pharisees and Sadduces chiefly. And that is in the plural Number, fruits, and
not fruit; and how dare he or any else to limit where God does not? and to
require fewer fruits than Gods word does? And to make a verbal confession to be
equal with any other fruit of repentance, and yet say who can know certainly
who is in the covenant of God by it, and say that the fruit of the life is the
loudest discovery of the change in the heart? and yet verbal confession must do
all! and where can he prove that verbal confession to man is a certain fruit of
true repentance? as for Philip's requiring a confession, that is as false as
all the rest, For he required none. He says, if thou believe with all thine
heart thou may. But not if thou confessest. If he, or any, else say it is
Employed, that will be no help to him. For if Phillip required or intended to
have a confession of the truth of his grace, as it is writ in his heart, Why
did he take a confession of the object of faith? and if the Eunuch had
understood Philip to intend the discovery of the truth of his faith, as wrought
in his heart, Why did he confess something of the object of faith, etc.

And for the confession mentioned Romans 10.10. That is a confession to
salvation, and not to baptism, and to God and not to man, and of practice and
not verbal only. The Pharisees baptizing their hands was an honoring God with
their mouth, that is, with their outward man, Matthew. 15.8. Mark. 7.6. Would
this Gentleman have persons confess heir sins to him upon their knees as people
are to do to God in prayer? You that have so required, and preached and printed
for confession, show your command for such a confession to give right to
baptism, or publish your repentance and do it no more.

26. Observe he says, no doubt of it but it was a confession of actual sins,
and therefore it did concern Infants. Observe, if Infants were to be cast out
of the Church of God if they could not make it, then it did concern them, for
what they were to be cut off for the Omission of, that did concern them, Genesis
17.14. and then persons at age must commit those sins, or else they could not
commit them, nor be capable to gain a right by it to be baptized. See my
treatise from 36. to 55 (...)

27. Observe, He says p. 53. That the baptizing with the holy Ghost, does not
signify the communication of the savin^ graces of the spirit to true believers,
or their participation of them, But the v^si^le gif^^ ^f tongues, and working
of Miracles, etc. ^et all flesh see this proved false in my treatise. He
refle^ts against p. 51. an^ also in this ensuing, and let all flesh Judge of
the dreadful Impudency of thi^ man that should dare in the face of to many
express scriptures produced, and undenia^le arguments, to a^^ert such
^alsities, and for his reproachful slander against me, to say. I abuse those
tex^s, R^m. 5.^. And Mala. ^. L^^^ 1.1^. L^^ the thinking and Impartial view
their exp^^^^ ^on. And the argumen^ from ^n my tre^^ise p. 60, 51, 62, 63, 64,
65. And let all that have a ^ gh to fe^ch a tea^ to shed, fetch i^ for, and
shed it for ^his man; That shall have the face to style himself a pastor of a
Ch^rc^ of Christ, and yet dare to preach and print such Notorious falsities.
And so to censure and ^ondem^ to hell G^ds faithful Ministers, and their
conscientious hearers. And this when he had no^ his, nor any of his opinion,
their nam^s mentioned. Nor any reviling giv^n him. And yet in the presence of
Atheists, Papists, Form^llists, persecutors, and profane, can ^ublish it to
the world, and call what he says precious truth of Christ, and produce nothing
to prove (...) wh^^ th^se that be does so reproach has said, and feed the
says of his Church of Christ with th^^r s^^ings. The Lord help all to make ^t
^ lamentation: But that all my see my Title Page is not a grand un^ruth, I
shall first prove, that the Church of the Jews ^as th^n the only visible Church
of God. 2. That the wo^d a^l does include and in^end Infants as well as adul^.
3. That this is as expressly dec ared as to the B^p^ism o^ Infants as the adult.

First, That the Church f the Jews was then when John baptized, the visible
Church of G^d; and this is clear in that ^^hn calls them his flo^r, Matthew. 3.2.
and they are called his o^n, J^^n 1.1^, 11. and the Vineyard ^o them all the
servants, and the H^ir ^lso was sent, Matthew. 21.32. to 40. The temple Christ
called his Fathers house, and his house, ^^hn 2. Matthew. 21.12, 13. Their house
was not t^en desol^^e but Christ t^reatned them that i^ should be desola^e.
Matthew. 23.^7, 38. They were the children of the kingdom. Matthew. 8, and had the
kingdom of God, but Christ threatened them that it should be taken from them.
Matthew. 21.41, ^4. and sent h^s disci^les to them only, and forbid them to go to
another, Matthew. 10.6, 7.

2. To prove that the word all does include Infant as well a Adult. And I shall
produce no other texts ^o prove i^ than some of them that Mr. Keach does quote
in his 36. p. Where he puts the word all to Jerusalem, that I never put in, and
leaves out ^he word ages that I mentioned, p. 36, 37.

The First text he produces is Exodus 9.6. That it did no^ signif^ ever^
individual. Answ. But will any have the ^ace to say, that there we^e no young,
cattle amongst the old. If Mr Keach or any of his mind can and do prove i^,
then I may know what to say, but not before. Another is John 12.32. Christ
drawing all men to him. But will he say, that he draws no Infants to him? He
has gran^ed that God does and may s^nctify some Infants. And if he grant, it
is enough. p. 38, 47, 49. So Christ's dying for the elect only, and not for
every Individual. But does not he acknowledge that there are some elect
Infants? See p. 4^. or 49. of his reflections. Another text is Genesis 24.10. All
the goods of his master were in his hand. And if he can prove th t he had not
young asses and cam^ls in his h^nd as well as old ones, let all the Impartial
thinking persons Judge. So that by more t^an two or three ^exts quoted by him,
the word all does include and intend some of all ages were in Israel, and
discharge all the rest from any sin, guilt or punishment, though they did not
come, Luke 7.3^. and it s^gnifieth every Individual. Mr. Keach says in p. 37.
When the matter spoken of does equally concern all, and ^f Repentance and
Remission of sins, and deliverance from hell and death, and eternal life by
Christ does not equally concern every soul where the Gospel comes. Let all
Judges see Acts ^.23, 26. R^m. 2.6, 7. to 12. and let all that have reproached
and backbited truth, and those that desire to promote it either by Ignorance,
error or malice, read and tremble, that God should cause an enemy to present
those texts in public to confirm the truth that they have prosecuted in
private, and have not showed that honesty as Mr. Keach has to appear in
public.

3. That the baptism of the Infant is as express as the adult.

And if the word all does include and intend infants, as adult, then one is
expressed in it as the other. But that it does, Mr. Keach has quoted Texts to
prove; and if it did not include Infants, how could Mr. Keach out all the
Infants down, in Matthew. 3.10. Or take away all their privileges from them, in
Matthew. 3.9. as children of Abraham.

2. J^^^ does expressly declare to all that he had bap^ized them. Luke 3.16.

3. The sp ri of God does expressly declare that the general terms, all Judea,
all the Region, and all the mul^i^u^e, does intend and contain men, women and
children, and Mr. Keach has not proved one of my quotations false by any other
text containing the same expressions.

4. The holy Ghost does Witness, that they were Employed in setting forth his
praise, Mat. 21.15.

5. It is express, If they are chaff or wheat, Matthew. 3.12.

6. It is as express as the promise of baptizing them with the holy Ghost,
Matthew. 3.11.

If any reflect against the ensuing treatise. There is enough in Gods word to
answer them.

J. E.

A Serious Enquiry into, and a certain producing of, clear and express
Scripture Proof of the Way and Manner of John Baptist, and the Apostles
Administration of Baptism, when they first administered it to the Church of the
Jews.
AS well as the Scripture is sufficient to discover to us, and give us
sufficient ground, and warrant, who were then baptized by John the Baptist, and
the Apostles; that we might not be left in that case to believe, we know not
what. As having no distinct discoveries, who were the Subjects of that Solemn
O^dinance; That were then taken in, and admitted to be of the visible Church;
but some imagine one thing, and some another; some imagine Qualifications of
Nature, some of Grace, to be the Reasons of their admission; both which are
inconsistent with the nature of the admission in that sense that many contend
for.

For, if Grace do not constitute us, or evidence us, to be in already, it can
never do it. If the reception of the Lord Jesus, and quickening by him, do not
constitute us of the Mistical Body of Christ, whether visible or invisible,
when we are really partakers of i^, then it can never do it. And if Grace, as
infused and wrought by the Spirit of God, and received by us, cannot do it;
that is, make us Members of the Church of God: Then the confession, or making a
discovery of this Grace, cannot do it surely. For it is impossible, that the
discovery of that to men, should do that which the thing it self cannot do
before God. And this, when the Right, or Title, or Relation is to be toward
God, through his Son, and not with men in a civil respect. And if Grace cannot
give the right, either in the Nature or the Discoveries of it; then surely,
Nature, especially as to the number of Years, or degrees of Strength, or
measure of Seize whatsoever, cannot do it, so as to be Qualifications
absolutely necessary for admission to that Ordinance, except any can make
Nature to be of greater necessity, and excellency, than supernatural Grace; and
so render Grace needless, as it does unite us to Christ, and make Christ also
needless.

So also is the blessed word of God, sufficient to give us warrant for the way
and manner of the Administration of this Solemn Ordinance of Initiation into
the Church of God visible: To be by application, or pouring upon, or sprinkling
the person baptized with Water, together with the pronunciation of the words or
form of Administration; which, indeed, is that which makes and constitutes the
proper form of this duty, and distinguishes it from all other Baptisings
whatsoever.

And if the blessed word of God, should not yield matter for our direction and
warrant herein, what dreadful confusion must follow as to all?

For, if we be at a loss for the right manner of our admission, or the
constitution of us Members, what hesitation and doubt, must there be upon every
temptation afterward, about our State or Interest, as to visible warrant from
the word of God? And especially, when the subtilest Adversaries in their forest
onsets, and worst temptations most pretend to Scripture Warrant, and Rule. And
if there be Direction and Warrant to be had from the Word of God in this case,
what shame is it, that it should be no more studied and searched, that clear
Scripture Proof might be produced, for every thing practiced in so solemn a
Duty?

T^erefore, I have, and shall endeavor, in the fear of God, to search into,
and endeavor to produce clear Scripture Proof in this case, relating to this
Solemn Ordinance of Initiation of Members into the visible Church of God; As to
the Way and Manner, it is to be performed in. But before I come to the Texts
that gives us intimation of this matter, I shall premise some things that are
certain Truths of Scripture, that may be as general Rules for our Information
in this case.

First, It was such a way and manner that John the Baptist, and the Disciples
of Christ baptized in, at their first administration of this Ordinance of
Baptism to the Church of the Jews, as would consist with the truth of the
Promise and Covenant made to Abraham, and to his seed, which they were then
sent as Instruments to bring about the Performance and Accomplishment of. What
John the Baptist, and the Disciples then did as the Messengers sent by Christ,
as his forerunner, and deligates, was with respect to that Covenant and
Promise, Luke 1.55, 70, to 75. Romans 15.8. Acts 13.32, 33.

And the People to whom they were sent, were they, to whom of right the
External Administrations did appertain, by the good pleasure and free donation
of God, the Author of the Promise; and to one as well as another, and to one as
much as another, Romans 9.4, 5. Acts 13.24, 25, 26. Matthew. 10.6, 7. And they must
administer it in such a way, that one might partake of it as well as another,
being as expressly and particularly a subject of that Promise as another; and if
any must have been rendered incapable of the administration, the Covenant must
have been broken as to that person.

And should John, and the Disciples have administered Baptism by Dipping, then
all Infants, and all infirm Persons, must have been excluded; which were the
greatest number of the Subjects of the Covenant then living, Acts 2.38, 39 and
are the greatest number always among all People: and if the Covenant should
have been broken, or God's Truth fail to any, what might the rest expect!

2. It must be such a manner of Baptizing as would consist with the declared
objects of Christ's Ministry, to whom John was sent to prepare for the Lord,
and to whom the Disciples were sent; and the Objects of Christ's Ministry, were
the Circumcision, Romans 15.8. And they were Infants eight days old, to whom then
it was to be administered; and before that age they were of the Circumcision,
being Males of the Circumcised: And being by Divine Command to partake of it:
And in case Infants should have been excluded, the capacity of Circumcision,
which was Infancy, and in which all were looked upon, must have been certainly
exploded the Church of Christ, and none made mention of, in that capacity. For,
if any of the Seed of Abraham exceeded eight days old, they were to be cut off
as breakers of the Covenant, if they were not circumcised at eight days old.

3. Such a manner of Baptizing they used, and administered Baptism in, as would
consist with their participation of the Ordinance, as they were Children of
Abraham, and did enjoy their privileges, as the Children of Abram: For that
they had, and did enjoy under John the Baptist, and the Apostles
administrations, Matthew. 3.9. Acts 3.22, 23, 26. Acts 2.38, 39. Matthew. 10.6, 7.

4. Such a manner of Baptizing as would render the Promise sure to all the
Seed, Romans 15.8. Romans 4.16. and confirmed the Truth of God to them all, Acts
3.23. Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19.

5. Such a manner of Baptizing as would consist with the ordinary natural
strength of any one Officer to perform, without any miraculous ability.

It was that which John Baptist did and could perform; for he said, I have
indeed baptized you with Water, Matthew. 3.11. Luke 3.16. Mark 1.8. And what he
did, he did by ordinary natural strength, for he did no Miracle, John 10.40,
41, 42.

6. Such a manner of Baptizing as would consist with all Fleshes seeing the
salvation of God; that is, enjoy the outward means of Salvation, setting forth
the benefits to be had by Christ; and that was means to convey them to poor
sinners, Luke 3.6. If Children, and Infants, and all infirm persons, had been
excluded, what would have become of that Pr^mise, that was made so free, and
without any limitation?

7. Such a manner of Baptizing, as would consist with the Baptizing of they of
Jerusalem, all Judea, all the Region round about Jordan, the multitude, and all
the People; and the lost Sheep of the H^use of Israel, Matthew. 3.5, 6. Luke 3.7.
Mark 1.4, 5, 6. Luke 3.21. Matthew. 10.6, 7. And they that can exclude Infants
from being intended in, and by these expressions, must have a new Bible, and
make void the old.

8. Such a manner of Baptizing, as would consist with all the Trees in that
Field, that was either to stand, or to be cut down; and with all them, whether
Wheat or Chaff, that were in that Floor, that were either to be purged out, or
kept in, to be gathered into the Garner, or to be burnt up with unquenchable
Fire, Matthew. 3.10, 12. Acts 3.32.

9. Such a manner of Baptizing, as was consistent with the exaltation, and
magnifying of the power of God's Grace upon the Subjects thereof, Matthew. 3.9. 1
Cor. 1.24, to 29.

10. Such a manner of Baptizing, as the outward Baptism with Water might be a
Sign, Type, and Figure of the Beptism with the Spirit, Matthew. 3.11. 1 Pet.
3.21. Acts 2.38 to 43. Acts 11.15, 16. Acts 15.9. Romans 6.3, 4, 5. It was spoken
by them that then Baptized, which were the Apostles, and John Baptist.

11. Such a manner of Baptizing, as any that were in the capacity, either of
Fathers or Children, were capable of partaking of; for to both these John the
Baptist was sent, to turn them to the Lord, that they might not be smitten with
the curse, Mal. 4.6. Luke 1.17. And without Infants were not liable, or
obnoxious to the curse, they must be there intended.

12. Such a manner of Baptizing, that all that were to bring forth good Fruit
might partake of; which Fruit, among others, was especially to come to Christ,
to be baptized with the Holy Ghost, and to believe in him, Acts 19.3, 4, 5. and
whosoever was denied the means, could never be under the obligation to bring
forth Fruit.

13. Such a manner of Baptizing, as was consistent with all that were Subjects,
either of the Promise, or of the threatening; either of the promise of Grace and
Glory, or of the threatening of Wrath here or hereafter, Acts 2.38, 39. Acts
3.23. Romans 2.6, 7, to 12. Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, to 16.

14. Such a manner of Baptizing, as consisted with all that were to be the
Subjects of Christ's Fan, that he was to come with in his Hand, Matthew. 3.12.

15. Such a manner of Baptizing, as would not render the Commands of God to
that People, and that were then in force among that People, of none effect; for
it was the duty of all them, old and young, to be at public Ordinances; and it
was the duty of every one of them, to repent and be Baptized, and to hear that
Prophet in all that he said to them, Luke 7.29, 30. Acts 2.38, 39. Acts 3.23,
26.

16. Such a manner of Baptizing, as would not render the Institutions by Moses
insignificant, and ineffectual, which were than in force, John 7.21, 22. Psalm
51.6, 7. Romans 15.1, 4. Acts 26.22. Asts 24.14.

17. Such a manner of Baptizing, as would consist with the Church of the Jews,
then being God's visible Church, and with the Right and Privilege of the
particular Members thereof: If any should be exempted that were then members,
the whole must be overturned; and that Economy be rendered null and void. But
this was not, for they were all sent to, as an House or Family, Matthew. 10, 6,
7. God's Field and Floor, Matthew. 3, 10, 12. Matthew. 15.24, 25, 26.

18. Such a manner of Baptizing, as was agreeable with the Baptizing unto Moses
by the Cloud in the Sea; 1 Cor. 10.2. that all the Fathers were partakers of,
and baptized with; in which the Water was applied to them, and not they dipped
in the Water, Heb. 11.29. which was done by him that could as easily have dipped
them as sprinkled them, had that been the way in which it was to be performed.

19. Such a manner of Baptizing, as would consist with the Gravity, Austerity,
and Fullness of the Holy Ghost, that John the Baptist was filled with, and came
in; and not such as would expose the Solemn Ordinance of Baptism, to be a scorn
and redicule to the enraged, malicious, implacable Spectators.

20. Such a Baptizing, as to the manner of applying of Water to the person
Baptized, that might agree with the Gospel Prophesies, respecting the manner of
Christ's Communications of his Sufferings to many Nations. See Isa. 52.15. Joel
2.28. Isa. 44.3. Prove. 1.23. If any say, this is spoken of the pouring out the
Spirit, the inward Baptism? I answer, then they do, and must acknowledge
Christ's Baptizing to be by sprinkling or pouring upon, and the external
Baptism must be the sign of it.

21. Such a manner of Baptizing, as was agreeable to the great Gospel Promise,
that was to be fulfilled in Gospel times, Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean
Water upon you; and if they will make this to be meant of the Internal Grace;
they must acknowledge, that that is performed by sprinkling; and then they must
grant, the external means, the Baptism with Water, to be the Sign and
Representation, and to be the sign of the inward and Spiritual Grace; or else,
the exrernal Baptism must not be a sign; and, if not a sign, it cannot be a
seal; and what it will be then made of, who can tell?

22. Such a manner of Baptizing, as the Blood of Christ is affirmed to speak to
all in; and that is as the Blood of Sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. Heb. 9.13, 14, 19,
20, 21, 22.

23. Such a manner of Baptising, as the meaning and intention of John Baptist
might be understood, by the Multitude, when he expressed the internal and
external Baptism by one and the same word, without the least of Explanation,
Limitation, or Distinction, Matthew. 3.11.

24. Such a manner of Baptizing, they then performed it in, as the extremity
and violence of the Sufferings of Christ for sin, might be represented in the
most livelyest manner in that Sacrament, and the administration thereof, as
well as in the administration of the Supper of the Lord; that so Grace might be
magnified, and his love to Sinners the more clearly represented, Exodus 12.21,
22. Isa. 63.2, 3, 4. Heb. 9.13, 14, 19. to 23. Heb. 10.22. Isa. 52.14. Isa.
53.4, 5, 6, 7.

25. Such a manner of Baptizing, as will agree with all the Metaphorical
Expressions, whereby the inward Baptism is set forth by the Holy Ghost in
Scripture, as in Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6. Coll. 2.11, 12. Gal. 3.27. 1 Cor. 12.13.

Having premised some things in general, concerning the way and manner in which
the Primitive Baptism was performed to the Church of the Jews, by John the
Baptist, and the Disciples of Christ. Now let us enquire into those Texts of
Scripture, in which we have the way and manner of the Administration of this
Ordinance by John the Baptist, set forth; and that is in Matthew. 5.11. I indeed
baptize you with Water, but he that comes after me, is mightier than I, -- he
shall bapsize you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, Mark 1.8. I indeed have
baptized you with Water, but he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, Luke
3.16. I indeed baptize you with Water, but one mightier than I comes, -- he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, John 1.33. I knew him
not, but he that sent me to Baptize with Water; the same said unto me, upon
whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he
that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. Here our Translators have, and that not
without good Reasons, and weighty Considerations, rendered the words (...) and
(...) according to the Dialect in the New Testament; so that we have good
ground to believe, that the manner in which John the Baptist performed the
Ordinance of Baptism at the first Administration thereof by him, was by
applying Water to the person, and not by applying the person to the Water, by
dipping of him into Water, that he then baptized. As the Lord Jesus was
prophesied of by John, and also does baptize with the Holy Ghost, not by
putting or dipping the person into the Holy Ghost, but by pouring out his
Spirit upon the person he baptizeth.

Water is so expressed, as to be the Instrument, wherewith the action of
Baptizing was performed; when any action is performed by an Instrument, that
Instrument is expressed by this word WITH, or by some like term, to set it
forth by, or express it, to the Understandings of them, to whom this action is
discovered. So Jacob sets forth, how he got the parcel of ground that he gave
to his Son Joseph; he gained it with his Sword and with his Bow, Genesis 48 22.
Mary washed the Feet of our Lord with Tears, and wiped them with the Hairs of
her Head, Luke 7.38. Lord, shall we smite with the Sword? Luke 22.49. Now, when
persons do smite with the Sword, they do not take the person and strike him
against the Sword, but strike the Sword against the person. So Matthew. 26.67.
Mark 14.65. They did strike Jesus with the Palms of their Hands; and this was
by striking the Palms of their Hands against him, and not taking him, and
striking him against the Palms of their Hands; so that the Palms of their Hands
were the Instruments with which this action was performed, John 13.5. After
that he pouereth Water into a Basin, and began to wash ^he Disciples Feet, and
to wipe them with the Towel wherewith he was gi^ded. In all which Texts, and
many others that might be produced, the Holy Ghost gives us to understand,
that these things were made use of as means, and applied to the subjects in
these various actions, by the various Agents performing of them, and not the
subjects took and applied to those means, as the Tears and the Hairs were
applied to the Feet, and not the Feet to the Tears and the Hairs; and the Water
and the Towel were applied to the Feet of the Disciples, and not the Disciples
Feet to the Water and Towel.

Daemona non armis sed morte subegit Jesus. Great has been the noise that has
been made in the World, and dreadful the Confusion in the Church of God about
the manner of external Baptism; and abundance of poor confident Souls have
affirmed, that the manner of the Primitive Baptism was by applying or dipping
the person baptized into Water, and not by pouring or sprinkling Water upon the
person; and many good men, and great Scholars, have too rashly granted the
Primitive Baptism, to be performed, by dipping the person baptized into Water;
but by what warrant or ground from the Word of God, I do not know, though I
should be glad to know; and it is that which makes me search into Scripture,
that I might know. And if baptizing with Water, be taken to show to us, the
manner of the performance of the Ordinance of Baptism, then we may have some
light, and also, warrant, in this case; that it was not by dipping, or applying
their persons to Water, but the applying of, and pouring out of Water upon
their persons; by putting the word Dip in the stead or place of Baptize; and
read the words thus, I indeed have dipped you into Water, but he shall dip you
into the Holy Ghost.

If the word (...), to baptize, in the first expression of it, by John, with
respect to what he had done to them, do signify, and be understood to
signify, to dip into Water, then the word (...), to baptize, must signify two
things in this one sentence, about one and the same Ordinance, uttered by the
same Prophet, at the same time, to the same People or Auditory. And this, when
by Divine Appointment, one is to be a Sign, Figure, or Representation of the
other, and that to this end too, that the Understandings of the Auditory to
whom it was spoken, might be enlightened, to understand how they should be
partakers of the baptism with the Holy Ghost, from the Lord Jesus Christ.

In the first part of the verse, I indeed have baptized you with Water, Mark
1.8. Many do imagine, that John did mean, and intend by the word baptize,
dipping; and suppose, that it is all one as if he had said, I indeed have
dipped you into Water; and so say, the word does signify to Dip, from this and
the like Texts; but for Scripture Proof of it, I know none, nor could I ever
obtain one Scripture to prove this Interpretation of this word (...), from any
person that ever I requested it from. In the latter part of the verse, he shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost. There if all the men in the World would
gainsay it, by the plain expressions of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, it does
signify, to pour upon, to sprinkle or to shed upon. It is certain, that in the
Hebrew and Greek Languages, one and the same Root and Theme, or word, may have,
and have various significations, or acceptations, in various conjugations, and
various moods, when they respect various objects, and various actions; but
where can any one produce out of the Holy Scripture, one example, that one and
the same word, about one and the same Ordinance, at one and the same time, by
the same Preacher, to one and the same Hearers, should have, or have such a
directly different and contrary signification and acceptance as this word
(...), must be supposed to have in the Texts before quoted; and this when the
external Baptism was to be the sign and representation of the inward baptism;
or else it must cease in nature, and be neither Sign nor Seal; for all divine
signs were, and are seals, as they signified the things represented by them,
and the manner of their performances.

To make it app^ar, that the word (...), does signify pouring upon, or
sprinkling with the spirit (and was so intended by John, to signify, he being
a Prophet) when it is used in the latter part of the verse, to express Christ's
communication of his Spirit to them, and baptizing them with the Holy Ghost,
may be cleared from many express Texts of Scripture, where Christ's baptizing
with the Holy Ghost is spoken of, and that thing intended. Only we may premise,
First, that baptizing with the Holy Ghost is two fold, or two things are
intended thereby in the New Testament.

First, the communication of the saving Graces of the holy spirit in a
supernatural work of Grace upon the Soul of the poor sinner, to whom it was, or
is to be communicated; and this was to be, and is the special thing signified
by the external Baptism with Water; and is to be continued in the Church, to
the end of the World, by Christ's Presence, with his Servants in his
Ordinances; though to whom he please, or to all that the Father had given him,
M^tth. 23.20. 2. There is intended by this phrase, Baptizing with the Holy
Ghost, the pouring out upon some, especially them that were to be the first
Publishers of the Gospel, and the Planters of the Church, the extraordinary
Gifts of the Spirit; or the common Gifts thereof in an extraordinary manner, as
the speaking with diverse kinds of Tongues, and the power of working of
miracles, for the confirmation of the Truth, and the publishing of it to all
Nations, to whom the Lord did send them. And the manner of Christ's baptizing
with the Holy Ghost, in both these senses or with respect to both these
acceptations, was by pouring of it out upon them, or sprinkling them with it;
as is witnessed by the Holy Ghost in diverse places of Scripture. Whereby it
may, and will appear, that the word (...) in the latter part of the verses
before quoted, do not signify to dip the person into it, but pouring out the
Holy Ghost upon the person, or sprinkling him with it. First, As to the manner
of the communications of the saving Graces of the Spirit to the Soul, in a
supernatural work of special Grace upon the Soul: This is done, and was ever
done, by applying it to the soul, and pouring it out upon the soul, or
sprinkling them wi^h it; and not putting the person into the Holy Ghost: And
this we may see testified from Christ's own mouth, in John 3.3, 5, 8. Except a
man be born of Water and of ^he Holy Ghost, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
Here our Savior asserteth the necessity of the use of the outward means, when
the Lord vouchsafes it, to any person or people, as well as the necessity of
the inward Grace; and this to Nicodemus, who was of the Pharisees that
contemned the outward means, Luke 7.30. And how this birth is performed, our
Lord Jesus shows, in verse 8. not by applying the person, or putting the
person into the spirit, but by applying the spirit to the person; The wind
blows where it lists, thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell
whence it comes, nor whither it goes; so is every one that i^ born of the
sp^^it. Though Nicodemus's way was, for the person to enter the (...) time into
his m^thers womb. So Titus 3.5, 6. By the washing of Regeneration, and
re^^^r^^g o^ the h^ly gh^st, which he shed on us abundantly; (...), or poured
forth on us a^^^^^ (...), ^^t^ 2.16, 17, 33. so Isa. 44.3. I will pour my
spirit upon thy seed, and my bles^^^g u^^n thy ^^f-sp^ing, Heb. 10.22. Let us
draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts
spri^kled f^^m an evil Conscience. 1 Pet. 1.2. Through the sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus Christ. Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean Water upon you. If
that be meant of the spirit then Christ's baptizing is by sprinkling, Isa.
52.15. So shall he sprinkle many Nations. Ezekiel. 37.3, 4, 5. Thus says the Lord
to these dry bones, Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye s^^^l
^^^e; and I will lay sins upon you, and bring flesh upon you; Eph^s. 2.1. Y^u
has be q^^ ^^^^ed who were dead in trespasses and sins. By life entering into
us we have our natural q^g at first, and so also we have our spiritual
quickening, and not by our entering into ^^e; so we are said to receive of the
abundance of Grace, and gift of R ghteousness, P^ m. 5.17. and to receive the
holy Ghost, Acts 10.47. And to r^^ci^e of his f^lness, John 1.16. And to as
many as received him, John 1.10, 11. And all that we are made partakers of, 1
Cor. 4.7. and what is called receiving in Acts 10.47. is by the same Apostle,
called, baptizing with the h^ly ghost; Acts 11.15, 16, 17. Zech. 12.10. I will
^^ur out my spirit upon the house of David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
(...): the same word is used Joel 2.23. So also the baptizing with the holy
Ghost, when it i^ ^^k^n, and intended to ^^^nifie the common gif^^ of the
spirit, in an extraordinary manner communicated to any in the primitive time^,
en^bling them to speak with diverse kinds of Tongues, or to work Miracles. The
way and manner of their p rtaking of it in this kind, was by its falling upon
them, pouring out upon them, s^^dding upon them, etc. Compare a few Texts of
the blessed word of God, and see it fully proved, Acts 1.5. For John truly
baptized with Water, but ye s^all be baptized with the ^^l^ ghost, not many
days hence. This I s^ppose none can deny, but our Savior here int^nd^, by the
bap^izing with the Holy Ghost, his pouring out his spi^^^ upon h^^ Disciples at
(...) feast of P^^^^^o^^, A ts 2.2, 3, 4. And s^ddenly there ca^^ (...) heaven,
as of a ri^ ^ng (...) wind, and it filled all the house where they were
sitting: and there appeared to them cloven Tongues like as of fire, and it sat
upon each of them. This our Lord Jesus calls baptizing with the holy ghost,
not many days before; and this appeared to them, and sat upon them, and they
were filled with it; which shows, that it entered into them, but they were not
dipped into that. And this Peter does confirm, by proving it to be the
fulfilling of the Prophecy of Joel, Joel 2.28. Acts 15.16, 17. And it shall
come to pass in the last days, says God, that I will pour out my Spirit upon
all flesh; not dip or pour them into it: and Verse 33. it is called shedding
upon, (...). So Acts 1^.44. While Peter spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell
on all them which heard the word: Observe, they were not put or dipped into that,
but the holy Ghost fell on them, (...), etc. Compare this Text with Acts 11.15,
16. When Peter was contended with, for going into these men uncircumcised, he
is rehearsing and expounding the matter in order to them; and he says, As I
began to speak, the holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning, (...).
Verse 16. Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John,
indeed, baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost;
where, by the way observe, That in the same manner that the Apostles were
baptized with the holy Ghost, all others that did partake of it (either in the
special Graces thereof, or in the common Gifts thereof, in an extraordinary
manner; all others did partake of it) and were baptized with it also: and that,
though here is mention made only of the common gifts, Acts 10 45, 46. yet the
special saving Graces thereof is intended, and to be understood also, as being
poured forth upon these persons too; as may appear from Verse 18. When they
heard these things they held their peace (that is, from contending) and
glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance
unto Life: and Peter testifyeth, that God put no difference between the
believing Jews and them, purifying their hearts by Faith, Acts 15.9. where the
holy Ghost does call baptizing purifying. See also in John 3.23, 25, 26. Psalm
51.6, 7. Heb. 9.13, 14. Titus 2.14. compared with Titus 3.5, 6. Mal. 3.3.
Matthew. 3.12. Isa. 1.25. Psalm. 79.9. James 4.8. John 15.2. Heb. 1.3. that which
is called elsewhere Baptizing with the holy Ghost, and sprinkling with the
blood of Christ, is here called Purifying. By all which forequoted Texts it is
evident, with all clearness and plainness, That baptizing with the holy Ghost,
when it is spoken of the work of the Spirit of God by Christ, or from Christ
upon the Soul; we must understand, the pouring out of the holy Ghost upon the
Soul, in the Gifts and Graces thereof, and the sprinkling or purifying of the
Soul with the blood of Christ; and that when our Lord Jesus did tell his
Disciples, that they should be baptized with the holy Ghost, Acts 1.5. he did
intend the pouring out the Spirit upon them, and filling them with the holy
Ghost, and not their being put or dipped into the Holy Ghost: And this John did
intend by it, and this all the Apostles, and the Church of the Circumcision did
understand it, how else should they understand what the Apostle Peter did mean
and intend by it? in Acts 11.15, 16, 17. and they make suitable observation
upon it, Verse 18. and how else could they understand what Peter did mean and
intend, Acts 15.7, 8, 9, 10. And if John the Baptist did intend dipping by the
word Baptized, or (...), in the first part of the Verse, when he said, I indeed
have baptized you with Water, and intend pouring upon or sprinkling with, in
the latter part of the Verse, when he speaks of Christ's baptizing them with
the holy ghost, then John the Baptist must understand, and intend two things by
this one word in the same Verse, clean contrary one to the other; and this
about the same Subject, to the same auditory, at the same time; and this, when
his baptizing with Water was to be a sign, type, figure, and representation of
Christ's baptizing them with the holy Ghost, and with fire. But I suppose, that
many of them that argue for this directly contrary signification of the word in
this Text, would be very unwilling to be took and dipped in fire: but if John the
Baptist should have intended such directly contrary things by this one word
(...), in his first speaking of, and prophesying to the People of Christ's
baptizing them with the holy Ghost; how then should all the people and
multitude understand, what John did intend by Christ's baptizing them with the
holy ghost? What Souls living, that had been bred up under such a
superstitious, formal Ministry as the Scribes and Pharisees were? and that
never heard nor saw a Prophet of the Lord before, nor this Prophet neither till
then, for all that any can prove, come forth and heard John speak one word
twice in one verse; and he intend such contrary things by it, should have been
able to understand what he did mean, as to the manner of the performance of it.
By this Baptizing with the holy Ghost, They might understand what he did mean
by baptizing with water, because he had baptized them? But how should they
understand how Christ should baptize them with the holy Ghost, if John should
have intended dipping by his Baptizing, and sprinkling by Christ's Baptizing? He
giving no explication of his intention as to any different signification, how
could any living understand the meaning thereof as to Christ's Baptizing.

And if John should have intended such contrary things, by one and the same
word in this case, and they so understand him; Then they might also understand
his meaning to be as directly contrary in other words and expressions to them;
Namely that they should stand, when he spoke to them of cutting down, and that
when he called them a generation of Vipers, he did mean and intend, that they
were Saints. For if they understood his contrary meaning in one thing, and if
his words had a contrary signification in one thing, why might they not also in
another? when there was no explanation made of the words? But what Soul is
there that can have any Scripture ground to believe, That John the Baptist, who
was one of the greatest of all the Prophets, and was filled with the holy Ghost
from his mothers Womb, should have such directly contrary meanings by one, and
the same word, in the same mood, at the same time about that which one was to
be an example, type, figure or representation of the other, his Baptizing with
water, to signify and seal Christ's Baptizing with the holy Ghost? And if he had
such contrary intentions by one and the same word, how would this have Answered
the end of his Ministry, in turning them to the Lord their God? In case they
could not understand his meaning.

And if the Scribes and Pharisees, those Implacable enemies should have
understood John to act and intend by one and the same expression contrary
things, how would they have railed against him and his Ministry, and have said,
that he did deceive the people; and brought this to confirm it; In that he did
intend such contrary things by the same word, about the same ordinance, and
never explain his meaning? And if John Baptist should have had such contrary
Intentions by this one word (...), and never make the least explanation of the
same; how did he make plain the way of the Lord, and help all flesh to see the
salvation of God? Was this to make the way of the Lord direct and straight
plain and even for to make dipping to signify Sprinkling, and dipping the
person into water, to signify pouring the holy Ghost upon the person, and to
make one word have such contrary significations in expressing the full, or both
parts of one ordinance, when the outward Baptism with water, was to be a sign
of the Inward Baptism with the holy Ghost? Would this help all flesh to see the
Salvation of God. that was to know Christ, when he did come, and appear by the
manner of his performance, and to see the way of the participation of Spiritual
benefits from him, by his outward and external ordinances and way of
Administration of it? Was this the way of the Prophets to deliver things so
darkly? Were they not to make the vision plain, that he that runs might read
it?

But now if we shall on the contrary not put in dip, or dipping in the place of
Baptizing, but pouring upon, and sprinkling with, and read the words thus, I
indeed have sprinkled you with water, or I have indeed poured out water upon
you, or sprinkled you with water: But he shall pour out his spirit upon you, or
sprinkle you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. Here these words will agree
both with the external sign and internal grace signified by the sign in the way
and manner of the communication thereof, foretold by the Prophets, which John
had a special regard to, and came to bring about the fulfilling of. Truth does
use to agree, though truth and error can never agree; this will not only make
the sign and the thing signified to agree, and the manner of their performance
to be one: But this will agree also with all the former types and figures of
their cleansing, In their sprinkling, and purifying them with blood; and also
with water of separation, Numbers 19. 17, 18, 19. Heb. 9.13, 14, 19, 20, 21.
This will agree with the great Gospel promise, Ezekiel 36.25. I will sprinkle
clean water upon you, (...) which must be understood of the supernatural graces
of the spirit without the means, or the work of the spirit by means: Or else it
must be understood of the way and manner of the communication of the means, or
of the thing signified by the means. If Any say it is meant of the pouring out
of the Spirit, like that, Joel. 2.28. Acts 2.16, 17. Then it must be meant of
the manner of Christ's Baptizing, Acts 1.5. Acts 11.15, 16. And if they will not
allow it, to be meant of the means, how then shall this be signified to poor
souls, whereby they may know how to pray for this mercy in the right way of the
communication thereof as David did formerly? Psalm. 51.6, 7. And God told them
at that time that he would be sought unto, that he should do it for them;
Ezekiel 36.37. Besides this of pouring of water upon them, or sprinkling them
with water, as Christ sprinkled them with the holy Ghost, will agree with what
was foretold by the Prophets of Christ's ( Isa. 52, 15.) way and manner of the
communication of the benefits of his death. The Hebrew word is (...) from (...)

This also will agree with the Title given to the blood of Christ, and in which
it speaks to the whole general assembly. Heb. 12.24. And this will agree with
the Titles given to the Inward Baptism, Heb, 10.22. having our hearts sprinkled
from an evil conscience, And through the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus
Christ, 1 Peter 1.2.

But it may chance, that we must stand to the Original; and what the
signification is there in this case, as in some others where the translation
will not serve turn, some plead the Original, But if the translation will serve
turn, then it is no matter what the Original is or does signify; Therefore I
shall endeavor to search, and to produce what the Original does signify in
this case, in the Texts before quoted, Matthew. 3.11. (...). Mark 1.

(...). Luke. 3.16. The same as before in Matthew. 3.11. John. 1.31. Therefore
am I come baptizing with water, (...). Verse. 33. But he that sent me to
baptize with Water, (...); The same is he which Baptizeth with the holy Ghost.
(...). In every one of these texts, The Preposition that our Translators have
rendered with, is in the Original (...), which generally is translated in: And
this the vulgar Greek Grammar tells us, Soli Dativo Jungitur, sed per Eclipsm
Genitivo. But tho generally it signifies in, and be so translated, yet it does
not always signify In, especially when it will not agree with the sense of
the place or context. And who is able to make it agree with the later part of
the verse, Baptizing with the holy Ghost, if it should be translated in the
holy Ghost; as if the person should be put into the Holy Ghost. And how was it
possible that John should put the multitude, or all the people, and all the
region, or all Judea persion, after person. into the water whether he did stand
in the water, or out of the water himself? and take them cleverly out again
himself as well as dip them in? But as to the particle (...) in and the
acceptance there of; It is, as the learned observe, rendered often as (...) or
(...) and taken to signify with; see Pools synopsis Criticorum upon Luke.
1.17. He shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias. What
construction can any make of this phrate, in the spirit and power of Elias, but
with the same spirit that Elias had? Was John Baptist put into, or dipped into
the spirit of Elias; and so come into the world? Or so come and exercise his
ministry among them? So Ephesians. 5.26. That he might sanctify and cleanse it,
with the washing of water by the Word, (...), the Word is the outward means
applied to them, and they are not put into that, John 17.17. Sanctify them
through thy truth, (...). Romans 1.12. That I may be comforted together with you,
by the mutual Faith both of you and me, (...), etc. Ephesians. 6.2. which is the
first Commandment with promise, (...). Ephesians. 312. (...), Luke 4.1. and was led
by the Spirit, (...)* Was Christ's Person taken, or put into the Devil? will
any have the Face to maintain such an argument? So Luke 16.15. (...), by men,
or with men, 1 Cor. 10.2. They were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and
in the Sea, (...). Was it not with, or by the Cloud that they were baptized?
And was all that great Host taken into Moses? and yet it is the same Particle
(...), that many will have to signify into, in Acts 8.38. Into the water. Luk^
4.32. his words were with power, (...). 1 These. 2.17. See your Face with great
desire, (...). Romans 15.29. I am sure when I come to you, I shall come in the
fullness of the bessing of the Gospel of Christ: I^ the fuln^ss, could Paul come
in that, or with that? Yet it is that, (...). So 2 Cor. 13.4. 1 These. 4.16. The
Lord himself shall descend with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the Trump of God: is it possible for the Lord himself to be put into
these, or any of these? (...), etc. So Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, (...);
Matthew. 5.34. Neither by Heaven, (...): so in Verse 35, 36. Nor by the Earth,
(...) -- Verse 36. Neither shall thou swear by thy head, (...); Matthew. 9.34. He
casts out the Devils through the Prince of the Devils, (...); Matthew. 12.27,
28. If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, (...), by whom do your Children cast
them out; (...), etc. but if I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, (...), the
same words in the Text that are rendered with the spirit, John 3.21. That his
works be wrought in G^d, (...): can that be meant of being wrought in the
Deity, or with, or by the Grace and strength from God?

So in the name of the Lord I shall destroy them, Psalm 118.11, 12. (...) In
the the name of the Lord, which must be with his assistance. 1 Samuel 7.45. Then
David said to the Philistine, Thou come to me with a sword, and with a spear,
and with a shield; but I come to thee in the name of the Lord; that which is
rendered with in our Translation, with, is in the Original the same with what is
rendered in in the latter end of the Verse, (...), in the name of the Lord, and
how could it be rendered, or understood any otherwise, than with the assistance
of the Lord? See also Acts 3.6. Acts 4.30. Acts. 10.16. 1 Cor. 6.11. In the
name of the Lord, and by the spirit of our God, (...), where we have the same
word as in the Texts before quoted: Compare Psalm 44.18. with Romans 8.37. In God
we boast all the day: We are more than conquerors through him that loved us;
Psalm 60.12. Through God we shall do valiantly; 1 Cor. 7.14. For the
unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the Wife, (...), and the unbelieving Wife
is sanctified by the Husband, (...). Can these Texts be construed, put, or dipped
into; Heb. 9.25. As the High Priest enters into the holy place with the blood
of others: Could the High Priest go in the blood of others into the holy place;
it is (...), etc. Heb. 11.2. By it the Elders obtained a good report, (...),
etc. But take one Text more, to lay all Gainsayers in this case to silence,
Heb. 9.22. And almost all things are by the Law purged with blood; it is (...);
and this, when the application of the blood was to the persons, and this by
sprinkling; Verse 19. For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the
people, according to the Law, he took the Blood of Calves and Goats, with Water
and Scarlet, Wool and Hysop, and sprinkled both the Blood and all the People,
Verse 21. Moreover, he sprinkled with blood, both the Tabernacle, and all the
Vessels in the Ministry; here is a full Text to prove, that what was applied by
sprinkling, was expressed by (...), with blood; and if any can bring such a
Scripture, to show, that it does signify dipping into, when it is expressed by
(...), then they may have some warrant for what they imagine, but not till
then. How any, either learned or unlearned, can gainsay so many express
evidences of Scripture, for my part, I do not know, either by what Learning or
Conscience they can do it. From all the forequoted Texts it does appear
clearly, that the Particle (...) is rightly translated with, by our
Translators; and that they have offered no violence to the Text, nor to the
least particle of it, either as to John's baptizing with Water, or Christ's
baptizing with the Holy Ghost; but if they should have it translated otherwise,
what an apparent contradiction would it have been, with respect to the plain
expressions of the Holy Ghost in other Texts of Scripture, throughout the New
Testament? where the Particle (...) has the same signification; and also in
those Texts where Christ's baptizing with the Holy Ghost is spoken ^f, and the
same thing intended: and how would it have overturned John's Baptism from being
a Sign and Representation of Christ's Baptism with the Holy Ghost? And if it
had not been a Sign, why should John mention and foretell Christ's baptizing
them with the Holy Ghost? To deny it to be a Sign, is to deny the nature of the
Ordinance, and cut it off from being a Seal of the certainty of Christ's coming
and baptizing with the Holy Ghost? And if it be not a Sign of Christ's
baptizing with the Holy Ghost, how can it be a Sign of burying with Christ? Can
it be a sign of our partaking of any thing of the benefits of Christ's death,
if it be denied as a sign in its nature? And a sign of our partaking of the
Spirit of Christ, by whom all these things are made ours, and communicated to
us, as the only agent thereof? all the Gifts and Graces thereof being the
fruits of Christ's Death and Resurrection, Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 3.21. Gal. 5.27.

If John's Baptism had not been a sign of Christ's baptizing with the Holy
Ghost, how would his administration have consisted with Christ's commendation
of John's Ministry, for clearness, beyond all the Prophets that were before
him? Matthew. 11.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Luke 7.19, 20, 26. How would it have been darker
than Moses's Signs? Psalm 51.6, 7. and how would it have consisted with the
peoples commendation of John, for speaking Truth of Christ in all that he spoke
of him, his Baptism was a moral discovery of Christ and his Baptism, John
10.40, 41, 4^. The Holy Ghost does call the external Baptism, A Figure, Sign,
or Type, 1 Pet. 3.21. (...), Exemplar, Heb. 9.24. Similis formae, it signifies
a Figure, by its similitude or likeness; representing some what, as the
Ancients did call the Bread and Wine in the Lords supper, figures of the Body
and Blood of Christ. It signifies the truth it self by a similitude, or
certain analogy answering to the Type or figure, Typus alii typo respondens, as
the Tabernacle and Temple were Types, Heb. 9.24. a figure is the relation, or
fashion that one thing has with another. Now if the holy Ghost says that
Baptism is a figure, how dare any to deny it, or do contrary? and if they do,
will that make the ordinance null and void as to the Nature of it: Is what men
say, or do, a rule to be followed and Gods Ordinance and Word to be slighted?

And if it be a figure, or type what must it be a type of? must it be of
salvation in heaven, as happiness, or of salvation from sin by grace; in the
work of the spirit of God upon the soul? The holy Ghost mentions that as that
which it is a type of, the Answer of a good conscience by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ. 1 Peter 3.21. And this is the Baptizing with the holy Ghost,
Acts. 11.15, 16, 17, 18. Acts, 15.9. Titus. 3.5.6. Heb. 10.22. And if it be
thus written here is ground for Faith to believe, and they that believe
otherwise must believe without warrant, Zech. 12.10, 11. Joel 2.28. Isa. 44.3.

And besides all this, How of necessity must this ordinance of external Baptism
be a Sign, being the great ordinance of Initiation, and Discipling of members
into the visible Church, which makes it of as great Moment and weight as any
divine sign whatsoever, of the pouring out of the spirit of God upon the soul.
And also it must be a sign of that nature, in as much as the Lords supper is
such a sign and full representation of the death of Christ, for the nourishment
of souls after they are brought into the Church of God. That is called a
showing of the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26.

And what is there in the external parts of that ordinance of the Bread or
Wine, or what action of the Minister in preparation, consecration, or
distribution; or of the receiver, but is a pertinent signification, and a real
and lively representation to us of what our state is by sin, and what Christ
has done and suffered for poor sinners.

If any could prove that John Baptist did Baptize with water by dipping them
into water, which can never be done by the Bible by any mortal, yet if it could
be proved as clearly, expressly, and fully as it has been proved that Christ
did and does Baptize with the holy Ghost by sprinkling or pouring upon, yet is
not the proof that has been produced of Christ's Baptizing by sprinkling or
pouring upon, enough to warrant the practice of the Church of God in
sprinkling? Do not they do best that follow Christ, and are not they in the
safest way; and are we not commanded to learn of Christ, and follow Christ, and
to follow men only as they follow Christ? 1 Cor. 11.1. If Baptizing with the
spirit be Christ's way, to sprinkle or pour out his spirit upon them, Do they
err, ^r can they offend that perform the sign which is external Baptism the
same way, that Christ performed the thing signified thereby? Acts 2.2.3.4, 5.
Acts 11.15, 16, 17. Titus 3.5, 6. Heb. 10.22. And can any deny i^, unless they
can prove External baptism not to be a S^gn? And to do that, they must gainsay
the very expressions of the h^ly Ghost, 1 Peter. 3.21. Or prove that the filth
of the body is more than the filth of the soul, either as to universality, or
deepness of Impression, or deny that sprinkling cannot purge the soul or heart,
Heb. 10.22. and to deny the expression of the holy Ghost. Or deny that they
that were but sprinkled, were not purged, and so condemn Moses in all his
Institutions, of that kind, and the Apostles assertions in Heb. 9.19, 20, 21,
22. and make David's prayer Impertinent, and say, that would not serve his turn
if God did sprinkle him, Psalm. 51.6, 7. and condemn the great Gospel promise,
Ezekiel 36.25. and Great Scripture, Prophecy, Isa. 52.15. and gain^ay the
title given to the blood of Christ, that speaks to all the general assembly,
Heb. 12.24. And except they can prove the predictions of the way and manner of
Christ's communications of the benefits of his death to many nations to be
Impertinent, and Insignificant as that which would never serve turn, if he did
do it, Isa. 52. And whatever soul can do this, or undertake to gainsay these
things, I esteem it a great happiness to be kept from such a frame of spirit.

But after all this, If any will or do Imagine that John did Baptize with water
by dipping and did so intend, when he said, I indeed baptize you with water,
though it has been proved that Christ's Baptizing with the holy Ghost is by
pouring upon or sprinkling with: Then they must make this Divine sign first of
all to be different from all signs of divine institution, mentioned in the
whole word of God, in that the sign must be performed one way, and the thing
signified accomplished another, the sign by dipping and the thing signified by
pouring upon or sprinkling.

2. Then John must take a contrary way to make known the mind of God to the
people, than ever the Prophets of the Lord did, in that he must have contrary
meanings by one and the same word about the same Ordinance at the same time to
the same auditory.

3. Then few of the people must understand what John did intend, when he told
them Christ should baptize them with the holy Ghost, as to the manner of the
performance of it: But in that he must be a Barbarian to them; which is
Notoriously false, John 10.40, 41, 42.

4. Then it was Impossible also that they should pray for or depend by faith
for the accomplishment of it, because they could not tell which way it should
be performed, Psalm. 51.6, 7.

5. It was Impossible that they should believe in Christ as the true Messiah,
that John had foretold, when he did appear; if John should have dipped them
into water, and called this Baptizing of them, and prophecy that Christ should
baptize them with the holy Ghost, and express it, by the same word and in the
same mood that he did his dipping.

And when Christ did appear if he should not take them and dip them into the
spirit, but pour out his spirit upon them, who of them that believed John to be
a prophet indeed would have believed that Christ was the Messiah indeed? But it
would have been the greatest obstruction to keep them, from believing in
Christ, that could be, contrary to John 10.42.

6. If this were true, then they that Dip must be followers of John, and all
that sprinkle must be followers of Christ.

7. They that would make this to be the meaning of John by this word (...)
about his own practice of Baptizing, must make John's Manner of Baptizing to be
humane, except they can prove it by some warrant of Scripture. And then also
their faith must be humane that believe it, and their practice humane that
follow it, without they can show express warrant for it, as has been shown for
Christ's Baptizing, by pouring upon, or sprinkling with his spirit.

8. They that can pervert John's words to the people, may pervert the words of
Christ himself also in Acts. 1.5. And the words of the Apostle Peter, Acts
11.15, 16. speaking of John's Baptism, and all other Scriptures, with as good
warrant as they do this.

But besides, a little further to view the words.

What can be made of these words, Matthew. 3.11. (...); I indeed baptize you with
water or in water? Is there any ground for any to Imagine that the meaning must
be, I have dipped you in water? Then they did not go in themselves nor came
forth themselves, for if they went in, and came out themselves, then he could
neither dip them in, nor take them out,

And if He dipped them in, it must be the whole person; for he speaks to them
as Individuals, and to every individual of them, and makes no limitation of any
particular part of their persons that he had dipped. And it must be in their
wearing apparel; for we read of no devesting of them. And when any can prove by
Scripture that any one Minister of ordinary strength can dip all sorts of
persons of whatsoever age, sex, condition, stature or dimension they be, in a
whole region, or in City, and Country, then I hope I shall have faith to
believe such Doctrine. But till I have the word of God for it, I must and do
esteem it Impossible, though if it could be done there must be a twofold
Baptism; One Immediate, and the other Mediate by the clothes.

And if it be taken, I have baptized you in water, then the meaning must be,
that he spoke the words while they were in the water; and whether they went in,
or he put them in, that respects nothing of the act, but must be in order to
the act of his Baptizing of them.

And this Argues nothing to prove by way of distinction whether the water were
cast or sprinkled upon them in the water, or whether they were dipped further
in. But if it gives ground for either, It is for sprinkling or pouring water
upon them: For in case a person be took and cast into the water, or dipped in,
and there held while the words are spoken, which gives the form to the
Ordinance, to distinguish it from all other, the person might be stifled

If John spoke no more words in his Administration than what is commanded by
Christ to be said now, yet some weak constitutions must, and would be stifled,
if they were held under water so long. But if Water be poured or sprinkled upon
them, there can be no danger of any harm as to the pouring upon.

And if any take the act to be done by John while they were in the water then
we have no ground from hence of the alteration of the position of the person
baptized, in the reception of the Baptism in water.

And if the person must be in water to be baptized, then this condemns the
baptism in the Red sea, for they were upon dry land, Heb. 11.29. 1. Cor. 10.2.

And if the words be strictly taken, I have baptized you in water; Then the
stress of the sense must lie, not as to the manner, whether it be done by
dipping or sprinkling, nor can the form of words yield any proof for it; but
only that the person Baptized be in water when the act it self be performed by
the Baptizer, nor whether he be under water or not, so he be baptized in water,
and then Paul's was not this way who was baptized in a house, Acts. 9.18. and
how any will prove the baptizing of the three thousand in some part of an
Artificial day was while they were in the water, is unknown Acts. 2.41, 42. etc.

But if any will have the meaning to be I have baptized in water, (...), I have
dipped you into water then they must show when and where in the New Testament
the Preposition (...), in, is so used to signify by the holy Ghost, with
respect to this Ordinance.

And then they must make the word (...) signify only to dip, when John speaks
of his baptizing with water; as it has been ^roved to signify only, to pour
upon or sprinkle with when it is referred to Christ's baptizing: And then
Thirdly they must make the difference to be in opposition to sprinkling in the
dipping into the water, and the words to be spoken while they be dipping in,
and then whether they be under water or not, is not significant so they were
dipped in.

But it must be in such a manner as the baptized must be wholly passive in the
act, and no coagent, or coadjuvant, for they were Baptized in the passive
voice, and then one part of the person must not be in the water before, for
then it cannot be dipped in, nor must one part stand upon terra firma, for then
that person cannot be wholly passive in the reception of Baptism in the whole
person, unless any do account the lower part of the person no part of the
person, or a part not ^o be purified, or else do Baptize pars pro toto, and yet
then but one part of the person can be in the power of the Baptizer, and that
not solely neither, but in such conjunction with the rest, that it cannot be
wholly passive, as it ought to be, And is and must be, all of the person in the
Baptism signified by it, Acts 2.2, 3, 4, 5. Acts 11.15, 16, 17. Titus 3 5, 6.
Or else if they will have the particle (...) to signify into, they must have
the meaning to be, I have baptized you into water, as Christ commands to
baptize into, the name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost. But that I suppose
none that make conscience will admit of.

But how any of these constructions not agreeing with Baptism with Water to be
a sign of Baptizing with the holy Ghost, is yet unknown to some.

But if the matter of difference do consist in and depend upon the meaning and
acceptance of this word (...), to Baptize, then it will be Necessary to
enquire into the New Testament how this word is taken to signify there.

Arguments and Reasons grounded upon Scripture to prove that John Baptist did
intend pouring upon, or sprinkling by the word Baptize, (...), mentioned in
Matthew. 3.11. when he Prophesied to the people that Christ should Baptize them
with the holy Ghost in the latter end of the verse. And also Arguments and
Reasons grounded upon Scripture to prove that he did not intend Dipping by the
word Baptize, (...), when he told the people that he indeed had baptized them
with water in the beginning of 11. verse of Matthew. the 3d.
When John the Baptist, told the people, that Christ, that should come after
him, should Baptize them with the holy Ghost, and with fire, that he did intend
by the word (...), Baptize, pouring upon, shedding upon, or sprinkling with,
and not dipping or plunging into, may be clearly proved from other places of
Scripture.

First, In that the people that were ear-witnesses of what John spoke of
Christ, and eyewitnesses of the manner In which Christ performed that which
John spoke of him, do testify that all that John spoke of Christ was true,
John. 10.41. Now this of Christ's Baptizing with the holy Ghost, and with fire,
is one of the things that John did speak of Christ; and therefore this was
true, and intended by John, as so to be performed, as Christ did perform it
when he did come: For if John should not have intended and meant by these words
that Christ should baptize them with the holy Ghost, that Christ should pour
out his spirit upon them and shed it upon them, or sprinkle them with it, which
was Christ's way of Baptizing them with it, Acts 1.5. Acts 2.3, 4, 5. Then what
John spoke of Christ could not be true, But all that John spoke of Christ was
true: Therefore he did not intend dipping into the holy Ghost, by Christ's
Baptizing them with it, but pouring upon, shedding upon, and sprinkling with,
by Christ's baptizing them with the holy Ghost, Acts 2.15, 16, 17. Titus. 3.5,
6. Heb. 10.22. 1 Peter 1.2. Acts 10.44, 45, 46. Acts 11.15, 16, 17. Acts 15.8,
9.

2. In that it was ground of faith in the people to believe in Christ, John.
10.42 What John spoke of Christ was true, even all things of it, and many
believed on him there; The conjunction copulative knitting together John's words
and the truth of it, and their believing shows that the things that John
spoke of Christ being true, they believed on him upon that Testimony John had
given: What was ground of faith in the people, and that to many and not a few.
And in the very place too, that John spoke these things at first and baptized,
were certain truths. But John's words or Testimony of Christ was ground of faith
to many of the people in the very place where John at first Baptized and spoke
them. Therefore John's words of Christ were certainly true. And therefore John
did not mean nor intend by Christ's Baptizing, dipping into, but pouring upon or
sprinkling with the holy Ghost, by Christ, Matthew. 3.11. When he did come

3. It may be further Proved from the holy spirit, that John was filled with
and acted by, in the work of his Ministry. He was filled with the holy Ghost
from his mothers womb, and came in the spirit of Elias, Luke 1.16, 17. Now if
it was by the same spirit of truth and holiness that John the Baptist spoke by,
and was acted by, as others of the holy Prophets of the Lord were acted by,
then what John spoke of Christ was true, and was in every thing intended by
him, as it should be, and was performed by Christ, when he came, and did
perform them: Therefore John did intend sprinkling or pouring upon by Christ's
Baptizing them with the holy Ghost,

4. It may be further proved from John's office, He was a Prophet: And what John
spoke of Christ he spoke as a prophet, foretelling of it, both as to the
matter, and the manner of the performance. And that he was a prophet, Christ
himself does witness, and the greatest of Prophets, Matthew. 11.7, 8, 9. And the
word of God came to him in an immediate manner, as to others of the Prophets,
Luke 3.2, 3, 4. And therefore he did intend, by Christ's baptizing with the holy
Ghost, his pouring out the holy Ghost upon them, and shedding, it upon them and
his sprinkling them with it, which titles the holy Ghost does afterward give
to the thing, that John expressed and intended by baptizing, Matthew. 3.11. with
the holy Ghost. And for any to gain say it, is to deny John's being a prophet of
the Lord. The Prophet did foresee what they foretold. Isaia^ aw his glory when
he spoke of him, John. 12.41. And did not John see it also?

5. Another Argument may be taken From Christ's giving the Disciples of John a ^
stimon^ that he was the Messiah, from the works that he did, and the manner of
his do^^ ^f the which is included in the matter of them, Matthew. 11.^, 4, 5, 6.
Go and tell jo^ again things that ye see. Which shows that John's Discovery,
and Prophecy of Christ, ha^ been his works. And if Christ had not done the
things that John ^ad foretold and as they ha^ ^een foretold, then they must
have been at a loss for the knowledge of the Lord Je^^^ to (...) ^e Messiah, and
if John had intended Dipping, when Christ should do it, by pouring upon, John's
t^^^imony must have been against Christ that he was not the Messiah,

6. From John's living to see the things fulfilled that he foretold, and
Prophesied of Christ And should he have foretold it, and prophesied of the
manner of the performance of this great work of Christ, the Donation of his
spirit by Dipping them into it when he did come, and when Christ was come he
should pour out his spirit upon them, and John live to see this performed as he
did, in the Immediate calling of the Apostes, that were fishermen, and making
them preachers, and upon diverse others. How would this have proved what John
had said to the people not to be true to his face?

7. Another Argument may be from Christ's testimony of John, thas he came in the
way of righteousness: And if he came in the way of righteousness, then he spoke
and intended truth, and not falseness, Matthew, 21.32.

8. Another Argument may be to prove that John did intend pouring upon by the
word baptize or baptizing with the holy Ghost, In that it was discovered to him
that Christ should be filled with and receive the holy Ghost that way, by its
descending upon him, and not by Christ's being took and put, or dipped into that,
John 1.33. But he that sent me to Baptize with water, the same said unto me,
Upon Whom thou shall see the spirit descending, and remaining upon him, the
same is he that Baptizeth with the holy Ghost.

^. In that the manner of the communication of the spirit was such a
distinguishing character of Christ, and his Baptizing with the holy Ghost such
a special work foretold of Christ, John. 1.32, 33. The Great thing foretold of
Christ. John knew him by receiving the spirit, and others were to know him by
his giving it.

10. This puts it out of doubt that John did intend not dipping, but pouring
out of the spirit, or sprinkling with the spirit, in that he mentions fire,
that was the extraordinary appearance of the spirit of God in that d^y when it
sat upon each of the Apostles, Matthew. 3.11. Acts 2.2, 3, 4, 5.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to prove by Scripture, and Arguments, and Reasons
grounded upon Scripture, That John did not intend dipping by his first use of
the word (...), Baptize, when he said to the people in Matthew. 3.11, I indeed
baptize you with Water; but did, and must intend pouring upon, and sprinkling
with Water.

First, That he did not intend dipping by the word (...), Baptize, when he said
to the people, I indeed baptize you with Water. And this may be proved, First,
from God, the Author of John's Baptism. His Baptism was from Heaven, in Matthew.
21.25, 26, 27, 32. and he must not intend dipping by his baptizing, nor perform
it by dipping. First, from God, his being the God of Order, and not of
Confusion; in the work that he does himself, or that he sends his Servants to
do in his Church, 1 Cor. 14.33. God is not the Author of Confusion, but of
Peace. And this in all Churches of the Saints, and the Church of the Jews, to
whom John was now sent, was the only Church of God upon the Earth, and
therefore God was not the Author of Confusion in this Church. But what dreadful
Confusion, and Contradiction must this have made in John's Intentions by the
same word, if in one expression of it, in the same Mood, he should intend
dipping; and in the other expression, intend pouring upon, or sprinkling; and
this about one and the same Ordinance, at the same time, to the same people,
without any Explanation? And what dreadful Confusion, between Christ's
Administration of the thing signified, and John's Administration of the sign,
setting of it forth? and this in John's own knowledge at the same time; and
also, so discovered and foretold by him to be administered? And also what
confusion between this External Sign, and all the institutions of Moses; which
did all clearly typifie out, and signify, what was intended by it? Psalm 51.6,
7. And what dreadful confusion between John's Administration, and the great
Promise of God respecting Gospel times* Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean
Water upon you. And what contrariety and confusion must there be between John's
^dministration, and all the great Prophesies respecting Gospel Times, Isa.
52.15. So shall he sprinkle many Nations. So also J^el 2.28. Isa. 44.3. So that
John must not, nor did he intend dipping by his telling them, he baptized them
with Water, because God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace; that is,
of Order, Indentity and Agreement in his instituted signs with the thing sign
fi d by them.

2. From Gods appointing Baptism with Water, to be a Sign and Type of Christ's
Baptizing them with ^he Holy Ghost. How could it be so called (...), if God had
not appointed it so to be of Christ's ^aptizing with his Spirit? Known unto God
are all his works from the foundation of the world, Acts 15.18. 1 Pet. 3.21.
And John's words, in John 1.31, 32. Because Christ should be manifest to
Israel, therefore he was come baptizing with Water. Now, the great thing Christ
should be manifest by to Israel, was, his baptizing with the holy Ghost, and in
this he was mightier than J^hn, as to his Administrations, as far as the Spirit
was above Water, as to Nature and Excellency, John 1.26 to 34.

3. From Gods Design and End in sending John to baptize with Water, to perform
his Oath and Promise made to Abraham, and to his Seed. Now if John should have
intended dipping, and have performed his Baptism by dipping, then all Infants
and infirm persons of Abraham's Posterity, must have been denied or suspended
from the Ordinance, and from partaking of the Privilege, but have been all
excluded and cast out of the visible Church of God, which would have been
inconsistent with the truth of God in the Promises made to the Fathers, Romans
15.8. Luke 1.55, 71, 72, 73, etc. Therefore John did not intend dipping by his
Baptizing, because this would have rendered the Promise null and void, which
was, and is, and must be for ever sure to all the Seed, Romans 4.16. Acts 2.38,
39. Acts 3.26. Acts 3.23.

4. It may be proved from the total overturning of all the ways of
Purifications instituted by God, by Moses, which were then all in force, and
have rendered them all insufficient and insignificant, most of which signified
as much as John's Baptism, Numb. 19. Psalm 51.6, 7. And all of them were
performed by sprinkling. This would have made God to contradict himself as to
the outward sign, when the inward thing signified was to be performed in the
same way. Compare Psalm 51.6, 7. with Acts 15.7, 8, 9. and it would have ca^^
scorn upon Moses, who was faithful in all his house as a Servant. And this when
they were all in force by Divine Authority, and in use among them, Acts 21.20,
21, 22, 23, 24, etc.

5. From Gods End in sending John to make plain the way of the Lord, or make it
straight; that is, the way of Christ's Communications in his Institutions and
Ordinances: And John declaring that he was sent to baptize with W^ter, John
1.31, 32, 33. and the Scripture mentioning this, especially as to John's
Ministry, Acts 13.24, 25. Matthew. 21.25. Acts 10.27. do show, that the great
work of John the Baptist was to baptize the people with Water, that they might
come to Christ to be baptized with the holy Ghost; and should John have
baptized by dipping, and Christ baptize by pouring upon or sprinkling, was this
to make a straight and clear di^covery of the way of the Lord? Would it not
have made the way of Christ more dark, and dubious, and crooked, than to make
it straight, clear, and plain to be apprehended? and that too, Then Moses, who
put a Vail over his Face, for they had sprinkling, to set forth sprinkling,
Psalm 51.6, 7.

6. From the Promise of God revealed by John to the people, That all flesh
should see the Salvation of God, Luke 3.6. Let that Salvation of God be meant
of the person of Christ, or of the Dispensations of Christ, or both, it is all
one for that. For they must have the Promise, or not the Promise, Christ's
person being to be manifest by his baptizing with the Holy Ghost, John 1.31,
32, 33. and this to be done, and so foretold by pouring out his Spirit upon
them. Should John have baptized by dipping, he must of necessity have kept all
from having a clear fight of Christ in his Dispensations by this, representing
to them the manner and way of Christ's Communicating to them his Favors. For
who of all Flesh could see pouring or sp^inkling set forth by dipping and
plunging; or who could understand it by John's Words and ^xpressions of it, when
it was both expressed by one and the same word, in the same Mood?

7. From Christ's Commendation of John and his Ministry, and that in point of
clearness, above all other of the Prophets; and this could never have been, had
John performed the Sign one way, and yet expressed Christ's performance of it
another way by the same word; and that without the least Explanation, and this
not in private to an understan^ing Company, but in public to all the
Multitude. This would have made John's Doctr^nes ^^d Administrations harder to
be understood than Ezekiels Visions, that the People ca^^ ^^^^e^ies. As to the
setting forth of the manner of Christ's baptizing with the Holy Ghost; whereas
ohns Ministry was more clear than any of the Prophets, Matthew. 11.6, 7, 8, 9.
Luke 7.27, 28.

8. It may be proved, that John did not intend Dipping by his Baptizing with
Water by the Holy Ghosts making use of another word, to set forth dipping by in
the New Testament; and that it is (...), see John 13.26. Luke 16.24. Rev.
19.13. Mark 14.20. Matthew. 26.23. and so makes a difference between Baptizing
and Dipping, in that Dipping is expressed by another word in the Original
always, where it is mentioned in the New Testament.

9. From John's saying nothing of the alteration of the manner of his
performance of this Ordinance, from any other typical Ceremonial Purification
instituted by God among this People: And if there be nothing said of it, no Man
can have warrant for Divine Faith to believe, without a Scripture warrant, and
to be the external matter to be believed, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4, to 12. And how any
can teach that for Doctrine to others, that they have no ground in Scripture to
believe themselves, I do not know: See Heb. 7.14. If John did baptize by
Dipping, he must do it either from his Commission by Divine Revelation; but of
that we read nothing: Or, 2. By way of imitation of Moses, and that could not
be, for his was by Sprinkling, Numb. 19. Heb 9.13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22. Or, 3.
To be a sign of Christ's Baptizing with the Holy Ghost; nor that could not be,
for that was by Pouring upon, or Sprinkling. 4. Or to make the way of the Lord
more straight and plain to all the people; nor that could not be, for it would
rather eclips and darken it. None can discern Sprinkling by Dipping: Or 5 That
all Flesh among them might see it, that is, enjoy and partake of it; and that
could not be neither, for then, all Infants and infirm persons, must be
excluded from it: Or 6. That Christ might be the clearer known; but that could
not be, because he performed his another way. Or, 7. To fulfill some Gospel
Promise or Prophecy; but that could not be neither, for that expressly h^ld
forth, sprinkling or pouring upon, Ezekiel. 36.25. Isa. 52.15. Joel 2.28. Isa.
44.3. Prove. 1.23. Zech. 12.10. Or, 8. In Imitation of the Pharisees and the
Jews in those days; for they sinned against the express Law of God, if they
performed any of their Purifications either by Blood or Water any other way
than by sprinkling; and they were a People that made it the all of their
Religion, to keep to the Letter of the Law, Romans 2.27. And John accounted them
a Generation of Vipers, Matthew. 3.7, 8. and they said, John had a Devil, Matthew.
11.17, 18, 19. What warrant Men will have for John's imagined dipping, I know
not, how confident soever they be.

10. From the Enemies silence, and their never quarrelling at John for any
alteration of this Purification, from what Moses's was; but they were the first
that John does record, that called John's Administration Baptizing, John 1.25.
and surely they did not intend dipping by it, because there was no such way in
any of their Typical, Personal Purifications, and they were great pretenders to
the strict keeping to Moses, and the observation of the Letter of the Law. And
they could not be so ignorant as not to know it to be a Sign only, and John's
words in declaring Christ's Baptizing with the Holy Ghost, was enough to
declare it to them; and yet we never find one word of their quarrelling, or
gainsaying, or finding fault with John as bringing in any new way of
Administration of the sign, contrary to what Moses had delivered to them from
the Lord.

11. Another Argument to prove, that John did not intend dipping by his saying,
he baptized with Water, may be taken from Apollos, who knew only the Baptism of
John, and was mighty in the Scriptures, and was able to prove, that Jesus was
Christ, Acts 18.24. to the end; which could never have been, had John's
Administration of the Sign been so contrary to Christ's Administration of the
thing signified: Where could Apollos have any thing from the Scripture to prove
the Baptism of John to set forth Christ's Baptism, or from his Doctrine by
expressing Christ's Baptism by pouring upon, by the same word that he expressed
his own, if he did perform his own by Dipping? If any say, that the word has a
twofold acccep^ation in the New Testament; let them that say it prove it by
the New Testament, if they can; for my part, I shall thank them for that
charitable Work; but till then I have no ground to believe it: and if any say,
That this act of Apollos proving by the Scripture, that Jesus was Christ, was
after that Aquila and Priscilla had instructed him: I answer, did they instruct
him in the Baptism of John, can they prove that? and did he teach publicly
before that, and not prove by the Scripture, what he preached? can they prove
that? Or can they prove, that John's Baptism was not warranted by the
Scripture? How dare they then overturn the way of Christ's Baptizing, and
follow John: Let them that make this Objection prove, that the commendation
given to Ap^ll^s, is to be restrained to that time following Aquilla and
Pr^scilla their instructing him; and not o the whole of his public Ministry,
with respect to his proving what he said by Scripture, when he knew only the
Baptism of John, let them prove it by any part of that Tex^. John's Baptizing
was a making straight and plain the way of the Lord; let who will make it
crooked.

12 We may argue it also, That John did not baptize by Dipping, nor intend so,
when ^e told them, he did indeed baptize them with Water. From the
impossibility of the act of Dipping; that is, that any particular single
person, with the ordinary strength of Nature, of whatsoever stature or
proportion John was, should be able to dip or plunge all sorts of persons of
whatsoever age, sex, condition, stature, or corpulency, according to the true
acceptance of Dipping, as set forth in Scripture, Whether John stood in the
Water or out of the Water: If the Baptism be to be of the whole person, and not
of a part, and but one, not of two kinds, one immediate, and the other mediate
by the Clothes: and if the person baptized, or dipped, be loose from every
thing else immediately before the act of dipping, and that the whole person be
out of the Water, before any of the person be, or can be dipped in by the
Dipper; and that the Baptized be wholly Passive, and no way Active in the
least, in the reception of it; and that part of the person, or thing that is
grasped by the Dipper, be not accounted to be dipped while so grasped by him;
and that the person dipped be taken out of the Water by the Dipper, as ever it
was dipped in by him; and all other Circumstances and Things that the Scripture
makes discovery of, with respect to Dipping, a real regard be had to them; that
so there may be, indeed, a real dipping, according to what the word of God does
discover of the nature of the act. And so to take Dipping in a Scripture Sense,
and then it will be found to be a thing impossible, or an act impossible for
any one Individual to perform, to all sorts, sexes, ages, and degrees of
persons whatsoever; and therefore, surely, John did not baptize by dipping, nor
intend dipping by his saying, he had baptized them with Water; for it was
impossible for him to do it by his ordinary, natural, personal strength; and he
had no other, for he did no Miracle, John 10.41, 42.

But some may object, and say, That it is not expressly said, that he poured
upon, or sprinkled with Water. I answer, no more is it expressly said, that he
dipped; but it is said, he baptized with Water; and he told them, That our Lord
Jesus, when he did appear, should baptize them with the holy Ghost. And this
kind of baptizing is expressly called, pouring upon, shedding upon, falling
upon, sitting upon, blowing upon, and sprinkling with in Scripture, Acts 2.3,
4, 5, 16, 17, 33. Titus 3.5, 6. Acts 10.44, 45. Acts 11.15, 16, 17. Heb. 10.22.
1 Pet. 1.2. and the External Baptism is to be a sign of the Internal by
Scripture warrant, and according to the Faith of all that own External
Worshipping of the True God; and if any can show so much warrant for the proof,
that John did intend dipping by his saying, he did indeed baptize them with
Water; and prove, by the like Scripture Expressions, That John did perform his
External Baptizing with Water by Dipping, I shall be so far from Reviling, or
Contradicting that Person, or those Persons, be they who they will, that I
shall endeavor cordially to thank them.

But a little further to end this particular: If it could be proved, that John
Baptist did as certainly dip or plunge into water, As it has been proved that
John did Prophecy Christ should pour upon them the holy Ghost, and sprinkle
them with it: and that Christ did so Baptize with the holy Ghost when he did
come: I say, if this way could be with all clearness as fully proved; yet it
must be granted in the result of it, Either That John Baptists way of
Baptizing, by Dipping was the best way; Or That Christ's way of pouring upon, or
sprinkling with was the best way, Or else ^t must be granted in the Third place
That both was equally commanded and alike effectually sufficient, for their
designed ends, and alike acceptably to God. If any say, That John's way of
Dipping and plunging, (if it could be proved) was the only right way; Then
Christ who is Lord, Lawgiver and Judge, must be condemned, and his way of
communicating of the holy Ghost which is the gift of Gifts; and the all of life
and Godliness in principle and practice, must not be in the right way, because
Christ does not take the persons he Baptizeth with it, and Dip them or plunge
them into the holy Ghost. And what then will they make of John's, If when he
did know certainly and clearly and this by Immediate revelation from God, that
Christ should Baptize, by pouring out his spirit upon his people and sprinkling
them with it; And did so foretell it to the people, and intend this way of
Baptizing when he spoke it: And expressed it by the same word, as he did
express his own baptizing with water by; what I say will they make of John the
Baptist, If when he did know Christ's way and manner, and yet he would not
follow it, When it is, and has ever been the honor of all his messengers and
people to follow Christ their Lord and Master: And all be bid to follow the
most Eminent and Immediate messengers as they follow Christ? 1 Cor. 11.1. What
will they make of John baptist for not taking Christ's way when he knew it, and
prophesied of it, and yet not follow it as they suppose, nor take Christ's way;
But take another way that was Impossible in it self; and show no warrant why he
did not take that way, nor any warrant for another way; But is and must be
supposed to do it, quite contrary to Christ's way when he did appear, and quite
contrary to the Nature of the Ordinance which is to be and must be a sign, or
else it must be nothing, and quire contrary to Moses, and Gods institutions by
him; and never give one word to the people to tell them why he did so do? And
what will any make of the way of their reception of the holy Ghost from Christ,
whether it be in the saving graces or the common gifts thereof, All partake of
it, in one and the same way, Acts 11.15, 16, 17. Acts 15.7, 8, 9. And if they
do not partake of it in the right manner, will they own it for right any more
than they do own the external Baptism to be right, if it be not partook of by
Dipping, or plunging? And if they do not own it as right, how can they dare to
make use of their gifts, or of their graces, or hope to be saved by their grace
as uniting them to Christ, or evidencing them to be in Christ? And if they Do
own either gifts or graces given to them and received this way as right, It
must be from a change of their Judgment, about external Baptism, or by way of
Compulsion that they can have it, or partake of it no other way. And if any be
of that mind, how can they praise God for it, whether it be common gifts or
special grace, or rejo^ce in Christ from whom it comes. And if any say, It is
not from a change of their minds about external Baptism, that they do own this
way of Christ's Baptizing, and do not look upon it as null and void; I Answer,
Then How can they justify and own the participation of the greater benefit, and
that which is the all in a wrong way, and yet condemn that way in the partaking
of the lesser, which is a little water as the external sign? Is no^ this to
make more ado about the Tything of Mint, Annis and Cummin, and to be regardless
about the way of partaking of the weighty matters of the Gospel? And if the
minds of any be not changed about the way and manner of external Baptism to be
null and void if it be performed by sprinkling or pouring upon; Then all the
harm I wish every such Soul is, That they will in the fear of God labor to
have clear Scripture warrant for the staying and fixing of their minds in that
frame, and be sure they follow Christ in it, lest at last they be found not
followers of Christ, nor of his mind, Phil. 2.6. And if It be not by pouring
upon or sprinkling I hope never any will have the face to say it is Christ's
way, when it is not. If Any or all say, That Christ's way of Baptizing is and
must certainly be the best way; and especially when John Baptists way by
Dipping is not commanded, nor can be proved: and then John Baptists way of
Dipping, if it could be proved, must be condemned. And certainly John, whom
Christ so commended, is not to be condemned for any thing that he did in his
Administrations: It is certain that John Administered Baptism with water the
right way, though it cannot be proved to be by Dipping, In that the Pharisees
and Lawyers were so condemned for not being baptized by him, Luke 7.30. Matthew.
21.32. For he came in the way of righteousness, and he fulfilled his course;
and therefore did not go out of the way, but was in the right way, and kept the
way, Acts 13.24, 25. and did his work faithfully both as to matter and manner.
And if Christ's way be the best way in any ones Judgment now can any Imagine
that it was not best in John's Judgment, that did prophecy of it, and was sent
on purpose before his face to make his way straight, and plain, and not more
crooked, and ecclipsed then it was before? And if Christ's way be the best way,
why should John's supposed way that cannot be proved by Scripture, be so
contended for by any Soul, and such Rents, Divisions and Seperations made in
the visible Body of Christ about it? and why should any Soul living have the
face to call that Christ's way which they do, but suppose was John's, and cannot
by Scripture prove it to be John's way or Christ's way either? And if Christ's way
be best, why should they be condemned that follow it, and those that are
baptized that way be taught to renounce it, to partake of none knows what? Or
Thirdly It must be granted if John's way could be proved to be by Dipping, as
Christ's has been by pouring upon, That both were alike commanded and
authorized by the will of God, and both were equally effectual and sufficient,
and acceptable. And if but this much be granted, Then sprinkling must surely be
lawful and commendable, and acceptable in all that perform it that way, and
they be, and must be looked upon to be in, and to keep to, the way of he Lord,
and the performance of the Ordinance that way must be valid, and not be
accounted ^^ll and void, nor must there be any Room or place for rebaptizing,
much less any room for renouncing, of it and enveighing against it, as
Antichristian, etc. when it is the way of Christ, and of as good warrant, and
as effe^tual and acceptable, as Dipping, if that could be proved to be
commanded, and also performed as Christ's Baptizing with the holy Ghost is
witnessed in Scripture to be performed by pouring upon, shedding upon or
sprinkling with.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to discover by Scripture Arguments, That as John
the Baptist did not, nor ought not to baptize by dipting, nor that he did
intend dipping by that word; so that he did baptize by pouring upon, or
sprinkling, and ought so to baptize with Water; and that he did intend pouring
upon, or sprinkling with Water, when he said, I indeed have baptized you with
Water, Matthew. 3.11.

Having laid down ^ome Scripture Arguments, to satisfy poor Souls, That John
did not baptize by dipping or plunging: Now let us see further, What might be
produced to prove, That John the Baptist did baptize with Water, by pouring out
or sprinkling Water upon them that he baptized: And I put in both these
expressions, pouring upon, or sprinkling, because these are made synonymous
terms by the Holy Ghost, and are used in Scripture, to signify and set forth
one and the same thing. Compare Isa. 52.15. Ezekiel. 36.25. with Isa. 44.3. Joel
2.28. and 1 Pet. 1.2. Heb 10.22. with Titus 3.5, 6. and Acts 2.3, 4, 5, 16, 17,
33. and Acts 11.15, 16, 17. And to prove, That John the Baptist did pour upon,
or sprinkle with Water, those that he baptized with Water, I shall offer these
ensuing Scripture Arguments. First of all from the great promise of God made
long before to that People in particular, and to the whole Church in general;
in Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. I will sprinkle clean Water upon you: Observe, the matter
is Water, and clean Water; compare this with Heb. 10.22. it is called pure
Water, (...), the very word that is used for to set forth their Water of
purifying, which must be understood of the simple Element uset apart for that
End, without the ashes of an Heifer. The words in Ezekiel. 36.25. are (...); the
word for clean is from (...) he purified, and is that whereby their cleansing
both External and Internal is set forth, and used: See Numb. 19.19. Lev. 13.34.
Mal. 3.3. Ezra 6.20. Prove. 28.9. Psalm 51.12. This Promise respects the
cessation of the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of the Heifer; and yet
it should be effectual for purifying by divine appointment and separ^tion. I^
any will have this to be intended only of the Internal Baptism, the Baptism
with the holy Ghost; then they must grant, that the Internal Baptism is to be
performed by sprinkling; and doubtless John the Baptist did know this as well
as any do or can now; and if he did, then he must intend sprinkling ^y the word
(...), when he prophesied of Christ's Baptizing them with the Holy Ghost, or
else he must contradict the express promise of God. And for any to exclude the
sign and means here to be contained and intended in the Promise; whence then
will they have the Means if not from the Promise? and why should the manner of
the application, or administration of the means, and External Sign, if it be
not contained in the promise, be made a matter of such weight and moment, as to
cause such Separation and Division among Christians? And why should that which
is not contained in the promise be matter so highly set by? But if the External
Sign and the Manner of the administration of it were not here intended, how
will this promise respect the Gospel times, and the cessation of their blood of
Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer to be done only with Water, without
any Composition? And how should they be able to pray for the fulfilling, of it
which the Lord says, he would be sought unto by them, that he should do it for
them? Verse 37. as David did of old, Psalm 51.6, 7. If John Baptists baptism
was not what was contained in this Promise, how could it be the fulfilling of
that which God had spoken by the Mouth of all his Holy Prophets since the World
began? Luke 1.55, 70, to the end. Then the Promise must not contain the making
plain the way of the Lord, nor the means whereby all Flesh should see the
Salvation of God, Luke 3.6. and they that have Faith to believe these things,
may for me: They mu^t make the Promise to be fulfilled by means or without
means; if by means it must be the same way administered to be the Sign
representing the thing to be obtained. If without means, then that renders
means needless, and then there is no need of ex^ernal Baptism, contrary to Luke
7.30. John 3.3, 5. Heb. 10.22. The ^ody is to be washed to draw near to God.
Secondly Another Argument may be taken from the great Prophes^e that respected
Gospel times, concerning the way of Christ's Communications of the Benefits of
his Death and Sufferings, in Isa. 52.15. (...) So shall he sprinkle many
Nations. Doubtless this Prophecy, or Promise by way o^ Prophecy respects the
Gospel Times, because it mentions many Nations; for till Christ's coming, and
till his Death, that Na^ion only was the only visible Church of G d. If any
will limit this to the Internal Sprinkling ^i^h the Spirit, or Holy Ghost: They
must grant, that Christ's Baptism is by way of sp^^nkling; and that is enough to
warrant the Sign and External Baptism to be so administered. If any will exclude
Baptism to be included in the Text, they must make it no means of the se^ting
for^h of the Death of Christ, and his Sufferings, or else no means of the
conveyance of the benefits of it.

3. If They l^mit it to the Inward Baptism, They m^st make Nati^ns, and many
nations the subjects of the Inward Baptism which will discover all such of a
more larger heart than they have been, if they so do. To allow many nations the
Inter^^l Baptism, but allow few the external Baptism: But for the
Interpretation of this text Christ's own words in Matthew. 28.19, 20. is enough.
But here is certain warrant that John ought to Baptize by sprinkling water upon
them, How else should this Prophecy be fulfilled with respect to the means
setting forth the death of Christ, and his way of communicating the benefits
thereof. The Apostle does argue the necessity of the Scripture prophecy being
fulfilled that respected Judas, Acts. 1. and was there not as great a necessity
of the fulfilling of this that respected all Nations, and Christ's
Administrations?

3. It may be further argued and proved by John the Baptists Intending and
Christ's pouring upon, and sprinkling with, by this word Baptize. It is proved
from express Script^re that he did intend sprinkling, or pouring upon by that
word, when he prophesied of Christ Baptizing with the holy Ghost, and until any
either learned or unlearned, can prove by Scripture, that he intended Dipping
by the same words, when he spoke of his Baptizing with water, the acceptance
of the word according to the sign, and the thing signified, must be of one and
the same signification to all that will not gainsay express Scripture.

4. It may be proved also, that John did Baptize by sprinkling or pouring water
upon them; In that the vulgar, even the multitude did understand his meaning
and intention, when he expressed Christ's Baptizing with the holy Ghost, and
intended sprinkling by the same word, at the same time, that he expressed his
Baptizing with water by: And this without the least explanation of, or
discovery of any different signification or acceptance. I Indeed Baptize you
with water: but he shall Baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire, Here
is not the least Intimation of the least difference in the signification of the
word (...) and he intended pouring upon, and sprinkling with respect to Christ's
way of Baptizing, and this the vulgar understood it and d^d bear witness
afterward that he spoke truth of Christ in this as well as in all other
things, John 10.40, 41, 42. Now they could never have born witness to the truth
of what he spoke of Christ, had they not understood what was spoken; and they
understood it though in a state of Ignorance and unbelief, for they believed
afterward, John 10.41, 42. Now it was altogether Impossible that the people
should have understood what John did intend by the word Baptize, when spoken of
Christ Baptizing with the holy Ghost, without the least explanation or
unfolding if in case he should have Baptized any other way, or the word have
signified any other way of Baptizing them, what it signified with respect to
Christ's in John's intentions. If any object and say the word have a two fold
acceptance, I Answer, That it has such a contrary acceptance in any one text
in the New Testament, Let they that say it, Prove it by Scripture: Or else let
them account what they say herein, without warrant from Scripture and what they
believe herein, to be but an opinion, Dogma, but not fides, a divine faith
having no divine warrant, till they can show their warrant, that thus it is
written, and therefore thus they believe; and if they could show, that the word
has another acceptance in the new Testament, will that prove, that it has a
twofold acceptance, the one contrary to the other, when it is taken to express
the sign, and the thing signified? If it can, it will be well for them that be
of this mind to clear these things to the world. And Thirdly If it should have
such a two fold acceptance, as some would have it, as to signify Dipping or
plunging, and pouring upon, or sprinkling, with respect to this text, Matthew.
3.11. and as to John's Baptism and Christ's, then it must overturn the truth of
the promise made to the fathers. Romans 15.8. For then children and all Infirm
persons must be excluded baptism, and it must contradict the end of John's
coming in excluding part and the greatest part of the subjects of his Ministr^;
Mala. 4.6. Luke 1.17. and make John's preaching of it to all the people of
Israel to be without warrant, because all could not partake of it, Acts 13.24.
and it must make all the Institutions of God by Moses, to be all Impertinent,
and insignificant, and insufficient, and have Destroyed the constitution of the
church of the Jews, and made them no members that were members and it must make
John's exhortation, backed with the greatest promises, and dreadfullest
threatenings, to be limited only to the strong, and firm and b^ld of the Adult,
and all the rest must be no trees of the field and neither chaff, nor wheat,
and to go neither to heaven nor hell, and Christ's fan not to extend to them,
nor they to be any sinners if they did never come to him, contrary to Acts 3.23.

5. It may be proved that John did Baptize with water, by pouring upon, or
sprinkling; In that that was the Manner in which the Lord did Baptize, by the
cloud, under the Ministry of Moses, in the r^d sea, 1 Cor. 10.2, All our
fathers were Baptized unto M^ses in the cloud, and in the sea. Or by the cloud
in the sea, as the words should be translated according to the Greek text. If
what was done by the cloud was, or is by pouring upon or sprinkling with, then
this Baptizing was by sprinkling 2. If the Baptized were upon dry ground, when
they were Baptized, then their ^ p^^zing was by sprinkling. But that they were,
Heb. 11.29. 3. If it was a baptizing of the w^^le h^st together, then it was by
sprinkling; But that it was of all our fathers. 4. If it was done in a short
space of time, then it was done by sprinkling, but that it was in one night. 5.
If their Baptizing was while they were in Motion and passed through the Sea it
was by sprinkling; but that it was, Heb. 11.29. 6. If the Red Sea was
restrained in its motion, then it was by sprinkling; But that it was; for it
was corgealed, and stood up like a wall. 7. If it was by one Baptizer, it was
by sprinkling, for it was to Moses, or under the conduct of Moses, 1 Cor. 10.2.
If any object, that this was an extraordinary Baptizing, I Answer, I do not
deny it: But does that make the manner of it unlawf^l; Or the word expressing
of it to have another signification? If that of the extraordinariness of it
will render it not useful in this case, Why does the holy Ghost here make use
of it, to stir up the Corinthians to taking heed that they do not perish under
the Means of grace by their unworthy walking, and unfruitfulness? Was not John's
Baptism, and the Baptism of the Apostles recorded in the New Testament,
extraordinary in this respect, that they were extraordinary Immediate officers
as well as Moses. And had Christ Corporeally present with them, and owning of
it? John 3.22, 23, 24. If the Extraordinariness of the things in the New
Testament, must make them be laid aside, what of that, which is recorded there,
must be left? Was not Philips mission to the Eunuch, and what he did and the
effect of it, all extraordinary? Acts 8.32, to 39. Besides, the question in
hand is not whether it was ordinary or extraordinary for kind; But the Manner
how it was done: This being Gods way; And John being sent from God Immediately
to Baptize with water, and giving no command for any other way of the
performance of the same ordinance; It is suff cient ground of faith, and
Scripture proof, that John performed the same ordinance, expressed by the same
word (...), in the same way and manner in the Application of water to them by
pouring it upon them, or sprinkling them with it, and not by Dipping or
plunging them in it, The same power that sprinkled them in 1 Cor. 10.2. could
have dipped them: But God chose sprinkling, John could not dip those that he
could sprinkle. And in this the condescension of God Almighty does appear to us
6. It may be proved from the nature of the ordinance, which is an outward and
visible s^gn, 1 Peter. 3.21. That Baptism that is saving is, by which I humbly
con^eive we be to understand that Baptism that is of Gods appointing, and not
man's. And that which Gods blessing does accompany to all whom he pleases: Of
which kind John's baptism certainly was, In that it was from heaven, Matthew.
21.25. and in that they were such sinners that rej^ct^d it, Luke 7.30. Matthew.
21.32. The words of the Pharisees, and also of John Baptist in his answer to
them, seem to carry this in the end and design of them, to show, that Baptism
external was a sign, John. 1.24, to 33. And if any will deny it to be a sign of
the Internal Baptism, They may call it their own, and do it or perform it which
way they please, and make the most of the success. A sign was proper to John's
Ministry being A prophet H sea 12.10.

7. It may be Argued, That it was done by sprinkling, In that it was Impossible
for any one single person, or any with him to do it by Dipping or applying the
person to the water, and make but one Baptism of the person. 8. It may be
Argued from the adjuncts of this performance, the mul^^tude of spectators of
all sorts, and the circumstances of time and place. The time being short for
John's perf^^mance of it, and the place in the wilderness, or near it. And the
time it was Impossible it should be pe^fo^med in, They that were Baptized were
so many, and the place at such a distance from places of succor. And a
generation of vipers spectators, And for John to take up all sorts of pers^ns
and Dip them into the water, and take them o^t again himself. And this of all
sexes and ages, whether in their usual wearing apparel or without it, for the
ground for devesting we have none: Before the Generation of vipers as
spectators could not be: But to pour water upon, or to sprinkle them with
water, this will consist with all adjuncts, ^^d circumstances of the
performance. Besides no other performance of Baptism than this of sprinkling
would consist with John's gravity and seriousness, being filled with the holy
Ghost, nor with hi st^rity of carriage and conversation, that he came in, not
eating and drinking, and affable converse, as Christ did 9. In that John's
Baptism was a preparing them for Christ, and making straight and plain the way
of the Lord, Matthew. 3.3. Mark. 1.3. Luke 3.3. (...), to direct, from (...),
rendered by complano, dirigo, John 1.23. It is as the Learned observe,
coumpounded of (...) been and (...) pro (...) pono, rectum enim est quod been
positum est, Luke 3.4. Every Va^ley shall be filled, and every Mountain and
hill shall be brought low; this makes Hills and Valleys to become Plains. And
the cro^ked shall be made straight; this respects the straightness of the way:
and the rough ways shall be made smooth; and this is from Isa. 40.3, 4. (...) a
plain prepared way, as persons do make by casting up Earth and Stones to make a
Highway, from (...) to lift up, Isa. 57.41. So that John's Administration was
in such a manner as did most clearly set forth the way of Christ's
Communications clearly, that all flesh might see the Salvation of God: and to
perform his Baptism by sprinkling, was according to what was promised and
prophesied of, Isa. 52.15. Ezekiel. 36.25. Isa. 44.3. Joel 2.28. Zech. 12.12. and
should John have performed by Dipping, he must have eclipsed the way of Christ,
and not made clearer discoveries thereof. If any can make that appear, that
dipping a pers^n into Water, is the way to make the way of pouring upon, or
sprinkling with, plainest; they that can so apprehend, I suppose, will have
little warrant of Scripture to prove it. The Prophets way was to make the
Visions plain; and the Apostles way was to use great plainness of Speech, 2
Cor. 3.12. and to deliver words easy to be understood, though the matter was
weighty. 10. It may be argued and proved by the Subjects of the Administration,
all the Trees of that Field, and all that Generation, Matthew. 3.9. Matthew. 11.16.
all the people of Israel, Acts 13.24. or else it would not have been the sin of
every Soul that did not hearken, Acts 3.23. Luke 7.30. Fathers and Children,
Luke 1.17. the Circumcision, Romans 15.8. Now I do know none that do hold these
capable of dipping, but they were the subjects of Baptism, as to the tender of
it, and their sin, if they did not come, being Children of the Promise, Acts
2.38, 39. therefore it was, and must be performed by sprinkling, or pouring
upon. 11. From the silence of the Enemies, the Scribes and Pharisees, and from
their giving of it the title of Baptizing, John 1.24, 25. Should John have
performed this Baptism by dipping, how would they have railed against it, as
one that did do contrary to Moses, and all the Jews also? See Acts 21.19, 20,
21, 22, 23. They were ready to quarrel against every thing, yet they never
speak one word against his Baptism, though upon other accounts they said he had
a Devil; yet they call this his performance and administration, Baptizing, John
1.25. which shows it was performed the same way that they performed their
Baptizings in, and that was by sprinkling; and this by the express command of
God, and they had sinned against the very letter of the Law if they had not,
Numb. 19. Luke 11.38, 39. Mark 7.4, 8. Paul argued his inoffensiveness to them,
and the groundlessness of their hatred against him in that he did say none
other things than Moses in the Law did say should come, and the Prophets too,
Acts 26.22. They would have had ground for their accusation if John should have
turned sprinkling into dipping, when the Prophets had foretold the contrary;
and Moses did contrary. 12. In that pouring upon, or sprinkling of the person
with Water in Scripture, and application of Water to the person, is expressed
by the same word (...), that John expressed his Baptism with 1 Cor. 10.2. the
application of Water to the persons of all the Visible Church of God; and this
is intimated to be the same with the Corinthians Baptism, and all expressed by
the same word; so Mark 7.4, 8. Luke 11.38. John 3.3, 5. And Peter expressed
p^uring a po^, or falling upon by the same word, Acts 11.15, 16, 17. and Paul,
in Acts 19.3, 4. and so also our Lord Jesus, Acts 1.5. 13. In that the Holy
Ghost uses another word to expres^ ^tio^ing by in ^he New Testament, John
13.26. Rev. 19.13. Luke 16.24. Mark 14.20. that is set f^^^h by (...) not
(...). 14. In that our Lord Jesus does set forth John's Baptism to be from
Heaven, Matthew. 21.25, 26. and if from Heaven, then it must be a s^gn, type, and
figu^^, 1 P^t. 3.21. and then no c^ntradictory to what was foretold by the
Prophets, and then, not of John's own devising; and then (...) there ^s nothing
said of ^ new way of Administration by dipping, then there is none to be
^^^^^ved, no^ was there any n^w way of Administration, because there is nothing
said of (...) 14. If from He^v^n, then it was not in a way of Confusion wit^
the rest of Div^^^ app^^^men^s, nor c^^^^^y to ^he m^nner of Christ's
administration of the thing signified. (...) it may ^e furth^^ argued from the
Holy Ghost's making use of the Noun from this Verb (...), to s^^ ^^rth all the
Cermonial Purifications by, which were all performed by sprinkling, Heb. ^.^^.
(...), the Noun that John's Baptism is expressed be; which clearly shows, that
the holy Ghost does intend sprinkling b^ it; in that their sprinklings are so
styled, ^^ve^s Baptisms, as the word should be rendered, ^^hn 3.23, 24, 25. 16.
It may be further argued and proved, That John 's Baptism, and the Apostles
Baptism with Water was p^^fo^med b^ sprinkling or p^uring upon. In that it is
set forth by all the various Titles, and expressions that their Purifications
by sprinkling were styled and set forth by in scripture, and the thing
signified by it also. As First, To purify, and purification, and purifying,
John 3.25, 26. John 2.5, 6. Acts 15.9. James 4.8. Heb. 9.13, 14. Titus 2.14. 2.
To purge, Psalm 51.6, 7. Heb. 9.14, 22. 2 Timothy 2.21. Matthew. 3.12. Luke 3.17.
Heb. 1.3. John 15.2. Ezekiel. 43.26. 3. To wash, Psalm 51.7. Rev. 1.5, 6. 1 Cor.
6.10, 11. Heb. 10.22. Ezekiel. 16.9. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Titus 3.5, 6. Acts 22.16. 4.
To cleanse, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. 1 John 1.7, 9. Ephesians. 5.26. James 4.8. 5. To
make clean, Mark 7.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, Matthew. 15.2, 19, 20. Luke 11.38, 39, 4^.
Matthew. 23.25, 26. 6. To sprinkle, Isa. 52.15. Ezekiel. 36.25. Heb. 10.22. 1 Pet.
1.2. Psalm 51.7. what was done with Hyssop was by sprinkling, Heb. 9.13, 14,
19, 20, to 23. Joel 2.28. where there is the same word (...) as is used in
Ezekiel. 36.25. though it be rendered Pouring out, Lev. 21.10. 7. To Sanctify,
Ephesians. 5.25, 26. 1 Cor. 6.10, 11, 12. 2 These. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2. Romans 15.16. 8. To
pour upon, or to pour out, Acts 10.44. Isa. 44.3. Acts 2.16, 17, 33. Zech.
12.1^. Joel 2.28, 29. 9. Sometimes shedding upon, which is the same with
pouring upon, Acts 2.16, 17, 33. Titus 3.5, 6. 10. Sometimes to fall upon, Acts
10.44. Acts 11.15. Acts 2.3, 4, 5. It sat upon each of them. It is expressed
and set forth by Receiving as well as Pouring upon or Sprinkling, Acts 10.47.
Which have received the holy Ghost as well as we. The same Title is given to
it, Acts 19.26. and Acts 8.15, 17. And by the laying on of hands upon them as
means, and not putting them in the hands; so also the Children received the
blessing, Mark 10.13, 14. and that which is called Baptizing is called the holy
Ghost, being given to them, Acts 11.15, 16, 17. Acts 15.7, 8. and being granted
to them, Acts 11.18. and it is called, a being filled with the holy Ghost, and
not our filling the Holy Ghost, Acts 2 4. Acts 9.18. The receiving the
remission of sins, and the gift of the holy Ghost, Acts 2.38. and the giving
repentance and remission of sins, and a washing away of sins, Acts 22.16. Acts
11.17, 18. and it is expressed by Christ's breathing upon them, and said,
Receive ye the holy Ghost: Compare that Text, John 20.22. with John 3.3, 5, 8.
The wind blows where it lists, and the first breathing of life into our
Nostrils, Genesis 2.7. and with the way of the typical Resurrection of the whole
Church of God, Ezekiel. 37.3, 4, 5, 6. The Spirit of Life entered into them, and
flesh and skin came upon them, Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, Rev. 11.11. The
Spir^t of Li^^ ^ed into them: and though it be thu^ clear, that is is applied
to us, and not we to tha^ (...) the same thing is rendered by (...), Titus 3.5,
6: So Rev. 1.5, 6. (...) so ^ Cor. 6.11. But ye are washed, (...), where the
same thing is intended, as when it is called Baptizing, Purifying, or
Sprinkling Acts 11.15, 16, 17, 18. Acts 15.8, 9. Heb. 10 22. 1 Pet. 1.2. Ezekiel.
36 25. So John 17.17. Ephesians. 5.2^. Sanctify them through thy truth: While Peter
spoke the holy Ghost fell on them; and this is called Baptizing, Acts 11.15,
16, 17. That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the
Word, (...), and the same thing is called, being saved, 1 Pet. 3.21. Titus 3.4,
5, 6. 2 Timothy 1.9. and also, a being in Christ, and being a new Creature, and
being born again, John 3.3, 5, 8. 2 Cor. 5.17. and it is called, a putting the
fear in the heart, and writing the Law in the Inward Parts, Jer. 32.4^. Heb. 8.
and putting the Spirit within him, or the Spirits being put in them, Isa. 59.
ult. To sprinkle, or put upon, or pour upon, signify one and the same, Lev
21.10. and putting Dust upon the Head, and sprinkling Dust upon the Head, are
all one; and heaping the Dust of the Earth upon the Head of the Poor; it
signifies a being buried, or in all one condition with the dead, Job. 2.12.
Job. 42.6. Amos 2.7. Ezekiel. 27.30. Revel. 18.19.

Besides many are against Infant Baptism, because they say they must not put a
seal to a blank. But by this they must grant that the way of Baptizing is by
applying water to the person, and not by putting the person into water; For who
did ever put the subject to be sealed to the seal? But the seal is allways put
to the subject to be sealed. John. 3.33. He has set to his seal that God is
true. This proves that the seal is to be set to the subject sealed and if it
be to be performed by dipping the person into water, then the person must be
the seal, and the water the blank, If it be but little, on the subject sealed,
and the person the seal, or else there must be neither seal, nor sealed, nor an
officer sealing, nor the Act of sealing, in it, If Baptism with water be to be
performed by dipping.

A serious enquiry into, and a certain produceing of, clear Scripture proof, of
the right signification, and constant acceptance of the word (...) in the New
Testament only: And not how it is taken or used by humane authors in Lexicons
or Dictionaries, and the acceptance of it in them.

The clear discovery and understanding, how this word (...), which signifies
to Baptize, is used in the New Testament by our Lord Jesus Christ, and John
Baptist, and all the Disci^les of Christ in the Primitive times, and the
constant acceptance it had with them, and the signi^^cation it carried in it,
to all succeeding generations, as expressed by them, and left upon record in
holy writ. I humbly conceive may have a great tendency to, and conduce much to
the settlement of the consciences of those that truly fear God, and that are
willing to be ruled by Gods word; That they may not be left under any
hesitation, and doubt of mind when they are beset with the sorest onsets of the
cunningest adversaries. As to their right to, and regular admission into the
visible church, and participation of the outward sign, and their right seeking
and begging for the Inward benefit thereof, for them and theirs, like David of
Old, Psalm. 51.6, 7. And also may conduce much to the promoting and settling of
true peace among true Christians that really subject to the word of God, And to
the rendering of all them that design faction and opinion upon any hand, the
more inexcusable, and the less prevalent, in their designs to snare souls, if
they will not be reclaimed, nor silenced. Therefore I shall by Gods assistance
endeavor to search into the word of God, and produce proof how this word was
taken to signify by John the Baptist who was Christ's Immediate forerunner? 2.
How our Lord Jesus Christ did take it to signify and what he did intend by his
use of it? 3. How the Apostle Peter did understand it, and what he did intend
by it, in his use of it in Scripture? 4. How Matthew. Mark, Luke and John, that
were the four Evangelists and Penmen of the Gospels, did understand it, and
what they do intend by it? 8. How the Apostle James did understand it? 9. How
The Apostle Paul did understand it, who was the great Apostle of the Gentiles,
and what he did intend by it? 10. How all the believing Jews did understand it?
11. How all the believing Gentiles did understand it? 12. How all the scribes
and Pharisees, and all the unbelieving Jews, and Gospel despisers did
understand it, and what they did intend by it in their use of it? Whenever it
is used in the New Testament it is used to set forth either the Internal or
External Baptism; or else the Religious ceremonial washings of the Jews; and
they taken as appointed of God signified as much as our external Baptism. For
every one that was unclean, or defiled, was not to come into the Sanctuary or
Tabernacle nor to touch the holy things nor, was he to have any remission
without purifying, Numbers 19. Heb. 9.19, 20, 21, 22. The like to which our
savior declared against the despising of Baptism when it might be had, and the
necessity of the acceptance and use of it, Luke. 7.29, 30. John 3.3, 5, 8.

Certain truths of Scripture, that are to be regarded as rules. In the Enquiry
into the true signification, and constant acceptance of the Greek word (...)
by keeping to which, the General, and also special scope, and agreement of the
contexts, and Analogy of Scripture may not be departed from; In the enquiry
about this word,
First, such a signification of this word cannot or ought not to be taken, or
received in the New Testament; as will not consist with the external ordinance,
to be an Outward and visible sign of the Inward and spiritual grace thereby
signified, represented, and typified out, to all that by faith receive it, or
by unbelief reject it If the ordinance as to the manner of its Administration
is not a sign, the nature of it is destroyed, 1 Peter 3.21. (...). 2. No such
signification can or ought to be taken of this word in the New Testament As
would force John the Baptist to mean two contrary things by the same word, at
the same time, to the same people, about the two parts that constitute one and
the same ordinance, and when one was to be the sign and representation of the
other and he Intend and design to set forth by his expressing himself by the
same word, the external part, to be a sign of the Internal grace; He being a
prophet and speaking by the spirit of Prophecy, Matthew. 3.11. Acts. 1.5. 1
Peter. 3.21. 3. No such signification can be taken of this w rd in the New
Testament, as will not agree with the accomplish^^nt of the Scripture
P^ophesies concerning Gospel times, Isa. 52.15. Psa. 44.3. Joel 2.28. Acts 2.2,
3.4, 5, 16, 17. Acts 1^.44. Acts 11.15.16. 4. No such acceptance or
signification can be had from the New Testament of this word: that will no^
agree wi^h the accomplishment of the great G^spel promise to be accomplished
especially in Gospel times, Ezekiel 36.25. Which is to sprinkle clean water upon
his people, and to cleanse them from all their filthiness, 1 John 1.7. 5. N^
such signification can be taken of it according to Scripture, and the mind of
God in the New Testament as will not agree with the Gl^rious title given to the
blood of Christ, that sets forth the Manner of the application of it, by the
holy spirit to poor sinners, Heb. 1^.24. It is called the blood of sprinkling
6. No such significa^ion can be taken of this word in the New Testament, as
will not agree with the express words of Scripture, setting forth the same work
of grace upon the souls of poor sinners, that is sometimes called baptizing
with the holy Ghost, Acts. 1.5. Matthew. 3.11. Acts 11.15, 16, 18, At other tim^s
calling it sprinkling with the blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Peter. 1.2. and having
our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, Heb. 10.22. Which he shed on u^
abundantly, Titus. 3.5.6. Acts 2.15, 16, 33. 7. No such signification can be
had from Scripture of this word, as would render that part of the Ministerial
work and office, an act Impossible for any one constituted officer, of a
compe^ent measure of the strength of an ordinary man, and of that stature, and
proportion; to perform to all sorts, sexes, ages and conditions of men, person
by person, or one after another. 8. No such signification of this word can be
had from the New Testament, as will not agree with the speediness, pertinency
and suitableness of the questions and answers, made, and returned, by this word
in Scripture, concerning the various things about which it is used, to set
forth and signify the things they discoursed of. Or no such interpretation as
would render John Baptist, and our Savior, and all his Disciples more
Imperfect in their understandings than many pretend to be Now. 9. No such
signification or acceptance can be had from the New Testament by any
whatsoever, as would force the holy Ghost to intend that by this word, in the
New Testament, when it is used to express, and set forth external Baptism with
water; That it should have that signification, that the holy Ghost does always
express another word in the New Testament by, John 13.26. Dipping is always
expressed by the spirit of God by another word in the New Testament, but never
by (...). But the same thing that is sometimes rendered by (...) is at other
times rendered by (...), or (...), which do properly signify sprinkling 1
Peter. 1.2. Heb. 17.22. Heb. 12.24. Acts 1.5. Acts 11.15, 16, 18. Dipping is
expressed by (...), John. 13.26. Luke 16.24. Revel. 19.13. 10. No such
significa^ion or acceptance can be had from the New Testament of this word, as
will not agree with the synonymous terms and words whereby the holy spirit of
God does s^t forth and express the same thing; tha^ at other times he calls
Baptizing, as purifying, Acts 15.9. cleansing, 1 John. 1.7. purging, Heb. 9 13,
14. Pouring upon or shedding upon, Titus. 3.5.6. etc. 11. No such acceptance
of this word can be had from the New Testament as will admit of diverse ways and
Manners of the public performance of this great ordinance of Baptism that is
such an express instituted Gospel duty, Matthew 28.19. John. 1.25, to 34. and as
would make the same word to have two contrary s gnifications about the way of
the administration of one and the same external sign of Baptism with water, 1
Cor. 10.2. compared with Matthew. 3 11. Ephesians. 4, 5, 12. No such acceptance or
signification of this word can be had from the New Testament as will admit of
Boasting to any flesh. 1 Cor. 1.29. For that is wholly excluded from all ^^esh,
both of Jew and Gentile, by the Gospel, Romans 4. Romans 3.27. 13. Not such a
signification of this word can be had from the New Testament as would render
the Institutions of God by Moses then in force Insignificant and Insufficient
For they are all exp^essed by a noun whereby John's baptism and Christ's baptism
are expressed by, Heb. 9.10, (...) compared with Matthew. 3.7. Matthew. 20.22. 14
No such acceptance as makes God to prefer sacrifice before mercy. 15. Not such
an acceptance, as would make John's way of Baptizing with water to be clean
contrary to Christ's way of Baptizing with the holy Ghost, and with fire, Matthew.
3.11. Acts 1 5. Acts 2.3, 4, 5, 16, 17.33 Acts 11.15, 16, 17, 18. 16. Not such
an acceptance or signification as must force John to do what he did in his
administration of Baptism, or, at least, be supposed to have d^^ e it with a
miraculous strength, when the Holy Ghost does witness expressly, that John did
no ^ir^cle, John 10.41, 42. 17. No such signification or accepta^ion can be had
from the New Testament of this word, that will render John Baptist's meani^^
and (...) ^ion ^ thi^ wor^, with respect to Christ's baptizing of them with the
holy Ghost unintelligib^e to (...) vul^^^, or gener^lity, even in the state of
their Ignorance and Unbelief, without the le^st Expla^^tion of it to them, as
differing from his manner of baptizing them with Water: C^^p ^e Matthew. 3.11.
with John 10.41, 42. where the Holy Ghost does testify, that the People do
bear J^hn ^^^ress, that all that John spoke of Christ was true; and this was a
gr^und of Faith to them: Now they could never have born witness to what John
had said of Christ, if they had not understood his meaning by his words, Matthew.
3.11. 18. No such acceptance of this word can be had from the New Testament,
as would render the way of John's administration of this Sol^mn Ordinance a
public scorn, as not being comely, and of good Report, nor shunning ^ll
appearance of evil. 19. No such signification of the word can be had from the
New Testament of this word, that shall overturn this Ordinance, not only from
being a Sign but a Seal also; and make the m^n^er of the performance of it, to
be clean contrary to the way of Sealing mentioned in the word of God, which is
by applying or putting the Seal to the Subject sealed, or to be sealed and not
by putting the subject to be sealed to the Seal, John 3.32, 33. Has set to his
Seal, that God is true. If this Ordinance were to be performed by dipping, the
subject to be sealed must be put to the Seal, or in the Seal; or else they must
make the person to be baptized to be the Seal, and the Water that he is dipped
into must be the subject sealed. 20. No signification or acceptance of this
word can be had from the New Testament, but what will render the subject
baptized, wholly p^ssive, from first to last, in the administration, or
acceptance, or reception of the External Sign, and as passive as in the
reception of the Inward Grace signified by it: It is always rendered in the
Passive Voice, with respect to the subject receiving of it. 21. No such
acceptance or signification can be had from the New Testament of this word, as
should discharge any Soul in Israel from being under the authority of Christ,
and from being guilty of grievous sin in its refusal, rejection, or neglecting
of being baptized by John, when he was sent to them, Luke 7.30. Acts 3.23. or
any Soul where the Gospels comes, Mark 16.15, 16. Matthew. 28.19. If it were
taken to signify dipping in the New Testament, then all they must be
discharged from Christ's Authority, or being under any guilt, whose condition
natural did not admit of being dipped in Jordan, whether Infant or Adult: and if
they were incapable of being baptized, they must be discharged from being bound
to hearken, Acts 13.24. 22. No such acceptance can be had from the New
Testament of this word, as would make Christ to indulge the Pharisees in their
alteration of the express Institutions of God by Moses from s^rinkling to
dipping, and yet Christ justifies them all the while, and calls them Purifying
L^ke 11.38, 39, 40. Mark 7.1, 2.4.8. or that would make John or Christ to
imitate the Pharisees, or the Pharisees to imitate Christ; for these were as
contrary as light to darknes^, and dar^ness to light. 23. No such acceptance
can be had of it, as would make the Holy Spirit of Truth to contradict himself,
who is always one and the same, Yea and Amen. Compare Ma^th. 3.11. with 1 Cor.
10.2. 1 Pet. 1.2. Heb. 10.22. Titus 3.5, 6. 24. No such acceptance ought to be
taken from the New Testament, as would overturn the Constitution of the Church
of the Jews, and exclude them from being Members that were then Children of the
Kingdom by God's immediate command, Genesis 17. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. and had then
God for their God, and were so owned by God, in that John and the Disciples and
Christ himself sent to them first of all. 25. No such signification can, or
ought to be had from the New Testament of this word, as would deprive any of
their Privileges, as Childr^n of Abraham, and make them all one with the
Samaritans, Matthew. 3.9. 26. No other acceptance can, or ^ught to be had from
the New Testament of this word, than what will agree with the Subjects of
John's Preaching the Doctrine of ^he Baptism of Repentance to, which was, to
all the ^^ople of Israel, Acts 13.24. 27. No other acceptance of this word can
be had from t^^ New Testament, than what will agree with the subje^^ ^f John's
Exhortation to them t^a^ he then b^ptized, which was, Every Tree that was to
bring fo^th good Fruit, and every Tree that sho^^^ ^^ing forth evil Fruit; all
that were Ch^ff or Wheat in that Floor and all that sh^^ld b^ gat^er^d into the
Garner as Wheat; or blown awa^, and burnt u^, as Ch^ff, with unque^^^n^ble
(...) ^3.1^.^8. No other signification can be had of this word from J^^^ (...)
Bap^^^^'^ acc^p^^tion of it th^^ wh^^ would agree with the Subjects or Objects
of Christ's Fan, or the objects of his pu^lick Minist^y, which was the
Circumcision; and they were Infants (...) eight days old, as well at any
others, Romans 1^.8. M^^th. 3.12. 2^. No other signification c^^ ^e ^ad from it,
than what will agree with the expres^ dec^ared subjects of John's Ministry,
w^^^h were Pa^ents and Children, Mal. 4.6. Luk^ 1.17. 30. No other
signification can be (...) of it from Scripture than what will agree with the
truth of God, in his Covenant made (...) Abraham and his Seed, R^m. 15.8. by
which it did belong to them, to have all the exte^^^^ means, by which the good
of the Promise and Covenant ^as h ld f^rth and conveyed, (...) Romans 9.4, 5.
Genesis 18.18, 19. 31. No other ^nification or acceptance can be had (...) New
Testament, ^ut what will agree with e^^ry Soul in Israel, having God f r the
(...) virtue of his taking them into Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.1^, 11, 12, 13 to 16,
17. 32. (...) ^^gnification or acceptance can be had of this word then what
will consist with the ^enders of grace made by the Apostles to that people,
Acts 2.38, 39. For if the promise had not belonged to them, and also if it had
not been the duty of a^l of them to be baptized, how could that great Apostle
Peter at that time be a true, and faithful Witness from God to them, 33. No
other signification of this word can be had from the New Testament than what
Will consist with the dreadful condemnations and theatnings of the New
Testament against all and every Soul that did flight, neglect or reject
Baptism. See Luke 7.30. Acts 3.23. John. 3.3, 5. Christ's express words to
Nicodemus the Pharisee that was one of that conclave that rejected Baptism.
Matthew. 21.32. Acts 2.40, 41. They are condemned as an untoward Generation.

Fi st Let us Enquire How John the Baptist did understand this word (...), And
what he did intend by it in his use of it, in Expressing his own Baptism with
water, and Christ's Baptism with the holy, Ghost by it? That John the Baptist
did understand and intend, pouring upon or sprinkling with in Matthew. 3.11. when
he spoke of Christ's Baptism, and told the people that Christ should baptize
them with the holy Ghost, and with fire, have been proved, and may be again
easily evidenced by John's being a prophet, and speaking as a prophet; and from
his seeing the way and manner in which Christ was to do it, when he spoke of
it, John. 1^.41. And by the evidence the people did bear of John with respect
to the truth of his Testimony, that he, did bear of Christ, in all things that
he spoke of Christ, and the ground of faith that this was to the people to
believe in Christ, John 10.40, 41, 42. And also from John's own words in Matthew.
3.11. and with fire, which respects the very time of the holy Ghosts falling
upon them, in Acts 2.3, 4, 5. Acts 11.15, 16, 17. And also his being acted by
the same spirit of the Prophets, but a greater measure, than they had of the
same spirit; and the commendation that Christ gives to John, all this shows
that John did intend the same way of performance in which it was done by the
Lord Jesus, which was by pouring upon, or sprinkling with, Acts 2.15, 16. And
this according to, and for the accomplishment of what the Prophets had foretold
that so that might be fulfilled, and this is witnessed to by the express words
of the holy Ghost in Acts 2.15, 16, 17. And it was foretold so to be performed
by many of the Prophet, as Isa. 52.15. Isa. 44.3. Joel. 2.28, 29. Zech. 12.10.
If Baptizing with the holy Ghost Was one of the things that John spoke of
Christ, and all that he spoke of him was true, then this of necessity must be
true, and was true, and was intended by the people when they spoke it of J^hn,
and bare witness to the truth of what John spoke of Christ, in all things, and
believed on Christ, by virtue of the truth of John's words, John. 10.40, 41, 42.
And for what he intended by his saying he Baptized them with water, whether he
intended Dipping or Plunging, or pouring upon or sprinkling, may be easily
discerned; In that The people understood what he spoke, which was Impossible
for any mortals to have done: If John should have intended s^rinkling by this
word when he spoke of Christ's Baptizing with the holy Ghost, but he performed
his own by Dipping in water, an^ yet expressed both by the same word, and this
without the least explication or discovery of any difference in the
signification of the word. That the people, and the vulgar of the people, and
while in a state of unbelief and Ignorance, and at the first time in the place
where John at first Baptized is all clear from the very expressions of the holy
Ghost in John. 1^.4^, 41, 42. And this could never have been, had John intended
sprinkling by the same word in Christ's Baptizing, that he expressed his
baptizing with if he had performed it by dipping and this without the least
explication, unless any can prove that the vulg^r, and common people could
understand what was in John's mind without his manifestation of it by his
expressions. And if any could do this by John, the same people could not
understand Christ's meaning when he said he did and would give them his flesh to
eat, John 6. and also it may be further discovered what he intended as to the
manner of his baptizing with water by the word (...): By the question proposed
to him by the Messengers sent to him from the Pharisees which were of
Jerusalem, John 1.24. Why Baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor
that Prophet, nor Elias. John understood the word (...) to Baptize, in no other
sense than what the Pharisees understood it in, For he Answered them
Immediately and Directly by and with the same word, verse 26. John answered and
said, I Baptize with water, etc. They, both, the Pharisees and John understood
what was intended and meant by the same word without the least explication of
it to show any different sense, that it was taken in, upon either hand or part,
as appears by their direct, pertinent and speedy answers one to the other. And
how the Pharisees and all the Jews understood it, and what they intended by it
we may know, and understand by their Baptizing of their C^^s and Pots and Beds
and Tables, etc. Mark. 7.4, 6, 8. which were things some of them at least,
Impossible to be Dipped, or to be baptized by Dipping, especially when it was
but the c^t^de of these that they Baptized, or purified Luke 11, 38, 39, 40.
Matthew. 25.25, 26. Which may be further discovered when we come to speak
particularly of their acceptance of the word.

3. John intended no other acceptance of this word Baptizing, nor did perform
it in any other manner, than what would consist with h^s Baptizing of All
Judea, and All the Region round about Jordan, and the multitude, which
consisted of men, women and children (...), Matthew. 14.21. Matthew. 15.36, to 39.
Matthew. 11.7. 4. John the Baptist Intended no other signification by this word
Baptizing, and performed it in no other manner than what would consist with
their privileges as they were children of Abraham, that they might enjoy their
privileges. For they had and did enjoy them, and partake of Baptism by virtue
of their being children of Abraham, Why else did John dissuade them from
trusting in their privileges, and being children of Abraham? Matthew. 3.9. And
should John have denied them the participation of the Ordinance upon this
account the covenant and promise of God must have been broken and made null and
void. And why does the holy Ghost say long after that it was theirs upon this
accoun^? Romans 9.4, 5. 5. John Bap^ist could intend no other signification by
this word than what would consist with the subjects of his Ministry, and the
end of his Ministry, which were the fathers and children, and the turning of
their hearts one to another, and all to the Lord, Mal. 4.6. Luke 1.17. 6. John
could intend no other signification by this word Baptizing than what would
consist with the Baptizing of all that were to bring forth good fruit, or be
cut down if they did not, and that were all the trees in that visible field of
that visible church, or than what would consist with the Baptizing of all that
were either chaff or wheat, or that should be purged out or kept in by Christ,
or that should be gathered into the Barn or Garner, or be burnt up with
unquenchable fire, Matthew. 3.12. It would be strange If any should suppose that
John should deny any the Ordinance of Baptism, and the participation of it as
means to bring forth fruit, and yet charge them upon the pain of Damnation or
Salvation to bring forth fruit. and good fruit. And if his exhortation did
extend to none but what were Baptized, then all that were of Israel were
baptized or it was their own default and sin if they were not baptized, and not
from John's denying of it to them. And if all both small and great were
baptized, then his Baptism must be performed in such a manner as that they
might partake of it, which must be by sprinkling, and not by Dipping, and then
he must intend sprinkling, and not Dipping by this word (...) or (...), when he
said he indeed had baptized them with water. 7. John Intended no other manner
of baptizing by this word and by his act in performance of what he expressed
thereby, than what would consist with the ordinary natural strength of one
person, to do and perform to persons of all sorts, sexes and ages, stature and
Corpulency whatsoever for he did nothing in this Ordinance by a miraculous
strength because he did no miracle, John 10.41, 42. And he said he indeed
baptized them with water, which he could never do by Dipping or plunging, for
whether their wearing apparel were on, or off, it is beyond the Natural
strength of any ordinary individual, to Dip all persons of all ages and sexes,
and stature into water a d take them out again himself, whether it were to be
done Diametrical or perpendicular. And if their Apparel should be all put off,
it must be to the shame of humane nature. And the baptism must be of two kinds
if any part of the b^dy were grasped or held by the dipper, and the Dipping
must be contrary to the way of Dipping as discovered in Scripture, if that part
of the person or thing were Dipped in, that was held by the Dipper, and yet be
accounted dipp^d. It was an act of Great condescension in God Almighty that
when he could by his Imme^iate Power have dipped the whole Host in the red Sea
with as great ease and freedom as ever he ^prinkled them, by the cloud, but by
this he condescended to our weakness to perform it (...) that manner, that any
one of his Officers and Servants were c^pable by their nat^ral ordina^^
^^rength, to baptize any one individual, of whatsoever stature, ^^eportion,
age, sex, or condition ^^ y were. And if this of sprinkling had not been the
right way of performance, the great Law give^ and Judge would never have given
us that Example, 1 Cor. 10.2. 8. John intended no other manner of Baptizing
with Water, than what would consist with the Gravity, Holiness, and Austerity
that he came in, which could never be by taking up Male and Female of all ages,
and dipping them in Water, and taking them out again: Neither would it consist
with the Modesty and shamefacedness of Humane Nature in them that were
baptized; nor with the honor, praise and comeliness of so Solemn an Ordinance
in the sight of so many spectators, which he styled, a Generation of Vipers;
and therefore he must intend, and did intend sprinkling, or pouring upon by
this word, when he said, That he indeed baptized them with Water. 9. No other
signification is intended by this word, by J hn, than what will consist with
other discoveries in Scripture, concerning the acceptance of this word; and if
the Holy Ghost have discovered no other signification of it, than pouring upon,
shedding upon, or sprinkling with, then there can be no ground of Faith, for
any to believe or teach any other, for if it be not so written or said by the
Holy Ghost, there can be no ground for any to believe any other, for there was
no other if the Holy Ghost said nothing of any other, Heb. 7.14. 10. He could
intend no other baptizing by this word, as to the manner of performance of it,
than what would consist with the nature of the External Ordinance, which was,
and is still to be a sign of the Internal Baptism by the Holy Ghost. For if he
did, he must be supposed to intend otherwise than what God did intend in the
appointment of it, 1 Pet. 3.21. and in ^ll the resemblances whereby it is set
forth in Scripture, Romans 6.3, 4. Gal. 3.27. They that can suppose this, and
imagine this of one that Christ did commend, no wonder if they imagine all evil
of all others of his Servants. 11. John could intend no other bapt zing by this
word, than what would consist with the Title given to it by the Jews and John's
Disciples, John 3.22, 23, 24, 25. which could be no other than what Peter
intended in Acts 15.7, 8, 9. with Acts 11.15, 16, 17. in both places it is
styled Purifying; and one speaks of the Outward, and the other of the Inward
Baptism; and all their legal Purifyings were by Sprinkling, whether it was by
Blood or Water, Heb. 9.13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22. Numb. 19. If it had not been
performed the same way as their Purifying was, the Jews that were envious at
Christ and John too, would never have given to it that name, ^ohn 3.22, 23, 24,
25, 26. compared with John 4.1, 2. If any will say, that Baptism is not
expressed, John 3.25, 26. I answer, It is intended of that which was the matter
in question, that they came to John with, and desired his Resolution of, with
respect to Christ; and if that was not about B^ptism, the word must be denied
that expressed it. 12. Such a manner of baptizing John intended by it, as would
consist with clearness, perspicuity, and plainn^ss of the Gospel Dispensations,
that he was sent to be the first publisher of, and the first admini^trator of,
That all flesh might see the salvation of God, Luke 3.6. it is called, Lights
coming into the World. John 3.19, 20. And the day spring from on high visiting
of them, L^ke 1.78. And the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. And that which made
John's Ministry in point of clearnes^, greater than all the Prophets that were
before him; and certainly, this must not be by dipping and plunging, to set
forth and make Representation, and to typifie ^ne Christ's sprinkling them with
the Holy Ghost, or pouring out the Holy Ghost upon them. This could never be
the clearest way to represent Christ's Baptizing; for if John should have
in^^nded dipping, and performed his baptizing with Water by dipping, when he
did intend, and must intend sprinkling or pouring upon, by the same word, when
he foretold Christ's ba^tizi^^ them with the holy Ghost, Matthew. 3.11.

Then John's Administration of Baptism must be the darkest, and most eclipsed
and occult dispensation that ever was in the Church of God, in any age of the
World, from the Foundation thereof to that day. And that First, for Author,
there being no Author discovered as the appointer of such a Dispensation, of
dipping persons into Water of all ages and sexes, and taking them out again to
baptize them. For though such an administration be imagined, yet there is no
mention made in the least of any Author commanding or in^^ituting of that
manner of baptizing. If John had had it commanded him, when the word of God
came to him, and if he was sent to baptize with Water, should we not have heard
of it? John 1.25, to 34. Luke 3, 2, 3. He came in the way of Righteousness; and
that is, and must be by Rule; but not a word of this way of baptizing, as
having God for the author. And they that can imagine John to be the author of
his own Head, may imagine any thing else of John, and of all others of the
Prophets of the Lord. 2. As it must be the darkest for author, so also, for
Scripture Warrant and Command, where can any say, that dipping is required, and
thus it is written, and thus we believe? 1 Cor. 15.2, 3, to 12, 13. all may say
for sprinkling, thus, it is promised and prophesied of expressly; and this is
according to the Title given to the Blood of Christ, and in which way it speaks
to us, Heb. 12.24. and thus it is written with respect to Christ's baptizing
with the Holy Ghost, Acts 1.5. Acts 2.3, 4, 5, 15, 16, 17.33. and in abun^ance
of other places the same matter is so set forth, and expressed; but where is
one Text that any one Soul can bring out of the Old Testament, or New, in
Promise, Prophecy, or Performance, that Baptism is called dipping into Water,
or so set forth in Scripture. 3. The darkest of all for passive Reception, in
every thing we be, or are to be Passive R^ceivers, 1 Cor. 4.7. and in b^ing
baptized specially, it being always expressed in the Passive Voice, with
respect to the person receiving of it; but how impossible is dipping to be so
performed, or received, that the person baptized should be wholly and
universally passive, and be rendered incapable of any co action or co-agency, as
it is in sprinkling. or being sprinkled; I am sure, should the Eunuch have gone
himself into the Water, so far as he went into the Water, he must baptize
himself, or else he must be took out again, as to that part, and dipped in
afterward, if his baptism had been performed by dipping. 4. The darkest of all
for administration by any one individual person, by any ordinary competent
measure of personal strength; but the administration must be impossible for any
one constituted Officer to perform by his personal strength, so that God must
command both natural as well as moral Impossibilities. 5. For the end of it, to
discover to the Baptized, the way and manner of being baptized by Christ, and
his partaking of the Inward Baptism from him, which David clearly understood by
the typical Purification by Moses, Psalm 51.6, 7. by the Lord Jesus pouring out
his Spirit, or sprinkling him with the gifts and Graces thereof, and not by
taking the person and putting him into the Holy Ghost. 1. For the extent of the
discerning of it, as to the agents or subjects to behold it; if any did discern
it, it could be but few, and that very few, if any that could discern
sprinkling set forth b^ dipping; for what way can any propose as means to
discern it by, it must be by their Senses, as their Eyesight, or by their
exercise of their Reason, or by a Sup^rnatural Revelation. As for their Senses
of Eyesight, it is impossible that any should d^scern sprinkling set forth by
dipping. 2. For the exercise of their Reason, how could they, or any living,
discern it from that, by Causes or Effects, or Parity or Disparity? Surely the
means of discerning of it must not be by Reason. 3 If it must be by
Supernatural Revelation, it must be by the word or without the word as the
means. For the word to reveal it, that they had not, for there is no one
express word to set forth such a baptizing by dipping, or such a twofold
acceptance of the word. And if any say, they had it without the word, this
mu^t be true of all that heard him, both good and bad; and this must render the
word needless to all: But they that understood what John intended were such, as
at that time had no Divine Revelation, as to the effect of it upon their Souls,
for they were in unbelief, and they believed afterward, John 10.40, 41, 42. so
that they could no way discern it. 6. It must be the darkest of all
dispensations, for the subjects capable to partake of it. All Infants, and
Weak, and Infirm among the Adult, must be excluded Baptism, as being incapable;
and it must be the bold, and hardy, and confident, that could endure to be took
up and dipped over Head and Ears in Jordan, that being a great River, and
therefore the more fruitful. Never was there an Ordinance of Initiation so dark
as to admission. 7. For the public shame and odium of the administration to be
performed, publicly in the Eyes of all, even a Generation of Vipers, whether
there were the least of devesting by any, or no^, or the least of investing
with other apparel, much more, if there should have been a total of both;
neither of which, at the participation of that Ordinance, in order to the act
of baptizing, have the least footing in the word of God. 8. For the universal
loss that all must be at, as to position in the Baptized, whether it was
perpendicular or downright, that they were baptized, or whether it wa^
diametrically, or by equal poize. If it was done perpendicular, or downright,
that they are supposed or imagined to be dipped, which end must be dipped first,
the Head or Feet? and whether it must be at one dip or at two? and which way
the Face must be, toward the Baptizer, or from him? And if it be imagined to
be by equal poize, or diametrically, with the Head and Feet of equal height,
whether the Face must be upwards or downwards, or side ways? whether toward
the Baptizer, or from him? though both ways are alike possible, yet what Soul
under Heaven can have a certain rule for posi^ion in dipping in this case. 9.
It must be the darkest dispensation that ever was in the Church of God, for
making natural strength of Body, and power of Nature to use the Limbs, to be
such a necessary qualification for admission to be of the visible Church of
God, and boldness and confidence to be dipped in Jordan, and not to be frighted
nor ashamed in the ^yes of such a Multitude; and the utter exclusion of all
others, as could not come by their own natural strength, and use their Tongues,
and that had not attained such a me^sure of confidence and boldness so to be
served from all right to, or participation of Gospel Privileges. Never was the
like in any age in the Church of God, if it could be proved that it was so.
When Christ makes a Cubit in the stature to be the least, less than a bit of
Bread, or a little Raiment, Luke 12.23, 24, 25, 26. and when God chooses the
weak things of the World, and base things, and things despised* to confound the
strong and honorable, and has forbidden us to glory in Natural Strength, 1
Cor. 1.27, 28, 29, 3^. Jer. 9.24, 25. 10. It must be the darkest with respect
to the discovery of the Grace of God designed to be made known in all Gospel
Dispensations. First, This does eclipse the freeness of the Grace, without
respect to any thing in the Creature, or subject recipient, Romans 9.21, 22. 2.
The Impartiality of his Grace, without respect to any person, Romans 2.10, 11.
Mark 16.15, 16. 3. The Universality and abundance of Grace from a drop to the
Ocean, and from a Crumb to the Crown, Matthew. 5.46, 47. Matthew. 15.27. Zech.
13.1. Zech. 4.6. 4. The efficacy of the Grace of God, and Blood of Christ; Heb.
10.22. Heb. 9.13, 14. One drop of that sufficient to cleanse fully. 5. The
greatness of the Sufferings of Christ, how he was broken by Divine Justice,
that his Blood was sprinkled, Isa 63.3, 4. 11. It must be the darkest as a
sign, for the disagreement between the sign and the thing sign^fi^d as to the
way and manner of distribution and participation. Never the like darkness in
any sign of Divine Institution. Moses, that put a Vail upon his Face was far
more clear, Psalm 51.6, 7. 12. The darkest, for the limitation of the
Administration to some times of the Year only, and to admit them Members of the
Visible Church in the hot Seasons, or hot Countries only. All admission in such
a manner, can never be at Winter performed, without apparent danger and
detriment to the health of the Baptized; and the confinement of the performance
to some Countries only, and excluding it from others that are not so hot; so
that they must never be admitted Members in a right Gospel manner; and if it
was not in a right manner, it was contrary to Acts 10.34, 35. and contrary to
the Commission, Math. 28.19, 20. Mark. 16.15, 16. And they had Winter as well
as other Countries, John 10.22. and had cold, and needed Fire, Mark 16.67. Luke
22.55. but we do not read of any cessation of John's Baptizing, because it was
Winter, or heating the Water of Jordan, or choosing hotter places, because of
the cold to baptize in. 13. Never the like, for non-explication of the Word, or
the Thing, or unfolding of it in any thing, our Lord Jesus explained his
Parables to his Disciples and dark sayings; and though Moses put a Vail over
his Face, yet his s^gn was by sprinkling, Numb. 19. Lev. 14. Matthew. 13. 14. For
unparallelness by any other President recorded in the Word, as to all that were
to be admitted Members of the visible Church, Moses did not purify that way;
nor was it foretold, that Christ, or any Gospel Minister should, but the clean
contrary by sprinkling. Nor did the Lord do it that way, when he did it by his
immediate hand, 1 Cor. 10.2. Nor did the Scribes and Pharisees, for they
professed themselves Moses 's Disciples, so that there must be no President for
it in the Church of G^d, as to the generality. 15. For the diversity of the
Baptism, if it must be done by dipping; one part of the person must be baptized
immediately, and the other mediately, by the Clothes, if that be not fully
divested, and by the hands, or other Instruments, if the person be universally
naked, and yet graspt. 16. For the difficulty and danger of the Baptized,
without great strength, and firmness of natural Constitution, especially
considering that God will have Mercy and not Sacrifice. 17. As to the subjects
of his Exhortation afterward, That he should in his words speak to all to
bring forth fruit, whether old or young, that were capable of cutting down, or
standing, or of being blown a way, or burnt up, or of being continued in, or
gathered into the Garner; and ye be imagined to baptize, in a manner, that very
few, if any, were capable to partake of it in; And yet threaten them to be
Damned, if they did ^ot bri^^ f^rth fruit of it. 18. That the very act, t^^t
John should bap^ize in, should be that by which Christ should be most known,
and yet he be imagined to do it in that way, by which he should not be known,
That John's administration sh^^ld ^e to bring them to Christ; and yet he be
Imagined, to do it in that way that should be an ^^^tacle, and obstruction to
them, from c^m^ng to Christ, and believing in Christ, when they did see, that
he Baptized with the holy Ghost. Another wa^, how should they believe, that
Christ was he that John had foretold should come. Secondly, To find out what
signification this word (...) had with our Lord Jesus Christ, who was Infinite
wisdom it self, and of whom it was spoken, and f^^^t^ld, as the way ^f the
communication of his spirit. And how he used it, with respect to the
acceptance of this word, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and his intent and meaning
by it in his expressing his mind by way of promise to his Disciples, after his
resurrection, relating to his Baptizing them with the holy Ghost. W^ may see it
in Acts. 1.5. The mind of our Lord Jesus is so plain and clear concerning his
acceptance, and intention by this word, that he that runs may read it. That
he did take it to signify pouring upon, and shedding upon or sprinkling with
Or applying of it to the person, and not the person to that, by dipping him
into it, is as certain as clear and express: For John verily Baptized with
water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost not many days hence. If we
compare this with Acts 2.2, 3, 4, 5. And suddenly, there came from heaven a
sound, as of a mighty rushing wind, and it filled all the house, where they
were sitting, and there appeared to them cloven tongues like as of fire (which
was that particular Baptism with fire that John prophesied of, Matthew. 3.11.)
and it sat upon each of them, and they were filled with the holy Gho^^. Here
every one of the expressions that respects the application manifests it to be
applied to them, and not they to it, and in the same manner that it was applied
to them, it was applied to all others, Acts 10.45, 46, 47. Acts 11.15, 16, 17.
It came from heaven, and not they put into heaven, it appeared to them, not
they brought to that, it sat upon each of them, and not each of them put into
that. And they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and not they put into that.
See also Acts 9.18. So our savior does witness that it is applied to the soul,
and not the soul to that, in John 3.3, 5, 8. The wind blows where it lists.
So Zech. 12.10. Isa. 44.3. Joel 2.28, 29. Isa. 52.15. And all the Promises of
God are in Christ yea, yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20. And then certainly that Great
promise, Ezekiel 26.25, 26. must be fulfilled, I will sprinkle clean water upon
you, The word is (...) from (...) ^as not this promise breathed by his spirit?
and all other of the predictions by his Prophets concerning the manner of his
communicating the benefits of his death, and resurrection to his church and
people in Gospel times? And also his spirits giving that title to his blood as
the blood of sprinkling, and that as sprinkling it speaks to all his Church,
Heb. 12.24. Heb. 9.13, 14, 19, 24. And never speaking any other way to his
whole church or General assembly. All this shows Christ's acceptance of this
word as to the Inward Baptism by him, to signify only applying his spirit to
his people, and not they to that. And as to the outward application with water,
does out Lord Jesus manifest the least of different signification or
acceptance, than what it had in the Inward Baptism, in that he expresses
John's Baptism as he did his own by the same word and gave it the same title of
being born of water, as well as of the holy Ghost John 3.3, 5. and declares
that to be by the spirit blowing upon, and not putting the person into it, in
verse 8th. and had he not breathed by his spirit in his Prophets long before
that he would sprinkle water upon them and pour water upon them, Isa 44.3.
Ezekiel. 36.25. and was there not a^ great a necessity of the fulfilling of that,
as to the external Baptism, as there was of the fulfilling of the Prophecy of
Joel concerning the Inward Baptism? Acts 2.15, 16, 17. 2. And Christ's by his
spirit declaring of it to be a type or sign, in 1 Peter 3.21. Was not this a
sufficient manifestation of the mind of Christ concerning the ex^ernal Baptism
with water did the spirit of Christ ever contradict himself? What blasphemy of
the most Notorious nature, must such a thought, or word be in the heart, or
mouth of the most confident soul? it is enough for every soul to withdraw
himself from such a person, tent or, company, Paul's words to the Church was not
yea and nay, but as God is true so that Gods truth do not admit of yea and nay
2 Cor. 1.18, 19. And let God be true and every man a liar* Romans 3.5, 6. If
Christ by his spirit have styled external Baptism a sign, type or figure by his
holy Apostle then it must be a sign, and so performed, of his Baptizing by his
spirit; And they have good Scripture warrant that so use it, in the way setting
forth Christ's Baptizing by his spirit, and sad must be the condition of all
that partake not of it in that manner, as a sign or type of Christ's Baptizing
by his spirit. And we may see how Christ accep^ed the word and intended by it,
b^ what apprehensions, and acceptations of his spirit taught his servants to
have of it, both as to the Inward and outward Baptism, Acts 11.15, 16. Acts
15.7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 10.2. 1 Peter. 3.21. 1 Peter. 1.10, 11. Heb. 10.22. Ezekiel.
36.25. Isa. 44.3. Isa. 52.15. Heb. 12.24. Heb. 9.13, 14, 19, to 24. 3. And also
we may see in what sense our Lord Jesus took this word, and what acceptance it
had with him, by his discoursing with the Phar sees about their external
Baptizings which by his own appointment was to be by sprinkling, and by the
Answers he made to them for pertinency, and directness and speed, and the
titles he gave to what they called Baptizing Mark, 7.2, 3, 4, 8. Matthew. 15.2,
20. And the words he made Answer to them in, in the Original as (...) and
(...), and the Pharisees likewise using the same word to set forth and express
that which at another time they expressed by (...), Luke 11.38, 39 40. That
which is translated washing there, should be rendered Baptizing for it is
(...); And this our Savior styles making clean, which sh^weth it was the same
that God appointed as to the manner of performance. So it is called cleansing,
Mat. 25.26, 27. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside, etc. Christ
Expresses it by (...), making clean or purifyng, And Peter by the holy Ghost
does render (...) by, or express the thing else where called baptizing by the
same word; compare Acts 11.15, 16. with Acts 15.^. So it is expressed by the
same word, Heb. 9.13, 14. both as to the external and Internal purif^ing, so
the Inward in Heb. 9.19, 20. to 23. 1 John 1.7, 9. and Mat. 23.25, 26. Mark
7.19. Mat. 11.5. Luke 7.22. Matthew. 8.2. Mark 1.40. Luke 5.12. Ephe. 5.26. And
the Noun from this theme, John. 2.6. John 3, 25. See what it is applied to Acts
22.16. Titus. 2, 14. And so at another time the same thing is expressed by
(...) and (...) Matthew. 15.2, 2. And the Pharisees and all the Jews did express
the same matter by, that they at another time called baptizing, Luke 11.38.
Math. 15.2. Mark. 7.2, 3. And this word (...) is the word that our Savior used
when he washed the Disciples feet, John. 13. which was a ceremonial typical
washing as appears by his words to Peter, John. 13.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. If I wash
thee not thou have no part with me. And this is the word the blind man's w^shing
his eyes is expressed by, John. 9.7, 11. And is applied to the washing the
feet, 1 Timothy 5.10. And to washing the face, Matthew. 6.17. And he Answers by a
noun from (...), Mark 7.8. with respect to the same thing. 4. Also we may see
what acceptance and signification Christ had of this word with respect to the
external Baptism, in that he performed it by sprinkling when he did it by his
Immediate power from the cloud, and his spirit sets it forth by this word, 1
Cor 10.2. He was the Angel that was with Moses and the people in the
wilderness. And they at least some of them received it by faith which must
necessarily prove the object of faith to be there, Heb. 11.20. which certainly
discovers to the full Our Lord Jesus his acceptance of this word. 5. We may
see and perceive how Christ understood and accepted this word (...) as to
external Baptism, In that he was a minister of the circumcision to confirm the
truth of God made to the Fathers. Romans 15.8. The circumcision comprehended the
Infant eight days old as well as any adult person, and in the same capacity he
was looked upon as the Adult, And the Adult could not have been in the capacity
with the Infant to be of the Circumcision, if he were an Israelite, and had not
been circumcised in Infancy: And upon the same account, and cause that he was
the Minister to one, he was the minister to the other, and that is for the
truth of God to confirm the promise made to the fathers: Now if this text be
any way objected against, as to the matter in hand, it must be because, that
Baptism did not come within the external administrations of Christ as Minister,
and if it did not, I wonder where any will place it. Or to what they will
attribute it! And what they will make of Christ's Ministry, Gal. 3.5. I would
pray all such to view that text. If any will object and say that by
circumcision, we be to understand the Circumcision of heart. I Answer who
should circumcise them in heart, for to be subjects of Christ's Ministry. And if
none but the circumcised in heart, then this must exclude the Elect of God
uncalled and who shall bring them in. 3. If it were that it did intend the
circumcised in heart only, yet that will not exclude children; For Christ has
done that work for some of them too; As Isaac, Sampson, Jacob, etc. 4. This
must make that we must bring grace to the Lord Jesus, and not come to him for
it, Ezekiel. 36.27. 5. To limit it to the circumcised in heart only, must make
the subjects Ministry to be Invisible, and the Ministry to be the Internal work
of Christ, in perfecting what he has begun in any Soul, or else to make that
Internal grace can and does live only with external means for Nourishment. Let
men and Devils make what cavils they will against this text. It is clear from
this text That the subjects of Christ's ministry were Infants as well as the
Adult; And if so, Then all the Acts of it must be such, and especially Baptism
such as they were capable of partaking of, and Sharing in. Or else Christ's
ministry must be undertaken in vain, his ministry respected all that the
promise respected, or did appertain to: And if it did not appertain to children
see Mala 4 6. Isa. 44.3. Joel 2.2^, 29. Acts 2.38, 39. And if that did
appertain to the youngest Infants, then they were as certainly the subjects of
Christ's Ministry as the adult; And then Baptism, which was one special part of
his external Ministry must and was performed by sprinkling, and not by Dipping,
the subjects of his Ministry being not capable of it. All the Fathers were
Baptized in the Red Sea, which must comprehend the smallest Infant as well as
the person adult, and that was done by Christ as Minister to the Circumcision,
1 Cor. 10.2. If any had no right to Baptism, they had no right to any thing
else of Christ's Ministry, For that is the door of Admission to All other parts
of it, or privileges to be enjoyed. as visible members: And of such this text
speaks, Christ being sent to them as such, Matthew. 15.24. Thirdly, Let us
enquire how Peter the Great Apostle of the Circumcision did accept this word
(...), and what he did intend by it in his use of it, who was the first great
and Eminently successful Preacher among them after Christ's Resurrection, and
the first user of this word after that time. That he did understand falling
upon, pouring upon, shedding upon and sprinkling with as to the Internal
Baptism is clear from his own Express words; compare Acts 10.44, 45, 47. with
Acts 11.15, 16, 17. and Acts 15.7, 8, 9. Acts 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 16, 17, 33. and 1
Peter. 1.2. The Hebrew word in Joel 2.28. The text which Peter says was then
fulfilled, is the same with that in Ezekiel. 36.25, Rendered sprinkling from (...)
And as to the Administration of the external sign, which is Baptism with water,
we have it also as clear in that he calls it (...), a type, 1 Peter 3.21. Now
it could never be a sign, type or figure, If not done in that way as to
represent the manner of the performance of that it typified out, which was
Christ's pouring out his spirit upon his people, Acts 2.15, 16, 17, 33. 2. By
his pressing of it as the duty of all by way of command to whom the promise did
belong, and that upon the account and reason of the promise belonging or
appertaining to them, Acts 2.38, 39. 3. Also his expressions by way of question
to all, when he was in the assembly where many were met together in Cornelius
his family, or house, Acts 10.46, 47. can any forbid water that these should
not be baptized who have received the holy Ghost as well as us? If any will
deny childrens or Infants being there, they must deny the whole Scripture, If
Acts 15.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. betruly and rightly considered.
And if any object and say, There were no children there because they that are
there spoken of, were heard to speak with tongues: I answer, that will rather
confirm that they were there; For their speaking could not be a greater miracle
than their speaking with tongues. And the Babes and sucklings in the Temple had
as eminent a privilege to set forth the praises of Christ, Matthew. 21.14, 15.
And these were also under a promise as well as them. Psalm. 8.1, 2, 3. Joel.
2.28, 29. Isa. 52.15. Acts 2.39. 4. By the Title that he gives to Baptism and
that is purifying Acts 15.9. The term whereby the legal purifyings were set
forth, which were performed by sprinkling. Compare that text with Heb. 9.13,
14, 19. to 24. Mark. 1.40, 41. Luke 11.38, 39. The same with the external
baptism and the end of Christ is set forth by this title as to his dying for
us, Titus 2.14. That gave himself for us to purify to himself a peculiar
people, and the Application of his blood to us is by sprinkling. 1 Peter 1.2.
Heb. 9.14. Heb. 10.22. And it is used by Christ to set forth their legal
purifications, Matthew. 23.25, 26. so in James 4.8. Where if it be taken for our
purging our selves it must be taken for our use of the means, Acts 2.38. 2 Cor.
7.1. And it is used to set forth external Baptism, John 3.25. compared with
John. 4.1, 2. (...). And the word (...) that comes from it is used abundance of
times, in the New Testament, which signifies clean, Matthew. 23.26. Luke 11.41.
John. 13.9, 10. Fourthly, Let us enquire How the holy Penmen of the blessed
Gospel, the four Evangellists did understand this word (...) From whose pens
this word did drop* and who were the Instruments to record the mind of Christ
to us ^y it, in the Word of God and blessed Script^res, who also were eye
witnesses of the Administrations, and subjects of the communication^ both
special and common. And First I shall Enquire how Matthew the First recorder of
it, did understand it, and in what sense he did accept it, and take it, and
^^at he did intend by it? The record being made long after the Administration
of the sign, and the communication of the thing signified to them. And we may
see how Matthew took the word to signify as to the Inward Baptism, by the
recording of the comunication of the spirit from Christ, by this word in Matthew.
3.11. He shall Baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire. And he was one
of them that did partake of it, and upon whom it was poured out, and shed, Acts
2.2, 3, 4, 15, 16, 17, 33. And by the Record he has made of the spirits
descending upon Christ like a dove from heaven, Matthew. 3.16, 17. And we may
understand what Matthew understood by this word as to external baptism, and the
performance of it, by the record he has made of the subjects of Baptism in the
Primitive times, Even all Judea and all the Region Round about Jordan, Matthew.
3.5, 6. Matthew. 4.15, 16, 17. And his calling these the multitudes, Matthew. 11.7.
And discovery of the multitude to consist of men, women and children, Matthew.
14.21. Matthew. 15.36, 37, 38, 39, 40. So that he did not in^end Dipping by this
word, in that the smallest Infants are Intimated to be there. 2. And by the
Discovery made of them that John's Exhortation was presented to after Baptism to
bring forth fruit, which was every tree of the field, and all, whether they
were chaff or wheat, or should be Damned or saved, Matthew. 3.1^, 12. 3. And also
by, the Discovery that he has made of Our Saviors coming from the water, when
he was Baptized, (...); Which pr^veth that Christ was not dipped into the water
by John, in that he was not taken out again. For whatsoever is dipped in by any
must be taken out again to distinguish it from casting or putting into the
water in a Scripture acceptance. And if children or females had been dipped in
by John, how could they have come forth, when their clothes were wet? by reason
of their weakness of Nature and want of strength? 4. We may see what he
understands by John's Baptism as to the manner, in that he has left enough upon
record to show that they had their privileges, as children of Abraham, and
were not denied them, and then surely the smallest Infant must be, and was
baptized, if they were Abraham's seed as well as the adultest parent Or else
they must be great sufferers, as being wronged, Matthew. 3.9, 10 Matthew. 11.16,
17, 18, 19. 5. By his rendering their external purifications by (...), which
the other Evangelists and the Jews did express by the word (...) as well as by
that word, Matthew. 15.2, 2^. Luke 11.38. Mark 7.2, 3, 4, 5. which word none will
be able to prove did signify dipping, Matthew. 6.17. Fifthly, Let us enquire how
the Evangelist Mark understood this word (...), and what he intended by it? and
as to the spiritual Baptism that must be yielded to be the same with Matthew,
He being one of the Apostles, and did partake of it as well as Matthew. And for
the external Administration of the sign, we may see what he understood by it By
his recording the use of the word among all the Jews, Mark 7.2, 3, 4, 8. and He
renders the words with unwashen hands, by (...), as Matthew. does in Matthew. 15.2.
about the same matter which is never used in the New Testament to signify
dipping into. And in Mark 7. verse 4. It is Rendered or expressed by (...), And
it should be translated Except they Baptize they eat not. Where we have a clear
discovery how Mark did understand (...) to signify, and that is the same with
their legal purifications, which were by express divine command to be performed
by sprinkling, Numb. 19.18, 19. And they must have Notoriously sinned against
the very letter of the Law, if they had not so performed it, but had done it
another way, and the Jews were exact observers of the letter of the Law. Romans
2.27. And in verse the 4th He ^ells us of their Baptizing of their pots and
cups and Tables or beds; (...) and it is expressed by (...). Which shows
clearly that their performance of it was by sprinkling, for the tent, and all
the vessels in a tent were to be sprinkled Numbers 19.18. If any object and say
this is discovered to be their own Inventions. I answer, That is true as to the
matter our Savior does tax them, but as to the manner of applying the ^ater to
cleanse them that ^as as God commanded, (...) not gainsaid by Christ, and the
thing in debate is not, who invented the matter, but how it was p^r^ormed, and
the acceptance of the word whereby it is expressed, and for the manner of
their performance Christ does not condemn that, but do acknowledge it a
purifying, and making clean of the cursde of the cup and platter, Matthew. 23.25,
26. Luke 11.39, 40. They erred no more in this than they did in the lesser
matters of the law Luke 11.42. and had they not had the letter of the law to
Justify the manner they could never have fadged in the matter in worship, nor
have accused Christ, nor any others for the neglect of it, with any pre^ence of
conscience. The people being so well acquainted with the five books of Moses,
that they could not gainsay the letter of the law, and especially the
ceremonial part thereof. That being the most of the religion then in fashion.
If any say that the Apostle does not declare his Judgment here, but reports
their use of the word that is the Jews and Pharisees; I answer, The greater
ground this gives to believe that the Primitive Baptism was not by Dipping, but
by sprinkling; For if this was the acceptance of the word among the Pharisees
and Jews, to set forth, their ceremonial purifyings which were by express
divine command to be performed by sprinkling, then that was the acceptance of
it, by the Apostles too, In that they do not in the least gainsay it. Nor never
give it any other signification. And should the Jews have broken the command of
God, and done it by Dipping, how would our Lord Jesus have showed his
abhorrence of their wickedness, therein? Or would John Baptist and Christ; and
his Apostles have followed them, in their way of violating the commands of God
that were then in full force? They that have such a belief have little ground
for what they do in Imitation of it, Acts 21.24, 26. How often did Christ call
them the blind Pharisees and serpents, and a generation of vipers? Matthew.
23.31, 32, 33. which are sad creatures to follow, especially when we know them.
Or else can it be Imagined that the Pharisees and all the Jews would in the
performance of their own inventions follow Christ and John Baptist, if John had
Dipped, or if Christ had Dipped and his Disciples? Did they not say John had a
Devil? and that Christ was a friend of Publicans and sinners? and did they not
make a law that whosoever did confess Christ should be put out of the
Synagogue? and then much more from the Temple? John. 9. and did they not
quarrel against, and were they not enraged that so many did come to his
Baptism? John 3.24, 25, 26. John. 4.1, 2. and were worse in their carriage to
John Baptist and Christ than the Publicans and harlots, Matthew. 21.32. So that
the Pharisees could not use this word to signify Dipping from God, nor Christ
nor from John Baptist, and then they must have it from themselves, and if so,
Then Christ and John would not follow them in their wickedness, and if any
should say they might have it from the Heathens, that will not mend the matter,
but make it worse. But it is clear from the various texts where we have both
Christ and John and them using the word about one and the same thing, that
their performance of it was one and the same way, and that they all had one and
the same acceptance of the word, John 1.24, 25. Luke 11.38. Mark 7.4, 8. And
therefore there could be no other signification of this word upon any hand,
than sprinkling in the New Testament. And this about the external Baptism, as
well as the Internal; Even by Christ and his Apostles, and by others. And the
things they baptized as well as their persons will confirm it, which was upon
the outside of their Pots and cups and brazen vessels, and of Beds or Tables,
or any other Utensil, Tent, or House, which were by Gods command to be cleansed
or purified, when a person died in the tent or house, and the things or
Utensils were made unclean thereby, Levit. 14.50, 51, 52. Numbers 19.16, 17,
18, 19. And as no one constituted officer, as to natural stature or strength
Indefinitely considered was or is able to baptize, either perpendicularly, or
Diametrically any person of any sex or age by Dipping, no more ^ould they
Baptize the Utensils here mentioned by Dipping, as their beds or Tables that
they Dined at, and slept on after Dinner, as some write; Nor to take up a tent
or house when standing and the vessels in it, and baptize it, or if they leave
out the persons and vessels; though we read not of the removal of either out of
the tent by Gods command to be purifyed. And all were to be purged one way and
that was by sprinkling, Heb. 9.13, 14-19, 20, 21, 22, 23. And by one Baptizer,
or Purifier, Heb. 9.19, 20, 21. 22. And this is the Baptizing that this holy
man of God Mark has reference to as well as those petty additions of the
Elders to it, and it was a ceremonial sign of the benefits they should have of
Christ to come, as Baptism is a sign of the benefits we be to seek for and
shall have from Christ already come; compare Heb. 9.20, 21, 22. with Acts 2.38,
39. Psalm. 51.6, 7. Ezekiel 36.25, 26, 27. 1 John 1.7, 9. Titus 3.5, 6. John
3.3, 5, 8. Titus 2.14. (...) Sixthly, Let us enquire How Luke did understand
and accept this word (...), and what he did intend by it in his use of it? and
as to the intent and acceptance of the word, to set forth Christ's Baptizing
with (...) the holy Ghost, He must be and was of the same mind with all the
rest of the Apostles Because he was the Penman of the Acts of the Apo^^les
where it is recorded in the execution of it, as well as in Christ's promising of
it, Acts 1.5, Acts 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 15, 16, 17, 18, 33. Acts 10.44, 45. Acts
11.15, 16, 17. and as to the intent, acceptance, and use of this word, with
respect to external Bap^ism with water, to set forth the manner of the
performance of it, he is as clear as the others, that it is not taken to
signify, 1. Dipping, but sprinkling or pouring upon; as may appear by his
giving us an account of the multitude that John Baptized Luke 3.7, 16. as well
as 2. Matthew in Mat. 11.7. and of John's Exhortation to be as extensive to them
as being baptized, to all that should be damned or saved in another world, Luke
3.16, 17. and as extensive to all as Matthew does, and the multitude the spirit
of God does witness consisted of men, women and children, Mat. 14.21. And his
stiling them all the people which consisted of men, women and children Luke
3.21. Heb. 9.19, 20, 21. Which proves that it was by sprinkling, because all
the people could be baptized no other way. 3. Also he gives us an account of
the Baptizing of three thousand in the latter part of one day, Acts 2.41. Which
could not be but by sprinkling the administrators then and there, being but
few, and we have no account of their going to Jordan or any other river; and
who can believe where there is no word for faith to anchor on? 4. and he
Discovers that it was the duty of all the people, In that it was their sin that
were not baptized, Luke 7.29, 30. and none could be rejectors tha^ had not the
tender and offer; yet this he records them to be, all which shows that he
understood the word to signify such a manner of Baptizing as all the people
might partake of as it did appertain to them, and was theirs by Gods free
Donation, Romans 9.4, 5. Romans 3.2, 3. 5. Luke did understand it to be a typical
purifying, why else did he so record it? Acts 15.9. which was always performed
by sprinkling, Heb. 9.13, 14, 20, 21, 6. We may see what Luke understood by it
by the account he gives of the Pharisees Baptizing their hands, Luke 11.38.
The Pharisees marvelled that Christ had not first washed, so our translators
have rendered it: But it is (...); Because he had not first Baptized before
Dinner, which does clearly discover that (...), or Baptizing with water does
intend and signify to sprinkle. The Baptism here to be performed was with
water, and that not in a civil sense, but in a religious sense, as appears by
the answer made by the Lord Jesus, and the Lord said unto him, Now do ye
Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and platter (in civil washings the
inside is especially looked to, to be cleansed, or else cleansers of them would
be esteemed very sluttish, and many might be poisoned) But your Inward part is
full of raven and wickedness, which shows it respected sin. See also Matthew.
23.25, 26. Matthew. 15.7, 8, 9. In vain do they worship me, etc. it was matter of
worship with them, Mark 7.8, 9, 10. But Ou^ Lord Jesus does acknowledge it a
cleansing of the outside of the cup, and platter, and that it ^as a making
clean. The word is (...), used again John 3.25. about Christ's and John,
Baptizing with water, about their sprinkling of old, Heb. 9.13, 14.22. This
shows that Luke understands by baptizing of the hands, the application of
water to the hands by way of sprinkling, and this by the Law was to be done by
a clean person, Numb. 19.18, 19. Christ was used among the multitude and did
use to raise the Dead; and cleanse the Lepers, and therefore the Pharisee did
suppose he might be unclean, and therefore admired that he had not first
Baptized, that is, purified himself. Because that Law was then in force: and
Christ does grant it to be a cleansing of the cup and platter. But condemns
them for resting in that, and never labor after that which was typified out by
it which was the cleansing of their hearts, as David did, Psalm 51.6, 7. and
though this was an addition of their own inventions to the Law of God, yet they
kept to the manner of performance, or else it could not have born the title, or
denomination of cleansing, Romans 2.17, 27. and should they have done it
otherwise it would have made their own Inventions to have been known from the
commands of God, and the people would have slighted them: and also Christ would
have detected their wickedness, should they have turned sprinkling to Dipping.
And if they should have perform it by Dipping, whether it were in their
clothes, or naked. Their frequent Baptizings wo^ have been a burden
intolerable, and Impossible to all, and utterly Destructive to their (...) mane
nature, as often as they came from market, or went to receive any food to have
(...) all over into water, or to have been put into water, or should they have
Imposed it upon (...) that they Invited to Di^e with them, to have been Dipped
all over in water, and where (...) hey have ^h ad water to Dip in? or heifers
enough to kill to have the ashes of them t^ (...) the water? see Numbers 19.
what it was made with, and besides he that was to be cleansed was not to touch
the water, for then he had defiled it, and if the clean person that was to
sprinkle it did touch the water he was defiled, Numbers 19.21, 22. etc. So that
of necessity it must be performed by sprinkling; all which declares Luke his
acceptance of this word. 6. Besides his recording Paul's baptizing, Acts 9.18.
and makes no Discovery of his going out of the house being blind, and of the
Jailors being baptized the same hour of the night, Acts 16.30, 31, 32. and
whatever faith persons have to believe rivers running through these houses, yet
the Scripture discovers none. So that they have no ground for their faith: and
also Paul's Baptizing the Disciples in Acts 19.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and of Philips
Baptizing the Eunuch in Acts 8.38. which could never be by Dipping. If it be
true, what is supposed by some. That they went both into the water, both Philip
and the Eunuch, The particle (...) rendered into, is in 1 Cor. 10.2. Translated
unto. But if any will have it that they went both into the water, How can they
Imagine that Philip could baptize, that is, as they suppose, Dip him? could he
baptize or Dip that part of the Eunuch that was in before? How far they went
into the water do they know, and can any thing or person be Dipped into the
water, or any part of it either, that is not out before? It may be moved in the
water, but not be Dipped into it. And could he Dip him while he stood upon terra
firma, upon firm ground? must not what is dipped Immediately before the act of
Dipping be loose from every thing else? and could he Dip that part that he
Grasped to Dip him? was he in his wearing apparel or not? how many baptisms
must there be in this way of Baptizing? If any part of his body was uncovered
that might be Dipped Immediately, they Imagine what was covered must be
baptized mediately, and what was Grasped must be baptized Secondarily to the
rest of the mediate Baptism, and when must the bottom of the feet be baptized
upon which he stood, we do not read of any change of the position, whatever
faith any have to assert, without warrant; If Philip did baptize the Eunuch by
Dipping of him, it must be diametrically or perpendicularly. And when they can
prove That Philips arms were so much longer than the common race of mankind,
and his strength so much more to do it, when I say this is proved by Scripture,
I hope, I shall have faith to believe it, but not till then? It was no other
than what one person could perform, for he baptized him, and it would be
strange If Philip should engage to do this any other way than what all others
of Christ's servants had done it. There is enough in the former Testimonies by
Luke to signify his acceptance of the word to the contrary to this
Imagination. Seventhly, Let us Enquire how John the Beloved Disciple, and the
Penman of the Gospel did understand this word (...) and what he did intend by
it in his use of it, and his Testimony with respect to Christ's Baptizing with
the holy Ghost, must of necessity be the same with the rest of the Apostles,
being he was a subject partaking of it with the rest of the Disciples; Acts
2.23, 4. and also we may see his Testimony of it in his recording the words of
Christ to Nicodemus who was one of the Pharisees that rejected Baptism, John
3.3, 5, 8. and our Lord Jesus assures of the necessity of it with the Inward
Baptism under the terms of a new birth, and the words should be rendered (...),
whosoever is not born again, let him be male or female, young or old, and so it
is also in verse (...) and the manner how this birth is brought about or
effected we have this holy pen man of Scripture recording in verse the 8th,
(...), etc. The wind blows where it lists, thou hear the sound thereof,
but can not tell whence it comes, or whither it goes? So is every one that
is born of the spirit; and if none know whence it comes and whither it goes,
God does not put the person into it, in that it comes to him, and can any one
put the person into it here? It comes to him and blows upon him, and enters
into him, Ezekiel 37.3, 4, 5. Ephe. 2.1. and also it appears that John the
Evangelist did understand the Baptizing with the holy Ghost to signify
applying to and pouring upon, and sprinkling with, and not Dipping into by the
Denomination that he gives to it, 1 John 1.7, 9. Where he calls the same thing
for matter cle^ming, which is the same title that God gave to their purifying
by sprinkling, Numbers 19.19. and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses
us from all sin, Which is the same that David prayed for, and was signified by
sprinkling with hyssop, Psalm 51.2, 6, 7. and the Greek word is the same that
is used by Christ to set forth the thing signified by the cleansing with water
by the Pharisees Baptizings, (...). compare this text with Heb. 9.13, 14, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23. and see how the holy Ghost does expressly ^^^^are it to be done
by sprinkling; so in verse. 9. we have the same word translated (...) (...) and
the same thing is expressly called sprinkling, Heb. 10.22. having our h^^r^^
sprinkled from an evil conscience, Heb. 9.13, 14. called it purging, and the
same word i^ used (...) and this is called Bapt zing by the holy Ghost in Acts
11.15, 16. and purifying Acts 15.9. and for his acceptance of the word as to
external Baptisms with water, We may see what he understood by it in his giving
of it, or recording the same Denomination given to it by Christ that is given
to the Internal Baptism, John the 3d. 3.5. and in the Denomination given to it
in John 3.25, 26. calling of it purifying; Then there arose a question between
some of John's Disciples and the Jews about purifying, and they came unto John,
and said unto him, Rabbi he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou
barest record, behold the same baptizeth, and all men come to him. Compare this
with John 4.1, 2. Now when the Lord knew how that the Pharisees heard that
Jesus baptized and made more Disciples than John, though Jesus himself b^ptized
not, but his Disciples. This text John 3.25, 26. is like that in Luke 11.38,
39. That which in one verse is called baptizing is in the other v^rse called
purifying. And the ground of the question seems to be about the right of Christ
and his Disciples to Baptize, which may be gathered from John 4.1, 2. And the
answer made by John to his Disciples and the Jews to this question, the
Pharisees and the Jews, of whom the Pharisees were the King-leaders were
offended at Christ and his Disciples Baptizing, and the Numerousness of the
people that came to be baptized of him. And the greatness of the number that he
made and baptized, and they came to John's Disciples, and started the case to
them, and the Disciples of John, and the Jews too, as I suppo e, with this
question, came to John for resolution of it. John to satisfy them that he had
r ght to baptize, tells them, for a man could receive nothing except it were
given him from heaven. There is the right of Christ cleared as to his call and
right for what he did. And for the Numerousness of his Disciples, and the
people that did come to him. He satisfyeth them as to that, in that he tells
them that Christ must increase, but he must decrease John 3.30. And the
observation that Christ took of the Pharisees being offended at the
Numerousness of them he Baptized is that he left Judea and came again into
Galilee. John 4.1, 2, 3. Which was Christ's usual course in such cases. So that
this gives a clear discovery of the way of the administration of the outward
sign by John and by Christ, in that it is called Purifying; for what is called
Purifying in the 25th verse, is called Baptizing in verse 26th. As what was
called Baptizing, in Luke 11.38. is called making clean in verse 39. (...) and
(...) are the two words used, and they that can show any difference as to the
theme, or the sense, may. And it is the external application of water that is
spoken of in both texts, and in this of John 3.25, 26. It has reference to the
Baptism of John and his Disciples with water. And if any will deny it, they
must deny the persons debating the question or concerned in it, to be meant by
the word THEY in verse 26. And they must de^y the answer of John to them, and
also excuse the Pharisees and Jews in their being mad, as they did use to be at
Christ, And deny Christ's observation of it. And Denying all make no more a do.
But for the present this seems to my weak understanding clear from the text,
That purifying and Baptizing signify one and the same thing, when it is spoken
of external Baptism, as well as it does when it is spoken of Internal baptism
in Acts 11.15, 16. Acts 15.7, 8, 9. Heb. 10.22. Heb. 9.13. And what is called
in Heb. 9.13. Purifying the unclean is in Heb. 9.10. called in our translation
Diverse washings, but in the Greek, it is (...) Diverse Baptisms, and
sprinkling is expressly mentioned as the manner of the performance of this
Baptism. As it is in Heb. 10.22. to set forth the Inward Baptism. So that it is
clear that John the Apostle did understand and intend by this word (...), both
as to the Internal part, and external part, Pouring upon or sprinkling with,
and not Dipping the Person neither into the spirit, by Christ, nor into the
water by the Baptizor. 8 Let us enquire how the Apostle St. James did
understand this word (...) to signify, and what he did Intend by it in his use
of it. As to the Inward Baptism his Testimony must be the same with the rest of
the Apostles, being one of them it was promised to, by Christ, Acts 1.5. and a
subject of the fulfilling of it, in having it poured out upon him with the rest
of the Apostles, Acts 2.2, 3.4, 5. and also we have the same title given to the
thing, that is the Inward Baptism that others of the Apostles and Christ did
give it, James 4.8. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye
Double minded, (...) Where we have for cleanse the same word that the holy
Ghost uses by Peter, Acts 15.9. (...). The Noun from which is used John 3.25.
As the Noun From (...) is used to set forth their purifyings, Heb. 9.10. And
the word to purify is from (...) used again John 11.55. 1. John 3.3. Acts
21.24. Where it is applied to their legal ceremonial purifications which were
performed by sprinkling, Numbers 19.18, 19. Heb. 9.13, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Now
whether these words are spoken as Peter's were in Acts 2.38. Repent ye
therefore, and be baptized every one of you, looking upon them in their natural
guilt and filth: Or whether as those that were externally baptized already, but
needed the Inward benefit of it, like David, Psalm 51.7. It is all one for
that, If the first word be applied to the Inward Baptism by Christ with his
spirit, so it is also of the outward and external, and the latter word is used
to express the legal purifications, Acts 21.24. Whereby we have the Testimony
of this blessed servant of God, as to his acceptance and his signification of
the word. And we have another text to show his acceptance of the word to be
the same with Peter's, Acts 15.9, 13. and Peter's to be the same with John's in
Acts the 8.14, 15, 16. Now when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that
the Gentiles had received the word of God, They sent to them Peter and John:
Who when they were come, prayed for them that they might receive the holy
Ghost: For as yet he was fallen upon none of them, only they were Baptized in
the name of the Lord Jesus; Then they laid their hands on them, and they
received the holy Ghost. Observe, It was fallen upon none of them as yet. Not
they put into that, but it fell upon them, and they received it. And Paul's and
James his acceptance of it was the same with all the rest, Acts 11.15, 16. And
in Acts 15.6, 7, 8, 9. When Peter had declared how God at first did take out of
the Gentiles a people for his name, and put no difference between the believing
Jews and them, purifying their hearts by faith. The Apostle James brings a text
relating to the spiritual seed of David. Acts 15.13, 14, 15.16. And confirms
what Peter had said, which is a sufficient proof that he understood it, in the
same sense that Peter did. Ninthly, Let us enquire how Paul the great Apostle
of the Gentiles did understand this word, and what he did intend by this word
(...). Who we read partook of the Baptizing with water, and with the holy Ghost
also, as Acts 9.18. And his repetition of it in Acts 22.16. And here with
respect to Paul, as all the servants of Christ, the holy Apostles, and as
Christ their Lord and master did understand, accept and use this word (...) to
signify pouring upon, shedding upon and sprinkling with; So did this holy, and
faithful servant of Christ take it, and use it to signify the same. As may
appear in his Epistle both to the Circumcision the Hebrews, and in his
discourses with them, as to the spiritual Baptism by Christ with his spirit.
For his apprehension of the Inward Baptism with the holy Ghost see Acts 19.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. He came in his Journeying and Travels to Ephesus, and finding
certain disciples he said unto them, Have ye received the holy Ghost since ye
believed? And they said unto him, we have not so much as heard whether there be
any holy Ghost. Where by the way, we may see how much truth there is in that
persuasion, That John baptized none but true penitents, and this repentance to
be made forth by a confession of their sins. These could do this with the
witness, that had not heard so much, as whether there were any holy Ghost. And
he said unto them, Unto what then were ye Baptized? And they said, Unto John's
Baptism. Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of Repentance,
saying unto the People, that they should believe in him that was to come after,
that is, on Christ Jesus. When they heard this they were Baptized in the Name
of the Lord Jesus Where observe, that there is no record of any confession
required, or made, of the truth of the grace of faith as wrought in their
hearts, to give them a right to Baptism verse 6th. When Paul had laid his hands
on them, (he did not put them into his hands but laid his hands on them. As the
Apostles Peter and John did Acts 8.15, 16, 17.) The holy Ghost came on them
(...), The holy Ghost came upon THEM not they took and dipped into that. The
Learned tell us that (...) and is used again in abundance of places in the New
Testament. As John 1.7, 11. Luke 2.27. Matthew. 2.21. etc. So in Titus the 3.5,
6. Which he shed on us abundantly. Through Jesus Christ our Savior. It is not
put them into that, but poured out, or shed forth that upon them. The word is
(...) from (...) used again in Acts 2.16, 33. So also in Hebrews 10.22. He
witnesses the same thing, which is Baptizing with the holy Ghost. Let us Draw
near, etc. Having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, Acts 19.2. Have
ye received the holy Ghost? so Acts 10.47. Where observe that all that we
receive does come to us, not we be put or dipped into that. So in Romans 5.17. All
that we have of the abundance of Grace is said to be received, and all the
difference that is made between us and others, or between what we were in our
selves, is said to be received in 1 Cor. 4.7. And whatsoever is given to us is
said to fall upon us, or come to us, Acts 10.44, 47. So that with all clearness
Paul does bear witness that he understood by Christ's Baptizing with the holy
Ghost, Pouring upon, shedding upon, sprinkling with, the holy Ghost, and not
our being Dipped into that. And as to his apprehension and use of the word as
to the external baptism with water, we may have a clear discovery from
Scripture also. And one text we have his acceptance of it as to that
discovered in, is in 1. Cor. 10.2. Where he speaks only of the Outward sign,
and nothing of the internal Baptism by the holy Ghost, and were all baptized
unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea. (...), Which should be rendered, and
were all Baptized unto Moses by, or with the Cloud in the Sea. That is, in the
place where the Sea did use to run, though now the Motion of it was Stopped by
the mighty power of God. And a way made for them to Pass over as upon dry land,
Heb. 11.29. There can be but two ways of Baptizing with water, the one is by
applying, or putting the person into water, and the other by applying the water
to the Person by pouring of it out upon him, or sprinkling him with it. Now in
the text their being baptized is asserted and affirmed by the holy Ghost. And
the Baptizor Named is Moses, by whose conduct they were bid go on, Exodus 14.15.
And the way whereby it was done is intimated to us by the Instrument thereof
the Cloud, and the place where it was done, and that is in the Red Sea. Which
they passed through as upon dry land Heb. 11.29. Now Dipped, or sprinkled they
must be. But Dipped in water they could not be, nor were not, because they
passed as upon dry land, Heb. 11.29. And the Red Sea stood up like a wall:
Therefore sprinkled they must be and were, Because not Dipped. They passed,
(...) from (...) rendered by transeo, trajicio, used again Acts 16.9. Come over
and help us, which was with a speedy motion: So Luke 16.26. Which showed they
stood not still in their Motion to be Dipped perpendicularly or Diametrically.
And this Motion was not of some, but of all, by their own personal strength, or
by others. So that as some were baptized So were all baptized. And if any
should say that they might be all wet, as much as if they had been dipped. But
wetting is not dipping. That is the case; I Answer that cannot be matter of
faith, because not recorded in Gods word. Neither is it the way of God to
prefer sacrifice before mercy; For should they have been much wet, how ever
some might have endured it, yet what must the women, and children and little
ones have done in the wilderness into which they were then going, where they
had neither habitation nor fire ready to dry or warm them, or change to shift
themselves with, for their clothes waxed not old, nor their foot swelled, Deuteronomy.
29. But if they were not Dipped, how can it be proved that they were sprinkled?
I Answer If they were Baptized, It must be by Dipping or sprinkling, But they
were baptized, but not by Dipping, therefore by sprinkling. 2. If the baptized
were upon dry ground it was by sprinkling. 3. If the baptized were in motion in
the Interim of the time of reception, then it was by sprinkling. 4. If the
great, and whole Host were baptized in one night, it was by sprinkling. 5. If
there was but one Baptizor then it was done by sprinkling: But there was but
one Baptizor, even one Moses. 6. If what is done from the Cloud is by drops,
then it was done by sprinkling. 7. Where there are Infants baptized as well as
adult, it was and must be done by sprinkling, but so it was here. If the
smallest Inf^n^ had not been baptized that lived to have children, how could
all the fathers have been said to be baptized 1 Cor. 1^.1, 2. But some will say
this was an extraordinary Baptism and therefore not to be a pattern for
ordinary administrations and performances. I Answer, whether the bap^ism be
ordinary or extraordinary is not the question here. But what the word baptizo
does signify and in what manner the Ordinance was performed. It is strange if
God Almighty should perform his Immediate works in an unlawful manner, or in an
Iregular manner; and does the holy Ghost use to bring Impertinent arguments? It
is brought as an argument to the Corinthians that they would take heed of
sinning against God, under such privileges without real godliness. And if all
must be rejected for argument that is brought from extraordinary, what use
shall, or can be made of the whole Bible? Especially the generality of the New
Testament? Must there be a proof for any thing? All was done by extraordinary
persons upon extraordinary occasions, and by extraordinary causes in the days
of the Lord Jesus, and his immediate servants. Must not the whole 11th Chapter
of the Hebrews be razed for proof? Was not John Baptist baptizing such a
multitude in such a place or places, and their confession extraordinary? is the
like to be produced? Was not the mission of Philip to the Eunuch Extraordinary,
and his preaching to him and the success of his preaching, and his baptizing
and confession, and all; Can any match it? And what of the New Testament is
not? Why should any Mortals have the face to cast this as an obstruction, when
the thing in debate and question is what the word (...) does signify and how
Paul does understand it, and take it to signify with respect to external
baptism and this is a plain Scripture proof that he did take it to signify
sprinkling and pouring upon, and this with respect to the whole Church of God,
at that time upon Earth. And that it does not signify, nor does he intend by
it Dipping into water. In the meaning of Paul to the Corinthians, it was then
in no other manner performed than what the smallest Infant might partake of it,
in the Red Sea; If it was not, how could all the fathers be baptized? And if
his baptizing of the Corinthians had not been by the same manner; Or if they
had not been baptized in the same manner, as to sprinkling, as it was by God in
the Red Sea: How might the Corinthians have said that they had not the right
Baptism, and that Moses did Baptize with the Baptism that was more like an
external sign than Paul? And that they had more of the Gospel Preached to them
in the Red Sea from the cloud as to discover the Baptism of Christ with the
holy Ghost than ever they had, and so have renounced their Baptism; If the
Corinthians did not say this, many in our days would have said it, and
abundance more, and rejected Ministry and Baptism and all participation of
ordinances with them, and called them liars and antichristian; If Paul should
have baptized by Dipping or plunging, and yet express the very same Baptism
when performed by the Lord under the Ministry of Moses by the same word, and it
did clearly signify to sprinkle, and it might easily be proved that it was
done by sprinkling, What an advantage would the false teachers have taken to
have rendered Paul's Ministry and labors null and void and ineffectual among the
Corinthians? And they would have proved him an Impostor and an intruder upon
them out of his own mouth, and from his own words, and this by Moses, that they
all acknowledged that God spoke by, and how must this have destroyed Baptism
from being of the Nature of a sign, type and figure, He in all his Epistles
assenting the Grace of God to be received by them, and they not received by
that, or put into it. And he always asserting it to be given them by sprinkling
Heb. 10.22. Or shedding upon, Titus 3.5, 6. By this we may see how Paul was
baptized himself in the house or chamber, Acts 9.18. He asserting sprinkling
with water to be baptizing. And how he baptized them in Acts 19.3, 4, 5, 6, And
how he baptized the Jailer Acts 16.31, 32, 33. And how he baptized Lydia and
her household, Acts 16.14. If any one can show so much ground for Paul's
understanding and taking the word (...) to signify Dipping into water, for my
part I shall thank them, and never revile them for what they bring for proof
with that evidence of Scripture from Paul's writings in the Scripture as this
is. For if Paul's Intentions by this word mentioning the means whereby it was
done, and asserting their motion the while it was done, and place, they passed
on the dry ground, Heb. 11.29. And the baptizing of all of them, had not been
to set forth the manner of doing of it, by sp^inkling, and if his
administratron of it had not been the same way and in the same manner amongst
them, that is, if his external baptizing, and their being baptized had not been
by sprinkling of water upon them: Then the design of the holy Ghost in
presenting the argument to them, to warn them to take heed of falling after the
same manner must have been contradicted. The administration being not the same
as to manner, which to some is the all, and if they Imagine it not to be the
right way, though they have no Scripture but men's opinions, they will renounce
their Baptism. And it must have had a contrary effect to have stirred up in
them a dislike of Paul and their Baptism, from his Expressions and
administrations. As First, it would have raised questions in their minds
whether Paul's calling and his administrations had been from heaven, in that he
administered baptism another way than what God did it by Moses, and have made
them doubt of all Baptism that was not performed by sprinkling or pouring upon.
2. That they had more clear discovery of the Lord Jesus, and his way of pouring
out his spirit upon his people than they had by Paul and his Baptizing. 1. For
the agreement between the sign and the thing signified, which was the spiritual
baptizing by Christ, by the external baptizing with water. 2. For the easiness
comeliness and glory of the mann^^ of the administration, and their
participation of it. 3. For the extent and universality of the su^iects
receiving of it, Parents and children, even the smallest of Infants every Soul
of them. 4. For the mercifulness and pity of God Almighty in it, for their
health and preservation, over what theirs was, that must have been dipped over
head and ears, which is dangerous to most bodies. 5. For the advantages of time
and place to partake of it at any time, and in any place, and not to be kept
from it because it was Winter, or for want of a Jordan to dip in. 6. For more
unity with, and fulfilling of the Promises and Prophesies, Isa. 52.15. Ezekiel
36.25. Ezekiel. 12.10. Joel 2.28. Whereas theirs, if it had been by Dipping, must
be contrary to all these; if many poor hardened Souls, had so much as this to
cast in the face of Ministers now, how would they Improve it? and expressly
publish it? 3. They might have questioned whether the covenant that Paul had
Preached had been the same covenant of grace that was made with Abraham, and
further made known to Moses, because the manner of the administration of the
great ordinance of Initiation was so altered not only as to the application of
water, to the persons to whom, but the fewness of the persons, and the
limitation of time and place for the administration. 4. Then they might have
Imagined that Paul did mean as contrary and different things by the same word
at the same time about the same thing, at other times, and in other things he
wrote to them about, and pressed upon them, as he did about this word
b^ptizing, if he should have called that in the Red Sea baptizing, and yet have
intended dipping by it when it set forth his manner of baptizing? 5. Then the
word baptize must signify two things with respect to external baptism that is,
Dipping, and sprinkling, but one thing as to internal baptism, and that is
pouring upon or sprinkling with. And this when dipping was and is Impossible.
6. This would have been urged by the false Apostles against Paul if he should
have done it contrary to Moses, 7. Then they must have concluded that their
baptism external was not a sign of the Internal baptism. But something by it
self. And without it can be discovered what it is, it must have been accounted
null and void. Tenthly, Let us enquire how all the believing Jews and Church of
the Circumcision did understand this word (...) whose Pastors and Teachers did
so often express their minds in this word to them? And this we may find by
their being present where this word was used, and other synonymous terms to
express it used also, and no manner of explication given to this word, nor to
the other expressions setting of it forth, by them that expressed their minds
to them by it; and no explication required, nor objection made of their not
understanding or knowing what was meant, and intended by it: as the Apostles
did, and was usual when they did not understand Christ's Parables. They asked
their Lord and master, the meaning of the Parable, this may be clearly observed
from Acts 11.1, 2. when Peter came to Jerusalem, they that were of the
Circumcision contended with him; and Peter makes a repetition in order of the
matter. And in verse the 15th he says as he began to speak, the holy Ghost
fell on them, as on us at the beginning, and this he calls baptizing in verse
the 16th, and all understood what he meant by the word in that they glorified
God, saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life,
verse 18. So also in the Great assembly Acts 15.4. which consisted of the
Church, Apostles, and Elders. And the Jews were thousands of them that did
receive the word and believe, Acts 21.20. (...), etc. And these are termed the
Church Acts 15.4. And their officers were the Apostles and Elders and in verse
12th they be called the multitude, (...) from (...), used again in Heb. 11.12.
For the Stars of heaven for multitude. And all this multitude kept silence
voluntarily It is not said were kept in silence, or there was made silence, but
they kept silence while Peter spoke; and discovered Christ's spiritual Baptizing
of the Gentiles by giving them the holy Ghost as he did to the Apostles, and
other believers. And put no difference between the believing Jews and them,
purifying their hearts by faith, Acts 15.7, 8, 9. And in all this the same
thing is intended that John foretold, and that Christ called the Baptizing with
the holy Ghost. And Peter had also so called it before, Acts 11.16. And all
kept silence as fully understanding what was meant and spoken. And Barnabas and
Paul were there present too, and acquiescing therein as knowing what was spoken
and intended. Besides Peter's Epistle to the Circumcision shows that that they
did understand it of sprinkling, or that it was their duty so to do, 1 Peter
1.2. The sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ was that which sanctified
them. And the way whereby it was done was by sprinkling, as the matter was
Christ's blood. So the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 10.22. Having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience. And the General Epistle of James James 4.8.
And the same thing still meant and intended that John the Baptist and Christ
called baptizing with the holy Ghost. Matthew. 3.11. Acts 1.5. Acts 11.15, 16.
See also Titus 3.5, 6. 2 Timothy 1.9. And by Paul's declaring how Ananias came to
him when he was in a house, and bid him arise and be baptized, Acts 22.16. Acts
9.18. This evidenceth they understood it. He did not say arise and go forth, or
arise and go into the water; But arise, why tarryest thou? arise and be
baptized, calling upon the Name of the Lord. And we may see it also, in the
Disciples of John coming to him with that question about purifying, and calling
it baptizing that they understood that the word signified, not Dipping but
sprinkling or pouring upon, by calling it purifying, John 3.25, 26. which is
the same that Peter called it, Acts 15.9. So Acts 2.38, 39. Eleventhly, Let us
enquire How the believing Gentiles understood this word (...), as far as their
acceptance of it is recorded in Scripture? And that we may have some Discovery
of from 1 Cor. 10.2. Where their sprinkling in the Red Sea by the Cloud, or
pouring upon is set forth by this word. No man living I suppose that stands in
awe of wrangling against Scripture can give any other Discovery than by
sprinkling from Scripture, of the Baptism there spoken of, and this was of the
manner of the administration of the visible sign, and this expressly, and of all
the whole host, and not of some only. And the place where, and the kind of it
dry ground, Heb. 11.29. and the relation they stood unto them in, as Fathers by
profession, though not by natural generation, and then all that were exempted
baptism of that great host must not own God, or have God for their God. and
that was not Infants a span long in Israel, for they had God for their God.
Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. and the Baptism of the Corinthians must be by sprinkling
to, or else they could not stand in that relation to them as children to
fathers by profession; Unless the Corinthians were of another mind, than many
are of now, who account Dipping the only way, and enveigh against sprinkling,
and account Baptism that way, as no baptism, for they must renounce that, and
be dipped, though scarce any part can be truly according to Scripture
acceptance of Dipping, said to be Dipped, but only put in some part under
water. I am persuaded that in our days many would have renounced them to be
their Fathers by profession in religion that had been baptized by sprinkling.
Though how ever men esteem it, thus the holy Ghost has styled them, to the
believing professing Corinthians. And this not such as were truly Godly,
neither that God had succeeded their outward baptism with the Inward, but such,
as with many of whom God was not well pleased 1 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. The like
relation is asserted by Peter, Acts 15.10. and owned by all in that assembly.
So in Gal. 3.27. It is called a putting on of Christ, and Surely they
understood it. Though putting on of a garment, or any thing else, by any person
upon another is not by putting the person into the garment or any thing, but
putting that upon the person. So 1 Cor. 12.13. It is called a baptizing by the
spirit into one body; Now the spirit do not take the person into the Church the
body of Christ, but confers the privilege of Adoption upon him, John 1.11, 12.
and what is rendered unto (...) is the same that is rendered into, 1 Cor. 10.2.
Certainly that Great host could not be put into Moses his person, Titus 3.6. It
is called a shedding upon, and did not the believing Gentiles understand this?
How then were they taught, and how could Titus teach others also? and why was
it a sin in any to teach otherwise? Romans 6.3, 4, 5. It is set forth to them as
a burying with Christ. Did not they understand what it meant? Did ever any dead
person go into the grave himself? Or did ever any bury another without applying
the matter wherewith he was buried to him? whether earth, or stones etc. The
stone was rolled to the mouth of the Sepulcher in which Christ was buried.
Absalom had a heap raised upon him. The buryal of a person is putting the Corpse
into the grave in order to be covered with earth. The word (...) rendered by
Sepultura is mentioned Matthew. 27.7. The field to bury strangers in, where they
were laid and covered with earth. (...) a sepulcher, a grave, or place where
the dead are laid, not that into which they go. Our Savior did not go into the
sepulcher, but they laid him there, Matthew. 27.60. (...) used Romans 6.4. rendered
by Sepelior signifies to be buried or be laid in the earth together, buried
hid or concealed; It comes from (...) used Matthew. 8.21. That in Jer. 8.1, 2.
Shows that when their bones were laid in the open view of all in the sight of
the Sun and all the host of heaven, and not covered, that then they were not
buried; Not put into the earth, and covered, but lay upon the face of the earth
as dung. The Hebrew word is (...) and signifies such a buryal as Abraham and
Sarah had. Genesis 25.10. Was not the Sharp knives that J shua made to circumcise
the children of Israel applied to the flesh of the person, and not the flesh
applied to the knife? Col. 2.11, 12. Do any understand what these expressions
signify now, and did none of the believers that were wrote unto in these
Epistles understand it, then? That which is called by Christ a being born of
water, and of the holy Ghost. John 3.3, 5. is called also by the same spirit a
being baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12, 13. And being buried with Christ, Romans
6.4. And baptized into Christ, Gall. 2.27. and if it be a baptizing into
Christ, it must be a new birth, for if any man be in Christ he is a new
creature 2 C^r. 5.17. and if this had not been understood, how should they know
what was wrote, or what he meant, when he expressed his mind by baptizing into
Cnrist? Twelfthly, Let us Enquire how all the Jews and the Pharisees; That were
none of the acceptors or embracers of the Gospel, and believers in Christ, but
Rejectors of Christ and John and his baptism did understand this word? (...)
and how they did use it, and to find out what they intended by this word; and
what they intended by it, we may have insight into, by considering the matter
they expressed by it, and the Synonymous terms they used to express the same
thing by. Now it is clear that it was their religious purification that they
expressed by this word (...) Luke 11.38. and Mark 7.4, 8. In that our Lord
Jesus discovered their intention in it to be a worshipping of God, Mark 7.6, 7.
Matthew. 15.7, 8, 9. Matthew. 23.25, 26, 27. and their way of religious purifying
was by sprinkling of the water of separation upon the unclean, by a clean
person, Numbers 19.18, 19. Heb. 9.13, 14, 19. to 23. and they did sin against
the express command of God, If they did do it any other wise, and that the
whole of the Religion of ^he Scribes and Pharisees, and all the Jews, lay in a
strict observation and keeping to the letter of the law, especially the lesser
matters thereof is as clear, Romans 2.17, 27. Matthew. 19.18, 19. The young man
that observed and kept all from his youth does show it That they did purify,
and were to purify is as clear, because it was not put an end to till the
death of Christ, and that they expressed their purifying by this word is as
clear as any thing else from this text, Luke 11.38. Whence they had the word is
no matter; Be sure we may that they did not use it in Imitation of John, nor of
Christ: For John they said had a Devil, and for Christ they said he did cast
out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils; and they made a law that
whosoever did confess Christ should be put out of the Synagogue, John 9. This
is clear that they did use this word (...) to signify and express their
sprinkling thereby. And they could have had no ^^ew or pretense for accusing
any for non-observance of it, if it had not been performed according to the Law
by sprinkling, nor never could have pretended any show of religion in it,
though for the particular matter it might be the tradition of the Elders,
Philip 3.6, 7. Had they not had a law they could never have pretended to
righteousness in it: Touching the righteousness that is in the law blameless.
So Romans 9.30, 31, They going about to establish their own righteousness: Israel
which followed after the law of righteousness. Besides, it could never have
born the Name of cleansing or purifying, or making clean, or purging, had it
not been with respect to the Law, and thus Our Lord Jesus the true and faithful
witness is pleased to style it, Matthew. 23.25, 26. and this with respect to all
the Pharisees, Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and
platter; Luke 11.39. So Matthew. 25.26. which none can make to be meant in a
civil respect or humane cleansing. Because Christ Blames them for neglecting
their inward wickedness, and for drawing near to God with the mouth only in it.
The word for to make clean is (...) constantly used in the New Testament with
respect to a religious cleansing or purifying, Heb. 9.14. 1 John 1.7. Heb.
9.22, 23. Matthew. 10.8, 23, 25. Luke 11.39. Matthew. 7.9. Matthew. 11.5. Luke 7.22.
Mark 7.19. Acts 15.9. Ephe. 5.26. James 4.8. Titus 2.14. 1 John 1.9, 2 Cor.
7.1. and so also the Noun from it, John 3.26. Heb. 1.3. John 3.25. Luke 2.22. 2
Peter 1.9. Mark 1.44. Luke 5.14. and should they have performed their
additional purifying any other way, than what the law did enjoin in all cases
where the law did command it; This would have made their own traditions have
been known from Gods commands, and the people would have observed them
accordingly. And besides, was it likely, That the Pharisees who were for the
lesser matters of the law and for an easy light religion themselves, whatever
burdens they did lay upon others, would turn sprinkling upon some part of the
body to the Dipping of the whole person in water? and this so frequent as they
did baptize, which was as often as they did eat, and this of all the Jews too
Mark 7.1, 2, and Immediately before Dinner, and besides the person that was
unclean was not to touch the water him self, for whatsoever he did touch he did
defile, and whatsoever he did touch, and if any one else did touch him he was
defiled, Numbers 19.22. John 8.28. And how then could he that was looked upon
unclean be dipped into it? And who could grasp him, and not touch the water, and
yet dip him? or how could he and the unclean person go together into the water
as some Imagine Philip and the Eunuch did? Acts 8.38. And where could they have
a clean person? for such a one they must have to cleanse, them if it were with
water, and the Priest, if it were with blood; Numb. 19.18, 19. Levit. 7.14. If
all were to be dipped before they did eat they must not all eat at one hour, and
with knowledge of one another hour, who should be capable to dip the rest else?
and how few could they have for strength to perform this act of their Baptizing
to all sorts of persons of whatsoever age or sex? and either such as did do it
must never be unclean or capable of Defilement, or must never eat themselves,
or not be of the Pharisees, or Jews Religion, and where should they have pits
or Rivers enough to go into to dip after this manner? and if it was in their
present wearing apparel, they must all have abundance of change. And if without
apparel that they did Baptize, they must be so far from Religion, as not to
have humanity; Baptize they did, but if it was by dipping so often as they did
Baptize, it must be altogether Impossible and Intolerable, as to baptizers and
Baptized; Therefore believe it who can supposing they kept to the letter of the
Law, it must be done by sprinkling. And John the Baptist did it the same way
why, else did the Pharisees so style his baptizing, John 1.24, 25. and this as
messengers to examine and to carry tidings to the Sanedrim at Jerusalem, and as
sent out to that end by them. Would they give John's baptism a wrong
Denomination or title in love to it, and if in hatred never raise one quarrel
in one word against the doing of it? They made more conscience then, than
thousands in our days do, if they did do so. However this is certain that they
must step beyond the Devil in what he did in his dispute with Christ, Mat. 4.
And beyond what the Sadduces did in denying the Resurrection, Matt. 22.23, to
32. If they make any gainsaying of the express Scripture that declares that
their purifying was by sprinkling, and this they called baptizing, and this
with respect to the external baptizing with water, John 1.24, 25. Luke 11.38.
and the same we have also in Mark 7.2, 3, 4, 8. Where the utensils mentioned
some at least, were not possible to be dipped by any one single person. The
matter is clear, that their baptizings were their religious washings, how else
could they be said to draw near to God with the mouth, and with the outward man
in it? and by the command of God this was to be performed by sprinkling. And
who can prove that they had turned it to Dipping? Does not Christ's call it
purifying, and making clean of the outside of the cup and platter? and does not
this prove that it was not changed as to manner, tho as to matter it was their
own inventions. If any can give from Scripture such or more evidence that they
did dip in their religious purifications, then there will be matter for faith
to believe; But till then, all that men say must go for Dogma, an opinion. But
a little further, that we may find out the acceptance of this one word among
these worthy Pharisees and unbelieving Jews, whose Element was old Mumsimus,
let us view the Synonymous terms whereby this one word (...), is set forth, and
the matter intended by it expressed in Scripture, in their Dialougues with
Christ. And one word that is frequently used to express the same thing that at
other times they expressed by baptizing is (...); and its compound (...), and
that is a word that is used to express the same thing that they did at another
time call Baptizing. It is applied to washing of the face, Mat. 6.17. Which is
not by dipping the face into the water, if it be taken in a civil sense. It is
used to express the same thing with Baptize, Mat. 15.2, 20. and Mark 7.1, 2, 3,
4. and the same thing or action is set forth by (...). In Luke 11.38. from the
Pharisees own month. And our Savior manifests that it was the mind and
practice of all the rest of that Sect. and the holy Ghost witnesses expressly
that it was the mind of all the Jews, Mark 7.1, 2. and their Practice too. And
they of Jerusalem as well as they of the country. Mark 7.1, 2. Compared with
Luke 11.38, 39. They found fault when they saw some of his Disciples eat bread
with defiled, that is to say, with unwashen hands (...), and in v. 3. (...),
and the action or matteri^ called expressed by (...), and there is this Reason
rendered, why they found fault with some of Christ's Disciples for eating bread
with defiled hands, was, Because the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they
wash their hands ^ft, eat not, holding the tradition of the Elders. Surely that
is a very unfitting and unseasonable time to dip the ^and all over, but if it
had been but the hands, that were to be purified, for to cleanse the whole
person, yet the ^hole person or thing that was to be purified, was looked upon
as unclean, See Heb. 9.19, 20, 21, 22. tho the hands (...) ^^^son, or the
outside of the cup and platter were, being purified, the whole was clean: Like
the saying (...) Savior to Pet. John 12.^.10. but Remember we ought, that the
(...) it were sprinkled on him. By this it appears that the application was
by sprinkled when expressed by (...) (...) The same we have expressed by the
Pharisee Himself in Luke 11.33. (...) If any obje^^ and say, That th^se are not
the Pharisees expressions in Mark 7.3, 4. etc. But of the Evangelist, I Answer,
will a^y c^m^ to that height in Impudency, as to accuse the spirit of God
speaking in the Penmen of the holy Scripture; as if that was to be questioned.
Or that they did report falsities. And if they did not speak it, if the holy
Ghost did report it of them, is it not authentic? It is a great mistake that
many are under who Immagine, that the washing of the hands we read of in the
New Tistament, in use among the Jews, was a civil washing, and so to be
performed as persons do now in their civil and humane cleansing of themselves,
as they please their own way this is a great mistake. For their washing of
their hands, was a religious washing, and made matter of conscience among them,
and agreat piece of their religion. If not the most Pharisaical: But the
purifying was a duty commanded, and the manner of it exactly by God Almighty;
as may appear at full in Lev. 14. Numb. 19. and Heb. 9. and the unclean was not
to touch the water, because whatsoever he did touch, was unclean, and if he
could defile the Sanctuary, then surely the water of separation. If he could
defile one clean thing, he might defile another. And God almighty was pleased
to appoint a clean person to sprinkle the water upon them, and if he did touch
the water, he was defiled; and therefore he was to do it with a Bunch of
hyssop, Numb. 19.18, 19, 21. verses. And the tent, and the vessels in the tent,
that were uncovered were to be sprinkled with the water of separation upon
them, and thence it is, that they are said to make clean the outside of the cup
and platter, Because they sprinkled the water upon them with the bunch of
hyss^p. And some of the things mentioned Mark 7.4. No one person was no more
capable of Dipping than any one is capable of Dipping, Persons of any sex or
age, as (...), and also their cleansing was not by a fountain stream or pool,
but by water kept in a vessel to that end, Numb. 19.9. As the blood was
sprinkled out of a basin, Exodus 12.22. The blood of the paschal Lamb; and the
blood of the Bullocks, Exodus 2^.6, 7. Compare that with Heb. 19 20, 22, 23. And
John 13.5. The water that Christ purified his disciples feet was out of a
basin: If that had been their manner to wash the feet by dipping them into the
basin, then Mary her dropping tears upon Christ's feet had been Irregular;
whereas Christ does own it for a washing, Luke 7.33. The word is (...) which
signifies to rain. But if it could be Proved that the Pharisees did dip, yet
that could not make it a duty so to do, they having no divine warrant for such
a way of purifying, But in stead of being a duty it was a notorious sin against
the very letter of the law. And then surely Christ would never have called it a
cleansing, or purifying, that they violated the command of God in the
performance of; no^ never would Christ or John Baptist have Imitated them. From
all which it does appear to any respector of Scripture, that the word (...)
does signify only to apply the water in baptism to the person, and not puttin^
the person into the water, nor any part of the person, according to the
Pharisees acceptance of the word, and by the Testimony of all that have been
the great publishers, and recorders of it, in the New Testament. From al^ which
the evidence has been produced. But some may object, That what is recorded of
the Pharisees, and the Jews about their baptizings in the New Testament was but
their own traditions, and of the Elders: And therefore there is no ground to
prove, that their performance of it was the same way that they performed their
legal purifications which was by sprinkling: I answer, It was theirs for
matter, having made their ceremonial defilements to come in abundance of more
ways, and from more things than God made it. But as to the manner and way of
performance, it must be, and was the same way, as the Lord commanded by
sprinkling That so their threshold might be set by Gods threshold, and their
Post by Gods Post; or else their traditions would have been known from Gods
commands, and so their wares would not have gone off with the people. 2. From
the high esteem that they pretended to have of Moses and the ambition to be his
Disciples accounted, which made for their reputation among the people, and
nothing would have blasted them sooner then to have showed contempt of Moses;
John 9.28, 29. 3. As to the matter of the defilement Imposed, for that they
might have some fair color and show; For the law did assert, that whosoever
did touch any thing that the unclean person did touch was unclean, Numb. 19.22.
And they did not know but when they had been at markets, or the like, they
might touch some such thing, and therefore, they had a color for their
additions; and especially when they were so mixed among the Romans and
Samaritans. Here they had a convering for their Inventions, but (...) the
manner of application of Water in purifying, or for the kind of the Water to be
made, there they could have none, the Law being so exactly known and daily
learned by the Jews and their Children; and should th^^ have done it, this
would have cast contempt upon Moses way as insufficient. 4. This would have
made the Traditions to have been more burdensome than Moses's Law and God's
Command, and made them to the P^^ple worse than Pharoah's Taskmasters. 5. This
would have been to the detriment of their own Bodies, a^^ the Bodies of their
Disciples; and so much the more, as the Country was hot, and they in a heat in
their ^ing from Markets. 6. This would have possessed the People with Prejudice
against them, as counting t^^^selves wiser than Moses. 7. This would have made
them their own cleansers, purifiers, and baptizers, co^ to the Law, should they
have dipped in their hands themselves. 8. This would have made the bunch of H^
(...)ve made that what the unclean person did touch, was not defiled (...)
could any have been defiled by touching of it: and so there would have been no
need of any cleansing neither of God's Institution, nor of their Invention. 10.
Should they have Dipped, this would have destroyed the use of the Priesthood,
and rendered them useless; for if they could cleanse themselves when defiled
with water, and so often? why not also with blood that was more seldom, Lev. 7,
14.

Reasons to prove, That as the Scribes and Pharisees did not dare to intend
dipping by baptizing; So that they did, and must intend sprinkling by their
baptizing.
1. From the letter of the Law that required it, and was so well known amongst
them, Number. 19.18, 19. 2. From their resting in, as well as keeping to, the
letter of the Law, as their righteousness, Romans 2.17.27 Romans 9.30, 31. Phil.
3.4, 5, 6. Matthew. 19.17, 18, 19, 20. 3. From the Titles, or Denominations given
to it, as purifying, cleansing, washing, etc. Which Titles the Holy Ghost gives
also to baptizing in the New Testament, John 3.25, 26. Acts 15.9. 1 John 1.7,
9. Heb. 10.22. Heb. 9.13, 14, 19, to 23. Matthew. 23.25, 26. Luke 11.38, 39, 40.
Acts 21.20, 21, 24, 25, 26. 4. By our Saviors expressing the same thing by
purifying or cleansing, which they called baptizing, Luke 11.38, 39, 40. Matthew,
23.25, 26. (...). 5. Because it was applied to the Outside of the Cup and
Platter, by Christ's own testimony. And this was according to the Law, Numb.
19.18, 19, 20. compared with Matthew. 23.25, 26. upon the Vessels and the Tent.
6. From the things baptized, which was their Beds and Tables, as well as their
Pots, Cups and Hands, Mark 7.1, 2. to 4, and 8, 9. 7. From the Holy Ghost's
expressing that which is called baptizing, by sprinkling; but never expresses
it by dipping, Heb. 10.22. 1 Pet. 1.2. Ezekiel. 36.25. Isa. 52.15. 8. From its
being a type of the same thing, that Baptism was then a type of, and is now,
Psalm 1.5, 6. Acts 2.38, 39. 1 Pet. 3.21. Heb. 9.13, 14. Heb. 10.22. 9. From
the same thing being expressed by (...) and (...), which signifies the
applicaion of water to the Subject, but not the Subject to the Water, Mat.
6.17. John 13.5. to 11. Mat. 15.2, 20. and Mark 7.1, 2, 3. 10. In that the
baptizing was in the same manner to persons as it was to things, Mark 7.2, 3,
4, 8. v. 11. From the pertinency, readiness and fullness of the Answers, that
Christ gives to their Accuations, Mark 7.1, 2, to 9. Mat. 15.2, 7, 8, 9. and
Luke 11, 38, 39, 40. 12. From their frequent doing of it; and this by all the
Jews: They did not eat, except they baptize their hands often. Which, if well
considered, renders it impossible, as well as intolerable, to be performed any
other way than by sprinkling. For it was impossible that they should baptize by
dipping every time they did eat, and yet live, or have wherewith to do it.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 15. for ssnners, read sinners. p. 9, l. 29. f. persion r. person.
p. 10. l. 11. f. (...) r. (...). l. 21. f. ftr. it, p. 11. l. 11. f. Gal. 5.27.
r. Gal. 3.27, p. 12. l. 37. f. could r. would, p. 14. l. ult. f. aw r. saw, p.
20. l. 23. f. nset r. set. l. 52. f. pody r. body, p. 23. l. 5. f. affable r.
afiable, l. 18. f. Zech. 12.12. r. Zech. 12.10. p. 28. l. 3. f. at r. as, p.
30. l. 48. for oue r. out, p. 33. l. 2. f. ye r. yet, p. 35. l. 2. for Ezekiel
36.27. r. Ezekiel 36.37, p. 37. l. 4. f. fadged r. fodged, p. 38. l. ult. f.
hey r. they, p. 39. l. 37. us is wanting, p. 43. l. 35. f. assenting r.
asserting, p. 44. l. 13. f. Ezekiel. 12.10. r. Zech. 12.10.


