AN EXPEDIENT OR A sure and easy way of Reducing all Dissenters whatsoever to
an exact and sincere Obedience both to our Ecclesiastical and Civil Government.
AMong all the great nations that have been, no man I believe can show me the
example of England, which being not only still entire under the Rule of its
lawful Governor, but also a great deal stronger in it self, by the happy
conjunction of Scotland (its former dangerous enemy] should nevertheless since
the Reformation be de facto much weaker, and consequently less considerable to
our Neighbors.

All English men, of what persuasion or interest soever, unanimously conclude
that our differences in Religion are the cause; and therefore as some of every
Opinion have proposed their Expedients for the cure of this misfortune, so I
hope I may take the same Liberty, and throw in my mite also, being induced
thereunto by the affection I bear my Country, which I suppose moved the rest,
that have already written: and though I am born a Member of the Church of
England, whose Liturgy and Rites are so worthy of admiration, yet I shall do
what I can (as far as it is lawful) to bridle in my Zeal, least seeming too
partial, I should rather harden than mollify our dissenting Brethren; who
happen (which is the misery of it) to be too numerous and considerable in this
poor distracted Nation.

We all know that the whole Kingdom as to Divine Worship is divided (besides
its subdivisions) into these four great Parties, viz. Church of England men,
Presbyterians, Independants and Papists; the three last of which we call
Nonconformists, as contrary to the present Religion established.

Our Church of England is more numerous than any, and has persons in it of all
ranks and conditions; but it seems not so full of Zeal as the others, because
it abounds with men that are too much in love with humane Interest, or have no
Religion at all; for these ever flock to that Church which is in power; whether
true or false.

Presbyterians have generally on their side the Corporations, and all formal
men, which they are pleased to call the sober part of the Nation. but as they
are rich, so they lie more open to be harassed, whenever the black day of
tribulation happen's.

The Independants of Phanatiques consist only in Artizans, and the meanest of
the Land, and yet are in two things very considerable; as first, let the
Government do what it will with them they cannot be much poorer, so that in
three months they will recover, and be as they were; In the next place, Their
c^af^^ and trades are of great concernment to us.

Of Papists there are seven parts of ten Gentlemen; and people of great
quality, and therefore they fancy that their Religion is probably the truest,
because it has been professed here all along by so many men of parts and
fashion; and boast that it is only through Ignorance, or want of attention that
the whole Nation is not as blind as themselves. As for Persecution they are not
much terrified at it, having (as they believe) manfully endured it so many
years; besides by long practice they know not only all the ways imaginable to
evade the penalties of the Laws, but also by their birth have Relations in all
offices, and employments, that always did, and still do help them when they
are in danger to be whipped by us.

This then in three words being the interest and state of each party, we may
the easier find out a Remedy for our disorders, which have ruined, or at best
strangely shattered one of the most flourishing Kingdoms in the world.

Ever since the happy Restoration of his Majesty, there has been still a great
cry in all quarters for Liberty of Conscience, to which I have been greatly
inclind, not only out of compassion to well meaning deluded souls, but out of
conviction also that it would totally root out all Sects, and erroneous
Opinions from among us: and seeing we have found by experience that severity
has neither destroyed Popery, which is so ridiculous to every body but its
Professors: nor yet prevented a troublesome broo'd of our own, I say
considering this, we ought to try what mildness will effect, since all wise
men alter those projects which they find deficient: at least we may make trial
of it for a while, as our matchless Parliaments do, that enact often Laws to
continue but for so long, to be the better able to see whether they may reap
the proposed advantage by them; Nor can this trial be any ways prejudicial to
us, if it endanger neither the souls of men, nor cause a disturbance in the
Civil Government.

It Is impossible, (according to the profession of all our most learned
Protestants) to hazard our Salvation by Opinions whilst we agree in that maine
Fundamental, to wit, The satisfaction of our Savior Jesus Christ; for
otherwise we must shipwreck our selves, whether we will or no, on the
unavoidable rocks of Popery; because if there should yet be any thing more,
which we are necessarily to believe, an infallible interpreter, and Magisterial
Judge to guide the ignorant and unlearned would consequently follow;
Magisterial I say, because a poor simple man must implicitly believe, as not
being ever able to comprehend or understand some truths; and infallible, least
men might be still doubting whether yet they are in the right or no.

No marvel then that Mr. Chillingworth (the miracle of his age) sticks close to
this, thinking it very strange a man should be damned for notions which he
cannot comprehend; and therefore lays down Repentance from dead work^, and a
belief in the coming and merits of Christ, as the only Fundamental amongst
Christians, and as a thing adequate to every ordinary capacity. The Papists who
would fain come near our truths, are also nibbling here though they handle it
another way; for they will have it too, That all men are damned through their
own wilfulness in resisting evident things, and say, Though Christ as a Prophet
sent from God may be easily conceived by humane Reason, yet an infallible
Church to govern his flock is easier comprehended and easier demonstrated to a
Christian, than his being sent can be proved to an I^fidel, and so forsooth
this infallible Church by its definitions, and explications makes the hardest
mysteries as easy as the plainest.

I here set down this pretty Doctrine dressed after the Roman fashion, to show,
that if a Protestant should not ground damnation on our wilfulness in rejecting
things within the reach of our capacity, the very Papists themselves will rise
up in judgment against him at the last day, to his utter confusion and shame.

This moderation the eminent Doctor Tailor himself highly esteemed, and this he
so stoutly maintained in his book of Liberty of Prophesying, that to this day
it remains unanswered. Many enemies I know he created to himself by his
reconciling zeal, and though by their cry he passes at present for a better
practical than controversial Divine, yet he has (as all men acknowledge made it
evidently appear inconsistent with Protestant charity to damn any of our poor
Dissenters for their tenets.

For first, can any godly Protestant think a Presbiterian a limme of Satan for
refusing to conform to habits and ceremonies, which every body confesses were
neither commanded by Christ, nor his Apostles: or shall he be reprobated for
railing against stage plays though the drift of the best of them is to abuse
the Brethren? Nor can the disowning of Episcopacy be damnable, unless we submit
our selves to Tradition, and Ecclesiastical authority, for the Scripture has
many seeming arguments for that opinion. Predestination, and the manner of
Christ's descent into Hell are points disputable among all Christians, and God
forbid we should think that every error in judgment will deprive us of all
happiness hereafter.

The Independants or Phanatiques, owe their being to the foregoing Sect, and if
they wildly fancy a barn as good as a Church, or a Graduate, not so learned as
a Cobbler; with other odd extravigancies (the half of which no one man can
recount) let us not be more rigorous than the Pope, who only looked upon them
that came to Rome to convert him as mad; and I think neither S. Peter, nor his
pretended Successors have locked Bedlams out of Heaven.

Nor shall I damn Papists for matters of Faith, whilst they believe the
Trinity, and can patch up their other Doctrines, so as not really to intend
thereby the dishonor of our great Lord and Master. For (as I said before) God
forbid every error in judgment should be a sin to death.

They fancy many promises in Scripture, That the Church shall never err. That
it is to be visible in prosperity and adversity as a Judge in all disputes that
arise, and laugh at Protestants for affirming that the Scriptures are easy
seeing all Sects among us quote Scripture for what they hold, and yet one is
often quite opposite to the tenets of the other in things of the highest nature.

They preach up merits (they say) to encourage men to work; but tell us
expressly (when we urge to them the foulness of the tenet) That neither their
own actions, nor the actions of any Saint can be in themselves sufficient to
bring them to heaven, did not God promise to accept them as meritorious, and
sufficient by the superaboundant merits of Christ.

They honor Saints (they say) only because they were faithful servants of
Christ, and believe, That these holy Spirits, must needs know our wants by
their rejoicing in heaven at our conversion, and That their prayers for us are
much more powerful with God, than those of our friends here below, which we all
often implore: yet they oblige none (as they pretend) to pray to Saints except
they will.

They think because some sins (viz. those against the Holy Ghost) shall not be
forgiven in this world nor in the world to come, that other sins may some times
be forgiven in the world to come. And therefore pray for the dead (that have
built upon hay stubble and other imperfect things) whom S. Paul to the
Corinthians declares (they say) shall be saved so as by fire. and they more
firmly also believe this Purgatory because, the Maccabees (that fought for the
maintenance of God's law) prayed for their slain Brethren; which they often
urge is recorded by an unquenchable Historian, if not by a Divine Writer:

As to their Idolatry in the Sacrament, they say, That by believing Christ
really there 't is him they worship, and not a piece of bread. That the thing
is no less possible according to humane reason than the Trinity: That the
words, THIS IS MY BODY are as plain, as THERE ARE THREE THAT BEAR RECORD IN
HEAVEN; and That it is much for their advantage, that all sects of Christians
in the world grant the Real Presence, except a few Calvinists as they call them.

By that text of Scripture, Confess your sins one to another. They think their
Confession enjoined; and that Christ's commission to his Disciples to bind and
to loose authorizes their Priests Absolutions and Interdictions. And before
many of their books of Pilgrimages, Relics, Pictures, and the like (to show
their worship is relative) they print this piece of Saint Jerome's Epistle
against Vigilantius. We honor the Relics of Martyrs, to render adoration to
him for the love of whom they were Martyrs, we honor the servants, that what
we do for their service may be referred to their Master, who says, He that
receives you receives me.

I should never have done, were I to set down all their opinions, and
Jesuiticall glosses, but this I may say for them, that they have much less to
answer, since they really think themselves in the right, and are so united in
their Fundamentalls, whilst the poor Protestants (to the great shame and
weakening of the common cause) quarrel irreconcileably about nicetyes, and
then divide and subdivide without end.

Far be it therefore from us to damn these Papists though ignorant, especially
seeing, we must do the like then to the Lutherns, who are not only Protestants
but the first Reformers also: for their Churches are crammed with Crucifixes,
and Pictures; and which is more, they as really believe Christ in the
Sacrament, as the Pope himself; the main point in which he and his brood commit
Idolatry, as the Church of England and the other best reformed Churches hold.

Let not therefore our passion shut up heaven against any to whom our Savor
has opened it; and since Protestants themselves do so disagree (as sometimes
each man in a family is of a different Church) let us be the more charitable in
our censures, according to the healing advice of many a painful Divine; and
thus may the Papists be baffled with their own distinction, viz; That they
differ in school points only, and not in fundamentalls.

But here I desire not to be misunderstood, for I hold many other Doctrines
extremely advantageous to poor souls, and heartily wish all men of my opinion,
but nothing but time and new methods can unite us without the utter ruin of
the Nation.

Having thus like a good Protestant proved, That Indulgence to dissenters
though (they should increase by it, as some vainly fancy) cannot hinder their
salvation, because all that do well may be saved; I will now come to the civil
Government, and show you that it will be so far from causing disturbances, or
endangering the true Religion that in ten years there shall not be a dissenter
left to piss against the wall; and this I hope (if practicable) must satisfy
even those, that limite God's mercy, especially since they know how firmly
sects are already rooted here, and could never be extirpated by the severity of
our Laws.

I have often laughed to hear persons of each Sect among us pretend that their
Religion teaches nothing but obedience to Magistrates, whilst all others foment
Rebellion. Now for my part I would absolutely trust no Religion in the world
with the full power of deposing Princes, no more than I would have an Infidel
trust his wife in bed with me because I am a Christian. It Is most certain that
the true religion of Christ, comands as well and exact obedience to our Rulers,
as that we should not commit adultery; but yet whilst men are men, many of the
Professors of this truth (what by the force of a partial appetite, and self
interreste'd distinctions) when they have oppertunity, often transgress those
two precepts, though as positively command as can be: and therefore some doubt
whether all the Primitive Christians would have been so patient under Nero,
Domitian, Diocletian, etc. had they had power enough to contend: Nor will I
more pass my word that the Grand Segnior should continue Emperor and
Mohammedan, were the sword wholly in the hands of his Christian subjects, than
that all the members of the Church of England would have submitted to our
present Monarch, had he yielded to the Papists, who were as buisy (they say) as
Bees to convert him.

All men whatsoever affect to have their Ptince of their Religion, because they
fancy it most for the glory of God, but nothing heightens this zeal so much as
persecution; for whenever there is difficulty of obtaining our will, the
desire of enjoyment increases; as we see even in women that often risque life,
fortune, honor, and all to enjoy a Gallant, when as if they afterward marry
(and then there will be no need of coming in by the window) it is a thousand to
one but they presently loath each others conversation, and bed. Besides this
natural pronenesse to pursue what is hindered us (for passions often bear sway
even in our spiritual actions) self preservation also or the hopes to be quiet
puts the brains of dissenters upon propagating their Religion; nor is it a
small argument to many of the truth of a new Doctrine, to see men suffer for it.

This we have experimentally seen here at home in every party that now contends
with the Church; for what could be more irresistible than Presbytery in the
beginning of the late war; and how many men, women, and children, would have
willingly ventured their lives for the Cause whilst kept under? and yet within
three years or thereabouts after it is establishment, 'twas kicked down even by
those who had before set it up with such zeal and hazard.

Phanaticisme (as well mankind enlightened with the last spark of reason will
acknowledge) has no greater enemy than it self, nor ever did, nor ever can
stand, because it wants all principles of settlement; and therefore it is we
that blow the party into some appearance of unity, in hoping by disturbance to
hasten their ruin.

As for Popery, let us consider it in Queen Elizabeth's time, and we shall find
in our Protestant Historians that for the first ten years of her reign no man
as a Papist suffered either in his life, or Estate, and yet from a handful the
Reformed became much more than half the Kingdom: but after that the Government
began to enact sanguinary and penal Laws we find that Allen, Philopater, and
the rest of their active Writers insisted upon no argument more (to prove the
truth of their Religion) than that Protestants of all sorts became daily
Papists, but not one in 7. years left them, except some scandalous fellow which
was a greater advantage than loss to them.

Let us look in the next place on their Jesuiticall Seminaries at Douay and
Saint Omers, and you shall find them (as knowing men have assured me) much
emptier now they can carry popish Children over with little danger, than in the
former days, when it was done by great bribes, and they often indicted for
fugitives also.

Again if we reflect upon our late Rebellion, it was called by many (as I well
remember) the popes harvest, and Halcyon days; and yet we know they lost
besides others of note, two Marquesses at a clap (I mean the heirs apparent of
Winchester, and Worcester) the like of which cannot be paralleld in the
greatest severities of the Queen, nor in the violent storm that universally
fell after the Powder Treason.

Lastly, concerning Proclamations and the like, what man ever found the least
good by them? If there be any thing got, the Priests are the gainers: for
(every body says) not one stir's out of England, and it is likely also by being
in a seeming kind of danger, that they are the more caressed by their
Penitents. Nay if all things were well examined, we shall find that the
Protestants themselves do ever pity them in distress, and that there are never
more conversions than in the height of these pudders, which it is no wonder if
they enter into their Anualls as Persecutions.

If punishment then serves only to increase the number of Sectaries, why should
we be so much their friends, and do them courtesies to be rayl'd at for our
pains? Courtesies I say, because their Domine or Godly Pastor would otherwise
starve, whereas now there is nothing thought too good for him; and the flock
then would have also leisure to consider their extravigance, which now the
pleasure of being harassed hinders. No Cavaliers will wonder at my joining the
word pleasure to harassing, since I dare say there are not any of those great
and loyal subjects, though they now possess places suitable to their merits,
but had formerly more satisfaction in one poor play by stealth at Haynes's, in
one meeting at Doctor Gunning's in danger, or in contriving any half Moon-plot
over a pint of sack, than ever they enjoyed (as to their own particular) since
the absolute establishment of his Majesty.

This is the nature of frail man, and if the best and wisest of men cool a
little by enjoyment, what must they do that have no other guide but passion.

I wish then that our Sectaries had churches allowed them, and all the
privileges of their brith right as they call it; nor am I yet their Advocate,
but the Nation's, as hoping to preserve it is Inhabitants and destroy their
foolish blind Zeal, which has been so fatal to us.

Their Churches or Congregations I would have under penalty public and
registered, which has nothing of particularity in it, seeing all the Churches
in the Kingdom are so. By this means his Majesty would know their persons,
manners, and Doctrine, which now by their meeting in holes, he is wholly
unacquainted with; and if any man then spoke in the least against the
Government, he should be made an Example with all the severity that could be
thought of.

I have heard say that in Holland (where no Religion is unwelcome if any
Minister in his sermon, or other spiritual function, meddles with state
affairs, the Magistrates send him next day a pair of shoos to carry him
forthwith out of the Province; and presently he provides for his march,
otherwise he is sure to be hanged unlamented; nor do they ever touch more than
the offender, which proceed's not so much from justice or Compassion, as
Prudence; it being certain no penalty can so surely tie up an Incendiary's
tongue as (when he suffers) not to be pitied by his Party.

For to punish the whole Body (as the English custom is) for the faults of
some members, makes them all desperate, racking many times their brain to
defend an action (the then common cause which otherwise they would have
disowned, without difficulty; and besides it is a kind of real martyrdom when a
man actually suffers either in his life or estate, for a crime which perchance
strictly and truly he ^b^minates.

No wonder then, that our Papists not only reckon themselves Martyrs, but are
cried up and esteemd for such by so many Foreign Princes; which must needs draw
a scandal upon the Nation, and so do the Protestant Religion a prejudice both
at home and abroad, if these increase, and gain repu^e also by their
sufferings. I cannot therefore but be highly dissatisfied with our common
Justice, which entails Rebellion on a Sect, and insulting too much over the we
kness of mankind, necessarily (as it were) inclines from Father to son
unprincipled men to all villainy and treason.

Let us therefore call to mind the Scotch Presbyterian Rebellion in 66 last,
and see what a ruin it would have been to England, had his Majesty instead of
his own great predence and merciful temper followed their council who thought
it fit to pursue our presbyterians at home, as complotters with those actually
in arms, This would have driven all into the utmost despair, especially those
that loved the King and Kingdom best; for then they would have deemed it
impossible to satisfy, and consequently thought ill designs the best of their
play, nor would they have looked upon themselves or children otherwise than
slaves, since no slavery is equal to that, of being always suspected by the
Government. Many that are now faithful, would then have been not only incensed,
but perchance have turned their bibles over and over to find again arguments to
maintain Rebellion; for what will not men fancy God says when it is absolutely
necessary for their ends.

Were every man that now heartily rejoices at a Thiefs execution at Tyburn, to
suffer with the malefactor, we should not only see theft defended by its
present condemners, but reckond for a virtue also. Some would cry up the life
of man for an inestimable jewel, and to be preferred before all world^y trash
Others would term propriety, a tyrannick, and unjust usurpation, with the like
metaphysical fancies, nay the tricks of a Rascal would be then called the
effect of a dextrous wit, and the setting upon two or three unarmed G^asiers,
the height of all valor and courage.

There Is nothing can ever destroy us in England but disagreement, nor shall the
Government ever fail of being thought the common enemy by all Nonconformists,
whilst the folly or Knavery of some few is imputed to the whole gang in general.

If this way of proceeding were laid aside (which now strongly cements them)
their Congregations would quickly be well satisfied with the condemnation of a
guilty Member, as we ordinarily are at what passes at the old Bailey, or at any
of our other Sessions. It may be some might strive to mince the matter of fact
(as daily friends do in all faults committed) but none would then defend a
crime to be no crime, which is the thing I solely insist upon, for from thence
arise all our disputes and factions.

It Is an error to think there can be a great Body of men inconsistent with
Government, since to be lawless is as opposite to the nature of mankind in
general, as death it self. Every sober man therefore (let his Religion be what
it will) find's out some distinction or other to prevent confusion, and to
conform to Laws that tend to Government. The Presbyterians are too discreet and
rich to be anarchica^ and whosoever has, and loves riches, will be always fond
of Laws that preserve his right to them The Phanatiques are generally harmless
and well meaning; and though a Quaker will not set out his Tithes, he will bid
the Minister or Tithing man take them: nay if he find loss by their carving, he
will at length do it himself with this or the like salvo, that It Is the old man
and not the new that pays the Hireling that Judaical abomination: nor do these
poor people refuse (it seems) to engage to live peaceably, as their friend Mr.
Pen tells us in his Great Case. Now for the Papists, the greatest and most
absolute Princes of the World are not only of their profession, but our own
Kingdom also was extremely considerable under their Government, and our
excellent Laws and prudent old customs were of their framing; as they well
know, and also vaunt in their late Apology and Reply.

Besides though the Papists of England are still so great Assertors of the
Popes power in Spirituals, that I really believe by what I have read and seen
that there would more die for him here, then in any two Countries in the world,
yet we know that in the very depth of Popery no body struck more bold and home
at all temporal encroachments of the Romish See, than the English, for they not
only made strict prohibitions against the coming in of Legates without leave
against publication of bulls, and the like; but also enacted those nipping Laws
of Mortmain, so that no body could voluntarily and of his own head give one
foot of Land to the Church, Nor at this day do I find, (for truly I have made
particular enquiry about it) any French man more willing than our present
Papists to tie up the Popes hands from meddling with the civil Government of the
Kingdom.

If therefore all or any of these Dissenters be now heaving at the Government,
it is because they are distinguished from the rest of the Nation, and made as
incapable of many things as strangers and aliens; nor does animosity or a
rebellious spirit always proceed from the Religion men profess but from the
frailty of nature which makes them often partial, and take the dictates of
their appetite for truth and reason. Now were no English Christian (as long as
obedient to the lawful power) inconvenienc'd for his Conscience, it is
impossible but Sectaries would be as heartily sollicitous for the good of the
Nation, as any man else whatsoever.

This most evidently appears by the Welsh, who (whilst we suspected and used
them with rigor) were ever unquiet, and our most deadly enemies, but after we
had recieved them as friends, and made them partakers of all the privileges of
the Kingdom, they not only for got our strange usage of their Princes the loss
of their Lands, and the Egyptian slavery they were under but so united
themselves with us, that our losses are now theirs, and theirs ours; nor have
they since ever stirred or made ill use of our favors; but (on the contrary by
them, both they and we are become one people, and one nation without the least
rancour, or grudge; nay so fond have they been of our Monarchy (which once they
hated ^bove all things) that four parts of five of them were faithful to his
late Majesty, whilst such a number of English were up against him. If then
gentleness and interest could reconcile long feuds, and make men from mortal
foes become the greatest friends why may not we expect by the like method the
like success in these our present distractions?

There Is one argument (as it is thought) of great weight against this liberty of
Conscience, viz. That all dissenters when they were in power would tolerate no
Religion but their own, (as the Papists in time past, and the Protestant
Sectaries in the late rebellion) and therefore in Justice they ought now to be
served in the same manner. The matter of fact is granted and taken out of their
sermons I know, yet nevertheless if persecuting Christians for conscience be in
it self against charity, we must not retaliate, and render like for like. but
on the other side, if the lawful Magistrate may punish tender consciences when
he thinks it for the honor of God, and quiet of the Government, this may
perchance a little touch the Presbyterians and Phanaetiques (who were our
Rulers by indirect means but then we can never blame any longer the Papists for
what they did, because their Government (as to its Jurisdiction) was as lawful
as ours, and their plea consequently unanswerable, viz, That they really
fancied their Religion true, and the Protestant heretical; That they thought it
would for ever distract and disquiet the nation to permit new Doctrine; and in
short, That they proceeded according to Magna Charta, and other Laws enacted by
the legal Authority of the Kingdom.

No man can therefore better defend the Marian days, and all Popish severity;
than by advising the punishment of Non-conformists, and practicing it as we do:
But if we would have the Church of Englands great beauty appear, and be the
true spouse without spot or wrinkle, we must necessarily refrain from doing
those things, which they whom we blame are deemed guilty of.

It is pleasant to ^ee now a days how Presbyterians, Independants and Papists,
(though really no great friends) begin to claw one another; and who can blame
them for it, or would not think them otherwise fools, since they all lie under
the same lash?

I remember when Dr. Hewet was to be executed, our Church of England and City
Divines joined together (though they hated one another sufficiently) to
petition Cromwell for him; at which some persons of quality wondering one night
at Dr. Duns, Sr. Henry Blunt answered, that he thought there was nothing
extraordinary in that action; for (said he) I have near my house a Common where
my pigs, and my neighbors feed, and there I daily see that they eagerly fight
and bite one another at the trough, But if a dog happens to fall upon any one,
the rest will presently take the part of the oppressed with all the zeal and
fury imaginable.

It Is certain both Greek and Trojan will unite when they find it their interest
to do it, and what greater interest can any man have; than the good of his
Country, if he be capable of participating of all the advantages that accrue. I
do not therefore infer that presently a Quaker must be made Master of the
Ceremonies, or Revels, but that if he can dance, and put of his hat with as
good a grace as another, he should not loose the hopes of these places by
reason of his Religion; for though thousands will never emerge but be beggars
and Tinkers, should all our Colliers be fraught'd with Gold, yet these very
contemptible men would think the Government uneasy, and perchance wish its
ruin; were they by Act of Parliament never to rise to any higher pith.

Were we all of one opinion, no man should be more willing to keep out Sects
than my self; for then twould be both feasible and lawful; but since things are
come to this height, it is now impossible to do it by s^verity, for all violent
courses will only exasperate more than half our subj. and cause many to catch at
all seditious opportuni^ies that shall at any time occur.

But some men (like Justice Over^ce) must be punishing, for otherwise they
fancy all Discipline lost; and therefore of such I would fain know, since all
Diss^n^ers cannot in Prudence be brought to the ring, which of them would they
bate had they power?

To fall foul o^ the Presbyterians would be madness, for who would not deem
that action so, which must needs provoke a r^ch, a prudent, and a num^rous
Pa^ty to be eternal enemies to the Government, and yet no Protestant can call
their errors in Faith, damnable. They once erred we know, but this may be a
means to make their children also faulty; and truly I doubt not but the
miseries they at last suffered in the late Rebellion, for wealthy m^n must
smart in such disorders) will cause them to be for the future faithful English
men, unless new exasperations pervert both their resolution and reason.

Twere pity also, methinks to be always punishing Phanatiques, who rather want
a good Physician, and Cephaliques, than the authority of a Constable. I am sure
(as I said before) it makes them more obstinate, as fancying themselves like
the primitivs Christians, whilst the Hollanders grow rich by our losses,
ffording them that quiet which they find not at home, and thereby become
masters of those manufactures which formerly we alone could brag of.

Or shall we then vent our fu^y against Papists, and make our selves still
ridiculous to our neighboring Princes, who receiving odd accounts from their
Agents, think us a weak people and easy to be distracted by vain fears and
jealousies? Nor can it certainly be for the good or honor of the Nation, to
persecute those, who have showed so much loyalty, that no race of men could
ever parallel them unless the true Members of the Church of England; and that
which makes me yet more their friend, is that at present (though we have often
provokt them) they keep no private caballing with either France, Spain, Pope,
Devil, or any thing that is all (for had they done it we should have smelt it
out long ago) but on the contrary, they have ever the King in their mouths, as
if the Rump were now on foot, and express as much grief at our publiquem
fortunes as any other Subj ct in the Nation.

I defy all their Priests and Friars to alter my principles in Religion, yet I
do acknowledge their Church to be a Church as our learned Prelates and Divines
have taught me; nor can I but decrie those that will damn our great
Grandfathers, and consequently all before them; for I am sure every body then
were Papists with a vengeance, unless sometimes two or three foolish Lollards
started up, who were far liker the Disciples of Fox and Naylor, than Members of
the true Protestant Religion.

Away then with persecuting Christians purely for Conscience, which is the only
hadvest for Knave, and of this here at home we have two most woeful examples;
For neither had the Head of our long Rebellion been so powerfully assisted at
first, could their zealous abettors have been assured of their Religion, Nor
was it ever possible for Cromwell to have raisd himself to that pitch he was in,
but by laying hold on the tender Consciences of men, who despairing of favor
from a lawfuler Government, became at last bands to his ambition, and then
shared with him in that rich and plentyful booty,

Away I say, with this persecution, the chief cause also of so must Atheism
amongstus; for men who want courage to suffer, by sinning often against their
Consciences, become hardened in time, and in stead of ever really approving the
Religion imposed think every thing at last a mere cheat, and so from harmless
people erronius it may be at first in points of small concernment) grow fixed by
degree in all infidelity and profaneness; nor has any one thing been more
destruct ve to our G vernment than so many Oaths, for most that were truly ill
men never scrupled the taking of them when as Dissentrs that stood on
Principles have always refused them and oftentimes smartly suffered for it.
Thus the best fall only within reach of the laws whilst the most factious and
dangerous (against whom those very laws were intended) escape their deserved
punishment.

I profess to the whole world I have no inclination to the Religion of our
Sectaries, but their persons; who being so numerous can never be misused
without an unspeakable inconvenience to us all, and though I have been a
Cavalier (I thank God) ever since the name came up (and to this day dote upon
any thing that truly was of the party) yet I have laid aside all animosity
against our old enemies, because I am sure it is for the interest now of that
Prince whose Rights we all heretofore so eagerly asserted.

As Rebels against the State must be pardoned whenever they are many, even so
we must do with Dissenters in Religion, for though the executing of three or
four Traitors may be Justice, yet to hang up many millions, would be termed
cruelty let the fact be what it will.

Let there be a general Toleration, for unless it be general we shall never be
at rest, but furnish knaves still (as I said before) with advantages to cousin
poor people, and provoke them (being once deluded) to kick against their lawful
Magistrate.

Let Presbyterians whine their fill, and tell us of Soulsaving-sending
home-comforts; let Phanatiques sigh till they be in earnest; and let Papists
tire themselves with their Pater nosters and Ave Mary's, and then I am sure
they will all of them soon find the honor and welfare of their Country to be
their only interest. Nor is there danger that the bare hopes of recovering the
public Lands they once bought in the late civil War, will make the Body of
Phanatiques fond of alterations; since they very well know, let what changes
soever happen (which God in his mercy defend us always from) the new Adventures
will get the prey to themselves, for that must be proportioned to each Actor,
according to what be then does, and not to what he or his father formerly did:
but though by rebellion they can have no assurance of reenjoying their old
silly purchases, or any temporal gain more than other new partisans, yet all of
them are sure that Liberty f Conscience will be granted them from the first,
what faction soever takes up arms against the King, which must needs make even
quiet Sectaries greedy to hear of insurrections and broile. How easily
therefore will Toleration hinder this natural tendency, and how necessary are
the means of preventing such an ill? for woe be to that country to so great a
part of whose Inhabitants, sedition and disorders are a certain advantage.

'Twere needless to mention the many places where Toleration even at present is
granted, as well in Popish as Protestant Countries, which shows all discourses
against its unpracticableness chimerical, and the idle whimsies of men's
brains; nay, we that know that in Holland, and in many provinces of Germany
(besides several plantations, in the East and West Indies, and a thousand other
places) Dissenters are not only good Subjects and make the public interest of
the Country their own, but also after their playing the fool a while, they
become tired at last by being let alone, and then commonly conform themselves
to the Religion of the Government under which they happen then to be.

Nor is this all for Toleration will convert several Sects from those
abominable opinion* as to Obedience which now they are thought tainted with;
because whilst they secretly meet in by places what may not their Pastors
infuse into them, and what will they not easily swallow; being discontented and
troubled? On the other side, if their Churches be public and allowed by
Authority, we may all then not only truly know what is taught by them but also
their Congregations (being enjoined to give up in writing the sum of their
tenets) will without peradventure soon conform to the due obedience mentioned;
for it is certain to all mankind that things positively against the Law of
Nature (as Murder, Theft, Adultery, Liberty to kill Kings when we please, and
the like) will never be permitted by any Power in the world, and therefore the
Knaves, or Ringleaders of our Sectaries (whose ambition and design is to draw
people after them) dare not insist upon such Doctrines, as knowing it cannot be
so much as coniv'd at by his Majesty; and instead of being thought martyrs they
are sure also to be deserted by their own followers, who will soon discover the
cheat, when they find the King really Indulgent and good natured and shockt at
nothing, but at that which is destructive and hurtful in it self: for as I said
before, There Is no Body of men truly anarchicall.

This will cause them then at least to explicate the worst, and most seditious
Doctrines so, that Rebellion must be owned unlawful, and the persons of Kings
esteemed Sacred; by which great numbers will be undeluded, and made faithful,
seeing that publicly condemned by their own Assembly which now a^ best lies
undetermined and therefore may be asserted by the Preacher when he pleases.
Moreover this enjoining each Congregation to give in a Confession of their
Faith, will certainly reduce all Sectaries to their wits; for thus they will be
accustomed to stand to some principles or other, whereas now they have nothing
positive, and consequently can hardly be confuted, the only aim of their
political and cunning teachers.

If it be then true protestant charity not to damn Christians for opinions
whilst they agree in the main, If moreover Sects are already so fixed, that they
cannot be rooted out by force without destroying the Nation, and if severity
blinds them that would otherwise see the truth, and makes them persevere in
their errors, entailing also a hatred against the Government on most of the
Posterity (which at present weakens and may for the future again undo us) where
is the fruit of tormenting men for their consciences, unless it be to furnish
our Sectaries (especially papists) with an unanswerable argument for any action
committed whilst the power was in their hands.

But if liberty were granted if guilty men only suffered and not their parties,
and if dissenters were capable of favor and trust, all people would join in
the maintenance of the Government, Delinquents might be punished to the
satisfaction of the rest also the designs of all dangerous Miscreants would be
wholly frustrated; and in that consists the only possibility of new troubles.
Nor can Dissenters by Liberty of Conscience have any pretense in the least to
Bishoprics, D^anries, or our other present Ecclesiastical preferments, more
than to any man's private lands; because they never contributed to them, and
therefore the King (had be no other title) must dispose of them, being ever
heir where there is none; and to how many men of parts and learning, our famous
Monarchs have still from time to time since the Reformation bestowed them, no
English man can I am sure be ignorant. What Sectaries give of their own for the
maintenance of their Pastors, in Gods name let them have it, and as for the
claim of Papists to the Premises we need not fear it, though our Ancestors of
that persuasion were the Benefactors; for they that got the Pope in Q Mary's
time for the quiet of the Kingdom to conform the Act of Parliament that sold
Abbey lands (which makes our title to them unquestionable upon all accounts
whatsoever) will without doubt in consideration of Indulgence do again the
like, should any man be so scrupulous as to desire their release to that little
which is still left the Church.

No benefit can there be to invent new Sects, or to continue them, because
Liberty to do as they please will quite cool (as I said the zeal of men
delighted with novelties, nor shall the persons of many now amongst us be
admired, who under pretense of suffering for God, devour Widows and Orphans,
and by degrees become the ruin both of Church and State.

How great and strong therefore must the Church of England grow by this
Indulgence, when 'twil be no advantage for Deceivers (that now daily rage) to
rob her of her children, and what shall hinder the sheep that went astray to
return when they find neither pleasure nor profit in their folly? Nor shall we
then (to the present wonder of mankind be always consulting about Religion, as
our very Gramer has it; nor wi l our Parliaments be longer troubled with the
insolences of Papists and Phanatiques, which has been the common artifice to
divert sober motions, when they ran counter to the private interest of a few.
Having thus stated each party's principles and case as full as I could (and
really believing Toleration will so settle us in our spiritual and temporal
concerns, that in a trice neither of them will have any considerable enemies
left) now defy our Dissenters themselves to prevent their own ruin, though I
have discovered every thing, and showed them the very trap and pitfall.

All that theit Leaders can (I am sure) do, is (as some have already done) to
hinder underhand that Indulgence which they seem so earnestly to desire; for
they are sensible enough (as I mentioned) that they will hereby not only loose
the present benefit they make of their followers (who in peace will soon be
weary of them) but also that a l heir rebellious designs must be frustrated, as
being never able to persuade them to fight the battai s of the Lord or in plain
E glish to rebel, that already enjoy what they hope for by the danger: and
besides al these true reasons, Pity it self cast's something into the
Ballanci; for if the righteous man be merciful to his beast, much more ought we
so to be poor well meaning Christians.

LONDON. 1662.
FINIS.

