An Expedient for Peace: PERSUADING An Agreement amongst CHRISTIANS, etc.
READER,
I Saw the World in a Flame, and among the rest, have thrown in my Bucket to
quench it: Indeed I have been something in haste; but where there is Fire in
the case, this must not be called a Fault, but a Duty: But I hope I have not
made so much haste, or been so ill guided, as to mistake with some, and to fill
my Bucket with Oil instead of Water. I Will assure thee I drew it from a very
Charitable Fountain, and am none of those that have either Respect to Persons
or Parties: But I think I need not make my Excuse for the ensuing Discourse,
for that would be to Apologize for doing my Duty. All that I shall desire of
thee is, That before thou begin to read, thou lay aside all those Common
Enemies to Truth and Peace, viz. Passion, Prejudice, Partiality, etc. or else
we shall both of us lose our Labors.

RELIGION (I will not say the True Religion) as men manage it, is become the
grievance and burden of the Nation, and is the proper Province of the State to
take it into consideration: When the Messiah was born, the Holy Angels Anthem
was, Glory to God in the Highest, Peace on Earth, Good Will toward Men; but
ill men, and the Devil together, have ordered things so, that the same is
inverted, and may now be said, D. shonour to God on High, Confusion on Earth,
Ill Will toward Men: The truth is, men have been so madly extravagant, in the
things they call Religion, and have made such tumults and stirs in this World
about the things of another, that notwithstanding I contend earnestly for a
Toleration, as the only remedy to heal them, yet it is not for a Toleration to
do mischief; and I can willingly subscribe, after all I shall say in behalf
thereof, that no sort or party of men should be indulged in any of their
Religions or Persuasions, of what denomination soever, but those that are ready
and willing to give the State security for their Good Behavior, and Peaceable
Living. Now the concern of Religion is to make men happy here, as well as
hereafter; and after all men's talk, has but two Parts, To love the Lord our
God with all our Hearts, etc. And our Neighbor as our selves: But men have
been so mad, that they have almost vacated both, by over zealously and
indiscreetly endeavoring to perform the first; and have thought they could not
love God enough, unless they hated and destroyed their Neighbor: That these
things are but too true, all Christendom by sad Experience can attest, and in
particular, this unhappy Nation; which like a Ship at Sea, has been long a
sinking: The Captain indeed labors to save her, having found out her leaks,
and call to his men for affistance; but they like madmen, every one endeavor
to secure something of her Cargoe, not considering that when the Ship is gone,
all is gone; and instead of assisting, do unreasonably oppose him: So that he
must save them against their Wills, or they will inevitably perish.

Indeed it is a lamentable thing to consider, that that same Religion which was
given by Heaven on purpose to the Sons of Men to make them happy, should by an
unhappy concurrence of evil Accidents, make them miserable; and I think to find
out those evil Accidents, it is the duty of every Man, especially of every
Christian; and therefore I will lay down my Observations thereof, although I meet
with the common fate of Reconcllers, to have blows for my pains.

Then First, I take notice men make a false Calculation of the Differences and
Dissentions of men in points of Religion, and call them criminal, when they are
not; and endeavor to reconcile them, when it is impossible; and put too great a
value on Agreements, that is, when men do the same things together; not
regarding so much, the Truth, Unity and Sincerity of their Minds, as the
Company, Presence and Congregation of their Bodies in one Place, and performing
a thing after the same manner.

All the World will acknowledge with me, that what is impossible to be done, is
not necessary to be done. Now as long as men have variety of Principles,
several Educations, Constitutions, Tempers, Distempers, Hopes, Fears, Degrees
of Light, and Degrees of Understanding, several Capacities, Offices and
Employments; it is impossible, (and therefore not necessary) they should be all
of one Mind: And therefore he that attempts it, does like him that claps his
Shoulder to the Ground to stop an Earthquake; that would stop the course of the
Sun, stem the raging Ocean, or pull down the Pillars of the Earth; It Is foolish
therefore to wish it or expect it, and they that endeavor it, do but vex and
trouble the World; and thinking to procure, they but spoil all its Harmony,
which consists in so great variety of Discords.

It has been said by a learned Prelate, that in the large interval of sixteen
hundred and odd years, so much juggling has passed in Christendom, That the
Obscurity of some Questions, the nicety of some Articles, the intricacy of some
Revelations, the variety of Humane Understandings, the windings of Logic, the
tricks of Adversaries, the subtilty of Sophisters, the engagement of
Educations, personal Affections, the portentous number of Writers, the infinity
of Authorities, the vastness of some Arguments, as consisting in the
Enumeration of many Particulars, the uncertainty of others, the several degrees
of Probabilities, the difficulty of Scriptures, the invalidity of Probation of
Tradition, the opposition of all exterior Arguments to each other, and their
open Contestation, the public violence done to Authors and Records, the
private Arts and Supplantings, the falsifyings and ind^fatigable Industry of
some to abuse all Understandings, and all Persuasions into their own Opinions:
These and a thousand more, even all the difficulties of Things, all the
weaknesses of Man, and all the Arts of the Devil, have made it impossible for
any man in so great variety of matter not to be deceived; And say I too, have
made it equally impossible for men to agree, or be all of One Mind.

It has been made plainly appear, that Rites and Ceremonies, that such and
such Vestments, such and (...) Ministers such Discipline, Gevernment, or way of
Administration, such Places or Times, etc. are things of an indifferent Nature,
and not of absolute Necessity to Men's Salvation, nor belong to the Being or
Essence of God's Church; but are things alterable according to Contingencies
and Emergencies, to be retained or disallowed, according to the custom of
Places or Nations, or as they are made plainly to appear to minister to the
Ends of Peace and Charity, for the Edification of God's Church, and not
Destruction.

And that the essential and fundamental qualifications that make a man a
Christian, and a true Member of Jesus Christ, are Holiness, Purity, Piety,
Charity, Belief in God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; and our Warrant
herein, is what St. Paul told the Romans, This is the Word of Faith which we
Preach, That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus Christ, and
believe with thine Heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved; as also St. John, For every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, is of God; God dwells in him, and he in God: So that such
a belief, with sincere and hearty endeavors to please God according to the
best Notices a man can get, will secure a man his Salvation; if it will not,
there is no Salvation to be had at all.

Now the best Notices we can get, and only Rule to direct our Lives and
Actions, are the Books of the Old and New Testament, wherein are transmitted
the Transactions of Heaven with the Sons of Men, and are of an inestimable
value, teaching all things fully that relate to God or Men, as to the Nature
and Worship of the one, or the Duty and Salvation of the other. Now that men
can understand these Books, is a thing without all controversy; (and only
disputed by them whose interest it is they should not,) I mean men of ordinary
and mean Capacities; for if not, to what end were they wrote? Or why to them
directed? And why are all commanded to read and search them, if they were not
capable to understand them? And how can such men who deny it, be able to
vindicate the Wisdom, Goodness, or Justice of Almighty God, in delivering his
Creatures a Rule to walk by, and exact a due conformity thereto, if they were
not capable to understand it? No certainly, the Good God, as he has
condescended to give his Creatures a Rule, so he has calculated this Rule to
all their Capacities, and so adapted the one for the other, that they have the
greatest reason in the World to Adore and Admire his Wisdom and Goodness for
the same.

I will allow that some can better understand them than others, and that they
are not equally understood of all, because of the difference of men's
Capacities and Acquirements, and because they should have a dependence, and be
beholding to one another, which ministers to Charity; but then nothing is more
certain than that all men of the meanest Capacities, may understand them
sufficient, and enough for Salvation, if they come with a sincere affection of
being instructed, and of finding out Truth; otherwise they would not answer the
end for which they were designed: Some things indeed the deepest Heads cannot
reach, and others, the weakest Understandings can hardly possibly mistake, and
those too, are all of the greatest importance.

If only one sort of men were able to understand them, as some would have it,
we should have had notice from Heaven, who those should be, and how qualified,
and that in such plain Characters, that it should not be possible we should
mistake; but there is no such thing. And if any sort of men claim this Arcanum
above others, it is an affront to the Understandings of all the rest and their
Words ought not to be taken in their own Case. And indeed, it is a thing too
great to be trusted with any one sort of men: Some indeed will only have
Learned Men capable of understanding them, but then if this should be, what
alamentable case the World would be in? Truth would then (...) a precarious
thing, and we should have no more of it than these Learned Men please, and if
they should be biased, corrupted, or be dishonest, what must the other three
parts of the World do? Must they lie at their Mercy, and their Salvation depend
on their Honesty? No, God forbid! And blessed be his Name, he has taken care
men shall not lie liable to any such Impostures. But if these men will needs be
in the right above the rest, and understand for them, let them do their duty
for them too; for it is not reasonable they should be charged with a duty, that
do not understand it. But having found their own failings herein, and that they
are but men like others, during not to be so confident as usual, they betake
themselves to shifts; and to countenance their fallibility, supply the defects
of honesty, and salve their imposition of their sense; they set up a strange
sort of Infallibility, which indeed would put an end to all the Disputes and
Differences in Chistondom, were there any such thing. But that which they have
invented to put out the Flame, serves only to increase it; for where the Power
of Infallibility is lodged, Heaven has given us no notice; which it would
certainly have done, had there been any such thing: And it is certain, that
those who pretend most to this Infallibility, have been most deceived of all.

Indeed the Romanists, for the most part, have drove furiously, and forced all
their People to do the same thing, and worship God the same way; but this
cannot be called an Agreement, no more than Sheep are said to agree, when they
are drove up and Pounded all together by the Shepherd. And there is greater
Agreement amongst those (though the foolish World think to the contrary) who
worship their Maker under the Administration of several Disciplines, and
Conduction of several Guides: For Force and Violence may make a Congregation of
Bodies, but no Unity of Minds. It Is only a Hearty Intention, Sincerity of Mind
and Affections, Simpleness and Identity of Address to the same Object, which
can be called Unity and Agreement, and nothing else; for other things, though
they may seem differences and disagreements to men, yet really they are none at
all; for the Circumstances of Time and Place, Public or Private, Day or Night,
the several Instances of Respects, Methods and Way of Worship, are all one and
the same thing to God Almighty; He only looks at the Unity of the Spirit in the
Bond of Peace; Differences with men are not so with him, if they agree in
sincerity of Affections and integrity of Spirit; that is the Agreement he looks
after.

It Is true again, That men understand the Scriptures differently, and to
different Senses; but why this difference of Understanding should be Objected
as a Crime, I know not: For it is impossible it should be otherwise, so long as
there be such great variety of Humane Understandings; and as long as they
understand not differently and amiss on a bad end and design, they cannot
possibly be Criminal; for no man is Obliged to understand better than he can.
Then again, Many men may be totally Ignorant of many things in Scripture, and
yet be very Innocent; and certainly if their Total Ignorance be no fault, their
understanding differently those things, which they might have been Innocently
ignorant of, cannot make them guilty of a Crime; if it should, it would highly
advance Ignorance, and very much depress Understanding and Knowledge. But
further, if they understand them differently (which I contend* for the most
part they do) in order to promote a Virtue, encourage a Grace, or suppress a
Vice, or any Immorality in themselves, then this difference ought to be so far
from being reputed a Crime, that it becomes Necessary, and ought to be
Encouraged; and they that put a scandal on it, are very much to blame: And it
must be allowed, that men may dispute things in utramque partem, affirm and
deny the same thing innocently enough, so the good intention be secured, and it
be to edification, and make no infraction on Charity. But the things that
become Criminal, are those sort of differences which every side and party of
Christians are but too guilty of, and which concerns them all to amend; and
that is, Forcing an Interpretation on Scripture, contrary to the natural and
genuine sense thereof; and that with a design to countenance their own Interest
or Party. And what the Papists Object, is but too true (though they have the
least reason to complain) that every one Interprets the Scripture to his Side
and Party (and so do they to Theirs) and that the divisions of Protestants have
been principally occasioned by every on's having the use of the Scriptures;
which admitting to be true, since these differences are unavoidable, and
naturally Innocent in themselves, and only accidentally evil, and much better
at the worst, than forced Agreements; one would think they should have no
further to Object: Since further, if the use of good things should be denied
and prohibited on the score of their abuse, and accidental Inconveniences, a
just pretense might be brought in for all the Irregularities in the World.

Now since the Essentials and Circumstantials in Religion are agreed on, since
it has been made to appear that every one may understand so much of Religion
and the Scriptures, as is necessary for his Salvation; since it is impossible
men should not differ and disagree, as also in most things not to be deceived,
one would think these things should make men modest and peaceable, and hinder
the ill effect of any dissension that might happen among them.

But men are willing to admit and indulge one another a difference of Thought
and Understanding in most of their Secular Concerns, but grow impatient, and
are unwilling to admit any difference of Sentiments in the matters of Religion;
and to their dealing on this account, most of the Confusions and Distractions
of Christendom owe their Original; and after the Unreasonableness, Injustice
and Folly of the thing has been made to appear to the World, one would think
they should cease their mad and ineffectual proceedings.

For it has been made to appear to the World, That Conscience ought not to be
constrained; that a Corporal Punishment ought not to be inflicted for a
Spiritual Fault; that men ought not to Punish where they have no power to
Command; that they cannot command the belief of a thing, unless they give a
sufficient Reason; and that, that can only be sufficient, when the party is
convinced; and that is not in their power to know, unless by the party
acknowledged; that matters intellectual are not discerned by a Secular Power;
that to punish men for differing in Opinion, is as unreasonable as to punish
them for having different Faces; that no Humane Authority is either sufficient
for cognizance or determination, or competent for infliction of punishment in
such matters; that the Terms of Schismatic and Heretic, are only Scarecrows,
and signify next to nothing; that no man is a Schismatic, but he that departs
from a good Life, that fears not God, nor loves his Neighbor; and that no man
is a Heretic, or ought to be punished as such, but he that teaches ill Life,
or takes up an ill Opinion contrary to Fundamentals, on a bad account, viz. on
the Score of Pride, Ambition, Interest, Malice, or any other Sinister End,
which will be very difficult to be known; that it is impossible for men not to
differ, that it is not necessary they should agres; that all Sorts and Parties
of Christians have been deceived; that amidst so great difficulties, it is
impossible they should not be deceived; that Punishments ought to be
proportioned to their Crimes; that Spiritual Faults ought only to have
Spiritual Punishments; that a certain Punishment ought not to be inflicted for
an uncertain Fault; that most Spiritual Faults are uncertain; that if a man was
punished or killed, he was certainly punished or killed; but that it was not so
certain he was in a Fault; that Conclusions ought not to be stronger than their
Premises; that no man ought to be Judge in his own Case; that Reason, Discourse
and Agreements are the only Proper Methods and Instruments to Convince Men, and
no other; that if others of an Heterogenial stamp were used, they might make
Hypocrites, but no Proselites, and that they were never accompanied with
success; that the generality of men are disposed to live quiet^y; that
Oppression, Tyranny and Penal Laws, are occasion of most of the Disturbances in
Christendom; that fallible men ought not to call their Opinions Articles of
Faith; that they ought not over-hastily to interest their Maker in their
uncertain Cause; that God's Glory does consist with the Good of Men, and may be
maintained without their Destruction. Further it has been made evidently to
appear against them, that say, We have a Law -- That Law cannot make a Truth;
that Truth is as old as the Eternal Veracity, and suffers no Degrees; for what
was yesterday, will be true to day, to morrow, and to the End of the World: And
therefore to force People to be of their Religion, because Established by Law,
is a great piece of Vanity and Nonsense: That neither Fathers, Councils, no
Individual Man, or Company of Men, no Power or Force upon Earth are able to
make a Truth, or an Article of Faith. No, all they are able to do, is by way of
Promulgation, Declaration, or Explanation of Truth, but nothing by way of
Creation; they may illustrate indeed, and make Truth appear to be so, but they
cannot neither add or diminish: What was Truth, and agreeable to God's Will,
was so before, they undertook the Disquisition, or before they came into the
World, and will be so when they are extinct and gone out of it, notwithstanding
all their endeavors for, or against it.

Again, Nothing is more Certain than that Men are Men, and Uncertain; that they
are, and have been proved fallible; That General Councils have erred and
contradicted one another on Record; that Fathers have been mistaken; that what
has been, may be again; and therefore that all respectively may be used with
reverence and respects as occasion may require, as the best Humane Guides and
Directors; but always with deference, and an eye to their Fallibility; that
their Opinions ought not to be pressed as Articles of Faith, nor their
Determinations have the weight of Mathematical Demonstrations. Methinks these
Considerations should make men look a little amicably on one another, and a
little come to themselves: But I find they do not, and may be the Scence is
laid too far off; and therefore I will bring it nearer home, and let themselves
judge.

A certain number of Pilgrims were going to the Holy Land, had equal desires
and affections for the Place, being all moved by the same Love and Good
Intention; none indeed had been there already, and therefore they were the more
to seek for their way; they were all very diligent to find out the true Road;
and as they go along, they meet with several Ways and Paths; upon which the
Company divided; some go one way, and some another, according as they thought
it surer and more probable than the other; but some of the Company, of hotter
Constitution than the rest, asked some of their Fellows, why they should not go
their way, since they were sure they were in the right? To which they answered,
They could not be sure, because they never were there; that they had the same
Charts and Directions which they had, and had as honestly and sincerely perused
them; induced by the same, if not greater Love and Affection to the Place; and
that they did not think that way to be right, but that the Path they were going
in, was the surer and more probable way, and hoped that it would bring them to
the Place as soon, if not sooner than theirs would, and therefore desired to be
excused; adding, That if they should go with them, they should go against their
Thoughts and Consciences, which would be a trouble to them all along the Road,
but especially at last, if they should be mistaken. This answer, though modest
and very reasonable, yet was not satisfactory; for the other pressed them hard,
loving Company very well, and said, That since they were all going to the same
place, 'twas fit they should all go together in the same Road; and if they
would not, they would take away their Provisions and Money, and force them: And
their Passions and Zeal was so hot, that they did so, and worse; for some they
beat, and others they killed; and for the Rest, at the next Town they prevailed
so with the Magistrate, and misrepresented them so ill, that they got them put
in durance.

Now who can but pity the hard fate of these poor Pilgrims? Or forbear to
Censure and give his Verdict against the hot fiery Zeal of the other? But let
them speak as dare: Whoever pities them, I shall say to them as Nathan said to
David, You are the Men; All sides have been too but Guilty, and have played the
same Pranks when in Power.

One would wonder how Christian men should have such Hatred and Animosities one
against another, and run Counter to all the Principles of their Religion, and
Laws of their Great Master; Whose Lessons, as one said, were softer than Nard,
or the Juice of the Candian Olive; teaching all imaginable Compliance, mutual
Forbearance and Charity; and one of his last Commands to them was, To love one
another; but they have not minded the Commands of their Good Lord, or observed
the advice of their Compassionate Joseph, but have fallen out by the Way,
dishonored their Profession, and ruined themselves.

But a man shall quickly be raised from his wonder, when he considers the
mistakes under which they lie.

They greatly mistake in calling their Respective Opinions, Several Religions:
I affirm there is but ONE God, and ONE Religion; and that they may as well call
the several Counties in England, several Nations, as to give several Opinions,
the denomination of several distinct Religions. We ask a man what Countryman he
is? If he tells us Darbyshire, Staffordshire, all is well, there is no hurt
done; but if we ask him what Religion he is off, and it prove to be differing
from ours; presently an Animositie arises, and we look on him with strange
thoughts, and reckon him almost something else than a Man, and rather a Heathen
than a Christian; and when we have made him such a Heathen, then we think, like
the Israelites, That it is Lawful to destroy such a Canaanite from among us;
never considering all this while the man's Constitution, Education, Prejudice,
the Books he may have Read, the Company he may have kept, etc. which may make
him have different thoughts and apprehensions of things from ours, and that his
Honesty and good Intention may make his Sentimens (though differing from ours)
yet altogether as Innocent.

Again, It Is a strange vanity that men have, in valuing themselves so extremely
for being of this or that persuasion or party of men, and brings a great deal
of trouble to the World. One says he is a Catholic and no Heretic; the
Protestant-Hereticks say, they are good Protestants and no Papists; and the
Church-of-England-man says, he is of a Religion established by Law, and no
Dissenter; as if Law could make a Truth; and so they go on, upbraiding one
another, supposing every Division of Christians that has a distinct Name, is a
distinct Religion. Now if we should be so foolish in other concerns, what would
the World think of us? If the Yorkshire-men should say the Kentish-men are no
English men; or the Merchant-Taylors tell the Mercers they are no Citizens,
would not the Asserters be exposed to derision? Further, if a man calls not
himself by some name or other, as Catholic. Church-of-England-man,
Presbyterian, Independent, etc. he is looked upon as a piece of Defaced or
Antiquated Coin that will not pass: If he say he is a Christian, that will not
satisfy; he runs some hazard in calling himself by that Name; but (...) or
none in not departing from Iniquity: if he ^^^ls himself Lutheran, Calvinist,
Zuinglian, etc. all will be well, he is sorted, and has Fellows, shall be
respected and esteemed; but if be will espouse none of their Factions, nor
interest himself in their simple Quarrels, he is branded with the odious Name
of Atheist, or to be of no Religion at all. And such a high pitch of
Extravagancy is the World come to, that a Jew in a Christian Nation shall have
more respect than a Christian; and that for no other Reason, but because he
calls himself so. Should a man be so hardy as to leave Paul, Apollos and
Cephas, and call himself by that Venerable Name, which requires some courage;
it is odds but he may be called to an account for raising a New Religion; his
imitation of his Holy Life would not satisfy the mad World; if he cannot
pronounce Shiboleth plainly, and herd himself with a Party, there is none will
take him into their Folds, but out he shall lie in the Fields, exposed to the
mercy of the Elements. But all this might be cured in a great measure, if the
State would put a Fine on those that call themselves by any other Name, than
that of Christian. For it is incredible to think what mischiefs go along with
these New Names; O, he is a Papist, says one; he is a Fana^ick, says another;
they are Words of reproach, and their meaning is, he is an ill man; for so
every Side and Party accepts them one against another: And some, when they
would go a shorter way to work, call but their Adversary by the name of his
Sect, that serves for Evidence, Conviction and Condemnation; and then secure
him Jailer. But it will be asked, and ought to be enquired into, How they came
by such false Notions of things? Then I say,

That Custom, Chance, Prejudice and Constitution, give most men their way of
Religion, and creates their Consciences too; they think this or that to be
sinful, not which is really and naturally so, but what they see some men abhor
and detest, and what they have been taught is so; and Youth generally take
their Parents word, and swallow all infinitely and implicitly; and if one be
mistaken, it is hardly possible but that the other will be mistaken too. And
it is certain, that the undutifulness of disobeying Parents injunctions, and the
reproach and shame of being singular, and doing things contrary to their
Country Customs and Usages, are great Obstacles to Truth and Peace. Some of the
Indians did eat their dead Friends and Relations, and thought it a great piece
of Piety, and the most honorable way of Sepulture; but the Greeks they burned
them all: Alexander asked each of them, what he should give them to exchange
their Method? They both answered with the greatest abhorrence imaginable, and
declaimed against each others Usages, as the most barbarous and undecent way in
the World.

Custom makes good things to seem evil, and evil things to seem good. And I
have read of a Shepherd on the Mountains of Naples, who in the holy time of
Lent, came with Tears in his Eyes to his Confessor, and earnestly desired
Absolution, in that he had swallowed by chance a little Whey, which leaped into
his Mouth from the Cheese-Press: The Father asked him, Whether he knew himself
guilty of no other Sins? He answered, Not any as he knew of. He again asked
him, Whether he was not accessory to any of the Robberies and Murders committed
on their Mountains? Yes indeed, Quoth he, that I am; but this we never esteem a
Crime; it is a thing daily practiced by all of us, and there needs no confession
for such things. By this may be seen what Custom can do. But Education,
Prejudice and Custom, have still further strange Operations. For,

They strangely dispose men to be resolute and tenacious of their
first-taught-Principles, and make them Deaf to the most Weighty, Sober and
Convincing Reasons; and when a man is linked to a Party, there is no unchaining
of him; he delights in his Slavery and Chains, and reckons him an Enemy that
would free him: He will be of the Religion he was bred to, whether Turk, Jew,
or Pagan; and thinks that always the best: Come to undeceive him, and he looks
on you as an Impostor, and all the Arguments you shall bring, signify no more
than Arrows against a Wall of Brass; he is resolved, say what you will, you
shall not move him; he will not consider any thing that is alleged against
him; will laugh at your Reasons, shift them off, and do any thing rather than
be Convinced; nay he comes with a Resolution to a Discourse, not to be
overcome; and to say something for his Side, rather than the Truth; and what is
worst of all, it is impossible some should be prevailed upon, who esteem all
Arguments to be Temptations, and therefore look upon themselves obliged by all
means to shun them.

So that this sort of Obstinacy and Perverseness, this Partiality, this respect
to Persons and Sides, and want of Sincerity, and Indifferency to Truth, keeps a
foot our Differences, obstructs mutual Compliances and Toleration; every one
calling his Fancy his Faith, his Opinion his Religion, and entitles God to all;
and when God is concerned, then they think their Zeal cannot be too much; and
out of an hatred to Lukewarmness, endeavor to make it as Hot as they can; so
Hot, that it destroys Charity, and Burns and Preys upon their innocent
Neighbors.

But a further Accessory (and Aggravation too) of Christian Differences, is the
Method and Administration of their Government. For First, They suppose God
Almighty has appointed a particular Discipline and Regiment for his Church, and
then fall out about it; every one maintaining that their own particular Scheme
is the same: Then again, they suppose that Discipline and Regiment is
absolutely necessary; both which are false: I or God neither has appointed any
particular Way, neither is any necessary, any further than for the necessary
Regulating such Assemblies as shall meet together to worship their God; or to
Excommunicate a man out of such their Assemblies for his evil Life; which are
things very easy to be done, and need no great Wit or Learning to perform: And
any man may be Honest, Just, True, Sincere, Charitable, Humble, and Exercise
any Christian Graces or Virtues, without the help of Ecclesiastical Policy; he
may Pray to, or Praise his God in Spirit and Truth, (which is all the Way that
ever Christ appointed) without the help of Church-Policy. Christ's Kingdom is
of another World, and requires none of the Policy of this to manage it; it
ought to be kept pure and unmixed, being clear of another Nature: We see Oil in
a Vessel of Water will not mix, but keep its Body entire to it self, no more
ought Spirituals to be mixed with Temporals. But these Spiritual Politicians
have mixed Heaven and Earth together, confounded the World with their Policy,
and so jumbled things together, that Christianity is almost lost in the
Composition, so that men know not where to find it. I should think that the ill
success and bad effects such Policy has hitherto had in the World, should make
them ashamed, and endeavor by all means to leave such methods, which did
always rather Disturb, than any way Beautify the Church of God. And let them
further give me leave to tell them, That if all the Hedges and Enclosures in
England were pulled down and levelled, that it would be England-still: It Is
True, Property might suffer by such a Communication; but to Heaven and
Religion, every one has an equal Title and Property.

And if God Almighty had designed a particular Way or Method of Worship, he
would have taken care that none should miss it, and prevented all Differences
about it. But he has appointed none at all, as I know of, but that of in Spirit
and in Truth. And had any particular Way been absolutely necessary, our Savior
would have told the Woman of Samaria, when she did as good as ask him the
Question, How, or where they should worship God? Whether at Jerusalem or
Samaria? (For there was a great contest about it amongst the Inhabitants of
each) But he told her, That the time was come, that they should neither Worship
him at Jerusalem nor Samaria; that is, not at either of those places in
particular, exclusive of others, but in Spirit and in Truth. As if he had said,
The Times of limitation of God's Worship is now over: Jerusalem indeed was the
place appointed, and particular Rites and Ceremonies were enjoined and made
obligatory; but now those times are past, all Rites, Types and Ceremonies are
abolished, and other Times are come, that God must be Worshipped after another
manner. I observe you mind Times and Places, and particular Methods too much;
and have foolish and unprofitable Contentions for the same, and mind Sincerity
too little; therefore I assign and appoint you no particular Place, Method, or
Time: But be sure when ever you Worship God, let it be sincerely and heartily,
let it be in Spirit and in Truth, and you shall then be accepted.

Now men have strange Contentions about the Truth of the Way of God's Worship,
but do but grope in the dark, since no way is appointed: I do not say they do
amiss, if they mean well; but the Truth of the Action I reckon is the principal
thing, by how much more easy it is to be performed, and more earnestly of God
required; for he says, Son give me thy Heart. And it is an easy thing for any
man to know whether he is in Earnest, whether he is Sincere, Hearty and Real,
in what he does; whether he Loves, or Fears, or truly Worships God or no;
whether the Affections of the Soul accompany his Actions, and that he is no
Hypocrite: This, I say, is easy for any man of the meanest Capacity to tell:
But then whether the Circumstantials of our Worship be in a true Way, is not so
easily found out, for the Reasons aforementioned, and the great Difficulties
therein. And if after Diligence used, (since no particular way is appointed) we
mistake in choosing instances of Respect to our Maker; our mistakes are
Invincible, and we shall never be answerable for them: But if we be, it is only
to him Our Lord, and not to One Another. And therefore it is the most
unreasonable thing imaginable, for men to judge one another in these points,
much more to impose their respective Fancies and Models, with insufferable
Penalties, one upon another, when they can have so little Assurance they are in
the Right.

But while I am endeavoring to Cool and Qualify the Mad World by Reasons and
Arguments, detecting theiir Mistakes, and exposing to View the Unnecessary
Occasions of their Differences, and Unreasonableness of their Destructive
Contentions, I am presently Mr. Wakes Text at St. Laurence and Mercers Chapel.
Interrupted with a Text of Scripture lakely Preached in the City; and that is,
Contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints. What, says some,
would you not have us contend for the Faith? Would you not have us earnest for
our Religion, and for the Truth? I reply, Yes by any means: And this Text does
encourage you to contend not only for the True Faith and True Religion, but
also for That Faith, and That Religion which you believe to be so; for that is
the same to you as the True, and no difference can, or ought to be made: And
then this Text, if not duly tempered and moderated, is sufficient to set all
Christendom together by the Ears; for every Party and Sect think their own way
of Religion and Faith to be Primitive, Apostolical and True; and by
consequence, have a Commission from this Text to contend earnestly for it: And
some have acted so earnestly, and depend so much on the goodness of their
Cause, and trueness of their Faith, that they have Plundered, Imprisoned, nay
Killed and Murdered their fellow Christians; to testify to the World their
Earnestness, and that they were in Earnest; but in my Opinion, they had much
better been in Jest, than so Extravagantly Earnest. Therefore this Earnestness
must be limited, so that it be not Prejudicial to our selves, or Destructive to
others: It ought to be managed with the greatest Cautiousness, Prudence and
Discretion; and by no other Instruments, but those of Persuasion and
Ratiocination.

Now lest People should be so much in earnest again as formerly, the Wise,
Judicious and Loving Father of our Country, would put Bounds to such
destructive Earnestness, which has made such Devastations among his People; he
would take their Weapons out of their Hands, with which they have done so much
Mischief: But they like foolish Children, are Peevish and Froward, exert their
Passions; grow Angry, are Sullen and Discontented, run and make their Moan to
their Mother; whose too Indulgent Nature and Tender Heart, is but too much
Grieved to see her Children out of Humor; and is almost ready to Sacrifice
their future Happiness and Prosperity, to their present Quiet and Contentment.
But what should be done in this Case, is an Impertinent Question: For the
Discretion and Authority of the Father, ought to prevail against the
Over-fondness of the Indulgent Mother, and the Peevishness of the Humoursome
Children; if they cry for Knives to cut them, Candles to burn them, or Food
that is unwholesome for them; they must be silenced, and no notice taken of
their Childish Demands. So that after what has been said and proved*

Methinks it is the most Unreasonable, Undutiful and Shameful Opposition
imaginable, which some go about to make against his Majesty; that when he
endeavors to make an Establishment of a Toleration, and offers to put it out
of the Power of any one Party to Hurt or Disturb another, and that by as good
Humane Security as possibly can be contrived, they should so Obstinately and
Childishly reject it. That when it has been made so plainly appear, that Penal
Laws and Tests have been the Ruin, and do Ruin the Nation; and will Ruin any
Nation, that maintain them: That they are most Unreasonable, Unjust and
Uncharitable, and yet Maintained and Continued; Good God, that men should be so
Stupid! What can this Argue, but that Heaven has no kindness for such men: But
seeing their Obstinateness and Perverseness, gives them over to Court their own
Ruin and Destruction; and, say I, May the Rods be continued on such Fools
Backs, since they are so fond of them. For my part, I think to be clapped up in
a Goal, to be Fined, Plundered, Wounded or Killed, on the Score of mere
Religion, and for having different Thoughts and Apprehensions from other men;
is a Reproach to the Christian World, and the most Brutish, Irrational and
Shamefullest thing imaginable; and I think it every man's Duty to endeavor to
Extirpate such a Wicked Principle.

For me to be punished for being a Man, for belieing when there is Reason
given, or an Argument which seems to me to be Reason (which is the same thing)
is a thing I can scarce think of with Patience. I know, to Countenance such
Unjustifiable Actions, there is a Black Charge advanced; and that is Heretic,
Schismatic, Turbulency of Spirit, Unruly, Enemies to Government, Plotters,
Seditious, Obstinate, Ungrateful, etc. These are the common Topics of Scandal
which one Party charges the other with, when they have got them under, or have
abused them: They think to charge others with Faults, is to make themselves
Innocent; and the World would cry out on them, should they not have some ugly
thing to lay to their Charge, after having so unhandsomly treated them. But
these Aspersions have been wiped off over and over; and it has been said, If it
be enough to Accuse, who shall be Innocent? The Charge also has been returned
on the Accusers Heads, to whom indeed it belongs: For Tyrants and Oppressors
blow the Coals, and then make Wonders at, and accuse the Flame: They wonder men
will not be Quiet, and accuse them of Disturbance, when They are their only
Disturbers, and occasion of all the Commotion, by Oppressing them, and
Punishing them without a Cause. They make multitudes of Penai Laws, and by
Consequence multitudes of Delinguents. The fewer the Penal Laws are, the more
Quietness and Peace always there is in the World; and those were happy Ages,
when -- Verba minantia fixo are, legebantur -- Every man might go but to the
Market Cross, and read presently his Duty, what he was to do, and what to
avoid. The plain Truth is, the multitudes of Penal Laws do but muster up, and
show the World how strong they are in Delinquents; and when they see their
Numbers, they take Courage, and presently Conspire (animated by their being
equally Obnoxious) to throw off their Yoke and Government, that has made them
all such Criminals, and Subjected them to Punishment, for things in their own
nature Innocent; and such Laws proves generally fatal to the Makers.

Further it has been made to appear, that it is a most Unreasonable and Unjust
Thing, that a King should come to a Crown, and not to have the Benefit and
Service of all his Subjects indifferently: That those Laws which qualify one
sort of men only for his Service, are too Partial and Unjust; and put it into
the Power of those men to do with him what they please; That it is not fit nor
safe for a Prince to have but one Staff to lean on, or one Weapon to defend
himself; That it is Unreasonable and Unjust that any one sort of men, under what
Denomination soever, should engross all Honors and Preferments to themselves;
and have all the Favor of the Prince, and only sit in the Sunshine, and all
the rest in the Shade; whose Fidelity and Integrity to their Prince, their
Sufficiency and Ability in Business; their Peaceable Temper, and equal, if not
more probable Arguments for the truth of their Religion; set them on equal
ground, and give them as large and just a Claim thereto as others: That such
Discriminating and Partial Laws, do naturally tend to put the Kingdom in
Confusion; and as long as one Religion (as they call it) receives an
Establishment, and another does not, that has equal Pretentions to it, there
will never be Peace and Quiet in England.

Again, It has been proved, that Laws are Naturally Null and Void, and grow
into Desuetude, and need no formality of a Repeal; after the Reasons for which
they were Enacted, are taken away; or when they bring so many Inconveniences,
which out-ballance their Advantages. A Law, for good Consideration is made,
That for the space of Ten Years, none shall presume to Kill or Destroy such a
sort of Wild Beasts; but in the space of Five Years they grow so numerous and
unruly, that they come into the Neighboring Towns, and make great Havoc, and
destroy the Inhabitants: Will any man deny the men of the place the privilege
of killing them, and charge them with a Breach of the Law? No sure I Such Laws
lose their Obligation, and ought to lose their Denominations too; and to be
called something elst than Laws, rather than Grievances, or Nutsan^es, which
they really are, and ought to do no Mischief under the specious Title of Laws.
His Majesty is charged with breach of Laws, for taking such Nuisances away;
methinks they should rather thank him for such Low Condescension, it being the
Scavengers Office. If unruly Fire break out in our Buildings, a Door is
admitted to be broken open, or a neighboring House to be blown up, and no
injustice charged. It Is His Majesty's Case; He pretends not to put the Fires
out of men's Chimneys, or to Cancel any wholesome or necessary Laws, but to put
a stop to the Outrage and Violence of those Fiery, Cruel and Sanguinary Laws,
that have made such Havoc amongst his People; and if so much Power must not be
allowed him, he has not Power enough to Defend Himself, or His People. But this
Opposition being made by Interested and Unreasonable Men, is less to be taken
notice of: And I question not, but will be overruled by Him, who is not
Partial as they ^^e; but consults the Good of the whole, and will not let any
one sort of men have Power to Oppress the rest. But then again, as to our
Differences:

I am utterly against reconciling of them by such Methods, which some men take;
and am indifferent whether they be reconciled or no; so they may be made
Harmless and Easy to the Public: And I do protest, I cannot see so much
Iniquity in them, as some would persuade; and hardly know how to call them
Differences, but observe more their Agreement than their Difference. For all do
mutually agree to Worship the same Eternal Ever-Living God, and believe in his
Ever-Blessed Son Jesus Christ. The Differences I most observe, are Men's
Differences, and mutual Animosities about Differences. And I affirm, the first
Differences in the various modes of Worship, are mostly Innocent; but the
second Differences are Criminal; that is, men's differing one with another, and
inflicting Punishments one upon another about them; and breaking the Bonds of
Charity; hating and denying Communion one to another, on the score of any way
of Worship, differing from theirs, though altogether as Innocent.

And what I have said before, is not with a Design to make all Men to be of one
and the same Mind to have the same Thoughts and Apprehensions of things; to
agree and perform the same things, after the same Manner and Method, as some
Men are over-fond of, and lay out all their endeavors (but to no purpose) to
bring to pass; for this is neither possible nor necessary; and therefore do
rather encourage honest and sincere Differences, than such forced and
Hypocritical Agreements: For what signifies a Congregation and Presence of
Bodies, when there is a dissent and absence of Minds? It Is the Unity of Minds
makes the Agreement; and though Company and Universality may seem fine and
plausible things to men, yet they cannot be pleasing in the sight of God, if
accompanied with Error or Hypocrisy, which are generally the Concomitants of
packed Agreements: But we know that he is wellpleased with our sincerity and
good intentions; and will rather Pity than Punish, our unwilling and
unfortunate mistakes, in our various and differing Methods and Instances of
Respect unto him. But my design is from the Impossibility of men's Agreement,
about the things they contend, from the Innocence of their first Differences,
from the Folly and Vanity of their Contention; all aiming at, and designing the
same things, viz. The Salvation of their own Souls, and the Glory of God; to
persuade men to calm, quiet and soften their Minds, and to convince them of the
Unreasonableness of their Mutual Severities and Impositions, and to dispose
them to Mutual Compliances and Charity: Also I would discountenance, as much as
possible, the foolish and vain Attemps of those Men, who with all the Art and
Industry imaginable, do endeavor to make the World all of One Mind; and are
impatient of any Contradiction and D^ssent. It Is strange that the Experience of
so many Ages should not School them into a better Understanding; let them quote
the Age wherein they all agreed: Has there not been Father against Father,
Council against Council, a continuation of Changes and Innovations? And have we
not transmitted to us a Black List of Heresies and Schisms, (as men call them?)
And it is possible they may quote an Universal Force and Tyranny, but never an
Universal Agreement. But why should I go on? These are things past
Contradiction, etc. And what hopes is there now to make Men all of One Mind,
more than formerly? Have we not Their Difficulties, and our Own too, to contend
with? And to say true, we have nothing handed down certain, and not subject to
dispute, but the Good Being weadore, and his only begotten Son, in whom we
believe. These things indeed are Universally Credited amongst us, and not
disputed by any. But all other things do, and may challenge a Dispute, since
they have passed through so many differing Hands, and served so many different
Interests and Parties. Indeed some Records I reckon more Authentic than
others, I mean those that teach and instruct us in the ways of Peace and
Holy-Living; but in general, all lie more or less liable to exception. For they
have been managed by men of various and differing Understandings, Passions,
Humors, Constitutions and Interests. And have we not the same sort of men? And
is not the World governed by the same Methods and Politics as formerly? We see
every party quote Scripture, and Fathers and Councils one against another. But
to what purpose? For none of them at this time of the day, after the Revolution
of so many years, are competent or sufficient to decide our Differences: Every
Age brings up Men of Prudence and Discretion enough to govern themselves; and
what the Fathers did is not to be drawn down for a President for these Time:
They lived in Ages wherein their Civil Customs were different from ours; and
their Civil Customs may as well be imposed on us, as their Ecclesiastical;
their Civil Customs did influence their Ecclesiastical, and so does ours; and
that increases the difficulty: Besides, they were but Men, and so are We: They
were Good Men indeed, and lived Holy Lives, and were Ornaments to their
respective Generations; and as such we ought to respect them. But there is too
much reverence paid to Antiquity by some; and they are apt to draw very weak
Conclusions; and say, Such a Father said such a thing; Ergo, it is true; and
think this way of Arguing is Good and Authentic; never considering the Truth
and Reasonableness of the Thing, so much as the Authority of the Man. But
further, passing over the Iniquity of the Times, and the Corruptions which they
may have undergone; and supposing them to be all truly transmitted to us, yet
they will signify very little at best, since every Disputer and Party is to
manage them: They will speak any thing we would have them to speak; and are
Weapons in the Hands of every one that pleases to take them: And nothing is
more common than to hear all Sides and Parties say, They have Reason,
Scriptures, Fathers and Councils on their Side; but this signifies nothing at
all, because they must not be Judges in their own Case. Indeed they signify,
as to particular men for instruction and direction in Holy Living; and give
Excellent Council and Advice, and minister to Holiness and Piety, but will
decide few of our Controversies, since Parties must manage them. It Is certain
that Law, Scripture, Argument and Reason, signifies little amongst Disputers;
each Party calling that Law, which does serve their Turns; that Scripture,
which does seem to countenance their Opinion; and that Reason and good
Argument, which favors and tends to promote their Design; and not what really
are so: And this misery will still be continued in the World, as long as we
have several Interests to manage; several Parties, and so few (if any)
indifferent, and impartial Judges amongst us; and all things will suffer
Aggravation or Extenuation, be great or little, good or bad; according as they
quadrate with men's Opinions, Prejudices or Interests. But supposing men to be
Impartial, Diligent and Honest, yet it is impossible they should not differ in
their Sentiments, since their Understandings are so various: And some
understand more, some less than is meant; some Figuratively, some Literally,
some Relatively, others Collectively, Distributively, Privitively, Positively,
Affirmatively, Negatively, and a hundred other ways, to the wearying and
wearing out of all the Adverbs; Witness all those numerous and large Comments
and Explications on Law and Gospel, both by Ancient and Modern Expositors, most
differing one from the other, though on the same Texts; according to the
Capacities, differing Acquirements, Educations, Prejudices, or Prior Notions of
the Managers, all which add to the Difficulties of Men's Agreement. Then again,
Affection being founded in Likeness; the various Authors find Abetters,
according as they find Readers of the same Humor and Constitutions: One loves
such a Book, and such a Man; and says, What he writes is certainly the Truth
and Right; and why? Not that it really is so; but because he writes something
suitable to his Genius and Complexion: The Sanguine loves the Cheerful and
Encouraging; the Melancholy, the most Doleful and Tragical Exposition; and most
call that which pleases them, the Truth.

But further, Let them tell me what good they have done, by such their
Endeavors of Uniting Men, as they call it? Have they no raised more Devils
than they can lay? Has not one Book begot another, and one Dispute another? And
so like is Truth to Falsehood, and one thing to another; and there be so many
Plausibilities and Probabilities, the Wisest and most Considering Man may be
deceived; and so by Consequence this Humor of Disputing propagated to the end
of the World; which instead of Curing and Healing Differences, does but enlarge
the Breaches, and increase them, by raising Men's Passions, and destroying
Charity. As to public Disputes, 'twas hardly ever known but they that had most
Power, and the largest Interest, always went away with the Victory. And as for
private, I scarce ever knew two Persons engaged in a Dispute, but that both
came off worse, though both got the better: The love of Victory on one hand,
and the shame of being overcome on the other; their Passion and Indiscreet
Zeal, their Weakness or Interest, has made them so obstinate and resolute, and
put them on such Shifts and Artifices, that have made them come off worse Men,
I am sure worse Christians.

Since then it must be allowed me, that it is impossible the World should agree,
or be all of one Mind in matters of Religion, and no means found competent to
make them so; to what end then do Men Dispute? Do they think to Unite the
Poles, or reconcile Contradictions? Indeed their Endeavors may be pitied,
because they mean well; but not at all to be commended. But to speak Truth,
they have seen the impossibility of their Attempt long ago, and therefore laid
their Heads together for an Expedient to salve all. Hence came the concern of
Infallibility a poor shift indeed, which has made all things worse than they
were before; and has been so often baffled, and is such a ridiculous thing, so
much against the Experience of all Mankind, that Laughing at it is the best way
of Arguing. And to my Apprehension, the more Certain and Infallible Truth, of
the Impossibility of Agreement, is a much better Expedient to charm the mad
World into an Agreement, than that of Infallibility: For when after so much
Experience, and so many Attempts made, Men find the impossibility of Agreement;
methinks they should at last agree; that is, they should yield themselves
Vanquished; see their Faults and Vanity of Contention, be induced to be at
Peace one with another; cease their mutual Violence and Severity, and Amicably
turn all into mutual Love, Compliance and Charity. And when the Romanists boast
of their Agreement and Infallibility, and object it to the Protestants, that
they cannot agree; I would have them tell them again, that it is impossible to
agree, nor is it necessary; and that it is no Crime to disagree in their Sense.
Also that their Agreement, however they may boast, is no Agreement; that the
Fagots may as well be said to agree, when they are bound up together, or Sheep
when drove up together and pounded in their Folds; and that it is rather a
Combination, or any thing in the World, more proper than an Agreement.

And let me ask the World the Question, Where the Harm would be, if Men Worship
their Maker in their own way; and have various and different Apprehensions of
Things; if all their respective Opinions and Sentiments be secured from having
ill Effects on the Public, and from disturbing one another? What is that to
me, if a Man think a Tree to be a Man, or a Man to be a Beast; if a Man so
misthought and apprehended, be secured from being baited or worried? We are all
to answer to one common Lord and Master; He is to be our Judge, if we have
served him not right: Indeed, I look on it as my Duty to inform my Neighbor,
and instruct him, if he be out of the way, if I think my way the better, and
more pleasing to my Maker. But then, since I may be mistaken, and out of the
way, and he in the right way, my method with him ought to be no other than
Reason and Discourse; and that in the most moderate and discreet way I can. For
if I should do otherwise, I may bring a greater Inconvenience on him, than that
I pretend to Regulate.

But again, As to the innocence of Differences, why should my Man be esteemed a
Criminal, or punished as such, whose Desires and Intentions are to please his
Maker as well as mine? We see all Rivers, little and great, at last discharge
themselves into the Ocean; and all Divisions and Sects of Christians have the
same End and Tendency, and Terminate in the same Center, viz. in endeavoring
to Please, to Glorify and Honor their Maker. Why therefore should the
distinct Ways and Methods in Spirituals, be more a Reproach than those in
Temporals; and Men not to be allowed to choose for themselves their Method in
obtaining a Mansion in another World, as well as securing a Possession in this?
Their own Souls lies at stake, which if they have any apprehensions of, must
needs oblige them to be sincere. But this interposing in other Men's Matters,
and being over-Officious, I like not; and they that force their own Inventions
and Models of Worship on other Men, under the specious pretenses of Right and
Truth, do (I am afraid) force a Trade rather than Truth, which stands in need
of no Coercion. And indeed there is such a mysterious Trade driven in the
Concerns of Religion, and so much Gain gotten by some particular Methods, that
it is no wonder Men contended so earnestly for them.

And amongst other hindrances of true Hollness, and Christian Affection, and of
the Establishment of Truth and Peace among us, are the Dignities, Honors, and
large Revenues of Spiritual Men: And I beg some Gentlemen's Pardon if I think
amiss, when I say I believe the Flames of Contention that are afoot, and so
much disturb Christendom, would cease and abate, were the Oily Substance of
their fat Benefices a little diminished or taken away: And that a great many
Men would not think it worth their while to contend so about the invisible
things of another World, were there not a great deal to be gotten in this. But
in order to a Conclusion:

We may hope and wish Truth and Peace to flourish in the World, but we never
shall see it, as long as Temporals are so mixed with Spirituals: There will
never be a prosperous or blessed Issue of such an unhallowed and unsanctified
mixture. But when there is a Divorce put to these, and all Power of the Church
be devolved on the State; and the Men be chosen in another manner, and their
Allowances settled on them by the State; and when Learning is better managed and
reformed. For the Poet says but too true,

-- Whatsoever ill the State invades,
The Pulpit either forces or persuades;
Others may bring the Fuel to the Fire,
But they the Breath which makes the Flame aspire.
And that was but an unlucky sort of Comment, which one made of those Words
wrote over the Head of ou^ Savior by Pilate, in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, That
he should be perseeuted most by men skillful in those Languages: For it is the
Learned men are the Warriers, and manage all our Contentions; they would in a
manner naturally Disband, had they not such Leaders, who have little else to do
but to raise unnecessary Quarrels, and set the World together by the Ears. The
other three parts of the World have little leisure, and less will and abilities
to maintain them; I say when Learning is better managed, and when a perfect and
unalterable Toleration of all Persuasions in Religion is established, then the
Eternal God will bless the World with Truth and Peace; but it is only the last,
I mean Toleration, which we at present may expect, and that for the Reasons
aforementioned; as also for the unvaluable Benefits hereafter we shall
certainly reap thereby. For in particular,

What can more contribute to the Security, Prosperity and Fourishing State of
this Unhappy Nation, than by one joint and Universal Act, to Abolish all those
Grievances which have so long disturbed our Peace? I mean Penal Laws and Tests;
and at the same time to Settle and Establish a Great Pacifick Charter, that
Hell it self, nor all the United Force of Malicious Men shall never be able to
disturb: Wherein every one cannot fail to find their Account, except those who
are not fit to be quieted or contented, because they will not be satisfied with
their proportion of Power, or good Livings, but demand all. But leaving such
unreasonable men to be managed into Compliance, by that Power, which I hope
will do it effectually, I promise my self, that all the rest will not betray so
much Weakness, as not to acquiesce in such a Sovereign Expedient, which will
certainly redound to the good of the whole. For hereby every one will have his
Religion secured to him, by as good a Title as his Land; every one will be
secured from the Destructive and Fiery Zeal of his Violent Neighbor: And since
humanum est errare, and Mistakes and Errors will be, as long as there be men;
yet this Great Charter will protect all from the evil of one another mistakes;
and will put an end to men's ruining and killing one another for God's sake;
will make the Lion lie down with the Lamb, and silence the voice of Complaints
in our Streets; will check the Insolence and Ill Nature of Perverse Men, of all
sides; and let men Worship their Maker sincerely and truly, and prevent
Hypocrisy; will make His Majesty's Government easy, and prevent Factions,
Plots and Conspiracies against it; will give Him leave to exert His Royal
Virtues, and make as considerable a Figure in Christendom as any of His
Ancestors; will take away all the pretensions ill men may have from Coercion
and Restraint, and leave them inexcusable if Turbulent and Unquiet; so that
none dare endeavor to Patronize them, or mitigate their Condign Punishment:
Will lay asleep all Fears and Jealousies, and quiet the Passions and
Animosities of men, or at least make them Impotent and Incapable of doing Hurt.
And in fine, that by its Provisions and Sanctions, will qualify things so,
that men'of all Persuasions shall have an equal Claim and Title to Religion,
Property, and their Princes Favor: and that no public Emoluments, no Office,
Interest, Benefit, Favor or Preferment, shall be denied to any man, on the
account of his Persuasion; but purely on some Notorious Wicked Incapacity. And
further, by its Pacifick Nature will gradually effect, that the present odious
malignity affixed to the distinguishing Names of Christians, shall be mortified
and made innocent; and to go under several different Denominations, shall be no
more a Reproach to them, than it is for Citizens to be free of several
Companies; or Countrymen to be called by the Name of the County they were born
in. But in answer to some Objections.

If it be alleged, That the Papists ought not to have the Benefit of
Toleration, because of their Wickedness: To this I answer, The same Argument
holds good against any Side or Party; for they have been all wicked by Turns,
when in Power, and have been pretty even one with another; and so, I think,
have the greatest Reason to agree: Besides, if we stay, and will admit of no
Religion to receive an Establishment, till its Professors have cleared
themselves of all Real Crimes, or pretended ones; I am afraid we shall have no
Religion at all: For all Sides have been really to Blame, and really Criminal,
though every Side endeavor to Extenuate their Guilt; but being Parties, must
not be Judges in their own Case. Their denying their Faults, does not make them
less guilty, though some men think so; and by an odd sort of Inference, they
reckon to make another man a Criminal, is to make themselves Innocent. And the
principal thing urged in their Discourse is, To magnify others Faults, and
lessen their own. And this humor is so Epidemical, I meet it almost every
where; and if they can prove, or make out any way, the Persuasion of another to
be absurd or odd, they look upon themselves to be very good Christians; never
considering how easy a thing it is to make any thing absurd; nor what
different ways of Falsehood there are; in some of which it is ten to one, but
they themselves may Tread.

But to come to a more ingenuous Confession, and as an Indifferent Person to
speak the Truth, and give all Sides their due; I protest I cannot in Conscience
vindicate any Parties proceedings. The Papists have Faults enough, and the
World is Inquisitive to find out more; (not to mention the misrepresentations
and foul charges, which is inseparable to disputing Parties:) Nor are the
Protestant D^ssenters innocent, but in many things must acknowledge they have
sadly miscarried; especially in those late unhappy troubles, in the Reign of
King Charles I. Much less is the Church of England to be excused, who by their
Severities and Pressures of Government, gave but too great provocations to
both; and their Furious Driving like Jehu, is the principal Cause of most of
our Troubles. They were the occasion of the Scots Rebelling, Archbishop Laud
imposing the Common Prayer upon them, (contrary to the Constitution of their
Nation) and of the English former and late Rebellions, by laying such Loads on
Dissenters, which they would not help to bear with the least of their Fingers;
but most of all to blame by establishing Iniquity by Law; and after so much
mischief done thereby, yet vindicate the same Law still, and by Consequence
their Wicked Proceedings. In Calm Fits and Sober Hours, they confess their
former ill Treatment by Dissenters has made them over-act themselves of Late.
And why will not they allow this to be a good Plea in the Mouths of others, who
over-acted themselves too in their late and former Outrages; resenting too
deeply and unchristianly their Ill Usage and Oppression? Tyranny and Oppression
is the Original and Source of most violent Outrages; and whenever the Banks
are pulled down, the Current runs with the greatest Impetuosity.

It Is well known the Papists have had but miserable Treatment in England, ever
since the Reformation, but especially since Queen Mary's time; and it is known
as well that the Dissenters have had little better: And no wonder therefore
that they have plotted and been troublesome to them that have kept them under:
and the Church of England too, when under Hatches by the Dissenters, were
Plotters to bring themselves (though they called it the King) in again: Indeed
they have not had so many Temptations as others; for since the Reformation they
have been mostly Regent, and in the Sunshine: I shall not further object
against them. what their Enemies have objected; but say they begin to show
themselves Men, and exactly like other Men too, they grow angry and
discontented; sometimes Threaten, sometimes Flatter, then Reflect, start
Jealousies, and raise Bugbears; and use all the little Shifts and Artifices
which their reputed Enemies, in much worse Circumstances, formerly used; and
then were objected to them as Crimes. So that in Conclusion, after all the
noise and talk of Loyalty, and good Principles, by every Party, I find none of
them good, but when they are pleased (which they say the Devil is) and none
much worse than another, but when they are are provoked.

But here, I know, will come in an Objection, and that is, (...) the Papists by
their Principles are so for from thinking it a sin to destroy their Innocent
Neighbors, (which are Heret^cks* as they call them) that they think it matter
of Merit and Duty so to do. Here is an Objection with a Witness.

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
If this could be proved, (which I never yet saw) and if they clear not
themselves from this, and give the World satisfaction; I am so far from
extenuating such a wicked Principle, that I think what Opposition their
Adversaries have already, or hereafter may make against them, is all but too
little; and I think it my Duty, and ought to be the Duty of every Ho^ew Man, to
extirpate such a Race of Men from the face of the Earth; and to respect them as
a sort of wild Beasts, that would devour and Prey upon Mankind. God forbid I
should argue for such a sort of Men. What I argue for, is only for an
Indulgence of Thought in things of an indifferent Nature, and Principles which
terminate in Speculation, and produce no wicked Action. And I here declare
again, as at first, That it is an unreasonable thing, that any sort of Men,
under what Denomination soever, should have the benefit of any Government, much
less be admitted as a Member, or Administrator in it, un^ess he do his
endeavor to Encourage and Protect it, and give Security for his quiet and
peaceable Living under it.

But then as our Savior commended the Unjust Steward, so I cannot but commend
all our Parties, and must needs say They do wisely in their Generation, abating
their Honesty and Integrity. For to begin with the Church of England; Her Sons
Act as Prudently as can be imagined; for they have got all into the^^ own
hands, all the Spiritual Preferments in the Nation; if any of them should turn
Papists, that is madness, for they have got all already; and the Papists have
nothing to give them: They know, that if either they move to the Right Hand, or
the Left, they shall be Lessened, since they are craving needy People on both
S^des them: Therefore their Interest consists in being obstinate, and standing
out against the Kings Demands: They may be made less, but cannot be made
greater: Therefore by all means possible they endeavor to keep those under
that would come in Snacks with them; also on the score of their Abuse, for they
are Conscious of the Injury they have done, and are afraid of Retaliation.

Then as they cannot be blamed to keep their Wealth and Power; so on the other
hand the Endeavors of others must not be blamed in getting what they can: And,
who in Conscience or Equity can accuse them, who being Poor, Indigent, and
ready to be Starved, do endeavor to supply their Wants, and come in Partners
with the Possessors? It Is natural for every Man that has been Oppressed, to rid
himself of his Yoke, and endeavor to secure himself for the future; and that
Man deserves to be hanged, who standing condemned by an unjust Law, and gets a
Reprieve, will not endeavor to get so unjust a Law to be Repealed. But then
the Injustice of the first, or the irregularity of the Methods of the Last, I
cannot consent to commend. And it grieves me to consider, how Religion is made
a Stalking-Horse; and is taken up for a Pretense and Cloak to cover Men's base
Designs; and indeed as far as ever I could observe, two thirds of that which
Men call by that venerable Name, is nothing else but a Trick to get Money. And
the Holy Scriptures are like Original Deeds, by which any Man that has but a
little more Wit than Honesty, may lay claim to an Ecclesiastical Possession.

But least I should be thought to speak irreverently of those Holy Books, I
acknowledge, That if a man be sincere and honest, and look for Truth as if he
had a mind to find it; and have no other ends in his Search, but to please his
Maker and save his Soul; he may easily find enough to make him both happy here
and hereafter. But as far as I can see, men seem to understand most of the
Scriptures backward. For whereas the Prophet says, He has showed thee, O Man,
what the Lord requires of thee, to do Justice, and love Mercy, and to walk
Humbly with thy God. And the Apostle tells them, That True Religion before God
and the Father, consists in visiting the Fatherless and Widows in their
Affliction, and to keep themselves unspotted from the World; also another, That
they should follow Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord: By their Actions and Living, they seem to understand them clear
contrary; as if it had been said thus, He has showed thee, O man, what the
Lord requires of thee, to do Injustice, to love Persecution, and to walk at
Enmity and Defiance with thy God. True Religion before God and the Father is
this, To neglect the Fatherless, and afflict the Widows, and to conform
themselves to the Fashions of the World; and follow Contention and Strife with
all men, without which no man shall go to Heaven. Truly men's Actions seems to
favor this latter Interpretation, rather than the former. And many other
places of Scripture I could quote, which exhort to Love and Peace, and mutual
Condescension, which men either do not, or will not understand; and it is a
deplorable thing to consider how partial they are in understanding the
Scriptures. Some Texts are great Favorites, when they seem to countenance
their Interest or Designs; and others that will not Vote for them, are
cashiered, and a hundred Objections raised against them. That of Contend
earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, I warrant you at this
time of the Day is a precious one; for here peevish Nature is gratified, and
here if I have a mind to keep any thing that is dear to me, I have a Cover for
my Dish; it is but calling my Faction, my Passion, Humor, Prejudice, Interest,
etc. by the Venerable Name of True Faith; and then I have a Commission to
contend earnestly for it. Contend earnestly with us for our Livings and
Benefices, once deliveus by the Laws, would not look well; But Contend
earnestly for the Faith, that is plausible and goes down glib. I will readily
allow the Objection which I see is ready to come upon me, that is, That men are
obliged in Conscience to contend for the Faith, or that which they think to be
true; yet this Contention ought not to proceed further than to Edification; and
if any other Methods be used besides calm Reasoning and Argument, that destroy
Charity, an Indifference is better than such Contention. And when men exhort
their Auditory to Contentions; however innocent their Meaning and Intentions
may be, yet their Discretion must be blamed, and they will never be able to
clear themselves of public Censure, if they do not qualify their Discourse
with all the Limitations and Restrictions imaginable; for men are too apt to
Contend without Exhortation.

But to Conclude,
SINCE in so many Ages, no Humane Art or Industry, nor all the Powers on Earth
together, by either Force or Stratagem, neither hitherto have found, nor
hereafter can possibly find an Expedient, or make it possible, amidst so many
various and all incompetent Mediums, That all men should be of one Mind, or
that they should not Disagree, not be Deceived, or not have Differences and
Contentions; I say, since these things are impossible to be done, (Salva
veritate, and allowing Liberty of Judgment) the Attempt is Vain and Foolish,
and not to be prosecuted but by Fools or Mad Men. And since it is so, the next
thing which naturally comes under Consideration is, How to make all things as
Innocent and Easy, and Suitable to Government as possible. All which things
His Gracius Majesty having duly Weighed and Considered; out of Great
Experience, Deep Wisdom, and Princely Compassion toward His miserable
contending Subjects, has found out and pitched upon the only Expedient in
order thereto. I mean a Great Pacifick Charter, which though it cannot subdue
men's Ill Nature and Will, yet will put it out of the Power of any one
Contending Party to hurt another. It Is this Instrument and only this, (with
God's Blessing) can make our miserable Contending Nation Happy. And he either
does not truly understand his Interest, or is no True Englishman, who does not
heartily desire it, and by all honest means endeavor to promote it. And I
doubt not, maugre all the Opposition of Interested and Unreasonable Men, but
that His Majesty will duly Effect it. The Almighty, all Good and Wise God, who
put it in his Heart, no doubt but will assist him in it; and if so, Gamaliel's
Advice is pertinent in the Case, To strive against the Almighty, will be to no
purpose; They but in vain promise themselves success, against the King of
Heaven and Earth. It seems to be an Honor and a Blessing reserved by Heaven on
purpose for him; and is an Action and Performance truly worthy of so Judicious,
so Just, and so Courageous a Prince; and will raise Him a Name, and a Monument,
not to be Defaced by the Spite of Time, or Succession of Ages.

FINIS.
London, Printed for the Author. 1688.


