THE EXECUTION OF WILLIAM IRELAND, AND JOHN GROVE.

Who were Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered AT TYBURN, On Friday the 24th of
January, 1678/9.

FOR High Treason.

With their Carriage and Behavior.

Tantum an Relligio potuit suadere Malorum?

LICENSED, 1678/9.

LONDON: Printed for R. G. 1678/9.

THE CONFESSION and EXECUTION OF The two Persons FOR HIGH TREASON.
COuld it be imagined, that it could ever enter into the heart of Man, to
commit Murder under a Conceit of Religion, or for God's sake traitorously to
kill not only God's Image, but his Vicegerent too? Could it be thought, that
under the most obliging, best-natur'd, and gracious Prince in the World, any
persons could be found so profligately wicked, as to Conspire against his Life?
and this too amongst a sort of men that have made such mighty boasts of their
Loyalty! What Sentiments must we have of such People? or how can we express
their Tempers better, than in that Expostulation of the Reverend Author of The
Practice of Piety? p 783 If they are Saints, who be Scythians? Who are
Cannibals, if they Catholics?

On Tuesday the 14th of December last past, 1678, these Romish Emissaries, on a
most fair and equal Trial, were Condemned to die, not in the least for their
Religion, unless Treason and Murder be an essential constitutive part of it;
not for being Roman Catholics (as they absurdly love to call themselves,) nor
for being Popish Priests, or seducing good Subjects to their Idolatrous and
Traitorous Principles: though both these latter Facts they know are made
Capital by our most necessary Laws, for preservation of the Government. 'Twas
not, I say, for any of these Causes; and therefore let not any of their Party
at home or abroad, who make Lies their Refuge, and devote all their Endeavors
to misrepresent things, cry out, as they were wont to do, and too lately, with
an impudence to be equaled by notbing but their malice, have done, That the
poor innocent Catholics are prosecuted, persecuted, martyred, etc. for their
Religion. But to satisfy all the World, be it known, They were Apprehended,
Tried, Convicted, and Condemned, for the highest of Crimes: for 'twas a Crime
of the same species that at first made Angels Devils; I mean Treason,
High Treason, aggravated to the highest pitch; being not only to destroy our
established Religion, but likewise subvert the Government; and in order
thereunto, to murder his most Gracious Majesty our Sovereign Lord the King,
(whom may the hand of Heaven, as hitherto, through a thousand dangers from
different Factions, so ever protect and long preserve.)

As for the qualities of these persons, we have little to say. If either of
them were well descended or related, we are sorry they should not retain that
Loyalty and Virtue, which had added luster to their Ancestors. One of them was,
without dispute, of the Jesuits Order, and a Man of Parts: the other was (as
far as I can learn) too much influenced by that Order. The first instigated the
last to the horrid Attempt; but as to particulars of the proof, I refer the
Reader to a peculiar Narrative, which is expected from Authority of the whole
procedure.

The Holidays intervening, and upon some other important considerations, they
had a large time allowed them for Repentance, and fitting themselves for Death;
but this present Friday the 24th of January, 1678/9 they were drawn to
Execution both together in one Sledge, with white Hats and gray Clothes. One of
them had a Book in his hand, and was often observed to whisper to the other.

By the vast Multitudes that crowded to see them pass, and the general sense of
the people, it was apparent how zealous the English Nation in general, and
particularly this whole City is, in their respects to His Majesty, and how
concerned to bring all those to just punishment, that shall any way make
attempts against His Sacred Person, or endeavor to destroy the Protestant
Religion, and introduce abominable Popery; which can never be effected, without
subversion of the Government.

At the place of Execution, they said something as Prayers, but otherwise
talked little that could be heard, by reason of the vast Throng of Spectators;
and so suffered most deservedly, according to the dreadful Sentence.

But since there is much talk of Jesuits, and indeed, not only we, but all
Europe has reason enough to beware of them, it may not be amiss, to give the
Reader some Account of the Original of those troublesome Companions, how long
they have been in the World, and who was their Founder.

The person that Instituted them, was Ignatius Loyola, a Spanish Soldier, in
the year 1540. He had been a fellow debauched in his youth, and having spent
all his Patrimony, grew so devout, as to set up for a New Order, whom
blasphemously he called, The Fellows, Companions, or the Society of Jesus; and
amongst other Provisions, besides the three Vows of Chastity, Poverty, and
Obedience, established, That all Members thereof should take another special Vow
-- That whatever the Roman Bishop for the time being shall Command, they shall
execute the same without Tergiversation or excuse. This was just after Luther
began the Reformation; and the Pope having need of such trusty sticklers, you
may be sure encouraged them: but that which made them first famous, was,
Teaching of Schools, which they discharged with great diligence and dexterity;
thereby, not only engaging Parents, but also imprinting a lasting veneration in
Youth, for that Society under which they had been bred. To tell you all the
lying Miracles they attribute to this Catholic Lance-presade, requires a
Volume. I shall only venture to show one piece of their audaciousness, in the
detestable words of Valdera^, one of that Order, de Canoniz. Loyolae, p. 51. He
not to be wondered, that Moses did very great Miracles, for he wrought them by
the power of the Name of God, (...) craven in his staff: Nor is it any more
that the Apostles did so many wonders, when all was done in the Name of God.
But that our blessed Ignatius should, with his own Name written in a piece of
paper, do more Miracles than Moses and all the Apostles put together, this
indeed raises in us an excess. Admiration for him.

For my part, I judge the greatest Miracle we are beholden to him for, is, That
he has set up such a mischievous Gang, so destructive wherever they come to
Government, and yet Christendom should suffer them so mightily to increase. --
The said Loyola's Motto was -- Cavete vobis Principes: wherever you see us,
look to your selves. -- This is the honestest trick that ever I read of from a
Jesuit; it is fair warning, and they may well laugh at any that will not take
it.

FINIS.

