THE EXECUTION and CONFESSIONS OF THE Seven Prisoners Executed at TYBURN On
Friday the 19th of December, 1679.
VIZ. John Parker, for High Treason. Benjamin Penry, for Robbery on the
Highway. John Dell, of Edger, for stealing a Mare; but tried for several
Murders, first of his Wife's Brother, then of her Father, and lately of his
said Wife her self. Richard Dean, heretofore his Servant, condemned with him
for the same Felony, but supposed to be equally guilty with him in all the said
Murders. William Atkins, Susan White, and Deborah Rogers,For several Felonies,
being all old Offenders.
WITH A particular Account of the said John Dell's impenitent and refractory
Behavior after Sentence of Death passed upon him, etc.
AT the last Sessions for London and Middlesex, ending on Saturday the 13th of
this instant December, there were in all Eleven persons (six men and five
women) that received Sentence of Death; of whom Four, viz. Jane Cragnel, Anne
Side, James Rawlins, and Sarah Bennifield, alias Bodington, obtained his
Majesty's gracious Reprieve.

As for the rest that suffered, we shall give the Reader a true and impartial
account both of their Crimes and Deportment after Condemnation.

John Parker was by Trade a Watch-maker, and it is said a most ingenious Artist
in that Profession; but happening long since into Ill Company, he has for many
years followed those mischievous practices of Clipping and Coining, whereby the
whole Nation is most horribly, and more of late than ever, abused and
defrauded. He had a Brother of the same bad Principles, for which he had three
or four times been questioned; as likewise this man had once been tried and
convicted of the like Offenses at Salisbury, though there he evaded Execution.
The Fact at present was fully proved upon him by an ocular Witness; and when
Sentence of Death passed upon him, he was the only person that desired time to
fit and prepare himself to die; which both to him and the rest was charitably
granted. After his Conviction, two persons coming to visit him, were detained;
whether charged by him, or otherwise, we shall not say. He seemed all along to
comfort himself with hopes of a Pardon, having (as it is said) obtained one for
his Brother heretofore in the same Circumstances, by presenting a Watch of
exquisite workmanship to a Woman of mighty Prevalency. But as he had led an ill
life, so his Deportment was now suitable, rather busied for a Reprieve from
man, than pardoning Mercy from God.

Benjamin Penry was a very stout portly man, proved to be a notorious
Highway-man, and Companion with French who was executed last Sessions; with
whom he was taken in Islington-Town on the Lords* day, where being (as it is
believed) in drink, they made an Assault on a young man, with an intention (as
it is probable) to rob him of an Horse of great value; for which Misdemeanour
being committed, other things came against them, and particularly this Penry
was found guilty of robbing a Gentleman on Bag-shot-heath. As he was a man of
Confidence, so he behaved himself with an untoward, at least unchristian kind
of Resolution. He had a woman indicted with him, whom he called Wife, one Mrs.
White, formerly condemned for Clipping; she endeavored to bring him to confess
others of the Gang, but as far as we hear, without much effect.

The next was the notorious John Dell, lately living at Edger in Middlesex, of
whom common Fame has given such a report, as may excuse us from enlarging. He
and his Companion Richard Dean, formerly his Servant, heretofore Tried for the
Murder of the said Dell's Wives Brother, a Tanner, whose Body about a Year ago
was found near Redlion-fields, were this Sessions Tried, first for Murdering
his the said Dell's Wife; and next day, for Murdering one Daniel Ball her
Father. The Circumstances on each were very pressing, and (as Mr. Recorder
excellently observed) in the judgment of most Auditors, seemed to want rather
Proof than Truth: However, they were thereof found Not Guilty; but afterward
Condemned for stealing a Mare. The Behavior of this Dell after Sentence was
very sad and extraordinary; he seemed to have no kind of Remorse for his Sins
in general, or Sense of his approaching End; but rather added to the former
Suspicions: For when soon after Condemnation, by the prudent care of the Court,
Dean was ordered to be taken out of his company, and kept apart, he seemed to
be much troubled at it; and calling for Ale, whispered to the Boy that brought
it, to commend him to the said Dean, and tell him, that possibly he might be
put to the Torture, but however he should be sure to stand his Ground. When the
other Prisoners went to Prayers, he would retire into a corner, wrap himself up
in his Cloak, and refuse to join with them, saying, He could not pray. Even at
Chapel, the Minister endeavoring to reach their Consciences by a particular
Application, and treating of the heinousness of the sin of Murder, this Dell
insolently interrupted him in the public Congregation, saying, Who do you
speak to? Why do you direct your discourse to me? or ill irreverent words to
that effect. Besides the unwearied pains taken by Mr. Ordinary, several other
able Ministers were sent, or led by Charity to visit him, but he sullenly
received them; and to one discoursing of the two future states, Heaven and
Hell, with a scoffing kind of Atheistical humor, he replied, Heaven! There is
not one of a thousand goes to Heaven, why talk you to me of Heaven? Another
time he refused to be uncovered at Religious Worship, scoffingly saying, He
should catch cold, or a Chine-cough, if he pulled off his Hat; with several
other marks of a deplorable Impenitency.

As for John Dean, though he behaved himself not so morosely and untowardly,
but would often confess in general terms that he had been a very great Sinner,
yet could not he by any pains of the Ministers be brought to acknowledge the
Murders whereof they were both so violently suspected as aforesaid. It Is
believed, that being only found Guilty of Felony for stealing the Mare, and for
want of Legal Proof acquitted of the other matters, might harden their hearts
to deny their other Crimes, hoping that for so small an one they might easily
obtain a Pardon. So sollicitous are bad men to prolong a miserable, and at best
uncertain Life here, for a few moments, though thereby they incur eternal Death
and never-ending Torments in the World to come. For let all stubborn Sinners
know, that however with Hypocritical pretenses to Innocence or Jesuitical
Impudence they may conceal from, or forswear their Villainies unto Men, yet
there is a most Just and All seeing God, from whom nothing can be hid, and who
will not always be mocked; but certainly, though sometimes slowly, and after a
long and seeming prosperous Carreer in Wickedness, will call them to a severe
Account, and pour forth to the full his dreadful Indignation upon them.

On this present Friday the 19th of December, Parker was drawn from Newgate on
a Sled with four Horses: He behaved himself very penitently, holding a Book in
his hand, and often elevated his eyes to Heaven. Dell, Atkins, and Penry were
carried in one Cart: The two women in another, of whom one was whipped but the
very last Sessions: And Dean in a Cart by himself; He seemed a poor sorry
fellow, but had often been concerned in Rogueries, and without doubt had been a
Confederate with his Master Dell in many of his late horrid Crimes. However, in
his Passage he demeaned himself with much more show of Penitence than the
other, and it was well hoped that he would make an ingenuous Confession.

Mr. Dell continued obstinate to the last, and in the Morning before he went
out of Newgate, the Ordinary pressing him to a Confession, he impiously
answered, What shall I confess for, it is not in your Power to Pardon me? Nor
did he at the place of Execution own any thing, nor indeed could be induced to
speak; but in a stupid manner was Executed.

Parker appeared very penitent, and gave away his Book before he came to Tyburn
to an Acquaintance of his.

The Highway-man Mr. Penry, died very composedly, and just before his death, in
spite of all his Resolutions, the Tears ran down his cheeks.

Atkins, who suffered for being a Pickpocket and a great Practitioner that way,
seemed also to be mindful of his latter End.

Dean was kept alive till all the rest were executed, and Captain Richardson
very worthily, and with incomparable earnest Expressions, importuned him to a
Confession; and once he was, as it were, turned off, but stopped; and then he did
say, That he verily believed Dell was guilty of the Murder of his Wife: but
would not acknowledge that he himself was concerned. And so he was likewise
executed.

FINIS.

