An Expedient for Peace amongst Christians.

The SECOND PART.

GROUNDED On the Impossibility of their Agreement in Matters of Religion.

And further Enlarged in a DISCOURSE OF Church and State.

WHEREIN A New Ecclesiastical Administration is Exhibited

Behold I will bring it Health and Cure, and I will Cure them, and I will
Reveal unto them the abundance of PEACE and TRUTH. And I will cause the
Captivity of Judah, and the Captivity of Israel to return, and I will build
them as at the first. Jer, 33. v. 6.7. LONDON: Printed and Sold by George
Larkin at the Two Swans without Bishopsgate, and R. Janeway in
Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster-Row. 1689.

EPISTOLA DEDICATORIA.
TEmpus refrigerationis e conspectu Domini dequo Locutus est Deus per os omnium
Sanctorum Prophetarum adventum est. Judaeis ergo Gentilibusque; cunctis Pacis
and Justitiae Cultoribus, Nec non omnibus Hujus mundi faelicem Statum, Gloriam
Dei, aut Regnum Christi, ex cord cupientibus, Author hoc opusculum primario
Dedicat, horum omnium cupientissimus. Deinde Anglicanae Conventioni
Augustissimae.

Coetus Honorabilis! Naufragium Ecclesiae accidisse, Parts laceratae in mudani
oceani faciem usquequaque diffluentes satis demonstrant, and divina Providentia
est penes vos reparare, and irrefragabilem reddere in aeternum. Est igitur
inquirendum qua rupe, queis scopulis frangebatur. Tum ad istam partem, quae ad
vos (Patres Conscripti!) spectat, data venia, ego absolvam, viz: Sancire leges
in Religione, non est sancire Religionem, sed perdere; est dare Veniam
peccantibus, and Sectas and Divisiones creare, ut hodie plane constat. De
quibus tunc versabitur Lex? Dicam, Leges in favorem Societatum, Artium,
mutuorum Foederum, and Commercij ferendae sunto. Religio est Dei Provincia
Peculiaris, de illa ad ferendas Leges misit filium, and exhibuit Sacras
Literas, and de his Legibus ipse solus est Judex and Veritas sola Regula, quam
Lex creare nullo modo potest. Quid igitur vobis agendum est? Obsequendum
Christi praecepto, qui Dixit Ite and Docete, etc. Ille hic principto primas
exhibuit lineas, and Primum Eclesia Saxum posuit quod respuebant Aedificatores
fatui, sed vos penes est anguli Capitale redere. Oh Gloria! Quae lauds, qui
honores Vestras circumstant seeds? Quam honorabile erit in Secula Seculorum,
inter omnes Gentes and Terrarum orbis incolas, Pacis and Justitia Fundatores,
and Ecclesiae tum Judaeis tum Gentilibus Restauratores appellari? Pergite
igitur sub Beatis Auspicijs Regis Pacis and Veritatis, Domini nostri Jesu
Christi.

Vale.
TO THE READER.
I Will not Affront thee so much, as to suppose thee ignorant of the great Stir
and Noise made in the World about Religion; For this would suppose thee to want
thy Senses: But if thou contributest to raise the Dust, if thou art one of
those Bigots, those tenacious Animals, that will not part with their very
Excrements, the cuttings of thy Hair, or the paring of thy Nails, for the
Public Peace, I charge thee to lay down my Book (Excuse my Courtship) for I
had rather thou would tear, than read it.

It Is to free and ingenuous Minds, divested of their Prejudices, who are
willing to entertain Truth, promote Peace, and as ready to receive, as to give
their Reasons, I say it is to such, I address the ensuing Discourse: But alas!
their Number is but few, and it is sad and deplorable to observe, how fierce and
zealous the most are in maintaining the Side and Party, which Chance,
Education, Prejudice, Interest or Constitution has engaged them in. And the
Generality of Christians being so pre-ingaged and retained by their respective
Parties, there is few can be prevailed upon to look into the State of the Whole;
so that amongst so many struggling and contending Parties, the Historians
Observation is made good; Dum singuli pugnant universi vincuntur; Christianity
is ruined, and must pay all their Reconings. And how sad and deplorable is the
Victory, whose Triumph cannot be made, but by the Spoils of Christianity! --
Give thy Son the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth
for his Possession, is the Prayer of many of us, and yet at the same time, we
are ready to pull his Gospel up by the Roots, if we find it growing any where
but in our own little Garden. We have taken an effectual Course to prevent our
Prayers, and to put a Perfect Stop to its Propagations: For with what Face can
we allure or invite any Heathen Nation, or any particular Man, to Espouse our
Religion, when we have such Scenes of Misery and Distraction amongst us, when
we can give no Security either to their Souls or Bodies, Amidst our fatal
Contests, the one being liable to Destruction, the other to Damnation? But is
there no Balm in Gilead? No Remedy for these things? I have (moved at so sad a
Spectacle) amidst great Avocations, made one poor Essay: But, Quis tam foelici
Sydere natus est, ut in his rebus arduis, in ipsissimam ubique veritatem,
incidat primo Tentamine, says St. Jerome; What Man is so happy, amidst so great
Difficulties, as to hit the Mark at the first Shot? And yet it has had no cold
Entertainment, which has encouraged me to venture another Shaft, I here
therefore present thee with a Second Part, begging no Favor or Approbation,
having had it already, from a better hand, viz. from our Savior himself; who
has said Beati Pacifici, that the Peacemakers are Blessed. The Attempt is great
for one single Homuncio to undertake; But the God of Peace and Truth needs
neither Strength nor Number to bring his Designs to pass. And whatever the mad
World may say, or the Issue be, it must be said of the Author, as of another
Great Undertaker, Magnis tamen excidit ausis.

An Expedient for PEACE amongst Christians, etc.
THE SECOND PART.
CHRISTENDOM makes up a good part of the Habitable World, consisting of several
Nations and Kingdoms, Professing but One Religion, and that the best in the
World; but the Inhabitants have so mixed the Government of this Religion (which
purely relates to Another World) with the Temporalities and Affairs of This,
that they are become the Scorn and Derision of the more Intelligent parts of
Mankind: For whereas they all believe in the Eternal and only True God, and in
Jesus Christ his Ever Blessed Son: They have such bitter Contentions about
Forms, and the True way of Worship, about right Interpretation of Books, about
Ceremonies, Vestments, Places, Times and Persons, their Power and Offices, etc.
That they make their most fruitful Land, an Aceldama or Field of Blood: Every
little Sect, Way and Opinion, is called a Religion; and a Law is made to
Establish it, and God Almighty entitled to the Truth of it; and when He is
concerned, then their Opposition cannot be too much, but the Powers of the
Earth must be Pulled down, their Dissenting Neighbors Destroyed, and
themselves undone for the maintaining of it; so that there is Kingdom against
Kingdom, and Nation against Nation; There is Papists and Protestants,
Calvinists, Lutherans; Dissenters, Churchmen, and an endless number of new
names of Distinction, the cursed motives to mischief and Disturbance, as is but
too manifest at this Day. It Is of sad Consideration, that Christian Princes
must have no Allegiance paid them, if of a differing Opinion from their
Subjects; That when a Protestant Rules, the Pope must discharge his Subjects
from their Allegiance; and when a Popish Prince Reigns, his Protestant Subjects
discharge themselves -- It highly concerns them therefore to think of some
Remedy and Expedient; for all their Power, their Titles and Crowns, are become
Precarious things, and ever and anon subject to be laid aside by the Insolent
Power of the Church, and ill Administration of the Affairs of another World:
But time will be ill spent in Mustering up a black list of Grievances, when
they are so Notorious, and so much (I will not say seen but,) felt by all Sides
and Parties of Christians of what Quality soever, even from the King on his
Throne, to the Beggar on the Dunghill; it will be much better spent in
Contriving of Expedients. And it may justly be expected, that any performance
of this nature, will rather meet with a favorable acceptance then
dicouragement, since a thing so universally wanted by all sorts of Men.

The Dove has been once sent out, but has returned again, finding no place to
rest the Sole of her Foot; The Waters of Confusion covering the Land: I shall
presume to send her once more, hoping she will find them assuaged, and return
with an Olive Leaf.

Then gently laying Infallibility aside, I shall resume my former Argument of
Impossibility of Agreement, and put it in its place, not only as the more
certain and undoubted Truth, but because when a foundation for Peace is laid,
it may be expected, it should be a Proposition universally acknowledged and
agreed to by all; And this we all know and agree in, That we can Not Agree: To
this the whole Christian World may safely Subscribe; but if they will not, they
cannot convince me to the contrary by any other thing than their Agreement. Let
them Agree then, and I have done. But I shall take it for granted, they will
not convince me after such a manner, and therefore will go on and say, That
this Proposition must be one of the chief Stones of the Foundation we must
Build our Peace upon; we must have our Agreement one way, from the
Impossibility of our Agreement another way; we must have Light out of this
thick Darkness; and order out of Confusion. And herein we are instructed by the
Methods of our all-Wise God and Creator, in a case of a Parallel Nature.

For in the Beginning, after he had Created all things out of Nothing, and
Spoke things into their Existence, from a formless Mass of Matter, by a
wonderful and strange sort of Chimistry; He brought Light out of Darkness, and
Order out of Confusion, and set all things in that most exquisite and
incomparable frame and model we see them: And all this, not by altering or
changing the nature of things differing (for as necessary He had Created them
so) but by bringing things of a like Nature together, or qualifying things of a
different Nature, so as to make them Agree, and be Harmonious -- But for the
present, waving this Observation, it will be necessary I Speak something of
Differences and Agreements; especially of the Nature of This Agreement, which I
say is Impossible.

Learned Men have employed their Parts, and been over and above Curious and
Critical in vain and unnecessary Distinctions; in such sort, that they
embroyled the World, and have too much contributed to bring it into the present
misery and distraction: I should be heartily glad now at last to see them
employ their Talents otherwise, and as they have distinguished men into Misery
and Confusion, so now they would try their Skill to distiguish them out again,
and bring the World into Peace and Order: It Is but high time they should do so,
and would they but distinguish a little and truly inform the world of the
Nature of Unity and Dissension, Discord and Concord, Agreement and Difference
(for Men have been miserably mistaken about these things) it is my Opinion they
would not be ill employed.

It ought to be observed, that amongst Christians there are several sorts and
kinds of Agreements, and several sorts of Differences.

First, They Agree in the most principal things, and in what they ought to
Agree, and this Agreement they call their Difference, though nothing so; for
they all Agree in their endeavors to please God; and their various Lines,
however differing in the Circumference, do unite in the Center. It Is a Maxim,
That things which Agree in a Third, Agree together; this being well followed,
will Metamorphose most of our Differences into Agreements. Our belief in the
Supreme God, and his Son Jesus Christ, pronounce and declare an Universal
Agreement: Now what are all our various ways and Modes of Worship, but so many
several Essays and Attempts to please This God, and Testifications of our
Agreement; and ought rather to be called parts thereof, than Differences: We
all endeavor to Worship God after the best manner we can, and must this way
and this manner, and our endeavors herein, be called Differences? Indeed the
World has branded them along time with that odious appellation, but very
improperly, for herein we show nothing more then our Agreement. But to speak
the Truth, this is not the Agreement I contend for, it is indeed a sort of
Agreement we have, and think not of; It Is mixed, Partial and Relative, but not
productive of Public Peace. One Man keeps a Festival thinking to Please God
thereby, another is afraid and scrupulous, and will not keep it, thinking to
please him too. Here they both Agree, and both Disagree. They both agree to
Please God; he that observes, and he that observes not, observes to the Lord,
which ought to be a motive of Charity: But then they disagree and differ one
from another, which though they may innocently enough, ye too frequently is
made Criminal by exerting their Passions to that height, that Charity and their
Honest Intentions are consumed in the Flame.

Secondly, They Agree in what they ought not to Agree, viz, They Conspire,
Cabal and Agree, to Plague, Vex, and Disturb one another; and this ought not to
be called an Agreement, but a Difference: And of this Nature was the Agreement
of Herod and Pilate, and of late but too frequently practiced by Two Parties of
Christians, in order to ruin the Third.

Thirdly, When Men cease to Molest and Disturb one another, they are said to
Agree; and when they have made Stipulations, and Contracts, we call the
Transaction an Agreement.

But the last sort of Agreement (I principally contend against, and in my
former Discourse have showed to be impossible) is that of Men being all of One
Mind, One Judgment, One Apprehension in the matters of Religion, or otherwise;
and whenever I say Agreement is impossible, I mean, this sort of Agreement,
which really is so, and no other.

Christian Men have indeed taken indefatigable Pains to bring this Agreement to
pass, and cannot as yet be brought to leave off, although opposed by God,
Nature, and all things Visible and Invisible.

Let us turn our Eyes wherever we Please, we shall see nothing but Diversity
and infinite Variety in things; if we look up to Heaven, what shall we see
there, but an innumerable company of Stars, not ranged and in order, but
promisciously placed, hic et ubique? Indeed if the Sons of Men had been to have
placed them, no doubt but they would have put them in Rows and in Order; I mean
such a position which they call Order: But what they call Order, Unity, and
Agreement; The All-Wise God esteems not so; He knows and can see Beauty; Order,
and Agreement in different Natures and infinite variety of Things, though They
cannot; and methinks He plainly speaks from Heaven and tells them so; having
Confronted them with such a glorious appearance of infinitely differing but
most beautiful Instructors, which they cannot miss of seeing, if they will but
look upward: I say, one would think they should learn their Lesson out of this
glorious Book of Heaven, wrote in such fair and legible Characters, and cease
their vain attemps about an universal Order and Agreement. Further, if the
Almighty has not only placed these Heavenly Bodies for Ornament, but also has
empowered them to influence the Bodies and Minds of Men (as it is possible he
has, and many suppose and contend for) Then this will aggravate their vanity,
in endeavoring to be more in Order, and more Methodised, than their
Principals. And they may contend and endeavor to Eternity, but all to no
purpose; for when they shall have Power, or be able to remove the Stars from
place to place, or form them into what Figures they please, discharge their
Influences, or regulate their Promiscuousness: Then, and not till then, shall
they be able to bring their Motly Agreement to pass. But as it is impossible to
do the one, so not more possible to perform the other.

Then again if we cast down our Eyes upon Earth, what shall we see to agree
there? It Is nothing but a Composition of things of different qualties and
natures, a pregnant Mass of Matter, productive of infinite Variety of Forms and
Shapes. And this is not its Deformity, but Beauty, and it would be but an
unpleasing Heap without it. But after all, we (like Men as we are,) will needs
have all to Agree. We would have no Differences, we would have all Men to have
One Mind, the Same Opinion, the Same Thought and Apprehension of things, and
perform Actions after the Same Manner and Method; Notwithstanding all the
discouragement, and constant and successive defeats, we have met with in the
Prosecution thereof.

For first our Maker defeated Nimrod and his Accomplices, the old Babylonian
Builders, who were contriving and forming to themselves strange universal
things, under One Form, One way, and One Government; as also of late, in the
Reformation, the New Babylonian Butlders, who were carrying on the same work,
but in an Ecclesiastical manner. And most of the great Invaders of the Earth
have met with the same misfortune; for some of their large Dominions and
Empires, have at this day scarce any being but in Records, and that with great
difficulty Preserved. By God Almighties proceeding and dealings with the sons
of Men in the things of this Nature, he seems plainly to tell them, That he is
not pleased with such their universal Proceedings. He never yet prospered or
established universal Kings, or universal Churches (excepting for some little
time to punish others) but has always pulled down their Buildings, and reduced
them to their primitive Condition and station: And whatever esteem or value
they may put upon universal Agreements, universal Empire or Churches, it does
plainly appear He has not the same. For he has divided the Globe of the Earth
by Seas, and Rivers, and Mountains, and allotted each Nation its Limits: And
this Division is both Ornamental and Necessary, and no Division with him at
all, for he beholds all the Kingdoms of the Earth, as one Undivided Mass and
Spot of Ground, and all the Generations of Men, as one Stock and Family in one
House, but several Apartments; and though we cry out of Division and
Separation, yet he beholds all Christian Assemblis together, and as in one
place, and all to be in the Communion of one Church, as so many Figures in one
Sum. and all their several Opinions to be parts of One Agreement. So that we
need not be so fierce to attempt impossibilities, to fill up the Sea, choke up
the Rivers, or level the Mountains, to make all a Terra Firma; nor take all
that pains which some Men do to reconcile Differences and make all men of One
Mind, which is equally impossible: Which brings me again to my first Assertion,
which ought a little further to be insisted on.

It Is impossible that Christians should Agree in the way and nature they would
Agree, not only for the reasons mentioned in my former Discourse, but because
there is no common Standard fixed and agreed to by all, by which all Parties
may take their measures, and square and decide their Pretenses. Some will have
the Pope to be head of the Church, and to be Infallible, and the sole Judge of
all Controversies and Differences; others will have a General Council; some
will have both in Conjunction, others neither of them, either apart, or in
Conjunction: Some again will have the Scriptures to be Judge, others Tradition;
some, Scriptures and Tradition together; others neither Scriptures nor
Tradition, but every private Person; Some again will have the Church, others
the Fathers, some neither Church nor Fathers. And what a noise have we
perpetually sounding in our Ears about Church, Fathers, Councills, and
Scriptures, which are true, and which are spurious? The Objections at this time
of Day, lie almost equally alike against all. But if they agree, which are the
True, they fall out about the Interpretation, and every Party say their own
Comment is right, and nothing as yet on Earth has been found sufficient and
competent to make a dicision. It Is not fit that the less number should judge
for the greater; a single Man for a whole company, nor a whole company for a
single Man, where the matter is Salvation: The Scriptures indeed are the best
Rule, and the best Judge we have, but this only to private and Particular
Persons for themselves but not for others, not for public Communities; and
Societies against one another. For the Question, Who shall interpret them, will
never be answered; a private Person may judge for himself, but not for himself
against another; when another is concerned. he is a party, and therefore cannot
be Judge: But all the several Sects and Societies of Christians are Parties,
therefore cannot be Judges, neither can Reason, Scripture, Tradition, Fathers,
Councils, etc. be Judges, being interpreted by Parties; neither is there a
Judge on Earth, but is a Party; Our Agreement therefore must be concluded to be
impossible, and our Differences left to be judged by the God of Heaven, who is
only sufficient and competent for Judgment. From this Impossibility therefore
of a material Agreement, proved from the infinite variety of humane
Understandings as men, and from the infinite difficulty of things, as
Christians, I would lay a Foundation for a formal Agreement, integral and
complete in all its parts, toward God and toward Man; but a further
improvement I shall reserve to the foot of my Discourse, and make Answer to a
very necessary Question which may be asked me, viz. Amidst so great
Indeterminations and Irresolutions of men, amidst so many Plausibilities and
Probabilities, and infinite Pretentions to Truth, what Measures must Men take,
or what Rule must they walk by? To which I answer,

That Is a Reason which convinces, and that is an Argument which persuades, and
that is a good Sermon which makes men better; besides those which are the best
in their kind, and in their own nature really so; and he has understood
Councils, and Fathers, and Scriptures right, who understands them in a sense
which assists him to mortify a Lust, crush an evil Affection, or make him a
better Man, although he understand them wrong and differing from the original
Intent; and it is possible for a man to understand wrong, yet live right; to be
convinced by a slender Reason, a weak Argument and edified by an ordinary
Sermon Every one of these, though not the best in their kind, yet are
equivalent to the best, if they produce the Effect of the best; And this will
put a Check to a great Evil there is in the World, viz* the extravagant
Commendation of Preachers Books and Discourses, raised often to that height,
that Charity is infringed and the Peace endangered. Why must the greatest and
most sublime Reasons be pressed upon me, when one of a lesser magnitude does
convince me? And I be forced to hear and may be vilified for not commending
such a Brave Preacher, when one of another style and another Method does more
operate upon me and give me better Satisfaction? There is a necessity that
Truth should be served no and addressed to men in various and differing VVays
and Methods, because there are Men of various and differing Understandings to
be wrought upon; and hereby all Books, Comments and Discourses, infinitely
differing one from another, according to the differing Capacities and
Apprehensions of their Authors, become useful and profitable. And this in a
great measure may serve for answer to the Question; but that which must make it
complete, is an honest Heart and sincere Endeavors of finding out the Truth,
and a ready and willing Disposition to comply with it when found: And when men
have done their best to please God, and find out the Truth, (as every Party of
Christians say they do) if they mistake, they mistake like Men, and God will
never punish them for it, for that would be to punish them for doing their best
which ought to be far from the thoughts of every good Christian, so that (...)
they be not (...), yet they may be safe, safe I say from the Displeasure and
Punishment of their Maker thought not of their Fellow Creatures. For when men
have been diligent; honest and sincere, and used their utmost Endeavors to
find out the Truth, please God, and save their Souls, in comes an armed Band of
humane Sanctions, Laws, Penalties and Compulsion, to drive them out of this
way, which they have judged and pitched upon to be the only true way to
Salvation; which brings me to the second Head to be discoursed of in order to
the Peace of Christendom, and that is Law; which I shall publicly and solemnly
arrest, as the grand Enemy and Disturber thereof.

For in the name of the King of Peace, what has Law to do in Religion? Religion
ought to be the most free, most (voluntary and) unconstrained thing in the
World; he that ministers in it, ought to do it freely and willingly, I and he
that performs any Action in it, ought to choose it, and be fully convinced and
satisfied in his Mind; and no Method ought to be used either in the
Administration or Propagation, but Argument, Reason and Discourse; and it must
be acknowledged as a most certain Truth, That if the whole World join together
to make a Law, this Law cannot make a Reason a good Reason, or an Argument a
good Argument, or make any Proposition either true or false; and if we ask any
party of Christians why they use such a Method or such a way in Religion? Their
Answer is, Because they think it true: Since Truth then is and ought to be the
Standard and Measure by which men ought to determine their Choice, and since it
is most certain, that Law cannot make or determine Truth, Law by a plain and
necessary consequence must be judged useless in Religion. Again, If Actions are
not voluntary, and Religion be not chosen, there will be no Grounds lest for
either Rewards or Punishments, Nil ardet in Inferno nisi propria voluntas,
nothing burns in Hell but a Man's Will: It Is the Will that makes men criminal,
and subject to be rewarded or punished; but when there is a Law, there is no
Room lest either to will or to choose, but it comes with a must, with Authority
and Power, and puts both Religion our Will and Choice out of doors. And here one
may easily discover the Paw of the Grand Imposter and Enemy of Mankind, who
when he foresaw what great Advantages the Religion of the Holy Jesus would
bring to the Sons of Men, by a sly and crafty Device spirited away the True
Babe, and left us a Changeling in his room; he stole away Religion and left us
a Law, and so effectually brought about his cursed Designs and ruined us. But
further, amongst Protestant Christians Law is the most absurd and vain thing in
the world, for they do (and that truly) acknowledge the Books of the Old and
New Testament to be the Only Rule of Faith, containing full and ample
Instructions how to Worship God, and perform all necessary Actions in Religion;
also that men in common are able to understand, interpret and judge of these
Books.

Now if these be their Rule and only Rule, what have they to do with Law, which
is another Rule Our Savior faith, His Took is easy, his Burden light; But Law
is a Tyrant and Usurper of Christian Privileges, and lays on heavy Burdens,
contrary to the sweet and gentle Methods of the Gospel; it neither is nor ought
to be a Rule to Christians in their Religion, and in things relating (...)
another World, though it may in their secular Concerns, and in what may relate
to this. But some will say that Law is not another Rule, but the same, and that
it is consonant to the Seriptures: But who must be Judge of all this? If one
Party usurp the Power of Judges, it is an injury done to all the rest, and all
Protestants have been allowed the Privilege of judging for themselves, being
to be punished themselves: therefore whatever party usurps Judgment, makes a
Law, or affixes a Penalty, are to be looked on as Tyrants, and as those who
bring in a foreign Power, and invade the Privileges of their Brethren. But
suppose it agreeable to Scriptures, what then? Why then it will be agreeable to
Scriptures, and so the Point is gained; it will have no Penalty, because
Scriptures enjoin no Penalty, and so by consequence will be no Law, but will
dwindle away into another thing. and must have another name, a Scripture
Inference, or a Deolaration what is Truth and agreeable to Scripture, such are
all humane Sanctions in relation to Religion; Men think they have done
something and that they are Parents, and that they have made Laws, when alas!
they have done nothing, they give their Children Names before they are Born. It
must be acknowledged in all Human and Secular Affairs; that in any Kingdom or
State Majority of Consent can make a Sanction which may take the Appellation of
a Law, and pass an Obligation of Obedience, and charge a Penalty on the Breach.
But in Religion and divine Matters, and things of Eternity, the Scene is
changed. These are things aliend Provinciae and alient Fori, of another Nature
and another Jurisdiction. The Powers of the Earth have nothing to do here,
being neither competent for Cognizance, nor sufficient to give Judgment in such
Matters. Their making Laws and meddling in such Mutters as these, have set the
World in a Flame, and when rightly considered, it cannot be expected it should
be otherwise. For Temporal things hold no proportion with Eternal, nor the Laws
of God with the Laws of Man: That God has given some more particular and
special Laws to Mankind is most certain, because he knew the best Contrivances,
and most refined Inventions of Men would be insufficient, and fall short of
reaching all Emergencies: Therefore he has reserved the Cognizance of such,
special Laws as a particular Prerogative to himself, and that in the Court of
Heaven, and not in any humane Judicature. These Laws I mean are the Laws in
Men's Consciences, the Laws of Truth and Revelation, which neither a greater
number for a less, nor a less for a greater, nor any one Man for another, is to
judge of but every single and individual Mann for himself, and this because
every single Man must answer for himself, and be punished for himself and not
for another. Further, the Eternal God has fixed Eternal Rewards and Eternal
Punishments to the performance or non performance of his Laws: And it is the
highest Reason imaginable, that Men should not in the least be honored, but
have all the Freedom which the World is able to afford them in a disquisition
of so great and infinite Importance, as the Salvation of their Souls, and
obtaining Eternal Happiness, or shunning Eternal Misery. (...) however
plausibly interested Men and the Politicians of the World may discourse for
Coercion, their Reasons are vain and foolish. For it is a most certain Truth,
That no Christian Prince can be long safe on his Throne, nor any State long in
Peace, where there is any Let or Hindrance in these (...). For what is able to
counterballance or stand in Competition with Eternity? What will not Christian
Men, really believing in another World, do to obtain Eternal Happiness or shun
Eternal Misery? All humane S^nctions though contrived with never so great Art
and Subtilty, have hitherto been Baffled, and snap'd asunder like Simplon's
Cords, when these Mighty Philistines have come upon them. When the God of Heaven
speaks, where shall Mortal Man appear? What can humane Sanctions do when a
(...) Law appears? When Eternity speaks what can Temporal Punishments prevail?
Hitherto they have not prevailed, and I think I may safely affirm they never
will.

Laws in Religion therefore must be granted me to have no other Tend^^cy but to
disturb Men, and to be a most effectual (...) keep on foot all the Plots and
Contrivances which Perplex the Christian World. Every Side and Party do really
believe, that the Way and Method they have those to Worship then Maker, is the
Best, the Truest, and most conducive to make them Eternally Happy, and what can
be supposed to be the Consequence of a Hinderance and a coercive Law to Men so
thinking, then what we see daily practiced by all of them, viz. Plotting and
Contriving the during one another? Can it be supposed that a Man should be
easy when he is put out of that way which he really believes the only way that
leads to Eternal Life? But if it be supposed he may be easy in such a Case to
yet it cannot be supposed that he should be casse (if he be in his Senses) when
he is put into the ready way to Damnation, and consigned to Eternal Burnings,
which every Side and Party think they are, when by a Law they are forced out of
their way? Who then will appear an Advocate for Law in Religion, which has such
a Natural Propensity to pull down Monarchs, unhinge Governments, dishonor God
and ruin Men; I wish I was at a loss for Instances; but alas: they are too
ready at hand our own unhappy Nation has too long been a Scene of Troubles on
this Account. For whereas we have all done our best (as all sides will say) to
please our Maker, and every one strove who should come nearest the Mark: yet
some has had The good Fortune to be Esteemed and Rewarded, others to be
reproached and punished, and all for doing and endeavoring the same things,
and all this by a discriminating and intervening Law, which can make none of
our ways either true or false, good or bad. And it must be acknowledged that
the word Dissent is a Relative Term, and implies one we dissent from, and if I
dissent from another, another dissents from me. So we are both Dissenters, and
Law cannot turn the Scale (being no Judge) so that it is a most unreasonable
thing, since all Arrows are taken out of the same Quiver, and equal
Probabilities and Plausibilities brought by all Parties from Scriptures,
Fathers, etc. that one should be respected above another (...) Religion, or
rather Opinion Establi^^d (...) and Hic pret^ sceleris (...) hic D^: Alexander
for Robbing is called a Conqueror, but another a Banditti; one gets a Crown,
the other a Gibbet; one for dissenting is rewarded, and another for dissenting
is punished, though both have a like Pretention to Truth.

It Is Law therefore in Religion which I impeach as a Dissturber of the Peace of
Christendom, an Occasion of Plots, a Fomenter of Sedition, Faction and
Rebellion* and of most of the (...) amongst us, which being taken away,
innum^^able Advantages of Peace would ensue. (But of those in the Conclusion)
What for the present I shall further add, is (with their leave) the Templers
Motto, with some Variation (leaving out the Sword as a strange Instrument) and
(...)

Let the Truth Live.
And the Law give
((...))
(...)
As also what the Prophet speaks, Isa. 56. and 16. The time being now come
says the Lord, That he who blesses himself (...) himself in the God of Truth;
(...) by the God of (...) are forgotten, and because they are hid from mine
E^es* Which brings me to the third Thing (...) discourse of in order to (...)
Government, (...) be (...) be (...) although (...) ensue thereby (...) says he
by his Prophet Haggai, It is a little while and I will shake the Heavens and
the Earth, and the Sea and the dry Land, and I will shake all Nations, and the
Desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this House (meaning the
Temple) with Glory, says the Lord of Hosts. The Silver is mine, and the Gold
is mine, says the Lord of Hosts; The Glory of this latter House shall be
greater than of the former, says the Lord of Hosts: And in this Place will I
give Peace, says the Lord of Hosts. Here let me make my Paraphrase: By shaking
the Heavens and the Earth, etc. is not meant a literal Sense, as some would
have, nor are the Material Heavens to be so shaken, but hereby is meant all the
Kingdoms, Constitutions and Governments of the World; and that the Prophet
means so, is plain by verse 21 and 22. where he says, Speak to Zerubbabel
Governor of Judah, saying, I will shake the Heavens and the Earth, and I will
overthrow the Throne of the Kingdoms, and destroy the Strength of the Kingdoms
of the Heathen, and I will overthrow the Chariots, etc. And what is meant by
the Desire of all Nations? It Is Halcyon days, a peaceable Time, the flourishing
of the Gospel, the calling of the Jews, and what our Savior Prayed for, Thy
Kingdom come, thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: The Silver is
mine, and the Gold is mine; that is, I can Adorn and make this Temple as Rich
and as Beautiful as I please: I want nothing which may Embellish it, for the
Silver and the Gold is mine, and so are the Cattle of a thousand Hills, as he
told David; but it is not my Desire that should be Adorned with Silver or Gold,
and yet the Glory of it shall be greater than the former, for in this Place
will I give Peace. Here by this Temple cannot be meant a Material Temple,
either formerly built or to be built, neither of the two Former, because it
must Exceed them in Glory, and the Glory must not consist in a glittering show
of Silver or Gold, but of Peace: Where let me note, that God does plainly
intimate little Peace has hitherto been in the World, and therefore as a
special Blessing does promise, that Peace shall be the peculiar Ornament of
this Latter Temple; and that we may depend upon his Word and Promise, four
Times says the Lord of Ho^ts, is mentioned in these four Verses, sufficient
Asseverations to Engage the Faith of a mortal Man. But I cannot leave off my
Comment here, but for the Sake and Consolation of the scattered Tribes, shall
bring the Prophet's Words again to the File. Yet once, etc. by which the Living
God plainly intimates, That he had often shaken the Heavens and the Earth
before, that is, the Governments and Kingdoms of the World, for the Material
Heavens and Earth were so far from being shaken often, that since the Creation,
they were never shaken once; for that of the Deluge, was not a shaking the
Earth or the Heavens, but only a Permission of one Element some time to be
Predominant, and to return again to its Duty. But not to Expound it by Parts,
The Eternal God, the Lord of Hosts, does seem plainly to say thus: Ye Sons of
Jacob mine Heritage, my Chosen, Weep not, but be Comforted; though your latter
House falls short of the Glory of the former, though you cannot Adorn it with
so much Silver and Gold, weep not, I have Silver and Gold enough, I accept your
Will and good Endeavors; and know ye, That Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is
my Footstool, What Temple can you make for me? I value not Houses or Temples,
for the Substance of these things have mine Hand made; but him I value who is
Poor, and of a Contrite Spirit, and Trembles at my Word; but cease your
Lamentations and Weeping, though the Glory of the former Temple does far Exceed
the Glory of this your latter Temple, yet once, it is a little while, and I
will shake the Heavens and the Earth, and will build you a Temple (not a
Material One) whose Glory shall far Exceed the Glory of the former, and in this
Place will I give Peace says the Lord of Hosts.

The Lord of Hosts is now about to build this Glorious Temple of Peace, he is
Faithful who has Promised, he is beginning to shake the Nations; and to
perform his Covenant to his People; Yet a little while and the Gentiles shall
bring his Heritage and his Chosen for an Offering to the Lord out of all
Nations, upon Horses, and in Chariots, and in Litters, and upon Mules, and upon
swift Beasts, to his Holy Mountain at Jerusalem, as he has spoken by the Mouth
of his Prophet; Rejoice ye therefore with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all
ye that Love her; Rejoice for Joy with her, all ye that Mourn for her.

But here I must note that this Promise is made to all Nations, but
particularly to the Jews and to the Christians; when to the Jews, it is called
a Temple; when to Christians, a Church: The first, long since have had their
Temple, their High Priest and Hierarchy, abolished. The latter; have theirs
still in being, which Symbolizes much with the Former, and must Symbolize with
their Fate, for they must now be pulled down.

Of CHURCH and STATE.
HERE is a very great Error, and we form to out selves very hurtful and foolish
Notions of things, we suppose the Church and State to be Two Things, and in all
our Discourses name them at Twice, whereas they really are but One: for the
Church is in the State, or rather is the State; for when the Nations of the
World at first became Christian, and received the Faith of Jesus, they became
better Nations, and the Inhabitants better People, having received better
Maxims and Principles, but still the same People; and they stood in Statu quo,
as to all Power or Administration of their Affairs. The Religion which came
amongst them, made no alteration of Things, but for the better, gently infusing
it self with as little noise as Rain on a Fleece of Wool: its Ministry was of
Grace and Godliness, and not of Empire and Dominion; it claimed no Power, being
it wanted none; its whole Design and Drift relating to things of another World,
or tending to promote Peace and Godliness in this; and happy had it been for
Christendom had its Nations and States only been called Christian, and its
Princes looked on this Religion only as good Qualities in their Subjects,
tending to promote Obedience and Peace in their Kingdoms, and gave it an
Establishment on this Account: And the so much celebrated Name of Church, had
never been heard of in the Nature it has been used. Also when they sent Judges
to minister Justice to their Subjects, had they with them sent Ministers to
Preach the Gospel, and continued it in such a sort of way to this Time, I am
persuaded the Author would never had occasion to write Expedients for Peace at
this day. But here lay their Mistake, seeing its Ministry was of Grace and
Godliness, and not of Empire and Dominion, they looked on the thing in them, as
divided from them; and would needs give it a new Name, and invest it with
Power, which though little at first, by degrees rivaled their own, and since
has jostled many of them out of their Thrones: And now they have Leisure to
Repent themselves of their bad Logic, in dividing the Accidents from their
Subjects and setting up Non entities. For the Church is nothing at all, a mere
Metaphysical Term; and when Christian Princes Govern their People well, they
Govern the Church well: for the Church is in the People, or rather the People
are the Church. But if they set up a Regiment or a Government in their Kingdoms
distinct from their own, they do but Nurse a Viper in their own Bosoms, and
they cannot in Reason expect their Crowns should ever sit easy on their Heads
amidst the unavoidable Emulation of two distinct Governments. The Church and
State are a Christian State, and but one, and so at first appointed by the God
of Heaven, and what God has joined, no man ought to put asunder. And I humbly
conceive, that Men professing Christianity, ought to have no distinct
Government from the State, I am sure they were much better Christians when they
had none. The Apostles propagated the Faith of Jesus in the Gentile World, and
the Ecclesiae, or Assemblies, congreated to perform Acts of Devotion in the way
which they had Taught, are called Churches; and when we read of the Churches of
Asia, or of this or that Church, nothing else is to be understood but the
Congregation of Believers met to pay Homage and Worship to their Maker in the
Name of Jesus; which was done in a plain and simple Manner, never enterfering
with, or disturbing the Government of the Place. Neither Power, nor Policy or
Skill, can be needful for a few honest and innocent Men, to meet together in a
peaceable manner to Worship God, all the Requisites in such a Case, are only a
Sincere Heart, and a Willing Mind: What need we then so much Ecclesiastical
Policy and Church Government? Or if we must have it, why must such Frames and
Machines be called the Church? This is to call the Scaffold, the Building. But
after all, it is most certain, that only True Believers and good Livers are the
Stones which make up that Heavenly Building, and are the only True Church of
Christ, against which the Gates of Hell shall be never able to prevail.

But we talk of setting up or pulling down Churches, in as material a Sense, as
when we Erect or pull down Houses; and one laments the pulling down such a rare
Established Church, and mightily opposes the Building of another, and we all
think our own Cottages, Palaces; and are always commending our own Church, and
discommending another; and such a stir we make about our Churches, that makes
us Ridiculous to all the World; and no wonder Christendom has been so long
Embroiled, since we have had so many Churches, that is, so many Occasions and
Causes of Disturbance.

There is but One God, one Christ, one Faith, one Baptism, one Religion, and
but one Church; and the several Persuasions, make but one Religion; and several
ways of Worship and distinct Congregations but one Church: But we call the
Parts the whole, and a single House a Town, and are in a continual Alarm in
Defense of our little Respective Cittadels. And to that height of Abuse is the
Name of Church now Grown; that to be of This or That Church, is to compound for
a good Life; and Men think if they belong to such or such a Communion, all will
go well with them; and having so many Parties amongst us, and so many Interests
to be served, the necessity of proselyting Men to their side, rather than to
Goodness or Truth, does but too much contribute to it; and some Guides are but
too willing to indulge Men in their Vice, so they will but be of their Party:
But hour we may value our selves, one for being of this Church, and another
for being of that; I am afraid if we live not good Lives, we shall be found at
last to be of no Church at all. Our Savior tells us, he that does
Righteousness, is Righteous; and that the Tree is known by its Fruit; if we
Live well, we shall be of God's Church, and if we Live ill, we shall certainly
be out of the Church: however we may be admitted by Men with the greatest
Solemnity and Ceremony into that Society we call by that Name. Templum Domini,
Templum Domini, was the Cry of the Jews, and now is the Cry of the Christians,
and sufficiently abused by both. We all know the Fate of theirs, and the
Reasons; and in knowing this, we may easily Calculate the Fate of our own: For
their Temple and our Church exactly answer one another, I mean our Political
Hierarchical Church; The Constitution of which, is fixed in a Diametrical
Opposition to Public Peace, and we can never expect Peace to flourish in
Christendom, so long as one Stone of this ill-built Fabric does lie upon
another. Then in order to the Pulling down this Mystical Babel,

I here most solemnly declare and protest against all the Present Constitutions
and Ecclesiastical Corporations of Christendom, as injurious to Public Peace
and Tranquillity, and very much disserving all Temporal Government, thwarting
and crossing the just Designs of Princes, and on all Occasions ministering to
Faction, Sedition and Rebellion, and against all differing Sects and Divisions
of Christians whatsoever, which are any way endowed with Immunities,
Privileges, or any Temporal Power, Preferment or Benefices, independent of the
State. And since all the Princes and States of Christendom are in a
Fermentation and Motion, it is my Opinion, that if they would (after an Act
Passed for the Relief of the Present Incumbents) seize all Temporal Endowments
and Benefices appropriated to Religion or Churches, and dissolve and make Null
all Ecclesiastical Decrees, Canons, Charters and Constitutions, They would do
the greatest Service to Christianity, Public Peace, and Themselves, as ever
has happened to the World, since the first Propagation of so Holy a Religion.
Ouc agathon polycoironie, etc. says the old Poet; which with deference, I
interpret, One Government, and one Power in a Nation, is enough. But if
Ecclesiastical Government must go down, some like Saul, will be for saving
Amaleck and the best of the Cattle, their Wealth and Riches: To which I answer,
these must not be saved, for Dominion and Power are inseparable to Wealth and
Riches; therefore these must be sacrificed, before God's Wrath can be appeased,
or Peace be settled in our Israel. But in Answer, methinks I hear a great noise
of Profaneness, Sacrilege, and the Ruin of of all Religion, but I shall be
deaf to the Objection, since in plain truth, the English of it is no more Then
Great is Diana of the Ephesians. For Religion would not at all be in hazard or
concerned in so great a Change, but would be purified and cleansed, and appear
much more amiable and Eligible, it would but divest her of her sordid Rags,
knock off her Fetters, and leading her out of the Squalid Prison of Terrene and
Temporal Mixtures, cloth her with Royal Robes, and restore her to her Throne
and Dignity.

The Religion of the Holy Jesus is (God be thanked, at this time of the Day) so
well propagated, that there is no danger of its being lost, if Honors, and
Preferments, and all Secular Advantages be discharged her Retinue, and secluded
her Family: For they make no Constituent or Essential Parts of her, but are
things which her mistaken but well-meaning Votaries have given her, to Adorn
and Bedeck her, but really have disguised and deformed her. For her Government
and Empire is over, nay in the Hearts and Consciences of Men; teaching them to
live good Lives, and to follow the Example and Precepts of the most Holy
Author, whose Life and Doctrine was a of spiritual Nature, abstracted and
separate from all Vain Glory, Pomp and Splendour, who did utterly Renounce the
dividing of Inheritances, and publicly declare his Kingdom was not of this
World.

His Religion therefore ministering in the Affairs of his own Kingdom, viz. of
Heaven, Grace and Glory, ought to be kept separate and pure, and not mixed with
the Things and Powers of this World. The English of Mill per Ann. is not
taking up the Cross, nor does Grace and Godliness echo right to Honors and
Revenues. Faith, Hope and Charity are Fundamentum, Paries and Tectum; The
Foundation, Walls and Roof of Christ's True Church upon Earth; other Structures
which we call Churches, are nothing at all, and if we can procure Means, or get
Builders to rear this Heavenly Fabric, implant these Essential Qualifications
in the Hearts of Men, our Work is done. The old Building must come down, and
the old Builders must be rejected, who have built with untempered Mortar; have
mixed Temporals with Spirituals; instead of Humility and Charity, have put Pride
and Ambition; and in the room of Mortification and Self-denial, have placed
Wealth and Honors, and have fenced all about with a High Wall of an usurped
Power and Authority. Other Measures therefore must be taken, and a new
Administration exhibited, since most of what hitherto have been taken, must be
acknowledged to be mistaken, and not calculated for public Peace.

Christ has been Preached indeed, Grace Administered, and Souls Saved; but the
Manner and Method of Administration has been irregular and unhappy, Ministering
rather Matter of Disturbance, than any Advantages to the Affairs of Princes and
Governme^ of the World. The many unhappy Monarchs disturbed in their Measures
of Government, by struggling Parties, and contending Churches, abused by
Ambitious and Discontented Bishops; especially by him who is so notorious, and
has so often Signalized himself by Affronting Crowned Heads, and perplexing
their Affairs, are sad Instances, and but too easily Verify the Charge.

And for the several Forms and Ways of Discipline and Administration, however
all Parties and Sects of Christians pretend they find them in the Scriptures;
They are no more able to find them there, than they are able to find the
several Figures of Birds, Beasts and Fishes in the Heavens, which the
Astrologers tell us are there. They may find faint Resemblances indeed, but no
Plain and self-evident Schemes: The Reason is, because none is of Absolute
Necessity to Salvation, and we must entertain very mean and low Thoughts of the
Goodness of the: All-wise Being, to let poor Mortals ramble in the Dark for so
many Ages, and subject them to an Eternal Search and wrangling about Schemes
and Forms of Government of his Church. If any at all had been absolutely
necessary, his Blessed Son, who came to Reveal all his Will, would have fixed
it as plain as the Sun in the Firmament, that it should not be in our Power to
mistake: And if no Church Government at all be necessary, then it follows of
Course, that no particular Way or Model is necessary; and indeed if we consider
things narrowly, a Coat may as well be made for the Moon, as any particular Way
be prescribed. The Flux and Reflux, and infinite uncertainty of humane Affairs,
will not admit of it; as long and as often as Men sin, they must be Punished,
but this cannot be done, unless there be Disturbances, and setting up and
pulling down Kingdoms, Nations and Families; and since it is necessary there
should be so great Changes, what particular Scheme can be drawn to fit all
Circumstances? But some will send me to the Apostles and to the Primitive
Times: But to this I answer, That what they might then prescribe, ought not to
be drawn down for a President to these Times. The Church then was under
Heathens and Persecutors, and but in its Infancy, and if we take their
Measures, we put a Child's Coat on a Man's Back, which is but an ill sight; but
yet it is done by us, and is a Folly we are so fond of, that neither the
Inconveniences we labor under, nor the just Derision we incur thereby, can
make us forego. We find indeed in the Scriptures, Episcopi, Presbiteri,
Diaconi, but not exhibited to us in such commanding and indispensible Terms, as
to pass an Obligation and Necessity on all Ages of the Church, and all Mankind,
to have the same. But if Men useful, serving the Same Purposes and Ends, and
more Conducive to Public Tranquillity in these latter Ages of the World, after
so great a Change of Circumstances and Corruption of Manners, by the Supreme
Power of any Nation shall be thought fit to be chosen, no matter whether they
have the same Names or no, or any Names at all, so they serve the same Ends;
for the Business of Christianity is not a thing of Names and Titles, but a
Substantial Thing, productive of Holiness, Piety, and Charity: And whatsoever
Person or Thing which may be thought Fit and Convenient to promote her
Interest, and Minister to her Necessity, may without Scruple be adopted into
her Family. And all Present Methods of Government and Ways of Administration,
if found disserving the Ends of Public Peace and True Religion, may be
innocently dissolved, and new ones Chosen, according to the Wisdom and
Discretion of the Supreme Power. And the Reason is, because all Offices and
Functions Ecclesiastical, and all Methods and Ways of Administration in the
Religion of the Holy Jesus, make no parts of it, but are Extrinsecal to the
Nature of the thing, therefore may be changed or altered on the forementioned
Account.

The greatest Opposition to this will be made by those who pretend to their
Functions by a Commission from Heaven, and by a Divine Right; but these are of
two sorts. The first I believe will quickly lay down their Pretensions, when
the Grandeur of the Church is Diminished, and her Power, her Law, and Riches,
are taken away; The latter, who may be innocently Abused, and think themselves
under an indispensable Obligation of Preaching the Gospel, must be let alone,
there is no Remedy for them but Time, which it is possible by degrees may let
them see their Error, and lessen their High Thoughts of their Fitness, and
sufficiency of undertaking so great a Charge. But however it may happen, the
Predication of no Pretenders can affect the Public Peace, when both Law and
Power to do hurt, are taken from them, and the Matter and Subject of their
Discourses are purely spiritual, and relating to the things of another World.

But by way of Recapitulation, and in order to a Conclusion. The Foundations to
be laid for a New Settlement, are, First,

The Impossibility of Agreement, and Innocence of Differences.

Secondly, That the Church be converted into a Christian State, that she needs
no Law, no Power, or Revenues.

Thirdly, That whatever Forms or Ways of Administration in Religion, or the
Church, has hitherto been used, may innocently and lawfully be changed. Then
the Plain and necessary Consequences will be these:

When Agreement is Impossible, Men will cease to attempt it; and when
Differences are made Innocent, the infinite variety of Understandings and
Apprehensions of Men will be no more hurtful or offensive, then their different
Faces: When there is no Government, all Contentions which is the right, will
cease; and where there is no Law, there will be no Transgression, and by
consequence no Delinquents to be punished; and when there is no Power, there
will be no danger of abusing it; And how soon shall we see the the flames of
Contention cease, when the combustible Fuel of Wealth, and Power, and Honors,
are taken away? But further, At the very sound of impossibility of Agreement, a
cessation of all Controversies must necessarily ensue, and this Doctrine does
presently summon all the most skilful and learned in the Art of Wrangling, to
lay down their Arms and live Peaceably; and how happy must the Christian World
be, when rid of such Seditious Captains, that so long have disturbed her Peace?
Then the Doctrine of no Government, is not less Advantageous and Beneficial;
for at one breath it tumbles down all Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, and gives
ease to the groaning and miserable Potentates of the Earth; it answers all the
Prayers of the Saints for many Ages; and like a voice from Heaven, or the Trump
of God, Tumbles down the mighty Man of Sin, or Whore of Babylon, from her
Throne: And methinks I see the Princes of the Earth already in Council against
her, to pull down her Pride, and divest her of her Power, which so long has
been used against them: Then for Law, that being banished, Christian Men would
then begin to look Innocently, and the great Machine of Persecution and Rapine
would fall to the Ground; Wicked Men would have no pretense to exercise their
Cruelties, and the Earth would no more Groan and Cry out for Vengeance for the
Blood of Saints, Martyrs, and Professors, that has been spilled upon her: It Is
these Laws that are the sharp Teeth with which Christians devour one another;
they might Dispute and Argue with Innocence and Safety, were but these Weapons
laid out of their way, which they too often snatched to complete the Victory,
and to the ruin of each other.

But by this time men will say my design tends to unhinge all Governments, to
destroy all Laws, and to make nothing but Confusion in the World: To this I
answer, That there was Darkness before Light, Confusion before Order, and
whoever will have a new House, must have some trouble in the building, and
endure the Inconveniences of puling down the old One: But this is not
sufficient, but in further answer to the Objection, I desire to have it
observed, That the Christian World is in Confusion already, that I make no
disturbance, but find it; that I cannot Confound them more then they are
already Confounded; that Governments are unhinged, and Laws broke, and Princes
in Arms, ready to destroy one another, and one of the principal occasions is
Religion; therefore some great thing is the matter; It Is either in the Religion
itself, or in the Managery and Administration of it; the first I acquit; the
latter I lay my Accusation against, and charge the Administrators with assuming
Power and making Laws, and Erecting a Mock Government, which has Ruined and
Confounded the State, and all True Laws and True Governments: I therefore shall
take the Liberty to move and suggest some Considerations for a New and Better
way of Administration; and I hope my undertaking will find a Favorable
Acceptance amongst all good Men.

Then the Administration of the Religion of the Holy Jesus, may be divided into
two parts, Ordinary and Extraordinary; the Ordinary, which consists of Prayers
and Praises, and Dispensations of Charity, to be Performed by ordinary Men; I
hope it will not be denied me, but that Men in Common are capable of performing
such things, after some few Lessons taught them of the nature and attributes of
the Being they are to Petition and Adore; other Requisites are only a Sense of
their Wants, and Mercies received, which almost naturally will make them both
Eloquent and Grateful. As to their meeting together, this will require no great
Art or Subtilty, nor will the Time and Place meet with greater Difficulty:
Wherever Two or Three are gathered together in my Name, says our Savior, I
will be in the midst of them; there is neither Time and Place mentioned, nor
the Quality or Capacities of the Persons to meet, but all runs in an indefinite
Manner. By two or three, either may be meant so many, in a literal Sense, or a
certain Number for an uncertain, but however a posse to congregate, or gather
together, must necessarily be employed and allowed to Men in common, from this
indefinite Text. And notwithstanding all the great noise of Disagreement,
Dissenters and Schismatics, if Men can agree so to meet together to pay Homage
to the great God in the Name of Jesus, their Agreement is sufficient, and here
is a Blessing promised them from this plain Text, which I hope will be
sufficient to discharge me from the Reproach of an Innorator. As for their
Matter and Way, etc. God must be Judge of it, and not Men. Let there therefore
be given to Men a Power to Congregate, and in their Respective Congregations,
let them choose what Men they think fit to dispense their Charity, and to be
Judges of the Lives of their Fellows, so as to Expel them their Congregations
if Occasion require. Let them call these men by what Names they please. But let
there be no Laws amongst them, but those of Reverence and Respect, of Shame and
Fear, which are the best and only Laws which Christians ought to have in their
Economy. But if they break these gentle Bonds, Then Currat Lex, let the
Secular Power take Place. This for the ordinary part of the Administration to
be performed by ordinary men, or men in Common. As for the Extraordinary, which
is the Administration of the Word and Sacraments, to be performed by Men
separated, and of better Capacities, let it be thus:

When the Supreme Power of each Christian Nation, have set themselves in Statu
quo, dissolved all Ecclesiastical Governments, and resumed from the Church her
usurped and destructive Power and Revenues, (the first must be never given her
again, the last put to better Uses.) Then I say let them build and Erect in the
midst of each Respective Nation, Magnum Collegium Christianum, a large
Christian College, and Endow it with such Privileges and Conveniences, as may
be thought fit and Proper, etc. Then let the Wisdom of each Nation, (after
having asked their Willingness) choose a considerable number of Youth, of the
hopefullest Constitution of Body and Mind; and after public Addresses made to
the Living God, by Fasting and Prayer, for an auspicious Election, let Lots be
Cast, and on whom the Lots do fall, let them receive an Order from the State,
to Enter into the said College, to Fit and Qualify themselves to be Preachers
and Ministers of the Gospel; and after such a Term of years continuance, as
shall be thought fit, let a certain number be brought forth; and the question
of Willingness being asked, and Addresses made to Heaven, as aforesaid, let
Lots proportioned to the National Wants be cast, and on whom the Lots do fall,
let a convenient and honorable Allowance be settled, and let them receive their
Commission from the State, to Preach the Kingdom of Heaven, and Jesus Christ
Crucified, and Minister the Word and Sacraments in a plain, decent, and orderly
manner, as near as possible they can to the first Institution: And when the
Judges set out in the King or States Name, to distribute Justice, and determine
Law, let them also per Order of the King or State, Preach the Kingdom of Heaven
and the Gospel, in the same Itinerant and Circular manner, through all the
Cities and Towns of each Respective Kingdom, instructing the People in the most
pure Doctrine and Belief of the Holy Jesus, and in all the most Necessary and
Fundamental Points of his Religion (a definition of which, it is possible,
Volente Deo, may be the Subject of another Discourse) and let their Subjects be
levelled against Sedition and Rebellion, Exhibit Peace in its best Apparel,
Extol Justice, Mercy and Charity, and whatever may tend to the Glory of God,
or Peace and Welfare of Mankind, and not at all to meddle with Law, the
State, or Government; always remembering they are not appointed Ministers of
State, but of the Gospel. And if a distinct performance was allotted for such
and such a Circuit, it would not do amiss, viz. Instructing and Proselyting for
one, Baptizing for another, and giving the Sacrament for a Third, or varying
these, as may be thought most fit and convenient, doubling the first, or
intermitting the last: Or if from the said College, having Twelve Gates, they
should go out every Month and Heal the Nations (which Scripture indigitates)
nothing can be thought of more convenient. This way and method, I hope, will
easily be allowed me to be sufficient for the Salvation of Souls; and would but
the Princes and States of Christendom consent to settle such an economy, the
plain Consequences thereof would be,

Popery, that wicked thing, so much hated and abominated by Protestants, not
only for its own innate Evils, but also its Collateral and Accidental ones;
being the common Tool which all Parties use to set up, or pull down one
another, would in a moment be buried in Oblivion; and Heresy, its Twin and
Brother in Iniquity, would be buried in the same Grave. A new Heaven and a new
Earth would suddenly appear; all the Disturbing Names of Papists and
Protestants, Schismatic and Heretic, would speedily cease; we should have no
Sides nor Parties of Christians; no bitter Contentions which is the True
Church; the Indefatigable Pains of compassing Sea and Land to make Proselytes,
would be at an end, and all the mischievous Consequences attending thereon: Now
all Sides and Parties are Industrious to make Converts, and give their Reasons
and Arguments, and yet at the same time Interpretatively would not have them
taken, for none meets with greater Shame and Ignominy then Converts, who if
they obey their own, or are convinced by others Reasons, are said to change
their Religion (as they call it) and are hated and abhorred; so that men in a
great measure, are under an obligation to stick to their Principles, whether
they be good or bad, because of the Reproach they of necessity must meet with
if they change them. And alas! These which they call their Principles and
Religion, are nothing but some fond and unnecessary Opinion, which may be
changed and no hurt at all done. But then men would have no Temptation to
change, having no Party to go to, no Sect to maintain, and no particular Church
to defend; which are the common Themes of Christian men, and at this time make
but too great Part of their Religion, and too frequently ministers matter of
their Mutual Ruin. Again, Now most of our time is spent in commending our
selves and our way, and discommending others, and their way; and Three parts of
our Religion, is made up of nothing but Vapor and Smoke, of mere Talk and
finding of Faults; if we can charge and accuse, and make others Guilty, and our
selves Innocent, it is Religion enough: And amongst so many contending Parties
of Christians, it is almost impossible any Justice should be done, the Spirit of
Partiality so reigns amongst us: But Terras Astraea Revisit. Then Justice
would run down our Streets like a mighty Stream, and all the Parts, the Piety,
and Learning, at least wise Honesty, which is certainly amongst most Parties of
Christians, would have their due Effects, and appear in their own proper
Colors, when cleared from the Foggs and Mists of Contentious Disputes, which
confines them to their proper Orbs, and will not suffer them to be
Communicative, or disperse their Rays, but give a dim and partial Light.
Further, Now no Oath can bind, no Benefits oblige, no Prince Reign, but all the
most Sacred Bonds of Gratitude, Honor and Obedience, and every other thing
which may make men wish to Live, are violated and broken asunder, if Religion,
or that which men call by that Name, stand in Competition, or Mother Church is
to be served; and men pull down Houses, tumble down Monarchs, and ruin
Kingdoms for her sake. Sure then those must be happy days, when no particular
Religion or Church is to be set up, nor any to be pulled down, no Party to be
pleased, and none to be offended, but every Nation will be all of one Side, one
Party, and the same Religion: And of how great Refreshment and Consolation is
it, to think that that hot and fiery Zeal which has burnt so many Martyrs, and
consumed so many Pious and Good men, nay, destroyed the Lord of Life himself,
shall be absolutely and for ever quenched in the Springs of this most
Charitable and Refreshing Fountain, which from the Heart of each Respective
Kingdom shall be constantly running, and refreshing the dry and barren Corners
of the same; and like so many Rivulets of Oil, shall pass through the great
Ocean of the World, and Heal, and Cleanse, and Purify, but not mix with the
same: But what should I say?

Vltima Cumaei Venit jam carminis aetas,
Magnus ab integro Seclorum nascitur ordo;
Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia Regna.
The Happiness which this Administration will most certainly bring into the
World, cannot be well expressed, it will bring back the Golden Age, and
presently put a new Face on all Affairs; it will join Justice and Mercy, Truth
and Peace together, in such an inseparable Bond, that all the Malice and
Subtilty of the Grand Impostor (who is now going to his Prison) shall not be
able to unloose.

First, The Man of Sin will be pulled down, and we shall hear no more of the
Bloody Machinations of Rome, the Cruelty of the Spanish Inquisition, the
Barbarity of French or Irish Massacres, nor of the Unnaturalness of English and
Scotch Rebellions, no Holy Leagues or Solemn Leagues and Covenants, or
Associations, will be heard of amongst us; but Christendom from an Aceldama,
will be made like the Garden of Eden, or Paradise of God; and every Nation have
its Tree of Life, or Fountain of Living Water in the middle, which by its
constans Irrignous Streams, will cool all Heart and Animosities, and bring all
in Subjection to the Gentle Laws of the Holy Jesus: But further, We shall hear
of no Plots or Contrivances, or Black and Bloody Charges and
Misrepresentations, all Noise of Persecution or flying for Religion, the
Prorestants from France, or Papists from England, will cease; no Heretic to be
Burned, or Schismatic to be Ruined; and the reason is, because all Law, and
Power, and Parties, Names of Distinctions, and all other Causes and Cursed
Motives of Mischief and Distraction will be utterly Abolished, and cast into
the same Dungeon with the great Criminal and Deviser of them. But my
Contemplation still carries me further, in Congratulation of the Princes of
Christendom on this Alteration; How easy must be their Government, and how
happy their Days, when the heavy Ecclesiastical Yoke is taken from their
Shoulders? When they may be served by all their Subjects, when they may punish
single Offenders, and not offend whole Parties, when there are no Parties to be
pleased or displeased, and none to be Inflamed against the Government by
discontented Statesmen? And since some will be Lords, keep the Power to
oppress, and give no Toleration to men of differing Thoughts and Apprehensions,
This method will set them on a level with their Brethren, and there will be no
need that Toleration should be either given or taken; and Then they may reckon
their Crowns to set much surer on their Heads, when none have a privilege or
pretense to offend on the Score of a Tender Conscience: But in a more
particular manner, as to our own Nation and present Circumstances, a
considerable body of us are for a Church of England, a Religion Established by
a Law, for Bishops, for Ecclesiastical Government, Conformity, and a National
Church; others we have who are a no less considerable body, which we call
Dissenters (though indeed all are Dissenters one from another) and these would
have no Bishops, no Ecclesiastical Government, or Lordships, or Temporal
Dignities conferred on Spiritual Men, and no Superiority of Functions in the
Ministry of the Gospel, but would have Pastors, and Elders, and Deacons; and in
short, another differing way of Administration. Again, The first, which we call
Churchmen, and the others which we call Dissenters, are divided and
sub-divided, and have several Denominations and Classes, and Distinctions
amongst themselves; one are for Moderation and Condescension; another for
Strictness, and the Bigoted to their Law and Establishment, etc. Some again
are for a National, some for a Synodical, and others an Independent Church;
some draw one way, and some another, and all would have their own little. Way
and Method prevail, so that we are perfectly Distracted and Confounded, and can
come to no Settlement or Agreement, only we all agree in this, to call our
selves by one general Name; and that is not Christian, but Protestant. We all
protest against Popery, a Name for another sort of Christians, which possess
several Kingdoms and Nations, which we call our common Enemies. Now

Was but these Angeli Evangelizantes, these Gospel Angels or Ministers of the
Gospel, instituted and appointed in each Nation as aforesaid, to go their
Stages and Circuits:

First, As I said before, we should have no Popery, and by consequence no
Protestants to Protest against it; and all our Names of Distinction so
destructive to our selves, when cast into such an Avarage, would be perfectly
lost; we should have no Contentions for Offices, Dignities, or Superiority, the
Lot would give an equal Title and Privilege to all. Hitherto the Ministers of
the Gospel has been appointed by Men, so has been corrupted and forced to serve
the ends of Princes, of several Parties; and ill-designing Politicians, Has
been mixed with all our Governments, and clogged with Humane Inventions and
Traditions; but by This Method God Himself would choose his Ministers: and then
from Humane and Earthly, it would presently become Heavenly and Divine; all the
Sinister Arts to get Church Preferment (so destructive to public Peace and
Truth) would fall to the Ground; the Doctors would cease to Flatter the Court
to get Bishop-Pricks; and Lecturers, their Parishoners or Patrons to advance
their Stipend; it would be put out of the Power of Ignorant Patrons to prefer
Ignorant Novices to the Ministry, or Ignorant Parents a weak and unfit Boy for
the University; Nay, it would be put out of the Power of Princes and States
themselves to give Preferment, or make Ministers, and so by consequence (as
they have but too much done) to make what Gospel they please. And we may
reasonably hope, that Truth will then be a Virgin, and appear in her Native
Beauty, when Honors, Lordships, and great Revenues, the common Temptations to
Deflower and Disguise her, are taken away, and it will not a little contribute
to public Peace, when all Denials, the common Parent of Discontent are
removed; But what may be as great an Inducement as any to move a Compliance
hereto by all our Sides and Parties, is, That whereas they would all have their
own ways to be preferred, This Method will make no Party either upper or under,
but will pull all in general down, and set none in particular up, so will
prevent all Emulation, and give none of them reason to Complain.

From what has been said, it may reasonably be expected, that the perplexed
Nations of Christendom should hearken to so excellent an Occonomy, especially
the settleing Patriots of our own distracted Nations; and in hearkening to it,
they will but hearken to the plain Precept and Advice of their Blessed Lord and
great Legislator. For his Words are these, All Power is given me in Heaven and
Earth, go ye therefore and Teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Chost; Teaching them to Observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo I am with you always even to the END of
the World. As if he had said, May be some may question your Power and Authority
to Preach my Golpel; or it is possible you your selves may think my Commission
not sufficient, but expect to receive your Power and Commission from the
Princes of the Earth; But I tell you it is sufficient, and that I have Received
all Power, both in Heaven and Earth, Go ye therefore and Teach all Nations,
etc. In which Words our Blessed Lord does seem plainly to Dictate to the whole
World, how he would have his Gospel dispensed; and that in every minute
Circumstance, viz. First, The manner, they must go and Teach, which does
plainly imply an Itineration; then whom, they must Teach all Nations. Secondly,
The Duty of these Predicants in the matter, what they must do, Baptize and
Teach them to Observe all the Things he has Commanded. And lo I am with you
always even to the End of the World. This plainly implies the Continuation, how
long he would have this Method continue, viz. for ever, to the End of the
World; and is confirmed by a promise of a Blessing on the due performance
thereof. But here let me Note, that the Princes of the Earth, though Idolatrous
and Pagan, had all the right and legal Power in ordinary; and that both our
Savior acknowledged, and the Apostles well knew, but not being Proselyted to
his Doctrine, would grant no Commissions, or Authorize such Preachers;
therefore he himself, as well as they, had Power on Earth (yea all Power in an
Extraordinary manner) was fain to use it, and issue out the first Commissions;
but the Nature and Intent of these Commissions was not to convey a Power to a
sort of men distinct from the State, but was an Act of Necessity; and he had
not used any Power, or given his Commissions at all, if the High Priest or
Jewish Sanhedrim would have done it. The Princes and States of Christendom
therefore since sufficiently Proselyted to the Faith of Jesus; may justly issue
out their Que Warranto's against all Ecclesiastical Power, and all Persons
whatsoever, who claim any Power, Privilege, or Jurisdiction jure divino,
distinct from theirs, for it peculiarly belongs to them as Nursing Fathers of
the Church, to issue out their Commissions, and to say, Go and Teach, etc. It Is
true, if they send none, or send those that are contrary to Christ's
Institutions, which instead of giving the Children Bread, will give them
Stones; then the Power Lapses, and returns to its Fountain, and Men must Act by
virtue of Christ's Extraordinary Commission, and have recourse to his special
Power, For Christ must be Preached. Princes ought to have the Preference; but
if they neglect their Duty, Renounce their Power, or are so far from commanding
it, that they forbid it; Then God must be Obeyed, rather than Man; as has been
the Plea (and a just one too) of all hitherto that have entered on the
Function. But further, I desire to take notice of one thing more, and that is
of the last Clause of our Savior's Precept, viz. And lo I am with you always,
even to the end of the World. Christ said, his Words were Spirit and Life; but
some there are who too much incline to the Letter, and like the old Jews, think
the Kingdom of Heaven should come with Observation. They expect a new Material
Heaven and a new Earth; and that Christ will come again on Earth personally,
and Reign a Thousand Years in great Glory: Those are but Fancies, for the Text
seems to be plain, And lo I am with you always, even to the End of the World.
First, this plainly implies, the World shall have an end, and then his
Willingness, that this way of Administration should continue so long; and he
mentions not the least word of his coming again in the Interim, or that the
world shall have Two Ends; which now leaving the world we may reasonably
suppose he would have made some mention of, if such things should have come to
pass. It seems plainly to me therefore, that there will be no New Material
Heaven or Earth, or that Christ will come Personally again to Reign amongst
Men, and my Reason is, his own Words, Lo I am with you always, even to the End
of the World; not I will be, but I am with you; and what he promised them, was
not a Personal, but a Ministerial Presence: A Presence by his Spirit; as if he
had said, If you will go and continue to Preach my Gospel amongst all Nations.
I promise to Aid you in your Administration, and Assist you by the Influence of
my Spirit, and that not for a little Time, but to the end of the World; which
Promise he performed, and and that in a special Manner; so long as they
continued to observe his Words and Institution. But when Men began to make
Merchandise of his Gospel, to Monopolize and to Closet up the Sunbeams, and to
put their Candle under a Bushel; no wonder they fell into such Darkness and
Confusion, and no wonder he withdrew himself and the presence of his Spirit
from them. If therefore, we expect his coming again, or his more particular
Presence in the large Effusions of his Spirit, We must send forth his Light and
his Truth, and cease to Sell and parcel out his Gospel: we must draw it out of
the Garrisons in which particular Parties have imprisoned it, and set it on a
Candlestick, on a Mountain, that it may be as free as the Air or the Sunbeams:
It has been long Enslaved and Enthralled; and if we a little view the present
State of Christendom, and consider what Canons, Constitutions and Decretals,
what differing Customs, Educations and Prejudices there are, how many differing
Opinions, and differing Interests; the multitude of Ceremonies and Traditions,
the various Forms of Worship, and Scenes of Government; and how fond every
Nation and Party; nay, every individual Man, is of his own Way: It will seem a
very difficult Thing, to Extricate and free it from so great a Bondage; but the
greater the Work, the more worthy the Author, and more Glory to God. Pharaoh
kept the Israelites long in Bondage, and was loath to let them go, reaping great
Advantages by them, as some do by the Gospel: But when the God of Heaven called
for, and demanded them, he was forced to restore him his Heritage and his
Chosen. Christ is now calling for his Gospel and his Saints; and God for his
Jews, his ancient People and Inheritance; and They will shake the Heavens and
Earth, but they will have them. For by Fire and by Sword will they plead with
all Flesh, and the Slain of the Lord shall be many. The God of Pleaven has
already begun to shake the Nations and is about to fulfill all his Promises made
to the Jews and Gentiles by the Mouth of all his Prophets. Behold, says he,
Isa. 66 and the 12. I will extend Peace to her like a River, and the Glory of
the Gentiles like a flowing Stream. Now what can be liker to a flowing Stream,
than these Angeli Evangelizantes? These Gospel Angels, which by a constant Flux
and Reflux from the Heart of each Nation, will fill the Earth full of the
Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea; No dry or barren Corners
shall escape watering from these Fountains, and no dark Recesses the Rays of
their Light. But Poor Homuncio, I fall under the Weight, being not able to
describe the Advantages of this Oeconomie; I must again call the Prophet to my
Assistance in that Pathetick Description of this Temple of Peace, this new
Jerusalem, cap. 65. ver. 17. For behold, I create a New Heavens, and a New
Earth, and the former shall not be remembered, or come into mind; But be you
glad and rejoice for ever in that which I Create: For behold, I create.
Jerusalem a Rejoicing, and her People a Joy; And I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and Joy in my People; and the Voice of Weeping, shall be no more heard in her
nor the Voice of crying. There shall be no more thence an Infant of Days, nor
an old Man that has not filled his Days: For the Child shall die an hundred
Years old, but the Sinner being an hundred Years old, shall be Accursed: And
they shall build Houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant Vineyards, and
eat the Fruit of them. They shall not Build, and another Inhabit; they shall
not Plant, and another Eat. For as the days of a Tree are the days of my
People, and mine Elect shall long enjoy the Work of their Hands: They shall not
labor in Vain, nor bring forth for Trouble: For they are the Seed of the
Blessed of the Lord, and their Offspring with them. And it shall come to pass,
that before they call, I will answer; and whilst they are yet speaking, I will
hear. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat Straw
like the Bullock; and Dust shall be the Serpent's Meat. They shall not hurt, or
destroy in all my Holy Mountain, says the Lord. It shall come to pass so and
so, say the Prophets; but as yet such things have not come to pass: But this
Administration of the Religion of the holy Jesus, not my own, but founded on
Holy Writ, will bring such things to pass. it will by its sweet and gentle
Influences, soften and mollify the Ruggedness of the World, appease the
Heavens, and transform the Earth, and render it a Paradise, it will set
Justice, Truth and Peace, on an unmovable Foundation; and turn the World in a
manner into a Theocracy. For it is more than probable, that by degrees it will
vacate and supersede all humane Sanctions, and make them of little Effect, by
its prevailing Energy and pacifick Nature; making Love, and Charity, and
Christian Condescension, the Principal Rulers of the Universe. Then will the
God of Love, or Truth, and Peace, visit us, and make his abode with us, and
rain down his Blessing and Graces upon us, as at the Beginning; and we shall
become a Royal Priecthood, a Peculiar People, zealous (not of destroying one
another, as at this Day) but zealous of good Works. Ephraim shall no more vex
Judah, nor Judah Ephraim Every Prince and Nation shall be content with their
own Territory and Borders: The noise of War shall no more be heard of amongst
us, our Swords shall be turned into Plow Shares, and our Spears into Pruning
Hooks. Zech. 2 verse. 10. Sing and Rejoice, O Daughter or Sion, for lo I come
and will dwell in the midst of thee, says the Lord; And many Nations shall be
joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my People; and I will dwell in the
midst of thee; and thou shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me unto
thee; and the Lord shall inherit Judah, his Portion in the Holy Land, and
choose Jerusalem again. Be silent O all Flesh before the Lord, for he is raised
up out of his Holy Habitation. And it shall be in that day, that Living Waters
shall go out from Jerusalem; half of them, (viz. Preachers) toward the former
Sea, and half of them toward the hinder Sea; in Summer and in Winter shall it
be. And the Lord shall be King over all the Earth; In that day shall there be
One Lord, and his Name One: The Jews and the Gentiles shall use the same Method
and Way of Administration, and send out their Preachers from the midst of their
Habitations. But the Question will be asked, how all the present Difficulties
will be surmounted? In answer to which, let the same Prophet speak, Who art
thou, O great Mountain? Before Zerubbabel (Christ) Thou shall become a Plain;
and he shall bring forth the Head Stone thereof with shouting, crying, Grace,
Grace. The Hands of Zerubbabel have laid the Foundation of this House, his
Hands shall also finish it. And thou shall know, that the Lord of Hosts has
sent me unto you. Christ is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the
Consideration of which, brings me to my Conclusion; in which I shall vindicate
my self from the Charge of Innovation, and say,

The way which I propose, is not a new Way, but the Renovation of an old One:
For it is the way by which Christianity Entered the World; and therefore the most
likely to preserve it; it is the way which the Apostles used, which our Savior
practiced; he went up and down doing Good, he sent out the Twelve, and the
seventy Disciples; who Preached his Gospel through the Towns and Villages, and
then returned to him again. When he was leaving the Earth, by a plain
Indigitation, he Recommended this way. It Is a way pregnant with all the
Felicities can be imagined; it is advantageous to all Governments, and friendly
to all Societies; 'twill bring Glory to God on High, restore Peace on Earth,
and good Will amongst Men.

How Beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of him that brings good
Tidings, that publishes Peace, that brings good Tidings of good, that
publishes Salvation, that says unto Zion, Thy God Reigns! Isa. 52. Verse 7.
Haec cum fiunt, and Statu hoc, Harmonium and Pacem adferente, inter Gentiles
in Terris Christianis posito, mirabuntur Judaei, Christoque Authori
Auspicatissimo tum demum credent. Nec non, pacato Deo, vocante, Christiano
adjuvante, magno cum gaudio and Triumpho, post tam longum ob malitiam and
incredulitatem exulatum, ad suas Terras Hierosolymitanas, ex omnibus plagis and
Terrarum Regionibus redibunt: Nec futilia aut inania Antiquorum Prophetarum
Vaticinia de faelici Judaeorum aut Gentilium Statut, diutius habebuntur. Nam
omnia ista Grandiloquia, de Pace, Justitia, and Veritate, plenam Solutionem hoc
Ministerio Theocratico habebunt; and exiguo Temporis Spatio, Diversas Mundi
Regiones, quasi diversas unius gentis Civitates, mutuo foedere irrefragabilis
amiciticae conjunctas, Spectabimus. Et Preces illa tum frequent in ore
Sacerdotum, viz. Revoca ad Seeds antiquam Gentem Judaeorum, and gloriam
Gentilium read completam, habebit responsum.

FINIS.

