THE EXECUTION OF Ed. Fitz-Harris, And OLIVER PLUNKET, Who was conveyed one
from the Tower and the other from Newgate on the 1st of July. TO TYBURN Upon a
SLEDG.
And there Hanged and Quartered for High Treason. In Conspiring the Death of
his most Sacred Majesty, to subvert the Government, by endeavoring to raise
Rebellion, and to introduce an Army to establish Popery and Arbitrary Power,
and destroy the Protestants. With the manner of his Behavior in the Tower, and
at the place of Execution.
IT is seldom known, but one time or other, Justice meets with those men, who
as it were sell themselves to do Mischief even when they think they are most
secure, then their black Designs and hellish practices are brought to Light,
for what height or depth can abscond from the allseeing Eye; Darkness and Light
to him are equal, and nothing can be done without his sufferance but these
things. It is to be supposed, men that ventures upon all Treasonable and
Villainous Designs, as to depopulate Kingdoms, by horrid Massacres, to raise
Rebellion, and set the Nations in a Flame, do not consider, or if they do, as
the Prophet says, They put far away the evil day, and hope at last to escape
due punishment, but most commonly are deceived, as here we shall instance in
Edward Fitz-Harris, the son (as he says) of Sir Edward Fitz-Harris, born in
the Kingdom of Ireland, and there brought up in the Burnish Religion, so
consequently the better quallified for such diabolick practices and treasonable
Designs, for which he is now justly brought to suffer death.

The sum of his most detestable Crime is, that he undertaking to perfect what
the bloody Jesuits and the rest of the Popish-Locust had begun, came about the
21 of Eeb. last to the Chamber of Mr. Everard, one of the Discoverers and there
began to tamper with him; first to try how he stood affected, and the more to
iusinuate into his good Opinion of him, he began to comiserate his hard usage
since he espoused the Protestant Interest, saying he lived far better in the
French Kings Service, and if he would again come over to the Papists he should
yet have not only a large reward, but also a yearly Pension. Then falling from
that, enquired if he did not write a Paper, pretended to be an Answer to his
Majesty's most Gracious Declaration, the which as he said, he was informed he
did, but Mr. Everard utterly denying it, he fell from that likewise, and
debated about giving Birth to so notorious and Treasonable a Libel, that the
like has not been known in any Age, Entitled The True English-mans speaking
true English. In which he endeavored not only to render the King odious to his
Supjects, but likewilse to fix a notorious and false scandal upon his Royal
Grandfather, and Father of ever Blessed Memory, of their designing during their
Reigns to establish Popery and Arbitrary power: to lay a Blot on his Majesty's
Royal Posterity, to raise Rebellion and set the Nation in a Blaze, by stirring
all sorts and conditions of people, unanimously to Rise and destroy each other,
under prerence of securing their Liberties and properties, and whilst this was
doing, as the end and scope of all, A French Army was to Land, and overflow us
like a Deluge wasting with Fire and Sword, whilst they left not a Protestant
remaining in the Land, then Popery was to be introduced, and established.

This was the purport of his Hellish Design, and this he got Mr. Everard to put
into a form for him, telling him for so doing, he should have 40 Guinies and
that the French Ambassadors Confessor was to manage the Affair, and that Mr,
Everard should have some thousands of Crowns for his Service, and become a
Pentioner to the French King. And that several hunderds of those dangerous
Libels were to be Coppied out, and put into the Pockets of such Lords and
Commons which were most adverse to their party and then to have Ruffians at
hand to apprehend and swear against them This was no doubt the second part of
Dangerfields Plot, and would have proved more satal, had it taken Effect;

For it was to have been managed under the name of the Noncon-formist, but as
God would have it, Mr. Everard was more honest and tender-Conscienced, than to
be any ways Instrumental in bringing so cruel a destruction upon his Native
Country, and thereupon discovered the design to several worthy Gentlemen, but
in fine to Sir Walliam Waller, and Mr. Smith, one of the Discoverers, who at an
appointed time came (but not both at once) and being placed by Mr. Everard so
that they both see and hear what passed in the next Room, they were at several
times Eve and Ear-witnesses to the Traitors Intentions, who little (at those
times) dreamed that his Villainy was so near detection, for these worth
Gentlemen after sometime given to make the Discovery, that it might appear more
plain to the World, caused him to be apprehended, who after some short
Examination, (the Treason being made plain against him) was committed to
Newgate, and then to the Tower, but in little time the Parliament sitting at
Oxford, the House of Commons receiving his Examination thought fit to impeach
him of High Treason, whereupon being brought to the Kings Bench Bar, in Order
to his Trial he pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the Court, but his Plea after
long debate being over ruled he was on the 9th of June last brought from the
Tower, and there received his Trial, where the forementioned, and many more
horrid Treasons were proved against him. So that after a short Debate, the Jury
brought him in Guilty of High Treason, and on the 15th following, he with
Oliver Plunket; Titular, Primate of Ireland, received Sentance of Death, which
was to be conveyed to the places from whence they came, and from thence to the
common place of Execution, there to hanged by the Neck, and then cut down alive
his Privy members to be cut off, his Bowels to be taken out and burnt before
his Face, his Head to be severed form his Body, his four quarters to be
divided, and to be disposed of as his Majesty shall think fit, after this
dreadful, but just Sentance, had passed upon him, he began to look sad, as
altogether dispairing to optain Mercy from his Sovereign, whom he had so
infinitely offended, then being conveyed to the Tower during the Respit, he
behaveed himself as a Man sensible of his great and grievous Crimes, no doubt
reflecting on what a Deluge of innocent Blood his wicked parctices were within
few days to have shed if they had taken effect.

And showing much seeming sorrow, that he had as he faith, by the very
Principles of his Religion, been persuaded to offend so good a King. During the
respit in the Tower several worthy persons were to visit him, among which, were
some Protestant Ministers, who gave him the best consolation they could, as to
his eternal welfare, adjuring him that he would not in any wise add Guilt to
Guilt, in accusing falsely any person, but that he would humble himself, and
seek a pardon from God for his many great and grievous Crimes, and especially
for those which had brought him under the hand of justice, for which, he was to
suffer, and to render thanks to God that he had prevented him, in being
instrumental to the shedding of so much innocent blood, as was intended, to
which he answered, he had been a perverse Liver, and that by reason of his
wicked Life, he concluded God had given him up to hearken to the evil Counsels
of such men as had taught him to cast off all allegiance and duty to his
Sovereign, and all pity and compassion to his fellow Subjects, and though he
could hope for no mercy from a Prince he had so infinitely abused, yet he hoped
that God would at last take pity on his Soul, desiring forgiveness of all he
had offended, as he freely forgave all that had been the occasion of drawing
him into the Crimes for which he suffered.

The next Capital Traitor (whose wicked Designs had they taken effect, had
inevitably ruined the Kingdom of Ireland, by reducing it to a far worse
condition then when the bloody Papists triumphed over the Massacred
Protestants) viz. Oliver Plunket whom the Pope had created Archbishop of
Dublin, as it is thought for no other end, then to carry on his Hellish Designs
of Murder and subversion, for having the Popes Commission, he was owned as
head of the Conspirators, and endeavored to bring in and establish Popery and
Arbytrary power, in order to which, having levied vast sums of money, Treated
with the French about Landing an Army of 70000 men to join with such Papists as
should be in readiness, and to deliver up Carligan, and some other
Seaport-Towns, for their more convenient landing, but e're these Traitorous
Designs could take Birth, they were discovered by some of those Priests that he
had entrusted with the hellish secret. For which being apprehended in Ireland,
was brought over and tried at the Kings-bench-Bar, where, upon full Testimony
against him, he was cast and condemned, after which he was remanded to Newgate,
when his Friends came to visit him, many persuaded him not to be daunted, but
to continue obstinate in his own vindication, but notwithstanding, when he came
to the place of Execution, he was very much dejected, and it is thought would
have made some Confession, had he not seen so many weeping Catholics present.
So after some private ejaculations to himself, the Executioner did his Office.

LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet.


