THE EXECUTION OF James Halloway: Who was Drawn, Hanged and Quartered at Tyburn
For High Treason, On Wednesday, the 30th. of this Instant April. 1684
JAmes Halloway, was one of those Execrable Villains who by a late horrid and
Diabolical, Conspiracy against all the Laws of God and Nature? the sacred
Obligations of Duty and Allegience to so good a Prince: Plotted and designed
the murder of his Most Sacred Majesty, and his Illustrious Brother the Duke of
York, and the utter subversion of this Imperial Monarchy both in Church and
State. But such was the abundant mercy of Almighty God, whose Divine Providence
more Eminently sheilds and defends the Thrones and Lives of Princes (his own
Vicegerents) all their damned machinations were brought to Light, and all the
steps they had made in this their Hellish Conspiracy detected and prevented:
And as several other False Traitors have upon their Trials been convicted,
attainted and executed, according to Law, so Vengeance in due time overtook
this Notorious Criminal tho he had fled from Justice, and the deserved
punishment of such Notorious Treasons.

He was born at Warwick, and afterward put Apprentice to a Linnen-Draper and
lived at Bristow, where he always appeared a zealous man, for promoting and
encouraging Sedition in the Government, and Schism in the Church. Upon the
discovery of the late Plot, diverse of the Conspirators having notice of
Warrants issued out for their apprehension absconded themselves, and made their
Escape, and amongst others, James Halloway fled to Neavis in the West Indies,
where he changed his Name, and disguised his Person: But his Correspondent
there, either from Principles truly Just and Loyal, or from some heats and
animosities which arose between them upon the Stateing their accounts,
discovered him to the Honorable Colonel Burt Deputy Governor, to be that
false Tray for James Halloway, who immediately seized him, and sent him over a
prisoner to England.

On Monday the 21st of this Instant April; he was brought from Newgate to
Westminster Hall, and at the King's Bench bar was demanded what he had to say
for himself, why Execution should not be awarded against him, he standing at
the same time attainted by Out-lary, upon an Indictment of High Treason for
Conspiring the Death of the King, and the utter Ruin and Subversion of the
Government, etc. he desired to hear the Indictment read, which was accordingly
done. Mr. Attorney General, then acquainted the Court that his Majesty was
graciously pleased in mercy to the prisoner to wave the Out-lary, and to allow
him liberty to make a defense for himself, if he were able to make any but he
having nothing to say for himself, and confessing the said Indictment, the
Court then made a Rule that he should be Executed on this day at Tyburn, as an
Arch-Traytor, by being drawn, hanged, and quartered.

During the time of his Imprisonment, especially after he was under a State of
Condemnation, he behaved himself with modesty and penitence, but very reserved,
not confessing any particular but in general Terms acknowledged himself guilty
of that Treason for which he stood outlawed, and the punishment awarded him by
Rule of Court to be Just upon him.

On the 30th. of this Instant April, being Wednesday, he was drawn upon a
Sledge to Tyburn, and there Executed as a Traitor.

LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, 1684.


