THE EXECUTION OF William Lord Russel, Who on the 21st of this Instant July was
Beheaded in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, for Conspiring the Death of the King, to Leavy
War, and Raise a Rebellion, together with his Behavior and Speeches, etc.
Entered according to ORDER.

WIlliam Lord Bussel having been Impeached of High Treason, for Conspiring the
Death of the King, to Leavy War, and a miserable Slaughter to make amongst the
Subjects of our Sovereign Lord the King, he was thereupon. Apprehended and
Committed Prisoner to the Tower, where he continued till the 13th of July, at
what time he was brought to the Old-Baley, where an Indictmant of High Treason
being found against him, and he upon his Arraignment Pleading Not Guilty, was
brought upon his Trial, and after he had made his challenges of the Jury, he
was put upon his Trial: The Exception for that, that the Jury were not
Freeholders, being overruled by the Court, after the Arguments of Council on
both sides had been heard and considered, so that the Evidence being opened by
Mr. North, Mr. Attorney General, Mr. Sergeant Jefferies, etc. each of them
laying open the heinous Ingratitude of the Conspiracy against the Life of so
good a Prince, and not only against him, but to the subversion of the
Government, and destruction of His Majesty's good Subjects, requiring them to
consider of what fatal consequence the Conspiracy would have been had it taken
affect: To prove which, Colonel Rumsey was called and Sworn, who gave
Evidence, That the Lord Russel had been at a Consult in the House of one Mr.
Shepherd a Merchant, in the Parish of St. Miles Basleshawe, and that he was
sent thither by the Earl of Shaftsbury, to inquire what the Lords, viz. the
Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, the Lord Russel and others there convened,
intended as to the general Insurrection? who told him, That the Earl must be
contented, for as much as Mr. Trenchard of Summerset-shire had deceived them,
in not having in readiness the 1000 Foot and 400 Horse he had promised to
raise, having sent Letters to certify them, that the people of the Country
could not be brought to action at so short a warning as was given; for that
they must provide for their Families e're they entered upon so dangerous a
design as a general Insurrection; and that when this Message was brought, and
the Answer returned, the Lord this day Executed seemed no ways to contradict
it, nor dissenting from it, and that the Insurrection was to have been on the
19th of November, had not the disappointment happened, which unhinged the whole
fabric of the design as to that time. It was likewise Sworn against him, that
by one Mr. Sheepherd a Merchant, that Mr. Fergagason came to his House to
bespeak a Room in the Name of the Duke of Monmouth and diverse other Lords, of
which number, when they came, and that by Night in the Secretest wise, the Lord
Russel was one, and that a Declaration in his hearing was read to palliate the
horrid action under pretense of Grievances, against which the said Lord
objected nothing, but appeared consenting to it. The Lord Howard of Escrick
opened the Plot in all its circumstances, declaring the Lord Russel had been in
it from the original, to the best of his knowledge; but that Shaftsbury had
been the greatest contriver and carryer of it on, and that he himself had been
at two Consults, viz. at Mr. Sidnies and at Mr. Hanbdens the younger, when the
Lord Russel was present; and where without control, diverse matters relating to
the Conspiracy were agreed upon, none then in the Assembly dissenting; and that
when they departed they went two and two together, giving diverse other
particulars in Evidence.

Upon this Evidence the Lord Russel, notwithstanding some weak defenses made,
was found Guilty of High Treason, and the next day ^rought to the Bar, where
he received Sentence as follows, viz. To return to the place from whence he
came, from thence to be drawn upon a Hurdle to the place of Execution, there to
be Hanged by the Neck, and then cut down alive, his Privy-Members to be cut
off, Bowels to be taken out and burnt before his Face, his Head to be severed
from his Body, and his Body to be divided into four Quarters, and to be
disposed of at the pleasure of the King. This Sentence passed, notwithstanding
diverse objections made, that what was sworn against him would not amount to
more than Misprision. He was this day conveyed by a strong Guard to
Lincolns-Inn-Field, where a Scaffold was prepared for his Execution, he having,
during the intervene, continued very penitent, and not appeared over-free in
Discourse to such as came to visit him. Being mounted the Scaffold, he
expressed much sorrow for his sins, often extending his hands toward Heaven,
desiring forgiveness both of God and Men, requiring the Prayers of all good
Christians, with diverse other expressions: After which, laying down his Head,
he had it at two blows stricken off by the Executioner.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham. 1683.


