AN EXTRAORDINARY EXPRESS, Sent from PASQUIN AT ROME, To all the Princes and
Potentates OF EUROPE.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Hills, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of
London, and Westminster, 1690.

THE PREFACE.
EUROPE has suddenly fallen in very great and dangerous Convulsions, which are
known naturally to proceed either from a too violent commotion or dispersing of
the animal Spirits, or from an oppression caused by fear; or lastly, from the
corruption of some gangreen'd member: Such has been the miserable condition of
this part of the World in these later times, ever since it was attackt by all
these Distempers (...) at once; for we have seen several Princes and their
chief Ministers of State through a prodigious and incomprehensible perturbation of
spirit, seized with an abstraction from their true interest, compelling them
blindly to follow that of the King of France, to facilitate his Conquests, and
to labor in promoting his Glory to the prejudice of their own. With how many
fears has Christendom been terrified during that inundation of the rapid
Torrent of Usurpation, which happened within these few years last past; when
the thundering voice of the Ambassadors of Jews XIV. was heard to roar in all
the Sovereign Courts of Europe, who assumed to themselves no less a Quality
than that of the Ministers of another Jupiter, whilst his Armies flew (...)
like lightning in diverse Places, and the Subjects of those Princes were
miserably oppressed that would not be engaged in the interests of this Monarch,
on purpose to make them an example to others, and by horrible Combustions and
devastations to strike a terror into the minds of all those that should dare
to refuse to offer Incense to this new Deity on Earth styled Dieu done, even
to this immortal Man, Viro immortali?

As for the Corruption, it was almost Universal throughout all Europe; the
Gangreen in some places had spread itself from the lower members even to the
head, and mercenary Parasites were employed in all the Courts; for time was,
when to adhere to the interest of France, was to become a la mode, and others
were ridiculed, and esteemed as dotards that knew not how to advance their
Fortune. Lastly, it may be affirmed that the greatest number greedily swallowed
the Spiritus Gall. as water; burnt incense with a great deal of satisfaction to
this Grand Idol; ran after this Golden Jews; and by a strange depravation had
promoted their total ruin, and had desperately cast themselves on the top of a
dreadful precipice without any possibility of recovery, if Heaven had not
commiserated their condition, and unexpectedly snacht them from the danger by
the miraculous revolution that happened as it were in the twinkling of an eye.
None can be ignorant that this was the sad and deplorable state of Christendom
a little before the year 1689. but since that time the spirits being
recollected, all Terror is expelled, the Contagion is stopped, and a
considerable part of the Gangreen'd Members being cut off, Europe has
recovered a better air, more wholesome and more temperate, these thick and dismal
clouds having passed away, and these menacing whirl-winds being altogether
dissipated; for King William foresaw the Storm, and ascending the Throne of
Great Britain, soon dispersed these dark Foggs, and without fearing the
Thunder, caused light to spring out of the gloomy Tempest: Sequar per fulmina.

These remarkable contingences and so sudden an alteration excited a curiosity
in all the Princes, to go and consult the Oracle, to know what effects might
(...) the Oracle, where being arrived, the Priestess Phoebas, to express her
respect to this old Gentleman, gently lead him to the Shrine, and the good
Father having rested a while, approached in his slippers to the Sacred Den, and
spoke to this effect.

AN EXTRAORDINARY EXPRESS, Sent from PASQUIN AT ROME, To all the Princes and
Potentates OF EUROPE.
I.
O thou suprem Deity that presidest in these lower Regions, after having
rendered most hearty thanks for my promotion to the Popedom, I Am come to
represent to you with profound respect how much I am surprised, that during the
time of my Predecessor, the Rights of the Holy See have been violated, the
Sanctuary profaned, the Papal authority threatened with rude assaults, by the
Schism which the French have caused in the Church, the eldest Son thereof
having lifted up his hand against his most Holy Mother, and against our
infallible Power; Nevertheless at a time when the Holy See had reason to fear
these menaces, our Son is returned to his Father's House, and we have seen him
lying prostrate at our feet, and with a great show of repentance professing to
restore all that he had violently taken away, having assured us by his
Ambassador of his entire submission to our Paternal correction, promising
always to maintain for the future a very good correspondence with the Holy
See, and as a testimony of the sincerity of his intentions, to restore the City
of Avignon and the whole County; to oblige all the Bishops of his Kingdom that
were present in the General Assembly of the Clergy in the year 1682. to
renounce the faith of that Conventicle; and to raze out of the Register of his
Parliament all Acts derogatory from the Reverence, Honor and Respect due to my
Predecessor, provided that I would use my utmost endeavors to procure a Peace
between him and the Catholic Princes. Being amazed at such a sudden fit of
repentance, I betook my self to this place that I might be informed from your
sacred mouth of the cause of this great Revolution, and to whom I am beholding
for this unexpected advantage.

When the Pope had made an end of speaking, there was a great silence
throughout the whole Temple, and the Oracle with a loud voice answered;

William Rex.


Afterward all the Sacred Trumpets were heard to sound in the Temple in like
manner as at the gaining of a great Battle: The Pope being extremely surpised
at this answer could not forbear expressing his astonishment to the Priestess
that conducted him to the Shrines; she replied that the good Father ought not
to wonder at this answer, since it belonged only to the Gods to unravel the
most hidden mysteries; that mortal men should know in process of time the truth
of that which at present appeared obscure, and that his Holiness need only to
make a serious reflection on what he had seen with his eyes this day. But
Alexander VIII. having already been too forward in attributing these wonderful
successes to his own Politic contrivances, was not very well satisfied;
However, fearing lest the answer of the Oracle might be divulged, he took no
notice of any thing, not being willing that it should be known to the World
that he was obliged to an Heretical Prince for his repose. The good Father not
being able to recollect himself from this consternation, was very desirous to
add a few words before he went out of the Temple, but a sudden qualm that
insensibly seized on his spirits put an end to his Interrogatories.

II.
As soon as the Pope was recovered from his indisposition, and whilst his
Holiness's Humanity took a nap, his Nephews with the Princess Donna Maria, who
very seldom leave him, and came to accompany him to the Temple, were very glad
to lay hold on this oppertunity to consult the Oracle; but there arose a great
contest between the Father, Prince Don Antonio Ottoboni and Cardinal Patron his
Son: His Eminency insisted that he ought to have the precedence as being a
Prince of the Church, fearing lest in yielding it, he might incur the
indignation of the Pope and of all the Cardinals his Colleagues; insomuch that
there could be no means found out to decide this Controversy, however, Donna
Maria, the Wife and Mother of the coatending parties thought that she had
invented an expedient which should not derogate from the Quality of a Father,
nor from the Dignity of a Cardinal, by imitating the ordinary disposition of
her Sex; whereupon she proposed that they should speak both together, being
confident that the Deity would understand every thing that was propounded tho
never so confusedly; but this device tended rather to laughter than an
accommodation, and gave no satisfaction to either party, neither indeed was it
in any wise agreeable to the reverence and respect due to so sacred a place; at
last, they unanimously resolved to submit to the Pope's determination, who not
being willing to overcharge his conscience, referred the matter to a select
congregation of Cardinals that followed him; and whilst these Judges of the
Quorum were employed in hearing and particularly examining the several
pretensions of Cardinal Patron, who in a very large and eloquent Oration
expressed his zeal in defense of the rights of the Church: Prince Don Antonio
being tired with waiting, and soon perceiving that the Judges were favorable
to him, thought fit to play an Italian trick, and taking the adventage of his
Son's long speech, stepped into the Temple and interrogated the Oracle, saying;

The Holy Father, my good Uncle, being promoted to the Papal dignity in a ripe
age, and having found the Nepotism or Pontifical Offspring extinct, has by a
very generous effort wrought a miracle at his entering into the Church, by
reviving it in favor of my Family, which in a moment appears laden with wealth
and honor, invested with Principalities, dignities and authority, and
abounding with great riches; but forasmuch as Laymen were heretofore
prohibited by the Law from meddling with any Sacred things, and the Goods of the
Church are appropriated to pious and charitable uses, I come to discharge my
Conscience, and to consult thee to know whether it be lawful for us to enrich
ourselves with the treasures of our Holy Mother, the Church, and freely to
partake thereof during the life of our good Uncle, especially since so fair an
opportunity is offered at this Conjuncture.

THE ORACLE.
When he that gives can absolve, every thing is permitted.


III.
His Eminency Cardinal Patron having finished his harangue, by which he thought
he had well established his rights and privileges, departed in a great heat
from the Congregation to cause Prince Antonio his Father to appear there; but
he found that he had supplanted him, and was gone before. The Cardinal
immediately making his protestation, went to the Temple, and said;

Our Holy Father the Pope advanced me in my youth to the Purple Robes under the
name of Cardinal Patron, ever since which time I have been endowed with
abundance of wealth, and if his Holiness shall continue to live some years
longer, I shall get up to the top of the pinnacle, and shall be in a fair way
to become great and rich, since the Pope heaps up treasures only to leave us in
a happy condition after his death, and although it be done with the goods of the
Church, nevertheless he is the dispenser of them; for in as much as he is
infallible he cannot err, and he that absolves others can also absolve himself
first, therefore without any scruple and with extended arms: I receive all that
comes from the Pope's hands, who alone can make the rest of my life happy;
wherefore I Am come to know whether this bright star shall ever attend upon me.

THE ORACLE.
No Man can be called happy before Death.


IV.
The Prince Don Marco Ottoboni, who had joined hands with Donna Maria, thinking
that it was his turn advanced, but the Princess cried out to him, Principe
honor a la Signora, give place to the Lady: Whereupon Don Marco retiring made a
very low obeisance to the Lady, and let her enter into the Temple to be
informed of what she most desired, and having entreated the Priestess to place
her in a decent posture, she muttered certain Litanies with a low voice, and
then said:

O thou Deity! that fillest this place with thy glory, forasmuch as nothing is
unknown to thee, I Am come to implore an answer from thy sacred mouth, to know
how many years the life of our good Uncle the Pope shall continue, to the end
that we may be able to pursue our advantage, and to advance our fortunes by
making hay while the Sun shines lest the night of his Death overtake us sooner
than we should desire; For according to the Proverb Passato la Festa, Gabbato
il Santo. When the Feast is past, the Saint is mocked.

THE ORACLE.
The Fatal Sisters spin out thy destiny as well as his concerning whom thou
inquire; thy life as his depends only on one snip of the Goddess Clotho's
Sizzers.


V.
Afterward the Prince Don Marco Ottoboni succeeded in her place, and made his
address to the Oracle.

The promotion of the Pope, my Uncle, has been very advantageous to us, the
lowness of my stature caused me to be but little regarded amongst the Ladies,
but since I am become the Nephew of a Pope, they enquire after me, and as
little as I am, his Holiness has made choice of me to propagate the Family of
the Ottoboni; but since I Am not one of the most vigorous, I Am come to consult
you to know whether I shall be so happy as to have any issue.

THE ORACLE.
Pigliate la Giovanetta and bella, that is to say, Take the young and the fair,
and thou shall have friends.


VI.
The Emperor Leopoldus semper Augustus, being informed that the Temple of the
Oracle was open: was glad of an opportunity to consult it on occasion of the
two Wars, in which he is engaged against his two most potent and most cruel
enemies, to know the success of which, his Imperial Majesty spoke thus:

The Conquests that I have obtained over the Infidels, and the fame of my
Victories have procured me a second War and a new enemy; for the King of France
being jealous of the prosperity of my Arms, has joined with the Turk, and
declared War against me without a cause, to the end that he might compel me to
divide my Forces, and to give my first enemy time and means to take respite,
and with more ease to recover what he has lost, and that in weakening me, he
might make use of this Conjuncture to satisfye the ambition which he has
always had to seize on my Empire, and to cause the Imperial Crown to pass into
his family. But by the means of these violent proceedings he has cooperated in
the Election of my Son to be King of the Romans, who was thereupon constituted
my Successor; and I am sofar from being oppressed, as this new enemy hoped,
that I find myself in a condition vigorously to oppose the assaults of these
two Potentates; and the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits give me reason to hope
that if I continue the War against the Infidels, I shall be able to set up the
Cross in the City of Constantinople; but on the other hand, all my Allies
represent to me the devastations and calamities that the French have caused in
Germany, and that to conquer certain barren Lands in Bulgaria, several fair
Provinces on the Rhine are ruined; What measures then are most expedient to be
taken by me in such an exigence, being urged on one side by the the desire of
destroying the Infidels, and incited on the other by the cruelties and
outrageous combustions of the French.

THE ORACLE.
Peace in the East, and suffer not thy self to be seduced.


VII.
The King of the Romans, having accompanied the Emperor to the Temple, his
Imperial Majesty advised him to consult the Oracle, who said:

I have been (contrary to the expectation of the enemies of the Emperor my
Father) elected King of the Romans, and appointed Successor of the Empire in a
time of trouble and in the midst of War, and all the means that France has
used to avoid this blow, in favor of the Dauphin, could not hinder my Election
from being made without any opposition; all the promises and efforts of my
Competitor have proved vain and ineffectual; and the just reputation and good
Reign of the Emperor my Lord and Father has prevailed over all the intrigues
and artifices of the French Emissaries: This is such a happiness that I could
not expect so soon, for which I Am come to render thanks to Heaven, as the
principal cause, and to be informed of the second.

THE ORACLE.
The Revolution of England: but especially, become Caesar, and not a Jesuit.


VIII.
All the Electoral Princes having accompanied the Emperor and the King of the
Romans, the Elector of Mentz advanced near the sacred Den, and spoke to this
effect:

I have been tormented, and my Territories have been taken as a prey, relying
to much on the illusory promises that were made to me on behalf of the King of
France: moreover, as an addition to my misfortunes, I found out the cheat only
with the loss of my Country, and received not a penny of all the money that was
promised to me; and if the Emperor, at length, had not had more consideration
for me, than I had at the beginning, fidelity to him, or regard to the welfare
of the Empire (tho my Quality of Elector and Prince of the Empire obliged me
thereto) I should have utterly perished: I stood on the brink of a dangerous
precipice where my head began to turn, but thanks to his Imperial Majesty, who
has extended his gracious hand to me, and has as it were snacht me out of the
abyss of destructions, wherein the Emissaries of France had almost plunged me,
contrary to my own peculiar Interest. But forasmuch as in adversity and perils,
we are most apt to reflect on our former errors and miscarriages, I Am come to
make a solemn protestation in this Temple, that I will never depart from the
true interest of the Empire, and that I am resolved for the future either to
overcome or to perish together with it.

THE ORACLE.
Offend no more lest a worse thing happen unto thee.


IX.
The Elector of Triers, approached, and said:

I have fought the good fight for the Empire, and have remained faithful to the
Emperor; neither promises nor threats have been able to move me, nor to
separate me from the Empire, which is my true interest. I confess my
Tertitories have suffered, but I take comfort in this, that it was for a good
cause, and that I have persever'd in all the parts of my duty and fidelity, and
I patiently expect the deliverance of my Country by the hand of my Allies, and
the consolation of my People, that groan under the oppression of the Usurper.

THE ORACLE.
Deliverance attends the just, and Heaven it self shall make a breach in the
Royal mount, where thou art detained.


X.
The Elector of Colen, not having obtained an oppertunity to consult the Oracle
since the death of his Uncle, was ravished with joy at this, it being the first
that happened since his election to the Electorate, and said: The Negotiation
of my friends has prevailed over the pretensions of the Coadjutor, that was
chosen by the Chapter; and all the machinations of France are frustrated. Since
my election all the great designs of Lewis XIV. begin to fail, and the Crown of
the King of the Romans has proved only imaginary to the Dauphin his Son: My
election has served as a bridle to restrain his ambition: Colen has limited
his conquests: Rhinberg, Keiserwert and Bonne have been such hard morsels that
the Cardinal of Furstemberg could not digest them; notwithstanding his taking a
dose of Spiritus Gall. he was obliged to disgorge them at the first emetic
potion given him by the Allies; not being any longer able to bear the Quality
of Archbishop of Colen; however for his consolation I consent that he may
please himself with that title during the War. Lastly, my election has been an
eclipse of this French Sun, that was about to set the whole World in a flame;
but thanks be to my good Allies the States General of the United Provinces, and
to the care of his Highness the Prince of Orange, now King of Great Britain, to
whom my election has served as the first step to ascend the Throne. Thus am I
now become the peaceable possessor of my Uncle's Arch-Bishopric, who was indeed
blinded by France to deprive the thereof, on the simple promise of the Cardinal
to give me the Coadjutorship; But this was least in the thoughts of Lewsi XIV.
his interest obliging him to keep this Electorate in the hands of his
Creatures; therefore it has been preserved by Divine Providence that extracts
sweet out of bitter, and I may justly affirm that the treachery of France has
opened to me a passage into the Electorate. The People of my Jurisdiction
passionately desire my presence, by reason of the Calamities in which many of
them are now involved; but I comfort them rather at a distance, since during my
minority I leave the Revenues to satisfye the debts of my Country. However, I
hope that the War being ended the Pope will grant me a dispensation to exercise
the Spiritual function, and then I shall go and take possession of both at
once. In the mean time what ought I to do for the good of my People and for
that of Christendom.

THE ORACLE.
Never depart from the interest of those that have assisted to invest thee with
the Electoral mantle.


XI.
When the Ecclesiastical Electors had finished their addresses, the Elector of
Bavaria (who had done honor to the Robe) drew near, and said:

Neither the promises of France, nor my Alliance with that Crown, nor even the
life of the Dauphiness, my dear Sister, were able to draw me off from the
interest of the Empire; The glory of vanquishing the Infidels has often caused
me to hazard my life for the defense of Christendom: My zeal for the good cause
as well as my valor has attracted the envy of the malicious, but heaven has
thought fit that I should survive some of them, and I hope that Christendom
will recover by me what it has lost by my competitor. I will give a reason to
Europe no longer to resent the loss of the brave Duke of Lorrain, and to France
the marks of my just indignation: I will make it appear that the Bavarian blood
still flows in my veins, and I remember the scorn put on my Alliance by their
protection of the Cardinal of Furstemberg, and affronts that they have offered
to the Dauphiness ever since I resus'd to enter into the French interosts, and
to become their King's Son in law.

THE ORACLE.
Thy glory may procure a Crown for thy family, if it be not prevented.


XII.
The Elector of Brandenbourg, after having paid his last respects to the memory
of the Elector his late Father, and having received the homage of his Subjects,
came nigh the sacred Den, and said:

I shall endeavor not to diminish the reputation and glory that the Elector my
Father has acquired in the World: The pipe through which the infectious poison
of France passed into my Country being cut off by the special favor of
Heaven, I will hearken to no proposition on that side, and shall always
embrace the common Cause: I will purge (if it be possible) my Court from the
French corruption, and none of their Emissaries shall be admitted therein: I
will follow the good counsels of the King of great Britain, my Kinsman and
Ally; And if nature has proved an unkind Stepmother to me in some
particulars; I will strive to repair that loss by a great and glorious name,
and by the considerable Forces that I shall always maintain; nevertheless my
Artillery cannot march but on silver wheels: Moreover with the help of certain
subsidies allowed me by the Allies I shall essay to make myself formidable to
my enemies; but without money the Machine cannot be moved.

THE ORACLE.
Take heed lest in milking the Cow too much, she should at last overturn the
pail.


XIII.
The Elector of Saxony, having received but little satisfaction in his last
Winter Quarters, and having deliberated in his Council what measures ought to
be taken this Campaign, since the Emperor had already acknowledged the justice
of his complaints, and had indemnifi'd him as to part of his pretensions, was
resolved to cause his troops to march for the defense of the common cause, and
to go and declare his mind in the Temple, which he did after this manner:

As to my particular, I have entered into no engagement with France; but have
adhered to the common Cause of Europe, for the maintaining whereof I was only
obliged to furnish my quota in the Forces of the Empire, but at the persuasion
of my Allies, I have exceeded this obligation; nevertheless, the French
understanding that my expectation was not answered; that no regard was had to
my troops; and that I had carried on the War at my own charge, made great
offers to me only to remain neuter; but I would not hearken to any of these
Emissaries:

Therefore the King of France can expect nothing but blows from me, provided
that my troops be treated after a better manner than formerly, otherwise I
shall remayn neuter the next Campain, and nothing shall be able to excite me,
nor to cause me to march, nor even so much as to persuade me to any thing
except --

THE ORACLE.
William Rex.


XIV.
The Elector Palatin came near, and said:

Ever since my promotion to the Electorate I have been as it were a victime
sacrificed for the safety of the Empire: my Country and People have been
offered up to the rage and fury of the French; the King of France has honored
me so far as to set me in the rank of his greatest enemies, and has give an
apparent testimony thereof to the World, by the conflagrations that he has
caused in the Palatinate; but Heaven cannot better avenge me of this cruel
enemy, than by making the Queen of Spain, my Daughter fruitful, and by Crowning
William III. King of Great Britain, with victorious Laurels, to the end that
after the Conquest of Ireland, he may advance to the relief of the oppressed
Princes, to compel mine enemy to retire within his own just bounds, and to
restore peace to Europe that is harrass'd with calamities on all sides. But
alas! when shall this happy time come?

THE ORACLE.
Thy Children shall enjoy this advantage.


XV.
After the Emperor and the Princes of the Empire, William III. King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, etc. carrying the second
Imperial Crown in Europe, came to the Temple to consult the Oracle, concerning
the important affairs, in which he is at present engaged; all Christendom
having their eyes fixed on him, as the deliverer of the afflicted, the hope of
the oppressed Princes, and the Restorer of Europe, which would have fallen into
perpetual slavery if England had not broken its fetters: Being arrived at the
sacred Den, he said:

The People of Great Britain have sent for me for their deliverance: My Valor
has put the Scepter into my hands, and Heaven has Crowned me, after I had
delivered the Nation from oppression that marched on with a swift pace, and
from those calamities that hung over their heads Veni, vidi, vici, I came, I
saw and I overcame; for the Agents whom the King of France employed to enslave
this Nation, and to bring it under the yoke of a despotic and arbitrary Power
gave place at my approach. I was Anointed King as another David, in the room of
my Father in Law, who chose rather to abandon the Kingdom, than to stand and
justify the proceedings of his Reign, and the birth of his pretended Prince of
Wales before a free Parliament, Lawfully convened without any sinister courses
or corruption; thus he left to me the Kingdom and the Crown, and Heaven having
designed me for great and glorious enterprises, has not put the Royal Sword
into my hands in vain; and thus as it were unto another Hercules, Ireland
becomes one of my labors; my Competitor is fled, and durst not appear in the
Battle before me, thinking it more expedient to save himself by flying to his
dear Ally, than to run the hazard of another Combat, tho a King ought not to
lose his Crown but with his life: but I had rather see him running away, than
in my own possession; his little courage is not capable of creating any fear of
farther trouble on his behalf, and all the treasons that he stirs up in my
Kingdom, are but as so many vapors coming from France, which are soon
dispersed by my presence: Several of my Subjects abuse my generosity, but some
of the Chief being punished, as an example to the rest, shall make it appear
that I know how to Reign, and that Justice and Mercy are the Basis on which my
Throne is erected. I am come to consult the Oracle, that I may know to what
side I ought to turn the force of my Arms.

THE ORACLE.
Toward the Lion of the Gaulish Forest, whose spoils shall serve as thy Trophy.


XVI.
The Queen of Great Britain, having accompanied the King, her Royal Consort to
the Temple, had a mind also to be informed of future events; and the Priestess
having rendered to her Majesty, all the honors due to her Sex and Royal
Person, she spoke thus:

I was born to Reign: The enemies of my glory are dispersed as the streams of
water, those Owls the wicked Counselors of my Father, have taken their flight
at the approach of the King my Husband: Heaven has frustrated their flagitious
designs: truth has triumphed over falsehood: the counterfeit Heir has followed
his supposed Father and Mother, and Heaven has secured for me the Crown of my
Ancestors, which a Mother in Law, with the assistance of her Owls, would have
caused to pass into another family: the King's valor has preserved my People
from falling into this misfortune; but to make both them and me happy, there
wants nothing but an heir to support my Crown.

THE ORACLE.
Heaven shall provide.


XVII.
The King of Spain, having been a great while employed in solemnizing his
second Marriage, and in making preparations for the reception of his new
Spouse, and the Council having made several resolutions and debates relating to
determine to what place his Majesty should go; their Majesty's came both
together to the Temple to consult the Oracle, and the King spoke first (as of
right he ought) and said:

Heaven has delivered me from one that was a great friend and adherent to the
King of France, who is the declared enemy of the House of Austria. Marriages
with France are so many gins and snares that are laid for me on that side; I
have at last opened my eyes tho somewhat late, and therefore I have disposed of
my Daughters on the side of Germany, and I hope that being no longer spied even
in my very Bedchamber, I shall soon find myself in a capacity to oppose my
enemy, and to pursue him with the assistance of my Allies. Moreover if the
deceased Queen had not compelled me to restore to the French, the money that
was brought from my Indies, on their account for prohibited Goods, I should
have been furnished with ready cash to prosecute the War with success; my Wife,
given to me by France, persuaded me to do this act against the opinion of my
Privy Council, but the business is done and there is no remedy. Wherefore I
come to know whether I shall get the Victory over my enemies, now that I am
within the arms of a Queen, who is obliged by her interest to assist me with
her wholesome counsels for the advantage of the good Party.

THE ORACLE.
Labor if thou can to get a Successor for thy Country, and that is the
greatest Victory that thou can gain over thy enemies.


XVIII.
The new Queen young and vigorous approaching, spoke thus with a gallant

To so many Kingdoms lately bestowed on my by Heaven, the addition of an Heir
seems to be altogether necessary, without which my present possessions and
enjoyments can be esteemed but as lame and imperfect, since all at last must
devolve upon another Family. Therefore I am come to this place to know whether
Heaven will vouchsafe to grant a Successor to the King, my Husband; as for my
part, I shall use all possible means, but --

THE ORACLE answered, without permitting the Queen to proceed.
The enterprise is great.


XIX.
Jews XIV. King of France and Navar^e, being employed day and night in
debating in his Council concerning the most effectual means to withstand so
many powerful enemies, that had declared War against him, could not well spare
time to go and consult the Oracle. However at last he resolved to set forward
in his journey; but being informed that King William intended to be there, and
understanding that he walks in the midst of fire, and that he is even
Canon-proof, he was not willing to meet him, wherefore he sent Madame de
Maintenon before, as a Scout, in the habit of a Friar, with a purse full of
Louys d'Ors, to observe the avenues, and to enquire of the Priestess Pythonissa
what might happen; This faithful messinger being returned, and having made a
report to the King that the danger which he feared was past, his Majesty had
much ado to take up a resolution, for fear of some treachery or ambuscade:
Nevertheless to prevent all disasters and for a greater precaution, he
commanded all his Dragoons to serve as an Avant-guard, giving them orders to
surround the Temple, and a strict charge to keep a strong guard at the Gate,
during the time that he remained within; lest he should be taken away for a
Saint. He took also along with him the most able Fathers among the Jesuits,
that he might be preserved by the merit of their holy Prayers: and for his
Lifeguard, the Ban and Arriere-Ban of the City of Paris, which the Marshal de
la Feuillade undertook to command, swearing by the Statue of the mighty Monarch
erected in the Place des Victoires, that for his Masters greater security, he
would put all Strangers that he should meet on the road to the edge of the
Sword, and would carry fire and destruction wheresoever he passed, for fear of
an Ambush. Thus his most Christian Majesty being accompanied with so valiant a
Champion, entered into the Temple, but he was not able to forbear casting an
eye on all sides for fear of a surprise: at last his spoke very devoutly after
this manner:

I thought that after I had extirpated all the Hugenots of my Kingdom, the
Catholic Princes according to the example of my Ally, the King of England,
would have joined with me and assisted in subduing the Hollanders, and after
them all the Heretical Potentates, that I might be able to establish the
Catholic Doctrine throughout all my Conquests, but very far from that, the
whole World, Catholics and Hugonots have combined together against me, and by
a strange revolution, have suffered my only Ally to be driven from his Country
by the Prince of Orange. Wherefore I have been constrained contrary to the
Catholic Faith, to enter into leagues for my own defense, with the Grand
Signior and the Corsairs of Algier, and compelled to engage at the Ottoman
Port, to send the Dauphin with a great Army to the frontiers of Germany, to
harass the Emperor, and to give his Highness my Colleague, an opportunity by
dividing the Forces of the Empire, to respite and to gather his Forces
together, to invade Leopold; lest the whole burden of the War should fall on my
shoulders. I flattered myself with the expectation of great succors from Rome,
after the general extirpation that I had caused of the Hugonots in my Kingdom,
and the submissions that I had made to the Holy See, since the exaltation of
this present Pope, who was pleased more over to promise that by his Pastoral
authority he would procure a reconciliation with the Catholic Princes, on the
account of some small restitution, to the end that I might be in a capacity to
oppose the Hugenot Potentates, to which effect I had bent my chiefest forces:
nevertheless with an intent to restore all afterward to the Catholics, which
I would have readily granted to them for the accommodation of my affairs: But
the Venetian Policy is an impenetrable mystery to my Ministers of State, they
bawled aloud at Rome, that the Prince of Orange, is an Usurper, and a more
dangerous and formidable Heretic than Calvin himself, who advanced his
Conquests only with the tongue and the pen, whereas this Prince makes use of
his Sword; and that a remedy ought to be provided in time: but all my zeal for
the Catholic Religion has hitherto produced no effect, and it is alleged to
me, that it is not a War maintained for the cause of Religion, but for that of
Ambition. In the mean time thou know Oh Deity! that presidest in this Place,
that I labor to reestablish the King of England on his Throne, and that I have
almost exhausted my treasury to preserve Ireland for him; but instead of a
recompense, it has been objected to me, that it is my own interest that
obliges me to act; and the Catholics are so far from assisting me with
Croisades, that they sing Te Deum when the Hugenots are victorious; this
causes me often to deliberate, whether I ought to recall the later into my
Kingdom to enrage my Catholic enemies; but the mischief is, they will give no
credit to my word, nor I to their.

The Union of the Allies is more closely knit together than the Gordian Knot,
and requires another Alexander to untie it; but it is a Clock that always goes
and never strikes, it is a Lute on which some strings are always jarring, or
out of tune. I have devised an Expedient to defend my self, and not to fear
them, for I find them to be better Travelers than Soldiers; I hope, that if
they always March as they have begun, they will soon be ready to return into
their Winter Quarters, and then I shall have no longer any cause of Fear on the
side of Germany. My Cousin of Luxemburgh, who is as subtle as a Fox, has
promised to deceive the Prince of Waldeck once more. I have drained my Subjects
and Churches of all their Money, because I knew it is the sinews of War, and
with this familiar Spirit all things may be effected, with the help thereof I
penetrate every where, even into the most secret Counsels, and it is my only
Refuge, my Lifeguard, and the best Ally that I have at this time: It often
performs the function of a General, by gaining the Victory for me, as well as
that of an Orator amongst the Ladies, and by its Virtue I subdue many Obstinate
Enemies: But alas! it is my sad misfortune, that this familiar Spirit could
never tame the Prince of Orange, who is the Enemy that I most dread above all
others, and I am very much afraid, lest he should have a powerful party in my
Kingdom, as he has had in England; moreover, I have been assured, that he is
Cannon-proof, and that he fears no danger; what course then shall I take to
defend my self against him?

THE ORACLE.
Restore unto God and Men that which belongs to them, otherwise thou shall
drink the Juice of ORANGE.


XX.
MADAM de Maintonon who had accompanied the King into the Temple, afterward
entreated the Priestess to conduct her to a convenient place, and to set her in
a decent posture, that she might interrogate the Oracle, which being
accordingly done, she said,

By the favor and assistance of the Reverend Father La Chaise, I have quieted
my Conscience, and secured my Honor, against all Obloquy and Slander; never
any poor Lady in France ascended to that high degree of Glory to which I have
arrived, only by my Intrigues: I have refused the chief Honors of the Court,
but I have exercised in a manner all the functions of a Queen. I had a respect
for Madam the late Dauphiness, because she preceeded me at Court, but when
another shall come, I do not intend to give her the same Honor, or Deference,
since I am at present the first in right: Shall it be said, that I who have
attained to so great Intimacy and Familiarity with the King and his Female
Counselors, should give place to an upstart; this I confess would be a very
great vexation to me; therefore I come hither to consult thee on this occasion.

THE ORACLE.
Women and Fruits have their Flowers and Seasons.


XXI.
WHEN the King was gone out of the Temple, the Dauphin succeeded in his place,
and said,

I fear, lest being as yet Dauphin, I should become greater than my Father,
which is a thing without a president in France, but Woe to him that is to be
the first Example. Madam the late Dauphiness often reproached me, by reason of
the little share that I had in managing the Affairs of the Kingdom, to whom it
chiefly belonged, and because very often the pleasure of a Minister of State
has prevailed over mine; indeed it is their Conduit through which I have
frequently received favors from the King, who has too much Ambition to suffer
me to Rule during his Life, and (after the example of Charles the Fifth,) to
put the Royal Authority into my hands: Though the People have much inclination to
me ever since the Troubles in which they are involved; the Catholics are
desirous of me, and the Hugenots wait for me with great Devotion,
notwithstanding that the Dauphiness, (as many others were,) to make her self to
be regarded, was accessory in tormenting them; but they are persuaded, that I
was not engaged in causing the Vexations that were offered to them, and that
the good Precepts of the Duke of Montausier my Governor, were prevalent in me;
neither indeed could I ever approve of all the violent proceedings that have
been promoted with respect to them, because I well foresaw, that they would be
attended by mischievous Consequences, and would partly kindle all those
Combustions that we see at this Day inflamed in the Kingdom, which cannot but
produce most dangerous effects. The King's Evil Council has raised up this
vast number of Enemies with whom we are now to contend, and who are resolved
not to hearken to any Peace till France be abased, but it is my misfortune,
that in this abasement I shall find my own. The King will not give Ear to my
Counsel, and perhaps when he shall have a mind to take my Advice, it may then
be too late: He always thinks that he has strength enough to break through the
multitude of his Enemies, and to make way for a favorable Peace; but this
account is very different from that of the Confederates, who advance on all
sides to enter into France: Peradventure if I were Master, and should make
propositions to them, they would hearken to me, but the King will never consent
to this till the last extremity. Therefore I come hither to know to which Party
I ought to adhere, in case the Enemies should invade the Kingdom.

THE ORACLE.
The Success of the Campain of the Year 1691, shall show it to thee.


XXII.
THE Duke of Orleans tired with doing nothing, and vexed to see himself
rejected and despised, went to consult the Oracle, saying,

I have always very well discharged my Trust whenever the King has thought
fit to require my Service, witness the Battle and Taking of St. Omer, and
although his Majesty has been pleased to express the satisfaction he received
from the Glory that I had there obtained; nevertheless I remain without
Employment, and the King neither talks, nor takes no more notice of me, than if
there were no such Person in the World; Whence does this proceed?

THE ORACLE.
The King would not have his Actions Eclipsed by thine, neither does he desire
any other Glory but that which he acquires himself.


XXIII.
THE King of Sweden having declared that he is very willing to assist his
Allies, but withal to keep a Neutrality with France, that he might thereby
promote the Commerce of his Subjects, whilst the most part of other Nations
were engaged in a tedious War, went to consult the Oracle, saying,

The King of France offers great advantages to hinder me from affording any
Supplies to the Confederates, and to induce me to stand Neuter: He has
propounded an Expedient to stop the Vessels that I am obliged to send to the
Hollanders by virtue of a Treaty made with the States General, and if I have a
mind to enter into Pomerania, he will not only pay all arrears and summ's of
money due to me; but will also restore the Duchy of Deux ponts, and defray the
charge of the War; moreover, he promises that the King of Denmark shall make
no attempt upon my Country, but shall likewise remayn neuter on my account,
and that we shall both enter into a Treaty of Commerce with France, and make a
league together to oppose all that shall endeavor to incommode or disturb us
therein. Whereas on the one side I am allured by the advantage of Traffic; on
the other, the treachery and ill usage that I have received from France deters
me: all these fair propositions being only the product of that necessity with
which he finds himself urged: what then shall I do?

THE ORACLE.
Rely not on a reconciled enemy.


XXIV.
The King of Denmark being solicited on the one side by the fair offers of
France, and detained on the other by the interest of Prince George, who stands
in need of King William's assistance to establish the Crown in the Family; and
knowing not what to determine to preserve both, came to consult the Oracle on
this occasion, saying:

The present offers of the King of France are fair and good, but they are not
to be compared with the advantages that will hereafter accrue to my Country,
by a strict union with England; for if the Princess of Denmark should ascend
the Throne, there would be a great and indissoluble band of unity between
England and my Dominions; besides that the assurances which the King of Great
Britain, now reigning, has given me at present of his amity, and the sincerity
that I have always found in the word of this Prince, have obliged me to send
Forces to assist him in finishing the Conquest of Ireland; my own interest also
exciteth me to afford him this supply against King James, since the later
designed to exclude the Princesses his Daughters and their offspring from the
Crown, to transfer it to a stranger whose extraction is unknown; but I would
willingly assist the King of England, without leaving the King of France, who
considering his present circumstances will not be offended as he would have
been heretofore at the aid that I have sent into Ireland, since he is now as
Meek as he was haughty in times past.

THE ORACLE.
Beware of the French disease; for that of England had its original in France.


XXV.
The King of Poland, being sufficiently disgusted at France, when he had caused
the Sieur Granville to depart out of his Dominions, and having declared to the
Queen that after the marriage of the Royal Prince his Son, with the Princess of
Nieubourg, he would no longer hearken to the Ministers of France, tho they were
able even to bestow on him the same faculty as Midas had heretofore of turning
every thing he should touch into Gold; came in this resolution to consult the
Oracle, saying:

The French baits have caused me to lose the high reputation that I had
acquired before Vienna. I confess my weakness, hitherto in placing my Summum
bonum in a little yellow clay, which I have kept more carefully than holy
Relics; and I have often looked on the effigies of the Louys d'Ors as a
Tutelary God and the object of my happiness. However I now begin to understand,
that these material goods are but froth in comparison of the worth of real
glory, which alone can set my Son on the Throne. I know that the taking of
Caminiec can at present contribute more thereto, than all the treasure of
France; but on this occasion my Allies have at least this consolation, that I
have taken more from the French than from the Turks, and that to exhaust is to
weaken. That War can be but of little moment, where the danger and the honor
are not great; therefore for the future after the example of Hannibal, I shall
turn to the side of glory, as soon as the marriage of the Royal Prince with the
Princess of Nieubourg shall be accomplished; and to that end I have stopped my
ears against all the Sirens of France, since I observe that their King will
have enough to do to preserve his Crown for his own Son, and that the Emperor
alone can establish mine on the head of my heir: I am come hither to receive
your wholesome Counsel.

THE ORACLE.
Endeavor thy self by thy own valor to secure the Crown for thy posterity.


XXVI.
The King of Portugal, after his Alliance with the House of Nieubourg, thought
himself also obliged to embrace the interest of the Empire, and the common
cause of his Allies, but the French (who are alwais pregnant of politic
contrivances) forseeing that this marriage especially at this present juncture
of affairs, might alienate that Kingdom from their interests, to amuse the
Portuguese Court propounded another between their Infanta and the Dauphin, and
that the issue of that Bed should succeed to the Crown of Portugal, on
condition nevertheless that the King of Portugal should declare War against
Spain, and that France should bear a part of the charge; wherefore his
Portuguese Majesty in this perplexity went to consult the Oracle, and spoke
thus:

The Ministers of France continually represent to me how much both my
Predecessor and my self have been obliged to them on the account of the
Pyrenean peace, insinuating that the Grandeur of Spain might hereafter produce
my abasement, but they would furnish me with means in this conjuncture whereby
to deliver my self from all pretensions that that Court might make to my
Country for the future. Now since I have an oppertunity to serve France with
my Commerce, to remain neuter, and to procure the Traffic of the other Princes
engaged in War; why should I not improve it to the enriching of my Subjects by
furnishing the French with all manner of ammunitions that they shall want in
this present War?

THE ORACLE.
Thou do not yet know the force of Spiritus Gall.


XXVII.
The Grand Signior after so many losses, notwithstanding his affiance in
Mehemet Rasoul, and after the return of his Dervishes from Mecca, not knowing
any longer to which Saint of the Alcoran to make his addresses, determined to
go and consult the Oracle, and to try if he could there find any hopes of
deliverance: Being arrived at the Sacred cave, he spoke after this manner:

I have offered to the Emperor of the Christians, my enemy, all that my Law
allows me to give (notwithstanding the persuasions of France) without being
able to obtain any thing. I have lost my best Janissaries in battle, and my
Dervishes are weary with crying throughout all the Mosques; my Treasures are
exhausted, and my People raise commotions in diverse Places, demanding Peace:
The Women with Child miscarry at the approach of the uncircumcised; and I durst
not venture to return to Constantinople with out a peace. The Cham of Tartary
indeed has promised to come to my assistance, and the great Sultan of France
to pay him, and that he will send the young Sultan, his Son, to the River
Rhine, to compel the Christians to depart out of my Dominions, but especially
he that will never make Peace till all my Territories that I have lost in
Hungary be restored to me, provided that I maintain the War as long as he; But
my Forces are broken, the enemy stands at my gates, and I am continually
terrified with great alarms, being doubtful whether I ought to give credit to
this Sultant that bears the name of Christian. He has often abused me, and the
necessity of my affairs has hitherto forced me to hearken to him. He proffers
to swear by my Alcoran that he will keep his word; but since all his promises
have had no effect, what resolution shall I take, and on whom shall I rely?

THE ORACLE.
On thy own Forces.


XXVIII.
The Deputies of the States General of the United Provinces, being come to
consult the Oracle, said:

It was necessary for the security of our State, to set the Prince of Orange on
the Throne of Great Britain, to secure us from the threats of France; and the
assurance that the count d' Avaux gave us of a strict alliance between the two
Kings, has opened our eyes, to the end that we might take away from the King
of France the means of being able to hurt us. We have by our own aid disengaged
ourselves from a very great encumbrance and perplexity, and by placing the
Prince on the Throne, we have well provided for our safety for the future, by
that indissoluble Union that will always be maintained between the two States;
but since all things in this sublunary World are subject to variety of changes
and revolutions, what course must we take to preserve that high reputation
which we have acquired to our selves in Europe.

THE ORACLE.
Be always Masters of your own Forces.


XXIX.
The most Serene Doge of Venice, being ready to return laden with the Laurels
and Trophies of his Victories, was extremely glad of an oppertunity to consult
the Oracle, and said:

The most Serene Republic having been hitherto the terror of the Infidels, has
compelled her haughty enemy to sue for a Peace, but the advantage of have a
Pope descended from her own loins, obliges her to continue the War, and not to
separate from her Allies, tho Poland stands as an idle Spectator; therefore it
is time to think of a Peace, and so much the rather, by reason that a great
fire is kindled in the neighborhood of this Republic, that is capable of
inflaming all Italy, if it be not soon prevented. What is most requisite to be
done on this occasion?

THE ORACLE.
Make Peace, and return from the farthest to succor the nearest.


XXX.
The Duke of Savoy, having for some time amused the King of France, who only
sought to seize on his Country, and having thoroughly penetrated into the
subtle intreagues as well as the danger in which he was involved by confiding
in the French, remembered the example of the Duke of Lorrain, and resolved to
take new measures contrary to the interest of France, and such as were only
able to secure his preservation; for the better pursuing of which he thought
fit to consult the Oracle, and coming to the Temple, spoke thus:

It was generally believed that I was so strictly united to France* that I
durst not separate my self, nor undertake any thing without the consent of
their King, but the event has shown the contrary, and that I knew my own true
interest as well as the King's intentions; but if I have dissembled for some
time, it was only that I might seek myown advantage and to engage my Allies;
neither the tears of the Royal Duchess, nor the fair promises of the Duke of
Orleans* could prevail with me to alter my resolution, nor never shall; the
bowl is cast and cannot return again, for if I had received the French troops
into the Citadel of Turin, I should have had nothing else to do but to go and
keep my Country House in France with the Prince of Utopia; but not being
willing for the future to depend on any but God and my Sword, I have made it
appear to the whole World that I Am Master within my own Dominions, by the
return of my Subjects of Piedmont into their Valleys; and without delay I have
embraced the common cause of the Emperor and his Allies, who will not abandon
me, nor invade my Territories: And if the Cantons of Switzerland would do the
same, and shake off the yoke of France, we should find employment for their
Monarch on the side of Dauphine. I am come hither to know what success will
attend me.

THE ORACLE.
Pignerol shall open its Gates to thy good fortune.


XXXI.
The Cantons of Switzerland being amazed at the sudden change that happened in
their neighborhood, deputed soveral persons on the behalf of the Helvetian
States to be informed by the Oracle of future contingencies, who being arrived
at the Sacred Den, spoke to this effect:

We have seen a great light in our Neighborhood, and have rejoiced in the
brightness thereof: The recalling of the Vaudois, and the Declaration of the
Duke of Savoye in favor of the Emperor and his Allies, has caused our heart
to leap for joy; moreover, we never received so many caresses from France, only
to persuade us to remayn neuter, but they do not as yet offer to demolish the
Fortress of Hunninguen; however if they do not set about it speedily, we shall
open a passage for the Germans, tho as yet we divide a little spot of ground
with the King of France; but forasmuch as there is nothing now to be feared,
and since he can no longer bite; if he do not himself begin to dismantle this
Place, we will apply our Batteries thereto: We are in good earnest brave
Switzers, and will not be mocked for the future, they must now deal plainly
with us and set their hand to the work: their Louys d'Ors are good, but
somewhat more must be done at this time, since ours are now more current money,
for by the virtue of hocus pocus Monsieur Amelot takes us for Block-heads, and
thinks to gull us as he has done heretofore, but we have no mind to let slip
this opportunity, and we will act our part before the Farce be ended: We are
heavy and corpulent, therefore we march stowly. In the mean time what shall we
do?

THE ORACLE.
Follow the light that goes before you.


XXXII.
The Republic of Genoa, being very glad to see so many dogs set on the wolf,
and all the Powers of Europe combined against France, the most formidable enemy
that she ever had; sent to consult the Oracle to know what ought to be done in
this conjuncture, saying:

The whole World has seen the submission that we have been forced to make to
the King of France, after he had bombarded our City: we have been constrained
to kiss the rod with which we were scourged without murmuring; and the Senate
has been obliged to go in a body to Versailles, to thank the King for his
great justice; but we hope that the time is now come wherein Heaven will avenge
us on them, and that the Allies will cause reparation to be made for the
Damage that we have sustained. What means shall we now use to take some
satisfaction our selves of our concealed enemy?

THE ORACLE.
Let not thine inhabitants furnish him with arms to beat thee.


XXXIII.
The late King James, being obliged to abandon his Kingdoms a second time, and
to depart out of Ireland; and not knowing what Saint to invocate, nor of what
materials to make weapons in France, where the unfortunate are not at all
welcome, went very mournfully to consult the Oracle, and said:

I now acknowledge my fault, and that my misfortunes have had their original
only from the wicked instigations of the Queen my Wife, and her pernicious
Counsels, that induced me to seek for means to make my self absolute by virtue
of an Arbitrary power independent of the Statutes of the Realm and authority of
Parliaments; and to abolish the Test and Penal Laws: This model came from
France, and has lead me to the precipice and to this unhappy Labyrinth: My
People could not endure neither an alteration in Religion, nor in the
Succession of the Crown, but sent for a Competitor, who easily got possession
of my Kingdoms, without hopes that I shall ever be able to reenter therein as
long as he shall live. The greatest part of my Subjects have forsaken me, and
my Friends durst not so much as lift up their head: My Forces have abandoned
me, and they of my own Family have turned their backs on me. Thus am I left
destitute in the hands of the French, reduced to the necessity of imploring
their aid, and of making a most lamentable figure; not knowing whither to
betake my self when the King of France shall be weary of me. Alas! will my
banishment from my Kingdoms continue much longer?

THE ORACLE.
Until thy Successor shall have a mind to abrogate the Laws, as thou have done.


XXXIV.
The Queen Jacomina, having seen with much consternation the return of the
King, her Husband, to Saint Germain, went accompanied with Father Peter's and
the little Urchin, her Son, to the Temple of the Oracle to know the reason
thereof, and spoke thus:

I have been always very exact in my devotions to our Lady of Loretto, and
have made many vows to her, to the end that I might re-enter into my Kingdom;
nevertheless we are so far from approaching it, by the way of Ireland, as the
King of France vainly promised, that we are now driven back farther than ever,
by the retreat of the King, who has been totally defeated feated with his Army
at the first shock of our enemies. Whence to so many misfortunes proceed that
have happened to us in this World?

THE ORACLE.
From thy self.


XXXV.
Father Peter's, having entreated the Queen to permit him to speak in his turn,
said:

I have incessantly labored day and night for the good of the Society, and
considering that a Prince of Wales created by our hand, might hereafter be a
very powerful instrument for the propagation of the Catholic Faith, and the
increasing of our Revenues in England, our good Lady of Loretto has by a
miracle brought this Prince to light, which was very necessary to protect us
after the King's death; none but the Society know the depth of this Mystery;
but in the mean time some spiteful person disaffected to our interest, having
discovered the mine, brought the storm on the King's person and all the Royal
Family, and at the same time on our Holy Society; thus to avoid exposing our
selves to the mercy of the Conqueror, we were compelled to follow the fortune
of the King and Royal Family, by retiring into a place of safety, to the end
that by our Prayers we might be able to merit our return into England, as soon
as possibly it can be effected, for the consolation of the party that we have
left there, and which impatiently expects our coming. Shall we be speedily
reestablished? for we are all ready to repass the Sea.

THE ORACLE.
Immediately send for all that thou have left there.


XXXVI.
The Cardinal of Fustemberg, having lost all hopes of obtaining the Electorate,
and having turned that Arch-Bishopric into an Abbacy; went full of despair to
consult the Oracle, and said:

I have foolishly neglected the opportunity of advancing my fortune, having
voluntarily renounced my right of Coadjutorship to the Arch-Bishopric of Colen;
I have converted the money that I received from France to procure me friends to
a very different use, and not doubting but that I should certainly accomplish
my design, I spent it in treating my dear Niece, who by her fond caresses
caused me to imitate the Crow in the Fable, and that which torments me most of
all is, that the matter is irrecoverable, since the Holy See has again
ratified all that was done in this affair, and that my Competitor is younger
than I: Thus my fortune is limited within the narrow bounds of the Abbey of
Saint Germain, However, the King gives me hopes of obtaining an Arch-Bishopric
in his Kingdom, to sweeten the remorse that I might have for betraying my own
lawful Sovereign; but I cannot rely upon it. The fear of some foul and
unexpected chastisement caused me to withdraw from Rome incognito, to take
shelter under the Culverins of the great Jews; but in regard that the
unfortunate are never welcome at the French Court, I can make but a sorry
figure, and it will be yet so much the worse, if the Emperor and his Allies
should gain any considerable advantages over France, for then I might serve as
a Victime to a Peace, not knowing whither to fly, since all Europe only
desires my ruin. Thus on whatsoever side I turn, I can see nothing but crosses
and tribulation ready to attend me. I am come therefore to know my destiny.

THE ORACLE.
It will follow the fortune of thy new Master.


XXXVII.
The King of Siam, being disengaged from the French and the Jesuits went to
consult the Oracle, and said:

my Predecessor was much addicted to the French that were brought to Siam by
the Jesuits, who having made themselves in a manner necessary by the profession
of the Mathematics and Astrology, with the study whereof they had amused him,
soon insinuated themselves into his favor, and by that means got possession of
the most principal Places in his Dominions, with a prospect of becoming at
length Masters of the whole Kingdom; designing to set one of their own
Creatures on the Throne, and to seize on our Golden Gods that attract all their
admiration, neither would they have preached there Religion here, but to that
end; however having perceived their subtilty with the advice of my chief
Mandarins I got rid of them, as also of their principal abetters and adherents.
After the King's Death I took possession of the Kingdom, lest it should fall
together with our Gods into the hands of the French; I am not ignorant that
their King will make pretensions against me, but I fear him not as long as I
can maintain an Alliance and good correspondence with the Hollanders, my
neighbors; at least if they do not come to demand the presents that they gave
to my Predecessor, and to Constantius his chief Minister of State, who was the
instrument of all their designs, and the wheel that set the engine of the
Jesuits on motion; but the first that shall presume to enter into my Kingdom, I
will deliver as a prey to the wild Beasts; for I can no longer suffer such
vermin in my Dominions.

THE ORACLE.
Be always Master.


XXXVIII.
The Republic of Geneva, being delivered from those terrible alarms that the
King of France continually caused in their neighborhood, on the occasion of
the marching of that vast number of the enemies against whom he is now engaged,
and of the great War in which he is involved; sent two Syndics to consult the
Oracle in the name of the whole City, who spoke after this manner:

Our condition being altered, and the tempestuous Storm having passed over our
Heads, he that so lately threatened us, begins now to caress us; thus we breath
in a clear and wholesome air, and we may certainly affirm that King William is a
great Physician, and that his most efficacious remedies operate at a very great
distance; but for as much as in all distempers, relapses are very dangerous, by
what means shall we preserve the good health that we now enjoy?

THE ORACLE.
By the virtue of Spiritus Angliae.


XXXIX.
The City of Hambourgh, being obliged to publish the Emperor's Avocatoria, was
not a little disgusted, and in this perplexity sent two Licenciats to consult
the Oracle, who spoke in the name of their Principals, saying:

We hoped that all our neighbors being engaged in War, we might have
monopoliz'd the greatest part of their Traffic by the means of a neutrality;
but since jealousy often creates violence, insomuch that we have found an
embrago laid on all our Vessels in England. with the Emperor's consent, we have
been compelled to submit to the Avocatoria, and to cause the French Resident to
depart from our Tertitories; but the King may clearly see that we have been
constrained thereto to avoid the ruin of our inhabitants; for the King of
England who knows not how to dally, persists in obligng us to observe the
Avocatoria. Thus we are perplexed being deprived of our Commerce with France,
and not knowing what party to adhere unto in this Conjuncture.

THE ORACLE.
Follow the strongest.


XL.
The Princes of the House of Lunembourg spoke thus to the Oracle.

We have had no regard to all the offers of France, and they could not hinder
us from cleving to the interest of the common Cause of Europe, and from
furnishing our Allies with Troops, notwithstanding the vast sums of money
offered to us by the most Christian King to prevent it, but we have no mind to
be harrass'd; we would act as we think fit, and be Masters of our own Forces;
we would willingly assist our Allies, and especially the King of England, for
whose valor we have a particular esteem, as our Friend and true Ally, and we
are ready to concur in any thing to the utmost of our Power that may tend to
his satisfaction.

THE ORACLE.
Glory and Victory fly before him, and Heaven is his Protector.


XLI.
The Marquess de Gastanaga, Governor of the Spanish Neitherlands, after the
Battle of Fleury, fearing lest the enemies might invade Flanders, went
immediately to consult the Oracle, and said:

May the Heavens protect us in this Conjuncture, for if the Hollanders should
retreat, my Master's Country is lost, and if the French should enter therein,
they would spare neither Virgin, nor Saint, nor the most Sacred Relics. I have
caused several Masses to be celebrated, and have made several vows for the
prosperity of the King's A^ms, but I hope that when the King of Great Britain
shall come, he will defend us from all disasters, with the aid of our good Lady
of Hal.

THE ORACLE.
Help thy self, and the Gods shall assist thee.


XLII.
The Prince of Waldeck, after the same Battle of Fleury, was also very glad of
an oppertunity to consult the Oracle on this occasion, saying:

I have been unfortunate in the last Battle, although at the same time the French
have no reason to boast; I did what I could, nevertheless I know that I am not
respected by the People. Men give Battle, but the event comes from Heaven,
whence then proceeds my misfortune?

THE ORACLE.
Consult thy strength and thy age, and be a friend to Spies.


XLIII.
The Kingdom of Algers, sent two of their Reys that belong to Sea affairs to
consult the Oracle, who said:

The French have Bombarded our City, but it has cost them dear, they are come
to demand a Peace, and have applied a Golden plaster to our Wound, and if we
may believe them, we have no better friend than their King; shall we give them
credit?

THE ORACLE.
There is no great difference between one Corsair and another.


XLIV.
The Czars of Moscovy, having entered upon no considerable Action against the
Turks since their Declaration of War, notwithstanding all the Assurances given
by their Ambassadors whom they sent into all the Courts of Europe, came both
together to consult the Oracle, saying:

We have declared War against the Turks, and although we have demanded Supplies
of all the Christian Princes, yet none comes to our Assistance, insomuch that
we are obliged to maintain this great War at our own Charges; if this continues
we shall be compelled to make a Peace.

THE ORACLE.
Ye shall do no great good, nor no great harm.


XLV.
The Reverend Society of the Jesuits deputed Father La Chaise, and another
English Father lately come from England, to go and consult the Oracle in the
Habit of Cavaliers, lest they should meet with any of King William's Troops on
the Road; where they were no sooner arrived, but they very confidently entered
into the Temple, and said:

Our Society is esteemed as the Pillar of the Catholic Church, for without it,
it would have fallen in several places, and by our intercession we obtained a
Catholic Successor in England; nevertheless the Sins of Men have caused
Heresy to prevail for a time, but we are not discouraged, our Party always
subsists there, and another Revolution may put us in possession of what we have
lost.

The City of Geneva was very near falling into our hands, and we had already
reckoned it in the number of our Conquests: It has indeed escaped out of the
King's Power, but a fair opportunity pretermitted is not irrecoverable. We have
had better success with the Emperor, and have hitherto hindered him from making
a Peace with the Turks.

The Martyrdoms that our Society has suffered in England and China, caused us
justly to hope that we should have been regarded by the Holy See, but it seems
all our Pains and Zeal for the propagation of the Faith cannot as yet merit the
esteem of the Venetians, which has in all times been of very bad consequence
to us, with respect to the Heretics; but if we can hope for no great matter on
that side, we may expect much from the Most Christian King, who promises to
himself a happy Issue of this War, through the intercession of the grand Saint
Ignatius, and the Prayers of the whole Society. We have entirely devoted our
selves to France, the King of Spain being a Saint that at present can do us
neither good nor harm. We had reason to hope for much, from the King and Queen
of England, if Fortune had not been unkind to them; but the whole Society
labors for their Restoration. Will thou therefore Re-establish them and us by
their means?

THE ORACLE.
It is impossible to rise again after so great a fall.


XLVI.
The Right Reverend the Clergy of France, being assembled together, intended to
depute the Archbishop of Paris to go and consult the Oracle, but when he was
enjoined to speak the Truth, he desired to be excused, by reason that the King
had promised him the first nomination to a Cardinal's Cap, and therefore being
under such Circumstances he durst not disoblige his Majesty, whereupon they
soon appointed the Bishop of Grenoble in his room to discharge that Office, who
being arrived at the Sacred Den, spoke to this effect,

I am come hither on the behalf of the most considerable Assembly in Europe, I
mean the Clergy of France, and of the Gallicane Church, to pour out our just
Complaints into your Bosom. The King in taking away our Revenues draws the most
pure Blood out of our Veins by continual Taxes and Gratuities beyond our
Ability; and by a prodigious Usurpation, this Monarch has lately taken from us
all the Ornaments of Gold and Silver belonging to the Sanctuary, without the
consent of our Holy Father the Pope, under pretense of a War to be prosecuted
against the Heretics, and of the Reunion of the Hugenots of his Kingdom with
the Church; insisting moreover, that he has been obliged to disburse vast Sums
of Money in maintaining the Royal Mission that has brought in great Revenues
to the Church: But that which most affects the Conscience of our Prelates is,
that they must believe every thing that the King requires them, and accommodate
their Faith according to the Affairs that intervene between the Court of France
and that of Rome. It would be great matter of Joy, if by your wholesome Counsels
this Venerable Assembly might be delivered from all these Vexations, that we
may peaceable enjoy our Benefices, and not be compelled to believe any thing
but what are commanded by our Holy Mother the Church.

THE ORACLE.
Your Kings pretend that Religion may be adapted to their Ambition.


XLVII.
The Catholics of England in their Exile went to consult the Oracle, to know
their Destiny, saying:

We thought that as soon as our Zealous Monarch had ascended his Brother's
Throne, the time of our Restoration was at hand, and that after a tedious
Captivity, we should have re-enter'd upon the possession of all our Rights and
Prerogatives: The Reverend Fathers the Jesuits gave us great hopes thereof; but
by a strange Revolution, we find our selves further off than we were hitherto,
and by hoisting our Top-gallant too high, we have overset our Vessel at the
first Blast of Wind; the Tempest soon dispersed us on all sides, like scattered
Sheep, at the Mercy of Foreigners, without any prospect of returning, at least
of a New Revolution, which we are forced to wait for, without so rouch as being
able to foresee the least Remedy for our Calamities. Alas! When shall we meet
with a more favorable time.

THE ORACLE.
Patience is a great Virtue.


XLVIII.
The Marshal de la Feuillade, having for a long time passionately wished for an
opportunity, freely to disclose his Mind, went to the Temple, and said:

I had foretold long ago that the Prince of Orange would at length create us
much trouble; but no credit was given to my Word, and for speaking the Truth, I
was very near being disgraced by the King, instead of serveing Him with my
wholesome Advice; He would no longer hearken to me, because I knew not how to
flatter, and I was constrained to hold my Tongue; but now that this Prince is
become King of England, and has Power in His Hand, He begins to Sing a very
different Tune than he did before; and if ever He should pass over into France,
we shall see Fine-work, and the Post will find good Employment. My Predictions
were always true, that with too much squeezing the Orange, it would at last
become bitter, but I was not heard; and when they shall be willing to give Ear,
perhaps then it will be too late. Fear has already seized the Court, and they
have sent me to repair the old Forts in Dauphine, lest the Prince marching at
the head of the Vaudois, should recover his Castle. The King has charged me to
take great care thereof, but I am very desirous to declare my Opinion to him.

THE ORACLE.
Thy Master hates the Truth.


FINIS.

