A LETTER FROM A Person of Quality IN THE NORTH To a Friend in LONDON,
CONCERNING Bishop Lake's Late Declaration Of his Dying in the Belief of the
Doctrine OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE, AS THE Distinguishing Character of the CHURCH of
ENGLAND.

Licensed Sept. 19th. 1689.

J. F.



LONDON, Printed for Awnsham Churchill at the Black-Swan near Amen-Corner. 1689.

A LETTER FROM A Person of Quality.
Dear Sir,
YOU may wonder, that at this time of day I should begin to talk to you of
Bishop Lake's Death, for which I dare say both of us have before this, paid our
just Tribute of Sorrow, and for whose Memory every True Protestant must have a
very particular Respect, so long as the Courage and Constancy of the Seven
Bishops remains upon Record; which I verily believe will be till time shall be
no more: But some (as if this Glorious Action had not been enough to have
secured his Fame to all Eternity) seem rather desirous to transmit him to
Posterity by another Distinguishing Character; that of the Great Champion for
Passive Obedience; thinking that to be a greater Honor than to be recorded for
one of the great Maintainers and Assertors of the Protestant Religion, and the
English Liberties; For there is a Paper sent abroad about our Country, attested
not only by his own Hand, but also by several unquestionable Witnesses, wherein
the Good Bishop on his Deathbed declares, That he had been brought up in, and
had also taught others that great Doctrine of Passive Obedience, which he
always looked upon as the Distinguishing Character of the Church of England,
and that he would not have taken the Oath, though the Penalty had been Loss of
Life; but found great Satisfaction and Consolation in his Mind because he had
not taken it; and these he desired might be looked upon as the Words of a Dying
Man, and so represented to his Friends: But whether those Friends had not done
him as good Service if they had kept it to themselves, and not represented it
to the World, I think may be a Question: for I must confess it is a little
unaccountable to me what Designs they could have in Publishing it: For it is so
far from being necessary on the Bishop's account, that 'twas really
impertinent: For he that at that time was under, and had submitted to a
Suspension, merely upon his refusal of the Oaths, had certainly given the World
as convincing a Proof of his Opinion, as if he had printed a Thousand Volumes
about it: So that there was no more occasion (I think of making, but I am sure)
of Publishing such a Declaration, than there is for my Lord Bishop of Cant. to
Print Manifestoes, to tell the People he is suspended on the same account. And
since there was so very little Reason to do it on the Bishop's Score, the
Motives and Designs had need be very good that can justify their doing it on
their own. Had either they or the Bishop given us the Reasons of his adhering
to that Opinion, besides that of his being bred and born in it, (an Argument
that a Turk or Pagan may have for the Truth of their Religion), they might have
obliged the World exceedingly; but the only Motives at least that are to me
apparent, for telling us what we knew before, I think might as well have been
spared: for there are Two Inferences which may very easily be made from the
Paper, and which I suspect was the chief aim in publishing: The First is to
insinuate, that from the beginning of the Reformation, ever since the Church of
England was restored to its Purity, Passive Obedience was the Cornerstone of
it: for it is called, The Distinguishing Character of the Church of England: so
that it seems none was accounted her true Sons that did not hold it. Now if
this be true, here is the whole Body of the Clergy in Queen Elizabeth's days cut
off from the Church of England at one blow; for it is not the Opinion of one or
two private Prelates, but the whole Convocation, who agree not only in giving
the Queen so very large Subsidies, but also in declaring the accounts on which
they did it; and that was assisting and protecting the Scotch and French
Protestants, and for abating all Hostilities against the true Professors of
Gods holy Gospel, and for the advancing the free profession of the Gospel
within and without Her Majesty's Dominions; and a great deal more to this
purpose, as may be seen at large in the Preambles to the Three Subsidy Bills,
given the 5 th of Eliz. l. 24. the 35 th of Eliz. c. 12. and the 43 d of Eliz.
c. 17. So that it is apparent it was their practice for Forty years, and I hope
their Faith also: for I cannot be so uncharitable as to think they would sin
against their Conscience, and purchase Damnation at so dear a rate, as those
vast Sums they gave for the assistance of those that I am sure did resist their
Kings, and who according to the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, ought to have
been looked upon, and used as Rebels. And truly, whatever is pretended, their
Doctrine was agreeable to their practice; for although the Book of Homilies has
been so often cited for the confirmation of this Doctrine, yet the Example of
David, which is so much recommended to us in the 2 d Homily against Rebellion,
for his Loyalty and our imitation, that is we desire to stand or fall by; for
if the Subject may be allowed to take up (as we are sure David did against
Saul) Defensive Arms, I think they would be very unreasonable to desire any
more. But this having been enlarged on by better Pens, I shall say no more of
it; but cannot pass by the Epithet of the distinguishing Character of the
Church of England, without some Animadversions on it: And, first, I would ask
you, Sir, whether you think it necessary for particular Churches to have
particular distinguishing Doctrines? For I must confess, to me (but if I am in
an Error I hope you will correct it) it appears so far from necessary; that I
think it is very inconvenient when particular Churches have such distinguishing
Doctrines: for I believe it has been the occasion of all the Schisms in the
World. For since, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 5. there is but one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism; and I may add, one Church, and one Truth. Why should we not
(at least endeavor to) be all of one mind, and not affect little distinctions,
which oftentimes create great Animosities? of which our present Age can give
too many sad instances. But alas, the Disease did not begin, neither will it, I
fear, end with us; for we find St. Paul reproving it in his Corinthians, as
that which occasioned all their Divisions; while one cried he was of Paul, and
another of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ: So that it seems they did
not only give their patticular Teachers the preference above others, but also
set them in opposition to Christ; but to such I may ask the Apostles Question,
Who is Paul, or who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom you have believed? But if
Paul, or an Angel Preach any other Gospel, let him be Anathema; and the same
thing may, and I think ought to be said of Churches, when they impose any thing
but what is the true Catholic Faith. Therefore to say such a Doctrine is
particular to such a Church, and that which distinguishes it from the
Catholic, is indeed to say the worst thing in the World of it; and to own that
is not any part of the Catholic Faith. And why Bishop Lake, or any body,
should value a Doctrine so much on that score, is that I cannot comprehend. And
in my Opinion, it would more have become his Lordship, if as the Office for the
Sick directs, he had made a Confession of the Christian Faith contained in the
Apostles Creed, which unquestionably he believed; but it would satisfy us
Lay People very much, if those Gentlemen who have attested this Recognition of
his distinguishing Faith, would Print another Paper, to assure us that he
rehearsed the Articles of our Common Creed; that we may not be misled by the
Example of a Bishop, to depart from the Rules of the Church when we come to
die, and instead of the Cristian Faith, declare we believe just quite contrary
to his Distinguishing Faith; that in some cases Resistance is lawful.

But I fear I have already tired you by being so large on my First Inference,
therefore shall endeavor to be as short on the Second as I can, and that I
take to be this; that from the Bishops declaring he would not have taken the
Oath to have saved his Life, and that his not taking it was the great
Consolation he had at that time, they would insinuate that the taking of the
Oath is a very wicked unlawful thing: For they being the words of a dying Man
just going to receive the Sacrament, ought to be the more credited, and to make
the deeper impression; for so good a Man as he could not be easily deceived
himself, and at such time it is certain did not design to deceive others. To
which I shall crave leave to Reply, First, That as to the main Question of the
Lawfulness of the Oath, it has been so fully and so satisfactorily discussed
already, that I am very confident you and I know some that have taken it with
as good a Conscience as Bishop Lake or any body could refuse it with; therefore
it would be superfluous to say any thing on that point: But only wish that
instead of urging any humane Example, both sides would remember the Divine Rule
of St. Paul, Romans 14. 3. Let not him that eats despise him that eats not;
and let not him that eats not judge him that eats.

But then, Secondly, as to the Authority that Bishop Lake's Dying Words ought
to have over mine or any Man's judgment, I must declare, that till Infallibility
be, I will not say the distinguishing Character, but the inseparable Attendant
of a good Man, I cannot say that they ought to influence any body any farther
than they appear true and reasonable. For if dying Men's Sentiments were to be
the Rule of our Faith, we should have a very uncertain Standard. For you must
know that once I was acquainted with a Papist, that I think, setting aside his
Opinion, was a very good Man, for he led a good Life; and when this Person came
to die, he did it with as great confidence, and comfort too, as could be
imagined; and expressed as great satisfaction in his not being a Protestant, as
the Bishop could in not taking the Oaths. So that we may see it is only the
strong persuasion of the Party, and not the truth of the Tenets, that produces
that sort of Consolation. For I am confident the Bishop himself would not have
approved of the Argument, had I turned Papist on that dying Man's declaration.
But it seems some think it no great matter* what we turn now; for I hear some
are so exceeding fierce, that they will hardly allow those which have taken the
new Oaths to be so much as out-lyers of the Church of England; but to be sure
none must be within the Pail that have not the distinguishing character; and
truly the number of the enclosed will be so small, that King James himself
could hardly have hoped to have contracted the Church of England in so small a
compass; and may in part be said to have got his ends of us, for I am sure he
has done more mischief by the Divisions he has occasioned among our selves,
than he could have done by his Persecutions. But although some Persons
indiscreet Zeal have made them so uncharitable, I am as far from supposing it
the temper of all the worthy Men of that Party, as I am from believing the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience in that unlimited sense it was Preached up by
some, was the universal Opinion of the Church of England in any Age. For that
it was not so for Forty Years of Queen Elizabeth's Reign has been made pretty
evident by matter of fact; and that it is not so at this day, I think may be
demonstrated by the same way of Argumentation. For although I might have
supposed it possible that a few particular private Persons might for interest
sake have disclaimed their former Opinion, and complied with any thing; yet
truly I have so much respect for the Clergy of the Church of England, as not to
believe that the whole Body of them could be guilty of so mean a thing; to say
no worse of it. For really the Dissenters, in comparison, are so few, that had
there not been some Names of note among them, they would hardly have been
reckoned a number; which gives me great hopes that those great and good Men,
whom we looked upon as the Pillars of our Church, will not forsake the stations
they so well became, for the sake of a particular private Doctrine, which was
no way essential either to the being, or well-being of the Church* but whose
only use was to distinguish the Church of England from all the Churches in the
World, and that is really from the Catholic Church. For this Bishop Lake seems
to me to own, when he calls it the distinguishing Character of the Church of
England; and so truly it may still continue if they please, for I believe there
is no other Church so fond of it, as to rob us of it, if to be carried so high
as some would have it. But if taken in its limited and true sense, Passive
Obedience must be acknowledged so necessary a Duty, that the World could not
well subsist without it. And I am very confident, that all the difference about
it has been occasioned by a little mistake, in applying those Rules to
Communities, which were given to particular private Persons, and only designed
for such. For although in my single private capacity I ought to submit to, and
suffer the greatest injustice, rather than disobey the lawful Magistrate, and
disturb the Government: Yet as I am an English Man, I think I am as much
obliged, by all ties both Civil and Sacred, to defend and maintain that
Government and Constitution of which I am a Member, as I am to obey the King;
and that being the Primary Obligation, ought to be discharged in the first
place; but the safety of that being secured, Subjects ought to obey without any
other reserve. And this seems to me so evident, that I think it needs no
further proof, though it is capable of the clearest, if it were necessary, as I
hope it is not; for after all, I am very confident that the greatest and best
of our Dissenters are of my mind in this point, as might very easily be proved,
if they would please but truly to resolve me one Question; and that is, Whether
they did not both wish and pray, that Londonderry should be delivered out of
the hands of those merciless Butchers? and this the excellency of their temper,
as well as their Christianity, obliging to, I cannot at all question but they
did; nay, I verily believe they would have gone further, and assisted them with
their Purses, if they had known how to have conveyed them Relief.

And now pray let us a little consider the Consequences of this; for if the
Doctrine is true, That it is unlawful to take up Arms for the Defense of our
Lives and Liberties, then all those great and gallant Men were certainly great
Rebels, and whosoever did assist or abet them, incurred the same guilt: so that
for any thing I see, we may all shake hands as to that matter. But in case I
should be mistaken, and they were not so good natured (as I do still believe
they were), but did desire that so many thousand innocent persons might fall
into the hands of their bloody implacable Enemies: If, I say, they could wish
this, it would give me a greater prejudice against the Doctrine than ever yet I
had. Since it not only made them put off those Bowels of Mercies which
Christians out to have for one another, but even divested them of common
Humanity. For unless it be the Papists, I know no other Sect that is arrived to
that height of Barbarity, as to wish, that so many thousand persons (who they
never saw, nor never did them any wrong) should perish, only because they were
not of their Opinion; and if this could be their Temper, I Am sure I would never
be their Proselyte; for I should dread it as much as Popery it self; and so
truly I believe those good men do. But I forget my self, having already, I
fear, exceeded the bounds of a Letter, and trespassed too much on your
patience. But whatever the Effect may be, I hope the Cause is pardonable,
because it proceeds from that entire Confidence I have both in your Judgment
and Friendship, that all my Notions must be approved by you, before they can be
so, by,

Dear Sir, Your most entirely affectionate Friend and Servant.

FINIS.

