A particular Deduction of the Case of William Air Esquire; Concerning his Right
to the Half Barony of Shelelah and Castle of Carnow, in the County of Wicklow
in Ireland, now in Possession of William Earl of Strafford, truly stated, and
humbly Presented to the King's most Excellent Majesty, and both Houses of
Parliament.
THat Calcot Chamber the Elder, Esque selling a very considerable Estate in
Oxfordshire, did with the money, Purchase the said Half Barony of Shelelah,
and Castle of Carnow, with the Appurtenances, containing in Arrable, Pasture,
Meadow, and Wood-Land, about 60000 Acres, and being thereof seized in Fee, See
the Inquisition Anno 1636.
Fearing the profuseness or Imbecility of his Son, and to secure the
Inheritance, did the 18th, of August 1629. make a Lease of the same to James
Fines, Nathaniel Fines and John Crew, Esquires, for 200 years to commence
immediately from his death without Impeachment of Wast, in Trust for the
payment of his Debts and Legacies, and afterward to such Uses as he should
declare by any further Deed, or by his last Will: And in default of such,
Declaration, to the use of his own Right Heirs, with power to Revoke it, but he
never did, so that the said Lease still remains in force.

That the said Calcot Chamber the Elder, made his last Will 30 Octo. 1632.
and gave all his Lands to his Son Calcott Chamber, and likewise all his Goods
and Chattels, whom he made sole Executor, and dyed, owing several sums of
Money, and his Will by his said Son was duly proved.

After whose Decease, the said Trustees by virtue of the said Lease, possessed
themselves of the Premises, and agreed to let a Lease thereof to one Sandford
for three years, for payment of the Deceased's Debts and Legacies, and to allow
young Chambers 300 l per Annum for these three years for his maintenance, and
then to account and deliver up the Estate to him; The said Sandford being one
of the principal Creditors and Legatees.

See a large Affidavit of this.
But Thomas late Earl of Strafford then Lord Deputy of Ireland, being by some
ill persons put upon the Coveting this Estate (which was and is as considerable
as most in that Kingdom) and having even in the lifetime of the said Calcott
Chamber the elder, set on foot some Attempts, to render it Forfeited to the
Crown as Plantation-Lands, and to that purpose caused several Inquisitions to
be Executed, but continually failing therein, the same always appearing to be
an Estate in Fee, and exempt from Plantation-Land, yet persisting in such
designs after the death of the said Calcott the Father, caused another
Inquisition to be taken, to pry into the Estate, and how it was holden,
endeavoring to represent it as Forfeited to the King, by making the said Lease
of 200 year, without Lycense; but finding the Title and Estate clear, and not
in His Majesty's disposal, to grant any custodium; upon the return of the said
Inquisition, no Forfeiture being made, as it was possitively certified, by
Barron Bolton, then Attorney in the Court of Wards; great endeavors were made
to all the three Clerks of Sir Philip Percival the then Register of the Court
of Wards, proffering a considerable sum of ready money, and to be advanced to
places of 100 l a year, if they would Alter and Amend the Demicle of the said
last mentioned Inquisition, and procure a Custodium of the said Half Barony in
any one of their names, but they not daring to attempt it without acquainting
their said Master Sir Philip, informed him thereof, who was much troubled at
the same, and did thereupon strickly command all his said Clerks not to attempt
any such things; and that if they did, he would turn them out of their places,
so that no such thing durst be done by any of them, as is lately deposed by one
of the said Clerks, still living and ready to justify the same.

Having proved unsuccessful in these several ill projects, a plot in the next
place is laid to prevent the said Trustees in such their honest intentions of
letting the Premises for three years, for paying of Debts and Legacies as
aforesaid, and to get the whole Estate by another way into the hands of such
his Creatures and Agents for his own use, without paying any valuable
Consideration for the same, which was brought to pass and accomplished by the
means and practices following, ( Viz.) The said Chamber the younger, coming to
Dublin with his wife, to take Shipping for England, to live with his Father in
Law ( Esquire Lester in Cheshire) till the aforesaid three years should be
expired, in pursuance of the said agreement, was by the subtilty of the Earl of
Strafford's Agents (as an introduction to their great design) persuaded not to
go aboard that night as he intended See the Depositions this sworn by diverse
Witnesses.
but use means to get his Brother Sandford out of the Estate or else he would
be undone, and that he should Arrest the said Sandford for 7000 l. which he was
to account for in his Fathers time, (he then having managed the Estate for the
Old Man) but the morning following Chamber himself was made a Prisoner by the
Combination aforesaid, for the mourning for his Fathers Funeral, and Sandford
hearing of it, kindly posted to Dublin to pay the debt, but the aforesaid
Agents met him as soon as he came, and told him, if he went to his Brother he
would Arrest him for 7000 l. at which Sandford much troubled, went back and
took council of the Earl of Strafford, seeming his great friend, whom he did
not suspect to have any design upon the Estate, and he advised, instead of
releasing his Brother, to clap another Arrest up on him for 1000 l. pretendedly
due to Sandford; which being done, and Chamber and Sandford thus set at
variance, the Earl caused Sir Philip Perseval and others to make a proposal
that the said Sir Philip might have a Lease of 22 years of Chambre's Estate for
the use of the Countess of Carlisle, paying 4000 l. Fine, and 500 l per annum,
and the third penny profit of the Woods: and in order to this, the said Agents
persuaded Chamber to Petition the Earl of Strafford, that the Lease from the
Trustees to Sandford might not go on, but that the Lease proffered by Sir Philip
might be perfected, that he might receive the 4000 l to pay his Fathers Debts
and Legacies, and get out of Prison. As soon as the Earl received this
Petition, he transmitted it to England to His late Majesty and Council, seeming
much to commiserate Chambre's condition, and desiring their Order to compel the
Trustees to consent to this Bargain, they living in this Kindome of England.
Hereupon the Trustees were sent for before the Council Board, to yield to this
Lease propounded by Percival, who alleged they were letting a Lease of the
Premises to Sandford, much more advantageous to the Petitioner; upon which the
King and Council made an Order that the business should be wholly remitted to
the Earl of Strafford, January 17. 1637.
to perfect that Lease for the Countess of Carlisle (which was in truth for
himself) or make any other better bargain for the good of the Petitioner,
declaring, that the Earl should by a Decree in Chancery, enforce the Trustees
to assent to what bargain he should make with the said Countess or others, so
far as did concern their Trust, for 22 years, but further, that the Earl should
provide by such Decree, to preserve the Inheritance, according to the intent of
Old Chamber, which was, that the Trust should continue in them 200 years.

Now Chamber being informed what Order the Earl of Strafford had received,
Petitions again to him and the Council, that the Lease propounded by Percival,
might not be made good, for he could have a much better Bargain; at the reading
of which, his Brother in Law, the Lord Brabason, being one of the Council,
desired, since his Brother must be forced to Let his Estate to pay his Debts,
that the King and Councels Order might be fulfilled, and the best bargain
accepted of, and for his own part, he was willing to take the Lease of 22
years, and give his Brother Chamber, 5000 l, and 600 l per annum, and half the
profit of the Woods: whereas Perceval would give but 4000 l fine, and 500 l per
annum, and the third penny profit of the Woods, so that here was a bargain of
above 14000 l profit better then that of Persevals, for there was above 2000 l
per annum, made communibus annis of the Woods. Yet the Earl of Strafford
rufused this offer, and thereby created a certain loss to Chamber, to a greater
value, during that 22 years, than what he himself afterward pretended to give
for the whole Estate, Reversion and all. The Earl I say refused this offer,
directly contrary to the King's Oorder, and caused the Lease with Perseval to
be perfected by a special Order, on the terms first by him offered, forcing the
Trustees to consent by a Decree, but no care was taken therein to preserve the
Inheritance, so that His Majesty's Order of Counsel was doubly defeated and
eluded, nor was this 4000 l Fine, or the 500 l per annum Rent, or third penny
of the profit of the Woods menned in the said Lease ever paid, or if any of the
4000 l were paid, it was after Chambre's death, and to whom the Earl of
Strafford and his Agents pleased.

Secondly Sandford being thus turned out, and the Earls Agents got in
possession of the Premises, Chamber was still detained a Prisoner, and being
scarce able to get Victuals for his necessity, Petitioned the Earl of Strafford
that the 4000 l Fine might be paid, that he might be able to discharge his
Debts, and go out of Prison, upon which, the Earl to drive his design on
further, causes an Agent to tell him, that the 4000 l fine would not pay his
Debts, and persuade him to sell the Reversion of the Estate, and he should have
13200 l. for it. But Chamber refusing was kept more straightly a Prisoner then
before, and reduced to great Want, yet often visited by several of the Earls
instruments, and when they got him merry, or at all inclinable to the Earls
desires, he was sometimes sent for to Dine with him at the Castle, and
sometimes let out of Prison, and then by one pretended Debt or other upon Paper
Petitions, clapped up again, though he offered security for any just Debt could
be charged upon him, whereby being brought into such misery, by continual
vexations and cruel duress, he was at last willing to yield to the Earls
Proposal for the Reversion of the Estate (but not the Lease) if his wife would
consent.

To make her willing, the Earl sends a Messenger to her, and upon refusal,
threatens her, and causes her Husband to be kept so close a Prisoner, that
neither she nor any of his friends could come at him, though she Petitioned six
times to see him, yet she could not be admitted, till he often falling into
Convulsion Fitts, the Keeper thinking he would dye, went to the Earl of
Strafford, and told him that Mr. Chamber had a desire to see his wife, and if
it were not speedily, she would never see him alive; upon which the Earl sent
his Gentleman to go along with her, who found him lying upon the floor on his
belly, very near death; but raising him with some spirits, and other help, he
began to look up, his wife asking him how he did, he answered, See the
Depositions, this proved by three Witnesses.
she saw his sad condition, in which he must continue, unless he would consent
to pass away the Reversion to the Earl of Strafford, to which she replied,
Prithee Husband I see they are resolved to have it, and rather then I will be
an instrument of thy death, I will agree to it. Immediately the Earls Gentleman
hasted back to his Lord, and told him he must strike whilst the Iron was hot,
for now she was willing; so a Fine was next day clapped up, upon those words, and
a Deed dated the second os November 1638. Sealed by Chamber for the Reversion
only, to Joshua Carpenter, Henry Wentworth and others, (intended though not
expressed, to and for the use of the said Earl of Strafford and his Heirs) for
the sum of 13200 l. mentioned therein as the consideration, whereas the Estate
was then really worth above 120000 l. for the Lands would be worth within 4 or
5 years time (when the old Leases Expired) between 5 and 6000 l. per annum.
Besides Customs, which were worth as much more, and at that time the Woods
were worth near 100000 l. The Earl of Cork having proffered (but a year before
Old Chambre's death) 60000 l. for the Timber Trees only upon the Estate..

But now by the practices aforesaid, Wood and Land, and all the Appurterances
are wrested from the said Chamber and his wife, for the bare mentioning 13200
l. for even of that money none was ever yet paid, save only 500 l. said to be
paid to one Chamber of Minmore for to relinquish all his pretensions to the
Premises, so much being given by Chamber the Father, on that condition. This
Deed and Fine being executed (which were not only obtained by duress of
Imprisonment, Fraud, Cruelty, etc. and directly contrary to the King and
Councel's Order before mentioned) the said Chamber was thereupon fully set at
Liberty, but coming into the fresh Air and full diet, within few days after,
viz. the latter end of November 1638 Dyed, leaving two Children, a son that
dyed soon after him, and a daughter.

But before his death or making of the said Conveyance, viz. the 17th. of
August 1638 the said Chamber made his last Will and Testament in Writing,
bequeathing all his Lands to Mary his wife for 12 years, and for the Remainder,
one moiety to her during life, the other to his Heirs Male, and for want of an
Heir Male to his Uncle Chamber of Minmore and his Heirs Male for ever, and 2000
l. to his Daughter, and made his said wife sole Executrix, and expressly gave
her all his Goods and Chattels, by which she became Entitled to the Lease of
200 years, for the Remainder to come. And whatever was given to Chamber of
Minmore by Will, or otherwise, was sold a year after Chambre's death by Chamber
of Minmore to the deceased young Chambre's wife, so that the Family of Minmore
have no pretense of any right to it, as by Deed under his hand does appear.
That Chamber the younger thus dying, without signing any Deed, to lead the use
of the aforesaid Fine, and his Will in writing being concealed, the Earls
Agents, apprehending they had not yet made the Estate secure, set up by false
suggestions a Nuncupative Will, supposed to be made by the said Chamber, and
made Mary his Relict prove the same. And in pursuance of such pretended Will
set up likewise a Lease and Release, Dated the 3d. of November 1638. supposed
to be made under the said Chambre's hand only, of all the Premises with
th'appurtenances absolutely, and a Deed of uses or Covenants with the same
Date, between Carpenter, Wentworth and others, the Earls Trustees of the one
part, and the said Chamber of Carnow, Squire Lester his Father in Law, Job Ward
that afterward married his Relict, and his Uncle Chamber of Minmore, pretended
Trustees for the said Chamber of Carnow, of the other part; whereby the said
Carpenter, Wentworth, etc. Covenant to lay out 12000 l. before the first of
November 1645. in Land to be conveyed to the said Lester, Ward, and Chamber of
Minmore, for several uses, and upon several limitations therein mentioned, but
all these Deeds pretended to be signed the 3d. of November were false and
Hatched after Chambre's death, being accomodated to the Nuncupative Will, for
Chamber perfected no Deed in his lifetime, but of the 2d. of November, by
which he sold only the Reversion of his Estate for 13200 l. under his own hand,
without the Trustees; and the said Lester and Chamber of Minmore, who knew
nothing of these other Deeds, were named in them only to color the intrigue.

This Nuncupative Will, and several Deeds being thus set on foot, and admitted,
and the said Job Ward having married Mary the Relict of Chamber of Carnow, and
they desiring the Earl that the 13200 l. might be laid out in Land for Calcott
Chamber an Infant then living, son of the said Chamber of Carnow, and Mary, or
else to be restored to Shelelah again, his Honor made the said Job Ward his
Favorite, and caused him the said Infant to Petition that the said Trustees
James Fines, Nathaniel Fines, etc. might give up their Trust in the aforesaid
Lease of 200 years, who indused by the suppositious Deeds, and a Decree
grounded thereupon, and obtained by the Earl's Potency in the Chancery of
Ireland, were prevailed upon to sell the said Lease (but without the said Job
Ward or his wife signing the same) to two persons, for the use of Carpenter,
Wentworth, and others: but it was upon condition that 13200 l. should be paid,
or laid out for Purchasing Land of Inheritance according to the aforesaid
Articles before November 1645. which was never performed; true it is, in the
time of the Suites with the said Trustees of the Lease of 200 years, the late
Earl of Strafford in pursuance of some part of the pretended Articles,
pretended to purchase a place called the Renalaghs (or Knockbrea) of Sir Adam
Loftu^, which was Plantation-Lands taken from the Irish, and given to several
men upon Commissions of Grace, and no real Inheritance, for it was only a Lease
for years, and with several limitations; and though the Earls Agents pretended
they laid out 10000 l. for it, yet if they did, it was in their own wrong, and
not with our consent, and the Land was not worth 5000 l. as appears by many
Witnesses.

That in the year 1640. the real Will in writing of the said Chamber of Carnow
(entrusted by him with Mr. Gutteridge then Minister of Carnow) was
providentially discovered and produced, which being proved, and Administered
unto by the said Mary his Relict, the Nuncupative Will (though she was forced
to Administer a year before, and the Earl of Strafford had spent above 500 l.
in Law to maintain it) was thrown out of Court, upon which the said Earl and
his Agents began to be at a stand, because all the false Deeds and Articles of
Agreement, upon which the Trustees Assigned away their Trust, being done upon
that Nuncupative Will, seemed to signify very little, and therefore to the
intent if one device would not serve another might. The Earl having about
Trinity Term 1637. 13 Car. 1. caused a Case, called The Case of Tenures upon
defective Titles, (tending to the taking away and disposing of Lands without
Jury, Trial, consent of Parties, or Legal Process, to evidence or adjuge that
the Titles were defective) did amongst at least 400 other Mannours comprise the
Premises therein, though there were no color of reason for the same, and in
or about the year 1640. 1640
obtained an Act of Parliament of Ireland (as is pretended) whereby the said
Half Barrony were vested and settled in His then Majesty His Heirs and
Successors, or any he should grant them to, within five years, as
Plantation-Lands and Defective Titles.

Whereupon he obtained Letters Patents under the Great Seal of Ireland, whereby
the Premises were granted to Five persons in Trust for Sir William Wentworth
his Son (now Earl of Strafford) who since his Father's death, has renewed the
laid Letters Patents; and thereby, and by the said Act, he holds Possession;
whereas in truth the said Half Barony and Premises were not Plantation-Lands,
or ever so reputed, nor was the Title of the said Old Mr. Chamber any way
defective, but he bought the same for a valuable consideration, parting with a
very considerable Estate in Oxfordshire, to purchase this, and was lawfully
seized of the Premises in Fee-simple at the time of his death, as by the
aforesaid Inquisition appears, neither were the same ever Forfeited or
Sequestered to the Crown.

Besides the practice is apparent, for in the 10. Car. 1. An Act being made for
securing Estates of Plantation-Lands, etc. which undertakes to specify what
Lands should be counted Plantation-Lands, and names several places, as
Renalaghs, etc. in the same County of Wicklow, yet never mentions one word of
Shelelah, now this Act 1640. seems only a Repetition of of the same Act of the
10. Car. 1. and has no more in effect in it, save only that this Estate of
Shelelah is here inserted, and indeed no other Lands are added, but that, or a
small Estate or two adjoining, which the Earl about the same time possessed
himself of; so that it seems, as if this Act were designedly carried on to
color his pretenses to this Estate, fearing what was done before, otherwise to
that purpose, would not be sufficient; From all which it appears that as well
the Parliament in that Act, as His Majesty in His Grant,
were surprised with false suggestions and mistaken grounds.

In the year 1647. The now Suppliant, William Air, intermarryed with the said
Mary, formerly Relict and Executrix of the said Calcott Chamber of Carnow, and
thereby in Right, became Entitled unto, and ought to have had and enjoyed the
Use and Benefit of the Premises, under, and according to the Trust aforesaid,
for the then Remainder of the aforesaid Term of 200 years: And accordingly most
of the writings aforesaid came to his hands, and also the said Lease of 200
years: But by Deceit and Subtilty, he was deprived of them, and many of them
came into the now Earl of Strafford's hands, and his Agents.

For the said Air, by means of his opposing Oliver Cromwell and his Arbitrary
Power, and the Death of the late King, of blessed memory, being a close
Prisoner, in Warwick Castle, in the year 1649. Judge Advocate Whaley, formerly
a Servant to Ms. Chamber in Ireland (then Eyres wife) persuaded her to make
Colonel James Temple her Daughters Guardian, least Cromwell should Sequester
their Estate, because of her Husbands actions, whose pernicious council she
took, and trusted the said Temple with most of the said writings concerning the
Estate, upon his promise to restore her Daughter and writings upon demand: But
the said Air and his wife in the year 1650. demanding them, he refused to
deliver them, and contrary to his promise inveigles the Daughter to marry his
youngest son Alexander.

That Air in the latter end of the year, 1650 went into Ireland to look after
his Estate in Right of his wife, and did enter thereupon, most of the Nobility
and Gentry being sensible of the wrong done to Mr. Chamber, the said Eyre's
Predecessor, by the late Earl of Strafford; the then Council, put the said
Eyres in Possession of the said Chambre's Estate of Shelelah aforesaid, which
the said Eyres held several years: But being made a Prisoner again by Oliver
Cromwell* for many years together, the Earl of Strafford and Colonel James
Temple, and his Son Alexander and his wife, taking the opportunity of Eyre's
Imprisonment, combined together, and commenced many suits, to out him of the
Premises of Shelelah, of which he was in Possession, and made use of the said
writings which the said Colonel Temple had so unduely deprived the said Air
of, and redelivered the Lease of 200 years into the now Right Honorable the
Lord Crew's hand, one of the Trustees, who has acknowledged that he has the
same by him, and is ready to deliver it to whom a Court of Judicature shall
command.

The first Suit the said Confederates Commenced, was on the behalf of the
Countess of Carlisle, for the aforesaid Lease of 22 years, yet had not paid a
penny Rent, nor any profit of the Woods, according to the tenor thereof, so
that the same was long since void; yet they still brought vexatious Suits to
weary out the said Air as he was a Prisoner, and also against Chamber of
Minmore, as pretending to be Heir Male to the Estate, according to the Tenor of
young Chambre's Will.

And in the year 1657. all the Suits of the now Earl of Strafford and his
Agents came to a Hearing, and after five days debate from morning till night,
before Chancellor Steel, He did then judge that the Reversion might belong to
the Earl of Strafford, because of the Fine past, although surrep^tiously
obtained, but the Court was of Opinion that the Lease of 200 years did belong
to Air in Right of his wife; and therefore did Dismiss the said Earl of
Strafford and the Countess of Carlisle with all their Suits: that had been of 4
or 5 years standing in several Courts, and seemed resolved to continue the said
Air in Possession, in Right of his wife; the Lease of 200 years belonging unto
him.

Which the Earl of Strafford's Agents perceiving, betook themselves to their
last refuge, and produced the aforementioned Act of Parliament for strengthening
of Defective Titles; amongst which Chambre's Estate of Shelelah was foisted in
untruly as aforesaid. Upon which Chancellor Steel deferred his Judgment till
the next Term, expecting the cross Bill of Eyres and his wife would then come
to a Hearing.

That before the next Term, the now Earl of Strafford and his Agents put in a
Plea to such the said Eyres cross Bill, waving all pretense; of Titles, and
Claims whatsoever, and did challenge the said Estate merely by the said Act,
for corroberating defective Titles, and Letter Patents thereupon granted under
the Great Seal of Ireland, the 28th. of September Anno 1641. 17. Car. primi to
George Carr and others to and for the use of the now Earl of Strafford.

That Air being a Prisoner, and his Council neglecting to argue the said Plea,
or bring that Cause to a Hearing, Steel the next Term proceeded to pronounce
his Decree in the said other Cause, wherein the said Earls Agents were
Plaintiffs, and merely upon the said Act (though as is credibly affirmed; it
never had the Royal assent, nor was Recorded) gave away Eyre's Possession not
upon any other Title the Earl had to it, but merely by that pretended Act:
Declaring in his Decree, that the same chiefly to be considered, viz. Whether
it be a defective Title or not, and therefore gave the now Earl of Strafford
Possession, only till he was outed by due course of Law, or further Order of
the Court, and did publicly blame Eyre's Council, for not bringing his cross
Bill together to a Hearing, and told them, there was speaking of a Will and an
Inquisition, proving the Estate was no defective Title. And he did believe
there were such things, but they had not appeared judicially before him; and
therefore advised the said Air to Appeal to a Parliament, who would
undoubtedly do him right in the thing, by their Sovereign Power, which he being
of an inferior Court, had not power to do.

But the said Air could not obtain his Liberty, till after Richard Cromwell was
turned out, and Ludlow sent over by the Long Parliament into Ireland, and
within half a year after was made a Prisoner again, upon the occasion
following, ( viz.) His Majesty, our Sovereign that now is, being to be
Proclaimed in Ireland, on the 18th. of May 1660. The said Eyres wife desirous
to rejoice with her Tenants for His Majesty's Restoration, had invited many
of them to a Feast on that day, and ordered servants to carry them Loads of
Wood to a Hill to make a Boonefire; of this the subtilty of his Adversaries,
who were in Possession of his Estate, that they might prevent him from
Appealing to the Parliament in Ireland, for recovering the Lease and Estate
aforesaid, took an advantage, and brought feigned Complaints, suggesting to
some Magistrates, that if they did not secure the said Air before the said
day, he would be at the Head of a great number of persons to oppose the coming
in of the King, than which nothing could be more farther or remote from the
said Eyre's Intentions.

However upon this slander, the Council of State sent five Troops of Horse,
haled the said Air out of his bed, and carried him to Dublin Castle, where he
was a Prisoner for some time, and afterward hurryed from Prison to Prison
above ten years space, without any known crime; sometimes kept from all kind of
Food, for several weeks, but what was given by stealth at a hole made under the
door, for the Cat to go in and out: and his Keeper being demanded by the
Prisoners and others, the reason of the extraordinary rigor toward the said
Air, would usually answer; That his command was so strickt, he durst do no
otherwise, often declaring, he had an order to st^^^ him.

Yet whilst the said Air was thus in durance, all acquaintance prohibited to
come at him, and his wife not suffered to visit him; at the same time, some
were admitted to serve him with Subpoena's in Chancery, through the Combination
of the said Alexander Temple, and the now Earl of Strafford's Agents, and for
pretended contempt of the Court, under that inevitable necessity, Chancellor
Eustace grants an Injunction, and turns the said Eyre's wife and Family out of
doors, of the Estate of Renelaghs too; and they had utterly perished, if good
people had not relieved them: Although Eyres his Council did proffer his Oath,
that the said Air did not make any Contempt, neither was he in any capacity so
to do: Upon which Injunction, the said Air and his Family have been ever since
kept out of the Estate of the Renalaghs, which was pretended to be Purchased to
the use of Mr. Chamber aforesaid, with the money that was to be given for the
Reversion of Shelelah. And Steel did declare, that if all the money had been
really paid for the Reversion, it could not have hindered Air of the Lease of
200 years; and if so, the Renalaghs being but a Lease of 500 years, really
belongs to the said Air in Right of his wife.

But by reason of such Combination, and Cruelty against him, the said Air, nor
any one for him, (as he knows of) has not since received one penny profit
thereof to this day, and his the said Eyres wife, a person well descended, and
who had lived formerly in great splendour, fainted in the Streets of Dublin (for
want) she being taken into a House, crying out, her Daughter Temple had broke
her heart, and dyed about two hours after: For by the Cousederacy aforesaid,
the said Temple and his Wife enjoy all that the Earl, or his Ancestors gave for
Shelelah, (except the 500 l. to Chamber of Minmore) although in truth the whole
13200 l. (if the Purchase were honest) did belong to William Air, in Right of
his Wife, as a Chattel, as it has been often declared by all the Judges in
Ireland, no Land being purchased in Chambre's lifetime. And the Judges did
further declare, that whatever they pay of the Purchase money to any other then
the said Air, they pay it in their own wrong: (which caused the now Earl of
Strafford to take a Bond of the said Temple of 20000 l. (as he is informed) to
save him harmless from the said Air, which it will not nor cannot do, when
Truth and Justice shall take place, for Mr. Chambre's daughter had a distinct
Portion of 2000 l. given her by her Father's Will, though now they would make
her Heir of all that they have been pleased to leave the Family.

That the said Air to vindicate his innocence to the world, brought himself to
a Trial, some time since in Ireland, by Habeas Corpus, and was cleared by
public Proclamation in the Kings Bench there, but immediately before he was
clear of the Prison, there came an Order to another Marshal more cruel then the
former, to take him into his Custody on a general charge of High Treason; and
four years and upward he was brought to the Bar twice a Term to know what his
Treason was: But the Attorney General put it off from time to time, insomuch
that the Judges declared in open Court, It would fall heavy somewhere at last,
for keeping a man so long after he was cleared by Law, but His Majesty and
Council being informed of the Hardship used to the Prisoner, was graciously
pleased to command by special Order, that he should have the benefit of Liberty
according to Law, upon which Order the Judges brought him again to the Bar, and
finding nothing against him, but only an Allegation that there was formerly a
Charge of High Treason preparing against him, but now the same was lost; they
cleared him the second time by Proclamation, and then after ^e^ years hardship
and vast expense, he was Released, not knowing of whom to seek for
satisfaction* which continual and most vexatious Troubles (he fears purposely
contrived) have been the only cause why he no sooner made his Humble Address
for his Relief and Recovery of his Just Right* in the before mentioned Estate,
wrongfully ( as he humbly conceives, and is by Counsel advised) withheld
from him.

Upon the whole matter be pleased to observe first, that Calcott Chamber the
younger, being Entitled, not only to the Inheritance, but also distinctly to
the Lease of 200 years (which would not be drowned by the descent, because it
was to operate to other intents afterward, as Payments of Debts and Legacies,
and was acknowledged to be in force long afterward (as well by their attempts
to Sell and Convey it as by the depositions of the Right Honorable the Lord
Crew, in whose hands it still remains) and he by his Will having expressly given
all his Goods and Chattels (wherein that Lease is comprised) to his Wife, and
Executrix; and the Conveyance executed afterward in his lifetime, not
pretending to affect such Estate for years, but only the Reversion, Air by
intermarrying with the said Executrix, and being in Possession of the
Premises, became lawfully Entitled thereunto, for the residual term; and for
the Assignment or Sale thereof by the Trustees, the same was without
consideration, and they were surprised into that action by the pretended Deeds,
set on foot as aforesaid, nor could such Assignment (as Council advise) give
away the Executrix Right, unless she or her Husband had actually Sealed the
same.

Secondly, that there appears only 500 l. paid, by the late or present Earl of
Strafford, or their Agents, for this vast Estate (their Purchase of the
Renalaghs being without the consent of Chamber or his wife, etc.) And it is
proved by many Witnesses, that the late Earl of Strafford made above 30000 l.
of the profits of this Estate in 4 years time, before the Rebellion broke out,
And the present Earl though Ordered to the contrary in the year 1661. (till the
Title should be cleared) has made at least 3000 l. per annum ever since, only
of the Wood growing thereupon.

Thirdly that the present Earl, his Trustees or Agents can pretend no Title,
but by the pretended Act of Parliament, and Letter Patents thereupon.

Against which there are these Arguments.

1. That Shelelah being no Plantation-Land nor Defective Title, was inserted
into the said Act by Practice, as before is demonstrated. Besides neither the
Heir to the Inheritance, nor the Trustees to the Lease of 200. years had ever
any notice to defend their Title and Interest.

2. It Is conceived, that as the said Act was unduly obtained, so it was never
duly Recorded, but kept privately in a Gentleman's Study, insomuch that 17 years
after the Date thereof, at a Hearing of the Cause they moved Chancellor Steel
that it might be Recorded, which was denied because it had not the Royal Assent
nor other requesite Formalities.

3. Had the Premises been Plantation-Land, or had the late Earl thought fit
then to produce by such his Title by the Act and Patent, there need never have
been a Nuncupative Will set up for Chamber the younger, nor so many feined
Deeds pursuant thereunto, nor so much money spent in justifying them, nor would
they have had occasion to force the Trustees to Sell the said Lease of 200.
years to them for 13200 l. to be laid out in Land for the use of the said
Chamber, which was never done, nor would they have had any need to Appeal (as
they did) to the Court of Claims in Ireland since His Majesty's Restoration,
to have it settled upon the present Earl of Strafford as Traitors Land; whence
it is plain, this lurking Title was intended to be kept as a reserve, and never
insisted upon till all other pretenses failed.

4. Nor can it be pretended, that upon the late Earls Attainder, the Premises
became forfeited to the King, and so might lawfully be granted afterward by
His Majesty, to the present Earl: for as in reason no man ought to suffer for
another, and much less lose his right absolutely, merely because another had
before disseised him wrongfully; so in that very Bill there is a salvo that
expressly preserves the right, Title and Interest of all and singular such of
the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments as they or any of them, or any to their
use, had or might lawfully claim before.

5. That Chamber the Son, giving all his Lands to his Heirs Male, and to
Calcott Chamber of Minmore and his Heirs, and the present Earl of Strafford
having disclaimed all his Titles by Deed or Purchase, and the said Calcott
Chamber of Minmore having after the Death of the before mentioned Infant, (Heir
Male) sold to the said Eyre's late wife for a valuable Consideration by Deed
executed under his Hand and Seal ready to be produced, whatever was given him
by that Will or any grant whatsoever: it follows (as it is humbly conceived) that
the Inheritance was invested in the said Eyre's wife as well as the Lease of
200 years.

6. How notorious, and by what Practices, all pretenses of Right and Possession
have continually been obtained on the part of the Earl's Agents, and how long
the said Air has been kept out of the same, by unheard of Cruelties, what
severe Imprisonments, and unparalleld Hardships (chiefly, as he has grounds to
believe on this occasion) he has suffered; and to what extremities he is
reduced, with many other sad circumstances, will appear throughout the whole
series of the Case.

The truth whereof, the said William Air is ready to make appear in every
particular; and yet (had he not been enforced by the unanswerable impulses of
Necessity, after all other Overtures were despised, though offered with the
greatest moderation) he should not thus have exposed the same, least he might
seem to violate his due respects to the memory of the Dead, or the Honor of
the living, both which are contrary to the Candor of his intentions, whose
design is only to set forth a brief of the matter of Fact, in order to the
discovery, and obtaining of his Right.

The rather for that amongst other things it appears by an Affidavit, ready to
be produced, and duly sworn unto by a person of Credit, who was present upon
the Scaffold, at the time of the death of the said late Earl of Strafford, that
the detention of the said Estate is contrary to his Lordships Resolutions, the
said Deponent making Oath, tha^ then and there he did hear the said late Earl,
a small time before his Death, command Sr. George Wentworth to charge his Son,
upon his blessing not to claim any Right to the Estate of Chamber (by name) in
the County of Wicklow, Beurks Estate in Connaught, or any other Estate in
Ireland, but what he had legally and justly purchased for his money, upon
valuable consideratious; and that he should disclaym any Right or Title to the
same.

In tender consideration of all which he hopes it may not be thought
presumption in this Ruinated Suppliant, Humbly to make his Address to His
Majesty, and the most High and Honorable Court of Parliament, in whose power
only (he is advised) it lies to Relieve him, by the Restitution of his Just
Rights (as he conceives) so long wrongfully detained from him, which upon
examination of the Premises, he doubts not to obtain, that the Justice of His
most Gracious Majesty and those Honorable Houses, may still be glorious, when
it must be acknowledged by his people in general, That there is no means left
by Potency, Favor or Fraud, to exempt any from the strict view and excution of
it.

WILLIAM AIR.

FINIS.

