THE Sinner a Traitor TO HIS KING and COUNTRY.

IN A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral-Church of Winchester, AT THE ASSIZES
Held there, July 24. 1700.

By ROBERT AIR, D. D. Fellow of the College near Winchester.

LONDON: Printed by W. Bowyer, for Walt. Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

To the Right Worshipful EDWARD CHUTE, Esquire, High Sheriff of the County of
SOUTHAMPTON.
Honored SIR,
THat which was at first Preached upon your Request, and is now Published by
your Command, has a just Claim to your Patronage: And I cannot but lay hold of
it as a particular Advantage to my Sermon, to have it recommended to the World
under the good Esteem of a Person whose exemplary Virtue and Sobriety, and
whose zealous regard for the Honor of God and Religion, do so eminently
distinguish his Character in that Dissolute and Profane Age wherein we live.

It Is for want of more Examples of this kind, that Discourses of this nature
are not only useful, but necessary: And till more of the Men of your Rank and
Quality amongst us are happily convine'd of this important Truth, That to serve
God is the most effectual means they can use for the Service of their Country;
and, That to be good Christians is the very best proof they can give of being
good Patriots, we can have no very comfortable Prospect of the lasting
Blessings of that Peace and Prosperity which we now enjoy.

This (Sir) is a Truth of which I know you are thoroughly persuaded: for you
have not only professed it with your Mouth, but exemplified by your Practice,
having throughout your different Stations in the World let both the Court and
Country see, that good Inclinations, cultivated by a good Education, are able
to secure a Man against all those Temptations to which any the most hazardous
Circumstances of Life are obnoxious.

That you may long live to enjoy the inward Comfort and Satisfaction of your
own Virtue here, and receive the Reward of it hereafter, is the sincere Wish of

(SIR) Your most Faithful, Humble Servant, ROBERT AIR.

1 SAMUEL XII. 25. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both
ye and your King.
THese are the Words of Samuel, which he spoke to the Children of Israel at
Gilgal: and the Occasion of them was this. The Israelites, according to that
wonted Inconstancy of Temper which was so very remarkable in their Character,
being now weary of their former Government, had requested of Samuel to set a
King over them: which Request of theirs although we find branded in Scripture
as sinful and a great Wickedness in them, we must not from thence conclude, as
some have unwarily done, that Monarchy, as such, is a Form of Government which
of all others is the most displeasing to Almighty God; for it is plain, that God
himself had long before this decreed a Scepter to Judah: and in pursuance of
that Decree we are expressly told by Moses (Deuteronomy. 17.) what sort of King he was
to be, whom the Lord their God should choose for them. So that it was not so
much the matter of their Request, as the peevish manner of addressing it, and
the undue Motives from whence it proceeded, whereby they offended. And it
cannot well escape the Observation of any one, who rightly weighs all the
Circumstances of the Story, that it was their seditious Humor of Innovation,
their Distrust of God's Providence, and their foolish itch of Conformity to
other Nations, which made them chiefly criminal in this case. But to pass by
this Remark.

Being now gratified according to their own hearts Lust, and having a King
appointed over them, to judge them, to go out before them, and to fight their
Battles for them, as they themselves had desired; lest they should from hence
too confidently presume upon their present Establishment, they are advised by
Samuel what Course they ought to take in order to their future Security. For
this purpose, he exhorts them in this Chapter, To obey the Voice of the Lord,
and not to rebel against his Commandments; but to fear him and to serve him in
truth with all their heart: for this (says he, ver. 23.) is the good and the
right way: this is the only means whereby ye can secure to your selves, and to
your King, in whom ye now so greatly rejoice, the Favor and Protection of that
God who has already done so great things for you. Whereas, on the contrary, if
you withdraw your Obedience from him, and continue to follow your former sinful
and rebellious Courses, If ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed,
both ye and your King.

This is the full Scope and Design of the Words, as they lie before us in the
Text, and as they more immediately relate to the State and Condition of the
Jewish Nation, to which they were originally applied. But if we take them out
of their History, they will be altogether as instructive to any other People,
or Nation, or Kingdom whatsoever: And without that Spirit of Prophecy,
wherewith the Inspired Author of them was endued, we may safely resolve them
into this General Proposition; viz.

That Sin and Wickedness is the certain Cause of Public Calamities to a
Nation, and effectually conduces to the final Ruin and Destruction thereof.

The Truth of which Proposition has been so universally acknowledged, and so
long experienced in the World, that I need not much labor the Proof of it. But
because there are several Truths of this nature, which although they cannot be
contested, are yet for the sake of bad Memories fit sometimes to be inculcated,
give me leave, in a few words, to remind you of the Certainty of it,

1. From matter of Fact:

2. From the Reasons upon which it is founded.

And 1. To show the Truth of this Observation in point of Experience, we need
only appeal to the History of all the Nations that were ever yet in the World.
For, If we ask of the Days that are past, which were before us since the Day
that God created Man upon the Earth; if we ask from the one side of Heaven unto
the other; we shall find Evidence sufficient to convince us, that National Sins
were always the Forerunners of National Judgments: and that, accordingly as the
Iniquity of a People did abound, and waxed worse and worse, so in proportion to
that, did their Calamities increase upon them, even to the final Ruin and
Dissolution of their Government.

There are very notable Remarks to this purpose to be met with amongst the
Heathen Historians themselves: but because they, for the most part, considered
the outward Means and visible Causes only, whereby the Decay and Fall of States
and Empires was effected, without taking the Justice of God's Providence into
their account; let us confine our Observation, in this point, to the Jewish
History. And from thence we are so often and so clearly informed of the Truth
of what is here asserted, that we read of no Judgments denounced or executed
upon any City, or People, or Nation, throughout the whole Bible, but it was
always on the account of those Sins and Wickednesses which they were guilty of.

And as to the State and Condition of the Jewish Nation it self, it is
notoriously evident, how that all along suffered and sunk under the weight of
its own Iniquity; till at length, by reason of the crying Guilt and many
heinous Provocations thereof, it became an utter Desolation, a Curse, and a
Reproach, a Hissing and an Astonishment, to all the World: And so it continues
to this very Day; the once famous fenced City of Jerusalem having not now one
stone left upon another, nor any thing remaining of all the ancient Bulwarks
and Towers thereof, but the very Rubbish of them only, to be a lasting Monument
of the just Vengeance of God against a sinful Nation, a People laden with
Iniquity, and a seed of evildoers.

And if the Holy one of Israel spared not his own chosen and peculiar People
upon this account, what then have we or any other People to learn from hence,
but to tremble under the Consideration of so terrible an Example? but to hear
and fear, and do no more presumptuously? For what happened to the Jewish Nation
in this case, may be very justly expected by every other sinful Community
whatsoever, under the like guilty Circumstances; and that upon these two
accounts:

1. Because the Justice of God's Providence is more especially concerned herein.

2. Because Sin and Wickedness, as such, has a natural tendency in it toward
the Ruin and Destruction of any Government wherein it is suffered to abound.

First then let it be considered, that the Justice of God's Providence is more
especially concerned in the present temporal Punishment of a wicked and
rebellious Nation. As to particular Persons indeed, we cannot so certainly
conclude that they shall be always punished for their Sins in this Life,
because God has appointed a more solemn Day wherein he will call them to an
account for what they have done: And if he sometimes permits them to go
unpunished here, the Equity of his Proceeding will be sufficiently accounted
for before his just Tribunal hereafter. But God cannot deal thus with Nations
and Public Societies as such, because they (as has been usually observed upon
this occasion) are not made to be immortal; but shall all be dissolved before
the great Day of Retribution comes. Since therefore they are not capable of any
future Account, it is reasonable to expect that the Judge of all the Earth will
do himself Right by punishing them in this World, and vindicate the Honor of
his Justice by bringing those Public Judgments and Calamities upon them which
by their Public crying Sins they have deserved.

How long a patient and long-suffering God may sometimes defer the Execution of
his fierce Anger in such a case; or how far he may think it most suitable to
the wise ends of his Providence, to reserve one wicked Nation to be the Scourge
and Punishment of another, is not for us to determine: but that God, to whom
Vengeance belongs, will sooner or later avenge himself upon a sinful Nation
for the Wickedness of them that dwell therein; and when the measure of their
Iniquities is full, will plague them for their Offenses, and make the power of
his Wrath to be known amongst them; is as infallibly certain, as it is that he
governs the World in righteousness, and rules over all the Kingdoms of the
Earth.

And let not any stiff-necked and rebellious People harden themselves in their
Wickedness by reason of their present Impunity, and fully set their hearts to
do evil because Sentence is not speedily executed upon them; for the Divine
Vengeance will most certainly overtake them at one time or other: and if it
lingereth for a season, it is generally with this great Disadvantage on their
side, that it falls the heavier when it comes.

But abstracting from the Justice of God's Providence in this case, it is
apparently evident,

2. That Sin and Wickedness, as such, is naturally destructive of Humane
Society; and by a proper Efficiency directly tends to the Decay and Ruin of a
Government.

To be just to this Argument, I might here detail the several public
Inconveniences which each particular Vice brings along with it; and show, for
instance, how Pride and Ambition, and Worldly-mindedness, are apt to whet up
the angry Passions of Men, to engender Strife and Envying amongst them; and in
consequence thereof, to bring on Confusion (as St. James observes) and every
evil work; how Luxury and Idleness are the certain Causes of Poverty and Want;
and how that generally prompts Men to Acts of Oppression and Injustice, to
Rapines, Murders, Thefts, and all sorts of Violence; and how Intemperance and
Lust naturally tend to make a Sin-sick and unsound Nation, even without a
Metaphor; and to propagate those Diseases, and Infirmities, and putrified
Sores, which are commonly observed to debilitate the Genius, and corrupt the
very Strain of a stout and warlike People, till at length they become weak and
defenseless, and fall an easy Prey to every the next Invader.

But the bare hint only of these things may be sufficient for our present
Observation: although if any farther Evidence were required in this point, it
is obvious to be met with from the common Sense and Experience of all Mankind:
from whence it has passed into a standing politic Maxim amongst all wise
Nations whatsoever, to restrain the Growth of Wickedness and Vice amongst them;
and that not so much upon account of the Guilt and moral Turpitude thereof, as
because of the fatal Influence which it is always known to have upon the Peace
and Welfare of the State.

For the mischievous Consequences hereof are so very visible, that the
Florentine Politician himself could not but take notice of them, and
accordingly direct his Prince to provide against them; and yet it is plain that
his celebrated Scheme of Policy was far enough from being founded upon any
Religious Principle: nay, that very Atheistical Objection, whereby it has been
suggested, that Religion is nothing else but a piece of State Policy, in order
to awe Men into good Manners, and to prevent those Extravagancies which the
unbridled Lusts and Vices of Men would otherwise lead them into; is a clear
Acknowledgment of the Humane Wisdom, and Public Usefulness at least of this
supposed Project. And thus much we may learn to our present purpose, even from
the Confession of Atheistical and wicked Men themselves, That the Wickedness of
a People is always found to be of such pernicious Consequence, that no
Government can long subsist under the licentious and avowed Practice of it.

A Toleration of Religion is what we have heard pleaded for, and approved of as
a Politic Expedient for quieting the Minds of Men, and for uniting the divided
Interests of a Nation, in order to its greater and more confirmed Strength and
Security: but a Toleration of Irreligion, a Toleration of Vice and Debauchery,
and all sorts of Immorality, was never yet permitted in any Kingdom whatsoever,
that we read of, unless in the Kingdom of Satan only: and yet even there also
there are, it seems, some Vices and Irregularities which the Devil himself
cannot safely allow, without the utmost hazard of Ruin and Confusion to his
Government.

So that whether we call to remembrance the Times that are past, and from
thence reflect upon the usual Justice of God's Providence in this case; or
whether we consider the bare Tendency of the thing it self; the Proposition
abovementioned will still be found true and undeniable, (viz.) That Sin and
Wickedness is the certain Cause of Public Calamities to a Nation, and
effectually conduces to the final Ruin and Destruction thereof.

This therefore being laid down as a standing and established Truth, let us now
apply the serious consideration hereof to the present melancholy Circumstances
of that sinful Nation whereunto we belong.

And what a black and dismal Prospect, both of Sin and Ruin, have we here
before us, whilst we contemplate that lewd, profligate, and profane Spirit that
now works in the Children of Disobedience! by means whereof, our National
Guilt is become so very clamorous and provoking, that we seem just ripe for
Judgment, and the very Vessels of Wrath, fitted for Destruction.

O Tempora! O Mores! has, I confess, been a constant Theme of Declamation in
all Ages of the World; and even that Life and Immortality which is brought to
light through the Gospel has not been able to prevail so far against the Power
of Satan, and the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, but that there have
been still many unrighteous, unholy, and ungodly men, walking after their own
Lusts, and such as were Enemies to the Cross of Christ, at all times and in all
places of the Christian Church. Nay this is no more than what our Blessed
Savior and his Apostles prophesied aforetime; and if we find the unhappy
effects of this Prophecy in a great measure fulfilled in our Days, we have been
long since forewarned not to look upon it as if some strange thing had happened
unto us. Yet this however seems somewhat strange and surprising in the
Observation, that Iniquity should so universally abound amongst us, at this
time especially; and that a Nation should lie under the Guilt and Reproach of
so general a Corruption both of Faith and Manners, wherein the most pure and
undefiled Religion, and the very best Christian Church in the World is
established.

The corrupt Principles and Practices of Men in former Ages might be in a great
measure owing to the many gross Superstitions and loose Doctrines of the Romish
Church; and the Madness and Confusion of the late Times has been pleaded as
some sort of Apology for the Wickedness of the Men of that Generation. But God
be thanked, we are now left without any manner of Excuse of this kind; we have
now no cloak for our Sin upon either of these Accounts: and yet, to our shame,
it may be observed, that Irreligion and Profaneness, and a professed Contempt
of Christianity and its Divine Author, was perhaps never so openly
countenanced, never so fashionably abetted in any one Baptized Nation under
Heaven, as it seems to be with us at this very Day: nor was the Seat of the
Scornful ever more highly advanced in any one Age of the Church, from the very
time that the Mystery of Iniquity first began to work in it. For, not to
mention those many gross Immoralities, and that horrid Lewdness and Debauchery
of Manners which betrays so great a Neglect of Religion amongst us; that which
yet aggravates our Guilt, and heightens the Horror of our Prospect, is our
insolent and avowed Contempt of it: for how is our most holy Religion it self,
which is the Wisdom of God, now become the Scorn of Fools, and the very
Derision of such as put it to an open shame, and impudently revile it all the
day long! How is that worthy Name by which we are called publicly affronted
and blasphemed amongst us! and that not only by those ungodly Deeds which
ungodly Sinners do commit, but by the many hard Speeches and profane Raillery
likewise of those who seem to glory in their Shame, and take a pride in being
thought the Reproach of their Maker, and the Scandal of their Times.

Now were such Monsters of Impiety as these as rare as Monsters use to be; were
they either few in number, or inconsiderable for their Quality and Station in
the World; we might then hope to have their Sin confined to their own doors
only, and that there would be still righteous Persons enough found amongst us
to atone the heavy Wrath of God, and to incline his Long-suffering and
Forbearance toward us. But the unhappy prospect of our present Case is, that
as the Wickedness of these Men is great, so is the Contagion of it likewise;
and the Danger wherewith it threatens us is so much the more formidable,
because of the spreading Infection and malignant Influence thereof.

For those profane Scoffers of whom I am now speaking, are not content to foam
out their own Shame, and to open their mouths in Blasphemy themselves; but they
are professed Advocates for the Cause: they seem zealously concerned to gain
Proselytes to it; and plainly show, that they are industriously forming a Party
(as much as in them lies) to laugh the Christian Religion quite out of the
World.

And indeed, it is very lamentable to observe what great Advances they are
likely to make in the prosecution of their Project: for, besides that the Minds
and Manners of our Youth are so generally corrupted by the contagious Example
and Encouragement of these Men, it is too notorious to be concealed, that many,
too too many of our very Children also (lest the hopeful Breed of this
Generation of Vipers should be lost amongst us) are now trained up without any
manner of sense of their Baptismal Vow, and with so little Knowledge of God in
the World, that we can rarely pass our Streets, and places of public
Concourse, without observing how early they have learned to affront their
Maker, by stammering out their Oaths and Blasphemies against him.

Now if this be the wretched state of that wicked and profane Age wherein we
live; if such Horrible Impiety as this be so openly and so universally
committed in our Land; What shall we do in the end thereof? for, Will not God
visit us for these things? Will not his Soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this? And when he does visit us for these things, when his wrathful Indignation
is fully kindled, so that he suffers his whole Displeasure to arise against us;
what shall we be able to say in the day of our Calamity, unless it be with
Shame and Confusion of Face to acknowledge thus much only, Just and righteous
art thou, O Lord, in all that is brought upon us. Thou have done right, but we
have done wickedly: and after all that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and
for our great Trespasses, yet thou our God have punished us much less than our
Iniquities have deserved.

But this is too sad and melancholy a Reflection for our Thoughts to dwell any
longer upon. And it being my main Design at present, not so much to represent
the crying Guilt and heinous Provocation of our National Wickedness, as to
forewarn you of the Danger, and to prevent the unhappy Consequences thereof, I
will direct the remaining part of my Discourse as usefully as I can to this
purpose.

But what Arguments shall I here urge? What Motives of Persuasion shall I make
use of upon this Occasion? If I should take up the Words of Solomon, and tell
them, that Sin is a Reproach to any People; if to the great Scandal which
accrues from it, I should add the Folly and Unreasonableness, and base
Ingratitude thereof; and if to this I should likewise subjoin the Consideration
of that Indignation and Wrath, that Tribulation and Anguish, which is so
severely threatened to it in the Gospel: all this perhaps might be rallied by
some as the Commonplace only of the Pulpit. For to talk at this rate, say
they, is the business of our Trade, and what we have our Tithes for, etc. not
considering, in the mean time, that severe Censure which we incur if we preach
not the Gospel of Christ according to all the revealed Terms and Conditions of
it, and declare the whole mind of the Lord concerning it. However, for the
present, to avoid all manner of Exception of this kind, and to divest my
Character of those Prejudices which the very Name, and Nature, and Design of
our sacred Function is so unhappily found to lie under (especially amongst
those against whom the main drift of my Discourse is here directed) I beg leave
to be heard upon this Occasion, as a true Englishman only, and a hearty
Well-wisher to my King and Country: for, a due and sincere regard to the
Welfare and Preservation of both these, is what is now chiefly offered to our
Consideration from the Words of the Text. From whence it is plainly intimated
to us, what those Temporal Calamities are, which by our continued Wickedness we
shall bring upon us; We shall be consumed, both we and our King.

The Judgment here threatened is very terrible, and such as ought to be
thoroughly considered, and laid to heart, even by the most Atheistical and
Profane Member of our established Government.

First then let it be considered to what an imminent and apparent Danger the
Honor and Safety of our King, the Anointed of the Lord, the Breath of our
Nostrils, and the Guardian of our Peace, is hereby exposed.

It was not long since that we solemnly thanked God for him as our Great
Deliverer, and the happy Instrument of his Providence, whereby we were rescued
from the danger of all those malicious Designs which the declared Enemies both
of our Church and State had formed against us: And we have since that pretended
at least to so grateful a sense of what he has undergone and wrought for us,
that we have not only offered up our constant Prayers and Intercessions to
Heaven for his Preservation, but we have moreover devoted our Hearts and Hands,
our Treasure and our Blood also, as a Tribute, which we thought but justly due
to the Merits of a Prince, under the auspicious Influence of whose Courage and
Conduct we have been hitherto protected, and who still continues both the
Honor and Defense of our Nation. And shall we now, after all this,
treacherously betray him by our own Wickedness? and by means thereof draw down
upon his sacred Head those heavy Judgments which yet we have so often, with
Fasting and Prayer, humbly begged of Almighty God to avert? Shall he who has so
gloriously fought our Battles, wasted his Strength, and jeoparded his Life for
our sakes, be nevertheless ungratefully consumed upon our account? And shall it
be said, to our Reproach, that a Prince who has so often braved the King of
Terrors himself, and against whom all the most formidable Power and Malice of
his Enemies was never able to prevail, did at last unworthily fall by the Sins
of his own People? Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the Streets of
Askalon; and let not so foul a Reproach as this be cast upon us, lest the
Enemies of our Peace rejoice at it; lest those who have evil Will against us
Triumph over us.

We may talk of our Loyalty, and make what outward Professions of it we please;
but as long as we so openly contemn the Authority, and rebel against the
Commandments of God, and will not suffer him to reign over us, all our
pretended Faith, and true Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King, is mere
Complement, and can but little avail him; for we are Enemies not to God only
(as St. Paul observes) but to his Vicegerent also, by our wicked Works: and by
reason of the provoking Guilt thereof, we become Traitors to the Peace and
Welfare of his Government, and form a kind of spiritual Conspiracy against it,
in order to diminish the Glory of his Crown, and to shake the very Throne upon
which he sits.

For there is so near a Relation betwixt a King and his People, that the Sins
of the one are oftentimes punished by the Fall of the other. And if this should
happen to be our Case (which God avert) we must thank our selves for it, and
put it upon the score of our own sinful Ingratitude; whereby we provoked God to
quench the Light of our Nation, and to withdraw that Blessing which we no
longer deserved to have continued to us.

But if the Honor and Safety of our King be not sufficient to move our regard
in this case, let us in the next place reflect upon those sad Calamities which
our Sins are likely to bring upon our Selves and our Country; for the Judgment
here threatened extends to the Ruin and Destruction of That also.

Notwithstanding the many different Principles and Opinions of Men amongst us
in other respects, it is observable nevertheless, that we would be all thought
very zealous Patriots, and highly concerned for the Good of the Public, the
lasting Welfare and Prosperity of our dear Nation, carries so much charm along
with it, that it seems to be the Darling Object of All our good Wishes.

But how, alas! can this dear Nation of ours be well thought so dear to us as
is pretended, when it is plain that our Lusts are so much dearer to us than
That, that for the sake of the one we can be content to hazard the Ruin and
Desolation of the other! How can we be truly said to love our Country as we
ought, when at the same time we so openly correspond with its greatest Enemies?
and cherish those Sins, which, if the former part of my Discourse holds true,
must in the end lay it waste, and utterly consume it?

We All pretend to wish well to the Happiness and Prosperity of our Nation; we
argue, and debate, and earnestly contend for it; we are bravely resolved, upon
any just occasion, to fight for it, and to die for it: but why, amidst all this
pretended Zeal for its Defense, should we not be prevailed upon to live for it
also? so to live for it, I mean, as that we may not by the Wickedness of our
Lives and Conversations forfeit our Title to the continued Favor and
Protection of Almighty God toward it; for without That, all other Ways and
Means for its Preservation will be found vain and ineffectual: without That the
Wisdom of our Councils will be defeated, the Strength of our Armies subdued,
and all our vain Confidence in the Arm of Flesh will be confounded and brought
to naught. And when once we are made the Objects of the Divine Vengeance, and
miserably abandoned to that just recompense of Reward which our angry and
offended God shall inflict upon us, what then will become of all those
endearing native Rights and Privileges which we now seem so fond of? How will
our admired Liberties be then enslaved? our beloved Properties invaded? our
dear Religion violated and oppressed? and all our ancient English Constitution,
both in Church and State, quite dissolved, and given up as a Prey to those that
hate us? who when this evil Day is come upon us, will insolently shake their
heads at us, and laugh us to scorn, saying, God has forsaken them, persecute
them, and take them, for there is none to deliver them.

This then being the sad and dismal Prospect of those National Calamities which
by our manifold and great Provocations we so justly deserve, and which, without
our Repentance and Amendment, we have too much reason to fear; how should the
serious Consideration hereof rouse up our true English Zeal for the Good of our
Nation? and effectually persuade us to forsake our Sins, reform our Manners,
and turn unto the Lord our God with all our heart, that so our Iniquity may not
prove its Ruin? for to apply the Words of Moses upon a like occasion (Deuteronomy. 32.
47.) to our present Case. That which is here offered to our Consideration, is
not a vain thing for us; it is not a trivial matter, or a thing of Indifference,
to be slighted and neglected by us; for it is our life: it is that wherein the
Public Safety and Prosperity of our Kingdom, as well as our own Private
Happiness, and that of our Posterity after us, is principally concerned: the
Fate of our whole Government, together with all our Ecclesiastical and Civil
Rights thereunto belonging, depend upon it.

So that if those more engaging Motives which our Religion offers cannot work
upon us; if we will not be reclaimed, neither for God's sake, nor for our own
Soul's sake; let us at least, for our King and Country's sake, be prevailed
upon to turn from our present evil ways, and to do no more wickedly: for if we
do, their Calamity may rise suddenly, and who knows the Ruin of them both!
May God, of his infinite Mercy, avert the Judgment! and give us All Grace in
this our day to know and to mind the things that belong unto our Peace, before
they are hid from our eyes!

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the Beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without End. Amen.

FINIS.

