Melius Inquirendum: OR, AN IMPARTIAL ENQUIRY Into the late Proceedings Against
the Bishops; WHEREIN The Kings Supremacy is Vindicated, and His Sovereign
Authority in (matters Ecclesiastical) Asserted against all the Popular
Arguments of the Times. In a Letter to a Friend.
By W. E.
SIR,
AFter a long debate with my Self, and many weary Minutes spent in hearing the
Argument under Consideration, banded Pro and Contra: I came to this Result, To
Examine and Enquire (with all the possible Candor and Ingenuity I could) into
the nature and merit of the Cause (so much noised in the World) lately
depending between the King and Seven of His Bishops; Deliberating upon which, I
easily perceived, That through the Sophistical Insinuations of some Designing men,
the Inadvertency of Others, and the Blind Zeal of an Unreasonable Rabble (that
neither can, not desire to distinguish between Truth and Error, in matters
Sacred or Civil) many a well-meaning man might be Imposed upon; for which
Reason. I conceived it a Duty to Represent to you and the World, an Impartial
State of the Case, both Respecting matter of Fact on the one side, and the
Right of Power Invested in the Prince, on the other; An Abstract of which, take
with all the brevity that so Important a Consideration will Admit of: The King
apprehensive that multitudes of His Loving Subjects might be Ignorant of His
Royal Inclination to the Establishment of an Universal Liberty of Conscience
(in matters merely Religious) Notwithstanding His Declaration to that purpose
had been Published Twelve Months before, thought fit to Repeat the same, with
New and Further Assurances of His Resolutions to Adhere thereunto; and
signified His Royal Pleasure to the Bishops, that they should Order the Reading
thereof, by the Clergy of their Respective Diocesses, at the time of Divine
Service; to the end, the whole Kingdom might understand His Majesty's Care of,
and Clemency to His People in general; Being a design so Heroic, and founded
upon Principles so Primitively Christian, that (perhaps) no Age can parallel in
any Prince, since Christianity has flourished in the World: However, a Juncto
of Seven Bishops, Petioned (or rather Remonstrated) to the King, that the
Declaration was Illegal, and founded upon such a Dispensing Power as might at
Pleasure set aside all Laws: (a heavy Charge) and that it was a point of so
great a Consequence they could not make themselves so much Parties to it, as
the Reading of it in Churches amounted to: A bitter Pill to be digested, tho an
evident and lasting instance of their implacable Enmity to Liberty of
Conscience; how fairly soever gilded with plausible and specious Pretenses.

The King's Sovereignty thus Arraigned, a Pamphlet to that purpose Printed
(which some of the Clergy showed no small disposition to read in the room of
the Declaration) the Mobile ^^eadfully possessed with the Popery of Liberty of
Conscience, It seemed high time for the King to Vindicate Himself; and
therefore the Bishops were Summoned to Appear before him in Council, which they
did accordingly, and in Conclusion, owned and stood by the Paper presented to
the King; and being Required to enter into a Recognizance to Appear and Answer
it at Law; they refused, and were therefore from the Council Board, Committed
to the Tower of London; which it seems they were not a little Ambitious of; for
as they passed along, they Proclaimed to the People to stand fast to the
Protestant Religion, as if they had been going to Martyrdom for that Cause; an
Ingenious way of courting the Rabble to abet their design of promoting the
Ruin of two parts in three of all the Protestants in England; by blowing
Liberty of Conscience off the Stage at one blast: As much as if they had said,
Now good People look to it, Popery is going to be imposed on you; Oppose it
even to the Death: An infallible way to deceive the unthinking Crowd; for in
the Language of the Ingenious Hudibras --

When you at anything would Rail,
Then you make Popery the Scale
To take the height on it; and explain
To what degree it is Profane --
A Notion so naturally Swallowed by the hotheaded Herd, that they never
consider the Event; till the violent Opperation (like a dose of Aquafortis)
rages in their miserable Bowels, to their unexpected Destruction. On the 15th
day of June, being the First day of the Term, they were brought to the King's
Bench-Bar, by a Hab^as Corpus; where after the Councils debare on both Sides,
they Entered into a Recognizance, to take their Trials on the 29th day of the
same Month, which accordingly they did; the matter they were Charged with, was,
for making and Publishing a False and Seditious Libel: Twelve Gentlemen being
Sworn to Try the Issue; after a Long Trial, they were on Saturday the 30th of
June aforesaid, brought in Not Guilty; and the Rude Multitude as well at the
Trial, as Afterward, were not a little Uncivil, by Hissing, Hooping, and
Hollowing; but whether it proceeded from the Church-of-England-Principle of
Non-Resistance, I am not able to determine.

One thing I may not Omit, That before the Trial, it was an undoubted Truth
among the Loyal Church-Party, That the Jury were packed, made up of Dissenters,
and Persons disaffected to the Bishops; and such as if it lay in their way,
would hang them, if it were for nothing but their Laun Sleeves: But when they
brought them in Not Guilty, they were all Good Men and True, and as clean from
Sin, as the Syrian from his Leprosy, after he had been dipped seven times in
Jordan.

Having given you a brief Recital of matter of Fact, I will add a few words
respecting the Kings Sovereignty; whence it shall be manifest, That He is not
only the Civil Head of the State, but the Ecclesiastical Head of the
Spirituality, according to the Constitution of the Church-of-England, and de
jure Metropolitan of all England, Scotland, and Ireland, and may at pleasure,
by virtue of his Sacred Function, be concerned Circa Sacra, about Sacred
Affairs; for when the Popes Supremacy and Headship was Beheaded by Henry the
Eighth, to the end he might be Divorced from Queen Katharin^, he obtained a
Statute for the cutting off all Apeals from Rome; and to enable the Kings
Courts Spiritual and Temporal to determine the same, any Foreign Inhibitions,
Appeals, Sentences, Summons, etc. from the Sea of Rome, to be no Let or
Impediment notwithstanding. 24 Hen. 8.12. That this King Annexed all the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and the Pope
never had greater Authority over the Church, then our Kings are Invested with,
by Sundry Acts of Parliament; that which of Old was Papa, is no other now, then
our Kings being Pater Patriae.

But does it not further appear, That at the Coronation of our Kings, they have
the Ordination of Clergymen, as well as the Oath of a King; otherwise what
means those significant words used by the Bishop, with Unction, Anthems,
Prayers, and Imposition of hands, and the same at the Coronation of the Prince,
as at the Ordination of the Prelate, Come Holy Ghost, Eternal God, etc? And
among other things, the Bishop says these Words, Let him obtain Favor of the
People, (though the Clergy has showed him but little of late) Like Aaron in the
Tabernacle, Elisha in the Waters, Zacharias in the Temple; Give him Peter's Key
of Discipline, and Paul 's Doctrine. And in Anointing, the Bishop further
says, Let those Hands be Anointed with Holy Oil, as Kings and Prophets have
been Anointed, and as Samuel. The Archbishop and Dean of Westminster, putting
the Coife on the King's Head, and on His Body the Surplice; using this Prayer,
O Lord, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, etc. Yet for all this, His Supremacy
will be no longer allowed, than it runs on all fours, to the utter Extirpation
of all that dissent from our Church; and he must by no means countenance a
Toleration, upon Pain of His Sovereignty being called in Question: And if His
Majesty insist upon Obedience to His Royal Authority, though in a matter,
presumed on all hands to be innocent and just in the Sight of God, and good
Men: Yet to color the design of obstructing Liberty of Conscience, it shall
bear the ignominious name of Popery and Arbitrary Power; and then our Work is
done. And though we style the King, God's Vicegerent, and say, Next unto Thee
and Thy Christ, Supreme Moderator and Governor: If he dispute our pretended
Prelatical Prerogative, the Church Rabble, in spite of passive Obedience,
shall be Animated with the dreadful Apprehensions of Fire and Faggot, to commit
all sorts of Outrages; as is evident by the late Ryots, upon Discharge of the
Bishops: Aut Caesar, aut nihil. The Prelates are resolved to be Os and
Oraculum, Regis and Reipublicae; and the Voice of the pretended Loyal Party,
is, that the King's dispen*sing Power is clipped, and Liberty of Conscience has
received a mortal Wound, and is Breathing its last.

Well, Gentlemen; whilst there is Life there is Hope; the King is still Head
both of Church and State; Your own Concessions allowed him so once; it is not
Threepence Difference, if upon change of Circumstances you have changed your
Opinions; the better part of his Subjects believe it still; and as long as he
is invested with a Power to Command, all good men will be ready to obey his
Lawful Injunctions; and (perhaps) to your Shame, and the Confusion of all your
Intrigues. It Is not to be doubted, but he is sensible of the Indignity done to
His Person and Government: However, that ought to be left to His own Princely
Conduct.

Thus much I presumed would not be unacceptable, of the Transactions of the
time, and the Sentiments of

Your Humble Servant, W. E.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for G. L. at the Two Swans without Bishopsgate. 1688.


