IMPRIMATUR, Ex Aed. Lamb. (...) 1673* Tho. Tomkyns,

A FREE AND IMPARTIAL INQUIRY Into the Causes of that very great Esteem and
Honor that the Nonconforming Preachers are generally in with their Followers.
IN A LETTER To his Honored Friend H. M. By a Lover of the Church of England,
and Unfeigned Piety.

(...) Jud. 16.
To which is added a Discourse on 1 Timothy 4. 7. to some of the Clergy at a
public Meeting.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Richard Royston* seller to the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty, 1673.

Dear Sir,
HOW very truly that delightsom walk, which with so much art and charge, you
have forced out of that neglected piece of ground adjoining to your Gardens may
be compared to the ancient Peripatum, those very many that you are pleased to
oblige there with the better Hospitallity of ingenious discourses, can
abundantly witness. And truly, Sir, as I have been happy in being one of the
frequentest Guests there; so I could not but think my self unjust, should I not
make this public acknowledgment of it, though I be sufficiently assured, that
since you honor me with a real Friendship, you expect no such empty and
troublesome recognitions. Now Sir, the method that you have been pleased to fix
your friends, that attend you in such converses, you know to be this, to agree
beforehand upon what shall be the subject of the next Essay, and the reason
you gave for it, I remember was this, that thereby we might with a little more
care furnish our minds, and be more advantaged by communicating (not any sudden
rash or raw) but the best and most maturely digested sentiments of our Souls,
each to other. For as the Spartan Logicians (say you) were (not without good
reason) never permitted to make any quick and sudden responses to any question
proposed to them. So though perhaps some things pertinent may fall from men on
the sudden, yet doubtless those that consider well beforehand have much the
advantage.. Leisure easily mends what haste did well, and always corrects what
precipitancy did amiss.

My present infelicity, Sir, is to be prevented by an envious distemper of
giving you my promised attendance. Yet that I might go as far as my utmost
possibilities would permit, in paying my due respects to you, I have sent this
to supply my place, and if you will please to permit K. to be my Official, he
shall read what I should have spoken.

Sir, I will be bold to tell the World that there is no Gentleman (placed in
the like circumstances) that can be more cordially sollicitous for the interest
of true Religion, and the flourishing Estate of the Church of England, than
your self. No man has more deeply and heartily bewailed her late woeful
persecution, nor can any have more solaced himself in the hopes of her rising
to her ancient splendour, since the late blessed and miraculous revolution. But
providence lets us be witnesses, that even rational hopes sometimes (as to the
expected Event) are vain, and that Clouds many times obscure the new-risen Sun.
That most fecundant heat which produces that most deliciously enameled Carpet,
that we see spread upon the Earth, produces also Frogs and Serpents, that
disturb or make dangerous that repose that men designed or promised themselves
upon it. And that most wise, and always just providence of Heaven, oftentimes
allays the greatest felicities here below, with some ungrateful and vexatious
appanages. And thus that great delight that so much longed for comfort, that we
may now take in worshipping our God, according to the Primitive Rules, in the
Communion of the Church of England, is now much impaired and embittered by the
contemplation of so many violent Oppositions yet against her, maintained by a
multitude of men, whom neither the greatest kindness upon Earth can oblige, nor
indeed miracles from Heaven prevail upon to lay aside their Un-Christian and
causeless animosities.

The searching into the causes of this sad reflection has been the task that
you have now for a considerable time imposed upon your self, and your
Philosophical Friends. And I should be injurious to the merits of so good a
Person, should I forget one account that you have religiously given of this
Phenomenon, and that has been fetched from Gods tenderest respects unto this
Church; which though appearing perhaps a seeming Paradox to some slight
Considerors, yet you have most intelligibly and plainly explicated. For a full
prosperity doubtless is the most perilous temptation, and a state most
dangerous to the design of Religion, and the great interests of Souls. And had
we not a full account of this in the difference of Christianity while under its
Primitive troubles and persecutions, from what it was when (by the providence
of Heaven) it emergeth from under these, and flourished in the triumphal
Banners of Kings and Emperors; yet you have told us, if we wanted these, we
were able to give too great assurance of this to our selves, within the little
compass of our own time, having seen those, who, whilst they were under the
late persecution, were exact and regular in all Christian duties, even to the
shaming as well as frustrating the malice of those who sought industriously for
something whereof to accuse them, yet since the changing of their conditions,
have strangely and sadly miscarried, swerved from their former rules, and grown
to harbor and commit prodigious immorallities.

Now the wise and great goodness of God knowing this, may well exercise us
still with these afflictions (and that without any diminution of its own
tenderness) that thereby, that filth and rust may be effectually prevented,
which should we lie long in an idle prosperity, we should certainly contract.
And the inference from it (I remember) was religious and pious, that we should
not too much repine and murmr a^ these disappointments of our hopes; but be
so far from entertaining any ill thoughts of God, as to cast the whole blame
upon our own wretched infirmities, and bless his goodness that has so
mercifully provided against them.

In the pursuit of this subject, and progress our discourses upon the causes of
it, we could not choose but glance often at the opposite parties, which are
indeed the great occasioners of our present disturbances, nor shall they ever
be able to free themselves from the guilt of them, what excuses and paliations
soever they may hope to frame. Now amongst these our thoughts first fixed
themselves upon the Antisignani, the Leaders of this great dissenting
multitude; and after several things remarkable in them (which I need not now
repeat) it came into our purposes to search for the causes of that very great
esteem they are in, and that great Veneration they have from their deluded
Proselytes, to whom as very many of those prophetic marks by which the
Heretics of old are signalized by St. Jude, are as pertinently applicable, as
if those very persons had already antedated the great resurrection; so this
particularly that now we mention, the (...), having the persons of their
Leaders in a wonderful admiration.

But, Sir, before I enter immediately upon this task I have thought it might
not be wholly impertinent, to vindicate this enquiry from those Censures, which
it will be most sure to meet with from others, when it is once discovered. And
two there are that perhaps it may be assaulted withal. Either first, that such
an enquiry is useless, and the expense of precious time (though I Will assure you
this has not taken up much) will lie heavy on him that pursues it. Or else
secondly, that it is already obvious and plain, and he will but hold a Candle
to the Sun that endeavors to account for it.

These are the principal (I am apt to fancy) of any that we need fear; as for
any other little petty objections or clamours that (its like) these concerned
persons would raise against it, we will wholly disclaim and relinquish our
Philosophy if we be much concerned at them.

Now for the assoiling the first of these, I will take liberty to assert, that
certainly he is either a deeply interested person, or a very superficial
Speculator, that can have the confidence to own it.

For first a man without pretending any great spirit of prophecy may easily
foretell, that while they possess this great esteem, they will most easily
influence their people how they please. Sir, it is a great truth, That the
people generally judge by their affections rather than their judgments, and
those whom they admire and reverence, they commonly pay an implicit Faith to
all their placits; they will seldom be at the pains or leisure of examining
things in their naked garbs, but usually go some nearer and easier way, and
pass sentence upon them as they comply with, or dissent from their passions,
and humors, and inclinations, or some external interests. And nothing is more
easy to observe than this, viz. what a mighty influence the reputation of a
speaker has, in raising a ready admittance for what he delivers, into the
minds of men; whilst he that labors under prejudices, and encounters with a
prepossessing disrespect, shall be little or not at all regarded in what he
speaks, though he were as Eloquent as Tully. The same things delivered by
different persons are very differently resented; Nay, many times a jejune and
flat discourse from one, men love, shall be mightily cried up, before the most
excellent compositions of one whom they value not.

And indeed, Sir, it requires no mean stock of Philosophy, for a man to free
himself from such prepossessions, and to be able to receive a truth equally
from all men. Even the Spartan Lords, as wise and as grave as they were, yet if
an useful truth were delivered by any of an ill repute, would have it repeated
by one of a better esteem; as if truth were not equally so from any men, but
owed it is acceptableness to the reputation and credit of him that spoke it.

And therefore secondly, one of the surest ways and methods to reclaim their
followers, will be by taking of them off from this high esteem of their
Leaders, and while that remains fixed, there will be little hopes of success by
any other endeavor: In vain shall you endeavor to persuade men to disbelieve
or abandon those, whom they have so dear an esteem and respect for; it will be
too difficult a task to bring them to believe, that those they so highly
reverence, will ever be so basely unworthy, as to teach them untruths, or lead
them into perdition. No, No, their love expects and hopes for other returns,
and better usage from them.

And this (I am apt to believe) will be sufficient to secure this undertaking
from this imputation, at least in all sober and unprejudiced persons esteem. I
doubt not but these men will cry out, we might have been better employed, and
have exercised our deep reasonings (for in such terms I expect their Sarcasms)
in more profitable and useful Theories. But so have I heard malefactors condemn
and rail at the activeness of their pursuers, and assert they might have been
more profitably employed than in their discovery and apprehension; while others
have applauded and commended it as hugely conducive to the wealpublick. And
certainly those that consider this to be one great cause and Origin of our
present distempers, will think the endeavoring to obstruct it a very
charitable design, and hugely contributive to the Peace of the Church. And I
can sincerely witness that a sense of this was the only reason of this enquiry.

Nor Secondly, Is it any so very obvious and palpable a thing, as some would
perhaps be apt to persuade us, but may very well require the pains of a close
Enquiror, rightly to state the reasons of it. And truly among the Ordinary
Occurrences of things that we commonly converse withal, very few seem more odd
and strange: For let us a little while, if you please, stay to examine the
reasons, that in such cases are commonly obvious, and which the Patrons of this
second objection, doubtless would readily fix upon, and assign as the reasons
of what we enquire now about.

I will examine some of the principal ones, and endeavor to let you see, how
wide they are in assigning any of them.

1. The first shall be the great learning of these dissenting persons, these
great men. This you know, Sir, is naturally accounted a very great adornment to
any person, and consequently renders him (...), some great one, in the esteem
and thoughts of others. If we should narrowly search into the artifices and
methods by which men have attained to honor and renown in the World, we should
quickly be able to assert, that Valor and Learning have been the chief: these
have been the two great Engines by which men of brisker mettle have lifted up
themselves above the rest of their brethren, and attained to shine in higher
Orbs than they.

I am not concerned either to discourse of the first of these (though perhaps
some would say that they approved themselves good at the Sword) or to arbitrate
on which side the degree of merit seems to remain; whether the Cedant arma
togae, may be a Text authentic. Or whether the Sword be not of solid and
lasting metal, while the Pen is but the excrescence of a rude Soul. It will be
more pertinent to remember you, how successful a reputation for the latter,
has been to the Heathen Priests of old in conciliating a reverence for them,
from their poor blind ignorant Proselytes, and how very sensible those men were
that this alone was the secure way to confirm them in this gainful veneration.
Therefore were the Heathen abdyta so industriously concealed from vulgar
notice, and not a man admitted into their mysteries till after several years
probation and study: As if no mean stock of Learning were needful for a Priest.
And those few that we read of admitted into these arcana in any other method,
were yet all of them persons whom common fame reported for great Scholars. And
truly if I should remark to you how well the Gentlemen in Black beyond the Seas
(I mean the Priests of the Romish party) understand this and how the great and
only ground of their esteem and veneration among the admiring multitude, is
their industrious endeavor by all means to preserve them sensible of their own
great Ignorance, and their Leaders great Knowledge: I should add another
consideration to let you see how mightily powerful, a repute for learning is to
obtain a veneration among the multitude.

If this therefore were so eminent in these leading persons, if they alone were
the Masters in Israel; then I confess the wonder were less, and the evidence of
this might superseed all further enquiry, and demonstrate it to be but
impertinently busy. But, Sir, I am willing to have so much charity for these
men, as to believe they are not so much Pharisees (in this respect also) as to
style all men but themselves, the populus terrae, qui nescit legem. And truly
they would go near to exceed the Pharisaick haughtiness, if they quite deny
their brethren of the Church of England any share with them in this Jewel, nay
would be much prouder than I dare judge them to be, if they grant not these the
right hand of fellowship.

I am far from aspersing them al as Fools and Idiots, I know some not unworthy
to be ranked with the learned; but I think I know some others, that have very
little, but either a different garb, or a greater stock of boldness and
confidence (some would give it a worse name) to difference them from the
silliest Woman among the crowd of all their Proselytes. And I am prone to
think, that I could make some men blush (but that they have abandoned modesty)
if I should tell you, that despair of ever attaining any considerable
preferment in the Church, arising from the consciousness of their own mean
parts, has been the great impellent with some men to set up in Conventicles,
and offer themselves Leaders of the Factions. But I content my self to observe,
that learning cannot be the cause of this veneration, for others both truly
are, and are acknowledged generally to be as learned as (or more than) they
are. And indeed it might most justly afflict us with great sorrow, if there
were either no Saints but amongst the Philistines, or no Seers but those that
dwelt at Ekron.

2. Another amongst the common ordinary attractives of respect and love, is a
charming benignity of conversation. Nothing is more evident than this same; the
Courtier commonly outgoes the Scholar here, and you shall see men that have but
studied, and are exact in the little modes and arts of pleasant and obliging
converse with men, charm their affections, and endear their Respects; whilst
others, though never so well accomplished and meriting otherwise, shall yet for
want of this, be cast off, and passed by as rude or deserving at least but a
common esteem.

Now, Sir, I imagine, you ghess very little pains will be required to show that
these men are none of them Masters of the Ceremonies, nor the only endeavourers
of men by a pleasing converse; that they are Masters exactly skilled in all the
cunning Arts of close insinuation, will be easily granted them by any; but
those of the Jesuitical Faction, who may very reasonably pretend to be their
equals, if not Masters in this, as well as in some other procedures. But as for
their outward converse, generally no men are more supercillious and Stoical
than they, nor more regardless of civilly giving respect to others. And indeed
it were something strange if they should, for men's Opinions and Principles in
Religion do mightily influence their manners in conversation, and it will be
rarely seenthat a man who is engaged upon a rigid censuring and condemning of
others, is over-affable, and courteous, and obliging to his own: But these
things ferment and sour his common carriage and deportment, and for the most
part render it austere, proud, and harsh. I could easily give light to this
observation from the Platonists and Stoics in the Heathen World, or (to come
something closer) in the different tempers of the Remonstrants, and the
Disciples of the Idolized man of Geneva. What Calvin's temper was, to outward
common civility, poor Castellio can tell you from sad Experience; and truly I
wish I could not also tell you, that he has a great many Disciples, the chief
of these persons that we are discoursing of. Now truly it will be no great
wonder to see those men not very affable and endearing in their common
carriage, who have infected their heads, by entertaining so harsh a notion of
God Almighty, as to imagine him to be the Author of the horrible decretum. They
may very well be austere and unpleasant in their carriage to men, who think
they herein but imitate the God they adore.

3. Another thing that might gain them a repute, would be the successful
managing and maintaining of the beloved cause; if they were victorious here,
then 'twere no wonder if they obtained Ovation, or any more splendid triumph
among their people: If they had Captivated the Ark of Israel, or brought it is
God as a spoil to offer unto their Dagon, then we could not wonder to see the
streets of Gath doing them honor, nor to hear the Daughters of Askalon singing
their (...).

For this (all men know) is indeed a very great endearing of a person to his
party; he that brings men victory shall be mightily honored by them, let him
be what he will in other respects. Consonantly to which, we shall find that all
victorious Captains in the World have been entertained at their returns with
joy and honor, and that not only among the barbarous Nations, but the refined
Grecians, and grave Romans; nay if David be victorious against the Philistines,
the Virgins of Israel will sing his triumph.

But, Sir, I dare trust you or any impartial person whatsoever to umpire the
contest, and tell who has the better of the Battle. Any intelligent and
unbiased judge will easily and readily give sentence against them. Who sees
not how often, and how shamefully they have been non-plust and bafled? who
cannot tell you the miserable sad shifts they have been put upon, to give but
any tolerable kind of color to their cause, that every Idiot may not perceive
it ruined and undone? Let me see the man that ever yet found Hooker to any
purpose answered. And how vain and fruitless have the late attempts of Dr. Owen
been against (that wonder of his Age) Dr. Parker. Who sees not the main cause
wholly neglected as invincible, while all the assaults are only made against
the mistaken and misrepresented title of the Book, or some other little things
that are but accidental and beside the main matter? And yet this (we have
heard) has been cried up as a full answer by some of the party. But certainly
it is by the same figure, that he that thinks he has surprised a few Scouts,
may be said to have Conquered the whole Army; or in the same sense as the late
King was reported overcome, and routed, when he disarmed the Forces of Essex in
the West. Certainly if this be all the Champions that they have, or all the
force of that Champion (and I Will do him the right to think they have not a
better) the Dr. needs not much fear his being overcome, unless perhaps they
have some other way of contending, which they hope may be more likely to
prevail, as now we see the Scene is changed, he that could not be disputed and
argued out of his assertion, must now be laughed and jested out of it; what the
grave Doctor could not do, the Jester is set on to Essay, the Jack-Pudding is
set up in the Room of his Master, and the Monkey it is hoped may once again
prove the abler Physician. From sober words it is come to downright raillery,
and him whom they could not fairly conquer, yet at least they will curse and
scould at. But if this be a victory let the Cock clap his Wings and crow as
loud as he pleases. Who that is wise sees not in this the desperateness of a
sinking cause, and an acknowledged inabillity of ever fairly maintaining it?
this is the plain tell-tale of an impotent and enraged passion. If they have no
spears now, but bitter words, they will not much (I hope) wound their Enemy; if
these be all the Arrows they have, let them shoot and spare not, they will do the
adversary little injury, but like the Parthian Darts shot in anger against the
sun, fall with the greater force and virulency upon their own heads.

And now, Sir, I am freed from these preliminary objections, and at leisure to
come to a more close pursuit of our theme. I find nothing more in the way to
hinder me from proceeding to a direct search into the causes of this affair. I
shall assign four or five things, which (when a little fully considered) may be
supposed to have an influence on this matter.

1. The first great cause th^^ I shall venture to assign hereof shall be this.
A preaching up of an empty, formal, Notional kind of Religion, and causing and
encouraging men to build their hopes of Heaven upon very easy and pleasing
conditions. If I can demonstrate these Leaders to be guilty of this, I shall
need be at very little pains to show you, that even naturally they will be
admired and honored by their followers.

For first, all men greatly desire Heaven and its happiness, especially all men
that have any tincture of Religion. For Religion being founded upon these two
prime Postulata's, the Being of a God and the Immortality of the Soul, the very
design of it is to instruct us how we may acceptably serve the one, and secure
(not only the present but chiefly) the future felicity of the other. So that
men's taking up a profession of any Religion, is an evident Declaration of their
desires of a future happiness, which all men call the felicity of Heaven,
though they differ very much in the description, and character, and account
that they give of it, and of the nature of its enjoyments. And for those that
have taken upon themselves the profession of that only excellent Religion,
which from its great Founder and Author is called Christian, and are but in any
tolerable measure instructed in the Principles of the same, for these to covet
Heaven, and the future glory thereof will not appear very strange to any that
considers the endearing account and description that therein is given us of it.
Indeed the nature of it is so very excellent, so adapted to the satisfaction of
a rational Soul; the degrees and measures of it are so very large, so fully
commensurate to all the vastest capacities, the most enlarged and craving
desires of that Soul, that he must needs forgo himself, cast off all natural
affection to his own being, turn savage and barbarous to his own nature, and be
guilty of the grossest Misanthropy imaginable, that does not ambition, and
covet, that (...) (as the Apostle most Rhetorically terms it) that weight of
glory, that transcendant felicity, that no Hyperbole can possibly reach the
measure of. Indeed we may with all safety assert, that the only bare naming of
such a felicity, is sufficient to excite the desires and longings of the Soul
after it. When the will has any excellent thing made known unto it, there will
need very little more complementing or persuading it into a desire of it, than
you would need to use to a pressing hunger, or an hydropick thirst, when those
things were before them that they so gasped after. In short, that man must
needs be brutish, more sottishly sensual than that great instance of sensuality
Esau, who does not desire this great blessing of his Heavenly Father; and he
comes much short of the self-love even of the Aramitish Sorcerer that desires
not to dye the death of the righteous, and that his latter end may be like unto
his. -- But sure there needs no great questioning this truth.

And secondly, it is as certain and evident, that as all men desire Heaven, so
most men desire it upon the easiest terms, and least offensive conditions that
may be: As it is with the Merchants of Earth, so it is naturally with those that
pretend to traffic for Heaven, they would all gladly have very good
pennyworths, buy as cheap as is possible, be at as little pains and labor for
Heaven as may be. And truly the humor of most men is such, that if God will
not give them Heaven, if he will not freely bestow it upon them for nothing, he
may keep it himself, for their parts, they will never buy so dear a purchase. And
as for the rest that seem something better than these, that perhaps may be
induced to grant a necessity of doing something on our parts, yet the less that
is, the better they are pleased; if they must bear any Yoke, by all means it
must be light and easy; if it chance to grate or press ruggedly, if it
excoriate and cause pain, if it cross any lust, if it retrench any sensuallity,
if it fairly consist not with the projected interest, if it restrain any wanton
exorbitancy; alas! it is not at all fit for these men's shoulders, it comports
not with their Complexions, and is much too harsh for these men's tender
constitutions. If it call for the amputation of a beloved Member, if it require
the discarding of an Espoused Herodias, it appears savage and cruel in these
men's esteem, and they have a Text against it, which shall be suborned to
patronize their refusal to obey it. Master spare thy self, these things shall
not happen unto thee. And for the man that deals honestly with them, and
roundly tells them, that without holiness they but in vain expect to see God,
that he only is our great Masters true Disciple, that does whatsoever he
commands him: alas! this man shall be looked upon under the same notion that
our blessed Savior was by the Demoniacks in the Gospel, one that comes (...),
unseasonably to trouble, and disturb their thoughts, and shall be as ungrateful
to them as a Tormentor.

But he that can reconcile Paris and Paradise, and render their sensual lives
and great hopes consistent; he that can sing one of the Songs of Sion to a
wicked Babylonian, that can preach up a possibility of leaping out of a
Dalilah's lap into the Bosom of Abraham; Oh no man hits their humor like this
man. Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. Says the ancient Adage and be
confident it is so in this instance. He that will undertake to find out a way
how the pleasant and good things here, may be secure of the better that shall
be hereafter. How the merriments of the flesh shall hereafter continue, and
commence raptural exultations and joys of the Spirit. He that can take the
bunch off the unjust rich Camels back, and smooth it so, as easily to pass
through the Eye of the Heavenly Needle. He that can cut the Gordian knot of
duty, and solve the Aenigm how a man may be glorious hereafter, without being
virtuous here; this man shall be the honored Oedipus, this shall be the Apollo
whose Altars shall never be without incense; this man shall be the Alexander
whose Troops of adoring followers shall allways be full.

We may without any great fear of censure, take upon us to tell those that deny
these things, that they are unacquainted with the humors of men, have lived
like so many Recluses in Caves or Rocks, where they have come into no
familliarity with things like themselves, yea that they are perfect strangers
perhaps to their own tempers.

And perhaps it may not be impertinent to the present subject, to remark to
you, how plainly this humor still betrayed and discovered it self in Gods
chosen people of old; according to those Memoirs that the Holy Ghost has given
us of them in those sacred inspirations of the Old Testament. You may (with a
very little considering of them) discover, that the great business of the holy
Prophets, was still to beat down this fancy, and convince them of a necessity
of moral righteousness, in order to true happiness; to assure them that a few
easy ritual observances was not all they were to regard; and that the
Ceremonial sanctity was nothing worth in Gods esteem, without the moral purity.
And a very little conversing with those holy Histories will let you see, what
entertainment these good men commonly found for this truth and plainness. They
were hated as Enemies, and pursued as disturbers of their peace, a Prison or
worse was sure to be the fate of him, that cried not still go up and prosper.
Alas these things hit not their humors, these were not stories complying with
their tempers, and therefore the Preachers of them were sure to find no very
good entertainment amongst them. This the Royal Prophet Isaiah (we shall find)
takes the liberty freely to tell them, Cap. 30. 10. 11. Which say to the Seers
see not, and to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things; speak unto us
smooth things, Prophecy deceits, go ye out of the way, turn aside out of the
path: cause the holy one of Israel to cease from before us. Which words
(without the assistance of any Comment) discover to us how little these people
loved duty, how much they desired to be indulged and soothed up in their
immoralities; to have Peace, Peace cried to them, notwithstanding all their
viciousness; and how the only way to be respected by them was to comply with
their humors and beloved carnallities. And if you will please to consult the
Prophet Micah, Chap. 2. v. 11. You Will find him charging them plainly with the
same thing also. If a man walking in the spirit and falsehood, do lie, saying I
will prophecy unto thee of Wine and strong drink. He shall even be the Prophet
of this people. No matter at all how true or false the Prophets words were, if
they were but oily and smooth, if they did but favor or countenance the
beloved sensuality; there was no man like him: this should be their beloved
Prophet. And consonantly to this you will find, that the false Prophets easily
perceived this humor, by all means complied with it, and hereby obtained an
esteem and veneration above any of the Prophets of the Lord. One Zedekiah with
these turns should push a thousand Micajah's out of all esteem with Ahab and
his people. And that this was the gainful practice of these deceivers, we are
assured; therefore are they represented to us, as men that cried, Peace, Peace,
when their was no Peace. Thus they soothed and flattered the people, and the
people largely rewarded them again, and there was no Trade in Israel sure to
bring in more profit, than the sowing Pillows to men's Elbows, and preaching up
Doctrines that brought them ease, and yet promised them happiness.

And if we a little further continue our course with these holy Writings, and
come to the New Testament, we shall soon discover, that this also was the
method by which the Pharisees, those great Doctors in Israel, obtained such a
veneration amongst the multitude: For though it must not be denied them, that
they were extremely strict and even critically austere in their carriage, yet
this may safely be added, that all this strictness which they preached up, or
practiced, was only in very little, and very easy instances, such as were far
enough short of any painful austerities, and might well enough consist with,
and be performed by the most carnal and sensual Complexions. For what great
violence was offered to the adored Mammon by tything a sprig of Mint, or a Pint
of Cummin-seed? little loss could result from hence to the estate; and who
would not readily be just in these minute things that he might neglect it in
greater? What great austerity in fasting twice a week, so that a Feast might be
allowed to their lusts all the days beside? What great difficulty in a long
Prayer, while that would presently be recompensed with the Widows House? What
great hardship in washing before meat, while the Soul was freely left to it is
uncleanness? What great unpleasantness in always washing when they had been in
the Market, all the while they brought thence such good pennyworths? What
course could be less contrary or afflicting to a scornful Pride, than to take
care never to eat with Publicans and Sinners? And certainly the wearing broad
Philacteries, was no such mighty act of mortification, but could well enough
consist with casting Gods Laws behind their backs. Now no men were ever surer
of esteem and honor from the multitude than these were; no men ever hit upon a
more certain way to be admired than they. For as strictness does well, so if it
be but in easy small things, it pleases too. This exactly suits with a man's
humor; for while the one (i. e. strictness) may a little quiet his Conscience,
so it being but in the other (i. e. small trifling things) secures his other
interests also. This excellent knack both assures him a kind of Peace, and yet
offers no violence at all to his most vicious propensities.

And now if after all these evidences, you will give me leave to add one
conjecture I will tell you, that if all the causes why St. James his Epistle
was so long disputed, and with so much difficulty at last acknowledged for
Canonical, were closely inspected, I have often thought that something
relishing of this humor, would be found among them. The Solifidian Error had
taken deep rooting, and made a large spread (you know) already, in the
followers of Simon the Magician and others, and possibly some dregs of it,
might be in some others that wore the visor of true Catholics. Now, Sir, these
persons very well knew that they had some little show and appearance of ground
for this so pleasing and bewitching a Doctrine, from the acknowledged Epistles
of the great Doctor and Apostle of the Gentiles, or at least there was
something in them, that might easily be suborned to countenance the same:
whereas now they must for ever quit, and have no tolerable Salvo or Argument
for it: it being most clearly and irrefragably condemned by this most excellent
and needful Epistle.

And now, Sir, if these persons (we have been discoursing about) be not guilty
of this fraud, if they have not trodden in this path; I will dare to tell you,
that none ever were or did. No men have more fearfully corrupted Christianity,
nor debauched it to the patronizing of wickedness and vice; No persons ever
preached up a possibility of Salvation upon easier terms; No men have ever
given people ground to hope for the Salvation of the Spirit, with less pain and
trouble to the flesh than these men have done.

I do not intend to stay only upon the Antinomians, and those various Mad-Sects
that have sprung from them; for here plain evidence of the fact renders
needless any further depositions. Never did Hell vent an error more pleasing
to carnallity, than this, which at once evacuates the whole law of God, and
declaims against any necessity of obedience to it: Enervates all exhortations
and motives to virtue, under pretense of a spiritual freedom; and deliverance
from any bondage at all.

And with the like brevity I purpose to pass over the late sprung up and doting
Sect among us, called Quakers, and their Leaders; men who have calculated a
Doctrine much what to the same Meridian, that have taught people to cast off
all respect to the Law of God, as being but the Law of a carnal Commandment,
(say they) and wholly to give up themselves to the conduct and guidance of a
light within; than which, there was never a fairer inlet offered to the spirit
of delusion, nor an opportunity given to carnallity to consult it is own ease
and safety, in debauching the natural Light of Conscience, and putting the
reins into the hands and power of Interest and Passion, to corrupt and
overruled the dictates of Reason as themselves please.

Neither do I intend to stay you any longer, with the consideration of the
Anabaptist and his crew. When I shall but only have mentioned that doctrine of
theirs, that Dominion is sounded in Grace; that the wicked of the World have no
right nor title to any thing they possess or enjoy, but may very justly be
dispossessed thereof by the Saints, who alone are the Heirs of this World, as
well as of that to come; you will easily perceive what a pleasant Doctrine this
is; how subservient to their own interests (for they alone are these Saints)
and worldly designs, and how wholly destructive of all Equity, and Justice, and
Charity in the World.

But I shall stay you a little longer with the two more considerable and
formidable sorts of dissenters amongst us, who though more sound and Orthodox
in many things, yet (I doubt) will scarcely crush this guilt off their hands,
nor approve themselves innocent in this matter.

I will not here enlarge in showing you, how they have dishonored the
Christian Religion and brought a scorn upon it, in the sight of the World, by
making it a stalking Horse to the most unjust designs, and a Cloak to cover the
most horrid impieties and immoralities that the Sun ever beheld acted upon the
Stage of any Christian Kingdom; nay, that a modest Heathen would have blushed
at and detested. Nor will I here take notice what a wretched influence this
carriage of theirs has had upon the Opinions and practices of too many among
us; how Atheism has entered in at this door, men naturally casting off all
honorable thoughts of Religion, when they have observed these greatest
pretenders to it, use it only as a Cloak of maliciousness.

I shall pass all these suggestions only with this wish, That the thoughts of
these things may set close upon these men's Souls and Consciences. That which I
am more directly concerned in, is to demonstrate my Assertion, That these men
have introduced into the World a Notional Religion, and preached up a
possibility of Salvation, upon very easy and pleasing Conditions. And this I
shall endeavor to do by two Mediums and Arguments.

1. First* I could easily refer you to many of their printed Books and Sermons,
in which it would be a very easy task to remark to you several things, which
would clearly convince them to be men that regard not so much to preach the
truth in sincerity, as to gull their Auditors into an high esteem and
admiration of them, by the pleasant Notions that they treat them withal. But,
Sir, our late reading the Excellent Author of the Friendly Debate will spare me
(I think) that pains, since the memory of those instances is yet I suppose
fresh with you. I shall therefore only propose this to you or any other that
will but read those things: Whether ever any things were more plainly contrived
to please the flesh; to bolster up men's hopes of Heaven upon easier terms, to
decry and disparage the narrow way of obedience to Christ's commands, and indeed
to supercede wholly any necessity of regarding any Evangelical Precepts? He
that but considers the inferences that the Preacher there makes from that Text,
Isah. 40. 11. He shall feed his flock like a Sheepherd, he shall gather the
Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those
that are with young; which Text yet he is not afraid to say the spirit of
Christ brought to his hands, and that his Soul had tasted much sweetness by
what Christ gave in upon that subject.

I say, he that but reads that stuff, I know not presently whether I should
fay, it will more tempt his Gravity to smile, or excite his Passion to bewail
the misery of those, that shall so attend to such an Impostor, and the
infelicity of the times wherein such shall be permitted to infect and poison
peoples Souls. Would ever any but a Madman, or worse, have given encouragement
to people to come full of sin and wickedness unto Christ? and proclaimed his
readiness of accepting all that can but cry Meih, though never such great
Whores or swelled with wickedness? What excellent interpretations the flesh
will make of such illation, is too too easy to predict. And indeed the effects
have answered the probabilities; men have learned an art of believing they
shall be saved and accepted by Christ, if they can but hope lustily, though
they be never so notorious workers of iniquity; nay the bigger they are with
sin, the more acceptable they shall be to him. And little better Inferences can
be made from that other so famed a person, that the same Author instanceth in:
For Gods sake tell me, what sense can be made of all that canting, of running
to the Promise, and sucking of the Promise, and lying flat upon the Promise,
when there is not one word of attending to the condition of it, so much as
hinted. Or what inference (I pray) can be drawn from it, but this? that if a
person can have but the courage, to venture boldly upon a promise without more
ado, he shall be accepted by Christ Jesus?

There is no doubt, Sir, but these precious promises are the Christian's great
Treasure, his stay and his Comfort. But surely he that honestly directs people
to affiance in them, should inform them that these are but conditionals, and
it is folly to expect the performance, without regarding the terms upon which
that is made: that it will be found at last a damning Adultery, to hug and
caress the promises, while men regard not at all the Precepts, but willingly
pass them by, and leave them to neglect and oblivion.

Now, Sir, that these things are truly and justly charged upon these persons,
that Author makes sure and evident, by referring to the very Book, and page
wherein such things and words are found. And if any man require more instances
of this fact, I could easily quote him, men of great reputation among them at
this day, who either are yet alive, or whose memory is held precious by them.
But because I intend but a Letter to you and not a Treatise, an hours
divertisement upon this subject and no more. I shall pass the instancing at
large in so many printed Sermons and licensed Books of theirs, as I easily
could. And

2. Secondly propose to your thoughts, and your Companies notice, the
consideration of some remarkable Doctrines that lie sparsedly up and down in
these Books.

And first what think you of the great pains some have taken in persuading
people to look to their election? and endeavor by all means to secure that in
the first place? and of the great motive added to enforce this persuasion? viz*
Because then their greatest work is done in a manner, their great fear is over,
for then they are safe; they need never doubt any danger of falling away; they
need not be further troubled, for their sins shall not, nay cannot prejudice
them, and however it is at present, yet the event at last will be certainly
joyful.

I condemn not all preaching about this matter, but I would have it done in the
Apostolical method: first, mind people of their calling, persuade them to adorn
that, to walk answerable to the rules and purposes of that, and then tell them
if you please, that by this means they shall assure their election. Let them
not trouble themselves so much to pry into Gods secrets, as betake themselves
to their own duty. He that walks humbly with his God, and through his Grace
continues in the paths of Mercy, and Righteousness, let him not doubt, but he
shall be safe, and his name found written in the Book of Life.

This procedure were Christian and honest, when the other is directly
conducive; first to nourish a needles curiosity, and bold groundless
presumption, and afterward to cause a careless remissness about any thing
further.

But I wish this were the worst, they were chargable withal. What think you of
the accounts we have from these men of the business of justification, by a bare
empty Faith? a Faith that is to do no more but barely accept of Christ, and
boldly lay hold on his Salvation, and strongly believe it self justified? How
often have you heard that abused Text of St. Paul, Romans 4. 5. Suborned to
patronize and defend this loose Doctrine? He that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for righteousness. What
wild and horrible inferences have we known made from these words? How often
have we heard the Faith of Abraham, in that particular act of it, the believing
against Hope, made a pattern and president of the Faith that justifies? and
this inference made from it, that a man must believe to be pardoned even
against Hope, i. e. He must firmly believe he shall enjoy all the blessed
privileges of Christ's Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, and Intercession
against all imaginable probabilities; contrary to all rational grounds of Hope,
and indeed wholly contrary to all the fixed Orders and Laws of Christ Jesus: As
if that Faith that could believe impossibilities were the the only saving one.
If this be true, what can the most sensual Sinner desire more? who is he that
will breathe after an active Faith, such an one as is to work by Love? which
the same Apostle calls keeping Christ's Commands, and without which he counts
all Faith vain and damning. And indeed he is told by these men, that such a
Faith is needless, all the work of Faith is only to believe that Christ has
done all for him. You know the Book in which these things are (...) asserted,
and if any require it, I shall quote the place of it, and yet this Book is
printed with the particular commendams of Mr. Caryll, Mr. Buroughs, Mr.
Strong, Mr. Sprigge, and Mr. Prittie, all of them considerable persons in
their Party; and I cannot omit reminding of you, what an honorable Title it
has usurped: no worse I assure you than the Marrow of modern Divinity.

And Consonant to this Tenet, you will find some other pieces of these Men's
Divinity, as that, (for Example) That good Works, Holiness of Life, the Vow of
Obedience, etc. are not at all necessary as to the business of procuring
Salvation; But yet indeed (for mere shame will force them to say something
here) they will follow in the justified person by way of gratitude, and upon
that account the man is obliged to them; but otherwise the great benefit
depends not at all upon them, but is already, before any of these things can
be thought on, done for him. Just as the ten Lepers (you know) were equally
cured, though but one returned to give thanks to his Physician. And truly, Sir,
if this Doctrine be allowed; if all the obligation to holiness be only
ingenuity, Let men be but assured that this cure shall be wrought for them,
Leave but the return unto their generosity, and I dare secure you, the odds
shall still continue, and for one civil and grateful Samaritane, there shall
allways be (at least) nine unthankful Jews.

And no very great matter if there be so, for in these men's Opinions even this
ingratitude shall fix no great guilt upon the man, nor at all hazard his
damnation. And what do you think the reason is? why a goodly one truly; God
sees no fins in his people, and this is maintained from the words of the
Eastern Conjurer, he has not beheld Iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in
Israel. And upon this account it comes to pass, that the grossest acts of
wickedness, such as in another man deserves no favourabler a Character than
damning impieties; yet, when committed by those that can by this Faith believe
themselves Saints, shall pass under the fine name, of the Saints infirmities,
unavoidable slips, and such as the lap of Christ's merciful Mantle will easily
cover, and conceal from the eyes of his Heavenly Father. And here I cannot
forbear transcribing to you one passage out of the lately mentioned Book. You
shall find the good Evangelista instructing his Neophytus in these words. In
case you be at any time by reason of the weakness of your Faith, and strength
of your temptations, drawn aside, and prevailed with to transgress any of
Christ's Commandments, beware you do not thereupon take occasion to call Christ's
love to you into question, but believe as firmly, that he loves you as dearly
as he did before you thus transgressed: for this is a certain Truth: As no good
in you, or done by you, did, or can move Christ to love you the more, so no
evil in you, or done by you, can move him to love you the less. I pray, Sir,
tell me, is not here an excellent Evangelist? I dare assure you none of all the
four in our Bibles are like him: indeed these words need no Comment, it will
puzle the Devil to invent plainer, or those that shall more strongly nourish
profaneness and presumption. These will easily reconcile Saintship and the
grossest impieties, and render men prone to believe, that the most detestable
Crimes cannot blot their evidences for Heaven; seeing these may be but the
stains of beloved Sons. And, Sir, if you consult the 39 th. page of the
Evangelium Armatum, you will find the Author quoting the words of a greater
person among these men, than ever the Author of that Book was, whose assertions
there, can by no art whatever be construed to any better sense, than the
former. Where, Drunkenness, nay this often repeated, Lying, rash Unchristian
Railing, Disobedience to Superiors, Schism, Sacrilege (i. e. wronging the
Church) are asserted to be consistent with true grace, and competent to a truly
godly person. Nay a man must exceed Peter's Perjury, Lot's Drunkenness and
repeated Incest, Solomon's gross Idolatries, and strange uncleanness with 700.
Wives and 300. Concubines, or else not merit the name of a notorious ungodly
person. And now, Sir, if these things be true the Daughters of Gath may well
dance, no Philistine needs fear the divine vengeance. These things are
evidences too clear of what I contend for; and yet (if you will promise to have
patience) I Will cast in some others more. And what say you to this Doctrine in
the first place. That a man may safely follow Providence contrary to some known
Precepts? and that God many times calls his people, by some signal acts of his
Providence to follow him in untrodden ways, nay prohibited paths? No
consequence was ever safelier drawn from any position, than this may from this
Doctrine, viz. that it is lawful and just to venture upon a forbidden action,
when Providence offers a fair and safe opportunity, and a promising success.
What is this but even the old Pagan Maxim, that even Tully himself detests.
Prosperum scelus vocatur virtus? and God must needs be thought to approve that,
which in his wise Providence he is pleased to permit to attain success. How
often have we been told (in some solemn Sermons of Thanksgiving before the late
long Parliament) by those great Masters in Israel (for none else ever preached
before them at such times) that now God had plainly decided the controversy,
and all might see (but the obstinately blind) who had the juster part of the
quarrel. You will find the Learned Hammond purposely writing a Treatise against
this fancy, and all men might see that there was a cause, the Doctor did not
feign an Antagonist to combat withal; for this Goliath had challenged all the
Armies of Israel. Now certainly, Sir, it must needs appear very strange, that
those men who had not only renounced Heathenism, but undertook to reform the
very best reformation of Christian Religion, should yet so plainly discover
themselves to be Turks and Pagans, as they did in this instance. Who, by virtue
of this Doctrine, may not warrantably undertake any thing, that he has any
tolerable hopes of being able to perform? this will secure and justify the
violation of all Law, all Justice, all Equity, where a great advantage seems to
encourage. Neither need any of these men's Proselytes doubt whether he may make
this illation or no; for even these his Leaders have made it for him, and
warranted his Logic in it. You have heard of one of them encouraging the
Parliament and City to those facinorious barbarities, in these words. Let no
Law hinder you, si jus violandum, if Law be broken, it is for a Crown, and
therefore for Religion. As if success in that would hallow any immoralities
done for it, and that it was but weakly said of Job, that men might not lie and
speak wickedly for God. And again, That which is best, though Evil, will be
counted good after Reformation as he is counted innocent who escapes at trial.
No matter though the action be never so evil now, yet when it has attained
it is designed end, it will be allowed and praised.

Give me leave, Sir, to acquaint you with another pretty invention of these
Casuists, than which the mystery of Jesuitism never invented a neater, to
warrant any vice; it is a distinction of the great Marshall's, before the House
of Peers. The question proposed is about the legality of taking up Arms, i. e.
against the King, for that is the intent of it. He had been acquainting them
with the successfulness of the Churches Weapons of old, Prayers and Tears, etc.
from which he brings in the doubting Christian as taking advantage, to argue
against the lawfulness of using any other Weapons now. To which he very gravely
with a profound dexterity answers, That Christian men might be considered in a
double capacity, as Christians, or as Men. Now as Christians (he grants) it
unlawful to use any other arms; but as men they might safely do so. We use no
other Weapons than these we have told you of, as we are Christians. These only
are proper and peculiar to us as mere Christians; but the Weapons that we enjoy
as we are Christians, do not deprive us of those we enjoy in the capacity of
men. And we challenge in this no more, than we might lawfully use, if we were
Papists or Turks, if we were Pagans, Jews, or Indians. And truly, let me tell
you, in this he speaks a great Truth, let men be Turks, Pagans, or Infidels,
nay Devils, they can do no worse, in this truly they quite put off the habit of
Christians, and show clearly 'twas the Devil that appeared in the Mantle of the
Prophet. How happy were all profligate Christians if this Plea or Salvo would
hold! what a Fool were he that could not tell God Almighty, that his
debaucheries and villainies were not committed by him as a Christian, but as a
man? and therefore though the man were culpable, yet the Christian was innocent
and might be saved. Tell me soberly, did you ever in all your reading, meet
with a Quirk of more mischievous consequence to all the purposes of goodness
and virtue? or which might with more ease be extended to the excusing and
defending of any or all the grossest anomies, that ever were or could be
committed by any that can but call himself a Christian? Well fare thee
Marshall, say I, thy Disciples may well thank thee, and celebrate thy memory;
never man smoothed the way to Heaven more than thou have done; never might a
Conscience be quieted upon easier terms. Thou shall never be called more the
Geneva Bull (by my consent) that only leads the herd to water; but the
Monoceros rather; dip but this Horn into any water; and all may confidently
drink of it without fear of poison; this will make any thing wholesome.

And yet, Sir, as excellent a Salvo as this is for a troubled Conscience, I
think I can tell you of another that comes very little short of it. It is that
which the most excellent Author of the decay of Christian Piety among us, has
taken notice of for us. And that it may loose nothing of its native elegancy
and weight by my imperfect reporting of it, I shall borrow his own words to
express it in. I shall refer it to consideration, whether that method that has
been used to quiet some Consciences, be not apt to stupifie more, when I see
one who from his present Reigning Sins, regularly infers the illness of his
State, that is yet by his Casuist diverted from that prospect, and bid look
back to see whether no part of his life afforded any evidence of true Grace,
and if he can but remember any such time, is warranted to make that his Epoch
from whence to date his infallible assurance; is told that that immortal Seed
though it may be covered, yet cannot be choked, but will most certainly spring
up into eternal life. When I say, I see this easy remedy prescribed to his
fears, 'twill be obvious for me to compound my self a remedy from the same
ingredients, to fix my eye upon some mark of Regeneration, which at some time
or other I either have, or phancied to have had upon me, and with the steadfast
beholding of that, as of the Brazen Serpent, be fortified against all the venom
of my fiery lusts. Cast in this one stick, and with it sweeten all the Waters
of Marah, secure me against all the bitter effects of my present guilts. I need
make no addition to this good man's complaint, we shall not need to call in the
help of any Augur to tell us, what a fatal influence this is probable, nay
certain to have upon men's practice. For who is he whose Conscience has been
always so callous, as not sometimes to awake him, and put him upon sorrow and
holy resolves? where is the Sinner to be found, whose Paroxisms have been so
constant, as never to afford him any lucid intervals? it will be a difficult
task to assign any such an one especially when we call to mind, that even a
Pharaoh, though the signal instance for hardness of heart (by reason both of
his own natural resolute wilfulness, and of a further degree, super-induced
upon that by a just punitive act of God) yet at some times appears as a real
Convert, confesses his Sin, deprecates the justly deserved wrath, promises
amendment for the future, and begs the holy man's Prayers for the obtaining of a
blessing. It is scarcely to be imagined, but that the most prodigiously
profligate Christian, can call to mind sometimes, in which some better things
have forced way into his thoughts. And if he can do this (in these men's
Divinity) he is safe, the Seed of God remains in him, this may suppress all
fears of his present guilt, or future danger, if he can but sit still, and be
content, God will in time work his own work, and he may rest assured that he
shall at last become an accepted Saint.

But yet this is not so easy a way to conclude a man in the possibility of
Saintship, but yet I can represent to you another as easy that will clearly
evince the actuality, and prove a man really to be a Saint already; and that
is a stout opposing of Babylon, and seperating from the Communion of Sodom. I
will not stay to observe to you that the great Charity of these men could
afford no better names than these, not only to Rome, but to their Mother the
Church of England. She was spiritual Sodom, the Babylon out of which the Saints
were to flee; her Liturgy as bad as the Mass; her Priests, Priests of Baal, and
dumb Dogs; all her Ceremonies plain rags of Antichrist: and the whole
Constitution a limb of the Beast, and the mystery of iniquity. That which I am
more concerned in, is to let you understand not only what a necessity has been
preached up of opposing this Whore, and flying all Communion with her, lest men
pertook of her sins; but what great weight has been laid upon so doing: this
has been sufficient to assure Saintship, and to evince a man an undoubted
Child of God. He that could have given but some considerable evidence of this,
but especially of his having been any way instrumental in pulling down the
Walls of this Babylon, of assisting and promoting the Cause, of helping the
Lord against the mighty. I say, he that could but produce any evidence of this,
in the late Times, needed plead no more for his Canonization. One such Heroic
act of piety as this was as effectual to obtain his being cried up for a holy
Saint, amongst these men heretofore, as two or three counterfeit Miracles and a
large sum beside could be to obtain a man's being Canonized in the Court of Rome.

This was esteemed so meritorious an act as would (without all doubt) atone
and expiate all other crimes. This holy zeal would not only bring a blessing
upon the Phinehas himself, but entail it also upon his whole House, and obtain
it the name of a very godly Family. One signal expression of this love to their
poor Sion, would certainly cover a multitude of the greatest Sins. It will be
needless and troublesome to you, to refer you to all the places, in which this
is laid down as a sure mark of a Saint, I will only tell you, time was, when no
less persons than the great Mr. Love, and Mr. Calamy pleaded it as marks, the
one of his integrity, at his Trial, and the other of his (...), in his Apology
against Mr. Burton. And the Author of the Debate, you know, offers to make it
evident, (and if he did not, another easily might) that the taking the solemn
League and Covenant was made generally a sign of holiness, and those looked
upon as the Dogs of the World, not worthy of the ordinary Crumbs (the common
benefit of the Law) that refused to swear to it. I am apt to imagine you will
look upon this as an extra-canonical rule to judge Saintship by, and such as
our great Master no where gives the least warrant for, or intimation of. And
indeed 'twere very strange if he should; Pride and Covetousness, and a greedy
Revenge might as safely be put into the Saints evidences for Heaven, as this.
For I dare assert it no impossible thing to demonstrate that some one, or all
of those, have been the common causes and Parents of this. Some men were too
proud to brook superiority, and some were covetous, and the Church was thought
too rich; and some had missed preferment (as 'twas once told the great Calamy)
or received (as they thought) some other injury, from the Church, and to
revenge these (as Arrius and Novatus of old) resolved to work (to their utmost)
her final ruin. And truly the temptation was fair, since that was the
Charecteristick note of a Saint and true Son of Israel; and the way to secure a
better name, than either Son or Daughter of the Church could enjoy. Certainly
if this evidence were real and infallible, they had a mighty multitude of
Saints, and more than any sober man can possibly grant them. And (to conclude
this reflection) if this be to be a Saint, Sit anima mea cum Philosophis.

I shall not stay you longer in instancing in other pretty Doctrines of theirs,
as the absoluteness of the promises, than which, never was a fairer inlet for a
bold inert presumption. The Recumbency and rolling upon a naked Christ, than
which (as the people understood it) never was a Doctrine better fitted to cry
down (or dispense with the neglect of) any great care of real holiness. I am
afraid, I have tired you with these instances already, and given you too much
cause of sorrow, that ever they should find Patrons among those that called
themselves of the Reformed Religion. I shall therefore add no more, but only
two short intimations ex abundanti.

1. And first of all I shall confidently dare to tell you, that for one Sermon
of Obedience, I will show you twenty of Faith; for one Sermon that you can show
me preached by these men upon Gal. 5. 6. I will show you ten upon that Romans 4.
5. for one Sermon of Justice (unless in that horrid Notion, in which 'twas
cried for, and preached up against the Earl of Strafford, the Archbishop Laud,
and at last against the best of Kings) of mercy, of walking humbly with God, of
abiding in our own Calling, and doing our own work; of meekness and studying to
be quiet, etc. I will undertake to show you forty against cursed Neutrality,
against Laodicean Lukewarmness, about the marks of Saints, about the excellency
of Faith, about getting into Christ, etc. Some of which seem to establish
wickedness by a Law, and none of which teach men a necessity of practical
holiness; but prompt them to a new formal kind of Religion, and an easier and
nearer way to Heaven and its bliss, than ever the former Ages knew of. I know
these persons (if any should ever chance to see these Papers) will be forward
to justify some of these subjects, that I seem to accuse their Sermons for
treating so commonly of; And so will I also, but it is with this limitation,
provided that they dwell not thus in generals, but proceed plainly to the
particular ways and methods in which such duties are to be done. God forbid,
that either you or I should be thought to be persons that condemn all preaching
about Faith, and all persuasions to people to endeavor to get an interest in
Christ Jesus. No, Sir, I know these are needful and wholesome theams; but what I
condemn is men's roving in general about these things; which indeed may work
upon men's Passions, heat their heads, but not at all rightly inform the
judgment, nor benefit the life of action. What benefit gain I by hearing a loud
Harangue about the excellency of Faith? the happiness of being interested in
Christ? while I neither am told the true nature of the one, nor directed to the
right and proper means of obtaining the other? And here, Sir, there comes into
my head, an Advice which the late famous Bishop of Down gave his Clergy at a
public Visitation (it is printed with many others, which I heartily wish all
our Spiritual men would diligently peruse and Regard) very pertinent to our
present business. Do not spend your Sermons in general and indefinite things,
as in Exhortations to the people to get Christ, to be united unto Christ, and
things of the like unlimited signification. But tell them in every duty what
are the measures, what circumstances, what instruments, and what is the
particular minute meaning of every advice. For generals not explicated, do but
fill the peoples heads with empty Notions, and their mouths with perpetual
unintelligible talk; but their hearts remain empty, and themselves are not
edified. There Is a great deal of spiritual prudence in the advice, and truly as
much truth in the reason to enforce it. Generals affect very little, and to
talk of getting into Christ, and rolling upon Christ, etc. is but like shooting
at Rovers, which indeed may exercise peoples eyes, divert them a little while,
find them something to talk high of, and contend about, but very rarely or
never hits the true mark. Let them but treat of these things, according to the
precedent advice, and they shall never find me in the number of their accusers.
But otherwise I shall take liberty to tell them, that these being handled in
the common usual method, serve but to entoxicate peoples heads, and divert them
from the main and great business of Religion, which is keeping the commands of
Christ Jesus.

I can scarce forbear here to acquaint you with another pretty practice of
these men, and that is, the judging men's sanctity, the truth of their
Regeneration, by a certain mode and form of speaking. I do not mean the
Dramatist's twang of Nose (though you cannot but have observed how modish that
was once among the Saints, and you know the Doctor at Oxford we once counted
perfect in it) but a peculiar way of wording things: by which men should be
judged by them, as the Gileadites discovered the Children of Ephraim of old by
Shiboleth at the passages of Jordan. I know the man (and could bring him to
attest what I am going to tell you) that having before the late pack of Friars,
given a handsome and rational account of his conversion, was nevertheless
dismissed without satisfaction, or any hopes thereof; 'till he was instructed
by one more ingenuous than the rest (and afterward by good fortune made his
friend) what the reason was; which was this. What he had delivered to his
Brethren was fair and plausible, but it took not, for want of being worded in
the sanctified language; for whereas he discoursed of Christ Jesus, and his
Savior, etc. he should have said the Lord Christ, the Lord Christ, etc. which
when he readily used the second time of audience, he presently passed, and was
accepted as a Saint of the right fashion. Sir, what consequences may be drawn
from these things, will be evident to the meanest Logician, viz. that these men
strangely debauched Christianity, and had other measures to judge themselves
and others by, than those in the Gospel. But this is not

2. The second thing I purposed to advert, but this, upon this account you
shall find those men openly traduced, publicly defamed and opposed; who
honestly pursuing and designing the interests of men's Souls, and keeping close
to the great Maxims and design of Christianity, have bent all their endeavors
to plant a real holiness in men, and taught them, that all expectations of a
future happiness without it, were groundless and vain. I will give you two
instances of this, which I know you will remember. One is Dr. Hammond upon the
writing of his excellent Practical Catechism. If you consult the printed Papers
between him, and Mr. Cheynell, you will easily find what the chief matters of
controversy were. The Learned Catechist is for exalting the Evangelical
Precepts, and asserts our Saviors setting the former commands at a higher
pitch, as requiring a more sublimited degree and measure of Holiness and
Righteousness, than ever was called for under the Judaical Economy. And in
this he shows himself not to be singular, but consonant to the whole stream of
Antiquity, as his many Quotations make clear and evident. Now what good
Christian will gainsay this? or quarrel with the good man for asserting of it?
Yet this does Mr. Cheynell, for fear (forsooth) lest the Law of God should be
disparaged hereby; which David voucheth to have been pure and perfect. And so
doubtless it was for that dispensation, till the fullness of time for a further
and clearer manifestation was come. Another contest is about the business of
Justification, and whether the Catechists Doctrine in that particular, or Mr.
Cheynell's, be most conducive to the real purposes of holy living, or
evacuating the necessity of Evangelical Sanctity, I shall readily trust you or
any considering person to judge. But I am sensible I should be railed at as
injurious to Mr. Cheynel and the party, should I not tell you, that besides
these, there was another matter controverted in those Papers, which was about
the prime Notion of the third Precept. Where the Doctor seems to allow a
greater liberty of swearing and profaning Gods name, than Mr. Cheynell. But as
to this, it is easy to observe that malice only framed the accusation, of
which the Doctor sufficiently clears himself, and his whole Doctrine in all
other instances, may assure and warrant any man's safety, in becoming his
Compurgator in it. I will not here add, what might be too justly charged upon
Mr. Cheynel and that party, that their great care of that Precept, and the two
others, between which it is placed in the Decalogue, will advantage them very
little, toward being esteemed great pressors of Holiness, while they appear so
very regardless of the other commands of the second Table. I will readily
confess indeed, never any Generation of men cried out louder against
Idoll-worship. Never were there men that seemed more to fear an Oath in
ordinary converse (though perjury were a small thing). Never men appeared more
sollicitous lest the Sabbath should be profaned. But if you will not be satisfied
with their respect to these three Precepts, if you will not count them holy
persons upon these accounts only, you shall scarcely have more* Nor any juster
cause to give them that title, than you would have to call that Jew an holy
person, whose hands were full of bribery and blood, yet thought it piacular to
pronounce the (...). Alas! Sir, its an old trick, and very few have been more
prejudicial to the true design and purport of Religion; to seem zealous toward
God, but regardless of men, to be mighty exact as to Matters of Piety, but
quite neglective of honesty. And the reason may easily be ghessed at; there is
little of difficulty, little of mortification, little opposition of a man's dear
interests in these things, in comparison of what there is in being righteous,
and just, and chaste, and merciful, and charitable, etc. and therefore as of
old, those engrossed the whole, the all of the Jews care, as things that would
expiate and atone (they thought) these smaller guilts; so we have seen it of
late amongst these people, no men have been more careful to appear splendid and
famous for their piety toward God, whilst Justice and Charity, Integrity and
Uprightness, have been neglected as absolute things, and no way becoming the
new Saints.

Another parallel instance I shall give you, is of Mr. Fowler in his late
excellent Treatise of the design of Christianity. How very ill this Book has
comported with the Genious of these men, may be collected from the clamours
raised against it: that it would be prejudicial to the merits of Christ Jesus,
injurious to Gods free Grace, and would teach men to take off their eyes from
Christ, and to build their hopes of Salvation upon their own endeavors; and
upon these accounts, and for these great Reasons, a Book must presently be
written against it, to antidote the infection and poison, that otherwise the
people might suck from it. I am not concerned to show you, how utterly
causeless and unjust these surmises were, the Gentleman is able enough to
vindicate himself, especially from such accusors; that which is more pertinent
for me, is by this to let you see, which way the humor of these people leads.
They had preached up a more easy way of Salvation, but this Book would
discover and betray the imposture, show the people, how they had been gulled
and cheated, and perhaps in time open their eyes and make them wise; turn their
present great admiration of these their Leaders into a just indignation, and
cause them in a little time to detest those as men not worthy to live, whom at
present they can esteem little less than Gods; to whom they can readily
Sacrifice even all their goods. And (to add a little more strength to this
instance) you know, we have been informed how Mr. Baxter has sped among them,
for daring to justify the Argument of that Book. Though (methinks this may be
said for him to his Brethren, that he has done it with as great caution, as
many distinctions, as studious a weariness of wronging the Palladium, as wit
can possibly contrive. Yet for all this even he cannot escape a suspicious
censure. From whence it is obvious to collect, that this is the noli me tangere,
this is the Talisman that secures the peoples affection to them. And therefore
must with all possible care and secrecy be preserved; this is that great Diana
against whom not a word shall be spoken, but there shall presently be a tumult
amongst these Silver-Smiths, who live by making and selling shrines of this
great Goddess. For, Sir, I dare be confident and peremptory in this belief,
that it is utterly impossible for any person of true Christian Principles to
quarrel or be offended with the great Assertion of that Book; but that other
considerations engage men into an opposition of it, and particularly that which
I have been all this while endeavoring to prove these men guilty of, i. e. the
love of a dry empty Notional easy way* of Religion. And this I assign as the
first (and indeed main) Cause of what we are enquiring after. In which if I
have been too prolix, forgive me, and your trouble shall be shorter in the rest
that follow.

2. Another Reason of this may possibly be a mighty show of Zeal in all
religious performances. Of this you will find these men always most careful;
and truly but for this there were nothing extraordinary in their Religion;
nothing to tempt men into an admiration of it. And therefore by this they
labor to conceal, or supply the defects and imperfections of it; that what is
wanting in substance and reallity, may be supplied by appearance and pageantry.
How successful a method this is to captivate the minds of the people, he is of
no observation that cannot tell you. Pompous shows and fair appearances do
mightily affect and work upon the multitude; and more strongly enchant their
admiration and charm their reverence, than the most solid and excellent things,
when not attended with these advantageous representations. It was not without
good reason therefore observed long since by Tully; and others before him, that
Gesture is the thing most principally to be regarded by an Orator; since a man
that is lucky in that, and by it hits the humor of his Auditory, shall prevail
more thereby, than by ten of the most rational Arguments, that he can fortify
his designed persuasion withal. The people generally judge with their eyes; and
the Comedian too truly represents many as beholding with their mouths: and
therefore cunning men use to entrap them by complying with this humor, by
treating them with things gorgeous and fair; and instead of dealing rationally
with their judgments, entertain them only with such things, as may cause them
to stare and admire, and by this means commonly are successful.

You cannot but oftentimes (as you have walked out into the Fields about
Oxford) have observed one pretty slight that the Fowlers have to catch Larks
withal; which is, by fixing a red Cross, set thick with little pieces of a
Looking-Glass, near their Nets, in a bright Sunshine Morning: this mightily
glistering, and casting abroad a mighty appearance, draws the poor Lark into
its admiration; which while the poor Bird stays to gaze upon, himself is easily
Captived and made a prey. I know you will pardon the homeliness of the Emblem; for
so have I seen the Hunters for Souls use a method not much unlike to this:
which is, by all means to make a fair show, a very great amazing appearance,
which while silly people have stared at, they have soon admired, and by that
means been easily ensnared, not only to espouse the errors, but revere and
honor the persons of the subtle Impostors. And that I may bring this discourse
close to the present instance; it is obvious to observe, that among all the
instances of pageantry in Religion, there is none that Seducers have been more
careful of, and successful in; than a mighty loud Zeal, and extraordinary
fervency of Spirit, in all their religious performances. In this (you will
find) they have always endeavored to exceed the true servants of God, and
thereby hoped to disparage them. Let me present you with one instance of this,
recorded in the Old Testament, it is the carriage of the Priests of Baal, in
that famous Sacrifice of theirs, wherein they contended for honor and respect
with the Prophet Elijah, before King Ahab and all Israel. If you read the story
('it is recorded 1 Kings 18.) you will soon find, how for all the marks and signs
of a great fervent Zeal, they far exceeded even Elijah himself; who yet (you
know) is looked upon as the great and chief instance of the Zealotick Spirit.
They addressed themselves to the Sacrifice with all possible signs of a great
and grave seriousness, performed it with all the marks of a raptural
transported Zeal, continue their supplications several hours, even with the
most passionate fervency, nay seem so far besides themselves by the vehemence
of their Zeal, as to cut and gash themselves, and turn cruel unto, and
regardless of their own flesh: While on the other side, the Prophet calmly
betakes himself to the repairing of Gods Altar, quietly, and without noise
orders his Sacrifice, and offers up his devotion evenly, in a Prayer more
concise and short than that of our Savior. Tell me, Sir, which of these the
people were most likely to slave at and admire? Sure its no difficult matter to
conjecture. How could they mistrust the Religion of such zealous devoters? how
could they choose almost but admire the zeal and fervor of such worshippers?
prefer these Idolatrous Priests, before the Lords Prophet? and the glistering
and amazing service and worship of Baal, before the less pompous service of the
God of Israel? If the succeeding miracle had not umpired the contest, I can
easily foresee on which side the votes would have fallen.

How well the ignominious name of Baal's Priests (which with so much virulency
they have cast upon the Orthodox Clergy heretofore) may become these Preachers
themselves in other respects, I shall not contend; but in this (I fear) you may
truly say, Ovo prognati eodem, they seem very near of Kin, and both to have the
same art and method of deceiving. What have you thought of these men, when you
have beheld the strange antic gestures, the ludicrous postures of some
addressing themselves to Prayer? the strange amazing violencies that some have
forced themselves into, in that performance? So as even to hale and gasp for
breath at every period, while the poor admiring people below, have taken these
for mighty agitations of the Spirit, and been as ready to adore when the men
came down, as the Israelites were Moses, after his glorious converse with God
in the Mount.

How often have you seen a Preacher heat himself, beyond the need of any
vestments? throwing off his Cloak, nay and his Gloves too, as great impediments
to the holy performance, squeeking, and roaring beyond the example of any
Lunatic. Sometimes speaking in a tolerable tone, and presently again crying
out as if under some immediate distraction? While the people with great
amazement have gaped upon him, and when he has finished, given him this
honorable Encomium, well, he is a rare man, a man mighty zealous for the Lord,
a powerful Preacher, and one that has taken abundance of pains that day; to
the cherishing and refreshing of whose wearied Spirits, the female Proselytes
are commonly very actively contributive.

If any man be so uncharitable toward me, as to imagine me an Enemy to Zeal in
religious performances, upon the account of this period, or that this discourse
intends the disparaging a fervency of Spirit in serving the Lord; I shall take
the freedom to tell him, he uncharitably mistakes both. No man more heartily
wishes, that all the Clergy would be grave, and serious, and zealous in all
their public services, and you can witness for me how much I have lamented,
and sometimes freely blamed some men's remissness and coldness herein: but this
I will readily acknowledge to all such persons, that as I have an Apostolic
Warrant for commending of Zeal only in a good matter; so I think I have the
same, for requiring the expressions of it, in a due manner also, with which (I
am apt to believe) the theatrical ludicrous postures of some men, do no way
comport.

3. Another thing that perhaps may be influential on this business, is a very
great specious seeming Sanctity in carriage, and common deportment. Sir, the
(...), the Sheeps-Cloathing has always been worn by all the Wolves that have
broke into the Church, and the Spirit of Heresy and Schism, has ever been
careful to appear in the garb of an Angel of Light. If you should search all
the Ecclesiastical Antiquities, you would constantly find, that almost all the
Herisiaerks that have disturbed the Church and its peace, have ever been
extraordinary pretenders to Sanctity; sometimes in their Doctrines, but allways
in their carriage; and under this vizard and disguise have done most mischief.
For though all novelties are strangely taking with the inconsiderate multitude
(who are even naturally newfangled and changeable) yet when they appear thus
dressed and habited, then they quite fascinate, and strongly charm their high
opinions and admiration; they are quickly drawn to wonder at and extol them.
And truly when they are once brought into these circumstances, they are then as
heated wax, ready to receive any impression, that their admired Leaders shall
please to stamp them with. This our great Enemy knowing very well, has taken
great care allways to send forth his Emissaries in this garb: and therefore,
you know, the great Apostle in his characterising of these Factors, omits not,
to put this into the description, that they have (...), a very great and
glorious form and show of Godliness.

I shall not bring my Charity in question, by disputing whether these persons
(...) may not well admit the diminutive attendant (...), or no. I am certain
then (if ever this came to the notice of any of them) I should be exclaimed
against, as a condemnor of the Saints, and one that spoke against the
Generation of Gods Children. But this I will tell you, that if it be but a
Form, yet it is well trimmed; if all be only personated, the Actors are
excellent Comicks; if it be not cast, yet caute it is; if it be only a paint,
it is very lively: It would go near the puzling of you (I think) to instance in
any pharisaick nicety in outward Conversation, which I should not be able to
match in these men. No men ever were better studied in all the little things
that make a fair show, in the sight of the vulgar, and carry with them any
appearance of piety: no men ever were exacter at Oral or gestural Sanctity than
they are. What their hearts are, God and their own Consciences know; we will
not judge them.

Now, Sir, I need not tell you, of what mighty advantage this is to them, in
this instance of gaining respect from their followers. I wish that some of our
own Clergy, would consider how possible it is that some of them, may be
contributive here, and how by their carelessness they become foils the more to
set off their Adversaries glory. It is a wounding spectacle to see the
carelessness of some of these; they little consider (besides their own heavy
guilt) what cause they give these Enemies to blaspheme their holy Religion; and
what advantage those gain hereby toward the assuring their own dear
reputation; they greedily gape for these falls, and they know how there out to
suck no small advantage.

4. Another Method by which these Persons attract a great veneration from their
followers, is, the suffering a seeming Persecution, and that (as they endeavor
to make them believe) for Conscience and Righteousness sake. Among all the
Saints, whose names are eminent, and famous in the Dyptichs of the Church,
there are none that have more justly been honored with the highest Eulogiums,
than the holy Martyrs, who have attested the truth of their holy Faith by their
own blood. He that can have the valor to suffer for his Religion, is in the
sure way to Fame and Renown amongst his Party.

Now, Sir, these persons appear evidently on the suffering side, and providence
has cast them upon acting the sadder Scene; the Laws are something smart
against them, and they may thank themselves for it. I wish they would thank the
goodness of a merciful Prince, who has been pleased to suspend the Execution
of these Laws against them, and keep off the penalties which they threaten to
them. However this act of Grace has now robbed them of this Plea; they cannot
now sure call themselves the persecuted Saints. But I must tell you, Sir, you
are deceived, if you think so. Alas they are sufferers and the persecuted party
still. Are they not branded with the odious name of Phanaticks? of
Schismatics? and is it not as good almost to take away their lives, as their
reputation? have they not, many of them, parted with good Livings to preserve
their Consciences pure and untainted? Yes, and more of them than would (we
know) had they not been trapan'd by the rich Cabal at London, that could live
without these Livings; and call you not this a suffering now? yes and a great
one too, here is silence in Heaven upon it, or at least they hoped there would
have been. Alas! the Ark is gone, and do not they suffer in its Captivity? This
is a sore Persecution, such as the Revelation tells you was to befall the
Witnesses, and all that adored and followed not the Beast.

But, Sir, if we grant them to be sufferers in earnest, yet surely we must
count them but in jest, when they pretend it to be for Righteousness sake. And
yet so (we know) they do, and by all means endeavor to nourish this Opinion in
their Votaries. They very well know, they have not a more plausible way, by
which to assure the people of their integrity and conscientiousness, than this
is; for who can doubt him serious and in earnest for his Religion, that will
suffer for it? What mad men were we (I have heard some say) to undergo these
things, but that our Consciences oblige us thereto? so that you must needs
believe them good men upon this account; for they will forego any thing of
Worldly concern, rather than violate their Consciences, and who must not praise
and honor such Devoto's?

Alas! Sir, a considering person knows this to be a very fallible mark of
Integrity; and it may safely be asserted, that it is possible, and common to
some men to take a pride in suffering. We know that great instance of Stoicism,
Possidonius, under the violent surprises of the Gout (and they say there are
not many things more tormenting) could cry out, quam suave, quam dulce hoc!
only out of pride that he might boast himself able to assert and maintain his
own Principles: and surely it is as possible now for some men equally possessed
with the same vice, to improve that vice to the same end, especially when the
sufferings are much easiler tolerable, and the gratifications of the vice much
more considerable. For none of the afflictions pretended to by these men, can
be near so tormenting as his; the Persons are untouched, and there is no fire
nor faggot to torment: and while the Stoic had but the content only to praise
and extol himself, these have had multitudes to applaud and glorify them for
their great constancy; yea and besides that* to make up, by their large
charitable contributions, all their losses. So that even their losses turned to
their advantage, and Calamy found three days in Newgate (as the Ano-Droll told
him in effect) more gainful, than half a years Preaching at Aldermanbury. So
that now we have found out another Vice, that may possibly be in this matter;
Pride and Covetousness too may have an influence upon some men's sufferings: and
marvail not that I add this latter, for even Covetousness sometimes may be
contributive to a seeming lavishness, and no man needs wonder to see a man
expend a hundred, when the Interest is sure to be double to the Principal.

But, Sir, I needed not to have taken any pains to demonstrate the fallibillity
of this Plea; no matter to the multitude, whether it be for Conscience or not,
all the while it is suffering, they examine not the justice or injustice; they
only slave at the sufferers (though perhaps some might suffer as murderers, or
evil speakers, etc.) and as long as this is for the beloved Cause, they shall
be no less than holy Martyrs; say you what you can even the late bloody
Regicides have been extolled by some, as Champions of the Cause, and
Ravilliack's name shall be rubric in the Jesuits Calendar.

5. Another thing that we ghess to have a causality here, is their continual
applauding, and commending of their people, and crying them up still for
Saints. Sir, men naturally love to be commended, and have good things spoken of
them. And of all the noxious things that vain men are fond of* Flattery is one
of the most acceptable. And truly it requires a greater stock and measure of
sobriety and prudence, than the multitude can be thought to be possessed of, to
suppress all tumors of Pride, that are so mighty prone to arise upon a man
hearing his own praise, and not to be mightily pleased, and tickled with the
words of a Parasite. I remember Epictetus long since, has laid it down as a
mark of a great proficient in virtue: (...). Let a man praise and commend his
virtue, he rather pitieth his ignorance, than proudly subscribes to his
Opinion; and rather takes advantage thence to heighten his humility, for
causing such a man to mistake, than gratify his Pride, as if he merited any
such commendation. And truly, Sir, He really is a very good man, who can
improve his being praised to the advantage of his humility, and exciting of his
industry, and avoid its blowing him up into a proud conceit of over prising his
own Excellency.

Now, Sir, it seldom fares worse with flatterers than with their message; he is
counted a good and acceptable man, who brings such good and pleasant tidings,
and men do not more delight to hear the report, but they have always as much
kindness for him that tells it. It has long since filled the hearts of good
men with sorrow, and their Writings are every where full of complaints, that
dextrous Parasites are allways the most acceptable persons to Princes, and
indeed to all men; and therefore 'twill be the lesser wonder, if they be so to
the vulgar, who, as to the exercises of Reason or Wisdom, are but one degree
only removed from Children, to whom nothing is so grateful as fine words and
fair commendations.

And since we see great men so prone to be mightily pleased with the praises
given them by those below them (whose praises are rarely or never judicious,
but ruled mostly by Passion, or some fortuitous emergences) it will be the less
strange, to see these mightily tickled with the praises of their Superiors.
And indeed experience lets us clearly see, nothing pleases the multitude like
Flattery: a cunning man by this shall persuade them to more, than by twenty
good Arguments taken from Conscience or Duty. We have seen the successfulness
of this artifice, in our late intestine Wars; how cunningly did those
Incendiaries Complement, and seek by all means to please and flatter the
people: Vox Populi was by them asserted to be Vox Dei, and the popular vogue
was the determination and dictate of Heaven. By this means you will find those
Primitive Rebels in the Camp of Israel, easily draw the people to side with
them, all the Congregation was holy they were all Gods chosen people, and
therefore what had Moses and Aaron to do, to exercise Dominion and jurisdiction
over them? and all successful Rebels have ever gone the same way, and the
Church-Mutineers have always found the method as successful as those in the
state.

Now, Sir, it is notorious to all men, how mighty civil these persons are to
their people, how careful to caress all their followers with the glorious names
of Gods Saints; the Lords holy ones, the dear people of God, the little Flock,
the Lambs of Christ Jesus, the Redeemed ones of Sion, the true Remnant of
Jacob, and the precious elect Seed. The Notoriety of this, will save me the
labor of referring you to any Books or Sermons in which you may find these
endearing compellations. And therefore I further tell you, that the only sure
way for any man to obtain these honorable Titles, is to join himself to their
Assemblies, for alas all out of these are Children of darkness, the wicked of
the earth, the Sons of Belial, and the Seed of the Serpent. We know their
Charity can afford us no better names: Just so did the Pharisees of old,
mightily extol and honor their own Disciples, whilst all men else in gross
were but populus terrae, or the best man in particular but isle publicanus; but
these men are Saints as soon as ever they are but of the godly Party, I could
tell you a story of a grave Doctor, that for some months together, every Sunday
constantly prayed for his sick Maid under no worser a title, than thy dear
Servant E. 'till at length the good Saint was delivered of a fine Boy, which
some unlucky Women swore was very like the Father.

Now, Sir, How mightily (do you think) must this Courtship endear them to their
people? oh! these fine names made a great noise in their heads, they could not
but dance to such melodious ayrs; and the men that would treat them so kindly,
need never fear any Ostracism, but should be sure to charm their greatest
affection: nay, all they have shall be readily at such men's service, how can
they grudge such civil Gentlemen any thing? He that can creep into the good
Ladies Chamber, and there affectionately pray for her, as Gods Elect Lady, his
holy Servant, his dear Handmaid, and her religious and hopeful Issue those
tender Plants of the holy Seed, and polished Corners of the Temple, may rise up
with confidence of her hearty thanks; nay, may find he has melted her heart
into some yellow pieces; as one of these once told a Confident of his, who yet
had not the Grace to conceal it, but published the saying to the uncircumcised.

This is a civility and honor to their people, that you will scarce be able to
parallel any where besides; it far exceeds that of the Papists to their most
religious Votaries: those seldom Canonize any till after death, and they do
wisely, because they can safelier fix on them Miracles, etc. which perhaps
themselves would have blushed at the forgery of, had they been living. But
these men Canonize all presently, they are all precious Saints, as soon as ever
they become their Disciples; and tell me then, does not one good turn deserve
another? you might count them ruder than the Boors of Scythia, if they should
not mightily honor such obliging and courteous Masters.

And now by this time, Sir, I suppose I may have hired you, as well as my self
in this Inquisition, in which I do not intend to give you any further trouble,
only let me for a conclusion add, that if these Causes be rightly ghessed at
and assigned, there will these two or three observables be easily colligible
from them.

First, That the people have no such extraordinary great Reason to honor these
men, as perhaps they may imagine, and that they act very little beyond the
weakness, and indiscretion of Children in adoring of them. If their eyes ever
chance to be truly opened, to see what true Religion means, and what the real
Terms and Conditions of Salvation are; they will find (I doubt not) that their
Leaders have abused them, and their Teachers caused them to err. And then
(perhaps) acknowledge they had no more true reason to honor these men, than
Children have to do the like to those Spirits (as we call them) who entertain
their eyes and phancies with some pleasant toys, 'till they have stolen them
from their Parents, and betrayed them into slavery. Indeed if men love to be
cheated, and can take a delight in being shamefully abused; then I confess they
may have cause enough to honor these Persons, for they can fit that humor
well; but otherwise, if they be wise, and detest imposture, they will have little
more cause to honor these as benefactors, and dispensors of true Heavenly
food, than they would have to do so to those, who, when they called for Bread
should give them Stones, or when they expected Fish, should treat them with
Scorpions.

Secondly, That these men themselves have no very great cause to glory in the
acquist; the applause of the multitude is in it self very inconsiderable, and
no wise man ever made much account of it: but it is much less valuable, when
it is fraudulently obtained; the guilt in the acquisition, will quite damp and
spoil the pleasure of the fruition. And certainly the joy in seeing the people
very much pleased, will very poorly compensate the horror, that must needs
arise upon the thought, that God is most grievously provoked and offended.
There Is a Scripture, Sir, that we have heard frequently in the mouths of these
persons to patronize and defend some of their actions, I only wish 'twere as
much in their hearts to allay their Pride in being thus honored. Whether it be
just in the sight of God to obey men rather than God judge ye; certainly Reason
would that men should ambition rather the honor that comes from God, though
the multitude were displeased; than to gratify the vain humor, and thereby
acquire the as vain applause thereof, by offending of God. We find the Apostle
of the Gentiles telling his Galatians, that if he sought to please men, he
should not be the servant of Christ. I doubt some men might read their fate out
of these words, and most certainly all may do so, who purchase man's applause by
ways that Christ has not warranted. Even in the midst of such laughter the
heart may be justly sad, when it reflects upon the reproach, and ignominy, the
confusion and shame, that will strike the Epilogue to all these Comic sports,
and turn the peoples present admiring acclamations, into the most virulent
curses and execrations for ever.

Were it not much better to be serious in preventing this direful Exit, now in
time? by every man laying aside these poor low mean designs, and quitting that
peevishness, and that Pride that necessarily engage men upon them? Were it not
much safer to cease quarrelling and disputing against things (acknowledged by
themselves) indifferent? the making vents, and Schisms, and parties in the
Church, which must be acknowledged extremely dangerous? and resolve to join
cordially with their brethren, in doing God and the Church service, and
bringing men's Souls into a love and pursuit of true Godliness, all which are
also acknowledged absolutely needful? this (I should think) were a laudable
method to Glory, a way to assure the honor that comes from God, and only
deserves that name: if they can outstrip their brethren in this procedure, let
them (say I) have a Benjamins Mess and welcome. No good man (I am sure) would
grudge them this honor, but rejoice to see them all have the reward due to
true Prophets. Nay I dare be public security, that hereby they should find ten
times the comfort, that they can possibly in the present contrary method. One
Soul thus saved, shall gain them more true joy, than a thousand gained to their
own party; one man brought by them thus acceptably to honor and praise God,
shall turn more to their advantage, than to hear a multitude canting their
glory.

3. Neither thirdly, need any of the other Clergy envy them this painted glory,
nor have much reason to grudge them this imaginary felicity. It Is what a wise
man would not grudge his worst Enemy living. It was a sad word which our
Savior spoke of the proud ambitious Pharisees, Verily I say unto you, they
have their* reward. And it is all that men of the like spirit must hope for. And
indeed it is yet so very little that even Envy it self cannot fasten one tooth
on. Let them please themselves therefore in the purchase, be thou quiet and
Patient, they will one day wish they had never known it: let the multitude of
their followers sing their Hosanna, be still, a day will come when their note
will sadly change: let them triumph over thee as one much inferior to them, do
thou thy duty sincerely, they may chance one day to wish they were equal with
thee.

But of all things, I hope none of these will make so very ill use of this
Enquiry, as to endeavor gaining glory by the same methods, or pursue honor by
making the same experiments. God forbid, this were the greatest injury possible
to the design of these Papers, and themselves too: if they should be inferior
to these in honor from their party (as it often falls out) yet they may have
the peace and joy, of faithfully discharging their great trust, and enjoy the
honor that comes from God, which he will most certainly confer upon every
true Servant of his; which the other may in vain wish for, when shame and
despair shall period all their glory.

But Sir, my Zeal here tempts me to be impertinent, as I should certainly be,
should I presume to teach such grave persons. If there be any need of an
address to them, or those of them now with you, the following discourse may
well be looked upon under that Notion, which (according to your command) I have
(with some importunity) obtained of our friend, and now send you. I think it
may pertinently serve as a seasonable advice to all Clergymen, how they may
secure that glory that fades not; to your desire of perusing which I now remit
you, after this one Request, that you will forgive this trouble I have now given
you, and believe it to result only from that delight and pleasure that I take
in any thing that may comply with your commands, and let you see how much I
ambition the honor of approving my self,

Dear Sir, Your most humble Servant, etc.

A DISCOVRSE Upon 1 Timothy 4. 7. to some of the Clergy at a public Meeting.
1 Timothy 4. 7. And exercise thy self rather unto godliness.
IF there were nothing else to secure me, from being counted impertinent, in
addressing to you at present from these words; this were abundantly sufficient,
that the great Apostle thinks it proper to be one of the principal Directions
to his beloved Timothy, among those many that he gives him in this Epistle, by
which he fully instructs him how to deport himself, both in his private
Capacity as a Christian, and also in his more public, both as a Priest and
Bishop of the Church of Ephesus. And as it relates to him in this latter
Capacity, I have determined to consider it at this time. But before I enter
immediately upon it, there is one word which will require me to stay a little
upon it, in order to the acquainting you with the full design and import of
this Apostolical Precept, and that is the [rather] here in our own translation.
It is apparent to any one, it is not expressly in the Greek (...), so the words
there are; Yet this we may say in justification of the Version, that it is
properly enough inferred from it. And the (...) will well enough bear* the
force of it; for when it comes to be a Comparative Exceptive, as here it is,
there is very little difference whether we express our selves, not this but
that, or rather this than that.

In the proceeding part of the Verse the Apostle is cautioning Timothy against
the (...), those vain, anile, trifling, foolish fables, either of the Jews or
Gnostics; but as it is most commonly believed, of the later, those great
boasters of the (...), as he calls it, Cap. 6. 10. Science or Knowledge falsely
so called. Men mightily Opinion'd and conceited of their own great Knowledge,
by reason of their dexterity and readiness in mixing a great many of the
Heathen stories, with the Christian Religion, accommodating the Fables of the
one to the Doctrines of the other; and afterward superinducing a necessity of
believing those Schemes or Systems that they extracted out of this strange
Miscellany. Of which wild conceits especially about God the (...), the Angels
the (...), the Creation, etc. Whoever desires an information, may have it in
Ireneus his account of the Phancies of Valentinus and his Followers, or
Epiphanius, or S. Augustine. But in none (I think) more pleasantly and fully
than in that excellent piece of Antiquity de Gemmis Basilidianis, retrieved by
the great care and industry of Chifletius.

And I wish this Charge were only to be brought against Jews or Gnostics, but
there are those will tell you, that others also may as justly be mentioned, as
guilty of these adulterous mixtures, who have depraved the Purity of the
Christian Religion with the baser allays of Heathenish placits.

1. And first, I may tell you, you will find this by many smartly charged upon
Origin, and some others that issued out of the Alexandrian School, that great
refiner and follower of the Platonic Philosophy: whose study has employed it
self so to accommodate the Doctrine of Christ to the Rules and Sentiments of
that excellent Athenian, that what was said of Philo the Jew and Plato, may be
said of the agreement made by those men between Christ and Plato, then (...);
and yet there are some that will undertake so to vindicate Origin from any
Crime in this, as to cause it redound unto his greater praise.

2. And truly to give every one their due, I am apt to believe that the like
charge may as justly lie against another sort of men, I mean those voluminous
triflers the Schoolmen, whose industry has fully as much adulterated Christian
Religion, by tying it up to the Rules and Philosophy of the Idolized Stagyrite.
This then may be the Periphasis of the [rather] there are a great many of
things in the Jewish Cabbala, and no less amongst the Gnostics and others,
that carry the show of pleasant things, and are hugely tempting to liquorish
Philosophical heads; but behold I show unto thee a more excellent way, let me
direct thee to a more noble and profitable study. Exercise thy self unto
godliness.

Exercise. There Is the act enjoined (if you require a division) thy self,
there is the subject.

To godliness there is the object. Though I will freely confess to you, I am no
admirer of some men's dexterity in splitting hairs, but count all forced
divisions needless, and often hurtful, as entangling the sense of plain
Precepts. And where there is not a necessity of them, in order either to
Explication, or methodical Proceeding, I cannot but account them very
impertinent.

Exercise, (...) a word evidently metaphorical: there are two references of it
sound enough; for it either relates to the stripping, or to the fervency of
those ancient Racers and Wrestlers, or other Combatants for Victory.

In the first sense it calls for Timothy's divesting and stripping himself of
all encumbrances or lets in his Study or Practice of Holiness, and particularly
those vain trifling Fables before*mentioned And in this sense it may receive a
considerable light from a parallel place, Heb. 12. 1. (...), laying aside every
weight that might impede and hinder us in our agonistick course of Piety and
Godliness.

But the second Reference is the more common, in which it calls for the most
vigorous pursuit, the most athletick endeavors after Godliness: be as sedulous
and diligent after this, as those great Masters of the Gymnasia, required their
Scholars to be after learning. -- And certainly the advice in this sense is
very rational; for if that of Solomon's be so in the things of earth, whatever
thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, (hoc age) as the Heathens
worded it, certainly it is much more rational in the things of Heaven. And
doubtless Piety deserves our most intense and vigorous endeavors above any
thing else, and the Apostle gives a sufficient Reason for this in the next
Verse, because it is (...), whereas the advantage of other things is but small,
and that small portion but in a few instances neither; this is greatly
profitable, and to all purposes too. And doubtless all wise men will proportion
the measures of their cares after things, according to the degrees of
excellency that is in them, and advantage by them.

And truly, Brethren, were I minded to stay here, this would cast a very severe
eye upon many in these days. Not only upon the modish profane Atheists, the
men that abhor the very show of Piety, have not so much as the Hypocrisy of it.

But also upon the Laodicean indifference, and tepidness of most after it; to
whom S. Ambrose's Rule, Immensitas est mensura, sounds like Heresy: and truly
Godliness has the meanest the minutest of the care of almost all men. View but
men's carriage upon the Sunday, when the great business of Piety particularly
summons their regards, and you will see those men taking their hours of sleep
then, who will scarce allow their eyes a minute of it all the week after. Come
into the Church, and you will find that Vestal fire of Zeal, which should always
burn there, not so much as once kindled. Not so much as the faintest Emblems of
it in many, and in the best, represented but by dull unactive Tapers*

And I heartily could wish, there lay not a charge too justly against Timothy
also here, whose zeal and fervency in Religious Service should be that great
flame, at which the lesser Tapers of the people should take fire. I will not
anticipate what would come in more properly hereafter. That I would willingly
touch at, is indeed a great defect in the (...), our Zeal in Gods Worship, and
religious Service (Not to detain you) it is plainly this, That careless posting
over the Service and Prayers of the Church. And give me leave freely to tell
you my thoughts, the Liturgy of the Church of England (that has so often
triumphed over the oppositions of all her gainsayers) has not worse Enemies in
the World, than these that carry the semblance of Friends; there cannot a more
effectual course be taken to render it common and contemptible in the esteem of
men, than what these men pursue. It will never be more wounded (I mean as to
losing its due veneration) by the assaults of its open Enemies, than it is in
the House and by the carriage of these its professed Friends. -- But I pass on.

Exercise thy self. And truly when we have said all, this is the right method,
if our Savior himself may be thought able to prescribe it, (...), first cast
the moat out of thine own eye, and then endeavor as much as thou will to help
thy Brothers. When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren: be sure begin
at home first. First love thy self, then extend thy charity to thy Neighbor:
Do what good thou can to others in Gods name, but remember that unless thou
do good to thy self also, neither God nor man will count thee wise; and sure
no man can expect to be counted other than silly in the extremity, who lays out
his care (with the imprudent spouse) to keep other men's Vineyards, while his
own is neglected, and exposed to Ruin.

The last thing is (...) unto Godliness, of which though (we know) all men can
talk fast enough, and all sorts usurp it as the proper signature of their own
party; yet too plain experience let us see how miserably men mistake in the
notions they have of it, and how sad and fatal the consequences of those
mistakes are.

Some take it only to denote a little care about Gods immediate Service and
Worship; and the consequence of this error is, to see men Saints on the
Sunday, and Devils all the week after.

Others take it to import only a zealous observance of the Precepts of the
first Table; and from hence it comes to pass that Piety is cried up by those
men who are wholly regardless of Honesty, and men fall into the old jewish
damning Opinion, that although they murder, steal, commit adultery, and swear
falsely, yet the coming into Gods House, observing his Sabbaths, and carefully
worshipping of him, will easily atone and expiate the guilt of those
Immoralities.

Another sort of men take it only for a Scheme of Faith, and judge of their own
and other men's Godliness, by the mode and fashion of their Religion. One man
thinks he is presently holy, if he be of this way, and another thinks he is so,
if he be of the contrary; and the consequence of this is, to see men wear their
Professions, as the Pharisees did their Phylacteries, and the Gnostics their
Gems, as Amulets and Charms to secure them against the obligation of any
Commands. From whence it comes to pass, that Saintship and the most prodigious
acts of wickedness are easily reconcilable and consistent.

And truly those that go beyond these, and grant godliness to include obedience
to Gods Commands, yet are apt to halt and lisp here, and fall into another old
Jewish error, that if a man do any one thing well, it is enough; in compliance
with which, men choose out a few of the easiest things to perform, such as least
thwart their humor, or cross their interests, and the performance of these
(they doubt not) will hallow all their other neglects. And from hence proceeds
the straining at Gnats, and swallowing Camels, the Tithing-Mint and
Cummin-Seed, but neglecting the great important things of the Law, because more
unpleasing and difficult.

It will highly concern us therefore, to settle such a Notion of Godliness, as
may secure men against all these fatal mistakes; and that we may do by
expounding it so as to take in the whole matter of Christian Obedience, the
whole Syntane of Duties, the combination of all those Virtues, which our great
Master has enjoined all his Votaries; and which the sacred Idiom expresses
sometimes by Holiness, sometimes by righteousness, and sometimes by both.

And I understand nothing to hinder, why we may not so understand and expound
it here. For though I know (...) is many times taken to import the true and
right manner of Gods Worship according to his Word, in opposition to all
Idolatrous Superstitions, and false Worships among the Heathens; yet I know as
well, that it is oftentimes understood in a fuller latitude, as comprehending
the whole duty of a Christian man. And therefore the Syriack Interpretor
translates it here justitiam, and St. Chrysostom expounds it to denote vitam
rectam, as well as sidem puram. Therefore may it well be called Godlikeness,
endeavoring to be pure as God is pure, to transcribe the divine perfections,
and Virtues, Truth, Justice, Mercy, and Charity, according to the utmost of
humane possibilities. Upon which account I suppose it is, that holy men are
said to be (...), 2 Pet. 1. 4.

And yet if we understood it here in the first and stricter sense, without much
straining, it would draw in also this later, for certainly that man worships
God best who obeys him most, and in vain do we the first if we neglect the
latter. It is the Sacrifice of the just that pleases God, whilst that of the
wicked is abomination. Even Nature has taught the Heathen that the Sacrifice
of the guilty person is but (...), suel only to the flame, but not at all
acceptable to the Gods; and it is known to have been a common speech among the
Pythagoreans, (...). Our persons by godliness hallow our gifts, and not our
gifts our persons.

And now I will suppose you have the full import of this Apostolical direction,
which though given to Timothy, may yet by a just and warrantable Analogy, be
extended to all Clergymen after him, enjoining them the exercising themselves
to Godliness.

There are two Instances in which the exercise of this is required of us; and
when I have acquainted you with the reasonableness of its being required in
both those, I have finished the trouble ^ intend your patience at present.

The two Instances I mean are these. Our public Preaching to others, and our
own life and conversation with others: endeavor by thy Doctrine to plant and
promote it in others, and be sure to practice and exercise it thy self.

1. We should earnestly endeavor to plant Godliness in others by our
Doctrines, making this the great end of all our Preaching, designing all such
our public discourses toward the implanting of true holiness in our hearers.

1. For first of all; this is certainly to do them the most real good. That the
great interest of Souls does depend on holiness, and, that the happiness of
them is not attainable without it, is a Truth so clearly asserted, and so
frequently attested in the sacred Canon of our Faith, that I dare take the
confidence to tell any that doubts of it, either that he is wholly a stranger
thereto, has very little conversed therewith; or else has taken a great deal
of pains to misunderstand it. And doubtless it requires some considerable
industry, for a man so far to debauch his Conscience, as to be able to
withstand clear Convictions, and to suspend its assent to such clear and
evident assertions of the Almighty. And truly though a man came to consult the
divine Revelations, with some considerable prejudices, and prepossessions
contrary to this truth; yet a sober person would think, he would meet with so
many, and those so plain and express assertions of it, as were abundantly able
to chase away all those prejudices, and irresistably impress a sense of it upon
his Soul. And certainly he that but reads over Heb. 12. 14. James 2. latter
part of that Chapter, 1 Epistle of St. John, part of 1 and 2. Chapters, or
several sayings of our great Master Christ Jesus. as Mat. 5. 17. and 20. and
many others, the time would fail me to recount all, in which this truth is so
plainly and beyond all possibility of any rational doubting asserted. I say he
that reads over all these, must needs labor under some strange fascination, if
yet he be able to doubt of, or question it.

Nor is this only the way to secure them an eternal and future, but also to
enstate them in the greatest present bliss. Give me a man that dare set up any
one thing whatever to vye with the present felicity of being holy; I will dare
to tell him, that it is so far from yielding a man any true happiness, that it
is not able so much as to secure him from being miserable; it cannot yield him
so much as the privative and meaner part of bliss. And indeed we need not
consult the Ephod for this truth; even the Heathens themselves (as bad Masters
as they are) yet will clearly teach us this Notion. I will not suppose any of
you so unacquainted with them, as to waste time in summoning their sayings to
attest this, only let me hint this to you, that these sayings, are not only
some Rhodomontades of the Stoics, but even of the soberest among them.
Therefore did the Pythagoreans represent vicious men, as placed upon a restless
rowler, -- (...)
(...)
are the very expressions in the golden Sayings.

And indeed it were a very easy task rationally to demonstrate this, in any of
the gay Phantasms, and admired Felicities of the World, that take them separate
from Godliness, and they have not that lesser part of felicity in them, viz.
the making their possessors not miserable: while on the contrary Godliness has
the honor to be (...). And besides the certainty of its future glory, is
retinued at present with that joy and peace, and serenity of Soul, that he only
knows that is the happy possessor of.

And certainly then it will by a very easy consequence follow, that he least
pursues the intendment and design of his holy Calling, that endeavors to be
serviceable to his people in their greatest interests, and levels all his aim
at this great mark, the bringing them to understand and comply with the great
end of their Religion, and the transcribing and imitating the divine
perfections of that God, whom it obliges them to adore. And while others have
other Rules to judge the excellency of Preachers by, their measures certainly
are very false and precarious. Socrates (we know) was deservedly judged the
wisest of the Athenian Philosophers, for this very reason, because whilst
others employed themselves only in aerie Speculations; he only bended his study
to the bettering men's lives, and healing the Immoralities of humane Nature. And
doubtless that Preacher deserves the greatest praise, who most closely pursues
that great design, while a great many others (its easy to signalize too many)
must sit down in much lower rooms.

And truly what that good man said of the great disputers, may too truly be
spoken of some great Preachers amongst us. It is just cause of sorrow to see
men so serious and yet so trifling, a very wounding spectacle to see these
great Heroes (like Hercules at the distaff) so degenerously employed, and to
find those that were designed by Christ for Fishers of men, entertain
themselves and others too only with picking up shells and pebbles on the shore.
Nor is it much wonder if these men take up the Disciples complaint, we have
labored all night, and taken nothing. The great Eulogium is to the faithful
Servant, and shall in vain be expected by him, that is treacherous to his trust;
and the shining as Stars in the Orbs of Celestial Glory, will only be the happy
lot of those, who do (or at least cordially endeavor to) bring Souls to
righteousness.

2. This is one of the most probable expedients, to retrieve the true and
ancient Christian Religion. He that but soberly considers what Christianity was
in its Primitive State, will (like that good man of old reading over our
Saviors great Sermon (Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut nos non sumus
Christiani) be forced upon this conclusion, either that was not true
Christianity, or this which now bears that name, is not: and because he is
assured that the first was true, therefore infers that is spurious and
counterfeit.

Time was [B] when (...) and (...), were the characteristick notes of the true
and degenerate Members of the Church; that of the first and this of the latter,
and holiness of life was the true signature of a Christian. Non magna loquimur
sed vivimus, was then the Christian Motto. And that pristine honor that She
was so happy in, even to the envy and silence of all opposition, was acquired
by the Piety and Holiness of her Votaries. A Christian was but another name for
a virtuous good man, and the lives of Christians verified these to be
Synonoma's.

But alas whosoever views the Religion now on foot, will easily discover its great
degeneracy. That lay in the Heart, from whence it imparted life and vigor into
all the active members; while this resides only in the Brain, and seldom
descends lower than the Tongue: from whence proceeds a kind of a spiritual
rickats, the head swells, and grows large and tuberous, while the active
members are void of strength, and dwindle away into an unactive leanness. There
is none that makes it his business to do good now; yea we may with the Psalmist
repeat it, and say scarce one. An empty formal Notional Religion is that, men
content themselves withal. And while a few Ceremonies and Appanages of
Religion, are so eagerly controverted, you see very few contests about the life
of it; we can see men with great Zeal and little Charity manage controversies
about the little things, but can discover no lists for the agonistick Contests
in Godliness, or if there be any, can discover no Contenders in them.

It is too obvious to need much insisting upon, that men consult their Passions
and Interests and Inclinations in choosing their Religion; and let these alone
to provide for themselves; be sure, while these are the Electors, the choice
will not be very uneasy. Never fear, there will be nothing of difficulty,
nothing of painfulness, no austerity in these men's Religion. The mortification
of a beloved lust, the amputation of a dear Member, the restraining of a
sensual Propensity, are lessons which their Religion will never go about to
teach. St. Peter shall be their Apostle, but it is in the worst advice that ever
he gave, Master spare thy self, consult thine own ease, God is a better Master
than so. He Is the Prophet for these people, that speaks smooth things unto
them. And I need not tell you how many secure the peoples favor, by indulging
and complying with this humor. Tell them fine stories of Christ, of the
Freeness of Grace, etc. and so become adored by their Proselytes as so many
Apostles, while the degeneracy of Christianity is these men's great Guilt, and
in a great measure owes it self to their Doctrines.

3. There are very few means more likely to stiflle and quench those various
Sects and differences that there are amongst us.

And that not only upon this account, because Godliness is so contrary to, and
destructive of all those humors that occasion and feed these distempers.
Though it has been seen that this has been pleaded to justify most Schisms,
and Holiness has been the Banner under which each Faction has pretended to
march; which lets us see what gross fallacies men put upon themselves, so as to
be able to imagine, that Piety can be the true Ensign of a Schismatical
Faction, and the holy Bible and Sword in the same field true Heraldry (the
Solecism, not long ago, of the Scottish Reformers). And yet every man that can
but consider, can tell you that nothing can be more contrary to Godliness, than
giddy Factiousness.

And that upon other scores besides what I have hinted. It Is true, if men study
to bring the people to Godliness, they endeavor to bring them to that which is
contrary to Pride, Covetousness, and Convictedness, which are the three great
Parents and Origines of Schism and Heresy; and so go a direct way to destroy
these. But besides these, the conduciveness of Godliness to the destruction of
these is apparent upon other accounts also.

1. For first, it is most certain, that men's intermitting of sober and regular
Actions (such as Godliness engages unto) is the*readiest way possible to fall
into wild, extravagant, and exorbitant ones. And that Idleness is one great
Cause of Factiousness, has been so fully and clearly demonstrated by one
(whose goodness or humility I know not which most to admire) that I should but
go about to correct Apelles, should I add any thing to fortify the
Demonstration: It is while men sleep that the envious man sows these tares, and
(as a learned Prelate of our own has long since observed) The laborious Bees
pass safely by those tempting Bottles, into which the idle Wasps are easily
seduced. Let men but resolve upon Holiness, I Will secure them, they shall find
enough to employ themselves about, be they as active as they will, or can be;
they shall have no time for Idleness, and consequently no leisure to admit
those pests that follow it.

2. Besides secondly let us do this, and by Gods blessing upon our endeavors,
we may rob these dissenters of their most popular and plausible Argument
against us. You cannot but know the stir that has been made, about
communicating with wicked men, and the danger of joining with mixed Assemblies.
Men have hunted for Purity 'till they have lost all Piety, and the sight of
profaneness in some professed Members of the Church, has made the readier way
for the admission of that Apostolical Precept (though in a mistaken sense) Come
out from among them my people, and be separate from them.

But now this course is the ready way to beat the Enemy out of this Hold: For
while by Holiness appearing in us, all men should be forced to confess that God
is indeed among us, we should let those all see the vanity and wickedness of
those, that cry out of a necessity of seperating from us.

4. Let me add one inducement more; this will be the most effectual course we
can take, to perpetuate our Religion, and procure the divine protection of that
Church, whose hedges seem now broken down, and her self exposed too like an
Orphan.

It is a Maxim of Solomon, That length of days is in the right hand of
holiness, and in her left hand riches and honor, and it is as applicable to
Societies as to single men: As the Pillars of a Nation so of a Church too are
supported by Righteousness, and without that commonly in a little time crumble
to nothing. The Jews tell us, that in the second Temple, which lasted 420.
Years, there were near 300. High Priests, while in the former, that lasted
within 10. Years as long, there was a Succession but of eighteen; and the
difference they assign to arise from the Piety of these, and Impiety of those.
You have an excellent Discourse to this purpose in the late famous Bishop of
Down.

I cast in this enforcement now [B] a little the rather because of the time;
there seems to be silence and amazement in this our Heaven now, I pray God it
may be but for half an hour. Who knows but we may be within the prospect of
that time, in which that Church which has been blessed with so many miraculous
resurrections, may draw near a final expiration? God Almighty avert the Fate,
and change the Prognostics; but certainly there never was more cause, to take
up the Psalmists Prayer (and there is no means likely to cause its speed, but
Holiness) Arise O Lord maintain thine own cause, remember how the foolish man
blasphemes thee daily.

Give me leave to conclude my Ecclesiastes much what as Solomon does his. Fear
God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man, and the
endeavoring to bring men to do this, is the whole duty of the spiritual Man.
And when that great day of Revelation shall commence, in which every secret
thing shall be brought into judgment, he that has most studiously pursued this
design, will certainly be acknowledged by our great Master for the most
faithful Servant.

In this first sense therefore, Exercise thy self unto godliness.

2. But that is not enough; therefore secondly be sure also to exercise thy self
unto Godliness; show it forth in thine own life and actions; think not thy duty
done, when thou have commended it unto, and pressed it upon others, but be sure
endeavor it to thine own Soul: let it be seen in thy living, as well as heard
in thy Preaching.

This is the second Reference (you may remember) I made of this Precept to
Timothy; and give me leave to urge a Consideration or two to enforce it.

1. And first, Let us (I beseech you) consider that we have Souls as well as
other men, whose Salvation ought to be as dear, and whose damnation certainly
will be as terrible unto us, as other men's can be to them, or us either. And
certainly it is a very wild Charity, that prompts us to endeavor other men's
Salvation, and wholly neglect in the mean time our own. Certainly [B] it would
be but a poor relief to a man in Hell, to think that he has been instrumental
in saving others, but rather be the greater aggravation of, and cause him more
virulently to curse his own Folly, in neglecting his own welfare. What Is that
Sheep profited by Clothing others, while it self goes naked? or what comfort
finds that filly Worm in its death, who has extracted its bowels to make
others fine and gay? Who but a madman would seek to build a fortune unto others
upon the ruins of his own House? and I am sure he is far enough from the temper
of an Apostle, who when he has preached unto others, will not take care that
himself may not become a castaway.

Either therefore say thou have no Soul, or the Salvation of it is nothing unto
thee, or else that it is attainable upon other Terms and Conditions than that
of other men, or else exercise thy self unto godliness; and do this, because
thou can not say the first, and art unnatural if thou say the second, and
have no reason to think the third.

2. For secondly, Know that thou art obliged to Holiness as well as other men,
nay by stricter Rules too than they are. Thy Salvation is not only not
attainable without Holiness, any more than another man's is, but requires a
greater measure of it, in order thereto; and thy negligence may cast a greater
grief upon thee, than another man's upon him.

I will not urge this from the greater measure of knowledge, that thou art
supposed to have above them; though that alone will fix the guilt faster, and
make the stain deeper, than it will on another, the (...), Christ himself has
assured us will be such a man's sad portion.

But I would rather argue this from the Consideration of that sacred Function,
we are honored withal. Our very Orders (you know) are called holy; the very
Bells of Aaron alone will ring him this note. I have chosen you out of the
World (says Christ to his Disciples) and surely then such are to be separate
in their Lives as well as Office, and a horrid guilt it will be for these, to
be conformed to it. Certainly, those that are Stars in Christ's right hand, must
either shine bright, or else they will sully their Master's Glory, and be cast
thence with indignation and scorn. While other men that are wicked, do yet
retain the name of men (though Fools or Madmen) it is worth our observing, that
sin in these is a perfect Exanthropie, and causes them presently to commence
Devils. You may see this in two Speeches of our Savior himself, have not I
chosen you twelve, yet one is a Devil? meaning Judas. Nay when St. Peter
himself becomes scandalous, and tempts to evil, he is rebuked in no milder
terms than, Get thee behind me Satan. The Corruption of the best is always the
worst, says our old Maxim, and it is as true in Morality as Nature. It was
therefore excellent Advice, which the lately mentioned Bishop gave his Clergy.
That every Minister should judge of his own duty, by stricter Measures, and
severer Rules, than he does that of his People. And truly it were a very easy
task to instance in many things, that in the Laity are tolerable, which would
carry a very dangerous appearance in the Clergy, and be too liable to
misconstruction.

3. This will be the likeliest way to render thy Preaching Holiness unto
others, effectual unto its blessed end, and thy failing here, will be sure to
frustrate thy endeavors there. It is even a commonplace Truth, That man is
Minical, and regards Examples a great deal more than Precepts; there are enough
have told you, that a Preachers good Example is his best Homily, and his good
Life his most prevailing Sermon.

And if that Maxim of Chrysostom be true, that good Works convince more than
Miracles, than certainly that Preacher that desires any fruit of his labors,
must acknowledge himself under the strongest obligations imaginable, to be
critically careful how he lives. As Religion has no more powerful argument
for it self than the piety of its Votaries, (for that Fountain must needs be
clear, whose streams are so) so truly no man's exhortations work so powerfully
upon us, as his, who is himself (we see) affected with them. Quae agenda
docebat ipse prius agendo premonstrabat, was the commendation of one of our
English Saints, and ought to be ambition'd by every Preacher. Alas! as the
command of that Captain wakes coldly, who only cries go; in comparison of his,
that says Come (ignave venire te Caesar non ire jubet;) so men little attend
to those Preachers, that bid them go in the paths of Holiness, in comparison of
them, who go before them themselves. It Is the language of an Egyptian Pharaoh,
Go ye and serve the Lord, the language of Canaan, is O come and let us, and
which of these is more likely to prevail on man, less than a Prophet may easily
foretell, and that upon very rational grounds also.

For why should any man think that his exhortation should prevail more with me,
than himself? or hope to persuade me to practice that* of which I see him
wholly regardless? What more compendious course can he take, to cause me to
mistrust the truth of all his Arguments, and suspect them for Fallacies, be
they never so specious, only because I see they have no Faith with him? Who
regards a drunken man's Exhortation to Temperance? or believe that himself
thinks that necessary, with which he makes bold so constantly to dispense? In
vain shall you endeavor to persuade men, you are serious in pressing those
Duties on them, which you make no Conscience of performing your selves; nor
will men ever think those Duties practicable, that are wholly disregarded by
those that preach them. It was therefore an advice worthy of an Apostle, which
is given to Timothy in this Epistle, Take heed unto thy self, and to thy
Doctrine; and certainly the former is of as great necessity as the latter, nay
necessary in order to it; that thy Doctrine may not miscarry, be sure take care
of thy self: for thy loose neglect of thy self, will be sure to frustrate the
design of thy Doctrine.

Upon these accounts therefore be sure to exercise thy self unto godliness.

What Censures then can be too severe for these men, when profane and
profligate? I hope there are not many, but those that are, are so many too
many. (...) is all the Petition I make for them. And I hope we are not yet in
such sad circumstances, but that it may be granted, if the Church may not judge
them without, yet she may be permitted (I hope) to govern and correct (when
need is) her own Children.

Give me leave once more to speak my thoughts before you; the Church of
Englands Honor will never thoroughly be vindicated, nor her Clergy's Reputation
cleared and asserted, 'till this course be effectually followed. And (I doubt
not but) every good man is sensible of this, and will add his suffrage to the
conjecture.

I conclude therefore by beseeching you [my B.] to suffer the word of
Exhortation. Let us all combine together in this pious resolution, of
exercising our selves unto godliness, and contending each man to exceed his
Brother in it. Our Contentions here will (I am sure) be warrantable, and our
neglect inexcusably culpable Providence has cast us upon afflicting times,
wherein many eagerly hunt and gape for our destruction, and who knows but God
intends it as an essay of our faithfulness? That vindicating our Religion, the
asserting our own Innocence are only to be effected by this method. Our failure
will put a Sword into our Enemies hands, and make us accessaries to our own
ruin; while our care will shame the malice of our detractors, and put to
silence all gainsayers.

I speak to wise and good men, that are able to judge what I say. And therefore
I speak so little to these things, which indeed it is a task, not to enlarge
upon.

But I conclude with the Psalmists Prayer; Let all thy Priests, O Lord, be
clothed with righteousness* and then shall all thy Saints shout for
joyfulness, Amen.

Now to God the Father, etc.

FINIS.
Licensed,

April 9. 1673. Roger L'estrange.


