A CAVEAT For the PROTESTANT CLERGY.

Or, A TRUE ACCOUNT of the Sufferings of the ENGLISH CLERGY upon the
Restitution of POPERY in the days of QUEEN MARY.

Virgilio Malvezzi in his Tarquin.

The calamity of others may be a Lesson to you: it is true, the good which is
learned by what befalls ones self, is counterpoised by disasters: he knows
much, to whom much has befallen; But who can learn by another man's harm; Say
he be less wise, he is for certain more fortunate.

Printed Anno Dom. 1671.

The Publisher to the Protestant Reader.
THis Letter was sent to a Person of Quality, whose Learning and Prudence are
such, that, but to know him, and that He recommended it to the Press, were
enough to endear it to the perusal of any Man. But neither have I power to
discover him that approved it; nor does the Author desire the World should know
what he thinks upon, or writes to his friends: He is confident this Age is so
supinely negligent, and ignorant, that all this will pass for a Midsomer Dream,
or some old foolish story, in the knowledge whereof this Generation is not
concerned. But yet it is most certain, that they who are acquainted with the
proceedings of the Papists in Austria, Bohemia, or France, will think what He
writes to be probable. They who examine things further, will find all to be
exactly true: And they who by comparing past and present times, take a prospect
of the condition of our Affairs, will think the Publication to be necessary:
However, there is no hurt in being cautilous; and many events happen in the
World that were as remote from the aprehension of them that suffer under them,
as what the most jealous heads are perplexed at now in England: The Reading
hereof will not take up much of that time which is now the least valued thing
in this Nation; and 'twill be no evil effect, if the consideration hereof bring
into any one's mind that Petition in the Lords Prayer, Lead us not into
Temptation, but deliver us from evil, with which I conclude.

Honored Sir,
LEast you should interpret my long silence to be a relinquishing of that
Friendship which I have vowed unto You, I again renew that Correspondence which
has been so many Months discontinued: And because you expect from me somewhat
more than Ceremony and Complement, I shall here represent unto you an Account
of the Condition of the Clergy under that revolution in the Reign of Queen
Mary, when Popery was re-established. It is well known how that Queen was
promoted to the Crown by the sole aid and assistance of the Protestants, who
flocked unto her in Suffolk, and offered to hazard their Lives and Fortunes in
her defense against the Lady Jane, who was proclaimed Queen, and abetted by the
Nobility. It Is known that She promised unto the Protestants, that She would
make no alteration in the established Religion: and this She did so Solemnly
avow, that none misdoubted her Reality. But after She was once advanced into
the Throne, and had possessed her self of the Regal Power, She violated all
those Promises, and being put in mind thereof, answered, Forasmuch as you being
but Members desire to rule your Head, Acts and Monuments, p. 1279
you shall one day percieve that Members must obey their Head, and not look to
bear rule over the same. And to terrify others from importuning her with
solicitations of that nature, a certain Gentleman named M. Dob, dwelling about
Windam side, for the same cause, that is, for advertising her by humble request
of her Promise, was punished by being set three several times in the Pillory.
At first She made alteration in the Church, but assumed the Practice of her
Religion, as she allowed unto others the use of theirs: Ibid. p. 1281.
She declared no more by Proclamation, then teat being settled in the Throne
she could not hide that Religion which God and the World knew She had ever
professed from her infancy: which she was minded to observe and maintain for
her self, during her time: and would be glad the same were of all her Subjects
quietly and charitably embraced. Yet she does signify unto all her Majesty's
loving Subjects, that of her most gracious disposition and clemency, her
Highness minds not to compel any her said Subjects thereunto, until such
time as further order by common consent, may be taken therein. Forbidding
nevertheless all her Subjects of all degrees, at their perils, to move
Seditions, or stir unquietness in her People by interpreting the Laws of the
Realm, after their Brains and Fancies, but quietly continue for the time, till
(as before said) further order may be taken; and therefore wills, and
straightly charge and commands all her said good loving Subjects to live
together in quiet sort and Christian charity, leaving those newfound devilish
terms of Papist and Heretic, or such like, and applying their whole care,
study, and travail to live in the fear of God, exercising their Conversations
in such a charitable and godly doing, as their Lives may indeed express that
great hunger and thirst of Gods Glory and Holy Word, which by rash talk and
words many have pretended: and in so doing they shall best please God, and live
without the danger of the Laws, and maintain the Tranquillity of the Realm.

After this, upon pretense of suppressing all factious praying and Libels, She
prohibited all universally (except in the Universities) to preach or teach any
Scriptures, or any manner of points of Doctrine concerning Religion, unless
they have her Majesty's special License for the same in writing.

This Proclamation being made, she proceeded to trouble such Ministers as did
oppose the Popish Doctrines preached by Mr. Bourne: several were summoned
before the Council, and cast into Prison, who had either preached or talked
against the Queen's proceedings.

Diverse Bishops suspended in the days of her Brother Edward, were restored,
viz. Dr. Heylin does call him Bishop Poinet; I know not why; for he writes his
own name Poynett.
Dr. Gardener to Winchester, and John Poynec put out; Dr. Bonner to London, and
Nicholas Ridley confined; Joh. Day to Chichester, and J. Scory excluded; Dr.
Torstal to Durham; Dr. Heath to Worcester, John Hooper excluded, and committed
to the Fleet; Dr. Vesey to Excester; and Miles Coverdale cashiered. And in the
beginning of the Parliament, before any Laws of K. Edward VI. were repealed,
Mr. Harley Bishop of Hereford, was excluded from the House of Peers for being
married; and of those which should adhere to the Laws in being (till they were
repealed) some were marked, and others presently apprehended.

The Universities were severely vifited, and many either expelled or forced to
retire: Acts and Monuments, p. 1341.
in our College of S. John's in Cambridge, 24 places were vacuated; and no
less miserable was the state of Oxford, by reason of the rigorous and strict
dealing of the Visitors, that to set forward their Papistical proceedings, had
no regard to the ingenious or learned.

Our Records show, that Five Bishops, and twenty one Divines were put to death
in those days: But the particular usage of the Clergy is not so related in any
Chronicles I have yet seen, It was Dedicated to K. Philip, and Q. Mary, and all
the Estates in Parliament.
as in a Defense of the Married Clergy, whose Author I know not; (my Book being
imperfect) and because I think it may be somewhat new unto you, as it was to
me, I designed the sum of it for the Subject of this Letter.

There were twelve or sixteen thousand Clergymen turned out in those days, at
one time, and reduced to great poverty; this was done and executed to the
uttermost, and against all Justice upon a number of them, even after the charge
of the Cure served, the Tenths and Subsidy paid, N.B. In this relation I
generally retain the Language, and even the Orthography oftentimes of my Author
and they at the point of receiving that which was before labored for, and
deserved, all was snatched out of their mouths by preventions. Some were
deprived, and never convict, no never called. Some called, that were fast locked
in Prison, and yet nevertheless deprived immediately. Some deprived without the
case of Marriage after Orders. Some induced to resign upon promise of Pension,
and the promise never performed. Some so deprived, that they were spoiled of
their wages, for which they had served the last half year before, and not ten
days before the receipt sequestered from it. Some prevented from the half years
receipt, after charges of Tenths and Subsidy paid; and yet not deprived till
sir weeks after. Nay, they stood chargeable in Law for their first Fruits,
notwithstanding their deprivation. Nor were they only divorced from their
Livings: But the Orders of Bonner are extant whereby they were appointed to
bring their Wives within a Fortnight, Acts and Monuments, p. 1334.
that they might likewise be divorced from them

The Queens Articles sent into every Diocese with Letters writ unto the several
respective Bishops, were of the same import, though in some things better
qualifyed, than those that were to put them in execution would have regard
unto: But it is no nnusual thing in so great revolutions for the Instruments to
exceed their Commission; and to comply more with their private instructions or
intentions, than the public Declarations of their Prince. Whatsoever there is
of mitigation in them, was not taken notice of, but such rigor practiced, as I
relate. The Articles relating to this Subject were.

That every Bishop and his Officers, Dr. Heylin's History of the Reformation.
Ann. Reg. Mar. 1. 1553
and all others having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, proceeding summarily, and
with all celerity and speed, may, and shall deprive, or declare deprived, and
remove according to their learning and discretion, all such persons from their
Benifices and Ecclesiastical Promotions, who contrary to the state of their
Order, and the laudible custom of the Church, have married, and used Women as
their Wives, or otherwise notably and slanderously disordered or abused
themselves, Sequestring also, during the said Process, the Fruits and Profits
of the said Benesices and Ecclosiastical promotions,

That the said Bishop, and other Persons aforesaid, do use more lenity and
clemency with such as have married, whose Wives be dead, than with others whose
Women do yet remain alive. And likewise such Priests, as with the consent of
their Wives or Women, openly in the presence of the Bishop, do profess to
abstain, to be used more favorable. In which case, after Pennauce effectually
done, the Bishop according to his discretion and wisdom, may upon just
considevation, receive and admit them again to their former administrations, so
it be not in the same place, appointing them such a portion to live upon, to be
paid out of their Benifice, whereof they be deprived, by the discretion of the
said Bishop, or his Officer, as he shall think may be spared of the same
Benifice.

That every Bishop, and other Person aforesaid, do foresee that they suffer
not any Religious Man, having solentnly professed Chastity,, to continue with
his Woman or Wife, but that all such persons after Deprivation of their
Benefice, or Ecclesiastical Promotion, be also divorced from his said Woman,
and due punnishment otherwise taken for the Offense therein.

In these Articles it is to be observed, that the Queen seems more inclined to
call the Wives of the Married Clergy rather Women, than any other name: and
matters were so ordered, that not only the Regular Clergy, which do vow
Chastity, but the Seculars, (who promise at their Ordination only castitatem
colere and docere; which was the old Form, and obliges them directly no more
to refrain Marriage, than to teach others so to do,) were divorced from their
Wives, and deemed to have made a solemn profession of Chastity, according to
those Verses, Ordo, Sacer, vestis, professio Religionis
Quae sit facta palam factunt solemnia vota.


The Married Clergy were in all places represented as Lewd Fellows; Nay, it
came to that pass immediately, as that they were imputed such an unworthy sort
of Men, that they ought not to be said Ave unto in salutation: not fit to come
to their Tables or Presence, for disteining their Holiness and mystical vows of
Chastity. Whereas in truth the Secular Priests of the English Church were never
under any such Vow, nor did our Pontifical oblige them to any such thing: as
Dr. Redman attested in the Convocation-house; professing they were not bound by
reason of any Vow, which (in as far as his Conscience was the Priests in this
Church of England do not make. But all Pleas were rejected; it was in vain for
them to say they did nothing but what was warranted by the Laws of the Land,
the Convocation, or Scripture, and Fathers: they were condemned for breach of
Vows, as if they had been Ordained by Romish Poutifical and not that of
England. The Popish Clergy told them, that upon the repealing of the Laws in
being, the old Laws and Canons did ipso facto take place, and oblige, though
there was no express Statute for it, and though the Queens Commission was, that
they should proceed according to Learning and Discretion in this weighty
matter: and that they should not put any other Canons and Constitutions of the
Church in exercise, than such as might stand with the Law of the Realm. Yet for
all this grave and gracious Advertisement, diverse of the Officials proceeded so
far against Learning, discretion, and Laws of the Realm in most places, so that
the poor Subjects and Orators were far otherwise used than one would have
imagined, considering the trust committed to them. In truth it appears that all
Pleas were invalid against the Arbitrary proceedings of those times; and
whatever was alleged out of the Laws and Constitutions of England, though
never so old, and made in the times of Popery, (and who is safe, if such a
defense be invalid:) were defeated by this general assertion of Dr. Martin, and
others, that no Laws bind against the Church, but are ipso jure and ipso facto
unlawful, void, and of none effect; That a particular Church, a little Member
of the whole, cannot derogate the universal Law of the Church. They proceeded
so far as to tell Men, that the Acts of K. Edward VI. did not take away the
penalty of the Canon Laws: and interpreted that Act of Q. Mary, which barely
repealed the Statutes of K. Edward, as it had annulled the Marriages of
Priests. Nay, though there were a Statute in force then, made tricesimo secundo
of Henry the Eighth, that no Reservation or Prohibition (Gods Law except) shall
trouble or impeach any Marriage, without the said Levitical Degrees: and that
all such be lawful persons to contract, which be not prohibited by Gods Law to
marry Yet did they proceed to annull the Marriages; and argued, that the
Priests could take no advantages of the Law, any longer than it continued: and
that the ancient Laws of the Church were never extinguished, but only for a
time shadowed, and brought asleep. It was further argued by the married Clergy
thus: But to return again to Dr. Martins assertion, wherein he defines, that
the Church-Canons be ready, watching straightways to fall into men's necks, upon
repeal of such Statutes as kept them back: which he does so boldly, that belike
the wise and well learned Commissaries, in diverse places, without further
advisement, takes upon them wondrous stoutly, to separate, not only Regulars,
but Seculars too, against their wills and consents. Upon which their doings, I
would ask them a question: How they can gloss the words of K. Henry's Statute
in the XXVII. year of his Reign, where it is plainly decreed in Law, that all
manner of Licenses, Dispensations and Faculties obtained of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, in matters not repugnant or contrary to the holy Scriptures, and
Laws of God, shall stand in full Authority and strength, without any revocation
or repeal hereafter to be had of any such License. And I know diverse married
Priests, which have such Dispensations, some corroborated by the Kings Broad
Seal, and some by the said Archbishops Seal. I would fain learn, how they
understand these weighty Laws of the Realm. Belike, as they have proceeded in
Deprivations of many Men, never called, or cited, never convict, nor confessed;
and some called on one day, and slat deprived on the next day, not examining
whether he were Secular or Regular, married before Orders, or after, without
all manner of inquisition: So belike they desire to proceed in Separations,
against both God's Law, and their own. And as for the Laws of the Realm, they
make but washway of them, so little compting of them, that if a Lord should see
his Tenants in his Court Baron so little regard the Bylaws of his Courts, he
would think them not unworthy, to loose their Copies. -- To this the only
answer I can find, is, The marriages of the Clergy be so great offenses, that
they cannot be forgiven by no manner of means, no not by Christ's Blood, but
only by a Separation. And Dr. Martin says furthermore, that Bishops and
Priests have so great deformities and skars yet remaining in their Bodies and
Souls, for their old Incests, (as he calls them) that they cannot be mitigated
by any gentle Medicine, Christian Clemency, no not purged yet, nor sufficiently
punished, with the deprivations of all their Livings, but must look for much
more yet, Curses, Excommunications, Excoriations, Confiscations, open Penance,
yea, the Devil, Hell, and all. -- And Dr. Martin assures the Clergy that they
were dealt with very favorably in being turned out of their Ministrations, and
no further Penalties inflicted on them. It Is not to be denied, but that after
they were turned out of their Livings, the Church did mercifully open her lap
to receive them into new Benefices and Livings, though they had lost their old,
where they had done cost. But such was the Churches merciful lap, in receiving
her own begotten Children to ministration again, that yet first they must speak
their own shame in Bills of their Penance, lying against themselves, most
vilely and shamefully disabling their credit and estimation for ever. They must
profess an earnest and hearty repentance of that foul sin of Unchastitie by
marrying, relinquish their Wives for the future, and bear such a part in
Procession, as Jane Shore does in the Puppet-Plays, carrying Tapers in their
hands: I could wish all our Clergy would resor to Bartholomew Fair, and behold
that spectacle, and judge of that happy condition into which their supinity
will precipitate them. Some did undergo it in the days of Q. Mary: and, Surely
in some places the Churches mercy was so sore extended, that whose Wives were
two or three years past before departed, yet they could not be admitted again
to ministration, but must do open Penance, and go before the Cross, without
any redemption or entreaty that could be made; and the parties such as by whom
the Commissaries themselves could allege not one point of dishonesty, or evil
opinion in all their conversation besides forth. Shall Laymen hereafter trust
well of the Churches Mercy, if they come within their claws, when the Clergy
are thus dealt with? Of whom some dissented in no Point at all from the
Papists, but only in this fact, which the Law made them bold to adventure on.
-- Thus, Sir, were those Clergymen served, who before that fatal change, were
in as good and lawful possession of their Wives and Livings, as any Subject
ever shall have of any thing hereafter. Nor is there any way for the present
Clergy to avoid the like inveniencies should such a Revolution happen (from
which the greatest security we have, as to humane and Political Affairs, is the
great Zeal which our Prince continues to show for the Church of England, and
that unquestionable unshaken constancy with which His Majesty persisted to be a
Protestant during his Exile) except it be confessed that they are not in
Orders, and that the Succession did cease in the Election of Matthew Parker to
be Archbishop of Canterbury: this is a thing the Papists do commonly say: and
Dr. Champney has writ a plausible Book to prove it: and if it be true, that He
which makes arbitrarily Bishops in Greece, of Chalcedon, Corinth, etc. has
ordained some for England, and Ireland; it is eafie to judge what courses will
be taken, should Protestancy loose its Legal force, and power. Perhaps you will
say that such a revolution would endanger the Layety also, and bring the Crown
of his Majesty into Question, whether it be feudatory, or no: it is true indeed,
that the Papists do now entitle some of their Clergy to our old Abbeys and
Monasteries; and in France there is a Nunnery that lays claim to Sion house,
and they are called the Nuns of Sion. It Is most true that the Pope does reckon
upon our Kingdom as held in Fee of the Papacy, and to this purpose did
Bellermine produce unto K. James other Arguments than the Donation of
Constantine. Bu^ I am resolved not to doubt the integrity or prudence of his
Majesty, or our Parliament; it is not to be doubted but the intellectuals of
Statesmen are as elivated as their condition is above others, and their
prospect greater into Affairs: what passed in the days of Q. Elizabeth, and K.
James is not effaced out of our knowledge: and it is only the intent of this
Letter to acquaint you with the condition of the Protestant Clergy in the days
of Queen Mary. Dr. Heylin has not treated so fully of this matter as I have
here: and I think it would be a seasonable Work to publish Dr. Martin's Book
about the proceedings against the Clergy then; and the Defense of Priests
Marriage, (which is the Book I follow, and it is a learned piece, written by
some eminent Man, but mine is defective in the beginning, and wants a sheet in
the middle.) Nothing informs us so much as History, and to be forewarned, is in
a manner to be fore-armed. I am

Your most devoted Servant, Y. E.

FINIS.

