ELIANA.

A NEW ROMANCE: FORMED BY AN English Hand.

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci,

Hor. Nihil est aptius ad delectationem Lectoris quam temporum varietates,
fortunaeque vicissitudines,

Hor. Aut prodesse volunt, aut delectare Poetae
Aut simul, and jucunda, and idonea dicere vita,
Hor. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Peter Dring at the Sun in the Poultrey, next
door to the Rose-Tavern. An. Dom. 1661.

TO THE READER.
THou see here the fruits of some spare hours: and of those which might
justly have been given to sleep. My desire is, that thou may read them in
the same manner as I wrote them, that is, Relaxare animum, being tired and
wearied with more serious studies, or weighty affairs. By this means you shall
neither tire your self, nor abuse your time, using them for an innocent
recreation. This is but the first part of the whole Work, and indeed but a kind
of introduction to the rest. This first appears as a Libament to your palate:
if liked, it shall induce me to finish the rest; if disliked, I have already
done too much, and shall desist: For I am none of those who dote upon their own
fancies, and Narcissus-like, fall in love with the shadows of their own brain.
I make you my Judges, and by your Votes I shall either proceed, or give off.
Mistake me not; I yield my self not to the mercy and judgment of those who are
prejudiced against such writings in general, and count it a part of their Creed
to abhor them, and whatever of good that appears under the title of a Romance.
These are not like the ingenious Be, who sucks honey out of the very weeds;
nor like the good Chimick, who extracts the good, and leaves the bad; They
fling all away in a lump, despise the book for the covers-sake, and disregard
the matter, because the title do'nt please them. These I say shall not be my
Judges, nor shall their barkings discourage my future proceedings, for they
will be sure to condemn all, though they never read a word: They will cry out,
that they are bewitching, frothy, and apt to withdraw the mind of the Reader
from graver studies. But surely they are ignorant of the true ground and scope
of these kind of Writings; which is to depaint virtue and vice in their natural
and genuine colors, and to exhibit the fairness of the one, the foulness of
the other, and the rewards of both. They know not that Romances are not always
farc'd with Love-stories and toys, though those are intertexted for delight,
and that things Oeconomical, Ethethical, Physical, Metaphysical, Philosophycal,
Political, and Theological as well as Amatory, may be, not unaptly, nor unfitly
exhibited. The Divines will be angry if I tell them, that many have found that
in a Romance, which has induced them to be virtuous, and converted them from
the lewd actions of vice, which they could never find in their Sermons, though
they weekly frequented their Oratory. The reason is, it persuades more
pathetically than they can, a story giving life to the words, and representing
it in lively colors, presses it home upon the understanding, where it is
scarcely delible. Neither do I submit my self to the Censure of those Critical
Fellows, who would find fault with the Muses themselves, or the Writings of
Apollo. I confess these will say, I never took a nap upon Parnassus, and that
my pen was never dipped in the Heliconie fount. The best is, whilst I am unknown,
I can look over their shoulders, and hear their opprobries without passion; and
engaging my self to answer their follies, I would have none to criticize or
discant on any work, till themselves have undergone the trial of writing the
like; for it is far easier to find fault, than to know how to amend it. I was of
the same humor, and in reading the works of others, methought the most perfect
seemed sometime lame, either in style or story, but in making trial of my own
invention, I well understand humane frailty, in a continued Series. I confess
the judicious may find matter enough to increpate the Author justly, but the
Critic may carp, where there is no cause, for they most times find fault where
there is least need. As I much regard the censure of the one, so I very little
value the carping of the other. It Is those Wits who have laid aside that
Mordacity, and who know how to distinguish betwixt the good and the bad, which
I constitute for my Judges: With those fair and wise ones of the female sex,
whose delight I chiefly aimed at. If they find any thing that may content them,
'twill be inspiration enough for higher, and better conceits, and will be the
greatest inducement for the perfecting of Eliana; but if they pass hard
censures upon this, th'le strike dead all desires of proceeding. I am conscious
of my own failings, and that makes me remain incognito, to receive either the
disgrace or commendums of these juvinile Writings; whilst I lie in obscurity,
and am

ANONYMVS.

ELIANA.
BOOK the first.
FLora had new begun to spread her flowry-fragrant mantle upon the superficies
of the Earth, and to bespangle the verdant grass with her beauteous adornments,
thereby inviting troubled Lovers to ease those continual passions, which
possess their amorous Souls, with the beholding the variety of her pleasing and
delightful Objects. When the most passionate Angelois walking with a negligent
pace, and deeply ruminating on his amorolis affairs, was entered into a grove,
free from the frequentations of any besides the ranging beasts, and pleasing
birds, whose dulced Notes exulscetated him out of his melancholy
contemplations. Being well nigh in the midst of that solitary place, he cast
his eyes upon a bank, which as if it had had some Soveranity over the rest of
the earth thereabouts, was more peculiarly crowned, with all sorts of Sylvane
flowers, and the grass with a verdant luster seemed a repose for a troubled
soul. The Trees as if they had conspired together to guard the place, from the
scorching beams of Phoebus, grew so thick with intermixing branches, that it
was impossible for him to peep on the beauty of the place, whilst themselves
bowing their proud tops did homage to its luster. And that there might not want
any thing which might conduce to its exuperancy, in quietude, beauty and
pleasure, there ran not far from its verges, a silver current, which having a
small descent, made a pleasant murmur, with forcing its way over the pibbles,
which opposed its quiet passage, which noise seemed a base to the sweet trebles
of the pretty birds, who pearcht one every branch made a most harmonious noise.
Argelois seeing this place so agreeable to the solitude of his mind, that he
might more freely consider its beauty, he cast himself upon that delightful
bank, being under the thickest covert in the grove, and letting his fancy for a
space be carried about with these pleasing objects, he lay beholding the beauty
of the place, and listening to the pleasant notes of those wood Choresters,
whereby his senses with the pleasure were rapt into a sweet repose, and for a
season gave some ease to those inquietudes that possessed his amorous breast. But
at last, remaining in that kind of stupidity, he was assaulted by a violent
rushing in of those passions which had through that small repose received some
stop to their wonted current, but then overflowing the banks of his silence, he
uttered to the senseless trees, that which his breast was too weak to contain.
"Ah cruel and unsupportable flames, said he, that neither danger nor distress
can quench, what torments put you my soul to! what cruelty do you exercise on a
soul, who so much adores your Deities, and has your power in so great
veneration, that it endures those pains you inslict without the least
murmuring. Why exercise you not your cruelty on those who oppose your regency;
and make them feel the heat of your penetrating flames? Ah! no, those polluted
souls are not worthy your visitation, nor their defiled breasts capable of
receiving your sacred fires. Seeing it is an honor to die by the hands of
love, I shall desire not to be freed its bonds, but quickly to receive a
welcome death, for thus to live in continual torture is more than mor^als are
(...) bear: And yet the continual sight of that fair deity, the object of my
love, and passion, makes me yet live to enjoy that blessed sight, so that
through the assaults of pain and pleasure, I am at once both killed and made
alive. It seems to me sometimes better to die than to live, and sometimes
better to live than die: sometimes I pray for the one, sometimes for the other.
But O you powers which rule us Mortals, What need I sigh out my misery to you,
when you know and are the Causers of it? Surely not for my disobedience, but
that I may know your power. Ah! I must be content for ever to endure this
torment, which yet no other ever knew, because hope is wanting. I am like one
who admires the Sun, but may never reach him. I love an object, more requisite
for the gods than man, much less I who know not whence I am, nor by what
fortune I came into the world: How dare I then aspire to serve a Princess so
far beyond my reach? I must blame ye Deities for binding me with an infragible
chain, so that it is not possible for me to live, and not love Eliana, whose
very name transportes me. Love her! I cannot choose that, that I must do, admire
and adore her. O Heavens me thinks I find some sparks of a generous soul which
tells me, I am not formed out of the common earth of Plebians. May your
Divinities make known my stock, and that may extricate me from this Labrinth of
love and confusion; or else with my life, end my misery. That I confess is the
most feasible, for such humble thoughts best befit mortals grouling at the
shrine of such a supereminent divinity as I adore. Dye! ah! that's all my hopes!

The conclusion of these words showed the unsuppertable burden of his
sorrowful mind, for pointing them with a sigh, able to penetrate an obdurate
heart, he entered into so profound a cogitation, with his eyes fixed on the
earth, that he heard not the obstrepency which one made in coming, till he had
approached him with these words.

Sir, accidentally hearing the complaints of your too amorous soul, and I know
not by what power, feeling your torments stirring up a pity and curiosity
together in my breast, I have thus rudely adventured to approach you, and also
out of a desire I have, prompted by a more than ordinary violence, to enter a
discourse with you, and if it might be to show you the precipices of this
Tyrannous love by too many experimented Trials. I have before now observed your
melancholy resort into these shades, my habitation is nigh and unknown, where I
have a freedom to study at large Dictates of reason against such youthful
excurrances. Pardon Sir this rude address, and exact what punishment you
please, after having given me the favor I desire. Argelois at his first
speaking had lifted up his eyes, obscured as they were with the clouds of
sadness to behold him, who thus had disturbed his melancholy humor, and they
were incountred with a gravity that allayed the cholor that began to arise
through this disturbance, but being suppressed through this grave object, he
arose, and saluting him, thus expressed himself. "Though it be the greatest of
disturbances, to be interrupted in these pleasing cogitations, and nothing
(hardly) less pardonable, with a Lover, yet the gravity which accompanies you,
and some intereor motion which moves me, by I know not what power, I am well
satisfied with this your interruption, and desire to know that laxating drogue
which you seem to promise. The stranger invited by Argelois seated himself by
him on that pleasant bank, exercising his eyes in beholding the incomparable
features, and most attracting graces, which accompanied this Hero, and at last
being not a little astonished that such a brave aspect should complain, who
deserved justly the title of incomparable; "I cannot but wonder (said he) that
nature having dealt so favorable with you; Love and fortune should so much
oppose you, for nature has made you rather to be sued to by the fairest
female, than to sue to any whatsoever, and given those graces which others
want, but love it seems crossing her intentions, makes you leave that which you
have to seek beauty where it is not to be found but in your self, and fortune
being of the conspiracy strives to make you equally miserable, by hiding from
you the knowledge of your extraction and birth, this I understand by your
complaints, which though I may not help altogether, yet I may give some remedy
for those plagues of love: I will show you my experiences, as marks to shun his
deceits, and show you how my utter ruin came from thence, which makes me have
a just cause to complain against sin, and forwarn others that they may not
precipitate themselves blinded with his deceits. It may be (says Argelois)
that the fault lay in your self, not in Love, and and through your own fault
lost that which Love had ordained for you, and so were the cause of your own
misery, which you impute to Love. I know not i^ I have erred (replied the
stranger) but if I have, it was because I was blinded, for I account it
altogether impossible for any to be deeply engaged in that folly (for so I must
term it) and not to degress the precepts of wisdom. I have had my share in it,
which made me (hearing your complaints) so far to pity your estate, as to
present my self before you to acquaint you with the experience I have had of
him, and though Love deal not with all men alike, yet it is seen for a time he
undoeth most. When in my youth I felt those heart tormenting flames, though I
were sensible of the pain, yet I esteemed it as a pleasure, and rejoiced in my
own discontent, I accounted it the happiest condition, and pleased my self with
my own fancy, but now the experience of years, with the dictates of Reason,
has pulled away the vizor from the face of Love, and now I see it nothing but
a sense-pleasing fancy which banisheth reason from its Residence, making a man
lose that which makes him almost equal with the gods, and submit to a passion
altogether servil. Argelois a little smiling, said, Surely love in an
extraordinary manner has crossed you, that you are so much his adversary, I
will not go about to defend him, (though it be a most noble passion, at least I
think so) because I know not, but hereafter I may have cause enough to complain
and speak against him, and for that it is requisite that I cede to your more
tried experiences, which makes me desirous to know the miseries love has
caused you, and the good and bad fortune of your Life, and if my poor condition
may any ways be able to stand you in stead, you may assure your self of my
service. I thank you for your generosity (replied the Love-opposing stranger)
my condition is too base for the help of so noble a hand, I shall most
willingly relate the full story of my life, although I know you not, but
believe so generous a soul cannot harbor my destruction; yet the apparent
danger and hazard of my life in discovering my self might be a sufficient
excuse, had I not a more inward persuasion of your noble and generous
disposition. and an extraordinary impulse upon me, to make known my various
fortunes. I have no other end that pricks me to this relation, by which I lay
my self open to dangers, but that pity which I mention, that impulse I speak
of, for I was not able longer to hear your complaints, and not render to the
assistence (and if possible to snatch you from a precipice, I see you even
falling into) all my Humanity, Philosophy and experience. Let it not seem
strange, that being thus a stranger, I should thus freely disclose my self; if
I have any knowledge left in phisnomy, I read in your face a generous and
heroic soul, which will not give the weakness of a kind heart an ungentle
acceptance, and consture this freedom in the worst sense. I cannot but believe
a good Fate in this accidental meeting, therefore I am so free and plain.
Argelois much pleased with the strangers freedom, and having a great desire to
hear his fortunes, and who he was, told him the content he should receive by
his relation, and that he might not be interrupted through fear, protested that
whatever he related to him, he might assure himself should never prejudice him,
or any way redound to his hurt. The stranger giving him thanks for his verbal
assurance, and well satisfied in his behavior and gentleness, after a little
pause to collect things in some method, seeing him attend the motion of his
tongue, he began thus.

THE HISTORY OF EVRIPEDES.
GOod fortune always attends not an illustrious birth, and great men are not
always happy, for if a great birth could have engaged fortune, and my former
riches obtained my felicity, I had not been in this condition which now you see
me, though I must confess in this estate of Poverty, and solitude, I find more
content then in my former greatness, and tumultuous engagements in the world.
In the Country of Cilicia I first drew breath, and not far from the famous
City of Nicopolis was I bred; the greatness of my parents was eminently known
in that Country, though so great an estate through me has found an overthrow,
I will not tell you of the nobility, and and antiquity of my predecessors, nor
the great opulency of my parents. I being their only child I wanted for nothing
procurable, neither for littrature, nor arms, to the latter of which in my
youth I was much addicted. The exercise of these employments took up my age of
puberty, and having been well grounded in both, I desired to make use of my
arms abroad, but my parents denying me so dangerous an employment, I was
constrained to abide under their indulgent wings, being the joy and comfort of
their old age. I had scarce attained seventeen years, when to my grief my
mother departed into the Subterranean walks of the Stigean grove, and before
two years more had passed, my father ran the like fortune, being suddenly
struck by the hand of the inexorable Parca. My father seeing a stayednesse in
me, which was not* usual to such young years, left me sole Guardian to my self,
and with his death surrendered up those possessions which were sufficiently
great. Some time I spent in just tears for my parents loss, till time had
consumed the moisture of my eyes, and wore away the sadness from my heart,
then having the reins in my own hand I purposed to put those resolutions into
act, which the indulgency of my parents had deterred. For which end, having two
Uncles, one the brother of my father, the other of my mother, I desired them to
look to my estate at home, whilst I sought renown abroad; I made known my
desires, and urged them to grant my request, they endeavored to dissuade me,
but in vain, which seeing, they promised (to my joy) to fulfill my desires. The
eldest son of my fathers brother named Araterus knowing my resolutions, with
great importunings got both my leave and his fathers to accompany me. Having
spent some time in furnishing our selves with what we wanted, we departed from
our own Country of Cilicia, having none in our company but a faithful servant
of my own named Meador. Having furnished our selves with a ship at Tarsus, with
a prosperous wind we failed along the Tyrrhenean sea, and for that our desires
extended beyond the limits of an ordinary travel, we were resolved to pass into
the Atlantic Ocean, and to view the utmost limits of the Roman Empire, and so
returning at leisure, view the places of more fame. This our resolution carried
us beyond Herculus's pillars, and passing the straight, we entered into that
vast and spacious sea, which beats upon the coast of the Iberians. The wind as
it were repenting his former kindness, on a sudden began to rise, and Boreas
with a full gale opposed out prow, making Neptunes watery surges bear the ship
aloft, mounting it so high on those liquid rocks, that it might receive the
more dangerous precipiet: we endeavored to gain the shore, but a contrary
wind, contraried our design, and in spite of all our endeavors carried us
far into the Ocean, where we ran every moment the danger of death, and to
aggravate our miseries, a dark and pitchy night overtook us, with the continual
assaults of this furious tempest against our floating Castle, which sometimes
had almost yielded to the battery of the winds, having so unsteady a foundation
as the waters. When we perceived our endeavors to save the ship and our selves
were vain, we committed our selves wholly to the protection of the Gods, and
let the ship follow the fortune of the waters, being carried along with the
impetuous blasts of the enraged wind. The night so dark that we could not see
our own deaths, nor the imminent danger we were in, at last vaded, the wished
for day appearing, but with a troubled sky, clouds accumelating with that
crassitude, as if in despite of the Sun they would transvert the day into
night. The wind having this day and the ensuing night vented its fury, began
to diminish its rage of its self, or the gods pitying our condition, gave a
countermand to the encounters of the inferior windy and watery Deities. At last
our weather beaten ship, and both affrighted and tired Mareners were driven
upon the coasts of a small and unknown Island, joyful we had escaped this
danger, we desired to ease our selves on the Land, and there on a sure
foundation pour out our prayers to the gods. Some of us passed into the Island
in a boat, which we had for the like occasions, whilst the others remained in
the ship. We wondered we could find no harbor for our ship, nor scarce could we
attain Land with the boat. Araterus and I being desirous to see what place
fortune had driven us to, and to know of the inhabitants in what Country we
were, after some repast on the shore, we left the rest of the ship, giving them
orders to stay our return. Not knowing what dangers might occur, we put on our
armor, and with Meador (my servant) passed into the Island: We intended not to
go far, because the evening approached, but entering a walk beset with green
fair-spread trees, by the side of a small clear rivulet, which with a gentle
murmur hasted into a bigger river, which carried it as a tribute to the Ocean,
we had passed farther then we were aware of, the pleasantness of the walk
stealing away our denotation of the time. The end of this walk conveyed us into
a most dilectable grove, in the which was the most pleasing walks that might
be, a place as we thought consecrated to Diana and her nimphs. But that which
made us wonder was, that in this pleasant Island, we could neither see man nor
beast, nor the ^oo^ing of any living creature, for which cause we gave it the
name of D^sola^^. Curiosity led us into this Grove, still filling us with
admiration that these pleasant should be uninhabited places, and the silence of
the place struck an awe upon our spirits, that we durst not communicate by the
ton^ue the cogitations which lay in our breasts, for fear of breaking a Law
which seemed to be imposed on those that entered, besides a Majesty accompanied
the place, which made us think it no less then sacred. We were now about to
return, finding it already night in that obumbrated place, when we found the
musings we had entertained had made us lose our Judgments for return, the path
that brought us into this Labyrinth could not be retrod, though searched by the
memory of us all, and the more we thought to extricate our selves, the more
were we entangled in this Dedalian Grove.

Seeing necessity caused our stay, and that our hopes for departure were
abolisht, we left retriving the path, to seek some convenient repose, hoping
the next Sun would accommodate us with light to find that which then we sought
in vain. I had many times pitched upon places for our repose, and as often
(through my unsettled thoughts) rejected them. Thinking to find some better
than the last I had pitched on, I made a further search into a place thicker
than all the rest; entering the place I espied a large Cave, the entrance being
paved with moss. This place I thought most convenient to shelter us from any
annoyance of the heavens. The entrance was impleat with a silent darkness, and
with a little descent; we went but few paces within the mouth least we might
precipitate our selves in that obscure place. We soon betook our selves to
enjoy that rest, which nature requires, and of which through our danger at sea,
we had been much deprived. Araterus and my servant had soon entered their living
death, whilst my agetating thoughts had kept open the windows of my senses.
But endeavoring to suppress the motions of my mind, I heard certain emotions
within the Cave, which gave a check to my thoughts and a stop to my desire of
sleep, and attending what might ensue, I perceived the noise to approach, and
suddenly felt some blows which I could not see acted, because of the obscurity
of the place. This engaged me to rise, and with my sword to defend my self, the
noise I made in striking (which light on nothing but the sides or ground of the
Cave) awaked Araterus, who half amazed, and discomposed at being so suddenly
awaked, had like to have offended me more then my unseen adversaries, for
hearing our blows, he engaged himself in the dark, and with a forcible blow a
little wounded my head, I made known to him his unseene perpetration, and
gained him to retire, leaving me to defend my self from the unseene blows of
my unknown adversaries. I wondered, when feeling their blows, they cut not, nor
struck as if in the hands of a weaponist, and so consusedly both behind and
before, as if I had dealt with many adversaries, that I knew not how to defend
my self, nor offend them, for my blows, though struck every way, could never be
fastened on any, besides none answering to my demands, made me begin to think
them some Phantasmes, or some unknown terene Deities which inhabited the
Island, these thoughts made me retire to the mouth of the Cave, and not being
pursued, I would not enter to disturb the sacred. Araterus had for the wound he
had given me, applied some drogue which he usually carried about him. After
this disturbance we took up our lodging at the very mouth of the Cave, and not
trusting to my imagination, one of us watched whilst the other slept, and in
this sort we spent the night. As Soon as the day began fairly to display it
self, we arose, and resolving to see whither my thoughts of those Phantasmes
were true conceptions, we entered the Cave, and the light demonstrated the
wounds I had given the earth where I had that strange combat.

But passing farther we came into a four quare room arched with stone, and in
the middle of it a Tomb, more fair then rich, with a certain inscription which
we could not understand, our perquestions could find no creature that might
give us any light into these novils, which made us depart, altogether
unsatisfied. It was not without trouble that we found the path which led us to
the place where we left our boat, but arriving there we found, that both the
ship and it were departed: we could not conjecture why they left us, except
they thought we were devoured by wild beasts or some other accident had happened
us because we stayed. We saw our case was desperate, in that we were left upon
an Island where we knew not that any came, except driven by the like chance as
our selves, and where was neither beasts, nor fruit that might serve for food,
unless some certain nuts which we espied in the Grove. But for that we saw no
help, we forced our selves to a generous patience, traversing the shore, if
happily we might see any vessel which might transport us thence. Two days and
two nights passed, and not the least hope appeared to our sight, the next day
wandering upon the sea with our eyes; we beheld something like a small boat
floating upon the sea, the calm which succeeded the last storm was great, but a
gentle Zepherus curling the face of the sea brought that which we had seen into
more perfect view, which then we saw to be a chest, which we judged to proceed
from some naufrage in this last storm. The wind and the gentle moving of the
water at last cast this chest on the shore, not far from the place where we
were, which moved us to see what it might contain, hoping to find something
that might preserve our lives, for the distress we were in for lack of food
made all our thoughts run on nothing else, but with some labor and difficulty
having gotten it out of the water, I lifted up the lid and beheld a sad object
of pity, which was a very young child in rich swaddling clothes, as I thought
dead, but at last I perceived it breath, and saw that sleep had only preserved
its life. The distress of this tender infant had utterly taken away the thought
of our own, and now our prayers and our tears called the gods to the help of
none but it. I took it up in my arms and saw it was a boy, which by the face
and the rich clothes which wrapped him, we judged to be the offspring of no mean
parents. I do not know I ever felt the like pity as then, to see a child
persecuted so soon, by the hand of fortune, and having run so great a danger at
sea, must also run the hazard of being starved on land. The lovely looks of
this tender infant, with the pretty smiles it made, caused so great a ruth in
my soul, that not enduring the sight of so pitiful an object, I closed it in
its tomb, I knew not how to preserve it alive, having no food to give it, or
our selves; therefore I thought it must inevitably perish.

The next day Araterus and Meador leaving me alone with the sea-preserved
infant, went into the grove to gather some Nuts which we had espied there, to
sustain us from perishing, and to preserve our lives for greater misfortunes.
Being alone I uttered my complaints and prayers to the gods to help us from
that desolate place, complaining on that constant inconstant Deity, attributing
our misfortune to her perpetration. and our preservation to the more merciful
gods. In the midst of my cogitations, that the share the gods had in my
preservation might appear, I espied a good tall ship pass not far from the
Island. I lost not the opportunity, but with a strained voice, and many signs
called them to my delivery; what with the one and with the other, they espied
me, presently I saw they made toward the Island, and filled their ship boat
with their armed men. I was about to implore their aid, but on a sudden they
let me know that they intended to force me to that which I had intended to
desire of them, and with their Arms and multitude made me their prisoner.
Indeed I had little mind to resist, being willing to be shifted from that
imminent danger I was then in, though I fell into another as great, I
endeavored to persuade them to stay for Araterus my Cozen, and to take that
booty too since they accounted me so, but nothing would prevail with those
unreasonable men, neither of entreaty, nor in pity, but left him exposed to an
unquestionable starving. I accounted this encounter rather for the sake of the
infant than of me, since I left there my heart, with my distressed Cozen of
whom afterward I never heard tidings. The Chest being greedily preserved out of
hope of Treasure (for their have gave them not liberty to look into it) was
carried with my self prisoner to their ship.

My eyes were still fixed on the shore, and no deportments could divert them
thence, till the ship wherein I was insensibly had carried me beyond the view
of that tristfull remembrancer, yet could it not depart me from that sorrow,
our unhappy disjunction had caused, and though I had lost the visible sight of
the Isle, yet my imagination represented me there, as a partaker of Araterus's
miseries. My musings at last were diverted, by the remembrance of the child,
whose safety consisted in my help, after they had seen that their prize was not
so considerable as expected, I persuaded the Chief with all the Oratory I had,
to let the Infant be preserved, whom the more cruel would have flung
overboard: what the floting-house could afford, I procured for the Infant,
though scarce fitting for so tender a Palate, but necessity constrained me to
administer such as I could get, and that with the gods help saved its life. We
had faild two days when we espied a tall ship before the wind, to whom these
Pirates that had made me Prisoner made up, thinking that she had been prize, but
they found this ship full of armed men that met them with so much resoluteness
they expected not, that they would have disingaged themselves, but could not;
we were at last after great slaughter of their men taken and made prisoners
anew, but as it happened to better Masters.

After they had discarded the Pirates vessel, I was made known to the Chief of
the other to be none of them, and had all the civility could be asked showed me
by that generous Chief, who at my request had a great care on the infant, I
with so much care regarded, having by so strange a fortune acquired it. I gave
him the knowledge of my name which is Euripedes, and of my adventure at the
dissolate Island, and asking so him what he knew of that place, he told me,
that he had no other knowledge than by relation from others, which was, that
many had endeavored to inhabit there, but were molested in the night with
apparitions of spirits, and with unsupportable blows were driven thence, the
cause (as he heard) was that a man who inhabited that Isle, being a famous
Druide, and having great knowledge in the infernal arts, after his death caused
these Phanta^ms to guard his body, which lies in a Sepulcher in a cave
compassed about with an intricate grove, and it is thought his Sarcophage
incloses great riches, which has caused many to adventure thither, but
returned well beaten, yet he hardly believed the report, till I had confirmed
him by relating what had happened to me there. The more we were acquainted, the
more grew our friendship, and the more I perceived his good disposition: I
found him to harbor not a seeming, but a true and generous amity, desiring
rather in deeds than in words to express his generosity. I found a great
relaxation in his conversation, and a sweet engagement in his communication, so
that being familiarly acquainted with him in some short time, he gave me an
account what he was, and of the enterprise he was then going about, which
because it is delightful, and that you have given your self up to hear these
stories of loves follies, I shall relate as near as I can to the form he gave
it me in. And that you may not think it strange that I should after so long
time remember these eveniments, you must know I had since my retirement
collected them into a book which thus imprints them in my mind: But thus he
began his History.

Fortune that fickle Goddess made me believe she had changed her nature, and
caused me to accuse those who called her inconstant, for as if in me only she
meant to be immutable, she balanced all things with a constant hand, neither
could I accuse her with the least mutability. She made me be born a Prince, so
bred me up, and (till of late) in all the course of my life gave me no cause to
complain. But when that I assured my self to be her fortunate darling, she
precipitated me from the top of her moving wheel, and conspiring with love to
ruin me, turned her smiles into frowns. But that you may know (went he on) how
she effected my precipitation, I must tell you, I am named Bruadenor, Prince of
the Veneti in Gaul, where with a prodigious constancy I had remained, till
Love first arrested me. One evening as I was walking by the side of a grove, I
had cast my eyes suddenly on an Object, which as suddenly surprised me, it was
a Lady of incomparable beauty, without any company, who with a sad aspect
seemed to rest her self under the tree's umbrage. This sight brought at first a
kind of shivering, but afterward a burning into my breast, so that I being
unacquainted with this disturbance, thought the Lady to be of the nature of the
Basilisk who delates her poison through the eyes. But though I felt my self
wounded by my sight, yet could I not withdraw my eyes from so lovely an object,
till I had discovered my self. I then rendering her the courtesies which
belonged to civility, made bold to enquire the cause of that sad and solitary
encounter in a place so dangerous and subject to rapines, with all offering her
my self and castle for her protection; She answered me, that solitude was
consonant to her desires, and that she had deserted others to be left alone.
But I still pressed her to accept of my protection and civility, giving her the
knowledge of whom I was, and using all the persuasive Arguments I was capable
of giving, which at last wrought upon her for an acceptance. Whilst with a
softly pace we moved toward my Castle: I told her that my desires were great
to know who she was, not so much out of curiosity, as to know if any way the
small power I had, could render me any way serviceable to her, manifesting by
many words the great desire I had to de her service. She answered me, that all
the services that could be rendered her, could do her no good, nothing but death
alone was able to help her, but she added, that hitherto she had found no
opportunity, though sought, to accomplish her desires, and that therefore she
expected nothing now, but a continuation of her miseries.

This pressed me to a further enquiry, to know the cause of this affliction
which thus depressed her, and though I uttered my inquisitions with many
circumlocutions, because I would not seem so boldly to intrude, yet she
perceived my desires, and to satisfy me, she said thus. Lest you should have
any sinister opinion of me, whereby you may stain my honor in your thoughts, I
shall freely declare who I am, and the occasion of my being unaccompanied,
although in so doing I shall discover the frailty and almost impudicity of my
actions constrained by a passion which some call Love. Before she proceeded I
beseecht her not to conceive me guilty of such a crime, as to think any thing
but virtue harbored in so delicate a vessel, protesting that my thoughts had
not had the least intimation of any thing, but what was agreeable to virtue and
honor. She replied how that it could not be termed a crime, if that I had
conceived any maleopinion of her, seeing that a just occasion had sprung from
her encounter, and seeing that I had rendered so great a testification of the
purity of my thoughts by my actions, she could not without running the hazard
of ingratitude, suffer me to remain in ignorance concerning her self, and as
with confidence she had trusted me with her honor, so without fear she might
relate the preceding actions of her life. After I had given her an assurance
of my fidelity both for the one as the other, she proceeded thus.

Love is a passion, which differently possesses souls, and with a different
fire consumes our vitals, if harbored in an immaculate breast, and reanswered
by the object beloved with as pure flames, there is no content, joy or
pleasure, like to the scorching influences proceeding from each other, whereby
they communicate the very essence of their love, with as pure breathings as the
sacred Deities; the thoughts of so great a happiness has often times carried me
into an ecstasy, what then would be the fruition? My desires have been as
chaste, and flames as pure, but that naked and blind deity has fatally crossed
me, which makes me love with so much anxiety and torment: For Love not
regarded, and not meeting with the desired flames, feeds on the life of the
Lover, and it may be has caused that Simile which compares love to the
continual feeding Eagle on the liver of Tityus, which renewing makes him suffer
continual unsufferable torment, so that the preeminency of pain may be ascribed
to it. We see that those who feel and suffer extreme pains to do and speak
that, which they would not, were they not in that pain-forced frency: So
oftentimes Lovers through the great vexation and anxiety which they feel
through the opposition of their Loves, do most extravagant actions, and women
sometimes vary beyond the pudicity of their sex. This I bring as a Prologue for
a favorable construction of those actions in my relation which may seem to pass
the bounds of womanly pudicity. But briefly (proceeded she) to give you an
account of my life it is this.

My name is Floria, and I am the sole daughter of the great Lord of the
Santones on the other side of the river Ligeris, where till Love oppressed me,
I lived with as great content as pleasure; but it fortuned that I was touched
with its dart, since which I never well enjoyed my liberty, but of late more
furious have been the assaults, the more they were despised by that cruel one
the cause of my misery. The Object of this passion (not to hide any thing from
you) is Subelta Lord of the Redones, one as valiant as cruel. We were
acquainted sometime before this Tyrant took possession of my soul, and by his
jovial Court-ship was I brought first to a likeing, and afterward to a violent
love, which forced me to express some small signs thereof, yet never
transgressing the Laws of modesty. He (cruel wretch!) soon perceived it, and
as soon slighted my innocent affections, oftentimes despising that company,
which before he had so much sought. He had no other reason for this but his own
opinion, which was he accounted it, an extreme folly for any to yield to so
sottish a passion as Love, openly despising and speaking scoffingly of that
Deity. In this budding of my Love happened that which might have deracinated it,
had it not been too deeply grounded, for my father being oppressed by Caelius a
Roman Captain, I was given to him to be sent to Rome as a hostage for my
fathers obedience. I must confess I parted not from my father with so much
regret as from Sub^l^a, and the thoughts for him made my journey unpleasant. I
was had to that stately City the Mistress of the Universe, and by Augustus I
was appointed to wait on Julia his daughter, a place nothing dishonorable. The
statelyness of the place, the pomp of the Court, the daily converse with the
great ones, and the tender of services could not divert the passions I retained
for Subelta. I rendered my self acceptable to Julia, and with my obedience
gained her good liking. But though I served her with all willing duty, yet she
observed a more than ordinary sadness still accompany me. One day she said
(thinking it was because I was given in hostage, and remained as a Captive)
that she had wondered at my sadness more than others, for she thought I had been
there long enough to forget my home, and that there were many of my condition,
who counted their exchange the happiest thing that could betide them, in coming
to a place where they might learn that which naturally they had not, leaving
their Barbarism for Civility, and but then living like humane Creatures, but
she said, if that it grieved me to serve her, she would release me, or if it
was because I remained in the condition of a slave, she would get Caesar to
free me, bidding me to tell her truly the cause of my trouble, and not to doubt
of her assistance. I seeing so great gentleness in the Princess, thanking the
gods for that occasion fell upon my knees, and not without tears told her that
it was not my captivity that caused my sadness, nor in that I was her servant,
which I accounted the greatest bliss, yet seeing she had charged me to let her
know the cause of my trouble I told her the truth. My words and my tears were
so effectual, that she told me, although she greatly desired my company, yet
she would rather show her affection in pleasuring me than in contenting her
self. I beseecht her not to oblige me with so many favors, for if she did, she
would cause me endure a perpetual misery in parting from so benign a Princess.
Within a short time after, she told me, she had gaind Caesar's leave for my
departure, on condition, my father would give him other hostages. I made no
question but to redeem me he would have given half his Signory. I sent him word
of Caesar's will, desiring him to festinate those who should supply my place: He
moved with a fatherly love, used such speed that they arrived at Rome before I
could expect them. Leaving those my father sent as a despositum for my fathers
faith, in my place. I with great celerity hastened from Rome, once more
visiting my native Country, but my chiefest joy was, that it harbored
ungrateful Subelta.

Many of my friends visited me after my return, and Subelta among the rest,
desiring to know the rarities of that stately place which I had deserted for
his sake. I quickly left others company to enjoy his, and no joy or content was
like to that when I thought I could pleasure him in my relations, of the City,
the Court, the polity of the Courtiers, the behavior of the Citizens, the
Royalty of Caesar, and the magnitude and statelyness of the City, Temples and
Palaces, spinning out my relations to lengthen the time, that I might enjoy his
presence. But this content that I gave my self, did but more ardently sufflate
that spark which remained in my breast, and inkindled a more violent flame,
which ever since has consumed my heart. That which tormented my soul was that
I saw he remained in his former obdurateness, and extremely slighted me, which
so pinched my heart, that it put me into a grievous sickness. She to whom I had
used to communicate my secrets, was ignorant of this, but perceiving something
besides a natural sickness, conjured me to let her know what I ailed. Hoping
the discovery might give some vent to my passions, I related to her (under the
seal of silence) the torments I endured. She comforted me, and to quiet me
promised much. But sickness increasing, I was forced to write to Subelia
declaring with as much modesty as sincerity, the great affliction I conceived
for those slightings he had made of my favors, and the true and affectionate
Love I bore him. To this Letter which was conveyed to him by one I could trust
with such a secret, he would return no answer, but a perverse obstinacy in his
slights. The relation of this had almost put a period to my life, and happy had
I been if it had been the last exigent thereof, but the gods have prolonged it
for future shame and miseries. I know not what Fate attends me, but all that
ever I could do, could not overcome a passion so firmly fixed in my mind, nor
all his slightings and contumelies lessen the immoderate affection I bore him;
so that the anxity of my mind, and indisposition of my body, bad so heightened
my disease, that every one looked for my death, and it was much wished for by
my self. But see the justice of the gods who heard my prayers, and avenged my
trouble, for whilst I thus languished, that deity whom he had so scossingly
derided struck him with a leaden Dart, and made him dote on Artesa, a great
man's daughter of the Santones, who as she was inferior to me in birth, so (by
others judgment) in beauty. Here he was repaid in his own coin, and as he had
dealt with me, she prompted by divine vengeance handled him. When I heard of
this vicissitude of fortune, my soul was mixed both with joy and grief. I
rejoiced that he might know what Love was, and that he might be sensible of
those torments he had caused me to endure; but I was troubled that he suffered
any pain, and that torment should touch the thing I Loved; for Love is of that
nature, that it cannot consent to see the object beloved to endure any
affliction, though it suffers by it the greatest despite. Had my love abated,
or had hatred possessed its place, then had I gone to have effected some
precipitation against him, and with vigor to avenge his injuries.

But I still persisted in my passion for him, though he persisted in his hatred
to me, but my sickness brought be at last to the very point of death, which
exigent something diminished those flames for Subelta, and by the pain and
torment I felt from the outward indisposition of my body, I thought them quite
exstinguished, so that helping to overcome my self, I banished him from my
thoughts, and sought to obliterate him within my breast, and at last I found a
great relaxation of my pain, for the cause being taken away, the effects soon
ceased. Recovering by little and little to the great joy of my father and
friends, and no less to my self in that I had shaken off so powerful an enemy
to my repose, I began to receive my former strength and to go abroad. I had no
sooner recovered that vigor which formerly accompanied me, but I began to feel
a little glowing and reviving of that fire. I thought had been extinguished,
which now I saw was but raked under the ashes, and at the least mention of his
name, it was ready to catch hold on something that would have annoyed my rest.

When I perceived the floods of sorrow had not quenched, nor my continual
torment extinguished that spark, which lay raked up in the ashes of silence, and
now began to be afflated by a new breath from Love, renewing my complaints I
gave my self up a sacrifice for his Altar, and in a short time that flagrant
spark enkindled by desire, possessed every corner of my heart with its ascending
flames, and this relapse came with a more violent motion than the first
assault; before with a tormented patience I sunk under the burden, and with a
contiual grief almost dispossessed my self of life, but now agitated by a more
violentick humor, I sought furibundously more assured precipitations. For as
the relapse is always more dangerous than the first falling into the disease,
so was this second passion more likely to overwhelm me. Seeing therefore an
assured torment, and a continual pain without the fruition of that, which I was
never like to enjoy, I contracted a resolution with my self, correspond to so
violent a passion, as well to free my self from misery, as to let Subelta see
how far the force of Love had carried me.

This determination passed not the portals of my lips, but with a new
resolution I desired to act this Tragedy in Subelta's presence, being thus
hurried along with these violent motions, I studied nothing but how to effect
my purposed precipitation; Hiding from my faithful servant the chief of my
purpose, with many words I told her the desire I had to see Subelta, whereby I
might give great ease to my perturbed breast, by pouring out those complaints
against him, which I had prepared for the like occasion, telling her that I
persuaded my self that (words being uttered from a passion so resenting, were
more powerful than dead letters) the effects would answer my hopes, but if it
wrought not on Subelta, yet it would be a great relaxation to my mind, in that
I had vented that which so much troubled my repose, hoping if that took no
effect, I might have power (seeing the impossibility, and his ingratitude) to
overcome my self, and to cede to the will of the gods. With other words
powerful enough to gain her to that which she hoped might conduce to my quiet,
I charmed her to my motion, and answered her to the objections she made
concerning the difficulty, and my honor. I had contrived before how to effect
my design, and to escape with a good color to save my reputation. I told her
how I would desire my father for my healths sake to convey me to a place where
I was brought up in my youth, and had took great delight in, hoping that the
change of the air might be a means to recover my health, and how that by the
way I would find means to get from those who should accompany me, and that at
my return I would contrive a story of my rape without mistrust. These things I
told her, and what Love had infused into me, or rather the great desire I had
to perpetrate that action I intended; so that seeing my resolutions were not to
be beaten off, she condescended to auxiliate me in my enterprise, not piercing
to the bottom of my design.

It now remained that my feigned desires were known to my father, which were as
soon granted as heard by him, little imagining my intentions. At last I was
sent to this place well accoutred, with a special guard to secure my person
from any rape, which were frequently committed by the Roman soldiers dispersed
through the Country. I knew it would be impossible to escape from the Castle
whither I was going, to go to Subelta; therefore as I had before concluded, in
our journey passing through a very thick wood we made an hal^, and letting my
Troop pass gently on, commanded none to stay with me but my confident, by which
means we had a fine opportunity to escape, which without their suspicion we
effected, directing our course a cross the wood, with such a speed as my desire
could wish, entering the most intricate places of the Wood, which being spacious
hid us from our searchers, and the obscurity of the night approaching gave us
more confidence in our clandestine slight. Having almost wearied our horses,
and our selves, not used to such hard service, we resolved to repose in some
convenient place in the Wood, imagining our selves far enough from our
Indagators, and espying a large Cave we resolved to lodge there. But Fortune
who pursued me faster then those who I know condol'd my loss, and as a
quick-sented blood-hound caught us when we least suspected, for not considering
the dangerous Animals which those spacious Woods harbored, we cast our selves
into the very lodging of a furious Lion: My maid was no sooner alighted then
assaulted, by the King of beasts, whose great strength so soon tare her weak
corpse, that she had no time to consider by what enemy she died. This miserable
spectacle, filled me with a grief unexpressable, which took away the sense of
my own danger, and as if I had been able to have revenged the death of that
miserable creature, upon that Robust animal, I drew out a dagger which I had
hid in my sleeve, to have effected a more bloody perpetration against my self,
and with that small vigor I possessed, flung it against the shaggy beast, which
being well cuspidated to facilitate my own ruin, made a small entrance into
his side, which so enraged this furious creature, that leaving the miserable
carcass, he made at me, who desired rather to perish than live in so much
misery. But my horse fearful of his approach, by running away saved my life
with its own, carrying me like a liveless statue upon his back, environed with
so much misery, that I thought death a sweeter companion. The night which was
fully entered into the dark shades of the wood, with the concussion of the
leavie boughs, and the ugly noise of those Nocturnal creatures, which echoed
through the Wood, and my solitude with the apprehension of the late bloody
spectacle I had beheld, cast me into so great an agony, heightened by the
frailty of my sex, that you may better imagine than I relate. My horse having
the liberty of his head, carried me all night up and down the Wood, not being
contradicted with the least check of the reine, so that in the morning (whose
approach had so often been wished for) I found my self on the outside of the
Wood, and happily meeting with a shepherd, I desired the liberty of his house,
to repose my perturbed mind, and rest my defatigated limbs, which hy the best
of metals I procured. The encounter of my thoughts disturbed the rest of my
body, and the agitation of mind took away the desire of sleep. But as the noise
of the waters lulls one to sleep, so the commotions of these inward billows at
last procured me a sweet oblivion, which yet was disturbed through the
injections of Morpheus, for I saw a great Cage with this inscription, Nec vi,
Nec Art, an Emblem surely of my future miseries, for by and by I saw my self
fast enclosed in it, and besieged with a great company of beasts, but at last,
I saw a man who came and cut off the head of the chief conductor of the
brutes, and dispersing the other, gave me liberty.

I know not (proceeded the fair FLORIA) whether this was any supernatural
representation from the gods, who often times forewarn us of our future
miseries, by manifest signs, were not our eyes sealed with disregard, or
whether it might be the operation of my affections, and obturbed thoughts,
representing those Ideas it had preconceiv'd, according to the distemper of the
natural body; or whether proceeding from the imagination, or the effects of the
suscitated vapors and humors, working upon the fancy, but when I awaked I
found it left greater impression in my mind than dreams ordinarily do. After
I had given some repose to my body, though little, through the discomposure of
my mind, I hired the shepherd to conduct me to Subelta's habitation,
disguising my self as well as I could, for the better security of my person.
After much travel I came to Condate, where I understood Subelta was in my
fathers country with Artesa. The indisposition of my body, weakened through the
assaults of my mind, rendered me unfit for travel, therefore, discharging the
shepherd, I remained sometime there, hoping Subelta's return would some way
terminate these discomposures. But stay being incompetable with my hasty
desires, I resolved to encounter him where he was, not considering into what
preciptation I ran my life and honor, for the one I cared not how soon I lost
it, but for the latter I should have had more regard. But having left Condate
in this precipitancy I would not return at my second thoughts, but proceeding
in this capricious journey, with a resolution to evolve my self out of this
labrinth of disquiets, by the fatal stroke of death, I have received some
comfort in that through a special providence of the gods I have met one to whom
with a confidence not usual I have made known my condition. And now (said she,
looking more steadfastly in my face, with eyes that penetrated to my heart, and
whose flames had already almost consumed it to ashes) you have heard without
any latitation of my defects, the whole scene of this sad interlude, whose last
act must complete my Tragedy, but could you but see the integrity of my heart
in these Caprichio's, with the strong influences that ascendant Love has
diffused on my soul, you will not altogether vituperate disconsolate Floria for
these inconsiderate and capricious actions. Here (went on Bruadenor) letting
her veil slide down over her face to hide those pearly drops, which the fire
of Love, through the declaration and consideration of her own case had
distilled, it seemed to me as the interposition of the earth between Sol and
bright Cinthia, whose umbrage casts so dark a vail; or as the Sun darkened
through the embraces or intervention of his less splendid sister.

Love exhibiting the beauty of her intellectuals, as well as that of her form,
by this time had taken a full and free possession of my soul, and had gained
the chief ascendancy over my heart, so that first giving way to some sighs I
said. Madam, Deserts are not always favored by fortune, neither is Love
always a pleasurer of the will, for if the gods cross our desires, we should
show our patience in bearing their afflictions, and more resolute are those
Lovers who evaporate the heat of their flames by sighs, and mittigate it with
the moisture of their tears, then those who lose patient of delays run
themselves into a thousand precipitations, for self-murder is not the mark of
a valiant person, but rather shows more cowardice, in that he dares not stand
out the battle with that which causes his desperation, but to avoid it gives
himself that which is not justifiable but by the hand of another. I cannot
blame you in that you Love, or that its vigor has caused you something to
transgress the Pudor of your sex, though your actions may be ill censured by
many tongues. But I cannot without admiration and astonishment consider the
obdurate heart of your despiser, and against him fulminate most just
increpations. Subelta has always been my enemy, and has sought occasions to
endamage me, but the considerations of these impudicities has rendered me his,
and if this honor may be given to your entertainer, as but to command him into
your service, you shall see how soon he shall be reduced to a more plyant
humor. To this Floria returned me an answer, full of mildness and affection,
not enduring to hear of Subelta's being reduced by any other means, than by the
relapse of his own will.

We were now come to the entrance of my Castle, which put a period to our
discourse, giving my thoughts liberty to study complacencies to cause her stay.
I rendered her into the hands of my mother, who knowing by me who she was,
cherisht her in the place of a daughter. The night being come we retired to
take our repose, but the agitation of my mind banished sleep his wonted
residence; for entering on a deep contemplation on the luster of those beauties,
which adorned the face and mind of Floria. I ran so far into a sea of thoughts,
that I could not reach the Haven of repose that night. This was a new world to
me, who resting before in the quietude of my mind, was diseased now with the
disturbances of Love. My mind unequally ballanc't, was tossed upon the waves of
my cogitations, sometimes entering the lists for Love, sometimes opposing it as
an adversary, wracked by torments and contrary thoughts I cry out. Ah
Bruadenor! must thou also be enumerated amongst those, who have listed
themselves under the extravagancies of Love? must thy folly be denoted? or is
it an inseparable accident to all mortals? is it not better to live free than a
captive? and to be a master than a slave? why then do thou debase that will,
which hitherto has been free, and make it become a slave to beauty? and to a
God that delights in tyranny, by these beginnings of thy disquiets thou
may judge the effects. Consider how many this passion has overthrown,
recount but the tragedies it has committed, and thou will find innumerable
examples of murder and rapine, nay she whom thou adorest, is so involved in
Love with another, that a door of hope is impossible to be opened unto thee;
unfortunate! take example by others, consider the precipitancies it has run
her into, and deracinate this folly, before thou have too much involved thy
self in this common error.

As if these words had given power to my will, I thought to have decussed this
troublesome passion, but whole troops of cogitations, conducted by Love, gave
these oppositions a most violent chocque, rebating their courage, he displayed
his banners, subjected my reason, and led captive my will, and with a voice
more beautiful to my ears, insuserrated these words.

Do thou think thy self more wise than the Ancients, who have honored me for
a suppressor of follies? and call those extravagant who list themselves under
my banner? Consider the innumerable follies attending upon youth, and consider
how regularly I marshall their exorbitant motions, and replenish them with many
excellent and commendable virtues. Neither count thou my captivity a slavery,
for though a bondage, yet full of sweet liberty, and though a prison, yet full
of freedom, where tyranny is not exercised but to the content of the lover. If
Mars have delighted in my thraldom, the muses have no less honored me, by
coronizing my head with a crown of flowers, acknowledging the Deity I possess,
the one in that I make the cowardliest valiant, and the timorous to atchieve
that which without my assistance he would have fainted to have thought on, the
other in that cropping the weeds of vice, I sow the seeds of virtue, and render
the heart susceptible to the dictates of knowledge. I have made the ignorant
become wise, and the learned infused with my spirit, render themselves as
mortal Deities, and will you call me extravagant, who am the author of all
science? Consider my power and not disabuse your self, for you are no more able
to redeem your self out of my captivity, than the Gally-slave to free himself
out of his chains.

In these violent contestations I spent the time that Sol resided in the other
Hemisphere, rising from my bed wholly captivated with the love of Floria. Love
now began to subtelize my grosser spirits, and infuse devices fitting for
Amoretta's. For knowing the irrecoverable loss I suffered if Floria departed,
I used all the eloquence and Rhetoric Love and passion could infuse, which so
far prevailed with the loved Floria, that she condescended to stay, and to let
me send one into her fathers country to learn their deportments at her loss,
as also to know the certainty of Subelta's being there.

A day or two passed, wherein I contemplated the beauty so despised by the
unhappy Subelta, unhappy in that he saw not his own happiness, finding no
delight but in her company and conversation, whilst she with continual showers
of darts from those sparkling eyes, more lively than the coruscing diamonds,
pierced my susceptible heart. I seemed not to live but in her sight, and I
joyed in no other company than hers, but I continually died when I considered
my miserable estate, and though the motions of my eyes might have discovered
the secrets of my heart, yet in her I perceived not the least regard. Oh the
pains! oh the anguish my soul felt, when I thought of discovering my mind to
her, fearing a killing repulse, and dreading the thunder of her anger, for a
true Lover continually lives in fear. But seeing she read not my mind by my
countenance, nor my eyes the true messengers of the heart, I resolved, having a
fit opportunity in being alone with her in a boury to explain my self, but as
often as I was about to begin, fear repulsed my determination, but at last with
a faultring tongue I emitted these words.

"Lady I have often heard of the wonderful and strange effects of Love, and the
power of its operation, but I could hardly give credit to those speeches,
because I never felt its flames, but being confirmed by your self with a more
powerful influence, I have quitted all pretentions to unbelief. And if it may
be inoffensive to your ears, and the boldness of your servant not suscitate
anger, let me tell you, that I not only believe but feel the power of that
powerful Deity. I may be well vanquished when the most powerful potentates are
subject to his yoke. Shall I say your beauty? your modesty, your chastity,
or your virtue has overcome me? one was enough I confess, but all assaulted
me, and have eternally captivated me. Think it not strange that I thus address
my self to you, knowing already how your affections stand; I do it not to ask
your love, for I am unworthie of it, but to crave your pity, in that you are
not ignorant of these torments. If you Love without hope of obtaining, I live
in despair of having. If you are tormented without regard, yet let not me feel
the same torments without your pity, for who can better Sympathize with the
grieved, than those who feel a coequal pain? you cannot be insensible of my
flames, if you weigh but the torments of your own. O happy Subelta! could
thou see thy own happiness, had thou eyes given thee to see the beauty that
loves thee, the chasti^y that follows thee, the virtue that desires thee, and
that person which is about to sacrifice her self unto thee. Unhappy Subelta!
unhappy in that thou rejectest one whose virtues equal thy vices, whose love
thy hatred, and whose passion thy disdain. Oh cruel! cruel to thy self! cruel
to others? Being hurried into this passion (said Bruadenor) remembering my self
I stopped and proceeded thus. "I hope you will pardon this excursion which
proceeds from a passion, that usually commits irregularities, I have no
better basis to found my hopes upon for your pardon than your own gentleness,
which if it contrary my expectations I must needs accompany you in your
precipitation, for I am not able to live tormented with disdain.

Whilst many suspirations, gave a period to my discourse, fixing her eyes upon
me which pierced my heart, she returned me this answer. "I marvel not at all at
your incredulity concerning Love, for none are able to imagine his power
without they feel it, nor believe the relation of others unless themselves
have experimented it; But I had rather you had remained in that condition than
feel it to your own sorrow. You know I have made you the depositary of my
secrets, and have trusted you with my life and honor. I hope my being in your
power will not give birth to any dishonorable suggestion; for be confident my
life which I brought to have sacrificed to love, shall be as freely violented
to save my honor. Were I capable to reanswer your love, these speeches might
be inoffensive, but you must take what I have spoken for a fable, if you think
I can hear them without disturbance. You say you crave nothing but pity, but
alas, alas! what good will that pity do which is not accompanied with help? If
I were capable to help you, I should pity you, pity you, I show I do pity you,
and desire your good by desireing and councelling you to subvert the structure
of this new love, before it be too fast settled, crop this bud before it
pullulate too far.

"Account me as a shadow, who am about to pass away, I am leaving not only you
but the whole world; what mean you to love that which is going hence? Your
courtefie has obliged my respect, but I shall injury you by my stay, if my
presence augment your flames. And doubt not, but if my presence have kindled a
fire, that my departure will leave water enough to quench the same.

These words (said Bruadenor) though they were a corasive to my heart, yet
pronounced with so sweet an accent, that it mitigated the sharpness of them,
and were as if vinegar and oil mixed together by love and anger had been given
me in a potion to drink. I had time but to tel^ her that she might assure her
self that my life should a thousand times depart my body before I would harbor
the least thought prejudiceable to her honor, and not correspondent to the
rules of virtue, when my mother entering the place where we were put a stop my
speeches and her return. The next day I presented my self armed in her
presence, and would not rise off my knees till she permitted me to go my self
to find out Subelta, and to be her Advocate, and that I might do some small
service for her as the mark of my growing affection, which yet had greater
regard to her safety than my own Love. I immediately departed, and to be the
less taken notice of, took no company but my Squire, and so went straight to
the Santons Country.

I traveled without any disturbance, till being almost at my jorneyes end very
early in the morning I met three men disguised with a woman behind one of them,
whom I judged by her tears and lamentations to beforceably born away by those
villainies. Though the number were unequal, and the danger I should incur to
oppose them, were enough to deter me, yet invited by the lacrymations of the
weaker sex, especially when espying me, she implored my assistance, I could do
no less than resolve to aid her, though it were to the hazard of my life.
Riding up to them I sought with gentle speeches to convince them of an error in
which they were resolved to persist. Bruadenor (says one of these disguished
ones who had the deplorable creature behind him) thou had more need use thy
tongue, to save thy self, than persuade us to leave this prize, thou art the
only man I desired to meet, to render this friend into thy bosom (drawing out
his Rapier) that thou may acknowledge thy error, when it is too late to
repent, the gods propitious to my designs, have put thee into my hands, from
which thou shall not so soon escape. Whilst he uttered those words with a
disagreeing tone I had time to draw my weapon, and his fellow-Camrades, to
disburden his horse of the Subject of our strife. We reiterated our blows with
forceable verberations, and with many endeavors wounded one another, at last
fortune sending a gentle aura upon my devoirs, with a vigorous thrust which
struck into his shoulder bone, I turned him over the crooper of his horse.
Whilst his body was precipitating to the earth, one of the other whose soul
possessed not the least spark of generosity, with a cowardly blow made me feel
the like fortune as my opposer. Enraged at this vile usage, receiving no wound
through the goodness of my armor under an upper coat, I soon recovered my
legs, and with a thrust passed the other off his horse, who had got the damsel
behind him, and before any of them could assail me, with a leap I ascended the
horse before her, making him show the nimbleness of his heels to my opposers.
He that had not lost his horse pursued me with the like velocity, till we had
lost the sight of the other two. Not enduring to fly before one, I let the
damsel reside the horse, and met my adversary in his carrere, where with many
thrusts we sought to end the quarrel by unmortallizing one another. Whilst we
pursued our advantages, the last man I had made to kiss the earth reincountred
me, both using the utmost of their skill to kill me, but their fury carrying
them without the guide of reason, made them disreguard all the rules of Art,
and gave me many advantages to annoy them. In the mean time he that received
the first fall, though wounded, had recovered his horse, and overtook us, but
leaving the other two to decide the quarrel, he seized upon the damsel who
stood quaking to see the event. Her screeks gave me notice of her Ravisher, and
turning my head aside, I saw, notwithstanding the struggling that affrighted one
maid, he had laid her before him upon his horse, and to be assured of his prey,
he made a forward fugacity. The desire that possessed me to rescue the damsel out
of that fugitive's tallents, gave me a vigor not ordinary, so that passing and
repassing my sword through one of my adversaries, I laid him on the earth to
breath his last, and the other fainting sunk from his horse. I made no stay,
but pursued the abacted damsel, quickly overtaking the Ravisher, being hindered
much by her striving, and the tardiness of his horse onerated with a double
burden. "Stay base villane (said I) thou art not so soon escaped the hands of
Justice, nor shall thy slight be able to hinder the just vengeance the heavens
will inflict upon thee, by my arm, for the wrong done to this damsel. I gave
him no liberty to reply, but adding more wounds to his former, I reduced him to
supply the defect of his vigor with his tears, and with a confession of the
injury done to the damsel to beg his life at my hands. After I had taken off
his disguisement, I was a little astonished to find it was Subelta, and straight
began a combat between passion and reason, whether to slay or save my
Antagonist, but having before freely given him his life, it would have been
incompetable with my honor to have required conditions, besides my interest
stopped my mouth from speaking for Floria, yet considering what anger it might
suscitate in her breast, I left him, and coming to the damsel, I desired her to
make use of me to conduct her to her habitation: She told me, the eternal
obligations with which I had bound her, were not to be solved with the services
of a thousand lives, and seeing that I would do her the honor to conduct her
home, her condition, with the desire she had to see my wounds cured, made her
accept it with an immense gratitude. I replied, The service I undertook, my
honor and compassion obliged me to, and that I looked for no other guerdion
for my pains than the knowledge how she came into the hands of those Ravishers.
After she had given me some direction which way I should take, I mounted her
behind me, and whilst we went forward, she said;

Of whom can we expect any worthy and generous actions but of those whose vigor
is accompanied with valor, whose valor with honor, and whose honor with
virtue? What glory is it to be strong and not valorous? what to be valorous and
not honorable? and honorable and not virtuous? therefore he is truly
courageous, he is truly valiant who is endued with these three. I have seen the
effects of your strength, I am freed by your valor, and have tasted the
goodness of your virtue, which extending to help the distressed is an act
worthy of perpetual fame. But not to fill your ears with my applause, I will
give you the account you desired.

My name is Artesa, I was born in this Country, and am daughter to a Lord of a
Castle not far distant, our usual abode is at a pleasant place, from whence
this night I was ravished, and where by a loss I doubt I am made perpetually
miserable, but when I am assured on it, my days shall terminate with its
knowledge. Tears (said Bruadenor) gushing from two limpid fountains, at the
remembrance of some past evenements, stopped the passage of her words, till two
or three forceable suspirations had reclear'd the way: then proceeding. I have
been (said she) so unhappy as to be loved by that unworthy one whom your valor
last overcame, whose name is Subelta Lord of the Redons, if Love can be said to
harbor in so Tyrannick a breast, or in one who has dealt so cruelly not only
by me that hates him, but by a Lady who has entirely loved him, as by his own
relation I understood. This Subelta being entertained at the Castle of the
Chief Lord of the Santons, his daughter, the fair Floria (so they called her at
Rome, which name she has since kept) fell in love with him. Unworthy wretch
dispising her Amoretta's and caresses he put her into an affliction, which
produced a sickness that almost cost her her life. He has often recounted to
me the joy he should conceive at her death, that he might be rid of an
importunate Suter, and has recited her endeavors, her caresses, and showen me
her letters, which though full of passion, yet also implete with modesty. I
have wondered when I saw so evidently her passion for him, that he should
despise her and accost me, who am far inferior in birth and beauty, and I ever
counseled him not to let her languish in despair, and forsake the substance
for the shadow, using all the persuasive arguments my weak Genius was capable
of. But as it is natural for us to despise what is profer'd, and crave what we
cannot obtain, so he left a beauty that accosted him, and sought to acquire me
who despised him. For having before given my heart to another, (though a
stranger, yet one whom I accounted worthy of my love) his allurements could not
incite me to relinquish him, nor the illectament of preferment, to be
perfideous to my pretendant. When I perceived, if his suit continued, it might
put me to much trouble, and if he intended what he said, he might, gaining my
father, force me to marry him. I treated him after a vigorous and rough manner,
which did but suscitate his ardour of obtaining. I cannot but think (went she
on) but that his passion was real, and imposed upon him by the just deityes for
his cruel disdain to Floria, for having recovered her sickness very lately, as
she was traveling through a large wood, she was strangely conveyed away with
her maid unknown to any of her company, which news so afflicted her father,
that he scarce could recover strength to live. At his command the wood was
thoroughly searched, and in their perquisition, they found some part of the body
of Floria's maid, and clothes which had been the relics of the feast of some
fierce animal. Thinking Floria her self had run the like fortune, they returned
with part of a cacrase miserably laniated, which spectacle with the
consideration of his daughters loss, had almost suffocated his vitals, and as
yet he remains in a languid condition, in consideration of her detriment. All
that knew her, or had but heard of her beauty or virtues, could not but resent
her disaster, and plunge themselves into the waves of a just sorrow, this
wretch excepted, who told me her misfortune with the Symptoms of Joy. This
caused me more than ever to hate him, seeing his inhumanity, and to show him a
more severer brow.

His haughty disposition not able to bear my deportments, He addressed himself
to my father, gaining him to make me his wife, if I would consent: As Soon as I
understood by my father how Subelta had dealt with him to have me, and that he
began to persuade me, I had no other way but with my tears to supplicate my
mother (who had a great ascendencie over my father) to frustrate the design of
Subelta, and not to force me by that marriage to end my days miserable. My
mother following my interests, obtained this boon at the hands of my father.
The next time he importuned my father concerning it, he told him if he could
gain my good will, his desires accorded with his request, but his indulgence
had made him promise, not to force me to any marriage. Subelta thought himself
highly affronted to be denied in that manner, yet hiding it what he could, he
sought to acquire me by the great protestations of his affections. But at last
his sight being as odious to me, as his company was troublesome, I let him know
in very sharp terms how much I hated him, bidding him never imagine or think of
obtaining me, for he should sooner bring the heavons and earth together than
obtain my love, commanding him to avoid my sight. This sudden mordacity st^^ted
my pretendant, rebating his love, it suscitated his passion, and with a
truculent countenance he told me, that ere long I should repent of my
peevishness, and be glad to accept of that honor which now I despised. In this
choler he left our house, threatening what he would do, but the joy for his
departure took away the regard of his threats. My Parents considering what an
irritated spirit might attempt, were something troubled at his deportments, and
blamed me for my temerity. I sent for him whose fidelity had attracted my
heart, to make him acquainted with Subelta's deportments, and to enjoy those
caresses which the company of Subelta had impedited. We met (when that silence
was spread through the earth, and the bright Goddess held the chief Regency) in
a little grove, into which a back door out of my Chamber opened.

We passed the time in those sweet caresses and pleasances that are enjoyed by
Lovers, and are delightful to those that are entered Loves pleasing bondage and
servitude. When the night began to wear out her sables, we parted, appointing
the time of our next meeting, which I believe was heard by Subetla, who I
suppose might be hid in the grove, and heard our discourses, for that when he
carried me away, he uttered some words which I spoke concerning him that night.
My thoughts are grounded on this, because this night which is past, being the
time I appointed my Confident to meet me, we had no sooner seated our selves in
the grove, but that Subelta, and the other two disguised entered upon us. I knew
Subelta by his voice, who gave no time for Phineriaz, (so is he termed) to draw
his weapon, but with his ready drawn, thrust it through his body. Seeing him
fall with a crimson stream slowing from his wound, I gave a sudden screek, and
swounded in Subelta's arms. In that condition they abrepted me, half an hour
expiring e're I came to my self again, but when I saw my self in his power whom
I hated, carried away from him whom I loved, I am not able to represent the
dolor of my soul, but at last breaking the bonds of my silence, "Wicked
Subelta! cruel Subelta! (said I) is this the effect of your passion? is this
the end of your oaths? is this the termination of your affections? is this love
that uses violence? Oh heavens pity my estate, and aid me against this
Ravisher! Who would have thought that this treachery could have been acted by
him, whom love (as he said) had attracted to my service, whom affection had
rendered a slave, and whom oaths had bound to use me with respect? Ah treachery!
ah falsehood! ah deceit! let not the words of men be credited! Let not this
force O Nemesis! pass without thy just resentment, let thy plagues pass upon
this Ravisher. And O Vitunus inspire a new soul into that muther'd creature
whom Love has exposed to this wretches villainy. Such exclamations as these I
uttered, grief making me incapable to know what I said, nor regard the
opprobrious speeches Subelta uttered. In this condition proceeded I with these
Ravishers till the just heavens helped me by your hands.

At the conclusion of these words said Brua^enor, we met certain Gentlemen who
were going to seek Artesa, but our encounter put an end to their trouble, and
returning together, we soon reached the place from whence she was carried,
where we met her Parents almost drowned in grief for her loss. The joy they
conceived at her return, gave them no leisure to consider me, till Artesa bid
them welcome, the happy instrument of her deliverance, pointing to me; then
turning to me, they rendered many expressions of thanks for what I had done, and
immediately applied things necessary to my wounds.

I remained with them some small time, being respected according to that great
service I had done them. Phineriaz remained in that house under the Surgions
hand, being very dan^erously wounded, but they hoped he would recover it. They
could not understand by him how he came so wounded, nor how he came there at
that time of the night. But I explained the doubt to Artesa's father,
representing the great love that was betwixt them, and so far prevailed with
him, that he consented to their marriage. This Artesa took as the highest piece
of service could be rendered her, and with innumerable thanks sought to express
it. Phineriaz conceived no less joy at the knowledge of it, which festinated
his recovery, and when I left them every thing was prepared for their Hymen.
As Soon as my wounds were healed, I urged my departure, telling them the
importunity of my business would admit me no delay. They sought on the other
side with all the words of invitation could possibly be rendered to keep me
there: And truly their affability and extaordinary Courtesy had gained so great
ascendancy over me, that it had detained me longer, had not the spur of love
pricked me forward, for my thoughts were on Floria, my care was for Floria, my
fears were for Floria, and all my imaginations were taken up in the
consideration of Floria, so that it was impossible for me to stay without
incurring some inconvenience by my passion. This broke all bands, and made me
force my way through their courtesies, for I knew not but Floria hearing of
Subelta's return might go to effect her resolved purpose, which thought made me
leave Artesa and the rest, loaded with their Courtises.

Love lent me wings to fly, and accelerated my jorney, whilst desire sent many
precursary thoughts to visit Floria, and at last I arrived where long before my
imganition had carried me. I soon gave an account to my Goddess of all my past
evenements, which I perceived she heard with some content, although she could
not but resent the Joy Subelta conceived at her death, and thereby she
perceived that the unmortalizing her self before him would work no remorse in
his conscience. I saw the excited passion in her breast, and conceiving whence
it was suscitated, I aggravated their circumstances, knowing it made well for
my interests, and the effect answered my expectations, for it shook the
foundations of her Love to Subelta, and rendered me more acceptable in her sight.

In the mean time Subelta enraged at the death of one of his companions, who
was a kinsman of his, and at his evil fortune, having recovered those wounds
which he received at my hands: he raised a band of men, and began to invade
some places under my jurisdiction. I soon heard of his practices, and for my
security began to raise some men for my defense, but he so vigorously
proceeded, that he had taken many places ere I could come to oppose him, and
arrogantly in the hearing of most of his followers, had vowed my utter
destruction: at last with those whom I had hastily gathered together I gave him
battle, and by the disfavour of fortune lost most of my men with the victory.
This loss hightned the arrogance of my enemy, who following his good success,
won almost all the places of strength from me, and followed me so close, that I
could hardly remuster the dispersed, and fill up the bands with more men, but
at last I had gained a considerable body, and was resolved once more to try the
hazard of a battle. Floria hearing what passed, though she had attenuated her
passion for Subelta, sent him a very kind Letter, desiring him to desist, and
not to prosecute me so vigorously when I had saved his life. Subelta sent her
an answer by the same messenger (which she showed me) wherein he told her, that
the joy he had conceived at his thinking her dead was converted into sorrow at
the knowledge of her being alive, and that because she had mentioned, she
desired no longer to live, he would become her executioner to rid himself of
such a plague, and that because she had desired him to desist from injuring me,
he would double his fury to annoy me and utterly to ^brute us both. I was
amazed (said Bruadenor) at the impudency of this man, and it suscitated an
extraordinary passion of revenge in my breast, hearing the vile speeches his
Letter was farced with. But I may bless that Letter, seeing it was the cause
that Floria withdrew her love from him, for it excited a generous indignation
in her gentle breast, and at length caused her to see the unworthiness of the
object she had loved, and to consider me in her thoughts. "Why have I loved
Subelta (says Floria) with so much fervency, seeing he despises me? why have I
loved him with so much verity, seeing he despises me? well I will disregard
him, and shake off that love which has caused me so much torment, seeing the
gods have given me power to do it. And let me add (said I) and regard him who
loves with so much passion. The smile which she sweetly made showed she was
nothing displeased at my words, which gave me great content, and in my heart I
pardoned Subelta all the injury I had conceived against him, seeing this
opprobrity had been the cause of my felicity.

The time that I remained in the Castle with her I improved to my best
advantage, and before I returned to the camp, she assured me she had no more
thoughts for Subelta, biding me to use my best endeavors to overcome my
enemy, and to free my self from trouble, and if it lay in her power to
pleasure me, I should not fear her performance. This transported me beyond my
self, and you may be sure I rendered her thousands of thanks for her benignity,
and assurances of my Loyalty, which induced her to tell me I held the place of
Subelta, and that my troubles ended she would accomplish my desires. The vigor
wherewith these speeches imbued my soul, carried me with an ardent desire of
fighting to the Camp, where convocating my troops I animated them with my
speeches, begetting as great a desire of fighting in them, as I retained in my
self, so that not staying for some auxiliaries we rashly encountered our
enemies, whose number far exceeded ours. My example made many cowards valiant,
and animated those who had any spark of courage in their souls; for Love
imbuing me with a kind of military Frenzy, I so much passed my common vigor,
that I wondered at my own actions, and stood amazed at my own force, in every
place where I went I laid rampiars of dead carcases about me, I often called
Subelta by name, but could never find him, for I believe he shunned incountring
me at that time. Nevertheless my valor could not gain the victory though it a
long time hindered them from it, for being overpowered we were carried down with
the impetuosity of their arms, and the magnanimity of my men choosing ^ather
dying to light, than to she dyin, made it bloody on both sides, but at last
being reduced almost to nothin^, and compassed in on every side, we were fain
through the utmost of our strength to force our way through the thickest of
their Troops, escaping through the favor of the approaching night. I could
impute the loss o^ this victory to nothing but my own temerity in not staying
for those approaching forces, who ignorant of our encounter, fell into their
hands and were all dispersed. Seeing my self brought to this calamity,
despair and shame had almost made me to destroy that life, which the force of
all my enemies could not take away. Having lost the victory, I could not have
the confidence to invisage Floria, which made me I would not put my self into
the Castle, but sent those few which remained to secure it from the attempts of
Subelta, knowing its strength to be such, that if their provision lasted, all
the power of Subelta could never atchieve it. I sent a Letter to my mother, and
to the chief of those who were in the Castle, how they should hold it to the
very uttermost against Subelta's force, whilst I went to get aid for their
releasment. Subelta was forced to send for men, his loss was so considerable in
our last depraeliation, before he could besiege the Castle, so that they
fortified it with men, and pretty well stored it with provision before he came
to besiege them. In the mean time I sought the Romans to help me against my
adversary, who giving me good words, filled me with vain hopes, and made me
spend my time when they intended nothing less. One who was considerable
amongst them taking pity on me told me that it would be a folly to attend
their succors, for that they did not intend in verity to help me, advising me
if in any other place I thought I could have help, I should not lose my time in
seeking help of them. Perceiving the integrity of the man, I followed his
council, and regretting their proceedings, I left them, being necessitated to
take shiping, and repair to Africa, where I had an uncle who had great command
under the Romans, he with great speed manned four good ships, both with Romans
and Barbarians: giving me the conduct, I once more went to try the favor of
fortune. We were no sooner engaged in the Ocean, but that impetuous storm
(which cast you on the Desolate Island) severed us, and as if Fortune had swore
my overthrow, with imminent danger hurried us along this vast sea. What is
become of the other ships I know not, but the storm passed, we endeavored to
proceed, when meeting with the Pyrat I had the honor to free you, and to
engage you on my behalf.

Having heard this narration from the Gaul (went on Euripedes) I assured him my
devoirs should be to do him service, and to resettle him in his former state.
He seemed very joyful of my company, and told me his hopes were increased since
I had undertook to help him, and that the gods had pre-ordain'd me to be the
instrument of all his happiness. Greatly contented with this Gauls company, I
passed my time upon the waters, and our ship without any opposition glided over
those deeps. At last we passed by the mouth of the river Ligeris, and put in
upon the coasts of the Veneti, whereof Bruadenor was Lord. Here we found the
ships he had spoken of arrived two or three days before us, and were in great
perplexity for Bruadenor, seeing after so impetuous a storm they had so happily
met, they raised a hope for their future fortunes, and with great alacrity
began their enterprise.

Whilst Bruadenor mustred his men, and gave order for his intendments, I sought
a nurse for the infant Fortune had cast into my hands, that being ^id of that
nursery, I might the better employ my endeavors to his help. I soon found a
woman whose child was newly interred, with whom I left the child and money for
her pains, I reserved a little bracelet which surrounded the child's neck, in
which was a remarkable stone, hoping by that (if fortune cast me into their
company) to find out the parents of the child, I gave the woman charge to call
the child Marinus, which she promised to do, and to take him into the place of
her own. Bruadenor having understood by his scouts that the next day Subelta
resolved to give an assault to the Castle, not as yet understanding of his
arrival, he desired not to lose that opportunity of assailing him in the midst
of his dispute. For this end we marched all night in by-places, through the
help of certain guides, so secretly that it was not known to Subelta, for
those we met we took along with us, that they might not discover us. By day
break we came within the sight of the Castle and of our enemies, the morning we
spent in sleep to rest our wearied limbs to be the better able to perform our
Devoirs, being hid from the sight of our enemies by the umbrage of a Wood.

As Soon as Subelta had begun the assault with much vigor, we attended till they
had spent their chief strength against the walls, and the defendants, letting
them persist till they had thoroughly wearied themselves; we remained
spectators. But seeing a gate in danger to be lost by the continual pressure of
Subelta, who was signalized from the rest, we gave a sign to our Troops, and
all together like an impetuous stream came rushing upon the backs of these
assailants. You may imagine whether our unexpected coming did not amaze our
enemies, and give no less courage to the besieged, seeing succor arrived when
they least expected it. The greatness of our slaughter augmented their
amatement, and by a sudden vicissitude made them relinquish being assailants,
and become defendants. Victory was already seated on our side, and we fought
with the greater animosity seeing her on our side. Bruadenor performed wonders
seeing the battlements of the Castle graced with his Floria, who with the rest
of her sex were mounted the Tarasses to behold the performances of this help.
Fear began to scare Subelta's soul, and he manifested his fear by his retreat,
for being pressed on all sides they made use of their legs to save their lives.
But those within the Castle issuing out, we made a general slaughter, Bruadenor
seeking for Subelta, with his own hands ended his Tragedy.

Floria having exterminated Subelta the confines her heart, found no intestine
motions at the sight of his death, but giving a good reception to his
conqueror, manifested the content she received by her liberty. They honored me
by taking notice of the small service I had done them, and were careful to
dress some wounds which I had received in the conflict. After their mutual
congratulations Bruadenor returned to give order for to sepulize the dead, and
to festinate some troops who were going to reduce those places which Subelta
had taken, which in short time they effected, reducing his Signiory to his
pristine state. Having enjoyed some time the conversation of Floria, I
considered Bruadenor had not reported amiss of her beauty, nor was the beauty
of her wit less graceful than that of her face. I who till then had considered
women with a constant eye, never saw attractions in any face which had power to
raise commotions in my heart, (and whilst I enjoyed that happy liberty, I
breathed in the air of felicity, but after Love had rendered my heart
susceptable of his impressions, I found my self bound with the chains of
captivity) now perceived by some instinct in nature they were made desirable to
men. I had considered them as shadows, not so much as desiring, (but rather
shunning) their conversation, admiring at those men, who bewitched with their
attractions, gave them the encomiums of Deities. The conversation of Floria
abolisht those thoughts, not that I had any desire or thoughts for her more
than any other, but that as praelibations they rendered my heart susceptible for
greater flames, and took off the precogitated opinion of the indignity of their
sex. That little tyrant of hearts was now resolved to plague me for my
contumacy, and as I had accounted them as shadows, to make me love the shadows
of them, and because I had disregarded beauty, beauty should cause my
disregard. For one day in viewing the several rooms in the Castle which till
then I had not seen, I beheld the effigies of a Lady which hung for an ornament
in a very fair chamber. The painter to show the rareness of his skill, had
with his art so ^ively imitated nature, that had not the frame discovered my
error, I had took it for a true substance. The skilful pencil of the workman
had given such lively dashes to the eyes, and so sweet a frame to the mouth,
that the one seemed vivacitly to move, whilst the other att^acted the eyes with
a sweet subrision, her hair tied up with azure knots seemed nets to catch
love-despising fouls, the structure of that beautiful face was supported with a
neck whose alabaster resemblance exhibited no less suavity; but the exhibition
of two fair orbs, which were but half ^i^covered, gave more attractions than my
averse humor could resist. It was very strange to me that the eyes of an
inanimate portraiture should beget ^uch lively sparks in my obdu^ate breast,
and that a shadow should show more attractions than I had observed in any
substance. In my heart (I must confess) I called my self fool, for those
emotions which I felt producted by those lovely and lively looks, because it
was but a shadow, and it may be delineated from the fancy of some painter, to
show the rarity of his Graphical art. I had lost my self in the contemplation
of it, had not Bruad^nor asked me if it were not well done: seeing they took
notice of my observance. I highly praised the piece according as it deserved;
And taking hold on that opportunity, I told them I took great delight in good
pictures, which made me take the boldness as to entreat them to let it adorn
my chamber whilst I was with them. My entreaties and their grants were all one,
so that it was immediately transported to my chamber. I forgot not to ask them
whether it was the portraiture of any living and of whom. Bruadenor told me he
had bought it of a famous Apellean, and that it was the true and lively
effigies of Amenia, daughter to Lilibilis, the chief Ruler over the Austures:
adding that her beauty had tempted many Romans, but her hatred to that nation
would not let her condescend to marry any of them, so that as yet she remained
in her Virgin state. This added fuel to my fire, and suscitated more ardent
flames for the invisaging this princess. Finding a pleasant titillation in
these thoughts, I began to have a more plausible opinion of the Amorous Deity,
and giving scope to my thoughts, I permitted them to wander into the Wantons
labyrinth.

At the first exhibition of an opportunity I relinquisht the company of
Brua^enor and Floria, that I might with more freedom contemplate the beauty of
Amenia's picture. Having included my self in my chamber, I set that bewitching
effigies before me, and with profound considerations beheld all its lineaments.
Breaking out in the midst of my silent cogitations, "Ah beauty! (said I) is it
possible to resist thy attraction? or to shut our eyes against so fair an
object? Can thy venust exhibitions be seen by any, without passion for thy
possession? I have been too grand an enemy against your Sovereignty; but to
expiate that crime I will become as much a slave to your greatness. A desirable
object! who cannot but adore those lily-intermixed Roses, which expand
themselves on thy cheeks? and consider the motion of those bright twinklers in
the Astrolabe of a subjected mind? which casts as great an influence on the
heart of a lover as the celestial bodies do on terrene substances. Many such
ejections were emitted, whilst my thoughts were extended on the object, and
whilst my considerations lasted, that Amorous fire burnt my soul, and deeply
insculpted the character of Amenia on my heart. Thus whilst love conquered, my
liberty was orewhelm'd, and I ran into the foulness of love, through the
fairness of a picture, and so far introducted through the considerations of
that effigies, that it was impossible for me to return into the state I was in,
before I saw it. I lost many hours, and I spent much time in viewing and
reviewing that delectable object, and I spent much time in viewing and
reviewing that delectable object, and truly I made it my daily exercise whilst
I was there, sometimes silently to behold it, sometimes passionately to basiate
those Rubric corals which gave so many bewitching attractions, and gave me
singular delight in those cold exosculations: sometimes as if I had been
infatuated, I made very foolish and impertinent speeches to those surded ears,
with as much care as if before the substance of that shadow. It shames me since
to remember my follies, and it would shame me more to relate them, had I not
undertaken to show my extravagancies that you may see the folly of these insuls
Amoretta's.

But to abbreviate the relations of these follies, I shall only tell you that
my soul was so imbrued with that foolishly foolish Love as I was resolved to
depart into Spain, to see the substance, of what I had seen in shadow, for
having so much liked the shadow, I should much more like the substance, but
most of all, could the love of that substance be acquired. The great
demonstrations of Love, which was shown me by Bruadenor and Floria, and their
ingeminated entreaties to have me at their Hymen was my only Remora: for the
Loves of Bruadenor and Floria being come to a fair issue they contracted
themselves, and resolved with all speed to celebrate their marriage. Bruadenor
having sent to Floria's father to acquaint him with the welfare of his
daughter, and of her great desire he should accord to her choice, the men
returned with Letters from him, which testified his exceeding joy that his
daughter was not only alive, but had made choice of one, who in all things
surmounted his wishes, assuring them his desires corresponded with theirs, and
had not his age, with fear of disturbancies amongst his people in his absence
deterred him, he had personally showed the joy he conceived at the match in the
place where they celebrated their Hymen; Sending to them both many, rich and
costly presents, to testify the good will he bore Bruadenor. You may conceive
what joyful news this was to the hearts of these two lovers, who desired
nothing more than the fruition of their nuptial pleasures, which made them
accelerate their Epithalamy, and that it might be more celebrious we removed to
Vindana, the chief Town in his Signorie. I was fain to forgo that delectable
object which had entertained my eyes, and pleased my fancy, not having
confidence to request its removal least it might too perspicuously manifest my
folly, and it was well reason was not utterly abandoned, considering how deeply
I had precipitated my self. I left it with regret enough, and parting from it I
gave it thousands of deosculations. Whilst we remained in Vindana preparing for
Bruadenor and Floria's Himenean triumph, some men whom I had sent to fetch
Araterus from the Desolate Island returned, but with no news of him. At first I
was sensible of his loss, but Love being like the soporiferous Opium, caused
so great Lethefaction, that I retained nothing in my memory, but the infarsings
of Love. As Opium causes stupifaction by the abundance of sulphurous spirits
which it contains, so that agitating fire of Love, causes oblivion through the
intense operation of the faculties of the soul. I might compare my self then to
a full vessel, which could not receive any thing because of its plenitude, for
having imbibed the delicious draughts of the Dionean youth, it so filled my
soul that I was not capable to receive any thing else; so that I could not
conceive much sorrow for the loss of Araterus at that time.

Vindana was now full of many people who were congregated, some to behold, and
others to help at the nuptials, and the day being come, a great deal of pomp
was shown, which was not usual with those (whom the Romans call Barbarians)
before their conversation amongst them. After the Ceremonies used according to
the fashion of the Romans (to whom Bruadenor was a great friend) many being
present, and assistants at the Spousals, made the streets echo Tallassius.
After a very sumptuous feast, wherein Bruad^nor showed his liberality, every
one repaired to a place without the town where Bruadenor had caused many solemn
plays to be exhibited; The Romans being expert in those sports, showed
wondrous activity in their deportments, both at the races on foot and
horseback, and with Chariots, and at their fighting with whirlbats, and at
their disgladiateing combats, at all which exercises I was expert in my youth,
and therefore I appeared amongst the rest, gaining the honor of the best
maintainer of the Hastick sport, and casting of the dart, for which they
empaled my brows with the wreathed Palm.

When man has lost the freedom of his Will, by the captivity of love, how
different are his actions from those, before his soul was imbued with that
self-distracting fancy? Being in freedom, he has the liberty to consider
things without passion to see another look on the same beauty with himself
without envy, and thought of rival-ship, to deport himself with great
correspondency to all, to have consideration in his achievements, and Reason
accompanying all his actions. But the seen being altered by Love, his
precipitating affection suscitates such passion, that he is not able to
consider things as they are, nor see another view that object in which Love
interests him without envy, passion, and trouble; making him deport himself
with great incongruity to others, and to fling himself inconsiderately into
dangerous precipies, banishing Reason from all his actions. In the one state he
is a Prince, in the other a slave, in the one he rules his affections, and
masters his passions, in the other his affections guides him, and his passion
subdues him, being carried down the violent stream of his desires full of
blindness. I speak this (went he on) because I had (before my lovefollies)
judged those whose Amors had carried them into the like extravagances, and now
I judge my self to be most egregiously foolish in many unadvised actions. But
this happened (which I am about to tell you) which manifested my folly. A little
before night there came into the place where these shows were exhibited, a
Roman Captain, who had caused Amenia's picture to be painted on his Buckler.
As Soon as I had cast my eye upon it, I knew the portraiture, by the resemblance
it had to that which I had seen in Bruadenors Castle. Love filled me with
jealousies, and jealousies with envy, so that I found a great combustion within
me at the sight of this simulacre. I immediately took him for my Rival, and
that s^in'd up a desire of obtaining that sheld, wherein I thought I might
greatly content my self in having that precious object always with me. These
cogitations suscitated a desire of g^tting, but considered not the danger of
atchieving: But Love that animates the heart to any bold action, made me
resolve to attacque him, and how dear so ever it cost me to obtain it. Whilst I
entertained many projects for the obtaining of my desire, I perceived him to
leave the company, and to ride away, marking the way he rode, I abruptly left
Bruadenor, and taking one of his Coursers followed him with speed. As Soon as I
had overtaken him, I asked him whether that beauty was exposed to sale, seeing
he so openly exhibited it to vulgar eyes. This Quirinan suddenly answered, that
the purchase was the last drop of blood that could be extracted from the
desirer. I replied that so exquisite a beauty deserved no less, however I told
him, if he would give it me as a gift, I would gratify him with all the power
I was able, if not, I was resolved to expose my life for the obtaining of it,
and that I had purposely followed him for that end. I am not (re^lyed he)
unwilling to hazard my life in the defense of this effigies, and shall more
willingly sacrifice it, than cede to your unjust pretensions. Our swords were
immediately unsheathed, and our words were turned to blows, his in the just
defense of his own; mine in the unjust prosecuting my desires, I sought by
offending illegally to take away his right, he sought by defending legally to
keep his own; he showed valor by defending, I cowardice by attempting. It
shamed me to think that I, who should (following the precepts of virtue) have
spent the utmost of my vigor in maintaining Legality, should (following the
dictates of vice) spend the utmost of my strength in performing an illegal
action. This consideration somewhat rebated the edge of my fury, with his
exposing that effigies against the edge of my sword, which like a Medusa's head
stifned my arm; so that I had not power to hurt my adversary for fear of
impairing, or hurting that Image; such absurd ceremonies had that infatuating
Love imposed upon me, as to observe so much reverence to a shadow, to the
imminent danger of my life.

We were but in the praeludium of our combat, when there arrived a Gaul, whole
valor against the Romans was well known. This Gaul had received some disgrace
by me in the exercises that day, which it seems had stirred up a revenge, and
for that cause he had watched my actions for an opportunity of effecting it. He
took notice of my departure, and therefore followed me, but finding me already
engaged, he harbored not so much of the Coward, as to help my adversary, nor
yet could his eager revenge be content another should punish me. Coming near us
he drew his sword, and directing his speech to my adversary, Remit this combat
(said he) and be a Spectator a while, and you shall see your enemy punished
without your pains, for your pretensions nor desires can be so great as mine to
fight this opposer. Whatsoever your pretentions or desires are (replied the
Roman) I think my self able to afflict a punishment on him as your self, nor
will I be so much a Coward to leave a combat begun, and see another finish it,
if I have the fortune to slay him, you may be satisfied, if he kills me you may
then encounter him. The Gauls hatred to the Romans was the cause he was so
extraordinary moved, for very furiously both with words and blows he replied,
Seeing with a fair remittance you will not give me leave to fight another,
being both enemies a like to me, I will attacque you both. The thunder of his
blows took away the sound of the rest of his words, and engaged us both to a
discreet defense against so sudden an assault, for sometimes he spent his vigor
on the Roman, and sometimes I sustained the fury of his strooks. I unwilling to
give over my first combatant, sometimes gave him many reiterated strooks, and
sometimes to oppose the Gauls fury, I was fain to deal my blows upon him. The
Roman sometimes opposed the Gaul, and sometimes requited me with the like I
gave. In this confused strife each had two adversaries, and peril attended our
promiscuous encounter, for the rules of art could not be displayed in that
confusion. We had all of us received some wounds, and were very hot in
receiving and giving of more, when Bruadenor ariv'd with three or four
Gentlemen with him, who having missed me, and by enquiry understood of my
departure, imagined some duel, and being very careful of my welfare, he came
himself to seek me: As he arrived, I had dismounted the Roman, and seizing on
his buckler, I rent it from his arm: having the possession of it, I affresh
opposed the Gaul, but Bruadenor's arrival put a period to our treble encounter.
The nights sable mantles beginning to display themselves, caused us to retreat,
and leave my Contenders there, having first understood of the Gaul wherein I
had offended him; I showed Bruadenor the cause and manner of our sight, yet so
that he understood not the great affection I bore to Amenia, or of my folly in
getting the shield.

My noble entertainer as soon as we were returned had regard to my wounds which
were inconsiderable, and could not detian me from exercising my self in those
masks which were performed that night, and which detered Bruadenor those wished
pleasures till almost morning, but the better part of the next day made him
amends for the nights injury. These nuptial joys being finished, and Bruadenor
about to return to his Castle with his Floria, I renewed my suit for my
departure, desiring him not to deter me any longer with his entreaties. The
regret he showed for my departure manifested the love he bore me, but seeing it
was impossible to keep me any longer, he was constrained to submit to this
severation. He supplied my want of a Horse with one of the best he had: and for
my better defense made me clothe my self with some of his surest harness. I had
a thousand Eulogies bestowed upon me by this kind friend and his fair bride,
who distilled some pearly tears at my departure. After I had left them, I
directed my course toward Spain; Amenia's beauty having the Magnetic virtue
of attraction, for she was the Pole Star to which I turned. It was now the
midst of Summer, and Titans Aethon gave his greatest ardout, so that I much
frequented the shades, and made my jorney through the thickest woods, being
glad of the benefit of the shadow-casting trees. I had passed two days in my
journey without any adventure, but the third being entered a wood, whose umbrage
gave some refrigeration, I slackned my pace, and seeing a fair tree, whose
branches being spread with broad leaves, and so thick that it denied entrance
to Phoebus, made an opacous dormitory on the verdant grass; Being invited by
some desire of rest, I descended my horse, and tying him to a shrub, gave him
the liberty to crop the grass, whilst sleepy Somnus cast me into a repose. I
had not slept long under those cooling shades, but the sudden neying of my
horse awaked me, doing me a greater pleasure then that of Dariu's did him when
he was chosen King, for I found the naked sword of my irritated Roman ready to
light upon my undefended head. Fear of so sudden danger made me forget my
wonted ceremonies, for I was forced to take my adored buckler, and hide my head
which sustained the blow, that else had perpetrated my life. I gave him no time
to strike a second, but rising with that agility which my present danger
required, I immediately drew for my defense. "Coward (said I) unworthy the name
of a Roman, I had not thought thy degenerated soul would have done so base an
action, but thy pusillanimous heart feared to see me waking. He answered not
but with his blows, whilst I gave him more than he desired, my extreme anger at
the baseness of his action made me do my best to kill him: his skill had not
saved his life, nor had my passion spared it, had he not (being brought to the
last exigent) begged it with many words. I was ever apt to forgive, and letting
him rise, I told him the consequencies of such treacherous actions were always
contempt, infamy, scorn, disregard, and revenge both from gods and men, on such
as use them. He told me how persevering he had been in watching for such an
opportunity, having vowed to sacrifice my life to his just resentments, but he
then swore never to seek my hurt any more, forgiving the injury I had done him
in taking away his shield, being I had spared his life.

This evenement being past, I prosecuted my journey, and at last without any
other adventure worth our observance, I drew near Spain. I presently heard of
the war that was made against the Austurians, Cantabrians and Gallicians which
made me hasten my jorney, desiring to help them for Amenia's sake. For a more
speedy passage, I cast my self into the arms of the sea, and with prosperous
gales arrived amongst the Austures. I hasted to Austurica hoping to gain a
sight of that fair one whose* shadow had already made me her captive. Enquiring
for Lilibilis I understood he was then in Austurica, intending with all speed
to appear at the Randezvouze with some auxiliary troops that he had raised.
This Lilibilis was a valiant person, and honest enough, only he loved to rob,
and spoil his Neighbors with war, which was the general fault of those
Lusitanians, but now joined together against the Romans. I resolved to
prosecute my intendments, and as soon as I came to Austurica I enquired for
Lilibilis, and being brought before him, "I told him the great desire I had to
do him service in those wars had brought me to Austurica; and how that I
accounted it as great a glory to oppose the rising power of the Romans, as I
should have accounted it a shame for me to have opposed them in the defense of
their just liberties. I said I was a stranger, and interess'd in neither
Nation, only a desire of glory and honor made me so voluntarily offer him my
service; I bid him reward me according to my deserts, and make me happy by
regarding me as his servant. And showing him the Shield with his daughters
portraiture, "I further told him, the impudency of a Roman Captain his enemy in
bearing that portraiture, had caused me to make him surrender it for the
save-guard of his life, that I might pre^ent it to the Princess his daughter,
avowing none worthy the glory of carrying her ^ffigies without her leave.
Lilibilis received me with great kindness and civi^ity, and told me, he
gathered a happy Augury, and hoped the gods would be propitious to his Armies,
since they had sent strangers to own his Cause, which was for the liberty of
his Country against the pride of a potent enemy. And that he should endeavor
for encouragement to others to reanswer such merits. Many other generous words
he uttered which showed that ability which accompanied his Lordship, but at
last that which I most looked for and desired he told me, "that immediately I
should go and present the shield to his daughter, which he knew would be
welcome in regard of her great hatred to the Romans. Immediately a maid of
hers, who of all others was most dear to Amenia, gave her notice of my
arrival, and of the passages betwixt Lilibilis and I; and set me out
extraordinarily more than I deserved, that Amenia prepared her self to give me
a good reception. What I shall tell you (says Euripides) concerning Amenia, of
those things which were done unknown to me then, she afterward related to me
when the bonds of Hymen had bound us together, however I relate it now, which
otherwise would make the story lame. Many beauties desire to captivate,
although they intend no favors to their slaves, and it is a general humor in
women to desire to be esteemed, and to see others lives depend upon their
wills, that they may tyrannize over their captivated hearts; and the more a man
is esteemed the more they desire to have him subject to themselves. Amenia was
not altogether free from this vainglorious humor, for, consulting with her
glass, she sought to illustrate those attractions, which without any
adornments were able to captivate, and least of all had she needed it for me,
who was before captivated by the dim luster of her shadow. Whilst Lilibilis
conducted me into a garden wherein were many arbours, Amenia following,
conveyed her self into one of those shadowy places, and viewing me through the
leaves considered my dimensions. Those small attractions (which age now has
consumed) that then accompanied me, made her spend some time in that umbratick
intuition. Love who is most commonly in a swift motion found an entrance
through those verdant windows, and taking possession of those open gates which
give entrance to the heart, he soon descended into the more intrinsecal parts
of that fair structure. For the eyes being the chief advantages of Cythera's
son, he there makes his occult entrance, and having gained the Fort afterward
plays the tyrant. This Quiver-bearing god having wounded us both with his
golden dart, made very much for my advantage, for if I seemed any thing hansom,
he presently exihibited it through a multiplying glass, and made the least
molehill of parts swell to a mountain of perfection. So that whatsoever my
actions were, in her eyes they were altogether complete. After some time she
left the Arbor, and being sent for by Lilibilis she approached us. We know
some little grace in a face otherwise not very taking, gives some attractions
according to the smalness of its measure, but a face beautified with due
symmetry, color, and lively eye, is a far greater charm, and gives more
vigorous attractions: But what unutterable delight is there in beholding a
face, wherein nature with a prodigal hand has bestowed thousands of
fascinating attractions? and to show her curious skill depainted those
flourishing colors that it is impossible for art to immitate. If I found such
attractions in her inanimate effigies, you cannot but conceive me ravished from
my self at her sight, that passed her shadow by thousands of degrees.

You are not able to conceive, nor I to utter, the ravishing content I took in
beholding that approaching glory: my eyes steadfastly fixing themselves on her,
gave the victory to the blushing roses in her cheeks. The suscitation of that
incomparable virmilion added new luster to her former splendor. Not forgetting
my self I did her reverence, and setting one knee to the ground. " Madam (said
I) I have taken the boldness to present you your own shadow, having rescued it
out of the hands of an unworthy Roman. I did not think it fit an enemy should
carry it as a trophie of his victory, though I believe himself was subject to
the image. Had he had your consent for the favor, I should have accounted it a
sacrilege to have robbed him; but knowing the contrary by himself, I thought it
your right and not his. I therefore humbly lay it at your feet, and implore
your pardon for this presumption. I ended with a profound reverence, when she
replied, extending her hand to raise me up. "Sir, the Romans, who seek to usurp
our Liberties, and hope to subject us to the yoke of servitude, are so odious
in my eyes, that I account the taking away this shield no small obligement, and
shall accept of it with thanks. Here Lilibilis told Amenia that she should do
better to return it me for my defense, since I intended to serve him in the
Wars against her enemies, and that it was great reason since I had won it so
fairly, that I should wear it by her favor and permission, under the notion of
her champion. These favorable words ravished me; Ame^ia blushing, and looking
on her father, said, Sir, since it is your command I must obey: turning to me,
To you Sir is this due, both by your own valor and my gift. I received it with
that joy cannot be expressed, kissing her fair hand, which injected new flames
into my breast, I rose up with a satisfaction as ample as my wishes. We
returned into his Palace, my eyes following the attraction of Amenia, and
feeding, nay almost surfeting on that delicious object. My content was but
short, for the next day we departed with those new Auxiliaries, hearing that
Caesar approached the body of our Army. Amenia gave a pleasing mine all the
time I was in her presence. She might have read by sad deportments with what
regret I left her company, and she found her self touched with no ordinary
pensiveness at my departure. Lilibilis assigned me a command in those new
raised forces, trusting much to my fidelity. There was to have been a general
Rendezvouse of the Austures, Gallicians and Cantabrians, but Augustus who came
himself into Spain to make a final conquest of that country which had cost
Rome so much blood and treasure, had divided his Army, and sent part against
the Catabrians, and part against the Gallicians, and the other remained to
oppose us. Lilibilis being a good Captain, performed every thing requisite
thereto. I shall not (proceeds Euripides) relate the circumstances and
encounters in this War, but give you a brief relation of the success as far as
it appertains to this relation concerning my self. The War was vigorusly
followed on both sides, and Caesar found it full of trouble and difficulty, and
his opposers resolute men, fighting for that Liberty which as yet they had not
lost. The Cantabrians and Gallicians on each side of us, did many brave
exploits, which animated our Austures to exhibit the like valor. When Caesar
had the better, those impregnable bulworks framed by nature hindered his
pursuit, for our men acquainted with the ways, could enter those precipices
without danger, where if the Romans sought to follow, they were either taken in
some ambushment, or swallowed alive into unreturnable Caverns. We had diverse
conflicts with Caesar, where to get a fame I often times ran most imminent
danger, and received many smarting wounds. However I gained that I sought for,
and I was known to both the Camps. Lilibilis daily professing new testimonies
of his Love for the services I did him. The shield whereon Amenia was portrai'd
I still carried as an Ensign of glory. I had caused a fine thin plate, which
stood hollow from the shield, and cut all over in fine works, to be nailed on
it, which saved it from the swords of the Romans, and yet exhibited her
effigies through the gravings. Often times when any small truce was betwixt us,
Love and vain glory caused me to challenge the Romans, and to perform many a
single duel against some of their chiefest Champions. Lilibilis sought to
hinder this, professing that in my loss he should find his ove^throw, but his
repression caused a greater pugnacity. One man's stren^th is nothing to the
overthrow of an army, but by his example so great animosity may be kindled in
the breasts of his followers, that they may subdue, when otherwise without that
exemplary courage they might have proved the miserable fortune of losing the
victory. I will not glory in my own actions, but the desire that I had that my
fame might resound in Amenia's ears, caused me with so great animosity to break
into the troops of my enemies, that giving life and courage to the Austures, I
often times enforced them to a victory, and by my example gave puissance to their
arms. It was a reasonable encounter, when choosing out a hundred of the chiefest
of Lilibilis's Camp, we attacqued a thousand of the Romans well appointed, and
put them to a shameful flight; which extremely irritated Caesar to see his
Eagles fly backwards, but neither his anger nor endeavors could recover the
loss, nor save his men from a miserable slaughter. These actions of mine
carried on with prosperous successes, rendered me another Hannibal amongst the
Austu^es, Lilibilis giving me more Encomiums than my modesty could receive.
That speedy Herald Fame still echoed my actions in Amenia's ears, and an action
was no sooner done in the field than known in Austurica. I shall let pass the
honor I received from Lilibilis, the Love from the rest of the commanders, the
encomiums of the soldiers, and the general applauses from all the Iberians,
and tell you, Winter being far entered, and Caes^r having withdrawn his Troops,
falling at that instant sick, as we thought for his ill success, we returned to
Austurica, where under triumphal arches they made me enter the City, seeking
for new honors to expre^s their gratitude.

Amenia carried the sure testimonies of joy for my return in her countenance,
and with a very pleasing language gave me thanks for my services; my content
was unexpressable at the reinvisaging those lamps which had kindled the ardours
in my soul, and the kissing those fair hands infused new vigor into all my
limbs. I did believe my actions could not be so lively represented to her ears,
as to beget that affection, which was possible for the intuition of them to
have done. This suscitated a desire to she^ some feats of activity in her
sight, that her eyes might be witnesses of my strength and agility. The next
day I told Lilibilis that it would not be amiss to exhibit some public
rejoycings for our good successes, thereby manifestin^ to the world the little
fear we had of the Romans. He was very well pleased with the motion, and
referred the ordering of it to my self. I immediately caused every thing to be
prepared against a time which I had prefixed, and published a running a Tilt in
the City. Whilst every thing was preparing for these sports, I gave continual
assaults to that specious fort with my eyes, not daring as yet to come so near
as to prove its strength with the engine of my tongue, for fear of a repulse,
and losing that ground I had gained, not knowing the desire my amiable enemy
had for an assault, that the Fort might be rendered with honor. Those favors
she showed me were with so great discretion, that I could not distinguish
whether she favored me as a Lover, or for those services I had done her
father, for those shots which went from my eyes, could not but declare me an
amorous foe. Neither could I perceive that she manifested any more signs of
Love than Clotuthe Lilibilis's wife, who was a young Lady, and married to him
since the death of Amenia's mother, and indeed too young for his years. My
designs being nothing but what were truly honorable, I resolved after those
public pastimes to exhibit my passion with a more apert language than that of
the eyes. Euripides was about to proceed, not minding the stealing away of the
time, when one whose misfortunes had made a companion to him in his solitary
life, came into the Grove to look him, but unexpectedly finding a Cavalier with
him in discourse, was about to return, had not Euripedes espying him desired
him not to descede. "I could not imagine (said he being come near Euripedes)
what should detain you longer than your usual musings, the consideration that
you were yet fasting, and the afternoon far entered made me come to seek you,
not thinking fortune would have brought me so abruptly to trouble your
discourse with this Cavaliere. I believe (said Euripedes) that you have done
him a pleasure, for I lackt a remembrancer being entered into the discourse of
my life (which you are acquainted with) and truly not denoting the elaption of
the time, I might have entertained him yet longer with it, and it may be to the
trial of his patience. I beseech you, said Argelois, think not that I am weary
of your discourse, for if you studied to do me the greatest injury in the
world, you could not find a greater than to debar me of the content I receive
in the audition of your fortunes; for my diligent harkening to the relation of
your life, gave me no time to reflect on my own miseries, and I did not think
another relation could have eased my passion. I should importune you to
continue your story at this time, did not the remembrance of your fasting
rather cause me to desire you to forbear, till a fitter opportunity, wherein
you may better continue your discourse. Euripedes following his advice, having
prevailed with Argelois to accompany them, returned all three through those
pleasant shades to his grott.

ELIANA.
BOOK the second.
THey had not walked very many paces in that delectable place, before they came
to a rock, where that little rivulet which ran through the grove had its
Original. The rock was of a hard stone, and the top and sides covered with
moss, round about it grew very high trees, which gave a great umbra^e, and made
the place seem with so great solitude, as if it had been the habitation of
silence. The declivity of the rock made an entrance, like to the mouth of a
great cave, and so dark that it would have feared one ignorant of the place to
have ent'red it.

Being at the end of that obscure entrance there was no further way to be
perceived, still Euripedes slideing away a stone pulled at a line which rung a
bell within a cave, but so far that the sound came not to their ears without,
which gave notice to them within to give them entrance. By and by some stones
being taken away, which on the inside might very artificially and easily be
slid by, gave them an entrance into a large entry, which admitted light through
certain artificial holes at the top of the rock, that entry introduced them
into several rooms, having the light admitted after the same manner; here it
was that nature and art strove which should excel in the illustration of this
Cryptoporticus. Nature provided the rooms, and had suffulted the roof of the
rock with admirable obdurate pillars, which divided the Chambers of this
curious Cavern: But art had so imbellished the more rude workmanship of nature,
that it made it surpass many palaces. Argelois little thought so tenebrous an
entrance would have conducted him into so fair dormito^ies, but having past two
or three, they went into a very fair Chamber, where Euripedes desiring his
guest to sit down, bid him welcome with very many hearty expressions. Whilst
the curiousness of the place had attracted many praises from the mouth of
Argelois, Euripedes servants brought in their dinner, which could not be great,
by reason of their solitary living, however it was more cleanly and neatly
cookt, than costly or superfluously prepared. Dinner being ended, Euripedes to
satisfy the curiosity of his guest, showed him all the secrets of that
admirable Cave, which was so secretly contrived, that all the searching in the
world could never find it, and its strength sufficient for to secure them
against all attempters, having but one entrance, and that so secure and
undiscernable, that the rock it self might as soon be beaten down, as that
broke open; and if any chanct to look down those holes which admitted the
light, they could discover nothing but a prfound darkness, for those
light-intromissories were so artificially placed, that the light sent in by the
one, could discover nothing to them that should introspect the other, and when
the want of Phoebus made them light Tapers, the drawing of artificial windows
before those holes, still impeded the discovery. The curiousness of the place,
with the conveniences, for solitude and contemplation had already made
Argelois in love with it, but his prepossessed love to Eliana denied him life
but in her presence, and took off those desires which else he might have had
eternally to have enclosed himself in it. Having seen every thing that belongs
to that nature-built, and art helped Structure, they reenter'd the place where
they dined, and seating themselves upon a Couch at Argeloi's request, Euripedes
prosecuted his Discourse, thus.

The Continuation of the HISTORY OF EVRIPEDES.
THE day being come wherein I was resolved to exercise the Trojan sports, I
gave order for the erecting of certain Scaffolds in the Catadrome, for the
benefit of the noblest Spectators. Every thing being prepared, Lilibilis and
Clotuthe, with Amenia mounted one of the Scaffolds, and seated themselves under
a Canopy purposely erected for them, on the other Scaffolds were seated the
chief men in the Signiory under Lilibilis, who held the place of a great
Prince. Austerica being almost emptied, old, young, rich and poor, men, women,
and the youth, filled up the outsides of the lists, all desiring to see these
sports that were not usual amongst them. I had chosen out a hundred of the
ablest, and best accomplished men in Lilibili's Army, and dividing them to fifty
on a side, we resolved to exhibit the form of a battle, having armor from the
head to the foot, with blunted spears, and rebated swords. As Soon as the
Spectators had seated themselves, and one by Lilibili's order proclaimed
silence to stop the murmr of the people, we entered the lists, each company
at several gates, having scarfs on our arms of several colors to distinguish
one from the other, when that we should close together. The Captain of the
adverse party was one whose valor had rendered the strongest and ablest in
Lilibili's Army, in the eyes of all others, and had given notable proofs of it
against the Romans. Being placed ready for our first course, the Trumpets gave
us the signal to charge. The place being spacious, we met with a most violent
shock, and the noise that the breaking of the staves, with the rattling of the
armor made, seemed an exact Counterfeit of great Joves tonation. Almost half
of each party kissed the earth at this carreer; it fortuned that I gained the
better of my adversary the other Captain, by unhorsing him, although in truth
his encounter was so considerable, that I lackt but little of the same fortune.
I immediately cast my eyes upon the fair Amenia to fetch new vigor, and seeing
she observed my actions, it inflamed me to my advantage, and the secret
operation of her beauty, now illustrated with a mighty splendour, so elevated my
spirits, that if all the company had been to encounter me with sharp weapons,
they seemed too small in my eyes to raise my self any glory by their conquest,
before one so superexcelling in beauty. Those that were dismounted soon gained
their horses, and drawing our rebated weapons, we furiously assaulted each
other, glory causing us as if we had been mortal enemies to endeavor each
others overthrow. The first charge was with so much animosity, that many felt
shrode brushes, though they were not cut because of the hebetude of our
weapons. My greatest ambition was to gain a gracious aspect from Amenia, for I
cared not if all Spectators had been absent besides her self, and that ambition
was enough to induce me to actions truly glorious; those that never had a
Mistress, can never tell what it is to perform any thing in her sight, the
intuition of parents, kindred, or friends contributes great animosity to a
Combatant, but the eyes of a Mistress makes him do wonders; I confess she made
me glorous by contributing vigor for the performance of those actions, which
had else been impossible for me to atchieve. Our encounter was in jest, and
friends and brothers opposed each other, but when that every one was thoroughly
heated, the desire of glory made them forget the remembrance of friends; and
the animosity and great vigor wherewith they prosecuted each other, exhibited
them as mortal foes, and had they not had obtused swords, I think all had dyed
in the encounter; I was sorry I had begun it when I saw with what vigor they
prosecuted it, and yet my self gave them example, but at last the blew scarfs,
(which was the signal of my men) had gained the better, most of the yellow, our
opposers, being humbled on the ground with bruses as bad as wounds which enter
the flesh. At last we perfected our Conquest, and had the glory of the victory
accompanied with great shouts and complaudings of the people. Lilibilis took
great content in our performances, and applauded those that had done well. My
actions which were particularized by Amenia, wrought as I could desire on so
gentle a soul, and the means did not frustrate my hopes, I cannot say it begot,
but it augmented those flames she cherisht for my sake, and preserved those
inclinations she had to me from all thoughts of a future change. Clotuthe in
the time of our sportive combat (as Amenia afterward told me) denoting my
actions with a partial eye, passed extraordinary praises in my behalf, the
which did but the more sufflate her flames to whom she uttered them, she
accounting them but as due to my merits, perceived not the others inclinations
in the uttering them, nor could she have been justificable, if she had had any
thoughts of her, that had such ties to the contrary.

Lilibilis, the Ladies, the Captains, and generally all the people expressed
the great content and pleasure they had taken in this exhibition, by their
applauses, shouts, joy, and praises, extolling those that had signalized
themselves by their notified actions, even to the very skies. After the
maintainers of this sport were departed with knocks, falls, bruises, some lame,
most receiving some hurt or other, I went to Lilibilis, where I received
precomiums befitting his accomplishments not my merits, But when I understood
the content Amenia had taken in the sight of these small performances, ordained
purposely for her sake, I sought to continue them, and therefore begged
Lilibilis to authorize those sports a day or two more with his presence. I
found him not difficult in granting a thing he desired, which made him give
notice of their continuance. The next day the place being filled as the day
before, I entered the lists, armed with a flame colored armor, the lower part
seemed like glowing coals, whose flames compassed my whole body, and many rich
stones artificially placed seemed the sparks which proceed from the fire, my
Cask was covered with a plume of feathers arising like smoke out of those
flames, and falling in curles very near the color of smoke, made the flames
seem more to the life. At a distance they thought a flame of fire had entered
the place, but managing my courser to the upper end of the lists, I did
obesance to Lilibilis and the Ladies, placing my self ready to receive those
who would oppose me. I had ordered this single running with spears, that those
whose actions were worthy that glory might the better be denoted by Amenia and
all the rest of the spectators. There was some distance of time after I was
entered the lists before any presented themselves, which I employed in the
intuition of Amenia, who seemed like fair Cinthia^ amongst the lesser lights, I
left no part of those exhibited perfections free from a contemplation, which
would have lasted much longer, had not the trumpets given notice of one who
entering the lists awaited my coming. At the second encounter I laid a
foundation to my glory by his fall. I will pass over the particular actions of
that day, as not much to the purpose, and only tell you, the gods graciously
favoring me with the helping vigor infused into my soul, by the beauty and
sight of Amenia, so far enabled me that I erected a trophie of glory to my self
by the fall of all those who encountered me that day. The next day was to be
employed in the same exercises, which gave a great content to the spectators,
and raised my glory with thousands of applauses, but I must truly tell you I
affected none but those of Amenia, which were as many and as great as could be
expected from one of her quality, and great modesty. But Clotuthe gave me such
encomiums, doing me so great favors, that I blushed, and partly repented that
I had done any thing whereby they might have any cause to attribute that to me,
which I knew my merits did not deserve. Clotuthe studied occasions to hold me
in discourse, gave me a very pleasing mine, put forth many ambiguous and quaint
expressions, passed many amiable looks upon me, and sought all occasions of
doing me any pleasure, more than ever I perceived her to do before, but my
opinion of her great virtue made me pass favorable interpretations on all her
actions, and thought those unusual favors proceeded from the content she
received in the sports exhibited by my means.

That night (as I understood afterward from Amenia her self) when that every
one was retired to their rest, A^enia whose fire augmented by my performances,
was now come to so great height, that she thought she should have been consumed
with its ardour, and setching a sigh said within her self. 'Ah Euripedes, what
need so many testimonies of thy valor be exhibited, unless thy design be to
captivate all those, and render them thy slaves that shall behold thy actions?
thy features and virtues are sufficient, you need not have demonstrated your
valor to have completed your conquest.

' Euripedes looking upon Argelois, I would willingly (said he with a different
tone) omit these or any other passages, where speaking of my self I might seem
vainglorious by the relation, could I persuade my self that I might be
faithful in the progression, or you pleased with the omission. And truly it is
so much against my humor, that I find more aversness in the recounting any
such passage, than I should by permitting it to remain in silence. Besides I
fear Lonoxia would accuse me of infidelity, being well acquainted with my
relation, if I should omit any thing, and make me a transgressor of my promise,
if I fail of an entire relation, at least of what I can remember; and if any
other besides my self could give you the narration of my life, I should have
remitted it to them, being a thing contrary to all that have any thing of pudor
or virtue in them, to relate any action or performance of glory, or
magnanimity of themselves; and very difficult to perform it without a seeming
elation in the eyes of others. I beseech you (replied Argelois) omit not any
thing for these considerations, your modesty too much hides those actions which
conduce to your glory, which is much eclipsed by your own relation, but I pray
you to proceed, and be not interrupted any more with these thoughts, for I take
extreme delight in hearing the passages of your Amoretta's, and were it not for
the trouble I put you to in the relation, I should not care how long you
entertained me with this discourse. I account it no trouble (answered
Euripedes) but I find a great content in that I think you take any pleasure in
the recital of my fortunes; I am more prolix in the relation of these first
Amoretta's in that they were my more fortunate adventures, and in which I found
great delight, than I intend to be in those which were the cause of my
miseries; but to leave this digression, I will proceed with what brevity I may,
not doing injury to my story.

Those words which had not passage through her lips, were accompanied with many
suspirations, which made Melanthe (one that attended her, and whom Amenia loved
extremely) who lay in a pallet in the chamber, think that she had not been
well, and therefore rising out of her bed, took a taper which burned upon a
side Table, and approached her bed side. Her sudden coming surprised her in her
tears, and suscitated through a feminine pudor, a blush which adorned those
cheeks on which those little ^ivolets had found a passage, from the clear
fountains of her eyes: And being unwilling to be taken notice of, (though it
were by her that she trusted with all her secrets) in an action that she judged
criminal, she hid her face with the corner of the sheet, and gave Melanthe
leave to think it might be to avoid the annoyance of the light of the Taper.
But Melanthe being sensible of that grief which she saw appear through her
mistresses eyes, and heard, by those ardent suspirations, which in abundance
proceeded from a most inward trouble, she fell upon her knees by her bed side,
and began with the most mollifying and attracting expressions, to draw from her
the cause of her dolor. She seeing her still answer her but with silence, and a
few sobs, which were not recalm'd since their first suscitation, 'Madam (went
she on) your silence to my implorations makes me think that I am criminal, and
seems to accuse me to have committed some unknown offense, which may have
suscitated these tears, and been the cause of this pregravation. Madam, if it
be so, if I have offended, though I am not conscious to the least known or
wilful offense, let me but know wherein, and you shall see me exact a most just
and vigorous punishment from my self, for the least offense that may have any
ways disturbed your repose, if you will not let me know wherein I have
offended, I will punish my self at all adventures in that I am not able to see
these tears, and think my self the cause, without a resentment that punishes
my soul with unutterable afflictions. Whilst she stopped to wipe away some tears
from her eyes, which her Ladys had begot, Amenia discovering her face, '
Melanthe (said she) thou have no ways offended me, nor art thou guilty of
these tears, unless it be in telling me thou will inflict a punishment upon thy
self, not considering that in so doing thou would afflict me, speak no more
of thy offeding, those tears proceed from a far different cause. Madam
(replied Melanthe truly afflicted for her Mistress) if I have not offended, as I
ought to believe since you have spoken it, why seem you to accuse me of
infidelity, in making me so great a stranger to your thoughts? since you have
formerly honored me by communicating them to me; this argues that my
disloyalty, has caused you to lessen your affections, and withdraw those
favors you have honored me with, in denying me the knowledge of an
affliction, either out of a thought of distrust, or that you now begin to hide
your self from me. I prosess, Madam, I desire not to know the least of your
mind out of any curiosity, but out of a desire I have, and that I think my
self capable, to serve you, which when I shall cease to be, I shall not desire
to be acquainted with them; But let not any thought of my infidelity withhold
you from making me the depositary of your secrets, for if all the oaths and
vows that may be made, can oblige you to believe me, you shall have them, if
you say you dare trust me, why do you withhold this from me? if you dare not,
why do you suffer me so near you? no no banish this wretch from your presence,
since you dare not trust her, and take one whose fidelity may oblige you to do
them that honor, since mine cannot, and though the gods destiny that I shall
not live in your service, they shall know they gave me not life without courage
to sacrifice it to you, which shall expiate those crimes, which deterred me the
happiness of being your confident. Amenia conjured by this manifest testimony
of her affection, and by those tears which she shed in abundance, but
especially by that love which she always bore her, could not refrain laying
aside the punctillioes of a Mistress, and clasping her arms about her neck,
'No, no Melanthe (said she) it is not any distrust of thy fidelity, nor the
lessening that affection which I ever have born thee, and shall still continue,
that makes me thus unwilling to discover my self to thee, it is pudicity that
ought to accompany such as I am, and these tears are to delave a crime I can
neither own, nor clear my self of; and a passion which I am not able to
decusse, nor would willingly entertain. After a little respite, thou shall see
(went she on) what confifidence I repose in thy fideliiy, and how entirely I
love thee, in laying open my weakness, my frailty, and my infirmities to thee,
and confess that which pudicity makes me so lougth to own. I put more than my
life into thy hands, I commit to thee my honor and my reputation, and tell
thee that which I cannot think on, without the imputation of a crime. Set away
that candle Melanthe that will discover those blushes which will be essential
to my discourse. Melanthe obeying her, I cannot (continued she) find words apt
to tell thee my egritude, and thou can not think with what reluctance I am
forced to acknowledge that which I cannot disown. Thou have been acquainted
with all the actions of my life thou have known how far both the Romans and
Iberians have sought to intrude upon my liberty, and thou have known with what
constancy I have kept it, when others have yielded to those disquisitors. But
that which with so much care I have hitherto preserved, is now insensibly lost;
and yielded to this stranger without seeking, which I have obstinately denied
all suitors. Do not thou wonder Melanthe to hear me confess this? and can
thou blame me for being so loath to utter it? I have suppressed it long enough,
but through its depression it has raised its flames; I have found the
disturbance of my former repose ever since the first sight of this stranger,
but I thought my former constancy might have been able to extinguish them. It
is not the loss of a repose dearer to me than my life, that can give me so much
cause of trouble, as the crime I commit in loving one who it may be has not
the least inclination for me. O foolish! O simple and weak Amenia, have thou
confessed thy self in love? could not thou have dyed with a resentment so
powerful, and have manifested by thy wonted constancy, that thou had been
able to have conquered all things, and made that tyrant god to have confessed he
had killed thee, but not conquered thee? but that thou must with the follies of
thy tongue confess those of thy heart. O thief! to rob me of a liberty so dear
and precious to me: O tyrant! to torment me worser than with the pangs of
death, in making me confess I love, and with a passion uncurable but by death.
What say thou, Melanthe, I have told thee my disease? know thou any cure
for the Idalian fire? do not thou reprehend me? do not thou blame me, for
entertaining that which was impossible for me to resist? But yet Melanthe,
preserve thy thoughts pure for my sake, think not but that a thousand deaths
shall give a period to this wretched life, before the least action whereby any
may gather a suspicion, shall be exhibited, nay, or the least thought within my
self, which shall not be competable with my honor; nevertheless I cannot, but
I must still say I preserve pure inclinations to Euripedes, and shall sooner
die than entertain the thoughts of another. The Love I bear thee has exacted
this confession from me, in which I neither distrust thy fidelity, nor thy help.

'Madam (answered Melanthe) I confess for these two or three days I have read
a more than ordinary sadness in your looks, but those characters were so
veiled, that the most diligent Physiognomist could never see the cause; But
since you have been pleased to take off that vail, and to let me know the
cause, give me leave to tell you, that I see no reason why you should afflict
your self: And I wonder that you account to Love, a crime, since it is enforced
upon the will, with so much rigor and violence; we do not use to impute the
crime to them, who are forced against their wills to the commitment, nor count
them noxious that are forced contrary to their own spirits to commit an error;
it is the consent of the will that makes us culpable, which cannot be laid to
your charge, seeing there is so absolute a forcement, and without the least
indulgencie on your part, your repugnancy showing how unwilling you were to
lose your liberty. It is not in this as in other things, where the will is able
to make its choice, for we are able, and have so much power left us, that
rather than lose our honor, with a generous resolution to sacrifice our Lives,
but in this we are so suddenly surprised, that even the will is forced to that
which you call a crime, and then to offer a Life, is not a choice, but an
expiation, but of what? of that which even the gods themselves had forced us
to, which would be blasphemy to say their actions are worthy of expiation, and
therefore you need not imagine that a crime, nor think your self guilty when you
are clear. You see with what confidence a^l the world entertains this Deity,
few or none escaping the touches of his flame, being once arrived at the age of
puberty; though some have it more violently injected than others. There seems
mighty difference in the actions of love, in some he seems to be the causer of
vice, in others the causer of virtue, which has made some account him as they
have seen his effects, whether good or bad, which difference is not to be
imputed to the nature of Love, which is constant, pure, and unchangable of it
self, but to the different dispositions of those people that possess him, and
cleaving to the habit of their mind, is regulated according to their
dispositions, and though in effect it keep its Sovereignty over the Will, in
that it cannot choose but Love; yet it leaves it free to act, and gain the
object that it Loves according to its own disposition, or inclination: and this
is it that makes so many different faces in Love, as there are different
humors in men: And this is manifest in that we see some to gain what they
desire through the passion of Love, become most merciless Tyrants, seeking all
the ways of vice, painting their way with blood, using all ways their evil
hearts may suggest, and yet in appearance caused by the passion of Love: Others
by the same passion seek to attain their wished desires, by the rules of
Virtue, submission, duty and obedience; all things contrary to the former,
which makes Love either a virtue or a vice according to the actions, and
several dispositions of men or women; therefore to Love is no crime, but the
impudicity of our actions that makes us criminal. But Madam, as the baseness
of our actions who are troubled with this passion, be a disgrace to Love, in
the eyes of those who are not able to judge right of him, so the goodness of
their actions that are virtuously possessed with the same passion redound to his
Complement, and without doubt having suffered by the impudicit action of
others, and knowing the severity of your humor, he has called you from all
the world, to restore him the good opinion he once had in the eyes of the
world, and lost by the folly of others. Therefore Madam feart not, that this
deity will do any injury to so considerable a servant, but expect him to infuse
the like virtue and the like passion into the object of yours, if he has not
already effected it; and for the rest wherein my duty and fidelity is expected,
you need not doubt, having vowed my life to your service, but that I will
employ it to the utmost of my abilities.

In this manner Melanthe sought to ease the disquiets of Amenia, who returned
her an answer to what she had said, and being somewhat settled, reposing much in
the abilities of Melanthe, she made her to return to her bed, and gave her self
to a repose, that might fit her for the intuition of the next days sports.

Had I had but that happiness, to have known with what affection Amenia beheld
me, I should not have felt those torments which I did endure that night, and
many others for her sake: having past it over with Loves usual disquiets, and
very little sleep, I armed my self with those flames, which represented those
within my breast, and in the same manner at the hour appointed I entered the
lists, as I had done the day before. I shall be brief and pass this over, only
I may tell you, and I think without vanity, that I d^d more that day, than I
had done both the days before to the admiration of all the Spectators, not
being moved out of my Saddle at the decursion of all those, who that day I made
to kiss the earth.

The better part of the day being spent, and the long intermission since any
had appeared to oppose me, made us think the sports had been ended, and we were
about to break them up, when there entered at the other end of the lists a
Cavalier of a good port, having his sword ready drawn, armed with fair green
arms and over them a strong paludament, his caske was plumated, with green and
white intermixed he attracted all the eyes of the beholders upon him, but his
motion was so furious that it gave them hardly leisure to behold him. His
furious pace soon brought him up to me, and being come near, with a voice that
showed anger had prepossessed him, he said, "Proud man! is this the way to
raise your glory, having ambitioned a happiness thou art not worthy of, by the
breaking of a few reeds, which is rather a sport for boys; than an exercise for
men? if thou have not lost all that courage, which fame has told us you showed
against the Romans, let us see it in defending thy self against me who am thy
mortal foe, with as much animosity, as thou have shown pusillanimity in
maintaining these juvenile sports. I am come purposely to deprive thee of a
Life before these Spectators, which cannot be in safety so long as I live, and
to let thee see on what weak foundations thy aspiring hopes are built. He spoke
these words so loud that they were easile heard by Lilibilis, Amenia; and those
that accompanied them. Lilibilis thought he knew that voice, but the unexpected
evenement, and his bold carriage, took off his imaginations, from calling to
his remembrance who it might be, and only took care to prevent a combat he saw
so much desired on both sides. For, whilst he uttered his audacious speech, I
cast my eye on Amenia, and very well perceived by the palenesse of her
Countenance, what resentment it had upon her soul, although I knew not but so
sudden an evenement happening to any other in her presence might have caused the
same timorou^ness, and that moved me more then his arrogancy, with a desire I
had to let her see how easily I could free my self from that presumptuous one,
whose vaunting speeches had suscitated her fear. His words had no sooner flown
from his mouth, but I returned him this answer. ' Sir, I know you not, nor can
I conceive what you mean by those ambitioned hopes you tax me with, but as I do
not care who you are, so I do not care what you mean, seeing you are come
purposely to deprive me of my life, I willingly grant it you if I cannot defend
it, I wont wrong, your impatiencie in deterring your desired Combat, but let
you see how vainly you had preconceiv'd my death. We immediately precipitated
our selves one against another with a most violent encounter, and had not his
arms been good I had undoubtedly slain him at the first shock, though I found
his puissance not unequal to his boldness: we reiterated our blows, so thick,
that those who Lilibilis had commanded to part us, durst not come near us, for
fear of losing their own lives, in seeking to save others. Lilibilis, seeing so
violent an encounter agitated against his will, descended from the place where
he was, and hazarded his own life to part us; for casting himself between us
with his sword drawn, he stroke my Aversaries horse so violently over the head,
that the pain of the wound made him so curvet, that he had like to have
trampled him under his feet, and do all what the stranger could he bruised
Lilibilis's foot, and cast my Adversary on his back. Lilibilis commanded his
Guard to seize on him, and to have him to prison for his rash attempt, and bold
speeches in his presence. I straight vaulted from my Horse, and casting my self
at Lilibilis feet, 'I beseech you Sir (said I) do not expose me to the censure
of all present for a debility which I am not guilty of, in that I was not able
to chastise his insolency without your interposing. I confess he has deserved
death for his insolences in your presence; this is all I beg for my Adversary,
that he may receive it as a man with his arms in his hand, and by me who have
most interest in it; let not the Combat be deferred any longer, nor deter me
the glory I was about to reap. Lilibilis would not answer me till he had raised
me up, and then he replied, I doubt not at all Euripedes of your ability in
raming a stronger Adversary, but his insolence does not deserve to be so nobly
punished; it would be too much glory for him to receive a death at your hands,
and will be too much trouble to me to see you deprive him of life, with the
hazard of one so dear to me, let me desire you to let him suffer by the hands
of executioners, and not expect that honor from your hands. I again besought
Lilibilis, and persisted with so many entreaties that at last he granted the
Combat, but with great reluctancie. Lilibilis being returned to the place where
he before sat, the Guard left us to prosecute the Combat. The stranger coming
up to me I doubted not my Liberty (said he softly) 'When Lilibilis had known
me, however I cannot but take notice of your generosity, which never^heless
cannot oblige me to abate any of that enmity which I bear you, therefore expect
the usage you could look for from your deadliest foe, and think not your action
has obliged me to spare you. I begged not the Combat (replied I) to gain your
favor, or to oblige you to an action which might not be for your own safety,
for I intend to prosecute you with the utmost of my vigor, and give you that
which you expect to render to others. We straitwayes renewed our Combat, but
with so much impetuositie, that the Spectators had never seen the like; my
Adversary seemed more furious and violent in his motion then at first, and with
his blows seemed to renew his strength and courage; indeed he had the
advantage on me in that I had traveled hand all that day in those Justs, which
had he been to have maintained, he would not have accounted so childish, and by
that reason I was something the less able to reanswer those strokes which came
thundering upon my head. I was abashed to see with what impetuousness he
prosecuted me: but considering in whose presence I fought, and what consequence
his fall was to the Complement of all my former performances, I gathered all my
strength together at that instant, and falling upon him with so violent a
surcharge, I forced him to make use of all his skill for the defense of
himself, his arms were so good that it was a long time before I could draw one
drop of blood; but at last with a continual battery I forced my Sword into his
flesh upon his shoulder close by his neck, the blood which incessantly ran from
his wound soon died his arms and the ground with its crimson color, and much
debilitated him. I had received three wounds but not considerable, nor were
they any impediment in the heat I was in; I found the greatness of my
Adversaries wound, by the weakness of his blows, and perceived the Victory my
own. I thought to oblige him with these words which I directed to him. 'I am
unwilling Sir to take the advantage I have over you, and to make a Valor fall
at my feet which is considerable, it was your own words made you my Enemy, and
having no greater cause as I know of to account you my foe, your own words may
likewise render you my friend, go but and confess your indiscretion at the
feet of the renowned Lilibilis, and I my self will help to implore your life.
His anger and dispight made the fire almost proceed from his eyes, and thinking
it would have obliged him, I found it otherwise by his words. 'Your friend
(said he) no, it is not the conservation of this life shall make me admit the
least thought of friendship toward you, were it in your power to give it me, I
hope yet and am assured on it too, to see thee breath thy last at my feet: With
this, with more fury then strength he lifted up his Sword stretching himself to
render it the more violent, in the interim irritated as I was through his
disobliging speeches, with a violent cast I made an entrance with my Sword; as
his arm was erected, under his arm-pit which was the more enlarged through the
violent falling of his own upon my head, which made my Sword appear at his
back, he struck too home to do me any harm, but clapsing his arms about me
with great courage sought to fling me to the earth, but having freed my self
from his embraces I drew my Sword out of his body, and with a back stroke,
struck him so forcible on his crest that I tumbled him at my feet. I was about
to pull off his Cask and to make him beg his life, or give him his death, when
I felt so many forcible blows upon me that they set me upon my knees; at last
mauger all opposition, I recovered my feet, and turning about saw at least ten
or a dozen Horsemen who sought with all violence to deprive me of my life: This
sudden surcharge put me into an astonishment, 'Is this the way then thou
intendest I should die? cried I out very furiously, and casting my self among
them I deprived the first I struck at of his life; I soon found they had not
that valor nor courage as he whom I first fought with, they knew what they did
must be with expedition, which made them seek all manner of ways to slay me,
running upon me with their Horses, but being carried with a desperate fury I
slew four of them before I fell, and I think wounded them all, just as I fell
Lilibilis came with his Guard, who had made all the have they could from the
place where they were, not expecting such a treachery, those that assailed me
fled at their approach, but Lilibilis thinking me dead ran in among them,
unarmed as he was, and slew two of them with his own hands, the other were
taken by the Guard, and destined to exquisite torments. Lilibilis approached
me, and finding me yet alive exhibited the joy he had through his eyes, he
caused me immediately to be carried into his Palace, and gave his Chirurgians
as great a charge of me, as if they had been to preserve himself. As they were
carrying me into the Palace, we went by the Scaffold where Amenia and Clotuthe
were, at our approach we heard a grievous cry among those that were there, I
would not be carried any further before I understood the cause, when it was
told me Armenia was through the fright that she had conceived in that
hurliburlie cast into a sworn, and Clotuthe drowned in tears for my loss, and
the treachery that was acted: ' I bid them that brought me this news to
present my humble duty to them both, and tell them that by the assistance of
the gods, and the industry of the Surgions, I might yet Live to do them further
service. My thoughts began presently to work upon that which I heard, and
induced a good presage to my future fortunes, I began to please my self by
thinking Amenia might have some particular inclination to me, in that my death
so nearly touched her, I began to collect her paleness when my foes insolency
exhibited it self by his speeches, for my own advantage, and to strengthen my
self with many such pleasing thoughts. In the mean time Lilibilis thinking my
adversary had been dead, because he lay without motion, pulled off his cask to
know who it was, as soon as they had discovered his face, Lilibilis stood in as
great amazemenr as one deprived of his senses, he could hardly believe his own
eyes when he saw it was Mandone the Prince of the Cantabrians, and him to whom
he had promised Amenia, and so accounted him as his son in Law. 'What's this I
see? (cried Lilibilis steping backward) what my son? could he be guilty of so
great a treachery against him who has preserved my life, and Signiory, and
hazarded his life so often for my sake against our mortal foe? Whilst Lilibilis
said this the fresh air had brought Mandone to himself, and opening his eyes,
beholding Lilibilis and all the rest standing round about him amazed, he sought
to arise, but he was so enfeebled through the loss of his blood, that he fell
again to the earth, and fainting away, he was not able to bring out those words
he was about to utter. It was then very different motions strove in Lilibilis
breast, compassion and a just resentment contended for the mastry, when he
looked upon him as my foe, as my murderer, and the avowed enemy of my rest, he
was about to finish that life he saw so debilitated, with his own hands; but on
the contrary when he looked upon him as his son, to whom he promised Amenia,
and to whom he was indebted for many former kindnesses, and him whose valor
was the chief obstacle that the Romans had no better success against them where
he fought, he thought it not fit to slay one so considerable, his youth pleaded
for his temerity, his quality and place wherein he held him, pleaded for his
safety, and his wounds and pitiful condition suscitated a compassion that at
last stifled his anger, and overcame all other resentments. He caused him
therefore to be had to his Palace, and gave order for the cure of his wounds.
He could not understand by his servants what was the cause he sought my life,
but only that Mandone had given them a charge to be in a readiness, and when
they saw him slain, (not else to stir) not to let me escape alive: for hearing
reports of my valor, he doubted his strength, yet he charged his men not to
fall upon me till they were sure he was slain. Being they were Mandone's
servants, and had done nothing but by his command, they let them have the
liberty to attend their Master, after their wounds were dressed. Lilibilis
immediately came to visit me, but was not permitted by the Surgions to speak to
me: they assured him my wounds were not mortal, though they were very many,
they told him it would very much retard the cure to have me often visited,
which made him contented only to look on me once a day without many words for a
week; it contibuted to his joy when in so short a space, I showed such
effectual signs of my amendment, so that he was permitted to acquaint me with
the designs of my adversary. Having first expressed abundance of sorrow for the
accident that had happened to me, he told me who my adversary was, and the
considerations that made him spare him.

'Nevertheless (said he) if Euripedes cannot overcome his just resentments, and
pardon that life which was at his mercy, neither the consideration that he is
in the place of a Son, nor the fear of his fathers wrath, shall withold me
from rendering him a punishment according to the vileness of his fact, in
seeking the life of him to whom I owe all my safety, the love I bore him shall
not overcome the love I owe to Euripedes, nor the Justice wherewith I should
punish such insolences, shall be diverted by any considerations* for I am
resolved he shall not hold his life but of Euripedes. When I heard who it was,
you may consider my interests desired his expiration, and I was angry with my
self that I had not finished that life, which now I could not take away without
a great blot and infamy to my honor; I considered likewise the affection
Lilibilis bore me, which made me that I could not consent to the death of one
so considerable, whose death would inevitably bring sharp wars upon him, and so
might be the utter ruin of them all, and the making of their common foe,
without the greatest piece of ingratitude which could be offered; These
considerations, with an ambition I had not to be out-brav'd in virtue, made me
return him this answer. 'The gods forbid that ever I should desire the death of
a person whose valor has made him so remarkable, and by whose fall I have
gained more glory then could have been expected by his death; but especially in
that he holds the place of a Son in Lilibili's affections, for which only
consideration I not only desire his life, but his pardon, in that I have
offended one so near to Lilibilis, and shall stifle all resentments whatsoever
for his friendship: I cannot imagine what has made him my enemy, nor caused in
him that violent desire of my death: I was sorry his obstinacy made me bring
him to that exigent, but I am not only glad that he lives, but that I live also
to do him service, for never shall Lilibilis his friends be my foes. These
speeches were uttered with much reluctance, and contrary to the desires of my
heart, not but that I could have forgiven the greatest injury that could have
been done to my person, but considering him as my Rival, I could not think on
him but as my mortal foe. Lilibilis embraced me as stricktly as the tenderness
of my wounds would permit, and highly praising me for my virtue, told me, 'He
would disown him for a son, if he did not acknowledge me as the doner of his
life, and crave pardon at my feet for the injury he had done me. After many
speeches to divert him from requiring any such thing of him, I besought him to
let me know the cause of his enmity. The cause was so false (said he) that
since he has been assured to the contrary, he is ashamed of his credulity, and
repents of what he has done, seeming by his speeches much to desire your
friendship, but not to hide it from you, he had heard, (and I believe from some
of Amenia's servants) how you were like to have deprived him of the happiness
of enjoying my daughter, and that you had gained much upon her affections, and
that these Justs were held only for her sake; this news so netled him, that he
never stood to examine the truth, but enraged as he was, left Juliobriga to put
in execution what the gods and your innocence detered. When I knew the cause,
my self, and all that were near Amenia, assured him the contrary, and I was
fain to make him new assurances of my daughter to assuage those violent motions
these considerations had cast him in, he would have had the like assurances
from Amenia, but she answered him as she did ever, That she would never disobey
the will of her father, and whomsoever he should design for her husband, she
should accept without murmuring, and that all inclinations whatsoever should
stoop to those of duty. We pacified him at last, and then I sharply reproved
him, both for his credulity and temerity, but his repentance moved me to beg
his pardon at your hands.

After some expressions by me of my innocence in the suscitation of Mandone's
Jealousy he left me, but to those tormenting thoughts that you may imagine his
discourse had raised. I begin to see all my hopes dejected and cast in the
dust, and that structure which I had built in my Imaginations to be broken all
to pieces, I saw it was a folly to gain an inclination which her virtue would
force to cede to duty, I looked upon my self in a deplorable condition, and I
saw Mandone already Possessor of Amenia by her fathers promise, and hers in
obedience to him, my only hopes were, I did not see she bore him any
inclination, nor would accept of him did not duty force her. On the other side
Amenia (though unknown to me) was no less troubled at this accident than I, and
falling into her wonted lacrymations, put her Melanthe to her usual
divertisements, duty and love had many a sharp conflict in her soul, and
neither obtaining the victory, gave her unsufferable Cruciations; she detested
Mandone for what he had done to me, and bewailed me with a great deal of
interest, my last performances were too greedily intuited to be forgotten, and
my valor in overcoming so considerable an enemy, was preserved with much
interest in that feminine breast: O how often did she wish he had dyed by my
hand, and how little she thanked the gods for their assistance in his
preservation, Melanthe was her only comfort, who by a thousand Sophistries
mitigated her dolor.

My Rival passed his time with no less torment, for shame and dispight in being
overcome by me, and his manifest treachery making him odious to many generous
souls, filled him with anxiety. And though he dissembled it, he could not so
satisfy his humor, but that he still imagined me his Rival, and bore me an
implacable grudge. The thoughts and inward commotions proceeding from his
troubled humor, retarded the cure of his wounds, and caused inflammations that
made them in fear of his life.

For my part that trouble which continually assaulted my soul through those
considerations in three days space had cast me into a violenr fever, and my
wounds bleeding afresh so debilitated me, that they thought I could never
sustain the loss of so much blood, and the Surgions almost despaired of my ever
recovering. Clotuthe by the special command of Lilibilis visited me every day,
and with her Amenia, we could not entertain one another, because the Surgions
thought it might conduce to my disrepose, but with a dying eye I gave Amenia
many sad glances, which testified the anxiety of my soul, I found a great
desire in my self to die, so I might but have the happiness (as I accounted it)
to have assured Amenia that I died hers. So foolishly vain are the thoughts of
those involved in the snares of love, to account it the chiefest bliss, and
greatest happiness, next to the enjoyment of the beloved object than can betide
them, to assure those they love they die for their sakes, and precipitateing
themselves in an amorous humor, find death sweet in such assurances, and
receiving its cold kisses with ardent desires, testify a content not to be
measured in the expiration, when such souls whom they expire for account it an
idle humor, or believing when they saw they could not live, thought to oblidge
them, by telling them they dyed theirs.

This was hardly liked by Argelois, but for the interrupting of his story he
would have replied, but considering he might have been accounted by some
unmannerly, he bit in his words, and heard him proceed thus.

Clotuthe visited me every day, sitting sometimes an hour or two upon the side
of the bed, where she shed so many tears, and expressed her self with so many
obliging words, that I could not but repeat the gratefullest words I could
devise, without very great ingratitude, it made me sorry to see how obliged I
was to her, and how unlikely I was to repay that officiousness which with great
affection she expressed: I sought often to recount to her how unworthy I was of
those obligations, and that she debased her self too much, to render them to
one so unworthy the least favor, she always answered me with so much modesty,
that though her actions testified a great affection her words never betrayed
them, but in the midst of sadness she often gave a cheerful look, and whilst
tears trickled down her cheeks, some smiles seemed to comfort me, which
exhibited a deploring my condition, and rejoicing that she suffered with me at
one time; all this I took as the effects of her good disposition. However to
balance these favors, she did me more sensible injuries, for desiring as much
as she could to entertain me alone, she sought with all diligence to avoid
Amenia, and to see me without her; but Amenia's severity would not permit her
to see me without her mother in Law, so that by this means I lost the sight of
her, who had preserved my life by her visits, Amenia at last perceived her
mothers spightfulness, and was much troubled at it, which made her the
narrowlyer to vigilate her actions, and mistrusted that which at that time I
did not perceive. Amenia when she failed of coming her self, sent Melanthe to
see how I did, and to excuse her absence. Lilibilis likewise every day rendered
me a thousand testimonies of his goodness, and expressed a wonderful trouble
at my weakness. I should be too tedious and too long to tell you all the
speeches, and the several visits they all gave me, during this weakness, it is
enough to tell you the chiefest passages, and that every visit Amenia gave me,
infused a life into my soul, which her absence took away; her presence gave me
strength, her absence debilitated me; whilst she looked on me I felt no pain,
when she saw me not I felt no ease; when I saw her she suscitated a joy, but
her departure regave me my grief. Thus I passed a week with a sensible
declining, my thoughts still agitating in a violent motion, retarded the
healing my wounds, and increased my fever, the Surgions and those who had me
in cure, looked upon me as one already dead, which begat a great consternation
in the minds of all those that bore me any good will, till then I could not
believe I should die, but now I was persuaded to it through my own debility,
which made me resolve to utter that, which my respect till then had made me
detain, and to let Amenia know the torments I had endured for her sake, and
with what great respect I served her, in the so long concealing of them, I
hoped that my life would end with my speeches, and if that the one begot an
anger, the other might suscitate a pity; and if I lived to hear her sentence me
for my temerity, yet it would be a happiness in that her self did contribute to
my death, and that my content would be extraordinary when that she knew I died
hers. In these thoughts I was when Melanthe sent by her Mistress, came to see
if I was yet alive, after she had (a little undrawing the Curtain) beheld me in
that weak condition, some tears which her commiseration had extracted running
down her cheeks, she asked me softly how I did. Turning my head toward her, I
asked her if there was any body besides her self in the room, after that she
had told me no, ' Melanthe (said I) if thou have any compassion on my
deplorable estate, as I am apt to think by the testimony of those tears which I
see thee shed, render me one favor before I depart this world, which though it
cannot be requited, shall yet be preserved as the greatest obligation you could
ever do me, those small moments I have to live. Sir, (said she) let me but know
what it is my poor power is able to effect, and I shall not be more ready to
embrace the greatest happiness that could betide me, then I shall be to render
you that service I am able, though it be to the hazard of my life. I thanked
her with the obligeingest terms I could devise, and then I proceeded thus. The
thing which I shall desire is so great, that I cannot acknowledge a greater
obligement, it is to dispose your Princess to felicitate that small remainder
of my life with her presence, and to do me that favor to make this last visit
alone except your self, because I have something of importance to communicate
to her, which till I have done, I cannot depart with my repose, this is the
last and greatest favor I may ever require, therefore good Melanthe if thou
regardest the repose of a man so deplorable, let it be quickly least my death
prevent this desired happiness. Melanthe gave me some assurance that she knew
Amenia would not be so ungrateful for all my former services done to her
father, as to deny me so small a request, with this she departed the room.
Amenia (who made me acquainted with every thing afterward) received this not
without some alteration, but seeing I was near my end, she resolved what ever
came of it to yield to so just a request, and to render me so small a favor,
for all my services done her father, besides her love to me obliged her to
comply to so small desires, and not without some curiosity to know what I had
to tell her. Melanthe imagined the truth of what I had to say which she hid
from Amenia, lest (though she desired nothing more) following the severity of
her humor, it might have stopped her coming. In less than half an hours space I
saw her enter the chamber, with none but Melanthe, which gave me great joy, but
accompanied with a fear that caused a general tremour through out my body.
After she had seated her self as near my bedside as she could, I looked upon
her with a languishing eye, which seemed to crave het pity to accompany me to
the grave, and did not insensibly behold that beauty, which as near the grave
as I was, had power to give me a resurrection, though I expected nor hoped for
any such thing. I beheld her a while with silence, and confusion, till I saw
the consideration of my deplorable condition had drawn some tears from her
eyes, and then ushering my words with a sigh, I spoke to her thus. 'Madam, I
have precipitated my self into a boldness altogether inexcusable, could I
otherwise have left the world with repose? This boldness could not be consented
to but at the last exigent, and yet even now I cannot excuse nor accuse my own
temeritie, but I am persuaded your compassion is so great, and your goodness so
far exceeding others, that you will account my death a sufficient expiation of
my crime. Amenia would not permit me to go on in those terms, but very softly
spoke thus to me. ' Euripedes, I cannot without interrupting you hear you call
that a crime, which I account a duty incumbent on me. It is a charity
acceptable to the gods to visit the distressed, and a sign of great inhumanitie
not to afford our assistance to the afflicted, and especially to those whose
obligements require greater services, and would condemn us to an eternal
remorse, if we sought not all ways, wherein honor, is not interested, to
satisfy their desires. I am come therefore Euripedes, not accounting that a
boldness, which puts me in mind of a duty that I ow both from my fatherrs
commands, and to obligements of the highest nature from Euripedes, whereby I
may render the last, but the least satisfaction to them and may be endeavored
a fuller, if the gods answer the expectations of our prayers, for a life so
considerable to us. I would gladly hear what it is you have to say, and account
it a farther obligation to your merits, in that you make me the depositary of
your secrets, but that I fear your much speaking might increase the
indisposition you are in, and it may be hasten that death which the gods may
yet defer; this consideration Euripedes makes me request you not to incommode
your self by speaking, unless your repose absolutely depend thereon, for I am
not able to see you die without being more sensible of it than you think, nor
your weakness without my share in it.

These words were a cordial to my heart, and I found so much sweetness in them
that I accounted it a panacea sent me immediately from the gods to cure those
inwards wounds by a hope inspired from thence, but the consideration how
differnt I might affect her by the words I was about to utter, made me resume
my despair, and as soon as she made a little stop; 'Madam (said I with a very
enfeabled voice) this goodness of yours is surpassing that of mortals, and I
could not have expected so charitable speeches out of a mouth less divine,
which fills me with unexpressable sorrow in that I must abuse it, and that my
repose cannot be, unless I utter that which I fear will make you contradict
what you have said, and instead of desiring my repose, condemn me to an eternal
torment; my only hopes are, the end of my speeches will put a period to my
life, that I may not bear that sentence with me, to disturb my repose in the
the Elizian fields, which (it may be) in justice may be pronounced against me.
Madam, those obligations you mention were never to be found in me, and those
small services I had the honor to do your father have had a glorious
recompense, since you have mentioned them far beyond their deserts, being the
glory that accompanied them in serving one so noble, had over and above
satisfied the smalnesse of the actions. But ah Madam! you say you bear a share
in my miseries, but alas! shall I trespass upon your goodness? or may I tell
you, without a condemnation worthy of that I am about to declare, that you are
the cause of these my torments? Ah Madam, reflect on your own beauty, and
imagine whether it were possible for me to remain so near those attractions and
be impassible, I felt their influence in beholding an inanimate essigies, and
judge what the effect could be in living in the intuition, which the most
accurate hand in the world could never give the least shadow of, consider
whether it were possible they should not inspire thoughts of a happiness so far
beyond my capacity, and make me, though out of hopes, to vow my self eternally
yours. I beseech you hear me after this free confession, and consider my love
by my respect, which had imposed a perpetual silence on my lips, and made me
content to: render you those services which could be expected from one truly
loving, without expecting any other satisfaction, than that in doing them to
you, which truly was reward and happiness enough, besides the effects of that
goodness which inseparably accompanies you, and by which I was continually
rewarded beyond my deserts. Let me also beseech you not to judge this
unpardonable fault according to the rigor it might deserve, but mitigate it
with thoughts truly worthy of your self and wonted clemency. Consider I have
not had this imprudency of acknowledging it till the last moment of my life,
though the pains inseparable to such a condition might have excused it, and by
that consider how fearful I was to lose a happiness I lived in, and how loath I
was to have disturbed your repose by this confession which could not but have
been fatal to me, and how careful I have been to conserve it to my own ruin
rather than to declare it, but by my services. At last grant one favor more,
that after this confession, if it has suscitated an indignation against
Euripedes, yet remember him not as a so after his death, but let that make a
perfect expiation of all his faults, nor envy him this happiness that he dies
yours.

'Now, O ye gods! take this life away which you have given me, and preserved
with honor enough, since you have given me the happiness to serve Amenia, and
deny not this felicity since you have permitted me to serve her, with an
affection pure and unspotted, and worthy your selves. Deny me not, I say, this
happiness at this instant to expire for her.

I saw Amenia was ready to return me an answer, and that my words had
suscitated a redness in her cheeks, but I was not so skilful to know what it
might portend, and fearing the event, with the imbecillitie I had put my self
to in speaking, I fainted away just as she began to speak, the fear she was in
made her screek out, and call Melanthe to recover me, after they had both used
many means though it were long first, at last they made me open my eyes, but
with so languishing and dying an air, that drew tears from Amenia, which she
fought to hide with her handkerchief. Before she could dissipate that trouble
that opposed her utterance; 'Madam (said I looking on her with confusion, which
expressed my passion more powerfully than my words) are you resolved then to
make me hear the sentence of your indignation? or will you forbid me the
happiness to die? my resolutions are unchangeable of dying yours, and I cannot
have a more happy time than now to expire. Surely I have not many moments to
live, but seeing your self have caused me to live them, I ought to be content
though it be more grievous then to die, and hearken to that which will prove
either my eternal torment or consolation in the other world, for the one I
fear, for the other I cannot hope. A little silence succeeded my words when she
broke it in this manner. What shall I say, Euripedes, you have surpised me,
and you will pardon me if I say I can hardly believe you; but if it be true
that that little beauty the gods have given me, have had such power over you,
the respect you always bore me pleads for the mitigating of a severity, which
this confession might have made me resolve upon, and tells me that it is
injustice to pass any other sentence, then to command you to live, and if the
power of my words can contribute to it, I shall not only command, but entreat
you to conserve a life that is so considerable to our interests, and if I may
say so to me too, and that you banish those thoughts that may any ways disturb
your repose. I know (proceeded she after a sigh which forced its passage in
spite of her suppression) it will be a sollie to command you not to love me,
if your passion be so strong as you exhibit it, but I must impose the same
silence which has accompanied you to this hour concerning this thing, and not
to trouble me with an affection I am like never to reanswer, you are not
ignorant my father has destined me to another, and I shall never contradict
his will. Live therefore Euripedes, but live as you have hitherto done, and by
that you will testify your love more than by all the words you can use to me,
however if it be possible withdraw your affections, if it be not I shall judge
of the purity of them by your actions. Is there no hope then (replied I) this
apprehension made me a second time faint in her presence, and so long it was
before Melanthe could fetch life in me, that they both thought it had utterlie
abandoned me, at last as the fates would, I opened my eyes, but I beheld
Amenia's so full of tears, that I could not but draw comfort in that she pitied
me. 'Live Euripedes if thou wishest me any content, and if I must say so, hope
Euripedes that thou may not be indifferent to me. She presently held up her
hand before her face to hide that rubor her words had suscitated; although I
thought she spoke thus favorable to me, to hinder my design of dying, yet I
could not but draw a support from them. 'But must I live Madam (said I) with
that severe imposition? can any one having a passion like mine, live in a
continual restraint, and not be permitted to utter the least part of what they
suffer for others? 'Go not about (replied Amenia) to force me to that I cannot
consent to, if I were not my self restrained by the Laws of duty, Euripedes
might have more liberty; you force me to speak (being ashamed she had spoke so
much, which she testified by pulling her veil over her face) that which I
believe I ought to have concealed. 'If the gods intend me my life (said I)
which I will not seek to frustrate, seeing you command me to live to serve you,
I shall endeavor to satisfy your severity by the patient enduring of that
pain, which the restraint you have imposed upon me will bring.

Lilibilis entered at the conclusion of these words with Clotuthe to see me,
they both expressed their resentments for my indisposition, when I comforted
them, by telling them some of my pains were mitigated, and that I thought I
had passed the chiefest brunt which gave me hopes the gods would preserve my
life, this gave my deplorers some comfort, but none except Amenia and Melanthe
comprehended the drift of my speeches. They were soon caused to withdraw by the
Chirurgions order for fear of disquiing me, who desired me to be as silent as I
could, and to give my self rest. I found my self better able to obey his
proposition, since I had made known my mind to Amenia then before, but I spent
the chiefest part of that day in recounting Amenia's speeches, whereas I could
gather for my self little hope, so I could gain nothing to make me despair,
neither could I blame, nor excuse her severity, I resolved to obey her, and in
that obedience to perish or gain my satisfaction.

Amenia soon invented means to entertain her self alone with Melanthe, and
being entered her closet together; 'Did not I tell you Madam (said Melanthe
briskly) that the gods would be so propitious to your love, that you should
have no cause to complain? that passion wherewith he is imbued, is no slight
one, and he has given sufficient testimonies of a grand respect, be you
careful therefore that you draw not upon your self your own misery by your too
too much severitie. I hope you will pardon my audacitie Madam in proffering you
council, who are able to administer it to the whole earth, but even the wisest
prepossest with this passion, desire it from those of less abilities than
themselves, not being able to be their own Physicians, though they become very
good ones to others. Melanthe (replied that dear one) I accept of thy speeches
as coming from that zeal and love thou bear for my happiness, but I cannot
see that the gods are about to favor me so much as thou think, but
involving me more deep into a passion that gives me not a minutes repose, will
at length bury me in its ruins, this I foresee which takes away part of that
joy I otherwise might conceive for Euripedes Love. How can I propose to my self
any thoughts of enjoying him, whom to thee I must confess I dearly Love, when
my father has already given me to another, and whose will I can no ways
contradict? before I might have only bewailed my own unhappiness in affecting
him who might not have regarded me; but now to augment my misery I believe he
loves me, yet I dare not admit one thought of ever enjoying him. Before I only
deplored my own loss, but now his pains, and sufferings which I may cause
though I cannot help, overwhelmes me with more sad considerations. Do not think
I can see his afflictions and not be partaker with him, nor his misery without
accounting it my own; I cannot obey my own inclinations, because I cannot
disobey my father, who engages me to one I can never love, though my duty may
compel me to obey him. O dear Euripedes, too dear ever to be forgotten, pardon
my severity, since it is an affliction to my self, and as insupportable as it
can be to my dear Euripedes. I confess I have inflicted a punishment upon thee
too too rigorous, but it is as great a one to me in that I debar my self so
great happiness. Melanthe was fain to interpose, and with reasons never wanting
to that witty wench, still gave her some beam of comfort in her deepest
afflictions. 'The gods (said she) ought not to be distrusted, before you only
complained that his inclinations were unknown to you, you considered not the
diffiuclties which now you propose, or if you did, at least less considerable,
the gods having been thus propitious, it should induce you to believe, that
they intend your content, and will give happy issue to your love. Do but your
endeavor to conform your mind to their wills, and though you see so many
difficulties, it is but to make your enjoyment the more sweet, for those things
are the most highly prized which have cost us the most travel, and the most
pains, and the difficultest conquest, gains the most glory. Many other means
and speeches Melanthe, used to settle a humor thoroughly disturbed with love and
despair, which wrought so upon her, that she withheld not from her; her most
secretest thoughts, and accounted her self happy in her sidelity.

Within two or three days the gods sent me a very savourable Crisis, and my
Chirurgions gave Lilibilis some hopes of my recovery, which was generally
desired, as my sickness was lamented by them. Three weeks passed away, my
sickness decreasing, in which time I was visited by Amenia almost every day,
and sometime alone only with Melanthe, which made me with some difficulty obey
her too too rigorous commands, nevertheless I exhibited through my eyes that
passion which my tongue prohibited to demonstrate, and by a silent declaration,
gave her proofs of my affection and obedience. I taught my eyes to play the
Orator, and with a mute Rhetoric described all the passions of my soul; which
was perceived by Amenia, and would, had her affection been capable of it,
increased it toward me; my obedience gained upon her heart, and my eyes speak
so powerfully, that they needed not the adjuvation of the tongue. I accounted
my self happy in that I had so frequent a sight of Amenia, and thar she
expressed so much care for my recovery. There was never a day passed likewise,
but I was visited by Clotuthe who continued her services to that hight, that
always made me ashamed that I was so respected. In this state I remained till
I had gathered so much strength as to leave my bed, and walk about my Chamber.
My Rival who never appeared in my thoughts but with indignation, about that
time also left his bed, and being somewhat stronger than I, to please
Lilibilis, was led into my Chamber, accompanied with Clotuthe, Amenia, and
others, who came to see me. As Soon as they were entered; I have brought '(said
Lilibilis) a prisoner who cannot be set at liberty but by your sentence, nor
receive that life we have given him but by acknowledging it your gift. This was
according to Lilibilis his humor, but I well perceived that Mandone did not
well resent it; however I returned him this Answer not without some repugnancy:
'Were he criminal I should soon free him if it lay in my power, being due both
to his valor and merits, his temerity may be excused in that he thought me his
Rival, and cannot be imputed to him as criminous, being he acted through that
suggestion: for the other he knows so well how to preserve his life by his own
valor, that he need not ask it of any living. This facilitated his complying
with Lilibilis his request, and made him stoop his imperious humor, and after
our first embraces, (which were cold enough on both sides, and showed a great
antipathy between us, what ever our words were to please Lilibilis) he returned
my first speeches with very humble ones, acknowledging that life which he
retained to be the effects of my goodness, in that I had spared it being at my
mercy, and that he should look upon it as my donation. I returned his with the
like, which were accompanied with many others, too long to relate, and in
outward appearance we seemed very good friends, to the great satisfaction of
Lilibilis. Three days after he came again to take his leave of me, being his
father hearing he was recovered, had sent a letter for him with a band of men
to conduct him to Juliobriga, we parted very friendly according to outward
ceremonies, although we desired nothing more than each others death; I was very
glad he had left me the liberty of entertaining Amenia with more freedom by his
departure, for I feared his jealousy might have been some impediment to my
visiting her. But before he departed he made Lilibilis to promise him, not to
delay the time any longer of his possessing Amenia than that following Summer,
which he was willing to spend in the exercise of Mars against his enemies, and
to consecrate the next winter to the sports of Venus; this being concluded, he
departed, and by his absence left me great content, though this agreement had
suscitated some fear.

The winter was almost consumed before I was permitted to leave my Chamber, and
in all that time I enjoyed a happiness not to be paralleld, in the most desired
visits of Amenia, my content in her visitations gave ease to those torments
which I suffered, and the fear of loosing those favors by which I lived, as
well as the fear I had to transgress her commands, obserated my lips, and kept
my tongue under a perpetual restraint; our talk was most commonly on
indifferent things, and if at any time I had let slip the least word tending to
love, or that might make her take notice of my passion, my cheeks were left
destitute of their Rubor, and a trepidation seized on my body; so fearful was
I by transgression, to loose the happiness I enjoyed. My obedience confirmed me
in her breast, and gave her most terrible cruciations, in that she was reduced
to an obedience contrary to her inclinations, by the duty she owed to her
father. This made her sigh in secret, and send forth rivers of tears, which
would have washed away that vivisicent color that adorned her cheeks, had not
the comforts of her Melanthe stopped those silver streams in the midst of their
distillations. Nevertheless though she perceived the languishing of my eyes,
and found them powerful operators upon her soul, and considered that they
implored the assistance of my tongue to tell her the torments I endured, yet
could not these considerations subdue her severity, though her self deserved
not to use it against me, but she would not countermand what before she had
commanded, and likewise she thought she should have been too weak to have
withstood both the assault of my eyes, and tongue together and made her yield
with her inclinations contrary to her fan^ied severitie. I will not repeat the
world of Discourses she had with Melanthe concerning the severitie of her
humor, and how often she had been about to let me know the affection she bore
me, being overcome by the powerful persuasions of that wench, and how often
she blamed her self for her own thoughts, and accused her self as guilty of the
most heinous crimes, at the least commitment againt her severe humor; yet all
her severity could not withold her from seeing me daily, and redring me that
satisfaction for my imposed silence, as also to give her self that
divertisement in my company which she was not capable of in my absence. Though
my sequent Am^retta's were so unfortunate, and those that made me an adversary
to love; yet I must confess this was with singular innocence, that we enjoyed
through a powerful and secret Sympathy one with another, and that life I have
accounted amongst the most happiest of my days* which I have spent in the
company of Amenia, whose innocent and pleasing conversation, often put my soul
into a posture of tranquillity, and rapt my soul into a contemplative enjoyment
of that which afterward I received more really, but hardly with more delight.

Thus I had almost passed over the winter, in the sweet conversation of Amenia,
never breaking my imposed silence; when Lilibilis had notice given him that the
Chief of the Gallicians, desired him with the chief of his men, to meet them on
the borders of the Austures, that they might consult for the general good
concerning their next Campaign, and in what manner they should oppose their
enemies. They sent him word that Caesar was returned to Rome, and had left the
Legions with Antistius, a valiant Captain, and who with all speed was mustering
his Forces to assail them, and to begin the War, though it was so soon.
Lilibilis soon departed with the chief of his Commanders, leaving a great
charge on Clotuthe to be careful of me, and desired me to contribute what I
could to my health, that I might be in a condition to render him that help
which he hoped for from me, and on which he depended more than on his Army. I
would have persuaded him to let me accompany him, but he utterly refused it in
consideration that my weaknsse was not so well recovered, but that so sudden a
jorney might have thrown me into a relaps. When I saw he would not let me
accompany him, I told him that I would cherrish my self, as much as his absence
possible could give me leave, and that I only desired my life to loose it in
his service, to which I had destinated the remainder of my days: He replied in
very civil terms, having nothing of Barbarism in him, and after our mutual
embraces he departed, leaving me to the care of those, whose love had made them
incapable of having their care of my health augmented by his commands or
entreaties. The second day after Lilibilis his departue, I was set in my
chamber by the fire in a very deep melancholy ruminating, on the different
tyrannies of the God of Love, and considering how deeply I was engaged in a
passion, that had cost me so many tears, and so much trouble, and yet had
received nothing but a severe Law from the mouth of my goddess, when her
Melanthe suddenly entered my Chamber, and surprised me in the midst of those
tears, which my ardent passion had extracted from my eyes. That Maid whom
affection had tied to my interests, excused her so sudden and uncivil entrance,
(as she termed it) with very good language, and desired my pardon for her
incivilitie. I soon made her understand how glad I was of her company, and how
much I desired an opportunity of entertaining her alone. She told me she came
from her Mistress, who had sent her to excuse her, in that she had not seen me
that day, by reason of an indisposition which had made her keep her Chamber. I
replied, I was unworthy the honor she did me in taking so great a care of my
welfare, and that I could entertain the assurance of my own death with less
trouble then to understand she was indisposed in her health. The Maid
reanswer'd, that there was no fear of any danger in her Mistress indisposition,
and that she made no question but that she would visit me the next day, and pay
me interest for that days neglect; we spent some time in these interlocutions,
till at last, after I had forced her to sit down, I uttered my self in these
terms. ' Melanthe you cannot be ignorant of the cause of those tears you have
surpised me in, which are but a small part to what I daily and almost hourlie
offer to a severitie which has made me mute. You know I have manifested my
love, and you do not ignore to what a cruel silence I was condemned: I have not
hitherto transgressed it, though all the world is ignorant, with what torment I
undergo it, I continually sigh, languish, and spend my time in tears, and yet
dare not declare my misery, which is the only and considerable ease others
troubled with the like passion enjoy. Was there ever such a Law imposed on any
as is on me? which makes me live in the continual languishment of my soul, and
in the daily conversation and intuition of the object of all my suspirations,
and still to lock up my lips by severity not to be parralel'd. I know Melanthe,
though sickness has not killed me, that grief will, if not mitigated by some
relaxation, but if I die, it will be a happiness in that it is by keeping a Law
imposed upon me, by that mouth which I so much adore, whereby she shall see
Euripedes can never be guilty of transgressing the severest of her commands. I
find some ease in declaring this to thee, what allevament should I find in
disburdening my self to her? but since she has enjoined the contrary, I must,
I will undergo it with silence to the death, and last expiration of a soul
totallie hers, and which lives only to do her service. She did not bid me
(Melanthe) to speak of love to no body else, therefore I hope I have not
transgressed in speaking to you, nevertheless I desire you not to make her
acquainted with it, lest her severity may impute it as a transgression to me. I
dare not sue, or desire, O Melanthe, to have this imposition taken off, but you
may conceive with what joy I should receive the revocation of so strict a Law;
but I doubt I am faulty in in that I desire to have that taken off, which was
imposed by Amenia, though it be more grievous, and less easy to be born than
death. Sir, (replied Melanthe) your virtues have made me inseparably yours, as
far as the duty I owe my Mistress, and the pudicity of my sex give me leave: I
will not tell you how often I have endeavored her, to revoke that which she
had imposed upon you, and which I saw you bore with a patience not to be
parralel'd, because my andeavours proved in vain to cause her revoke what she
had once commanded. I know the severity of her humor is such, that she will
endure the greatest afflictions rather than break it; and this severity is very
strange which she uses toward you, strange in that she afflicts you whom she
desires not to afflict, and strange in that she no less afflicts her self, in
that she is so severe to you, and that her humor is so strictly tied, to the
severity of her own Law, that she will rather endure what she suffers than
break it. She her self has told you Sir, [therefore I may say it without any
infidelity to my Lady] that you are not indifferent to her, but being tied by
the cruel Laws of duty, (cruel in that it makes her contradict her own
inclinations, and cruel because they will require her death rather than the
breach of them) she must be obedient to him who has that Sovereign authority
over her, which were it otherwise, Euripedes might not receive so sensible
afflictions, nor her self such cruciations. If my counsel be not too
presumptuous, I should advise by no means to break that Law she has imposed,
till necessity require it, content your self in that she both sees, knows and
feels your afflictions. If I have been too lavish of my tongue, I doubt not but
you will treasure up in secret what I have told you that I may not be accused
of infidelity to her, whose severe humor could never pardon me. The
afflictions I saw you suffer, engaged me to let you know this, that from it you
might exprome comfort in your greatest distress. I could not choose but embrace
Melanthe at the end of these words, and give her to understand how extremely
sensible of these obligations I was, both by my transports and words. We had a
great deal of discourse tending to this matter, whereby I found great ease in
the assurance she gave me, that it was not want of affection in Amenia, in that
I was condemned to silence, and in that she was so severe, but only in
obedience to the rules of her duty, and dictates of a natural severiety. After
she had given me new assurances of her service in every thing she was able
without being unfaithful and disloyal to Amenia, she left me in some repose
bette^han she found me.

She was no sooner departed, but I set my self to contemplate on that which I
understood from her, and giving way to believe what I desired, I began to
possess my self with most pleasing imaginations, but I had not long entertained
my self with them, when I was diverted by hearing one at my Chamber door, I had
then no servants with me, by reason I had bid them leave me alone that I might
with more freedom entertain my thoughts, which made me open the door my self,
where I found one of Clotuthe's women, whom I had seen always the most
familiar with, and who constantly bore her company in her visits to me. Being
entered my Chamber, I began to enquire after the health of Clotuthe, she told me
she was very much afflicted, and that without a speedy relief she was like to
perish under a disease which she had hid from the eyes of all the world. What
(said I being startled) is Clotuthe sick then? yea Sir, (answered the woman)
and if it were not for some hope which I have inspired, that one who can
recover her if he will, will be so merciful to her as to do it, she had been
by this time past complaining, it is my persuasions alone keeps her alive, and a
hope which I have inspired. O gods! (cried I) can that man live, who is able to
recover Clotuthe, and will not believe himself made happy, if in doing her the
smallest service he receive his death? O gods! must he be entreated; nay, and
has she but small hopes he will do it? Let me know this Monster, that with the
point of my sword I may make him more sedulous, and desire not only to help her
but to lose his life a hundred times were it possible for her preservation.
Sir, replied this subtle woman, I can hardly believe but that he will seek her
preservation, being the most generous man living, and truly Sir it is your self
must either kill or cure Clotuthe. I was so startled, and confounded at these
words, that I had no time to enter into the meaning of them, nor perceive the
scope of this woman's speeches, but stepping back replied amazedly, How I? has
she perceived so much ingratitude in me, that she has so little hopes I will
not sacrifice a thousand lives if I had them, to do her service? I beseech you
explain which way I am able to do her any service, for I am so confounded that
it is past my imaginations to comprehend which way her life depends on me. This
woman thinking she had sufficiently prepared me, and seeing how eager I was to
do her service, doubted very little but that she should accomplish her design.
Clotuthe her self (said she) shall illuminate your understanding, though I
cannot believe you can be ignorant which way to serve her, and in that service
to redeem a life which is about to be sacrificed to your Hallucination. With
that she drew forth a letter out of her sleeve and presented to me. Her last
words astonished me more than the former, but be^ieving the letter would
dissipate all doubts, I greedily open'dit, where I read to this purpose.

Clotuthe to Euripedes.
THese black lines, suitable to the nigritude of my crime cannot blush, nor
fear those titubations which might accompany a verbal confession, so absolutely
against the pudicity that should be inseparable to our sex, and especially in
the condition I am in; Let these confess what my pudor could never utter,
though assisted by time and opportunity. I had thought that my actions, my
looks and ambiguous words, might have exhibited my passion, without so open
agnition, but you were either wilfully blind, or else very obtuse in your
apprehensions not to see that which gave me so terrible cruciations, and which
I exhibited plain enough to be understood, by any less wilful, or less blind
than your self. This is it that has brought me to that pass, that as I have no
desire, so I have no hope to live, without the compassion of Euripedes. I have
preconside^ed how criminal I am, and what inverecundity I use to make known
this perturbation: but being brought to this exigent I cannot die satisfied
without letting you know I die for you, and that the grave may witness my
affection, I desire no longer to retain a life so culpable, but till I have
heard that cruel sentence, which I must expect from one so just as your self,
to perfect my tragedy. Yet O generous Euripedes, let this crime after my death
be sepeliz'd in the grave of oblivion, but if you remember me with regret,
consider too, that I died for the expiation of my fault, though death be too
small an expiament for the crime of the guilty and unfortunate

CLOTVTHE.


I Read not this Letter without exhibiting by my face those perturbing passions
which it suscitated in my breast, I a hundred times changed color, and my
trouble was so great that I could hardly accomplish the reading of it. That
gestatrix perceived my perturbation, yet I believe she knew not whether it
presaged good or ill, she was about to assure her self by words, when I cried
out. The gods have undone me! I expressed my affliction by iterating those
words often, without being capable of uttering more. Why have the gods undone
you? (said she composing her countenance as well as she could) I rather think
they have made you happy, were you able to see it, I thought what would become
of your great protestations to do her service when you were tried. Woman (said
I with an angry tone) tell me not of doing her service in so unlawful an
action, I know it would be the greatest disservice I could do her, to blemish
her honor eternally by illicit actions, the very thoughts thereof are to me
more cruel than death, would there were but any occasion offered to do her
service, wherein her, nor my honor might be contaminated, you should see how
willingly I would embrace a death in the performance. I honor Clotuthe, and I
honor her so much, that I will first lose my own life before I will defile
hers, or I will banish my self this place, seeing I have made others criminal.

After these words I walked a turn or two, in a very confused posture, and then
stopping suddenly with an action not to be expressed, I cannot believe (said I
looking again on the letter) that Clotuthe can be guilty of this letter; the
virtuous Clotuthe could never do it, this is some plot of my enemies to beguile
innocent Euripedes, but O my enemies, you shall never entrap him in such
illicit actions. The woman seeing me so transported, had not the confidence to
interrupt me, but hearing me go on in this, she at last fell into a thousand
protestations, adding innumerable oaths, calling all the gods to witness that
it was no design of my enemies, and that it was only Clotuthe, who waited but
her return to receive her death, therefore she desired me to take pity on her,
and remember how careful she had been of me, and that I should not cause the
death of the fair and amiable Clotuthe by standing upon a foolish point of
honor. I was so moved that I heard not many other words that she said. Ah
would the gods (at last cried I out) had verified my hopes, and have given me
no cause to complain against Clotuthe, by letting it have been a plot of my
enemies, with how much less trouble could I have bore it, and with what shame
should I have confounded my enemies. Think not by your persuasions (said I
turning to the woman) nor by your implorations to gain me to that which must be
a spot of infamy to us both eternally. Have I received so much kindness, so
much honor, so much love from Lilibilis, and shall I abuse it with so great
deceit, so much vileness, and so great an abuse, as to defile his bed? the gods
certainly would dart thunders upon my head, and the great God of Hospitality
would Eternally plague me, should I be guilty of such a thought. O Clotuth,
would, instead of preserving it, you had abandoned this life to ruin, then had
I never been guilty of hearing this proposal, nor it may be you altogether so
criminous. O Lilibilis, how well indeed should I requite your favors, by doing
you the greatest of injuries! To defile Clotuthe and dishonor my self for
ever: No, no, cease to urge me to so great a crime. That impudent woman replied
thus: Sir, I did not think you would have been less generous in this action
for Clotuthe than you have been in all things else, if you consider her love,
and life, they will bear down those weak reasons you allege. For, what
dishonor or infamy can it be, to love her whose love is so unparallelable,
and when none in the world else can discover it, and when you receive an
affection, that any in the world besides your self, would account a happiness,
to be envied of the Gods themselves? That reason of Honor is nothing, it being
but an outside, and can receive no distain but in the eyes of others, which
cannot be procured by this, being unknown. Besides, in my mind that is the
greatest honor whereby we receive proofs of it from others, to the advantage
of our selves, which you do in this, the other being but imaginary, this real,
though secret. But if she is willing to forgo that point for you, why should
you be so scrupulous as not to do so much for her? seeing she lives not but by
being yours, why then should you refuse to be hers? Nevertheless, if her love
cannot move you, let the consideration of her death cause you to pity her, if I
grant you that it is a crime (which can hardly be thought so, seeing the Gods
themselves have authorized it by their own actions); think, whether it be not a
greater crime, to cause her death by so much rigor, than to preserve her life
with so much ease, and pleasure to your self. Fear not that the Gods will
punish that, which themselves are examples of, no, they are too just to do so;
and as for Lilibilis, it would be far greater indignity to destroy Clotuthe
for all his favors, than to save her life with no wrong to him, especially
being unknown. Consider, I beseech you, her death is inevitable, and if you
refuse her, her shame will not let her live. Oh, be not so hard-hearted, if you
cannot do it with complacencie, force your self to save a life, which else will
be laid to your charge.

I admire how I heard her so long, but she had proceeded farther if I had not
put an end to her speeches; my choler being raised to the height: Woman (said
I, my face showing my resentment) were thou not of that sex; which would be a
dishonor to me to hurt, I would cruelly chastise thee for these speeches: I
know Clotuthe never gave you so large a Commission to treat as you do, her
Letter though it be criminal, is not so inverecund. I believe she her self
would punish thee if she knew it, and be ashamed of what thou have spoken in
her behalf: being thou belongest to her whom I truly honor, I force my self to
forget what you have said, that you may not appear before me as a Monster. Tell
Clotuthe that it is impossible for me to be ungrateful, but I cannot satisfy
her no other ways, than by laying my life at her feet: if she looks for other
satisfaction I have none; however, I will be so careful of her Reputation,
that even my self will forget that ever I received such a Letter from her, that
she may not appear criminal in my thoughts. Tell her, I would come to visit
her, but that I doubt my Company would be but a disturbance, and suscitate
those motions which I desire my absence may banish, and make her incur danger
of discovering to others what her prudence hitherto has hid, and which rather
than it should be known my life should expire at her feet. With these words I
left the Woman, and entering a Closet in the Chamber I gave her leave to depart.

There I called to my remembrance Clotuthe's former kindnesses, her speeches
and past actions, and with what fervency and care she performed many things for
me, I could then perceive there was a passion in all she did, and her ambiguous
speeches were now manifested, and in fine I wondered that I could not perceive
it all that while, being openly enough exhibited, but I was so far from
thinking of yielding to her, that the more I thought upon her, the more odious
she seemed to me, and in consideration of Amenia, I rather began to hate her
than love her. My thoughts likewise exhibited to me the great trouble and
vexation was like to ensue if she persisted in it, but if my disdain should
cause her hatred, as it was very likely it should; I saw on that hand as great
danger and trouble as might be on the other; I feared nothing but ruining my
pretentions for Amenia, by stratagems never wanting to enraged women. My life I
valued not, but I feared she might procure my banishment, which would be far
more g^ievous than death. A thousand thoughts came thronging into my mind all
representing some disaster to ensue, and methought this evement had already
ruined my hopes. I complained against the gods, inveighed against Clotuthe,
spoke against my self, and in these transports I spent a good part of the night
before I came forth of the closet. When I was in bed my imaginations hardly
suffered me to take any sleep; sometimes me thought I saw Clotuthe like a fury
assailing me, and endeavoring to tuine me, by and by she was represented
acting part of her resentment against Amenia, using her with violence and
rigor, this gave me real cruciations, though it were but a thought; and made me
often exclaim against her with the bitterest words I could invent, then I saw
her in my imaginations acting her own Tragedy, this caused me no less fear and
trouble on the other side, in consideration that she was the wife of Lilibilis,
whom I very much honored and loved; these troublesome thoughts took away sleep
and rest, with some that love injected for Amenia, and I hardly gained a
slumber that night, which also was interrupted with dreams of the like nature,
those Idaea's exhibiting themselves in my sleep.

The next day I was visited by Amenia, and her presence dissipated part of
those troubles which continually employed my imaginations, and gave me that
relaxation which nothing besides her self could do. We passed our time as we
used to do, in very ordinary discourse, and though she loved me well, yet had
she hardly the confidence to six her eyes upon mine when she spoke, and when
she perceived how intentively I beheld her, my eyes taking that liberty which
was denied my tongue, it made her blush out of the knowledge that she
understood those dumb orators, yet was she so cruel as not to take off her
imposition. At last Amenia made me acquainted with her mothers sickness, but
she knew not the cause; she desired me to go along with her to give her a
visit, I was afraid to discover it to Amenia, by denying to go, and I knew my
presence would do her hurt in consideration that I was the cause of it. I was
very loath to do Clotuthe so much wrong as to discover her weakness to any,
which made me go after two or three times invitation, wherein I could not deny
Amenia. I was troubled though, least Clotuthe might discover her self by some
action that my presence might cause; but my chiefest trouble was, least that
visit might give her any encouragement to persist in her love, or cause her to
believe I would not be altogether averse from her, or might yield to that which
was so odious to me. With this trouble I accompanied Amenia to Clotuthe's
chamber, we found none there but that woman who brought me her letter, for
Clotuthe desired few of her other women's company, being all ignorant of the
true cause of her grief. After Amenia had rendered her what she thought was
required from her, and testified what share she bore in her egritude by many
words full of sweetness and compassion, I approached her bed side, but with so
great fear and trembling, that I could not express my self a great while, her
color went and came very often at my approach, which showed an extraordinary
motion within her. 'Madam (said I after I had stood a while silent) I cannot
yield to any in the world that superiority of having a more sensible affliction
of your egritude than my self, and I cannot believe I injure truth if I say I
feel little less dolor than your self. How joyful should I be! and how happy
should I account my self, if by the sacrifice of my life the gods would recover
you to your pristine estate, I should offer it with more content, than I ever
shall receive while you are in this condition, and were your sickness depending
upon my life only, this moment should be the last of your grief.

She understood these words, and perceived what I meant by them, I saw they had
raised an extraordinary color in her face, and her eyes expressed the great
desire she had to speak, but Amenia's presence deterred her, she was not more
sorry than I was glad that she was there, but that subtle woman who knew her
desire found means to draw Amenia to the window, and Melanthe who attended her
stood at a distance, out of respect. Clotuthe glad of this opportunity
answered me softly, but so as I could hear her distinctly. ' Eur^pedes (said
she without looking me in the face, but hers was tinctured with ^e^^^^ion all
over) I cannot reproach you for your virtue, nor call you cruel though you slay
me; I am not ignorant what virtue is, though I have not the power to fol^ow it.
It shames me to our-live a fault I have committed against Lilibilis, my own
pudor, and your virtue, by the overruling of that implacable tyrant Love, but
I am so carefully watched, that I cannot gain an opportunity to expiate the
crime of Lilibilis his wife, by the victim of Clotuthe. I have confessed, O
Euripedes, that I have loved you, I cannot deny it, and to my shame I must
still own it, in that love I must die, the bonds of duty were too weak to
restrain me from letting you know it, and I should not have accounted it
acceptable if you had been ignorant of it. I die Euripedes, and I die for you,
or rather for the fault of loving you, if it can be imputed to me since the
gods inspired it, and forced my inclinations to it. I know you are too generous
to divulge it, and if the fault of Clotuthe might give you an occasion to do
it, yet the love you bear Lilibilis will restrain you. After a little respite;
Your heart cannot be capable of pity, (continued she) no, no, Euripedos, let me
die to ease my self of that pain which is insufferable, but I do not believe
you desire I should live, since you alone are the cause of it. Her tears
stopping the rest of her words, she gave me time to answer her. O Madam (said
I) I have told you, and do again, that I never had more affection to do you
service than now I have. and shall ever retain it, so long as my honor may not
be blemished, nor the precepts of virtue broken. I value not the expiration of
my life could it ease you, and you should soon see it poured out at your feet,
did I think it would be pleasing to you, but I will, ah I will leave this
place, this place so affected by me, since I am the cause of your disrepose,
and it may be my absence may give you that again, which my presence has robbed
you of; Madam, with this resolution I leave you, seeing I can no otherwise ease
you, I will not be guilty of the expiration of that life, which with my own I
should account a happiness to preserve.

With this making a low obeisance I was about to depart, when Clotuthe, looking
upon me, with an air full of affliction. 'O Euripedes (said she) slay me not
immediately, nor be the cause of a sudden and unavoidable precipitation, you
say you will obey me in all things wherein virtue gives you leave, let me then
demand, entreat and implore your stay, depart not, for if you do, that moment
shall be the last of my life. The fault of Clotuthe is already enough to her
husband, without aggravating it by the banishment of him on whom Lilibilis puts
all his considence, for the keeping of our liberties and our lives. I had but
time to tell her that since she commanded my stay I would obey her, and that I
would sacrifice my life for their general good, since she would not receive it
as an oblation to satisfy her for the crime I had made her precipitate her
self into by my presence, when Amenia came to me and to my joy hindered all
other communication. I was not sorry she had commanded me to stay, for I could
not have departed without leaving my life behind me, and thereby she would have
taken a more cruel revenge than if with her own hand she had given me my death.
We had but little more discourse before we departed, leaving her to her
afflictions.

Amenia had sent to Lilibilis to let him understand of the sickness of
Clotuthe, he bore her a real affection, and that was the cause he came before
he was looked for, I was extreme joycus for his return, as well for the love I
bore him, as that I hoped his presence would deter Clotuthe in the pursuit of
her illicit Love. Lilibilis expressed a hearty sorrow for her egritude, and
embracing her with a tender affection, expressed his trouble by melting words,
the exhibiting of so ardent an affection made me in my thoughts extremely
vituperate Clotuthe for the wrong she had done him. Lilibilis made me
acquainted that the result of their meeting was to oppose the Romans as they
had done the last Summer, and to assist one another as opportunity should
serve. Antistius was drawing his forces together, and as we heard by our spies
that he intended to march against us, with all the speed he could. This made
Lilibilis to take the field that he might not be prevented by his enemy, and
gave order, to his chief Captains to appear at the Rendezvouze with that
celerity as their case required. I was then strong enough to bear arms, and
found my self as well able as ever to do Lilibilis service, and I longed to be
in the field, that I might be free from the supplications of Clotuthe's woman,
who still persecuted me, though I am persuaded it was unknown to Clotuthe, and
that it was either hope of reward or compassion on her, who continued in her
sickness, that made her seek to effect her desires, but she still found me
inexorable, as also that I might render more proofs of my affection to Amenia,
from whose presence and sweet conversation I received comfortable to make me
bear that silence imposed upon me with much patience, especially when I
considered it was Amenia's command, and that it was a character of my
affection, and would be looked upon so by her. But when I thought of departing
it was with a most sensible affliction, and insupportable, had it not been for
the service of Lilibilis, and for particular interests in serving Amenia. She
assured me afterward that she entertained the thought of my separation as the
cruelest displeasure that could have happned, and had no less grief for it
than my self. Her goodness was pleased to ^^nde something pleasing in my
conversation, and her love had tied her to me inseparably, and now she saw me
ready to be ravished from her, and it may be never like to return, but receive a
death in her service, she could not but almost evaporate her soul through the
sighs and tears that she shed. What (said she) shall Euripedes lose a life, a
life so dear to me? since I love him, since I have proved his, and that with
the hardest proofs, why should I not confess it to him? it may be it will make
him more careful of it when he knows he cannot lose it without endangering
mine; it may be it will so animate him, that it may be some conducement to make
him return conqueror over out insulting foe: deter it no longer scrupulous
Amenia, let him know thou acceptest of his affection. These motions on my
behalf were opposed by those of her severity, they represented her more
criminous by that action than by loving me, and that she could not do it
without offending against her severity, and her duty, knowing her father had
destined her for another. The^e conflicts wholly agitated her mind, she
resolving upon neither when the last day was come wherein Lilibilis intended to
take his leave. A little before this last days approach I exhibited the
afflictions of my heart by that trouble which appeared in my face, and by it
Amenia read the greatness of my affection and of my sorrow. She saw my life
was ready to leave me at this separation, and yet I endured her imposition with
a patience not to be equaled, but by my affection, and that I had resolved to
die rather than to break it: this consideration wrought a compassion, joined
with her love, that made her resolve to give me leave to take my leave of her
in private, but she was not resolved to make known any affection to me.
Melanthe let me know the favor Amenia intended to do me, and truly in spite
of all my trouble, this favor gave me a real consolation. Lilibilis intending
to depart very early the next morning; considering the illness of Clotuthe be
would not disturb her repose so early, therefore he took his leave of her that
night: I was resolved not to take my leave of her alone, least it should have
engaged her into a discourse which I was not willing to hear.

After Lilibilis had taken his leave of her with words and actions full of
affection, and not without many tears, I ^pproached her bed (which she still
kept) and with my ordinary Civilities took my leave. Lilibilis his presence
locked up her mouth, but her eyes showed she resented that action, and that she
saw I purposely made use of that time, to avoid her reproaches. Go Euripides
(said she at last) triumph over those enemies, and spare them not that would
rob Lilibilis of his right, it grieves me that I shall not live to have a share
in your glory. I knew she particularized her self, but the answer I returned
her, could give her no light that I understood her so. I made her a very low
obeisance, and left her, but Lilibilis hearing her speak of death cast himself
again into her arms, from which embraces I saw he was not likely soon to
depart, and having heard he had before bid his Daughter farewell, my
impatiencie made me immediately depart to Amenia's Chamber, whether I always
had a free access. She had disposed her self to receive me kindly, and had none
but Melanthe with her, I entered not without trembling, for fear I should break
at last what was imposed upon me. As Soon as I saw her I cast my self at her
feet, and embracing her knees fully transported, I was not able to utter one
word, I remained some time in that posture, till my ingeminated sighs had
cleared the passage for some words. Madam (said I) this favor is so glorious,
and so far beyond the merits of Euripedes that it has over and above satisfied
for all trouble, tears and sighs, which the most violent of passions, and most
severest of Commands have afflicted me with: Ah, how glorious a recompense I
find! But, may I Madam (continued I trembling and showing that fear which
possessed me, by my eyes, and faultring of my speech) may I have leave to break
that --. I could not go on through the appehension I had of offending her, but
casting down my eyes I exhibited my shame, for going about to transgress.
Amenia's silence gave me liberty to lift up my eyes full of tears to hers,
which I saw fixed intensively upon mine, and to proceed thus. Consider Madam
(ushering them with a sigh) I am going whether the Gods only know if I ever may
return; nay, I shall account it no disaster, but a glory to die in the service
of Amenia. If I am troublesome to her, or if I have offended her, my death will
be most welcome, in that it will take me from the world wherein I have no life
but what I enjoy by her presence; rewarding me for my presumption, it will
deter a farther arrogance, and through her goodness may expiate that crime I
have committed in aspiring to love her, but with so much purity, that the Gods
themselves could not be capable of more pure affections: and if my death
content her, it will also content me, being her Joy and her Grief are
inseparably mine. But if Amenia will out of her goodness, not regarding the
meannesse of my merits, let me not to be so indifferent to her, as to desire my
death, but rather that I should return in safety, that also confirmed by her
fair mouth, will give me this comfort if I die, that Amenia not regarding my
presumption, in exhibiting my passion, had out of her abundant goodness pitied
me, and not seen my death without regret, this will be glory enough for
Euripides, with that of dying in her service, and would give him no other cause
of trouble but that of leaving her. Ah Madam! (vehemently sighing again) have I
not observed your Commands hitherto, though more terrible than death? how far
easier had it been for me to have died, then to have observed this silence you
have imposed upon me! must I still? -- (stopping a little, then with a
supplicating Air) and must I depart without telling you -- I dared not to
proceed, but stopping with a fear that seized me, least I had proceeded too
far, and should abuse the favor she did me, I fell into a trembling that made
her extremely pity me. My passionate words accompanied with more passionate
actions, and gestures not to be expressed, but by those whose passions inspire
them naturally, raised so great compassion comitated with that great Love she
bore me, that made her say more than she had intended; and forced her severity
to give place. I cannot but admire considering the vehemence of her passion,
(which she protested to me afterward) that she had been so long Mistress of it.
Observing the trouble I was in, and being mollified with compassion, she raised
me from my knees with these words: Euripedes, I have bid thee already hope that
thou may not be indifferent to me, I do not yet forbid thee to hope it, and I
think I have in some part exhibited it by this reception, though I confess I
owe more to the merits and services of Euripedes. Euripedes is going to
conquer, Euripedes is going to expose his life against my foes, and to redeem
our Liberty with the expense of his own blood; and could I do less than give
Euripedes this favorable reception at his parting? I would not have Euripedes
think I can take any content at the loss of a Life, which I have with all my
ability endeavored to save; No, think not Euripedes that I can part without
trouble, and do not believe but the sweet conversation of Euripedes, has
gained too much upon my spirit, as not to make me extreme sensible of his
loss, nothing but the hopes of your return, with victory and more glory than
ever, could mittigate a lawful trouble for your departure, therefore by that
power you say I have over you, I command you not to expose that Life to
unnecessary dangers which shall be still prized by Amenia. I have not
disregarded your obedience and you cannot utter more than you have done
already: I can see that it continues without your declaring it by words: what
need you tell me you Love me, if I believe it? (These words tincted her cheeks
with a new Vermillion, but she went on without stop) I have bid you hope, and
were I not prohibited by the Laws of Duty, I would say more, what can you
desire of me Euripedes, is not this sufficient? She uttered these words with
her wonted sweetness, which wrought that effect upon my soul, as you Argelois
being so deeply touched with this passion, may conceive in the like case. They
had cast me into extraordinary Raptures, and I hardly remembered what I did, but
casting my self at her seet; though she sought to hinder it. Ah Madam (said I)
I shall find a very different death from what my sorrows would have caused. If
I expire now it will be in the greatest content in the world, and will hinder
me from seeing any more trouble: and were not my Joy mittigated, with the
consideration of leaving you, it would so exceed, that it would work the same
effects as a killing sorrow. Alas, what is Euripedes that you should have
thus felicitated him? with a more sensible happiness than if the Gods had
placed him among themselves? I cannot fear my enemies now, were I to encounter
with the whole world. Amenia forced me to rise, and shedding some tears: I
know not, Euripedes (said she) what it is that thus afflicts me, but I never
felt a sadder heart in all my life; and I cannot but fear that this parting
will prove satall. I cannot but fear I shall never see Euripedes more; but let
me once more entreat you not to precipitate your self into danger, and check
the exorbitancy of your courage by your Love, and by remembering that I impose
it upon you, and that I have desired to see you return, for the encouragement
whereof I tell you again, my self will endeavor for your happiness in all
things wherein I am not prohibited, by the precepts of duty, virtue and honor.
Madam (replied I, bowing almost to the ground) think not but I shall obey your
Commands, and with more care observe them than those of the Gods themselves,
and I question not but you can raise me to far greater happinesses then they
can without you. You have had so much trial of my obedience, that you cannot
justly doubt but that I will lose my life a hundred times (were it possible)
sooner than fail in observing them; especially when they are so glorious, and
contribute so much to my own happiness. You need not fear that the power of
the Roman^s is able to take away this life, since you have been pleased to
conserve it, and with it you have given me so great animosity, that I need not
fear but victory will attend me. At the finishing of these words Amenia entering
a little Closet, faut out a blew Scarce with a very large fair fringe, all
wrought with Gold and Silver, in flowers and other curious work (partly wrought
by her self and partly by Melanthe) bringing it in her hand; here Euripedes
(said she) wear this for a remembrance of what you owe me. I received it upon
my knee, with a world of satisfaction: Madam (said I) you are too deeply
insculpted on my heart to need any remembrancer, and I am too great an observer
of your commands to forget them. I will receive this as the most glorious of
gifts, and esteem it above my Life since it comes from the hand of my adored
Amenia. In receiving it I kissed it, and being filled with Raptures I cemented
my lips to that fair hand, and gave it some most ardent suaviations. She
permitted it a little, but believing I trespassed too much upon her modesty she
withdrew it, and raising me up, Go Euripedes (said she) and conquer where ever
thou comm'st, and where it is not lawful for thee with thy Arms, use thy
Virtue and none can withstand you. These words made me blush, but I answered:
Madam, I cannot fear to lose the Victory since you have bid me conquer? but I
shall not glory in all the Victories the Gods can give me, or in being a
greater Conqueror then Alexander, so much as in being your Captive, aye there
lies my happiness, and there lies my glory. After these words I took my leave,
and I saw some tears drop from Amenia's fair eyes at my deceding, which gave
me a consolation not to be uttered, and that night I spent in the contemplation
of my Happiness, where I had spent many in that of my miseries.

I have been longer than I thought to have been (continued Euripedes) in the
relation of my Amoretta's: but the great content I received in them then, has
conserved them fresh in my memory to this day, though I have passed troubles
enough since to oblitterate them: if I had had no worser success in the latter
than in the former I might not perchance have been so opposite to Love; but
those Aerumnal Loves far different than the former, rectified my reason, and
made me see with clearer eyes than those of a Lover. Love they say is a most
noble passion and leads one to most generous actions: true, if you consider it
without that effect of it desire; whilst that it interest's not it self in any
thing, but solely loves the object because it is lovely; truly then it is
noble, it is free, and all actions that it produces are truly generous; but if
you take Love as most do, though you consider it in those whose Virtues were
never blemish't by it, yet all those actions they exhibit to the world, which
may seem most generous, and most noble, are nevertheless servile and abject,
whilst desire as an inseparable accident accompanies their Love, and makes
those actions of seeming generosity to be but the effects of their own desire,
and in all they do, serve their own ends. I do not make mention of those whose
Loves carry them to base ends, being converted to Lust, and to do things odious
to them in their right reason: you will say, that none that are virtuous can be led
to such actions: whilst that Virtue lasts I confess they cannot, but I
believe, and know by experience, that this passion whereon we treat is able to
stifle the motions of Virtue, and to insinuate those of Vice, and make those
persons do that which being clear from this passion, they would detest, and
which could not be attributed to their natures but to the enforcement of their
passions. Some I know, whose Virtues are Eminent, do not yield in the least to
their passion but overcome it by their Virtue; and though they Love, they
cannot be said to be subjugated by it, because it is subordinate to their
Virtues. I do not speak this without reason, and this small digression may be
some preparative to what I shall relate: for, in my first Loves I acted nothing
against the precepts of Virtue; but afterward, whether my passions were more
violent, or less pure, they drew me into actions, that made me justly hate
both my self, and that passion which was the cause of them; which when you have
heard, though it may not make you hate a passion so deeply settled in you, yet
it may excuse my aversion; in that it caused me to do actions so detestable and
unworthy of my self, which has drew thousands of tears from my eyes, for some
small expiation of my follies. But I would not have you think I am an enemy to
Love rightly stated; for Love is the purest spark of the soul, and that which
illustrates the whole man, and I may truly say that it is the fountain of all
good, and without it man were not man: so the want of it is the chiefest cause
of all evil. But by this I mean that Love which never introduced any desire,
but being an emanation of the gods, acts it self to that which is most pure,
and does most partake of its essence; and I cannot call this a passion but a
fire taken off from the altar of the Gods; communicating nothing but what is
most pure and Celestial, and making the possessor of it like to the Gods
themselves. In this our two Geniis find a great matter of Contestation, for if
the one inspire it, or rather the Gods, and that seek to preserve it, our black
Demon endeavors to subvert it, and knowing that it is apt to work upon what
is fair and like it self, it exhibites beauty and formositie, and then stirring
up a sensual desire contaminates that luster, and almost suffocates that which
is the very life of all generous actions. Since I have retired into this
solitude, I have had time to Contemplate this and many other things, both of
the nature of Love, and the effects, and have learned to separate the dross
from the Gold: I might declare more of it, but I read an invitation in your
face to the prosecution of what is unfinish't, concerning my life, and in the
end you may perchance perceive that this discourse was not unnecessarie.
Argelois would willingly have represented his thoughts concerning Love, but
being more desirous to hear the end of his Love and Adventures: he favored his
prosecution with his silence, and heard him proceed thus:

I shall be very succinct in my following narration, therefore I shall not give
you the particulars of this Summers War: only tell you, that which cannot be
omitted without impairing my Relation.

The next morning very early we left Austurica, and came to the Randezvous
within a short time being hard by the River Astura, where we encamped: there
was a great appearance of the Astures, who showed a great propensity, to defend
their liberties with their lives, and resolved to fight to the last man. The
Cantabrians and Gallicians were as forward as we, and the conquering Romans
were not behind us, who were encamped at Sigisama. The Romans had had a very
sharp and fierce War of it, and resolving to finish it this Summer, they had
filled up their Legions with their valiant men, and many stout Commanders.
Lanium, a Roman Captain marched with his Troops toward the Gallicians, where
they had many fierce Encounters, and though they were helped by the Vo^caeans,
and spared not for courage to defend themselves, yet were they fain to run the
fortune of the Conquered, and to yield their lives to the invincible Romans.
Many of those Barbarians being besieged on the Mountain Medullius, and seeiing
a necessity that th^^ must either yield to their Enemies, or die by their
swords, they unanimou^^^ ^^rn'd their arms against themselves, and by sundry
deaths, deprived (...) Conquerors of that glory, In the mean time Antistius,
and Firmius oppressed the Cantabrians, who though they were the most formidable
of all Spain, ^ell continually under the swords of the conquering Romans: But
the ferositie of that people made the Romans to win those Victories with much
blood, both of themselves and their Enemies, who oftentimes despising a
profer'd life, they showed how much they loved their liberty, by a voluntary
death. The Romans had not so easily gained that Country, if they had not
oppressed them with a Fleet of Ships, which they had transported from Gaul,
for seeing it otherwise impossible to have subdued them, they with a very great
Fleet oppressed them by Sea. The Cantabrians having lost many Victories, and
many men, and all their chief Towns taken, they were fain to stoop to that
yoke which the Romans had imposed on all the world.

Whilst these things were a doing on each side of us, you must not imagine us
idle, or that we had not as sharp afflictions as the rest. Carisius, to whose
lot it fell to contest with us, was not encamped far from us. We had at that
time a very great Army, composed of very stout and valiant men, and at least
5000 Astercones, which did great service in their battles, whose velocitie much
troubled the Roman Legions in all their Encounters: for, disordering them with
a sudden decursion, they as soon drew off with little hurt to themselves. We had
often called the chief of the Army to Counsel, that we might not be wanting of
Policy as well as valor to defend our selves, and that we might not take in
hand any thing rashly, and without the advice of the most experienced
Soldiers; For the want of good Council is oft-times the overthrow of the most
valiant, when with temeritie they undertake any design. Those actions I had
performed the Summer before were not forgotten by them, and they did me the
honor to call me to all Councels, and to cede very much to what I said. Indeed
the provocations of my love, with a desire that I had to return to Amenia, made
me extreeamly desirous to expedite this War; and therefore my council was all
for battle or some other valorous Stratagem, that might soonest put a period to
it: and in this I did not lack followers among so many valiant and hardy men. I
at last proposed the attacquing of the Romans in their Camp; for that I
understood by Spies, that they were very secure, not being accustomed to meet
with so much valor, as to dare to undertake such an Enterprise. I backed my
proposition with many reasons which I now remember not, but at last it
prevailed with them being all very stout men, and desirous of action. For this
end the Army was tripartited, one part was led by Lilibilis, the other by
Gurgulinis a very valiant Captain, and the third they honored me with. With
great secrecy we marched three several ways, that we might surprise them on
all side^ with the more astonishment, and we came so suddenly, and were so
near them before we were discovered, that we had almost effected our design,
which showed our valor that we ventured to undertake so difficult an
Enterprise. However, we put the Romans into great fear, and had we not been
discovered without doubt we had defeated them, but they had so much time as to
embattel themselves, and to meet us without their Camp: Nevertheless, they
found us assured in our countenances, and they were fain to animate themselves
with the remembrance of their former Victories to keep up their spirits. We met
with an impetuositie that admits of no comparison, where hundreds of men found
their deaths at the first Encounter, Lilibilis and Gurgulinis on each side met
with the like resistance, and on all sides the Camp was nothing but blood and
slaughter.

I will not go about to describe a battle to you, who I know have acted your
part in many bloody ones: but I am persuaded the Romans never met with a more
fierce and stout resistance. The earth was soon cruented, and spread all over
with dead bodies, whilst heaps of men lay groaning out their last, which could
not be heard through the noise of the clattering of their Weapons. It was a
dismal fight to behold how horror ranged throughout the Field, and with what
animositie each side received their deaths. The strenuitie of the Astercones
was very useful, but neither that, nor the general valor of the Soldiers,
nor the particular actions of the Commanders, (amongst which my self may
without vanity boast in having twice unhorsed Carisius) could keep the
invincible Romans from the Victory, though she had long hung in suspense,
being accustomed to light on the Roman standards, she so well knew her wonted
residence, that she resided there more out of custom, then that the valor of
the Astures did not deserve her. Alas, the Genii of the Barbarians were too
weak for those of the Romans, and I can attribute their gaining of that
Victory to nothing else, or their good fortune. Yet the Romans had little
cause to rejoice for their Victory, being gained with so great loss, and
blood on both sides: for the remainders of both, could not make up half the
number of one party before they met. We were not ignorant what was done on each
side the Camp: for we soon knew, we all ran the like fortune, and that the
same resistance on every side had caused the same internecation.

I had trouble enough at the loss of this Victory, but a new surcharge more
afflicted me, when I heard that Lilibilis was slain upon the place; besides the
affection that I bore the man, I had some cause to doubt that Amenia would
vituperate me for his loss. Gurgulonis with his party put himself into
Lancia, whilst I made my retreat with mine to the Mountains: I got some to
accompany me, and adventured, (when the Romans were retreated into their Camp)
to fetch off the body of Lilibilis, and first bestowed many tears (due to him,
as being my Entertainer, as being the Father of Amenia, and as being the
valiant and noble Lilibilis); Having first I say bestowed these tears upon his
dead corpse, which had received many wounds, I sent it to Asturica, to Clotuthe
and Amenia, and with it this Letter.

Euripedes to the fair Amenia
IF the overflowing of your just tears, can permit you to read these lines,
let them tell you, I bewail your loss with the greatest dolor possible can be
imagined, and that I never felt more powerful affliction for the loss of my
own Parents, than I do for the loss of the father of Amenia. The Gods had been
more Just, and I more satisfied, if I had been presented to you in the place of
Lilibilis, and that he had remained alive for the comfort of Amenia. The desire
I have to defend this Country to the utmost of my power, and to revenge the
death of Lilibilis: but especially that obligation you put upon me, at my
abcession, not wilfully to precipitate my self to death, makes me survive so
great a loss. You may well take off that command, for after the receiving so
great a loss, you cannot be sensible of a less, and give me leave with those
few men that have escaped the last battle, to endeavor the revenge of
Lilibilis, by the shedding the last drop of my own blood: I desire not but to
die in the Encounter, and by that to give you proofs of the affection of

Euripedes.


I gave those men a charge that went with the body of Lilibilis to tell
Clotuthe and Amenia, that I could not leave those few men the Gods had left me,
to come to comfort them in their affliction without apparent danger of losing
the Country and abandoning all to the Enemy, and that I preserved my life only
to do them service. Whilst they went with that sorrowful spectacle to
Asturica; I gathered up the scattered forces that were left and retired to the
Mountains, which kept us very safe and secure. Carisius sent a party after us,
whilst himself went to beleaguer Lancia. Those that followed us found that we
were resolved enough, and being gotten among strong Bulwarks, we often fallyed
forth upon them to their great disadvantage, and though they far exceeded us in
number, yet could they not gain any advantage over us: I would have persuaded
my men to have hazarded a battle, but I could by no means bring them to it,
because the Romans exceeded them. They often attempted in vain, to enter our
holds and to beat us thence, but they lost their men, without effecting the
least against us. This made them leave us and retire to Carisius, who wanted
their help to besiege Lancia, where he found notable resistance, we fallied out
upon their Rear, and very much endamag'd them, but we were fain to retire to
the Rocks again for to secure our selves, being so few in number, and not able
to oppose any considerable body, without the help of those Sconces.

In this part of his relation, he was interrupted by the bringing in of Supper,
and after they had taken that repast, Euripedes led Argelois into a Chamber
very well furnished, which he had appointed for his Lodging. Argelois desiring
him to finish his Relation, for that it was not very late, and that he had no
desire to sleep, He, as willing to satisfy his guest as might be, placed
himself between Lonoxia and him, and after recollecting himself he proceeded.

The end of the second Book.
ELIANA.
BOOK the third.
IN this condition we remained sometime, resting in those sconces after our
labors to ease and refresh our selves, whilst I sent out many of the Officers
to collect what forces they could throughout the Country. In this time of
vacancy, whilst I stayed for the addition of those forces they could get, I had
time enough to exercise my immaginations on my Amoretta's, and to ruminate very
much on those affairs. Such thoughts as these eased the trouble I had for
Lilibilis death. If (thought I) that Amenia has any inclinations to me, and as
she has told me her self, that if by the laws of duty she were not bound to the
contrary, she would declare her self more for me, and that I should not be so
severely dealt withal, may not I believe that the caprichious fortune, has
not dealt unfavourable, in taking away Lilibilis who was the only obstacle of
my good? Now she has no duty (which she always pleaded) to fight against her
inclinations, if she has any to me. Now I shall quickly see whether those words
proceeded from her heart, or only to keep me here for the interest of her
Country. Now her fortune is so hazardous, as also Mandone's that it may be she
will sly into my arms for protection, and be glad to accept that proffer of
leaving her Country rather then fall into the hands of the Romans whom she
deadly hates. By and by I should say thus within my self, by reflecting upon
the goodness of Lilibilis. Mean spirited Euripedes thou ought not to admit
these thoughts to mitigate thy just grief for the good Lilibilis, nor is it
just for thee to build any hopes by his fall; thy love to him which should be
built either from his friendship or his virtue should not be lessened by his
death, as to make thee forget his memory, and to flatter thy grief with such
hopes. What if Lilibilis was the only obstacle of thy happiness? he was the
father of Amenia, and thy friend, thou will not be so impious as to rejoice at
his death, though it enthrone thee in the highest felicity, and to have no
other thoughts but to raise him from the grave, thou would forgo all
whatsomever thou could pretend to, from thy passion, and deny thy self with
so much magnanimity, for the father of Amenia. Thou poorly flatterest thy self
to think that necessity will drive Amenia into thy arms, no she is not so
ignoble as to be constrained by fortune, against her inclinations, if she has
no inclinations to thee, she is so high spirited as to suffer death by her own
hands, rather than fall into the hands of her enemies, or to seek protection
unworthy of her self. If she has inclinations to thee, thou have more need to
fear, that her high spirited humor will both cross her self and thee, in not
yielding to be thine or accepting of thy protection, least she should seem to
do it basely, because she had no other to accept of, and that she yielded to
these because she could not better raise her fortune, and because she had not
declared it before, that she does it now because she cannot avoid it, and that
she forsakes Mandone because his fortune is spoild, and accepts of thee because
thine is entire. And thus Euripedes have thou most cause of fear, out of that
from which thou raisest thy highest hopes, for such thoughts as these are
enough to hinder thy happiness, in the high spirited Amenia, who can stoop to
no base ends, nor nothing unworthy that noble spirit that reigns in her.

In such like soliloquies I spent many hours, and sometimes completed whole
days in those cogitations, and whatever virtue did to make me not hope for any
thing by Lilibilis his death, yet could I not choose but remember that that
cruel enemy Duty was now abolished, though to have recalled Lilibilis I would
have been content to have run the hazard of the same enemy, though I saw I
must have perished by it, nor could I remember the death of Lilibilis without
tears, nor that Amenia was free, without hope.

In this condition I remained till those that conducted the body of Lilibilis
were returned, they represented to me with what dolor it was received in
Asturica in general, but in particular by Clotuthe and Amenia, who had secluded
themselves from all company, that they might with more freedom vent those
tears due to the death of Lilibilis, and that they had seen his body interred,
with much pomp and collachrymation, and that there was nothing but a general
consternation to be seen in Austurica since his death, wherein they had
treasured all their hopes. This news drew tears from my eyes, which was
reclear'd by a letter which they presented me from Amenia, and which Melanthe
had given them, in answer to mine, but a little before they came from
Austurica. I received it with much content, and as soon as they were gone out
of my tent, I fell to kissing of that letter and should not have ended in a
long time, had not the great desire I had to know the contents hastened me to
open it: But when I went about it, I could not impair that seal Amenia had
impressed without great reluctance, but at last overcoming these niceties, I
broke it open and read to this purpose.

Amenia to Euripedes.
MY eyes though drowned in tears found so much liberty as to intuite those
lines you sent me, and though the excess of my grief might justly have excused
me, had I omitted writing, yet to testify that which I owe you, I have taken
this liberty in the midst of my tears. That obligation wherewith I bound you
shall not be taken off by any consideration, and I hope you will not be so
injurious as to augment the grief of the enough afflicted Amenia, by a
precipitancy contrary to my will. I hinder you not from revenging the death of
Lilibilis, but effect it without wilfully casting your self into the arms of
death, and depriving us of the hopes we have you will help us in this exigent.
Live therefore Euripedes, and seek no precipices which may with your honor be
avoided, and by that you will give the most assuredst profs of your affection
to Amenia.


You may believe with what joy I read this letter, wherein I perceived I was
not indifferent to Amenia, and that in the midst of all her troubles she had
conserved a time to think on me, and that her tears had not so occupied her,
but that she found leisure to read my lines, and to write to me. If she had
been weary of my service, I thought she would not have forbidden me to die in a
revenge, wherein she needed not to have cared what lives had been sacrificed,
and in a time wherein her interests could not plead for me, being there was so
little hopes that I could accomplish any thing against the Romans, their power
being increased with their victories, and ours decreased with our losses. Once
did not satisfy me to read this letter, and out of this I conceived great
hopes of a future bliss, I thought now I might well deprive Mandone of his
life, without afflicting Lilibilis, and rid me of a rival whose power I feared,
but his being engaged in the wars made me think he could not effect any thing
against me.

In the reading and contemplating on that Letter, sometimes with hope,
sometimes with fear, I spent that time which from my troublesome employments
among the soldiers, was given for my repose, and till those troops arrived,
which were collected through the country the Romans were not yet possessed of.
After the addition of these forces, we completed eighteen thousand, and our
intent was to relieve Lancia which we heard was very much distressed, but as we
were about to leave our hold for that enterprise, our explorators brought us
word that twenty thousand Romans were landed, and came with great speed toward
Asturica, and that they were already masters of many places. It was generally
approved that we were to oppose them, and to let Gurgulinis defend himself from
the extremity the Romans had reduced him to, till we were able to help him, for
if we had raised the siege, which was hazardable, and in the mean time the
Romans should have gained the Country, it would have been to no purpose, but
if we had been able to overthrow those new comers, we needed not to fear, but
we should much daunt the besiegers, and animate our men for high enterprises,
being flushed with a late gotten victory. We saw that on this encounter
depended the safeguard or destruction of the Country, which made us animate
our men with all those words that used to put life and courage into the
fearfull'st soul. We made very long marches till we were come not far from
their Camp, they had understood of our coming and were resolved to bid us
battle, but we staid within our Camp two days without answering their
expectations, which they attributed to fear. The next day we resolved to
engage, and to try our fortune by a battle, but that night we understood, of
the surrender of Lancia, and that Gurgulinis being forced to it by the
soldiers, the Romans very hardly granted him his life for his obstinacy, for
he was resolved never to have yielded; And further, that most of that Army was
marching to Asturica. We gave a strict charge to those who brought us this
news not to communicate it to any else, for fear of disheartning the
soldiers, but it was quickly known throughout the Camp, for all our endeavors
to hide it, and had so dismayed them that they already began to fear the
success. The chief Officers and my self had work enough all that night to
resettle their minds, and to persuade them to fight the next day. As Soon as it
appeared, having had very little time to rest, I armed my self, and being they
were wholly left to my dispose, I drew them out of the Camp, leaving a
sufficient Guard within: and having divided them into two equal parts, I gave
the care of one to the best deserver, and one whose courage was not seen to
fail, named Etruscis, and the other I intended for to lead my self. We were in
a very spacious Plain, and where no advantage was to be perceived; the Romans
seeing our intentions very readily presented themselves, and by that time the
Sun was up we were ready to join. I was very sensible that on this battle
depended the ruin or renewing of our hopes, and therefore I used all the means
I was capable of, to infuse courage into their souls: and I spared for no
pains that I might accomplish my design, I rode through every rank armed
except my head, and seeking to stir them up to their duty, I uttered words
somewhat to this purpose.

VAliant Asturians: methinks I see in your countenances so great a propensity
to this battle, that I need not use words to animate such resolute men; but
being I am honored with the title of your Captain and General, there shall not
be any thing neglected by me that belongs to the place. And, though I am
persuaded that I cannot infuse more courage than you already have, and a more
desire of revenge for the death of your valiant Head then you retain: yet will
I put you in mind, that you now sight not so much for glory, riches and esteem,
as you do out of a necessity to defend your lives, Liberties, and your Rights:
Your renown lies not now alone at the stake, but your wives, your children,
your goods, your houses, your lands, and that Liberty so dear to you, are all
now ready to be offered up as a prey to your insulting foe, and your selves
born a free people to become their slaves, if you prevent it not with your own
valor, for it is the issue of this Encounter that will determine it, which
will make you glorious and a terror to your Enemies, or else slaves and a
scorn to your foes. The Romans are neither immortal nor invulnerable, but men
as you are, and though fortune has hitherto declared on their side, you ought
not to fear but Justice and your valor will overcome her. If the covetous
desires of Renown and riches, can infuse such animosity into the Romans, sure
this necessity of saving all that is near and dear to you by your valor,
should be more powerful to infuse it into the Astures, the Astures that are
the redoubted of all Spain, and that have so often foiled the Romans, and that
have showed no less valor and prowess then they in all their actions; Let
this therefore move you, that your enemies are not many more than you, that
your courage equals theirs, that the Justice of your cause, will oppose their
fortune, and that not only by this you will redeem your selves, wives,
children, lands and liberties, but gain a perpetual renown and hinder the
Romans from the like attempt, by the powerful remembrance of your valor; Let
this I say move you to acquit your selves like men, and to declare to all the
world that you esteem your liberties more than your lives; and that you have as
much courage to lose your lives in the midst of your enemies, as the Gallicians
who effected their own deaths rather than to accept of a servile life. I will
not go about to encourage your generous souls with the hope of reward or
booty, because these more necessary considerations ought to move you. Besides,
I know your earth plentifully affords you that which makes the insatiable
Romans to endeavor your subversion, and to make you their slaves for the
fulfilling their greedy desires. There is therefore a necessity, either you
must fight it out valiantly, turn your backs cowardly, or submit to the yoke,
basely, or as the Gallicians did, turn your swords against your selves,
d^sperately and wickedly. To turn your backs upon them and to fly, will render
you infamous to all the world, and would not save your lives from the pursuing
Romans: but that is so contrary to your wonted custom that I fear it not, for
I know you know not what it means to fly before your enemies, it is
impossible for the renowned Astures to be so cowardly. But to yield to the yoke
of these insulters will brand you with an Eternal infamy, and make you lose
that reputation you have acquired throughout the world; in that with so much
valor hitherto you have maintained your liberty: No, I cannot persuade my self
that you can admit such a thought, having spent so much blood in the
maintenance of it, to acquit it so basely and infamously, and you cannot think
of it being used to liberty without suscitating an anger capable to make you
conquer the whole world if they went about to deprive you of it. And then if
you think of doing as the Gallicians did, to run upon your own deaths
desperately, you had better expose your lives to your enemies, with your
weapons in your hands, and sacrifice theirs with your own, and so to die like
valiant persons making thousands of them to accompany you in your deaths, than
to effect it your selves and give them leave to laugh at your despair. There is
no other way then you see without cowardice, infamy, and an unworthy
precipitation, but that you must acquit your selves like men, and offering the
lives of these Romans to your just resentments exhibit to all the world, that
it is impossible for the Asturians to be conquered, or to yield to the yoke of
the Romans.

I quickly perceived that my words had wrought the desired effect upon the
souls of most that heard me, for with cheerful countenances, and great
shouts: they testified how willing they were to sacrifice their lives for the
good of their Country, they cried to me to lead them on, and they would follow
me even to death it self. At that time observing that the Romans had used the
same form with us, and that one of their bodies began to move, I put on my
Cask, and gave order to Etruscis to join. That first Encounter was very violent
on both sides, and many were slain by the impituousnesse of the first storm of
Arrows, but being mingled together pell-mell, the Ranks grew thin on both
sides by the deaths of their Companions: our party very valiantly defended
themselves, and for a long time permitted not the Romans to gain the least
advantage over them, but at last I perceived them to retire, when I advanced,
and quite altered the face of the battle, but it was not long without another
vicissitude, for their second body coming upon us with so impituous a shock,
that it overwhelmed the most valliantest, and made the most cowardliest turn
their backs. Our Soldiers were not of the choicest, but composed of all sorts
that could be picked up in that necessity, and of those who being forced had not
the heart to withstand the Romans, and these fresh-water-souldiers hardly
withstood the first brunt before they fled and left the resolutest finding
their deaths in the midst of their Enemies, for hardly one of them escaped that
remained to me of the first battle, for being resolved to die or conquer they
nobly yielded their lives according to their determination, and had the whole
body been composed of such men, we needed not to have had the least doubt of
the Victory, For my part, though my actions are not worth the relating yet I
gave them no example to slye: and seeing Etruscis slain by my side, I rushed
into the very midst of the Romans, and in spite of all opposition I decollated
his murderer amidst the points of a hundred Swords, but turning my head, and
seeing the shame Fortune had prepared for me by the loss of this Victory, I
was so suriously transported, that nothing besides that command of Amenia's
could have deterred me from running to have received my death from the Swords
of my Enemies, and as often as I went about to effect it; that strict
observance to which I had tied my self to all her commands hindered the
prosecution, and made me seek to save my life only for fear of disobeying her;
this made me after, having sacrificed many to my resentments, to clear my self
a passage with my sword, and to escape to the adjoining woods with nine or ten
that fought near my person: after I had seen my men dispersed, and my self with
those few that accompanied me left alone fighting among the Romans.

This Victory was so absolute that the Romans slew most of them that fled, and
so dispersed the rest, that they could never unite more. I retired to the Woods
with nine or ten Horsemen and from thence I went to the next Mountains, where
we found a very safe retreat. I did not fight so slightly in that battle but
that I received four or five deep wounds, which much anoy'd me after my riding.
These made me to keep my bed almost a month, before I was permitted to leave
it, but in all that time I endured most heavy Agonies, by the remembrance in
what condition that part of the Province was, and how likely Amenia was to
suffer by the Romans, I would in the midst of these thoughts often attempt for
all the pain that I self from my wounds to leave my bed and to go help Amenia,
but I was still deterred by those attended me almost by force. I sent some of
those that were with me to enquire after the actions of the Romans, and causing
them to disguise themselves, I charged them to enter Asturica, and to acquaint
Clotuthe and Amenia in what condition I was in, and how insuccessfull my
endeavors had been to their preservation. I would have wrote to Amenia, but I
was so debilitated that I was not able, but dismissing them I awaited their
return with much impatiencie, Some days after they returned bringing me news
that had almost broke my heart; they told me, that being disguised they entered
Asturica with much facility, being full of Romon Soldiers, for as soon as
Lancia was taken they approached Asturica, and those who were left to guard it;
considering their own weakness, and the advantage the Romans had over them,
abandoned it quite, and saved themselves by flight, so that the Romans found no
resistance, but committing all manner of villainies had turned that gallant City
into nothing but confusion. In that confusion they made a dilligent search
after them I sent them to, but they could not hear any thing what was become of
them, they were about to return, when one of them who knew that Woman who was
only the depositary of Clotuthe's love to me met her by chance, making
themselves known to her, they told her the Commission they had from me, and
that they desired the favor to speak with Clotuthe and Amenia. They certified
me that this Woman seemed very joyful at their message and that I was alive;
she bid them to follow her and they should obtain their desires, she conducted
them to a strong Tower at the further end of the Palace, where was a great
guard of Roman soldiers, she left them without for some time, and then
returning with the Captain of the Guard, she conducted them to Clotuthe whom
they found in tears for those considerable losses she had sustained, and
though she seemed a prisoner by the Guard, yet within she seemed to have all
manner of liberty given her. The Captain having withdrawn himself, they did
their message to Clotuthe, and then enquiring after Amenia: they told her I had
commanded them to bring me a certain and true account in what condition they
were in. Clotuthe, after having stood mute a pretty while. Return to your
Master (said she) and tell him in what condition you find me: I am a prisoner,
but it is to preserve me from the outrages of the soldiers, who else would not
have any respect to my sex, nor my birth; Tell him that he may visit me safely
and without fear, and that I desire to see him to communicate something to him
of importancie; as for Amenia proceeded she Atropos some few days since has
cut the thread of her life, and when he comes I may give him a fuller narration
of it.

As Soon as I had heard these words I gave a sudden cry, and (not hearing what
else they said) life had almost forsaken me in that mortal apprehenston of
Amenia's death; And is Amenia dead then? (cried I after I was come to my self)
and is Amenia dead; and does Euripedes live? In this agony I would have pulled
off the plasters from my wounds, that my life might have breathed forth at
those chinks, but I was deterred that, and all other means whereby I might
effect my own precipitation by the diligence of those who looked to me.
Nevertheless, I gave my self over to thoughts, and apprehensions that
tormented me, and gave me a hundred deaths in a day, and were more cruel than
one death. I neglected the counsel of those that were careful of my wounds,
who recommended silence and rest to me; for, continually I vented forth my
grief with thousands of exclamations, till I had so debillitated my self, that
I was not able to speak more, and for rest I permitted not my eyes to close
themselves for three nights together after this fatal news, which made the
messengers thereof repent that ever they had ob^yed me; They all represented to
me that death would inevitably follow if I persisted in my violences, and I
that must perish unless I gave my self to rest. I replied, that I desired
nothing less than life, and that to accelerate my death I used all the means
they had left me, and which they were not able to deprive me of: they dressed
my wounds as it were by force and much against my will, and they were all fain
to beg with tears in their eyes, and upon their knees, for me to take
sustenance, and not so wilfully to persist in my death; they exhibited their
love by an unanimous imploration, which made me use violence against my own
inclinations to satisfy some part of their love and care by taking what they
desired, and by letting them endeavor to preserve my life, only to avoid those
implorations which they daily continued: but I would not mittigate the least
part of that grief and dolor that I endured through the apprehensions of her
death, and they were so violent that without doubt I had continued much longer,
had I not been miraoulously preserved. One and twenty days had now past over
sine the last battle, wherein I received those wounds, which (with the
augmented grief for Amenia's death) had kept me in bed, when some of those few
men who accompanied me, going out, as well for provision as to hear, whether
there was no hope of recovering their own out of the Romans hands, had met with
a man, who made an earnest enquiry after me, he was disguised which made them
not think it safe to discover me, but, being pressed very much by him, and seeing
he was but a single man, they at last brought him to me. They first certified
me how they had met him, and his desire to speak with me, though I was
incapable almost to take notice of any thing, yet at last I bid them bring him
in.

So soon as he was entered my Tent, I knew him to be a young man that belonged
to Amenia, the sight of him renewed my grief, Ah (cried I out with vehemence)
art thou come to confirm that which I already know, but too much for my repose,
or to reproach me in that I retain a Life after the loss of Amenia's, speak,
for thou can not augment the dolor I have conceived by the confirmation of
that which makes me ashamed of my self in that I live so long after the first
knowledge of it. The young man, not knowing my meaning showed he was something
amazed by his silence, but at last seeing I expected his answer, he replied.
Sir, I believe you are not ignorant that I have the honor to belong to Amenia,
it is in her behalf I have sought you to give you this Letter. Whilst he was a
pulling it out, I replied hastily: why, where is Amenia? what is become of her?
is she alive or no? prethy tell me all that thou know, and hide nothing from
me. Sir (replied the Lad) I know nothing of her destiny, nor what is become of
her, but two days after we had heard that you had lost the last Victory
against the Romans: we understood those that came from Lancia were almost at
our walls: those soldiers that were in the City being terrified at their
approach abandoned us to their fury, and with abundance of the Inhabitants left
the City; I was in it when I saw the great confusion and tumult of those that
fled, which made me haste to the Palace, and going up the stairs into the
outward Hall I met Melanthe descending in very great haste, As Soon as she had
espied me, I never met thee (said she) more gladly than I do now, nor in a time
wherein thou might express thy fidelity to Amenia, so much as now thou
may, I was going to seek one, whom I might entrust with what I desire, and I
know none more capable than thy self, of doing it with thy wonted fidelity.
After I had given her all the assurance I could of it, and of the Joy I
conceived that I should do any service acceptable to Amenia, she proceeded
thus: You are not to take thought what will become of us in this approaching
danger, only you are desired by me, to depart the City immediately with this
Letter, (which she put into my hand) and enquire after Euripedes, if he be
alive deliver it to him, if he be dead bring it back again to me, but use all
your diligence to find him out, and with all the speed you can, for in doing it
you will do Amenia the greatest piece of service you ever did her in all your
life, and if the Gods preserve her she will requite you for it. She had hardly
ended these words, when three or four men in very great haste came to her
saying, they all waited for her, and conducting her away in great have, left me
alone upon the stairs. I immediately preparing for my Journey departed the
City within an hour, and for all the diligence I have used I could never hear
the least word whether you were living or no till this day, (being almost out
of hope after so long search) I met with those who have conducted me hither to
deliver this Letter with which I was entrusted.

I heard him with hope that he might give me some knowledge that she lived, but
seeing what he had said neither confirmed nor contradicted it, I remained in my
former perplexity, but (said I as I received the Letter from him) do not thou
know that Amenia is dead? Sir (said he) I know nothing of it, and I have
related faithfully all that I know, it may be the Letter may give you more
light. I then fell to opening it but with mortal apprehensions of what it might
contain, I dreaded the confirmation of that which had so debilitated me, but
unclosing it I found it was Amenia's hand, which gave me as much Joy I could
possibly receive in that condition. My tears for some time hindered me the
reading of it, through those apprehensions that continually assaulted me, but
at last with some hope I began, and with a world of consolation ended the
reading of words to this effect.

Amenia to Euripedes.
SEeing that the gods after the ruin of our house, have imposed a necessity of
my being a captive, I had rather to be so to Euripedes than any man living; and
to live under his protection whose fidelity I know, and in whom I can confide
without distrust. Duty which before compelled me not to think on Euripedes,
cannot now oppose my inclinations, being taken away by the gods to make me more
ingrate if, not having that excuse, I continue in my severity to Euripedes, and
if I do not consider him according to the justice of his services, merits, and
virtue. Euripedes, I declare therefore I am a prisoner (because I am forced
against my inclinations) to him whom Lilibilis had assigned for my husband,
though my inclinations were ever averse, and though I believed that the gods
would some way redeem me from it, but now having my will at liberty I am forced
by constraint and abreption, to leave this Country, and to abandon you,
whilst for my sake you expose your life to a thousand dangers. I set not so
much by my self as to value my life worth those dangers you may expose your
self to, in redeeming it, nor do I want courage to redeem it by my own hand,
rather than to hold it of another, did I not think you still retained that
passion which you exhibited to me, which would make this service as pleasing to
you, as it will be acceptable to me. I give you notice then of my captivity
with leave to redeem me, and if I must be a captive, it shall be to none more
willingly than Euripedes; It is to you then that I resign my life and fortune,
and it is from you I hope to receive my liberty. I know not whither I shall be
carried, therefore I candirect you where to find me. I know your passion will
accellerate you to effect my Liberty, which when I have received, I shall
consider the services of Euripedes, by requiting them by what in lawful and
just ways may be required from

AMENIA.


Before I had finished the reading of it all that were present saw by the joy I
exhibited in my eyes, with what content I received it, and reading it over
diverse times I continued a great while in this consolation, framing to my self
a happiness which the very next thought dejected; for reflecting upon that
which I had heard concerning her death, it not only mitigated, but absolutely
took away all the joy I had conceived. After I had desired the man that brought
me that Letter not to depart from me, before he saw me recovered, and that the
company were withdrawn, leaving me to the liberty of my thoughts, I uttered
many different exclamations both in the sense of my joy and grief. Sometimes
reading that letter with excess of joy, I ran into those pleasing cogitations,
that made me to forget my grief, and reflecting on every word I could not see
her affection without a world of content, being that (as I then thought) that
would make me the happiest man living, being that which I had desired with so
much passion, and for which I had exposed my life to so much danger. But these
joys did but augment a grief that came violently upon me at the least
reflection of her death, for considering that this letter was wrote before I
received that fatal news, and that I could find nothing that might contradict
it, nor could gain no knowledge of the man that brought it, you may consider
what agonies I was in, and with what grief I was agitated by these cogitations.
I thought that Mandone might sacrifice her to his resentments, or that her
self, rather than yield to him against her inclinations, might precipitate her
self to death, these thoughts with those that the nearness of my happiness, and
the assurance of her affection, had raised, augmented my dolor, in that I lost
a happiness at the point of receiving it. Before (said I to my self) her
severity, her duty, and that law which she had imposed upon me, made me
languish in pain, and were the only motives of my grief, but now her duty is
taken away, her severity is turned into mildness by her inclinations, and that
Law is abolisht by her affection, yet I languish in pain and more powerful
motives to grief are represented to me, motives that subvert both my joy and my
hope, to joy in knowing her affection, when she is incapable to render it to me
is a folly, to hope she should revive, it is against reason, no, no, her death
is too sure, and all my joy and my hope is turned to grief and despair. In
such respirations I languished for some moments, when different motions arose.
It may be (said I again to my self) it may be that Amenia lives, and expects
thee, and reproaches thee for thy tardiness, in that thou exposest her so long
to the violent assaults of Mandone, and give her cause to think that thou
slightest her, and that may make her filled with indignation to give her self
up to Mandone, more to dispight thee than please her self; hasten therefore and
do not frustrate her expectation, in neglecting to help her by a vain opinion
of her death. Sure this was my good Genius that insusurrated these suggestions,
and though they were not able quite to abolish those fatal apprehensions I
retained of her death, yet they made me resolve to festinate the cure of my
wounds, by yielding to whatsomever might conduce thereto, that I might go to
Clotuthe to understand the destiny of Amenia, and so either to redeem her if
living, or to follow her if dead.

The desire I had to be cured made me yield to all that was proposed to me for
the curation, and in space of a week I left my bed, and before another was
fully finished I departed that place fully cured. But least suspicion should be
raised in the breasts of our enemies, by our number we divided our selves and
took several ways to Asturica, I kept only the young man that brought me
Amenia's Letter. From him I understood the brave resistance Gurgulinis had made
at Lancia against the Romans, which had so incensed the soldiers, that their
Captain could hardly gain them from turning that City into ashes, and by the
ruins to have made it a perpetual monument of their fury. We were come within
sight of that stately City Asturica without any adventure, when the gods
intending to make me the instrument of their justice, sent thither the chief of
the Brigaecins, who was the author of our destruction, and had betrayed us to
Carisius, by giving notice of our designs upon their Camps. The beaver of his
cask was up so that the young man knew him, and discovering to me who he was, I
resolved to sacrifice him to the Ghost of Lilibilis, and to execute that
justice upon him which was due to traitors. Riding up to him I discovered my
self, and soon let him know what he was to expect from me; his conscience
accusing him of the fact he answered not, but being valiant he refused not the
combat. It was soon debated, for my anger against the traitor soon augmented
my strength, so that I left him dead upon the place, with almost twenty wounds,
I received not any so considerable, as to make me to repair to the Chirurgions,
but stopping their bleeding with such things as I always carried about me, I
entered Asturica almost in the evening.

My impatiency gave me no liberty to repose my self that night without seeing
Clotuthe, and I longed to know a desting, which would either prove fatal or
joyful to me. I therefore went to that tower wherein I understood she was, and
the guard knowing my desire to speak with their Captain, sent an Officer to
understand his pleasure. It was not long before he came to me, and
understanding my desire to see Clotuthe, and that it was by her command that I
came thither, after having used those civilities the Romans were ever prepared
with, he desired my stay for a moment whilst he went in and gave Clotuthe
notice of it. Clotuthe was kept so secret, that none in the City, no nor his
own soldiers knew of her being there, for if the one had known it, they would
have endeavored her releasment, being extreme affectionate to the family of
L^libilis, and if the others had known it, the respect of the Captain could not
have detained them from endeavoring her destruction, being very much incensed
against the whole stock of Lilibilis, which made him keep a guard more then
ordinary with pretenses specious enough to blind the eyes of others. At last
the Captain of the guard returned, and told me that Clotuthe was somewhat
indisposed and in bed, and therefore desired to be excused from any visit that
night, but desiring that I would lodge in that place, and in the morning she
would not fail to visit me betimes. After some other words between us of
complement and civilities I entered without the least suspicion of any thing,
only troubled at the procrastination of my life or death. I was led into a very
small court, and through that up a pair of stairs, into a chamber very well
furnished, I knew the place very well, for this tower which had several rooms
in it, was somewhat remote from the Palace, and was always the retirng place
of Lilibilis, being the strongest and most solitary of all the Palace. After
the Captain had left me with the young man, whose name was Lascaris, I was soon
visited by that woman belonging to Clotuthe, who made the same excuses to me as
the Captain had done, but longing to hear of Amenia, I desired her very
earnestly to let me know what was become of her, but she answered me her
Mistress would satisfy me her self, and that she was charged to the contrary,
she told me that when the Romans entered the City being abandoned, the Captains
had much ado to keep them from rasing the foundations of it, and how that
Captain coming first to the palace, finding Clotuthe involved in those common
miseries that had befallen the whole Astures, out of a mere sense of pity
preserved her from the rage and fury of the soldiers, and taking that part of
the palace for his own quarter, he conveyed her thither very privately, and
had thitherto used her with the same respect he owed to his mother. This was
all I could learn of her, and as soon as she departed I went to bed, and
Lascaris into another in the same room. I will not tell you how I past over
that night, but you may be sure it was with trouble enough, and wholly employed
in thinking on Amenia, with fear, hope, and joy; having wearied my self with
these thoughts I fell into a slumber in the morning, which detained me longer
in bed then I intended. I was just about to rise when Clotuthe knocked at my
door, I bid Lascaris unlock it to see who it might be, and having obeyed;
Clotuthe entered with that woman, the Captain and three or four soldiers. I
wondered to see so many enter my chamber, but seeing their intentions, I had
rose our of my bed had not the presence of Clotuthe stopped me to have prevented
them, for the Captain and those soldiers seized upon my arms, and both our
swords; Ah Madam (said I looking upon Clotuthe) what usage is this? have you
betrayed me? Lascaris would have run to have hindered them, but putting the
points of their swords to his breast, they had put a period to his life if he
had waged. As Soon as they had got the possession of them they departed the
room, leaving only Clotuthe and her woman with her. When they were gone without
considering Lascaris she ran to me with open arms, and quite forgeting her
wonted modesty, she clasped them about my neck, and letting her face fall upon
mine. Euripedes (said she) that buckler wherewith you were wont to oppose my
Love, and to defend your self, is now taken away, for now I have no duty that
should bind me, from giving you the testimonies of my good will, neither can
you refuse them if you have any regard to the life of Clotuthe, and you must
now seek new excuses if you continue in your disaffection, but I am sure you
cannot find any wherein virtue may interest her self against me. I account all
my sorrows as nothing, and all my miseries incompetable to that joy I receive
now in embracing my Euripedes; and I must make him see the greatness of my
affection by passing those bounds prescribed to our sex, but I cannot be
ashamed of this when I have more manifestly testified my weakness. It was the
amazedness I was in at this action, and the trouble that had seized me for
being deprived of my arms and made a prisoner, that made me suffer her in her
action and words, but by that time I had recollected my self, blushing more
than she did, and putting her off with my hands. Madam (said I) you are not so
absolved (by the death of Lilibilis) of your duty, but that you ought still to
have in veneration the memory of such a husband and not contrary to the rules
of modesty and decency to embrace one whom you have confessed to have loved in
his life time. I had hoped those troubles wherewith you have been afflicted,
had taken away these thoughts, and had reduced you to a more perfect knowledge
of your condition. But you have given me cause of a very great and just
resentment against you, in taking away those arms wherewith I have endeavored
to maintain your lives and liberties, and by delivering me into the hands of
your enemies, and not considering how often I have exposed my life to danger
for your sakes. Is this then the reward Clotuthe I ought to expect? and is this
the requital I shall receive for my pains? and is this the sure testimonies of
your Love? Ah Lilibilis do not thou behold this action of thy wife from the
lower shades with regret, and do thou not say. Ah Clotuthe, have thou so soon
forgot me as to desire the embraces of another, and art thou so ingrate to my
friend (he who has endeavored with indefatigable pains to withstand our evil
fortune, and whose good will to us has made partaker in our miseries) as to
render him a captive to our enemies? and deprive him of a liberty which may yet
be for your good? I had gone on further had she not replied very briskly. It is
but justice that Euripedes should be my captive so long as I am his, and though
I cannot captivate that part of his which he has of mine, yet will I give to
my self this satisfaction, that I will imprison his body in lue of those bonds
wherein he holds my soul. But i will assure you, you are not prisoner to your
enemies except you account me so. I hope (replied I) I shall never count you my
enemy, yet I cannot take this as the effect of your friendship. It is nothing
else (said she again) for it was impossible for me to part with you having you
in my possession, and could I believe you would stay with me willingly, I would
never constrain you, it is nothing else but fear of losing you, and of
depriving my self of that happiness of seeing you, that makes me act thus
altogether against my inclinations. I have not been free from all those fears
love uses to suggest since your departure, and having recovered that sickness
which my grief had caused, there yet remained some suggestions of hope, and now
to satisfy my self in part be not offended if I detain you by constraint. I
would not have you think so ill of me but that my grief was real for Lilibilis
his death, and that (though so much against the interests of my love) I could
wish him alive again, but seeing that is impossible it would be a folly to
precipitate my self to death by thinking to lose you also, and whilst my duty
opposed, I had so much power over my self as to withstand the incitements of my
love, and deny my self the taking of these liberties, but now my love is so
powerful that it banishes all those considerations of modesty and decency.

She was once again going to embrace me, when casting her eyes on the other
side of the bed she espied Lascaris, whom her passion before had not given her
leisure to take notice of, though she had seen him; she knew him to belong to
Amenia, which made her face seem all of a fire, being troubled that she had
made any other besides my self witness to her weakness, withdrawing from the
side of the bed with an action that showed her trouble, how came this man to
accompany you, said she, I answered her demand as well as I could, and told
her he had left the City in that confusion when the Romans entered it, and
found me out to give me notice thereof, hoping I might relieve it in that
necessity, and that since that time he had waited on me, being I had told him
I would bring him to Amenia to whom he belongs. I know he does very well
(answered Clotuthe) and I see the gods are resolved to make my foes acquainted
with my follies. I cannot believe Madam (returned I) that any who have the
honor to wait on your daughter in Law can be your foes. She was so extremely
shamed at this surprisal that she would not speak a word more, but with a face
as red as fire, with anger and shame, she cast her eyes toward me, and turning
her back, was hastening out of the room. I was very unwilling to let her return
without some more knowledge of Amenia, and I had not the patience to stay for
another visit; this desire made me to recall her by these words: Madam you sent
me word you had something of importance to let me know, I hope this is not that
you promised, besides you promised that I should know what has happened since my
departure, and what is become of Amenia, I pray do not defer it till another
time. That which I have to tell you, (said she) I will not declare before any
witness, and I have spook already too much for my shame. If you please to
procure leave for Lascaris to go out (said I) he shall be no obstacle to what
you have to say. She was very willing to utter her mind, and she saw that I was
unwilling she should depart, and I believe she did not mistake the cause, but
after a little pause, she bid her woman to go forth into another room with
Lascaris, and being left alone with me she returned and sat down upon the side
of my bed.

After she had sat silent for some time with her eyes very intentive upon me. I
will no longer dissemble with you Euripedes (said she) nor hold you in suspense
of that which you desire to hear; Amenia is not dead, but I know you had rather
wish her so, then where she is. I am not ignorant of your affection to Amenia,
and that she was the only obstacle that hindered the fruition I desired, no
Euripedes it was not the consideration of Lilibilis, nor of virtue, so much as
that of your love. Yes it was the beauty of Amenia that had preposses'd you,
and that rendered mine so despicable in your sight, and that hindered me of all I
could desire of Euripedes. So long as hope was remaining you might pursue your
love, as you thought to your advantage, but now there is no hope of enjoying
her who lives in the arms of Mandone, you will not exhibit so great a folly as
to persist in it still, and to love her who never loved you, for if she did
complie with you in any thing, it was in consideration of her own interests,
and in hope of that benefit she might reap by your labors, and that you may
know it was nothing else, when she saw you were no longer able to withstand the
destiny of her Country, she abandoned you fighting for her, and ran into the
arms of Mandone, without any regard to your love and services, and that she
might not have any thing to do with you, see here the letter you sent her,
which she left with me that she might not have any thing near her that might
cause her to remember you.

You may imagine by the relation of the Love I bore Amenia how much this
discourse perplexed me, and for all the resolution I had taken not to exhibit
my Love if she had certified me of her death, I was not able in this sudden
knowledge of her unworthiness to withstand the assaults of my passion, nor to
withold the giving of a perfect knowledge to Clotuthe by my actions, of the
great love I bore Amenia; all the blood in my face, and all other parts was run
to the heart, to strengthen it, which had need of all its forces at that time
to withold it from falling under that burden this fatal news had charged it
with, it had so suppressed the passages of my speech that I could not express it
but by actions. At last I confirmed my self in the opinion, by knowing the
letter that I sent Amenia to be the same Clotuthe presented me; I was so
afflicted that I was not able to bring forth one word, but sinking down upon my
pillow, I gave Clotuthe time enough to prosecute her discourse, and I remember
(though with much ado) she said thus. Ah fortunate Amenia! to be so highly
loved by Euripedes: But ah unworthy and base Amenia, to require it so basely
and persideously! But Euripedes (said she, taking me by the hand) she deserves
not to have any thoughts bestowed on her, acquit her to Mandone, and let her
enjoy him whom she has acquired, through her persideousnesse to you. If her
beauty were more esteemed by you than mine, yet my love far exceeds hers, and
all other mortals. Euripedes be not so cruel to Clotuthe as to let her so often
sue to you, let the baseness of Amenia oblitterate that affection you bore
her, und let it suscitate a disdain worthy your self, and also let the sidelity
and passion of Clotuthe acquier that which was unworthyly bestowed on another.
There can now be no hope of enjoying her, she now is embraced by Mandone whom
she desired: therefore let not your thoughts be busied about her, nor trouble
your self with her that is unworthy of them. Its true Euripedes, I sent you
word that she was dead, but that was for fear if you had known the truth that
you might have gone to have revenged your self on Mandone, and so I might have
lost that content I receive by yout sight. Endeavor therefore to settle your
thoughts, and to enjoy and accept of that which hitherto you have refused, and
which shall not be less through any consideration that you were forced to it,
and if that you are not altogether blind, you cannot but see the great love I
bear you, and if there be but the least spark of generosity in you, you cannot
be altogether so ingrate as to deny me. And though I keep you with me by
constraint, you need not fear that you shall receive any hurt under my
protection, nor that you shall be denied any thing but your liberty. She
uttered much more which I cannot remember, nor have I rendered this but
brokenly, for my thoughts were occupied with the news she had told me, that I
was not capable of remembering or hearing what she said. At last seeing her
stop, I replied with that little strength I had left me. Madam, since that you
have had so much knowledge of my love to Amenia, and since I believe I have
confirmed it by my actions in receiving this news you have told me, I will not
disavow it, or go about to deny that I have loved Amenia: But I cannot say that
that was the reason and not the consideration I had of virtue and of Lilibilis,
that made me not to comply with you. Its true, I have loved Amenia; and if I
have committed a fault, she has punished me enough by this action, but I shall
not reproach her, since truly I was unworthie of her. Madam (persu'd I with
another tone) you say nothing shall be denied me but my liberty, I will not
ask that since it will be denied me, but let me entreat this favor of you,
that I may be left alone for some time that I may digest this novity, which
has made me altogether insociable. I shall deny you nothing (replied she) that
may conduce to your repose, and you shall find me ready to cede to any thing
but the losing of you, for my life is of less esteem to me than your company,
but I know how to deny my self to pleasure you. After I had given her many
thanks for the favor she did me in complying with my humor, and that she had
again assured me that I should receive no discommodity in the place, but what
my own thoughts brought me, by her incroaching upon my liberty she departed,
and Lascaris returned to me again.

When I had received by the absence of Clotuthe some liberty of afflicting my
self with the thoughts of that cruel news, I received from them all the
torments and anxities a mortal man was capable of, and whole heaps of those
cruel cogitations precipitating themselves upon me, in such an indigested
manner, overwhelmed my senses, and took away all power of methodizing my
trouble. In this manner I lay almost void of sense and reason for a long time,
Lascaris having endeavored with many persuasions, which I was not capable to
understand, to have brought me to my self, but at last having spent some hours
in this great dolor without speaking or moving, I fell into those pathetick
complaints that I even made Lascaris accompany me with his tears, I am not able
to remember what I uttered, but sure I am that those Querimonies occupied me
all that day, without giving rest to my mind or food to my body. Sometimes
after I had even tired my self with complaining, I expressed my self by
suspirations, and deliberating with my self, I would cry out, Ah, who should I
blame? who should I accuse? shall I say it is Amenia? or shall I put it upon my
evil fortune? or shall I not attribute it to the Gods, who by this seem to
conspire my overthrow, by overthrowing me with the faddest miseries? But what
shall I accuse Amenia? shall the love that I bore her resign the precedence to
anger? what though she has forsaken me? can I give to my self so much power as
to forsake her? she has made me no promises that she has broke, nor gave me
any assurances but what my conjecture made so, if she has obeyed the will of
her father can I blame her? or should I not rather lay it upon my unworthiness,
or the smalnesse of my deserts? But yet Amenia, tell me, would not you have
blamed me if I had forsaken your interests if I had deserted you, and had not
opposed the violence of your enemies with the hazard of my life? methinks you
cannot but blame your self Amenia, if you consider it with any Justice, you
might have given me notice of it, and at least endeavored in so small a matter
to have satisfied my devoires. But you may say, you ought to prefer your own
fortune before the contentment of another. Yes Amenia, if you could have done
it without injustice, if in him whom you injure were not one who had sacrificed
all to your interests, and wholly neglecting his own, had entirely sought
yours, and if that by the action you were not made the ungratefullest of women,
in complying and seeming to have so great a care both of my life and
contentment, only for your own ends, a thing unworthy one of your quality, and
at the conclusion by your desertion to give me worse torments than death could
afford. No Amenia would you be just? you should be constant. Would you be
accounted true? you must not dissemble? Are you pollitick? exhibit it by just
and righteous ways, and draw not upon you the anger of the Gods by making
those miserable, who knew not what misery was till they came to serve you. In
these and such like discourses with my self I sought to pacify the
perturbation of my mind, but all was in vain, for did I begin to be angry with
her I blamed my self, did I reflect on my own trouble and misery, I cried out
on Amenia, was I thinking on my imprisonment I spent reproaches against
Clotuthe, and for all I increpated the gods, with all the words that could be
uttered from the sense of my soul-tormenting grief.

In this manner I spent the day not rising out of my bed, nor giving my self
any repose, nor taking of any sustenance, which I was resolved to continue, had
not the implorations of Lascaris, and his obstinancy in following my example in
my jejunations, made me to sustain my self with what was brought me. I could
see no want of any thing but my liberty in their accommodations, for I was
observed with more respect than usually was given to prisoner, but I was not
capable to consider either their generositie or pedantry, being wholly merged
in my own miseries. After I had observed the good nature of Lascaris I
represented to him that which he could not be ignorant of by my actions, but I
gave him a brief knowledge of my love with the favors Amenia had done me, and
the intentions of Clotuthe. After this knowledge he vowed himself to my
interests, and with many protestations sought to gain my good opinion of his
fidelity; after that time I made him the depositorie of whatsoever I thought
most secret; and I was not deceived in his love and fidelity.

After he had intuited my last letter from Amenia, being passion had not
deprived him of that reason, mine had made me incapable of, he began to
represent the little need I had to increpate Amenia, and making me read over
her letter again, so illuminated my mind, that I began to see with a less
troubled judgment, that it was not so as Clotuthe had represented it, and
blaming my own passion for my former ablepsie, I began to perceive it to be a
contrived plot from the malice of Clotuthe, and the more I began to examine it,
the more clear and apparent it exhibited it self to me, I could then view with
greater contentment the earnestness that Amenia used for my festination, and to
consider the care she had to send me word, with the liberty she gave me to
recover her, which she would never have wrote, had not she been forced. And
Lascaris representing to me with what have Melanthe was had away when she gave
him the letter, and with what earnestness she expressed her desire to have the
letter given me, confirmed me in my opinion, and began to establish that hope
which through Clotuthes means had been dejected.

But after I had given some time to that newcome joy which I felt through those
apprehensions, and established my hopes that it was not impossible but that she
yet might be mine since she was alive, I was encompast with a new perplexity,
in remembering I was restrained: and so was incapable to help her, which gave me
new cause of grief, that at last brought me to this result: To endeavor my
release, and to go rescue Amenia out of the arms of Mandone.

These resolutions employed all my thoughts to gain my releasment, but all the
intentions I could make use of proved in vain, and in vain did I make use of
all the devices, my passion was able to suggest, and in spite of all my
endeavors, I was forced to perhyminate, mancipated to the will of tormenting
Clotuthe in that place; tormented by my delay, and quotidianly plagued by the
perseverance of her affection so much against my inclinations. I must leave you
here to imagine the distress I was in, for I am no ways able to express it,
though I should tell you I did things inexcusable in any other that were not
implete with the like passion. For sometimes I fell into revilings, and so
furiously with what weak instruments were left in my power, I assaulted the
walls, windows, and all obstacles to my liberty, that even Lascaris durst not
present himself before me, fearing I had been utterly abandoned by sense and
reason, seeing me do such Athamantick actions. When my strength was overcome by
my labor, I gave way to those words that were agreeable to my rabid humor, and
in them I vented what want of strength had detered in my actions. These visits
of Clotuthe were assiduous, and never without exagerating her passion, and at
last she became so pressing, that she made me go beyond civilitie, when I saw
she past the bounds of modesty. At first I endured the visits of Clotuthe, and
heard her prolix amorous discourses with some patience, and permitted the
prosecution of her passion out of a hope to gain my releasement, but when I saw
all means fail, and that she would not release me without I would swear not to
desert her, the which I would never consent to, and at last resolving not to be
beholden to her for my freedom, I told her that prizons should never alter the
resolutions I had taken never to love her. Then it was I fell into those
ravings and distractions, seeing all means fail me, and all my devices prove in
vain, and then it was that I begun to be uncivil to Clotuthe, and sought by all
essays to irritate her for the taking away of my life, and oftentimes when she
came to see me I would shut my eyes at her sight, and stop my ears from her
words. In this miserable condition, I spent almost four months, and then being
past hope, and made equanimous whether I would or no, I effected my liberty
thus.

The Captain who had order to make Asturica his Hybernacle, facilitated
Clotuthe's design of keeping me prisoner with all the power he could, being
drawn thereto by the specious pretenses she had feigned: but never told the true
cause of my detainment, and fearing lest her subtle devices should be
manifested through our communication, she never would permit the Captain to
visit me but in her company, and that but very seldom, because his presence
imposed a coercive power upon her words and actions, and made those visits even
tedious to her self. But I who had not lost all generositie with my patience,
considered the interests of Clotuthe for the sake of Lilibilis, and therefore
would not discover any thing to the Captain of her love, though it was to my
own prejudice, nor detained those civilities which were due to her in his
presence. But the Captain being of too penetrating a Judgment, and love
beginning to interest him in our actions, made him perceive something of
inclination from Clotuthe to me, notwithstanding all the restraint she imposed
upon her self in his presence, and besides perceiving I know not what in me
worthy of his good will, he had a great desire to have more communication with
me than was permitted him by the good will of Clotuthe: But Love who by degres
had seized the Capital of this Captains breast, of a Conqueror had rendered him
a Captive, and made him subject to the commands of his prisoner. It was pity
made him at first preserve her, but now Love made him more strictly keep her,
for Clotuthe had amiable features, besides a very winning behavior and
expression that gave attractions not to be resisted but by such who were as
much prepossest as my self. For fear of displeasing her was the only cause that
he forbore his own inclinations of visiting me, but at last perceiving by her
frequent visitations, that she had inclinations for me, Love making him grow
jealous, he conveyed himself into a Closet adjoining to my Chamber, and where
he might hear what past between us very easily, for Clotuthe surprising me in
the midst of those implorations, which the cruel absence of Amenia, and my own
restraint had caused, the obstacle of my happiness, and cause of those
perpetual torments I felt, coming in the midst of my resentments, caused me
more eager and louder than ordinary to spend some part of my reproaches against
her, which she seeking to appease by the opposing of her Love and passion, laid
open all to the hidden Captain, and by the words that we mutually uttered there
was nothing hidden to him of either of our conditions, either of her love or my
aversion, and though he was sorry to find the one, yet he was glad to hear the
other, and for that cause did not extinguish that good will he bore me.

The Captain having found enough by our last visits, he did not so strictly tie
himself to her obedience, but that he broke it for his own good, but desirous
not to exhibit his disobedience, he visited me contrary to her knowledge with
great secrecy, and unknown to any that were about her. I was no less joyful to
see him there alone than himself, and then I reassumed my hopes of releasment
by his means. After our first civilities and some mutual discourses of
indifferent matters, I asked him concerning Amenia, and whether he could tell
what was become of her. He told me that when they entered Asturica they
understood of her departure, but whither he was ignorant, upon this discourse
he broke his mind to me, I will not relate his words or manner, which was
graceful and rhetorical, but the substance in brief was this. He exbited to me
how he had saved Clotuthe, and how since he had preserved her, he had been tied
to her by the constraining power of Love, which had made him so incivil to me.
What I have mentioned before concerning him I then learnt it from his own
mouth, and he gave me the knowledge of his love, and how he had exhibited it to
Clotuthe, and how coldly she had received it, with the suspicion he entertained
concerning her inclinations to me, though she had pretended I was her brother,
and had come purposely to have sacrificed my life among the Romans for her
interests, and that she had used that means to imprison me, least I should have
effected it, by the killing of some of the chief of them, and that I was grown
so furious at that detainment, that I had no consideration of her, and that she
had appeased me by making promise not to let any know who I was, and therefore
she communicated it to him as a great secret, and thereby engaged him not to
discover it to me, lest I should tax her with breach of promise, and exhiting
to him how great averseness I bore to the Romans, desired him not to visit me,
because his presence would stir up great perturbation in my mind, but at his
request she permitted it in her presence, with desiring him not to make known
by either word or action what he knew concerning me, and that he should look
upon those civilities I paid her, as only to blind his eyes, being that I was
assured she would not let him know what I was, and this (he told me) being also
shortly after tied by his love to her requests, was that which deterred him
from those visits he desired to render me. I could not but smile when I heard
how subtly Clotuthe had blinded his eyes, and I would not contradict nor aver
what he said, which seeing he proceeded, and smilingly told me, though I would
not take notice of Clotuthes subtilty, yet he would make me confess that I was
not the brother of Clotuthe. He then told me after what manner he had
discovered it, and what he heard, and how much knowledge he had in both our
affairs, and lastly craving pardon for the crime his love and jealousy had
made him commit in hearkening after the secrets of another, he vowed his
friendship to me eternally, and to expiate that fault he would render me all
that lay in his power to do, or what I would desire of him. I could not but
embrace him at that offer, and seeing that I could no longer hide the love of
Clotuthe from him, seeing it had been manifested by her own speeches that he
had heard, and considering how generously he had dealt with me in confessing
all to me, both of his own love and the love of Clotuthe to me, not considering
me as a rival, or as an obstacle to his desires, he had vowed himself my
friend, and proffered me his service to the utmost, I say I could not without
ingratitude any longer hide my self from, or reject a friendship so nobly
offered me, and that might be so conducing to my happiness.

Therefore that I might render him the surest testimonies of my friendship. I
gave him a true account both of my life and fortune, and the knowledge of those
actions I had done against the Romans did not diminish one jot of the affection
that he bore me, being more firmly grounded, and knowing that love had made me
only their enemy. After I had let him understand the progress of my Love, it
was needless to tell him that I desired my liberty, but that he proffered
though he found some difficulty to effect it, least Clotuthes anger should
light upon him. Fearing therefore to draw the indignation of Clotuthe by too
manifest a liberation, he found out a means for my escape, that none might know
he was conscious to it, not Clotuthe attribute it to his neglect. He prepared a
kind of ^oxicum mingled with such corroding stuff, that being laid to the
cross* bars of the window in a short time fretted them assunder, and gave a
liberty of escaping with long and strong ropes which he also holp us to. That
night being come wherein we were to effect our liberty, my Philoneus visiting
me, rendered me words which seemed to slow from a hearty affection, and after
many embraces and vows of eternal amity, he left me to take that liberty
which himself had procured. Latona's daughter did not exhibit at that time her
splendid face on our hemisphere, which facilitated our escape, but that
obscurity would have seared one from a precipitating dangerous enough, that was
not incited by love and desire of liberty. After I had fastened the rope to a
strong beam, I slid down to the ground with great facility, and after I had
safely rested my self on the earth at the bottom of the Tower, Lascaris
followed me with the like security. Then it was that I found some joy after my
accustomed grief, that I had my liberty to rescue Amenia, or to depose my life
for her sake. I soon left that detested place, and at the corner of the Tower
sound two horses which the Captain had ordered to be left there, with swords,
and arms, for my self, after I had accouterd my self with those arms, we went
to the back-gate of the Palace which was guarded with a slender guard, the
chief of them being acquainted with the Captains intentions, procured my
passage without any noise or disturbance. I left that City with as much joy
and speed, as heretofore I had approached it, when the Sunshine of Amenia's
presence rendered it in its primest glory, but now the darkness wherein I left
it, seemed to me to proceed from Amenia's absence. By the next morning I was
got far enough from the search of those whom I believe the Captain sent after
me to please Clotuthe, but I also believe he facilitated my escape by sending
them different ways from that which he knew I took, for I neither saw nor
heard of any that gave stop to my slight, which I accelerated with continual
journeys, till I entered Juliobriga, which then harbored my dear Amenia.

The first news that I heard was the preparation for the marriage between
Amenia and Mandone, I cannot tell which was greatest, either the anger that was
enkindled in my breast against Mandone, or the joy I conceived that the
marriage was not yet consummated, but considering how much difficulty there
yet remained to acquire her; I fed my imaginations with a hundred sorts of
inventions. I had neither men nor arms to accomplish my designs by force,
neither could I gain them, the whole countries being totally subdued, and
subjugated to the Romans. The father of Mandone was slain in those wars, and
himself was taken prisoner, but the Romans freely released him, and gave him a
domination under them, over Juliobriga, and those lands which adjoined to it,
but the City was then full of Roman soldiers, and they were making great
preparations for his wedding, being glad so fierce a Prince lived so quietly
under their yoke. The next day after my arrival, having consulted it to be the
best way, I sent L^scaris to the Palace, where he might be admitted, by making
himself known to be a servant of Amenia's, and I gave him in charge to discover
to her where I was, and to let her understand the cause that detained me from
obeying the contents of her letter so long time. I waited with a longing
expectation till the afternoon for the return of Lascaris, and at last I espied
him coming with Melanthe, I found an extraordinary joy at her sight, in that I
hoped those doubts which had so long perplexed me by the means of Clotuthe,
would now find a period by the means of Melanthe. When she was entered my
chamber I entertained her with open arms, but not daring to name Amenia, I
stood trembling between hers; out of a fear I had she should have forsaken me
for Mandone. Melanthe imagining my fear by the knowledge Lascaris had given
her, put me beside it with these words. Lascaris has given good satisfaction
to Amenia for your long stay and slackness in obeying her, you need not fear so
reasonable a Princess can retain any anger for your disobedience when there
was an impossiblity of obeying. She has not forgot your services, nor your
love so soon, as to resolve to marry Mandone; nor yet has their remembrance
left her so little courage, as not first to have conjugated her self to death,
although she never gave you any assurance that she was yours, yet by her
actions she would have testified it, that she could not have been ungrateful to
you, nor have been the less yours for his having her in his power. You will
have no came to mist^ust Amenia, though the subtilties of Clotuthe might have
effected it, when you know the truth, which yet is hid from you, and which will
be more confirmed, when you know what she will do for you. These words were
Ambrosia and Nectar to my soul, and they gave me a real taste of the goodness
of Amenia, I could not but reply with the submissiv'st words Love and humility
were capable to infuse. I extolled Amenia's goodness, and exhibited my own
unworthiness; and expressed my self so pathetically that Melanthe could not but
see there was not the least abatement in my love, but that the tide of my
affection was increased by the stoppings and dams of afflictions and
determents. After our first speeches I caused her to sit down, and Lascaris
being conscious to my Love, was not now to be suspected, therefore Melanthe at
my request gave me this account of Amenia after I had left her.

When that your warlike Troops had left Asturica, and that that City by your
absence seemed desolate, Amenia was assaulted with a sudden trouble, which with
a silent vaticination, foretold her ensuing disasters, and made her foresee a
misery which was to come upon her, though she was ignorant which way it should
hap^en. But she too too perfectly saw the accomplishment of her fears, when she
saw that funebrous spectacle of extinct Lilibilis. I will not trouble you with
the tears she shed over that corpse, nor with her lugubrous complaints, nor
with the continuance of that sorrow, which caused the decay of those Roses that
adorned her Cheeks, by too often irrigating them with her tears, and by that
lavation gave more liberty to the nivious Lilies to exhibit themselves; you
cannot be insensible of them, knowing the love she bore Lilibilis, and it is
enough to tell you, her sorrow was so violent, that I thought it would have
reduced her to the same condition with him: but if she was capable of any
comfort in that deplorable condition, it was by knowing you were alive, and she
not only found so much intermission in her tears to ^ead your letter, but also
to write you one, least in making good the contents of your own, you should not
only have increast her tears, but have given her that death through an
accression of grief, which she had but newly escaped for Lilibilis. The first
accretion of her grief was the loss of that Letter you sent her, by the means
of one whom Clotuthe by bribes and fair words had gained to her interests, and
had caused to prove so unfaithful to Amenia, as to steal that Letter from her,
and to give it to Clotuthe. We were not able to find out amongst her maids who
it was that had played her this ill part, for she that was guilty had showed as
much confidence, and as little change of countenance in denying as the
innocent: Seeing we were not so good Metoposcopers as to find out the criminal
by Physiognomy, Amenia fained the receipt of another Letter some time after, and
laying it on a shelf in her closset, left the door open on purpose the next
day, and hiding our selves in the next room, we found out the thief purloyning
the Letter, which was laid as a bait for her, being thus taken in this, she
confessed her former fact, and how it was through her means that Mandone came
to fight with you, and that since that time she had discovered to Clotuthe that
you were in love with Amenia, and that she bore you no little affection, and
that Clotuhe by her insinuations had gained her to steal that Letter, which she
had told her Amenia had received from you, and that in doing it she had
received a reward, that had made her covet to do the like by that which we had
prevented her in. Amenia's indignation was raised at this confession, but she
took no other punishment on her that deserved greater, but banished her her
service for ever, but Clotuthe entertained her for her infidelity. Amenia was
cruelly afflicted, that she knew so much of her affairs, because she lay open
to all her machinations, having none now to guard her from her devices, for she
knew Clotuthe both spiteful and subtle enough to work her mischief, and she had
some little suspicion that she was her corrival, though you never intimated so
much. Clotuthe and Amenia after this knowledge met not in a long time after,
being segregated to their afflictions, and by reason of Clotuthes
unwillingnesse to meet Amenia, but at last they met one another, where Amenia
stuck not to tell her of her ill actions, but with a great deal of modesty and
civility. But on the other side Clotuthe falling into great passion uttered
words extreme misbecoming, and soon gave Amenia to know the authority she
thought she had over her; after she had vented her passion against Amenia, at
their parting she uttered some such words as these, that gave Amenia a good
cause to fear her complottings. No, no, Amenia (said she, speaking in answer
to the justifications of Amenia against her aspersions) do not justify your
self against that which is so apparent, you were too careful of his life not
to love him, you gave him a charge not to be too forward in battle least you
might lose him, you cared not how great the loss be so you lose not Euripe^es,
nor how much damage your Country received by the backwardness of his valor,
so he was not in danger, this does not favor of too much affection Amenia? He
might as well have wrote to me as to you, but he cares not to pay what he owes
to civilitie and decency, so he pays what he owes to his affection and yours.
But stay Amenia, do not you think the death of Lilibilis disengages you to
Mandone, he has promised you to him, and though he lives not to perform it,
you ought this way to exhibit your love to him by performing what heengaged,
and do you account me your enemy and your foe, by endeavoring to find out
your affection to Euripedes, and by trying to convince you of your error, when
Mandone may claim you for his wife by right by the itterated promise and
engagements of your father, which ought, not to die with him, and when you
cannot marry Euripedes without great dishonor? flatter your self no longer,
for if you will not be Mandone's by Love and fair means, he has yet power
enough to force you, notwithstanding the power of Euripedes, who is a stranger,
and not so worthy as Mandone, a redoubted Iberian.

Anger had suscitated a fresh crimson in the cheeks of Amenia, and she had
answered these speeches had Clotuthe staid to have heard her, but finishing her
discourse she would not stay for a reply, but left Amenia somewhat disturbed at
her words. Amenia saw not Clotuthe after that, but retiring to her chamber,
considered her disasters with much weeping. In this she continued till a
surcharge came, which I thought would have been the greatest, it was the news
of your last overthrow, she heard the valor of the General recounted, but she
could not learn whether he was slain or no, or whether he survived that cruel
encounter. Truly this consideration more then the loss of her Country made
her find new springs of tears, which she thought her former grief had wholly
exhausted, and the Floodgates of her eyes were hardly wide enough to let forth
those torrents which impituously gushed out thereat. The next news she heard
did not so much trouble her; being fore-seasoned with a greater, as otherwise
it might have done, and it was the approach of our enemies toward Asturica,
having taken Lancia, and our own men who were left to guard it abandoned us to
their fury. This disaster was hardly considered when a greater befell us by the
means of Clotuthe, who had most maliciously sent for Mandone, and given him
notice both of the Letter, and of your Love to Amenia. I was sitting that
morning that the Romans entered Asturica with Amenia in great heaviness
considering our disasters, and what would become of us in that confusion, and
in a very sad posture were we when Mandone entered the Chamber with two or three
more. This sudden and unexpected coming of Mandone's so surpised Amenia that
she was not able to rise from the seat where she sat, which gave him liberty to
use all those civilities which he was accustomed to pay her. Madam (said he)
Although the gods are resolved to subjugate these Countries to the Romans for
an addition to their glory, yet have they had so great a regard to your person,
that they have sent me for your preservation, and for that end only have they
preserved my life, that I might preserve yours in this extremity. Our fortunes
are alike Madam, and I hope our affections are not unequal, since by the will
and command of both our Parents we were accounted individual: if you have lost
your father, the gods also have taken away mine; if you have lost your Country
I have also lost mine; if you have been abandoned by your friends, and are in
danger to be ruined by your enemies, I have run the same fortune, and my life
is solely given me for your preservation. I am come therefore in this very
exigent to carry you forth of the jaws of these cruel Romans; make not now my
endeavors fruitless, nor sacrifice both our lives to our foes by your delay,
for our safety consists in a speedy departure, the Romans are even at the walls
and there is scarce time for these words. Amenia by this time had recollected
her self, and rising at that time from her feat; I am not Sir, (said she) less
daunted then I thought she had been) so afraid of death but that I can embrace
it joyfully, having already tasted too much misery to desire life: I had rather
be buried in the ruins of my Country, than to fly it in its deepest misery,
and offer this life to the hands of those, that have sacrificed the lives of my
Countrymen, slain my friends, and taken away the life of my father; to be
slain by their swords than leave this place. I am very sensible of your care of
me, and render you many thanks for your pains, but let me desire you to leave
me to my disasters, and not engage your self in them, nor look that you are
obliged to it for me, more then any other woman, since I am about to leave all
the world, that all the world may leave their pretensions to me. I desire not,
nor care for safety, therefore leave me to receive death the chief object of my
desires. Madam (replied Mandone suddenly somewhat startled at her resolutions)
the consideration of your honor ought to festinate your abscession, for you
cannot continue here but that must be contaminated; they will sooner aim at
that then your life, there is no way left to save it but by avoiding that, (by
a sudden flight) which their fury will make them perpetrate. Think not
(answered Amenia) but that nature has given us that liberty of dying when we
please, and she has not been so nigardly of giving us means to effect it, as
to use other instruments but our own. You need not fear that the Romans shall
contaminate my honor, my death shall prevent them; Besides, I cannot persuade
my self but that it is more dishonor to fly my Country then to die for, and
with my Country. It is impossible for me to survive all these disasters, it is
better then for me to die quietly than with a languishing life to be daily
dying in misery. Mandone, seeing his persuasions in vain, and being a very
passionate man, and foreangred by the relation of Clotuthe concerning your
Letter, he could no longer hold from exhibiting it. What is your chiefest
disasters (said he, anger sparkling through his eyes) is it in out-living
Euripedes? I doubt not but you would change your Resolutions if he were the
supplicant, no, you shall not die for Euripedes, but live for Mandone. What,
will you force me then? (cried out Amenia) seeing he led her by the arm
forcably toward the door. It is not force Madam (said he) when it is for your
own safety, but if it be, and that I am irreverent, I hope you will not blame
me for it one day, when that you have more reason then now you have, the other
of his men did the like by me. When Amenia seeing they would have her away by
force, had recourse to her tears, and desired Mandone to give her so much time
as to take her chiefest Jewels with her, and to give her some small liberty in
her Closet. He could not deny her this, having made her swear that she would
not do her self any hurt, they gave me liberty likewise to accompany her, when
I had also sworn not to let her do any injury to her self. She craved this
liberty only to write you that Letter you last received, and in that
perturbation she gave you the greatest proofs of her affection you could have
required. When she had wrote it and sealed, I gained so much liberty as to pack
up the chiefest Jewels that she had which were exceeding rich, and after that I
got from them as they were leading Amenia out of the Palace at a Postern, and
in descending the Palace stairs I happily met Lascaris, I had no sooner given
him that Letter but those who belonged to Mandone came to seek me, for Amenia
would not enter the Chariot without me, this made them use those words to me
which Lascaris did not understand. After I was come to Amenia we entered into
the Chariot in great haste, for that we heard the Romans were so near that we
doubted our escape: we could not imagine the reason why Clotuthe would not
leave Asturica, but now we no longer doubt it, since by the relation of
Lascaris we understand it was but to make a prey of you to her self.

Ma^done with those men that accompanied him conveyed us very safe to
Juliobriga; but in all that Journey Amenia was so full of sorrow and
perturbation of mind, that he had hardly the confidence to speak to her. But,
when we came hither we were lodged in the Palace that belonged to his father,
and then he began to solicit the consummation of that happiness he had so
l^ng expected. Amenia at first answered him as if she had lost no part of her
authority, and denied him the taking of those Liberties, he proffered to take,
with as much courage as if she were still in her pristine power in Asturica;
But this proud Prince, being not able to bear it, began with more impituositie
to assail her, and was about to prepare for a constrained marriage, had not her
tears, which had more influence upon him, then that manner of carriage, given
him a Remora. He was content at last to grant her that ensuing Winter to
consummate her lacrymations for her father, for she continually urged, that she
could not marry so soon after the death of Lilibilis, and so great losses she
had sustained in her Country, till time had partly wore away those sorrows,
and had made her more capable for the pleasures of marriage, but Mandone had
made her promise then not to withstand his desires, which she did out of hope
that before this time we should have heard of you. Mandone after this gave
Amenia all the liberty she could desire, and used her with abundance of
respect, seeking all manner of divertisements, to make her leave that sorrow
which eclipsed the gracious beams of her countenance. But I am not able to
express the least part of the dolor she endured when all her hopes were
abolished by your absence; she saw the winter quite pass away, and you not come
to give her the liberty she expected, she knew not who to vituperate, nor who
to blame for your absence; sometime she chid Lascaris for his negligence,
sometimes she thought him slain, or that he could not find you. Sometimes, she
reproached you for your delay, and with woeful complaints would incuse your
affection, and with dolor enough she thought you had forgot her. But most of
her tears, laments, and reflections were for your death, and that she condol'd
with so much affliction, that it would have pitied the most obdurate. The time
was now at last come that she was by her promise to render her self into the
arms of Mandone, she was resolved to do it, but at that instant also to have
rendered her self breathless, and in performing her promise, performed also
what she thought was due to the finishing of her Tragedy; but the Gods at last
when all her hopes and expectations were at an end has doubled her Joy by your
arrival, and by knowing the cause of your so long stay, which has given her
sufficient proofs of your affection.

This Discourse completed my joy, for by the constancy of Amenia I judged of
the purity of her affection: and I was quite obeaecated if I did not see mine
was accepted; It yet remained, to make me perpetually happy by her presence,
and that I might arrive at the summit of my felicity, by gaining her out of
the power of Mandone, which was to be expedited with a festinated diligence,
for all cunctation was now dangerous. By the advice therefore of Melanthe I
went that night to see Amenia, and by the help of a funal Ladder got over into
a Garden adjacent to the Palace, and into the which Amenia's Chamber Door
opened. Necessity and Love were both my friends, and they both pleaded for that
reception so contrary to her humor, she could not abstain from shedding some
tears at my first invisagement, nor I at the sight of hers: our tongues were
obserated for a time, whilst our eyes exhibited in moist Characters, both the
sorrow our separation had caused each to other, and the joy our re-meeting
brought. Silence at last gave way to abundance of words that I emitted, in
demonstrating the anxietie and dolor I had undergone for those perplexities
that had befallen her and her Country; and for my cruel detainment in that I
was made incapable to help her. I told her, how that I valued not my life
longer than I might retain it solely for her serivce, and for that end had I
overcome those miseries, which else, might have rendered me among the extinct.

I have spun the thread of my Narration longer than I intended, I shall not
therefore extend it by relating our Discourses at that time, but indeed her
presence gave me not more joy, than her words, which were conduceable to my
happiness, in that she gave me an assurance of that which before I could never
draw from her. She acknowledged that she did but what was just, yet had not
that exigent enforced her to it, she had been for a longer time ingrate to my
merits, in denying me the knowledge of that Soveraigntie Love had given me over
her soul, her modesty and severitie still proving obstacles to that
Confession. At last she consented (since the bonds of duty were unloos'd and
those of Love more firmly fastened by afflictions) to leave that perplexed
Country, and return with me into mine, she then gave me charge to expedite her
abscession, and remitted her self into my hands. I never undertook a charge
with more joy, nor more desired then this: I doubted not but that the Gods
would favor my enterprise, since they had been so propitious to my last
designs. That small spark of animositie which I then possessed, would not have
had me bore away Amenia so secretly, and without the death of my competitor,
could I have gained the consent of gentle Amenia, but she absolutely forbad
those thoughts of doing injury to Mandone, since only Love had made him my
Enemy, and in her abscession I should punish him more than by death. I yielded
to all her desires, and gave her as absolute a power over me as she could have
wished. That night was one of the happiest I ever enjoyed, though I was not
permitred any other liberties than sometimes to ravish some kisses from those
lillyed hands, which notwithstanding at that time were sufficient to give me
more content than the gift of Empires. I am not able to exhibit, nor none able
to imagine the content and pleasure I received in her company, after so long
absence, but those who have experienced the ardencies of the Idalian fire, and
whose chaste Loves have found opportunity mutually to communicate, in the midst
of difficulties and hazards. You must help me out of this pleasurable content
with your thoughts, for I am as little able to give you a perfect knowledge of
it, as to describe the splendour of the Sun. As our affections work adequate, so
were our joy and content, which made us think Father-time had added more plumes
to his Wing, to accelerate his speed, for my thought I had newly begun but to
taste the sweets of her Company, when Lascaris giveing me notice of the
approach of the early godesse, we were fain to disjoyn least danger should
prosecute my bold attempt. She prohibited my returning thither any more, till I
came to take her with me, least I might incur that danger which might put a
period to out lives and Loves together; Having sealed my Adues with many
suaviations on her hands I returned by the same help undiscried to my Lodging,
where I had time enough to consider the means how to carry Amema from those
Towers.

I entertained many projects, and I found them not over difficult, because her
will corresponded with my desires. But not daring to commit this secret to any
one, I was constrained to send Lascaris to Taracone, to prepare a vessel ready
for our transportation, against we came. It was a great deal nearer cut to the
Cantrabrick ocean, but then I considered that we ran an assured danger of being
met with at the Herculean frete, and although this was more troublesome and
incommodious for Amenia, yet it was more secure, and cut off that great
compass we must have taken by sea. After Lascaris was gone, I was visited
almost every day by Melanthe, for Mandone being as it were assured of Amenia,
the marriage day being now very near and not finding her so obstinate as she
had formerly been, which she did to facilitate her escape, he did not keep her
as a prisoner, but gave her all the liberty she could have desired, for he did
not perceive any inclination to escape from him if she could. There lackt but
four days for Mandone (as he thought) to have had the full possession of
Amenia, when I having provided, two easy Palfrays for Amenia and Melanthe,
thus effected my design. Melanthe had given notice to Amenia, and had packt up
her richest Jewels, preparing every thing against the night, and to facilitate
our escape, she had gotten of the Gardner the key of a back gate at the further
end of the garden, this she had done diverse other times, and returned it him
again to divert his suspicion, but this night she kept it on purpose to save
Amenia the labor of getting over the wall. At that gate she appointed me to
appear in the dead time of the night, which I failed not to effect, at the hour
appointed. I did not stay there long before Amenia and Melanthe appeared, of
all the others that attended her, she had not confidence enough in any besides
Melanthe to communicate this secret, so that she left them all ignorant of her
departure. So soon as I saw her I fell upon my knees, and in the humblest terms
Love was able to infuse; I expressed my acknowledgement of all those
obligations wherewith she had bound me. She would not permit me long in those
agnizements, but raising me up, put me in mind of the danger we should incur,
if through our cunctation we should make our design ineffectual. After this
remembrance without further delay I seated them on their horses, and with what
speed we could we hastened our flight. The heaven favoring us, spread over his
face a dark vail, that we might travel with the more security, Nevertheless
fair Cynthia sometimes peeped through the chinks of those dark clouds, being
proud to illuminate the steps of a beauty, which in that obscurity seemed to
outshine hers. We made so good use of our time, that before Aurora had ushered
in the Sun, we were got further from Juliobriga than our pursuers could imagine.
I know the want of Amenia put Mandone the next day into an unparrallel'd
confusion, and I make no doubt but that he sent throughout the Country to
retake us, but our diligence, speed and care made all his scrutiny in vain, we
endeavored to avoid all the great towns, and to take our lodgings in small
villages, and sometimes in some lone cottage, making our accommodation give way
to our security. Besides we performed most of this journey by night, and rested
our selves in the day time, so that we made our selves inscrutable. Amenia
underwent this toylsome voyage with great alacrity, but not without some fear,
lest she should fall again into the hands of Mandone. But not to hold you any
longer with this voyage, love and fear together made Amenia overcome the
tediousness and incommodiousness of it, and we safely arrived at Tarracone,
where we found that Lascaris had prepared a vessel, and the wind also sitting
right for our purpose we stayed there but two days before we imbarqued, and
committing our selves to the mercy of Neptune, we left the Iberian coast, and
surrowed over the Tyrrhenian sea with prosperous winds, and full blown sails;
all thing seeming to conspire for my happiness, made me almost lose my self in
the gulf of pleasure and content.

The sea accommodated us with its calmness, and the wind with gentle furthering
gales, and Amenia beginning to shake off her fear, gave me testifications of
her affection, by a thousand endearments: we had time to recount the progress
of our fortune, and to consider how tragically that vituperated power had acted
for our feli^lity. Thus the sea and the wind favoring us we glided over those
deeps, but the next day being upon the deck of the ship, we espied a vessel to
make toward us, with great speed, when she was come within perfect knowledge,
the Marines knew her to be a Pirate. This news made Amenia reassume her fear,
and made her shake off that content she had but now received. But whilst that
she strove with the assaults of those first apprehensions, I had armed my self
for her defense, and encouraging the Mariners, I incited them to a generous
opposition. The Pirates made us quickly see their intentions, for forceing
their prow against ours, they put us into some danger, ours being the weaker
vessel, but as soon as they had joined, I caused iron graples to be made use of,
for the joining of the ships, and then being stimulated with the danger of
loseing Amenia, and putting a period to the content I had newly tasted of, I
leaped into their ship, and there surpassed all the common actions of my life,
by the blows and wounds that I then gave those wretches. I made them see that
a Lover was able to do more than an ordinaty man, having such special
incitements as fighting in sight, and for the life of his Mistress. The
Praedonians not accustomed to be prevented, and to have their ship entered, were
somewhat astonished, especially when they saw that in my fury I here
decollated one, there debrachiated another, opened the breast of a third,
dissected the leg of a fourth, and to all that came within my reach gave either
mortal, or very dangerous wounds. But at last the Pirates seeing only my self to
make that havoc, took heart and opposed me on all sides, where at last I must
have perished with their numbers, if the Mariners of my ship had not dissipated
them; with the help of those at last I overcame them, and those that remained,
yielded themselves. But before we could taste the sweets of this victory, and
before I could reenter the ship where Amenia was, we were fain to prepare for a
more formidable encounter, for we beheld the Admiral of these Pirates being a
great ship, to sail toward us with great expedition. We had not time to
consider our danger, before we were set upon, and that Naumachie was very
considerable for the happy encounter of Lonoxia, the generous Captain of those
valiant Pirates. I shall remit to him the relation of it, that he may thereby be
engaged to give you the relation of his life. It proved happy for us that
Lonoxia was the Leader, or else we had inevitably perished in that storm. Of an
enemy he became our friend; and from seeking our destruction, sought our
preservation, and conveyed us safe to the Issick gulf.

It was the happiest occurrent of all my life, (replied Lonoxia) and fortune
never did me a pleasure till then; and all the Prizes that ever I gained, were
not comparable to that of your friendship, for in it I have found more than
both the land or the sea could yield me.

Euripedes returning his Complement very civilly, took up his discourse, and
proceeded thus: We stayed some small time in Nicopolis to refresh Amenia after
her marine voyage, and from thence I went to my own habitation, where I was
received with abundance of joy by my Uncles, and my friends, but both theirs
and mine was very much lessned by the loss of Araterus whom I had hoped might
have been returned before me. However they could no ways viruperate me when
they understood how I was constrained to leave him, and by what accident we
were parted. Neither could they reprehend me for my choice, being the beauty of
Amenia made them confess that she was worthy of those difficulties and dangers
I had incurred for her sake.

My burning desires were somewhat cooled by the water of respect, and it wa^
sometime ere I could have the considence to crave what I so greatly desired:
but exhibiting my desire by my respect, she gave me liberty to attain to my
chiefest happiness by the sacred ties of marriage. This at last was effected,
and made very celebrious by the great concurse of people, and meeting of
certain Princes, to try the force of their activity. After which I freely
enjoyed that beauty for which I had ran so many hazards of my life, and gained
with so much difficulty; but then casting away all thoughts of my former
troubles, I enjoyed an unexpressible content and pleasure, in the embraces of
my dear Amenia, whose love equalling mine made both our felicities jointly
unparrallel'd; fruition took not away desire, but desire was increased by
fruition; pleasure stifled not our love, because our love was not grounded on
pleasure, but that preserving or rather increasing our ardencies, we lived full
of content, and full of happiness.

Our own content made us not forgetful of our faithful servants, Lascaris
having gained the good will of Melanthe enjoyed her, with a portion of Lands
which I gave them, where content also found a residence among them. We likewise
heard out of Spain (by one that we purposly sent to know what became of
Clotuthe) that she was married to that Captain who procured my liberty, and
that she held a greater state than under Lilibilis, her husband being made
Governor of the Austures, Cantabrians and Gallicians, under Augustus. And that
Ma^done, besides himself, for the loss of Amenia, had left Juliobriga, and was
gone in her search; but what became of him none could ever hear.

Euripedes here made some pause, as being unwilling to begin his more
unfortunate adventures, but seeing they attended him with the like taciturnity,
he proceeded thus.

You may perceive that love hitherto has not given me any cause to be his foe,
but now I must begin to relate his disfavours and my misfortunes, wherein you
may well perceive how for one moment of pleasure, he gave me years of pain, and
unmatched misery. For your sake I will not stick to undergo some pain and
trouble, which the remembrance of these past events will unavoidably bring, but
I may well endure some small pain in the relation, since I have endured so
great in the suffering them. Methinks I cannot tell how to frame my self to
leave the stage of my content and happiness, to begin the scene of my
misfortunes and miseries, but seeing I have promised it, and am resolved to
perform it, I shall only desire your pardon, if I give you not so large a
relation of my following miseries, as I have of my precedeing fortunes,
nevertheless although I intend to be concise, I will not omit any of the chief
evenements.

Joy and content never found so ample a residence, in the breasts of any as in
us, for through the mutual harmony of our souls we ravished each other with a
continual Symphony. We lived not but by the eyes of each other, and with so
perfect agreement and Sympathy we were knit, that we had but one Will, one
desire, and one soul distributed in two bodies, which seeking an inseparable
junction, almost expired at all those places wherein it found a free egression.
We even strove to outvie each other in this delectable exhibition, and love
never enkindled more ardent and immaculate fires, than those that encompassed
our hearts. In fine we enjoyed a paradysical happiness, and unparrallel'd
felicity. Alas! Whilst I lived in this heaven of content, and day of joy, I did
not think I could ever have felt the hell of misery, nor have been wrapped in the
night of sorrow; I did not consider that joys, pleasures and contentments rode
on the wings of time, and that they had no long residence in this world, but at
last I found it true, for this short day had a long night; this moment of
pleasure, years of pain; and this short content was followed with a world of
woe. The first and most grievous disaster was the death of Amenia, by a sudden
and short fickness, which ere I was aware deprived me of her, and wrapped her in
the leaden sheets of death. I need not tell you (for I believe you do not
doubt) that I endured a cruciation equal to my former Joy? for my love not
being any thing abated, it is impossible to declare what dolor I endured; and
if you had heard the complaints I uttered, and had seen the actions I did, you
would never have believed that I could ever forgotten her memory to have loved
another. But then the dolor I felt, and the excess of sorrow I gave my self
over to, had brought me to the very brink of the Stygian lake, and I was not
recovered without the exceeding great care of my friends. After I had
recuperated my health I celebrated her funerals, and spent much wealth on a
stately monument for her memory, which finished, I betook my self to a
melancholy life, having no children (the joy and life of the parents) to
delight in, in which state I intended to have finished my days, but the gods
otherwise disposed.

I continued in this solitary condition full of dolor, till my mournful days
had equaled my joyful ones, and three whole years were now expired since the
sad dissolution of Amenia, in all which time I had secluded my self so
strictly, that I knew not what vicissitudes or changes had happened in the
world, being wholly sequestered to my melancholy thoughts. I had re^ired for
that purpose from my wonted habitation, into a place convenient and agreeable
to my humor, being seated in the midst of a wood, whose trees groaned under
their own burdens, and whose shades made a perpetual evening. Here I had a dumb
Converse with the trees, and to those deaf Auditors I poured out daily
complaints, being full of mestitude and grief. Here I bemoaned the loss of
Amenia, harkening with some content to the sad crooking of the Turtle, who bore
a part in my miseries, and seem to tune her agreeable Notes to my sad tones. I
seemed to my self a shadow, or a carcass without a soul, having neither breath
nor life, and that small remnant that was left me, seemed to be preserved by
the agreeable Converse with the Idea of Am^nia, which presenting its self to my
imagination, seemed not wholly to have left me.

To deliver me out of this voluntary exile, my friends used all the means they
could devise, and my Uncles fearing that kind of life would have shortened my
days, by the exuberance of entreaties gained me from thence, endeavoring by
all manner of inventions to make me so get Amenia, and to cast off those
melancholy humors which I had acquired since her death. There was nothing of
outward means wanting, nor no pastimes or recreations, wherein they did not
force me to be one, to divert the intentiveness of my thoughts, but still their
endeavors failed of their expected issue, and I still persever'd in my
pensiveness. But at last one of my Uncles having an occasion to go into Greece,
earnestly invited me to be his associate: my propensitie to travel gained too
much upon me, and at last I accorded to that unhappy journey.

Being in Tessalonica I was on a sudden stricken dead by the thunder bolt of
beauty, for in beholding the fair Dames of that City at a feast, I was on a
sudden surprised with the beauty of one surpassing the rest: now the Idea of
Amenia beginning to vanish, seemed to take up her residence in this beauty, and
imagining a Pythagoraean transmigration, I persuaded my self it was the soul of
Amenia, that had entered the body o^ this beautiful Cynthia, for so she was
named. The more I beheld her, the more it confirmed my vain opinion, for me
thought (so did my fancy flatter me) her face was composed in the very
lineament of Amenia's, and the very features of my lost one, exhibited
themselves in this Cyn^hia. Her actions, her speech, her courage and gestures
were so conform^ble, that I could not but see Amenia, as it were resuscitated
from the dead in this Cynthia. Whilst I considered her thus intentively, Love
by this mocke^y wh^ll^ subdued me, and me thought I did not transgress to love
her wh^ ^eem'd to be compo^'d of nothing but Amenia. All my former arden^ies
were now renewed, and I now became an altered man, my Elegies for Amenia were
now turned into Sonnets for Cynthia, and all my mournful expressions into
Courtships and Complements. I now began to cast my mestitude and heaviness, and
to exhibit alacrity in my face and eyes, and after some weeks time forgetting
Amenia, I wholly employed my self to gain Cynthia.

My Uncle observing an alacrity not usual in me, I discovered to him what had
happened to me; but I know not whether he was more glad that I had forsaken my
sadness, or sorry that I had involved my self into those new Amoretta's. Some
weeks passed away, in the which I was truly informed what she was, and finding
her birth noble, and her riches suitable to her quality, they became inducements
to my prosecution. She was a Princess of great esteem in those parts, and had
resided in Thessalonica under the tuition of her Grandmother, many years, her
parents being dead. She was of the race of that unhappy Prince Perseus the last
King of Macedon, who illustrated the triumphant Chariot of Aemilius. After I
had understood all things that the generality could give me, I made it all my
employment to be acquainted with her, which I soon effected heing a very
aff^ble Princess. We had been four months in Thessalonica, and I had been
throu^hly acquainted with Cynthia, when we received lettters out of ^ilicia
that gave us notice of the death of my other Uncle who was father to Araterus,
and that he had equally divided a great estate between me, and the son of my
other Uncle that was living, whose name was Epamondas. This caused my Uncle to
prepare for a sudden departure, which gave me more trouble than the accretion
of riches could content, because I should be forced to leave Cynthia without
giving her notice of my pain. I could find no excuse to stay from performing
the Ceremonies at my Uncles obsequies. This put me to much trouble, and at last
made me resolve to exhibit my affection to her at my departure. When I came to
take my leave of her, I yet trembled to perform it, but at last I effected it
with all the Rhetoric I was capable of, and with no less passion than when I
courted Amenia. If my fancy flattering made me judge her features like
Amenia's, my judgment made me see her conditions were very unlike, and her
virtues not to be compared with hers, for having with small patience heard me
discover my affection, she answered me so extreme scornfully, and despising my
service in such a manner, that it utterly dejected me for the present. But
renewing my speech with as good order ar that trouble she had put me in, would
permit, I proceeded notwithstanding very submissively to exhibit my affection,
till she with very scornful and haughty language put a period to my discourse,
and scarcely taking any leave, departed from me, leaving me in extreme trouble
and confusion. The wind sitting very contrary, kept us there almost a week,
much against my Uncles mind, but conformable to mine, in that I hoped with my
implorations, yet to mollify the heart of Cynthia. I went to visit her as I
used to do, but three days one after another she denied to speak with me, yet
at last I gained the speech of her, but with the same scorn as the former she
answered my suite, which gave me so much trouble, that my countenance was well
fitted to follow the hearse of my Uncle. We at last left Thessalonica, and
arriving in Cilicia we performed our duties to the dead.

Those Ceremonies were no sooner finished, but I was preparing to return to
Thessalonica, and although my Uncle sought by very many persuasions to deter
me, yet my obstinacy would give place to no reason. That poison which I
avidously had sucked in from Cynthia's beauty, had so intoxicated me, that I
hardly was my self till I was returned to Thessalonica. But the welcome that
scornful Princess gave me was a terrible corrosive to my heart; for to show you
how much she disliked my coming, she would not permit me to see her in many
days. However nothing being able to deter me, I wore out her rigor with my
patience. Whilst I remained adoring this beauty, and consuming my self with the
scorching flames of desire, I received many letters out of Cilicia of the very
great wrongs that were done me in the partition of that estate, which was
bequethed to Epamondas and my self, and that all would go to ruin unless I
returned, yet all that could be wrote was not able to attract me from that
loadstone, nor divert my constant motion from that Cynosure; I had wholly
devoted my self to her service, though I found nothing but scorn, slighting and
reproaches in all her words and actions. But my soul like the Thracian stone,
the more it was merged in the water of her disdain, the more it was inflamed;
and the more opposition it found, the more desire it had to attain. Some
months were expired, and still my dolor increased, my heart was exhibited by
my eyes, my passion by my face, my grief by all my actions, and sometimes by my
words, yet hard-hearted Cynthia harbored not the least spark of compassion At
last that fatal hour came wherein I was to be deprived of that happiness (which
I had fancied to my self) that I received in the quotidian inspection of her
fascinating beauty: for having had some more liberty than usually with her,
being pressed by my ardent desires, I urged her with the greatness of my
passion, the extremity it had brought me to, how few days I had to reside upon
earth unless she graciously commiserated my condition. I followed my suit so
hard (her silence giving me liberty) that I thought I should have stirred up
some compassion: but alas! instead of pity I exsuscitated her an^er, and at the
conclusion of my words (the lightning of her eyes foreruning the thunder of
here is) she expressed a fatal sentence of banishment upon me, chargeing me
immediately to leave Thessalonica and never to appear in her sight more.

These words deprived me of all motion, and (as if metamorphis'd into some
Statue of brass or stone, for a memoria^l of the implacable anger of my
Goddess) left me so in^^nsible, that seeing her avoy'd the the room I had
neither power to speak or sti^r. But at last my spirits returning to exercize
their ordinary functions, by breaking the Phylica of their intent setlement,
gave me a more per^ect sensibility then I received in my astonishment. My
astonishment turned to grief, and my grief to fury, and that led me headlong
to my own precipitation. O strange power of Love! I could not hate her, nor
take any revenge but on my self to satisfy her. In a strange posture I went to
my lodging, my servants noting the strange alteration which I exhibited, but
they were not so bold to enquire the cause. I slung my self upon my bed where
my ruminating on my condition increased my fury, and urged me not only to leave
Thessalonica, but also the whole world, since there was no hopes of enjoying
Cynthia. After I had poured out a world of complaints, against Cynthia, and my
evil fortune, I suddenly started from my bed divertly agitated, till at last
being overcome with grief and despair, I drew my sword, and setting the hilt
to the ground I cast my self upon the point of it; But the Gods not permitting
me to dye for such a wretch, or else preserving me for future miseries, hindered
the execution, by one of my servants who fearing some such determination, by my
countinance, stood ready at the door to prevent it, and entering at the instant
of my falling, clapped both his hands about ^y middle, and so upholding me
withheld me from the death I was about to receive: nevertheless the point of
the sword declining, and my striving to force my self upon it, made a large
wound in my thigh. Being at last overcome through the implorations of my
servants, I gave over my intended purpose, and gave them liberty to cure that
wound I had given my self: whilst I lay in the curation of that wound (being
full of unexpressable grief) I received letters from Lascaris (who remained in
Cilicia) which signified how that my other uncle was dead, and how that
Epamondas had seized on my whole estate, giving out that I was dead, and
himself being the next heir, entered upon his right. This I confess nothing
troubled me, being wholly taken up with my former trouble, nothing could give
accretion to that which was before unincreaseable, besides I doubted not but at
my returning he would soon relinquish his pretensions.

The wound in my thigh being cured, (not that in my heart) to satisfy the
rigor of Cynthia I left Thessalonica, being denied by an express order from
her self the favor of seeing her before I went, for she was not Ignorant of
what happened to me, yet her more then Adamantine heart, could not be mollified
by my blood: When I came into Cilicia I repaired to Lascaris who certyfied me
at large ho^ Epamondas had possessed my estate, and what danger it would be for
me to go and demand my own. However being no way solicitous of my life I went
with Lascaris and those few servants I had with me to Epamondas, who with the
greatest hypocrifie in the world embraceing me craved pardon for his
usurpation, vowing he had heard it spoken of a certain that I had been dead.
With a great deal of blandiloquie he entertained me, proffering to have
removed out of my house that moment, would I have permitted him. His glozing
and grievous calliditie, playing the Doctor in the art of Hypocrisy would have
deceived one more suspicious than my self. I gave him no supercilious look, but
my self endeavored to excuse his temerity, seeing him seem to be so much
ashamed at what he had done; O grievous Hypocrite! before that it was night,
when that I had unarmed my self, and had taken some refection, not mistrusting
his treachery, I went for^h into the Garden adjoining to the house with
Lascaris. But before I had walked one turn, Lascaris being a little behind me
gave a great screach, I turning my head at the same instant, saw six armed men
depriving him of that life which had done me so much service. Oh how miserably
tortured was I at that instant to see my self without weapons, not so much to
defend my own life, as to have sa^d that of my faithful Lascaris, I ran to his
succor without arms, but before I came they had left him but breath enough to
desire me to have regard to my own life, and not endeavor to revenge his, with
danger to my self; all their swords points were immediately turned against me
that was weaponless, I was then in great straights, I was unwilling to let
those villainies triumph over my life, I was ashamed to fly, and I had no weapon
to fight: looking about in this exigent, I could find nothing wherewith I might
help my self, but retiring as handsomely as I could before those Pursuers, I
gained the end of the Alley, in which place stood many Alvearies. Necessity the
mother of invention, taught me a new experiment, for being weaponless I
suddenly raised thousands for my defense, who effected more than I could
expect. By the instinct sure of my good Genius being hardly pursued by these
assasinates, I assumed for my defense one of the stocks of bees, and casting it
against the face of the first approacher, it very luckely covered all his head,
who feeling the stings of those apicula's, cast off that terrible cap, but the
little hony-slies cleaving to his head and face, furious for being disturbed,
made him feel the force of their little weapons, which were so terrible, and
plagued him so shrodely, that he was feign to fo^ego his own weapon as being
useless against them, and as if he had been pursued by the Euminedes ran his
head against the trees: and knocked it against the ground to atter those little
but fierce creatures, his Comarades pressing in his place found the like
enemies to fight against, for making use of that defense I bestowed one after
another, all the domiciles in the apiary in their faces, which did such
execution, those creatures covering them all over, thrust their little
sharp-poynted-needles into their flesh in a thousand places together, which
inspired them with such sury against themselves, that I could not but take some
pleasure in beholding their mad actions, though I also was sensible of some
pricks which I received among those humming creatures. Being thus rid of my
assasins and having viewed their furibund postures till I heard the noise of
other voices approaching, I thought it not best to tempt the Gods, nor neglect
that favor of escaping, since they had done it miraculously. I then taking
one of those weapons for my defense, which but now were bent against my breast,
I departed at a back, door and so escaped from those treacherous and impious
men, but almost overcharged with trouble and grief for the loss of Lascaris.

Having escaped the hands of those assasins I went to Nicopolis, where I had
many friends, who were extremely affected to see me in that condition, all
proffering to the utmost of their power to reestablish me in the estate that
Epamondas had so unjustly usurped, though what by gifts and flattery he had
made himself very powerful. Would I have endeavored, to have regained my
right at that time I believe I might have effected it with the help of my
friends, or had I complained to King Tarcondemus I question not but that he
would have done me right, but so much did Love agitate me that I thought on
nothing but Cynthia, rejecting all the council of my friends, I thought all
company troublesome, which made me to affect my former solitude. After a little
while (oppressed by my own thoughts of the cruel banishment Cynthia had imposed
upon me) contrary to the mind of all my friends, I left that famous Issicus
accompanied only with one servant, resolving to lead the life of an Eremite. I
stayed no where till I came into the Province of Pamphilia, where under the
shadow of the mountain Taurus I caused a little cottage to be built, wherein I
intended to pass the remainder of my days. In this place I settled (having
first caused my servant to depart from me, being not willing that he should
partake of my self-imposed miseries) where I spent my time in recounting the
accidents of my life, the vicissitudes of my fortune, and my alternate loves,
with condoling my banishment, and striving to banish Cynthia, the confines of
my memory, but it was impossible for me to extinguish that fire which consumed
me in the midst of those deserts, in a place where the rays of the bright
Chariot-driver scarce ever penetrated, so much power had love over my soul, the
cause of all my miseries; for had I never loved, I had never been unhappy. In
this place I remained the term of an whole year, feeding on that which nature
without compulsion yielded, and drinking the water of a clear rivulet which ran
close by my domicile, with this food not usual to me, but more especially with
the continual grief of my mind I was so altered in my countenance that my most
intimate friends would scarce have known me. But to contract my relation, my
life being now a burden to me, and I desiring nothing more than death since
neither company nor solitude could divert the tortures of my mind, I resolved
to abbreviate my life with my own hands, but in the presence of Cynthia.
Leaving my Cottage with this intention I traveled with a world of pain and
trouble, being much debilitated till I had gained the sea, where I embarkt and
arrived safely at Thessalonica.

My mind giving my body little rest, as soon as I had prepared what I thought
requisite for my determination, I gained but with much trouble the sight and
speech of Cynthia. I had vestited my self with poor accouterments, and was so
changed in my Countenance that I was utterly unknown to her at the first, but
after she had commanded her Servants at my request to withdraw, except one that
always was Conscious to her privatest actions, I discovered my self to her,
and with many words desired her to excuse me for the breach of her severe
command, in that I had appeared before her, and since that it was impossible for
me to live any longer separated from her, I begged her not to deny me the
happiness of expireing in her sight, and that she would accept of the oblation
of my life for a full expiation of all my faults. At the conclusion of these
words drawing out a dagger which I had prepared, I lifted up my arm to have
perpetrated my determination; But at that instant I perceived by her tears
(the true badges of her sorrow) that pity had won the fort of her obdurate
heart, I had nevertheless effected my purpose had she not taken hold on my
arm, with commanding me to forbear my bloody execution, and to hope for better
usage at her hands. I could not disobey her commands, since she had been so
absolute over me, I therefore left that purpose of dyeing and reassumed my
despared hopes; by her permission I bought me clothes suitable to what I
formerly appeared in, with some gold which I had yet preserved. How soon was my
fortune changed! where I expectected nothing but death and assured destruction,
I found life and comfort inrased hopes, but ah constant inconstant power how
often have thou befooled me! for when I expected the Consummation of my felicity
with a strange caprichiousnesse thou replung'd me into a sea of miesries! After
I had resumed my formet habit, and with my endeavors brought my body to its
former plight, I followed the acquisition of Cynthia's love with so much
happiness, (as I thought,) that at last she (dissembling wretch) confessed that I
had obtained it* and promised me all that I could require of her. My thoughts
being all regular I pitched upon a day of marriage, which she also consented to,
and exhibited as much love as I could expect from a pudicite maid. Her
grandmother being conscious to it, seemed also willing to accord with our
desires. Thus arrived I at the summit of my Joys, fortune having brought me
from the bottom, to the top of her wheel, where I sat triumphing over all my
past miseries.

But see how soon I was dejected, and how in one moment was blasted all the
harvest of my hopes. My immodick love did not without ground beget a Zelotyp
fear, which at first insinuating it self for all the opposition of a contrary
belief, made me with a diligent scrutiny seek after my own death, it being the
nature of a Jelous person to desire draughts of poison in the Cups of
Curiosity. Whilst I with great diligence sought the love of Cynthia, I had
observed a gentleman of Thessalonica to resort thither, who (to give our
enemies their due) for the outward lineaments of the body, the sweet vivacity
of the eyes, the proportionable feature of the face, the exceeding pulcritude
and harmonious consent of all the members of the microcosme, was not to be
parallal'd in all Greece; but his birth and fortune was but mean. This
Gentleman was seldom out of the Company of Cynthia, and I never visited her
but I sound him in her company. The great show of amity which she showed me (as
I have told you) after my last return, wraping me into the enjoyments of a
fancied happiness, diverted the first motions of Zelotypie^, but afterward
Jealousy being more pressing, and exhibiting the attractions of that gentleman
gained possession of my soul, which gave me as great inquietudes as ever Love
had done; and the more it affected me the more reason me thought there was that
I should be Jealous, every day (through my inspection) bringing forth
concurrents of my fear, and confirmation of my Jealousy. It was in its highest
opperation when she consented to my disposition, and agreed on the time of our
marriage, but all this was too weak then to make me reject my former suspicion,
nor so powerful an antidote as to expel the poison I had received. I did
believe that she had no intentions to marie him, yet I had not observed so much
virtue in her as might make her reject the attractions of his beauty. Being
adusted with this fire, I sought by all means I could devise to know the
truth, which I effected thus. I first blinded the eyes of her chiefest maids
fidility with the ponder of injection, when I knew she must be conscious to
what her mistres did, what with adulat^on, and the lunar metal I gan'd her to
confess that which was almost my death to hear, oh the deceit of a wicked
woman to promise me her faith, and be naught with another. This kno^ledg could
not content me but that I must make my own eyes witness to her falsehood, this
(having gained that maid to my devotion) I did through her means. The time
drawing near which we had determined for our marriage, I pretended that I would
go into Cilicia both to fetch my friends, and to come accompanied with an
equipage suitable to my quality, and for those things that were wanting to make
the day Celebrious: This she willingly consented to, and having taken my leave
I departed. Our plot being laid before, I lodged very privately in Thessalonica
not far from the house of Cynthia; Night being come I repaired to a back door
of Cynthia's where I was met by this maid and conducted into Cynthia's lodging
chamber, and hid behind the tapstry where I might hear and see what was spoke
or done in theroome. But not to be tedious in recounting that which is odious,
I there beheld with an imparallel'd agony the confirmation of my Jealou^ie,
there I saw her whom I had so long and so ardently loved embraceing another,
without blushes, in her arms.

I should have manifested my indignation at that time had I not sworn to the
maid not to discover my self, for fear of detecting her, which oath I kept
with great difficulty. With the help of my concealeresse^ I departed but with
how much grief I cannot represent, I confess I was all most distracted,
through the continual torment that it gave me. The next day I departed for
Cilicia with an intention never to return more.

But being there, and finding less likelihood of possessing my estate then
before, Epamondas having through his power ruined the chiefest, and ablest of
my friends, and also being thoroughly agitated by Love and danger, I returned
back to Thessalonica that I might in venting the one quench the other, for
notwithstanding this, the fire of anger had mixed but contiguously with the
flames of Love. In that short time that I had been absent from her, the
exceeding grief and anguish of my soul, had debillitated and dejected my body
so much, that she could hardly credit her eyes when she saw me return in that
condition. When she knew the bad success of my Jorney and in what condition my
affairs stood, she attributed my sadness and dejection, to those evenements,
which she sought to drive away by unwonted expressions expressions of Love and
kindne^^^, which being but coldly received by me; made her wonder at my carriage.

The more Love she expressed to me the more aversion I had to her, and the more
she sought to please me with adulation, the more was my spirit excited against
her dissimulation. I had been there but a little time, when I perceived that
enemy of my repose to frequent the house of Cynthia as formerly, which fight so
stimulated my indignation that I was not able to smother it any longer, and my
anger then overcame my Love which till then it had struggled with. He entered
one day into the house when I was with Cynthia in her chamber, who at that time
full of blandiloquie, sought to know the cause of my discontent, and expressed
very much affection and Love to me, I was about to answer her when I saw this
gentleman through the glass window to come a long the Court, which sight so
excited my passion that poynting toward him I told Cynthia that he was the
cause of all my trouble, at which words I observed a very strange alteration in
her countenance, but she desireing to know in what he had offended me, I told
her that their too much familiarity had exsuscitated a Jealousy that could
never be cured. She seemed with a world of Indignation to detest it, and
denying it with great passion, and anger, she would have left me, useing many
bitter words against me, but taking her by the arm, my eyes sparkling with
indignation; Ah false and perfidious woman (said I) can thou with such
impudence deny that, which the Gods, and thy own conscience do testify to,
against thee; For what reason did you deter that which I was about to
prepetrate against my self? had your mind desired my death why did you not
effect it by persevering in your former rigor, or in any other way besides
defaming and defileing your self? if you did never love me (as I am sure you
did not) or if you did not count me worthy of it, why did you use so much
dissimulation, and so much hypocrisy as to make me believe it? but if you say
you have Loved me, and did intend to have effected the marriage according to
your promise, why have you so meretriciously been defiled by another. Ah cruel
woman! ah base and treacherous woman! thou art not worthy of those servants that
would sacrifize their lives at thy feet! I confess I have loved thee, and
that to the undoing of my self, but the gods inflict upon me all the plagues
that lie in their power to impose upon men if I think any more of Loving thee,
but of detesting thee as a monster, and unworthy the name of a princess. After
a little pause perceiving her in some astonishment. I do not this (proceeded I)
out of conjecture, or stimulated only by Jealousy, no my ears have been
witnesses of your amorous night discourses, and my own eyes witnesses of your
unchaste embraces. I then discovered to her where I stood, and when it was that
I discovered their base doings. When she saw that to her shame she was
detected, and that she could not deny a thing so palpable, and so punctually
proved against her, enraged through shame she ran out of the room, (leaveing
me amidst the pangs of grief) and returning within a short time with her
fornicatour, stood by to animate him that he might tragedize me, but being too
weak for that enterprise with three wounds I laid him at my feet, and had
slain him, had not Cynthia to save him cast her self upon him, between my
weapon and him, offering her breasts to be pierced for his safety, imploreing
me with abundance of tears not to spare her, if I intended to take away her
lovers life. The sight of that white skinn, and those tears so affected me
that I could hardly utter these few words for the overflowing of my tears. Ah
Cynthia (said I) how much cause have I to detest you and how little do either
of you deserve at my hands, your lives are now in my power and I should not do
any injustnesse if I sacrifized them to my just resentments, But you shall
live, I will not murder that which once I adored when I thought virtue had
been linked with your beauty, you shall Live that you may feel the heavy
punishments of your Conscience, which will plague you for your misdeeds; and it
may be cause remorse for what you have done against me, for your sake I spare
him who has not to much power so wrong me by his strength as he has by his
effeminate beauty; Live then to your own shame Cynthia and let the Godesses of
punishments inflict castigations equal to your deserts, whilst I seek to
deracinate thy memory out of my mind. With these words I left Cynthia, and
immediately after Th^ssalonica and returned to some friends in Cilicea, where,
within a month after, I heard that Cynthia had married this gentleman, which
(though I had resolved to forget her) gave me so much grief and trouble that it
put me into a violent fever, so hard it is for a deep rooted Love, and settled
affection to be decussed. But time and patience which effects all things put a
period to my sickness, and restored me to my former health; I then consulting
with my friends and by their advice, gained the help of the Romans, who knowing
of the great wrong I had suffered by Epamondas, through attestation of my
friends, they did me right and settled me in my estate with the death of
Epamondas who opposed them, to the Joy of all my friends, my estate being much
augmented through the accretion of what belonged to Epamondas, which was justly
mine being he had no heir.

After I had caused a solemn interment of Melanthe who dyed about that time,
and had made a monument for her and Lascaris close to Amenia's, taking also two
young youths that they left, to wait upon me, who are yet with me in this
grot, and who have done me as faithful service as their father, I betook my
self to my habitation, liveing many years full of Content and happiness,
which always accrew'd to me so long as I was free from the snares of Love.

I remained in this condition full of quiet, without any occurrents worth the
rehersall till the last year o^ the reign of Augustus, when being in the court
of King ^ar^^^demus of ^^licia the extraordinary beauty and pregnant wit^ of
Agavv^, near to the King, drew me once more into the inextricable troubles of
Love, after so many years repose, and when I thought my self incapeable o^
those fires, having finished twelve whole lustres of my age, Surely the essence
of my soul was composed of Love, for I believe, none was so amorous as my self,
nor none so much crossed in their Loves, or else all the amatorious stars
assembling at my birth poured down their influences on my soul as so many
Amotoriums. My soul of the nature of tow, being exposed against the adusting
beams of the sun of beauty, immediately carched fire, and contrary to my
expectations (having thought the winter of age had frozen up all my veneral
desirs) I found the calid beams, of Agavv's countinance to resolve all my icie
humors, and with a repullulation of desires, caused a new Spring of affection.
Being after much resort to that fire thoroughly scorched, and charmed by the
Philtre of her caring and courtious behavior, and my limbs made sprightfull
with new ardences, I sought by all means I could to make my self gracious in
her sight, being at that time highly favored by Tarcondemus, and of much
esteem in his court I pursued this suit almost three years till I had gained
Tarcondemus to promise her to me; and Agavve seeming to be ^^led by the King
consented, but unwilling; fortune once more befooleing me, frustrated all my
hopes most enviously.

At that time the King of Pontus who had newly buried his wife, having heard
of the beauty of Agavve, sent to desire her in marriage of Tarcondemus, he
desiring nothing more than such an alliance, was very well affected with it,
forgetting his promise, (as all other princes do, when it may redound to their
profit) to me, he sought to effect that. Agavve being one of the ambitousest
persons in the world, affected extremely to be made a queen, and therefore
consented very willingly to their proposalls. As Soon as I understood how
unlikely I was to have Agavve, and how the King of Pontus had ruined all my
hopes I was so enraged that nothing but death, fire, sword and revenge was in
my mouth and thoughts. The subtle Agavve fearing that my desperate mind might
effect Something that might deter her of that which she aspired to, seemed more
kind than ordinary to me, saining that she affected not to be Queen of Pontus,
rather than to have been my wife, if her uncle had so disposed of her,
entreating me not to be discontented at her fortune, but if I loved her that I
would advance her happiness by bearing her company into that country. She
found me extreme avers to all her entreaties at first, but she being of an
extraordinary winning carriage, used so much blandiloq^ie that I was feign to
yield my self overcome by her persuasions, I loved her so much that although I
could not have the full fruition of her I thought it a happiness to enjoy her
sight. All my ^nger was now bent against the King of Pontus, and I resolved to
accompany Agavve theither, only to reven^e my self on that King. This match
being suddenly performed I accompanied her with abundance of Lords, and
Gentlemen of Cilicia with great pomp and state, being received there with the
like sumptuousness. We were no sooner received into the Court before I could
resolve of effecting any thing against the King, but I was clapped u^ into a
strong tower, being the receptacle of Trators and condemned persons, this was
done by order from Agavve, fearing my resolutions would have spoiled her
pretensions, and ambition; if I had revenged my self on King Palemon.

You may imagine how hainovsly I took this imprisonment, and how enraged I was
at this action, but that could not liberate me from my enclosure; I received
the next day two or three lines from Agavve wherein she signified to me that
she was forced to deal so rigourously with me to deliver her self from the fear
my resolutions had put her in, and to deliver him whom the Gods had ordained
for her husband from those machinations I had laid for his life. Thus was I
deluded by Agauve and punished by my own folly.

I continued in this condition the term of a whole year, in which time Agauve,
had been delivered of the noble Prince Dardanus; in all that time I wanted
nothing but my liberty, being otherwise well attended and provided for. It was
not long after the birth of Dardanus that the Queen came to visit me, and
though I had received this injury from her, yet had I not the power to give her
a supercilious look, or not to exhibit the joy I had conceived at her visit. I
wondered what might be the cause of her coming to me, and because I could not
conceive any thing, hope and joy presently were sluttering at the windows of
my soul.

After I had made my complaints against her, for her deceit in causing my
imprizonment, she excused her self, with wondrous blandiloquie, and singular
Rhetoric; She told me that she could not be conscious to the death of him whom
the Gods had assigned for her Lord, without committing a most heineous sin
knowing my resolutions and intentions were to deprive him of his life, and that
therefore she had secured me, not for any other cause but for the preservation
of the life of her husband, and that now (seeing she had been so long the wife
of Palemon) she hoped I would be ruled by reason, and not to seek for her
affection any longer, nor go about to revenge my self of him that had done me
no injury, and that since the hope of obtaining her being past, she hoped that
my affection was also vanished and that she came a purpose to give me my
liberty, but that it must be conditionally to perform one thing which she
would desire of me. To this discourse I replied; how that my affection had not
been so lightly grounded as to be beat off by all the injuries she could have
inventented to have done me being nothing but death could make me cease from
affecting her, yet seeing she could not be mine, I would never desire any thing
of her contrary to virtue, and her honor, and seeing that she restrained me
for fear I should injure the life of Palemon, I promised her that I would not
effect any thing against him; not for to gain my liberty, but to rid her of
her fear and to show her how obedient I would be to every thing that she
desired, and that for my liberty I wholly remitted it to her self, being but
requisite that she who commanded my soul should have the disposal also of my
body: and further that she needed not to doubt but that I would effect any
thing that she could desire of me, but that I would not do it to gain my
liberty, but only for the affection that I bore her. Agauve showed her self
extremely joyful that I had so freely promised her, however she made me swear
to do that which she would desire of me, I would first have known what it had
been, but that she mightily desired the contrary, so that at last I consented
to take a blind oath, imagining that the worst thing she could have commanded,
would have been to have banished me from her, and that I would not have done any
thing against her husband, but the proposull of this ambitious woman was quite
another thing, and which both amazed me, and troubled me that I had swore to do
it.

The King Palemon had had by his other Queen two children, a Boy and a Girl,
the young Prince in whom all the people of the nation had treasured their
hopes, was at that time but two years old named Palemedon, the young princess
Panthea the chiefest star of beauty in our Horrizon was little more than a
year old, the Queen her mother dying, bringing her forth into the world, the
King marrying Agauve (as you have heard) presently after the death of his other
Queen, (whose birth, beauty, and virtue were unmatchable) had by her the Prince
Dardanus one truly noble and valiant, as most of the world can witness.
Argelois here interrupting Euripedes, I cannot be silent (said he) at the
mentioning of the worthy Prince Dardanus, and refrain from giving him those
collaudations which are deserved by his merits, having so highly experienced
his generosity, and do still bear the tokens of his favor, none less ignore
the valor of that Prince than my self, which should I go about to declare,
would prove too large an interruption; you will pardon this in that I give you to
understand that I am well acquainted with him in whom the very quintessence of
affability dwells, and that I have heard him express great trouble for the loss
of the little Palemedon whom you mention, not considering his own interests,
and that he gained a Crown by his death, but I perceived both he and all the
Court ignor'd by whom that child was taken away, which it may be (seeing you
know so much of those affairs) you may declare. Argelois stoping sometime, and
seeing Euripedes did not proceed, judging aright of the cause; Let not this
knowledge of me (said he) that I am conversant with Dardanus be any obstacle to
your relation, for if you dare to credit me, I will engage my life that no
danger shall accrue to you thereby. Euripedes thankt him in very affable words,
and telling him that he would not doubt neither of his secrecy nor generosity,
he proceeded in his relation thus.

Ambition the ground of all evil, being seated in the breast of Agauve, soon
found the young Palemedon an obstacle to her desires, and never beheld him but
with an eye of envy. Her evil Demon suggesting her to most pernicious
designs, she thought of nothing more than betraying this young princely child
into the arms of death, that by his fal^ she might raise her son Dardanus to
the Crown of Pontus. This was the cause of her visit, and this was the
condition she would release me upon, and to which she had made me most rashly
swear, that I should either effect or see effected the death of Palemedon. She
urged many arguments and reasons for the performance, she confessed the desire
she had to have Dardanus reign; she urged that thus I might revenge my self on
the King, ^gain my liberty, perform my oath, and show her the greatness of my
love, that I would perpetrate a thing so contrary to my nature for her sake.
After I had heard her discover her self, I was very much amazed at the temerity
of my oath, and sought by all persuasions to cause her to forego so mischievous
a design; But she still persisting in it, with such fascinating adulation, such
carriage and flagitation, still pressing me with the considerations of my love
and oath, that at last (oh heinous to think it!) she made me yield to see it
perpetrated, although I would not do it my self.

I hope now your self will excuse me for my aversion to a passion that made me
so enormiously consent to so wicked an act: I must impose my whole fault on my
passion, for it was that which overcame me through her fascinating words, and
not my consideration of revenge, or liberty. I told you before that I knew by
experience that Love has been able to extingush the coals of virtue, and
enkindle those of vice; Judge you therefore whether I speak without just cause
against that which made me act against all Justice.

After I had a long time sought to stop the stream of this exorbitant motion,
with the dam of persuasions, and that I saw it still bore down with the
impetuousness of her will, not able longer to contradict her, I was carried
down with its rapidity in the slender boat of my affection, where consenting to
what she required, I steered into a harbor of misery. For being set at liberty
on these sad terms, I endured the continual wrack and torment of my conscience,
and I never thought of my perpetration without horror, but having sworn to
effect it, and being still bound by the chains of my passion, I enforced my
self to resolutions of perpetration. But in the mean time this cruel Agauve
searing lest pity and virtue mi^ht overcome me, had gained three of her own
Country men to assist me, with a charge not to be persuaded by me, if I
endeavored to hinder the execution of the infant, after we should have it in
our power, promising them very considerable rewards for their assasin, knowing
that was most avidously desired by those fordid spirits. Being conjoined with
these by the order of Agauve we remained some time secretly in Tomus, awaiting
an opportunity for our design, which was propitiously offered us presently
after. The night before we seized on that young Prince, being extremely
troubled in my thoughts at what I was about to perpetrate; I felt a continual
torment till sleep had freed me from those cogitations. But being in the
kingdom of the image of death, me thought I met a man, who with a very
frowming countenance thus bespake me.

This Prince whom thou endeavour'st now to slay,
O murtherous Wretch! his life defend I bid:
If yet by force, you carry him away,
His birth (but not his valor) shall be hid
Until six lustres be expired, and then
This loss shall be recovered again.
The frowning countenance, and the force wherewith he spoke, waked me out of my
sleep, but the impression of this vision remained so strongly upon me that I
resolved to forego my design, though there wanted not suggestions that this was
but the working of the fancy in my sleep upon that which continually agitated
my thoughts waking; but I could not believe that this was any ordinary dream,
for that I so plainly saw a vaticination of the fortune of this child, which
yet has left some hopes that it may not prove in vain, although I live not to
see it.

The next day after this Spectrum, being together with my fellow-assasins, hard
by the Pallace-wall, the Nurse with the young Prince, and some few of the
seminine sex, came into a very pleasant green walk under the wall of the
Palace. Those wickedly sedulous persons for the Queens interests rejoicing at
that opportunity, ran presently to those Ladies, and forcing the infant from
the Nurses arms, made them strain their tender voices, for the invokement both
of gods and men, my self accompanying them (though secretly) increpated the
gods for their propitiousness to their inhumane designs: but these Butchers
having seized on the child, who in that tender infancy, seemed to triumph over
his fortune, and not to abase his courage with the usual cries of such
tenderlings, at such a sudden ereption from the arms of his Nurse, but opposing
his little eyes against those Murderers, he even danted them with an
infant-Majesty; Having ( I say) seized on him, they fled with that expedition
that their case required, my self following them, both for my own safety and
the child's, whose life I was resolved to save, though with the hazard of my
own. We slackened not our pace till we had entered a very thick wood some
leagues from Tomus, and being almost night, they prepared for their bloody
perpetration, which seeing and observing I know not what kind of authority in
the child's face, that did as it were command me to its succor, it animated me
to a prohibition no ways likeing to those assasins, first I tried the art of
persuasion, endeavoring to evercome their bloody minds by reason, to which
they opposed the oath that they had taken for the execution, and the hope of
the reward they were to receive; they made a mock at the vision, and slighted
all my entreaties. When I saw there was no other way but that I must expose my
own life to danger for the safety of the infants, I suddenly snatched him out
of the hands of one of them who was about to have pierced his tender belly with
his poniard, and laying him behindme, I drew for his defense. All there
immediately drew upon me, making me use the utmost of my skill and strength for
my own safety. Notwithstanding the ods that they had, the justness of my
quarrel called down the assistance of the gods, who endued me with so much
strength, that in less than the space of an hour I laid two breathless at my
feet, and made the third seek his safety in his heels. Being now left alone
with the child, and night having surpised me, troubled for the hunger it
endured, and the lodging it was like to have in that succourless place, I at
last took it in my arms, not without tears both of joy and grief, the one for
that it had escaped the murtherous hands of a step-mothers instruments; and the
other for the misery it was opposed to: but knowing there was no succor in my
tears, I traveled all night to have found some cottage, that I might have
given to the child what its tender nature craved. But alas! so had the gods
ordained it, and so hard was its destiny, that instead of succor it found
either his death, or more misery, for the day no sooner appeared to the
renewing of my comfort and hopes, but that I was met with by six Thieves, who
having given me some wounds for withstanding them, forced the infant from me,
and left me wholly disconsolate for my averse fortune.

After I had bewailed the hard fortune of that Princely child, and pondered the
inconstancy of my own, I found out a Cottage where I remained some few days,
till my wounds were healed; after which I began my jorney toward Cilicia,
having no desire to see Agauve, my love being turned into detestation of her
bloody humor. As I was returning not far from Tomus being entered a spacious
wood, I heard at some distance the groans of a person drawing near his end; the
further I went into the wood, the nearer I seemed to approach it, and at last
being guided by the noise that he made in emitting his soul, I came to the
place from whence I had heard those groans, where I found a man weltering in
his blood, which had been effused at many wounds. His face covered with blood
and dust was not to be known, but his strong heart still wrestled with death,
though he had an advantageous entrance at very many wounds. Pity and humanity
attracted my small endeavors to his help, though I saw an impossibility of
recovering him, but having wiped the blood from his face I knew him to be the
same man that had escaped my sword, when I fought for the defense of the young
Palemedon. I wondered to see him so pitifully martyred, but it he made me
remember that the Justice of the Gods, quickly overtakes such assasinous
wretches, and pays them the to utmost of their merits. After I had made him
understand who I was, and with my endeavors brought him strength enough to
speak, I gathered thus much out of his broken Language, being interrupted with
the continual pains of death and lack of strength. He told me being returned
to Agauve, and having faithfully related to her what had happned, she was
extremely enraged at me, vowing some way or other to be severely revenged,
being mightily perplexed that the child had escaped, fearing lest her treachery
should come to light, and for that cause not dareing to trust him, instead of
the reward he looked for, by her commandment he was so slain having been
intised into that place by her means. This was all that Death gave him leave
to utter, being totally overcome by him at the conclusion of these words.
Having entombed him under a heap of leaves I departed and met with no other
evenement worthy the recital till I came to my habitation, where I found that
distance of place, nor length of time had yet extirpated my memory among my
friends, and in a little time I recuperated my pristine glory, living in as
great content as ever. But being tormented with the treacheries of Agauve, who
by hired As^^^ms endeavored to deprive me of my life, not thinking her self
safe whilst there remained a witness of her cruelty, I was forced for my own
safety to write to her, not to persist in seeking my life unless she would
force me to discover her, and to rest contented that the child being dead, I
intended not to discover, but only to detest her cruelty, and inhumanity. I
believe those few lines I sent her gave her satisfaction, especially when she
understood that Palemedon was dead, for after that I heard no more from her,
but remained free from her assasinous attempts.

Long it was not before I was once more constrained, to leave the happy sort
of Content, pleasure, and quietude, being forced thence by the Shaftes of that
sworn enemy of my rest Cupid. My age nor all my former miseries were bulwarks
sufficient to keep off his fires, nor free me from those passions which had
ever been my ruin. Alas as if I had been born only to love, or as if it had
been my natural element, wherein I was only to live, I could not have had a
more propensitie to it, I once more found my frozen years melted away with
loves ardors and that over youthful God inspired me with his youthful flames,
and with Medean art brought back the spring of my age, making it find a
repulluation under the heat of his fires. The object of this last love was a
widow, in whom beauty and wit equally strove for mastership; her birth was
noble but her fortune mean, which made her exercise her wit to maintain her
state, being also touched with that plague Ambition, the mother of all
mischief, and the wicked Daemon's eldest daughter. The Gods thwarted my other
loves, and made me lose that which I sought to obtain, for which I rendered
them a thousand reproaches accounting them enemies to my happiness, therefore
it was Just that I should acknowledge the plagues of my own acquirements, and
see that the Gods in denying, were friends to my happiness. I obtained what I
ardently desired; being she whom I Sought desired it no less, not out of love,
but ambition and avarice, hopeing to make a Son that she had heir of that
estate I possessed. Content cannot last long where mutual love tyeth not the
affections, the love I bore her served but to extinguish my reason and blind
my eyes from Seeing her projects, and the respect, she bore me was but forced
for her own interest, and till she had made her self master of what I held.

The first appearing of her enmity was at my denial of certain unreasonable
demands for her son. Wherein she exhibited that her desire was for nothing more
then my death, and that the advancement of her son was the scope of all her
projects; however though it was too apparent not to be seen, yet could I not
use any remedy against it. Five years having consumed themselves since our
marriage, her desires being grown too bigg to be contained within its limits,
and her projects being fully ripned, she suddenly effected them, for having
great friends among the Romans, through their aid she possessed her self of
all I had, and by force, maintained her self in it, useing me as her professed
foe, and would (could she have effected it) have put a period to my days.

Love that before appeared to me as the most beautiful goddess, and with a
luster that begat her adoration, now seemed to be converted into a most ugly
Erinnrs, worthy of all detestation; the scales began to fall from my eyes, and
I began to see my folly, and to recount those enormities it had made me run
into, and finaly recovering my reason I professed my self a foe to that passion,
which before I so much observed. Endeavoring to recuperate that which was
violently withheld from me, I in some time effected it with the aid of my
friends, where I spent some more years, but being subject to the complotting of
my wife and her Son, having a desire to spend the rest of my days in
contemplation, in a place free from the access of men I sold my estate and
leaving my ungracious persecutresse, taking with me the two Sons of Lascaris
and very few servants else, I repaired to this place, being known to me to be a
place as full of pleasure as Solitude, and where I might be free from the
perquisitions of my friends, and plotts of my enemies. By the way to this place
I happily met with Lonoxia, and understanding each others fortunes, being tied
with a mutual Love and friendship, we resolved to spend the remainder of our
days together. This place being designed for our habitation, we added art to
perfect nature, and by the help of both we completed this domicile as you see,
in which we have spent some years without any evenement, or seeing any
stranger but your self, being a place so unfrequented, and this adjoining
grove being the utmost of our ambulations.

Here neither the troubles of Love, or arms assolt us; here neither the envies
or plots of our enemies annoy us; here quietude and peace accompany us, and
here being sequestered from the world, the knowledge of its affairs does not
deturb us, but being naruralized to this solitude, we find a pleasure which
all the Empires of the world cannot give us. I have now concluded my narration
wherein you cannot but perspiciously see, (if that passion wherewith you are so
inbued has not already exoculated you) that Love has been the cause of my
miseries made me the Sport of Fortune, and tyraniously triumphed over my
Liberty, and who lastly with so many vicissitudes has made me an abject to my
self.

Here Eu^iped^s absolved his narration, and Argelois beholding him some time in
silence, till having collocated his thoughts; he in few words displayed them
thus.

Give me leave to represent in brief those Speculations which I have observed
in your narration, where you so satyrically inveigh against love, which indeed
if we retro^pect into the often vicissitudes of your fortune, and into those
Hurricanes of passions, and dangers, into which you have been driven by love,
we cannot but in Justice excuse you; But as I conceive we are not to increpate
a passion, for the irregularities of others or of our selves, for if virtue be
adjoined to it, its effects are glorious, if vice abominable: So that the
passion produces effects according to the virtuous or vicious disposiof the
person it agitates. This distinguishes Lust from Love, for Love without virtue
is Lust and Lust concatinated to virtue is Love. This distinction (it may be)
may be thought too gross, for the stricter, and more refined Lovers, will not
admit of Lust, though as I conceive it is the same which they call desire,
which being involved in the actions of virtue and as it were chained to it, it
cannot be perceived to have a being, and therefore so refined Lust is
imperceivable, and wholly converted to love. Love (some distinguish thus)
undetermined is Lust, Lust determined to one, Love. This cannot be to those who
(as you say) Love without desire, for it must be a sensual desire of pleasure,
to all, or more than one, nay or limited to one, that we rightly call Lust, for
indeed we change not the quality in our desire or love to one, but the
exorbitancy which regulated is called Love. Now it remains doubtful to me
whether man, (as you have inse^'d) can be capable of loving without passion or
desire, unless deified. It is not barely formosity, beauty, wit, or any other
exterior object, or quality of the beloved that causes Love, (though all these
in themselves are lovely, and communicate a kind of pleasure in the beholding
them) were there not desire and hope of fruition also in the Lover; for to love
without desire, is to love without respect either to persons or sex, which is
the property of the gods and their celestial Ministers alone, not to admit of
Passion, and who without affection love all, and yet admit of degrees in their
love: some feeling the influence of it more than others, and yet distributed by
the gods without respect or passion. This may be explained by the Sun, who
communicates his heat withour respect to persons or places, having no passion
or affection to any in his communication, yet we know some partake more of his
light and heat than others, according to the distance and propinquity to the
Equator or Circuit of that bright deity. Even so the farther we are from the
gods by vi^e (which causes the distance between them and us Mortals) the less
we receive of their love, which would be freely communicated to us, were we
near them by virtue, which does as it were initiate us into their natures, and
so by our vicinity receive a full measure of their Love, and all this without
either respect or Passion in the gods. But now I cannot see how man being
composed with such affections and passions, can be capable of this Love,
without either respect, passion, or desire to love all alike. I am a little
wide of what I intended, which was to show that this passion, was not to be
contemned as it was a passion, but as it was irregular; for I hold not with the
Stoics, that all passions and affections are wholly to be mortified, wholly
slain and extinguished, but that they are to be regulated, according to the
precepts of virtue. As wrath and anger without moderation is irregular, and
therefore to be shunned; but when our anger is turned into zeal for the gods,
and the actions of virtue are used against others with moderation, we may make
use of it to animate our selves, and stimulate our courage, against our enemies
without peccation; and so Love regulated, is not to be culpated, but only the
irregularities and enormities of it. To know that, is to accommodate it with
virtue, and observe so long as virtue is predominate, and rules it, it cannot
but be a spur to glorious enterprises and attchievements, leading into all
virtuous actions, giving no cause of complaint, and never (as you complain)
deprives man of his Reason, but quickens and enlightens his understanding. But
now if this swerve any thing from virtue that I call irregular, and acknowledge
it worthy of detestation, for then those persons that follow the enormities of
this passion, are ruled by it according to the variety of humors of their
fancies, and acting often times contrary to reason, become notorious in their
follies. And (lastly) though men cannot have the power to decuss this passion,
being innate, yet they may have that power if they will as not to swerve from
the rules of virtue, and then though love cause egritude, and disquiets, yet it
is not vicious, so that we must thus distingush the passion from the enormities
the passion will lead us into, unless restrained by virtue.

Euripedes would have replied to this discourse, but that Lonoxia playing the
Moderator hindered his exaggeration, by remembering him how much of the night had
already been spent, and that the remainder was more fitting to be spent in rest
than discourse, he having already weaeied himself and his auditors with his
long-winded narration. Euripedes yielding to his proposition, after very many
civilities passed betwixt them, leaving Argelois to take his repose, he and
Lonoxia returned to take theirs.

The end of the third Book.
ELIANA.
BOOK the fourth.
TItan had no sooner left the embraces of his Thetis, following his
anteambulatriss the beauteous Aurora, but displaying his golden head above the
waters, he projected his beams into the room where Argelois lay, who at that
instant breaking the prison of sleep, began his cogitations with the early
morn. The relation of Euripedes had so diverted him the last day, that he was
forced to convocate his thoughts, to know where Love had left him, and that by
renewing his conceptions, he might assume his wonted and pleasing contemplation
of that Idea which so affected him, and to repend the former days loss, he
imposed on himself a ta^^, but very pleasing in the continual cogitancy of
Eliana. Thoughts obtruding themselves, set all the wheels of his imaginations
on work, and revolving to the heart with a pleasurable motion, gave him
exceeding contentment, all excursions being introvocated to that intense
contemplation he minded nothing but the Idea which represented it self in his
mind, and on which he fixed his thoughts without discursion, or by letting one
object lead him to another, and that to a third, and so coherently led
insensibly into confusion; but not letting his thoughts transcurre that object,
he willingly lost himself in that meditation, without denoting the elapsion of
the morning.

Whilst in these Co^it^ncies he sometimes erected structures of happiness to
himself, and sometimes diruting what before he had built, found a labor equal
to that of Hercules when he purged the stable of Augeas, or when he
internecated' the head-increasing Lernean Hydra, one conception begeting
another contrary, and that being dispersed, a third repullulates, so that the
vanishing of one, was still the increasing of another, his labor became
endless; and whilst his thoughts begat stronger desires, his thoughts also
sought out means to attain to those desires, which finding so difficult, he was
dejected almost to the absolute privation of hope, which made him be content
rather to adore her, than venture to implore her mercy.

Whilst he continued these musings, Euripedes and Lonoxia entered his Chamber,
which exsuscitated him out of his ponderations, and as it were gave him a new
being to himself, for beholding the great progress, the bright lamp had made in
his diurnal course, he ingenuously confessed himself to be lost in the Meanders
of his cogitations. After they had given him the good morning; It may be (says
Euripedes very facetiously) that you have been endeavoring to decuss those
ligaments wherewith you are tied to your beloved Image: but believe me it must
not be the resolution of a night, nor the endeavors of a few hours; but the
sooner you resolve, and the more you endeavors of a few hours; but the sooner
you resolve, and the more you endeavor, the likelier you are to effect it; for
it is a thousand pities that one so accomplished as your self, should languish
away in the prison of love, But we often find it to be the pride of that God to
make the perfectest the butt for his arrows. It is impossible (replied
Argelois) for me to take warning by others harms, or to escape now I am so far
entangled in the net, I confess I have not so much as a desire to be free from
my pain but by fruition, and the small (or rather no) hopes that I have gives
life to my desire, and though by intuition I receive more pain, yet also it is
an accretion to my pleasure; such contrariety is in the composition of Love;
for a Lover, though he acknowledges a captivity, yet he confesses a freedom;
and though he says his love is a prison, yet he calls that prison a paradise.
He cries out he is full of pain, and yet it is almost equalled with pleasure,
complains of torment, and yet he would not forego it for the greatest ease. So
it is with me, I am sensible of my captivity, my pain, my torment, and cruel
disquiets, and yet I account it freedom, joy, ease, and no trouble; neither
can I so much as desire to be freed but by the fruition of the object which
will recompense all the miseries endured for ever, but those hopes are so small
that I am almost arrived at the brink of despair.

After some such discourses Argelois arising, they went into their lower rooms,
and after some refection, Argelois put Euripedes in mind of desiring Lonoxia to
relate the evenements of his life. Lonoxia who was willing to satisfy Argelois
in what he desired, (he having gained extremely upon their affections, with his
generous behavior) without much entreaty consented to it. Euripedes
withdrawing, left Lonoxia to divert the humor of Argelois with his relation,
himself in the mean time betaking him to some Philosophical contemplations, in
which he daily spent some hours. Lonoxia and Argelois being seated, and seeing
him ready for the audition of his relation, after a little pause he began thus.

THE HISTORY of LONOXIA.
IT is a vanity (not to be born) of some continually to Jactate of the the
antiquity, glory, and opulency, of their Ancestors, whereby they fill
themselves like so many full-blown-bladders, and become a foot ball for the
calcations of the wise. Virtue not birth or riches at first wan the prize of
Glory, but their successors thought it enough to wear their badg without
making themselves worthy of it, glorying that their predecessors had been thus
and thus, So that greatenesse is now of the highest esteem and virtue little
regarded, it being pretense enough for some to obnubilate their own vices, by
exhibiting the virtue of their ancestors.

To avoid this crime therefore, I will not stand to declare, either the
antiquity, opulency, virtue, or vices of my parents, thereby either to hide my
vices with their virtues, or to set off any virtue of mine by their vices. But
indeed the Gods favored me with an honorable birth, though they have
disfavoured me with a wretched Life. The country of Mauritania Tingitana
claims my Birth and Education, and more particularly the town of Lixus. The
antiquity of our house was there well known, which I wave as a thing frivolous
for the furtherance of virtue. My fathers name was Marcipsius brother to King
Bogadus who unhappily fell under the sword of the renowned Agrippa, at the
battle of Actium, taking the part of infelicit Antony. I had two brothers
elder than my self, the eldest was named as my father, the other was called
Massanissa. I was but young at that time when my uncle Bogadus was slain, and
my father not affecting those glorious cares of a Crown, (the war immediately
following) he kept close in Lixus without meddling in those broils.

But my brother Marcipsius being of a stirring nature went into Egypt till the
war being ended, with the death of Antonius, when returning he hoped to attain
the crown, but being opposed; there grew great broils which lasted for some
years, till Marcipsius was driven out of Africa, where he was absent from us
three years. At last Marcipsius returns and tells us of many strange occurrents
that had happened to him in Spain and other places, our parents were full of Joy
for his safe arival, whom they had feared had been Lost. I was now arrived at
15 years of age, and began now not to fear the Envy of my brothers, for I
being the darling of my mo^her, and the chief depositum of her affections,
whilst I was little it procured their Envy, and that megre squint-eyed hagg
sufflateing that fire in their breasts, increased it as I grew in years: For
the Gods propitious to my studies made me surpass them in all literature, and
in the arts and sciences, recompensing my young years with great knowledge. I
would not boast my self of these things, or glory in such vanities, yet it is
requisite that I acknowledge the favor and benevolence of the Gods, seeing it is
at their pleasure to give either knowledge, or strength to whom they please. But
however that my studies chained me within doors, yet had I a peculiar
inclination to the actions of Mars, and I thought Mars and the Muses would do
very well together, and as soon as I arrived at this age of puberty, it
exhibited my great desire to arms, which my father, (being careful to further
my inclinations, as far as they tended to virtue) perceiving, provided
excellent tutors for me, together with my brother Massanissa, we learnd under
one master who sought impartially to Instrct us, and to imbue us with the best
of his skill, but in that martial discipline I did precell, which augmented
his hatred and made it implaccable, I often found it in many injuries and
affronts which I had borne all my life time patiently enough, but now I could
no longer resent them, espetially when I saw both of them desired no less than
my Life, such are the inspirations of Envy, that another prosperity is their
plague, and another ruin their delight though nothing accrews to them thereby.
I had pretty well found the use of my weapons, and could use with them
dexterity enough, either for defense or opposition, when Marcipsius returned
out of Spain, Marcipsius hating me no less than Massanissa, sought all
occasions of quarreling, and under pretense of trying me at my weapons would
endeavor to take away my Life, and sometimes would put me to my shift to save
it, and to come off with considerable wounds. Having been dealt withal so once
or twice, I took heed how I fell into their clutches and avoided all occasions
I could of offending them, useing those advantages the Gods had given me, with
as much modesty and humility, as could be required. I sought with meekness to
overcome their envy, but alas! it was too strong for Love to Conquer. I daily
found it to increase, and the Injuries that I received were almost
innumerable, inso much that it defatigated my patience, and made a Tedium of my
life.

But now the time was come wherein my unlucky hand freed my self of these
miseries, but involved my self in far worser dolors; one day which was very
inauspicate, Massanissa being with me in a garden adjacent to our house, upon
some small differnce between us about Casting of our darts, stroke me a box on
the ear, adding some Stimulating speeches: which provokement bannisht all
former fear and natural Love, filling me with wrath and disdain. My passion
blinding my reason, gave me no liberty to think into what precipices I slung
my self, but drawing my sword I showed him it was impossible for me any longer
to take his affronts. Massanissa not declineing this unnatural combat,
opposed me with his sword, and expressed a desire to end all quarrels with a
duel. We both prosecuted this fight with strange fury, no hatred being so
strong as that between brothers, yet had I had ever so little respite my reason
would have overcome my passion, but this duel was soon Consummated, for at the
third thrust I passed my sword through his body, tumbling him dead at my feet.
Then, and not till then, did I consider what I had perpetrated, Remorse,
straight ways seized upon me, and Repentence converted my eyes before dried
with anger, and flaming with wrath, into standing pooles, which overflowing
discharged themselves into Rivers of tears, all the faculties of my soul were
now turned into grief, all ceasing their operations to give this the more
scope, At last seeking to revive him with the eyes of pity, I cast my self upon
him, mingling tears of repentence with his crimson blood, and washing his
wounds with those distillations, addressing vain implorations for
forgiveness, whilst he expired in my arms. When I saw that he had yielded to
fate, new considerations unlockt new springs, till the excess of grief had
froze those currents to my cheeks, and had as it were converted me into a
marble statue, wherein was neither life nor motion.

In this posture my father and my brother Marcipsius coming Casually into the
garden found me, and seeing me at a distance, with one lying by me,
approperated as to behold some novelty, but appropinquating they soon beheld
that sad spectacle. So sudden and unexpected an in counter, put them into an
astonishment, and taking away the faculty of Speech, left them no power, but
by their eyes to demand the cause of his death. My Conscience interpreting the
dum language of their eyes, I cast my self at the feet of my father and with
out excuses, punctually and truly, related what had happened betwixt us.
Marcipsius not more sorry for the death Massanissa than glad that I had slain
him, that the wrath of my father might immolate me to the Ghost of my brother,
stimulated him to excecute his resentments immediately upon me, who provoked
equally with his words and passion devaginated his sword to have slain me. But
I, startled to see death appear in the hand of him who gave me life, consented
to the present motion of my spirits, and fled the fury of his wrathful hand.
Wrath invigorating his ancient limbs, made him follow me with nimble strides,
but yet my velocity left him behind some paces, and fear made me too nimble
for winged death, who carrying me into the arms of my mother made her prove
the Coal of Life. For meeting her at the entrance into the house I cast my
self at her feet. As you have been the author of my being (said I) so now it is
you only can preserve it, but that I cannot beg, seeing I have been the
destruction of another in whom you had a maternal interest, suffer me only to
disburden my Life at your feet --, the approach of my father, stifled the rest
of my words; my mother aghast at this encounter could not reply, but trembling
in this astonishment, she stood till the exceeding love she bore me excited her
for my safety, as soon as she saw at whom the wrath of my father extended.
Casting her self therefore at his feet, she so strictly embraced his knees,
that she stopped his further pursuit, and overcame his struggling, with her
strickt embraces, mingling her tears with plaintive words, and those with such
overcoming gestures, that she stifled his fury, and made him withhold his eger
revenge, to give her an account of what had happened, biding her not to retard
that Justice he ought to inflict upon a murderer. Her tears stopped her words
for some time, both in consideration of Massanissa's loss, and my danger, but
at last to appease his wrath, still embraceing him on her knees, she sought to
mitigate him with implorative words to this effect. Ah sad disaster, Ah double
misserie; wherein the blood of one Son must be the oblation for the blood of
another! Ah! think you not my misery great enough to lose one Son, but that I
must see another also fall by the hand of his own father! Let my tears conjure
you to consider first, the action, before you perpetrate any thing in your
wrath; for that cannot be done in justice which is balanced by passion, for if
you do it now, it is not so much for satisfaction of the Gods, as of your self
and passion, and not so much in consideration of Justice, as for to fulfill the
effects of your wrath. I will not in the least excuse his wicked perpetration,
for I cannot have less interest in the death of Massanissa than your self, but
yet in punishing Lonoxia by death we shall augment our evil by a double loss,
besides I find too much imbicility to withstand another surcharge which this
unnatural slaughter will inevitably bring upon me, it will be impossible but
that I shall make one in the Tragedy, therefore at least spare him his life and
execute Justice by some way less severe, rather banish him, and disowne him
for your son, than he being a son should be slain by the hand of a father, in
which you will show some mercy as a father, and yet not fail of the duty of a
Judge. These and many other persuasions her motherly affection emitted to save
my life, which could not but overcome the heart of my father, had it been much
harder, her words being accompanied with showers of tears, and her sighs
seeming stops in the doleful harmony of her words; and her actions
harmonizeing with her plaintive voice, altogether sent forceable penetrations
to the soul of Marcipsius, who ever bearing great love to my mother, could not
entertain them, without the exaction of some tears. But yet to be just,
though he consented to spare me my Life, he commanded that I should immediately
leave that Country, and see him no more, least my fight should instigate him to
that which through the persuasions of my mother he had omitted. This was grief
enough to my mother, and gave anxieties not to be known but by such who have
had the like affection, and the like disasters. I soon understood the doom my
father had pronounced which I received with the like welcome as I should have
done my death, it was no small grief for me to leave my friends at that Infant
age, and to expose my self to all those dangers incident to those that traverse
the world, being hardly yet freed from the tender cockering of a mother, but
seeing it was inevitable I prepared for it with all the Courage and animosity
my grief had left me, then indeed* being the time to try courage, when we are
environed with straites and difficulties. When evils force themselves upon us,
we willingly endure some pain to avoyde greater, and of two inevitable evils it
is Judgment to choose the least, my mother alittle before I departed came to
me, rather to hasten me than to stay me, Love seeming to act against it self,
in causeing her to hasten that from her, which she desired extremely to keep
with her, but this she did, as it were, with a willing reluctancie, seeing it
was the only means to preserve me from ruin, for my brother Marcipsius enraged
that I had escaped the fury of my father, and not content with my banishment,
sought to instigate him against me, and himself endeavoring to have slain me,
made my mother, fearing his maliciousness, to hasten me from his power. But in
receiving her last embraces, the sleuces of her eyes being set wide open, there
gusht forth so impetuous a stream, that I thought her life would have been
dissolved in her tears, or that it would have expired through her eyes, which
passion generating the like in me, exhausted all my remaining waters, pouring
them out to accompany her in her lachrymations. But at last the approach of the
silent night enforced her to unlock her arms and free me from her Strict
embraces, kissing my forehead with a dying f^rewell, for I left her rather dead
than alive in the arms of her maids. Having thus left my mother without
further stay I armed my self, and taking that gold and jewels she had provided
for me, I left the place of my birth, not admitting any one to accompany me,
though many pressed to have followed me. But by reason that it was night I
remained in Lixus till the next day, intending to transport my self in the next
ship that went out of the haven, not much careing into what quarter of the
world it carried me.

Having wearied my self with the languishments of that night, I arose as soon
as the bright day-bringer appeared in our Horizon, and going to the Haven I
embarked my self in a ship going into Spain, Which was not fuller fraught with
passengers and commodities, than I with misery and woe. There is none that
leave their native home, and travel into foreign parts, and that expose them
selves to the imminent dangers both of Sea and land; but that they shall find
that mutable power playing her caprichioes upon their fortunes, sometimes
adulateing them with successes contrary to their expectations, seeming to
felicitate them with the fruition of the utmost of their desires, that so they
may receive the greater and more sensible misery, for the loss of that which we
never had, cannot affect us so much as that which we have enjoyed, and this she
effects so suddenly that we receive as much damage by the surprise, as by the
loss it self; therefore we may very justly reflect when in prosperity, how
soon we may be cast into adversity, and that when we are in the greatest
adversity, there is still hopes of attaining as great prosperity, since there
is nothing more contrary to fortune than to retain a man long in the same
condition, whether it be good or bad, which equally Shares her benedictions and
her execrations from the same mouth. So has she dealt with me in exhibiting
strange vicissitudes in the series of my life, sometimes filling me with
content, sometimes distracting me with dolors.

The ship wherein I went continued a happy course till she arrived at the port
to which she was bound, which was to Olissippo a city standing at the mouth of
the golden-sanded Tagus, there I disembarqu'd after a thousand prayers to the
Gods to resent my miseries, and to ease me of my dolors, which were all
consummated and buried in oblivion by a shaft from the quiver of the winged god.

After some few days being in the City, having quite tired my self with
resenting my griefs, Curiosity inspired me with desires to see the City, and
to view the insigne building and places thereof, also to refresh my body,
lassated with the troubles of my soul. Consenting to this motion, I deambulated
through the City, and endeavored to satisfy my curiosity, and to divert my
self with beholding all things observable or worth taking notice of. Having
spent some hours in this perlustration I went out of the city, and walking
along upon the bank of the Tagus within a bow shoot of the City where the
river made a little Island I observed a very spacious house to occupy one part,
and fair groves and delicate gardens the other; it seemed to be a very pleasant
place and full of delight, the golden Tagus circumplectating its banks, seemed
to hugg it as its chiefest glory. Whilst I stood under the shelter of some
trees that grew by the river side observing the site of the house, and
considering how delightfully nature had furnished that amnick plot, I beheld a
casement of the window to open, which stood just oposite to me, and casting up
my eyes, I saw (though at a distance) a beauty which perstring'd them through
the guard of the trees under which I stood. The distance of the place hindered
the exact intuition of her, and obscured all those lineaments that rendered her
exquisite, but neither that not the trees through which I looked nor the
interposition of the River could hinder those shafts that proceeded from her
eyes, from transfixing my heart. Though I perceived a natural vivacitie in her
eyes, yet her complexion showed that affliction had robbed her of her color,
and her eyes seemed a little to shelter themselves behind a cloud of sorrow,
which yet was no hinderance to those winged shafts, but rather made way, my
soul Sympathizeing with her grieved looks: Her Countenance was more than
ordinary albious, yet it and not utterly lost that tincture which makes a
desirable mixture; which persuaded me that her palenesse was acquired either
by grief or some other indisposition, and not natural, which was confirmed
when I saw her make use of her hankerchiefe to catch the pearls that dropped
from her eyes.

I almost lost my self in this intuition, and having so convenient a place and
finding it so delightful, I sought to satiate my eyes with the food of beauty,
but that (contrary to the nature of other aliment) instead of saturity, begat a
greater esurition, and made my appetite increase with beholding.

But at last this delicate banquet withdrew it self, the Lady shutting the
casement excluded my piercing eyes from that beloved Object. Sol beginning now
to immerge himself in the Atlantic ocean I retired from that place, and with
gentle steps retrod the path upon the bank of the river Tagus, extremely
affected with the intuition of that delicate (but unknown) Object: I found
diverse agitations in my spirits, which at I first took to be the ordinary
effects of diverse beautiful objects, which have a certain opperative virtue on
a gentle soul, so that they can hardly be intuited without affection, and
desire, all delectable and amiable objects being desirable in themselves, and
especially to souls who are adapted to Love. My soul was too tender not to
receive the impression of that venust exhibition, and not to be delighted with
that Lovely object, but yet my former thoughts made me strive to stop the
discursion of my Imagination, and to extinguish the species of the object: but
for all my endeavors it would still present it self to my fancy, and awake
all the powers and faculties of my soul to an intense contemplation of that I
endeavored to discuss. Nor did time (the consumer of all things) annihilate
this species, for in the space of a week I sound it got ground upon my will,
and was become almost habitual. I also perceived my former dolors decrease as
this augmented, this beginning to engrosse all the working of my fancy to it is
self, So that at last I had quite lost or extinguished my former trouble. I
was yet so simple as not to know how to denominate this passion, and I durst
not think it was Love, being afraid of that monster which I had heard had
precipitated so many souls, but in fine it grew so turbulent, and molestuous,
that I knew not whether to thank the Gods for taking away the afflictions of my
mind; or increpate them more for these new disquiets. But though these
disturbances seemed greater than the other; yet were they mitigated with a kind
of titillation or delight, which moderated the sensibility of them, and made as
it were a kind of pleasure in the midst of pain, with an admirable mixture.
Remaning in these disturbances I frequented every evening the place where I was
first intoxicated, but I always mist of my desir^s of seeing her, which did
but beget greater ardencies. In the mean time, (having acquired a perfection in
the Spanish tongue, and diverse, others especially the Roman before I came over)
I made a disquisition to know who they were that dwelt in that amnick I Will, and
after much search I understood that none inhabi^e^ there but of the feminine
sex, and that the Lady was a virgin and daughter to the prince of the
Turditans, who since the reign of Augustus had lived (though not with so much
Regality, yet with as much honor as formerly) in the City Hispalis, situated
upon the olive bearing Betis in the provence of Batica: And that the ladies
name was Atalanta who by reason of the great affection she bore to that place,
and the desire she had to be sequestered from the sight of any but those of her
house, was permitted by her father to inhabit there, when this was verified by
the relation of diverse that knew it, I found it exuscitate diverse and contrary
motions within me, which agitated all the faculties of my soul, and I found not
more encouragements than disanimations for the placeing of my Love. I exhibited
all the difficulties and precipices I could imagine to divert my self from this
passion, but all was too weak to deturb it, insomuch that I was enforced to
cede to it is power and seek to feed that fire I could not extinguish. All the
difficulties I resigned to that power which had first wounded me, and relied
only on his advantages who uses to effect things very repugnant, and over come
all difficulties by his power. Under his banner then I placed my self, and
with prayers I entreated that Amorous god for aid.

Whilst I was agitated with this passion, I assiduously traversed the banks of
Tagus, and sedulously watched for an appearance of that bright Sun which had
begot those restless desires. I often circumvagated that I Will and left neither
bank unvisited which stood opposite to it, still hopeing to attain that
desired sight; but her great seclusion made some weeks pass away without the
attainement of that invisagement, which had left me almost bare of hopes. My
sedulitie yet continuing, and frequenting that place as I used to do; I sat me
down under the covert of certain trees, tho row whose bows I had a favorable
prospect to the house. At that time having long contemplated on diverse things,
leaning my head against the body of a tree I was suddenly deprived of the act
of sense, resolving all my Imaginations into the Kingdom of sleep; which
acting upon the species of visible objects exsuscitated many pleasing dreams
that held me past my wonted time of return, which was usually presently after
Sol had left our Hemisphere. But awaking from the pleasing fancies of sleep, I
found that the night had begun to inherit the place of day, and fair Cynthia
in her perfectest form began to enlighten the superficies of the waters with
her refulgent beams. I was about to depart when a sudden noise in the water
surprised my ears, which made me circumspect to see what it might be: creeping
without obstrepancie under the obumbrating boughs close to the bank of the
river, I perceived that it was the dashing of oars in the water that had
reverberated the air to my ears. The fulgency of Luna made every thing
perspicuous on the river, so that I saw the remigers of the little boat which
seemed newly to be put off from the little Island) were six virgins, whose
tender arms performed that office very artificially, the water willingly
giving way to their gentle strokes. At the head of the boat under a canopie of
silk Sat two women for whose pleasure the others made many turns upon the
water with their boat, to delight them with that aquatick recreation. I
avidiously attracted the boat toward the shore with my eyes, believing one of
them to be the same I had beheld with that perturbation that had accompanied me
ever since. This unexpected encounter made me to watch the motion of the boat
with great diligence, which at last came gliding down the stream close by the
bank where I lay so that I perspicuously saw one of them to be a woman of
great gravity, but imediatly leaving that object I cast my eyes upon the other
whom I presently knew to be same fair one that had involved my soul into such
perplexities. This sight caused a general shivering through all my body, and I
could not behold her without perturbation. I had little time by reason of the
swiftness of the boat to behold those perfections, but by the dim light of
the Moon I saw they surpast those which I had before seen at a distance, and
her Idea was more perfectly renewed in my soul; and with a more absolute power
over my will. The boat being past a little beyond me was stayed against the
bank by the force of the oars, and Atalanta with the other woman (which was
her governesse) came on shore, the other awaiting their return in the boat.
When I perceived that they walked toward the place where I lay, least I should
be discovered I prostrated my self on the ground amonst the thickest of the
grass and shrubs as grew there which sufficiently sheltered me from their
eyes. Being laid in this order I cast my eyes through the divisions of the
shrubs to behold the deambulation of Atalanta, who came with no vulger grace
being upheld by the other woman. Her stature neither too low nor too procerous,
the fashion of her clothes showed she was in her night dress, but they were
such that with their nigritude set off the albitude of her countenance. Her
body was shrouded under a garment of rich silk, the color being undiscerneble
at that time, but it was made so long that trailing upon the grass it might
renew its verdue by the happy kisses of her garment; over her shoulders was
slung a night mantle which was lined with the furs of delicate ermine, and in
which she wrapped her arms as she walked; the principal part of that rare
composure was inveloped in a sable Capitium which exhibited her face like
bright Cinthia's, when surrounded with clouds, and her eyes like two stars
gave a luster where e're she went: their pace was but gentle, which favored me
with the more time for the intuition of the perfections of this dame; I
perceived they had entered into discourse before I could audite their words, but
by their approach the harmony of her voice began to strike my ear, and for
that I hoped to gather something by my curiosity out of their discourse, all
the faculties of my soul contributed their powers to my eyes and ears, out of
which ports she was almost attracted through the excess of pleasure she
received. But the words that in my hearing were formed between those couralls I
beheld, were to this effect. Ah mother, (said she answering to some thing the
other had spoken) you who ought to be more severe, are too too lenitive to one
so sinful. But what comfort can I have, in liveing after such transgressions.
Surely the Gods will pity me in taking away that life, which you will not
permit to be offered as a libament to their indignation.

How often have you promised to yield your self to my tuitions (replied her
tutoresse) and how often have you promised not to afflict your self in this
manner? The gods do not require so much grief at your hands, seeing you have
unfeignedly repented, and if you do more than they require that surplussage is
by them unregarded, being we are not to be immoderate no not in the affliction
of our selves for good. It is a sign of too great abjection not to be
comforted, and too much mistrusting the mercy and pity of the Gods, when you
still retain such thoughts of their wrath. It is not the life they require but
the heart, and that, through an unfeigned repentance you have rendered into
their hands, so that from this iniquity your good proceeds, who else (it may
be) would not have repented or implored their mercy, so wonderful are their
incomprehensible ways that they even raise us to thrones of glory by the steps
of sin, for trampling that under our feet we mount to their mercy seats, and
it is a sign that they love them most to whom they forgive most iniquities; and
what they forgive ought not to be remembered by us. Atalanta all that while
prodigal of her pearls exhausted all the treasure of her eyes, which touching
my heart with an inward sympathy, extracted moist tears, and scalding sighs,
out of my inflamed breast. But she thus returned to her woman: you are always
the Gods messenger of peace, and you so much conscionate their benignity and
miseration, that the remembrance of offending such afflicts me more. I do not
doubt or mistrust their power, but how -- They were so far transpast me that I
could not hear her sequent words, but as they returned as soon as her words were
articulate to my ear, I greedily lisned to these. -- no no all men are false
and I cannot believe any after the perjuration of so many oaths and vows: Is
it not pity the Gods suffer such indignities unpunisht? This seclusion delights
me most, and if ever I escape that danger wherein my folly has precipitated
me, I will never forsake this retirement, but end my days in the company of my
maids, and will not so much as defile my eyes with the sight of that false sex;
that wicked sex! since they build their wickednesses on our weaknesses. My
father has indulged me to live in this place, which I hope he will continue so
long as I live, a thing most consentanious to my desires, and whereby I shall
receive some felicity in that I live without renewing my sorrow by the sight of
men. Come leave these discontents, (said the other) and do not deject your
self, your honor -- they were again past so far beyond me, and speaking so
submisse that their words died before they came to my audition, so that this
was all I heard of that ambiguous Colloquie. They at length reentered their
boat which floated against the stream hard by the place where I lay, compelled
to it by virgin-stroakes, which gave me opportunity to let my eyes take their
farewell of that rare object, and so to accompany her boat till it was arived
on the other side, where it was admitted into a little Creek under the
obumbration of certain Osiers.

I had no sooner lost the sight of the boat, that carried away the object of my
fancy, but as it were awaking out of a pleasing dream I began to recogitate
the words I heard, and so set the Image of that new-lost object before my
Imagination, that I might consider the particular perfections of it, which I
was incapable of before, through the intention of my soul upon the whole. But
in recounting the words I had heard I could not find out the cause of that
Ladies affliction, but that it was some great Injury that she had received from
some barbarous one of our sex, which made her so out of Charity with all men,
but I was resolved to repair that breach with the truth, obedience and
affection I had vowed to serve her with.

There was no room left now for any doubt or opposition to my love, this second
invisagement had totally overcome me, and all my thoughts were now busied in
contrivances which way to serve her, but that I found so difficult, by reason
of her seclusion, and what I had learned out of that interrupted discourse, of
her great aversion to men, that I was even almost past the bounds of hope. I
set all my thoughts on the wrack of invention, where I endeavored to extend
them to some happy result, but I had no sooner accepted this project, but
either some difficulty or something more convenient dashed it; and it may be
whilst I was considering on that, diverse unseen objections suddenly starting
up made that also of no effect, I spent good part of my thoughts, and good part
of the night in such none effectual projections, till at last remembering my
self I arose, and bid farewell to that place that had favored me with the
happy and longed for intuition of Atalanta.

I had not gone many paces before I heard a whispering which in the silent
night beat the air up the river to my ears: The last evenement; and good
fortune that I received by my curiosity; made me to forgo no occasion of
furthering my fortunes by those private auditions. Standing still to listen
after those confused voices that I heard, I could not hear any thing distinctly
but the repetition of my own name, which amazing me made me think it the
illusion of my fancy, for I had not communicated it to any in the City, and I
was utterly unknown to them all, but the noise still continuing I moved softly
that way under the umbration of the boughs that adorned the banks of the
Tagus. At last I perceived that the susurration had proceeded from the
intermixing voices of a man and a woman, who stood talking close under the wall
of the City. I was now got close enough to understand what they said and lying
upon the ground hid from their eyes by the procerous grass I heard words to
this effect. Come (says the man) let us nor stay any longer, least we be
suspected, we may effect it to morrow night well enough. But what (says the
woman as I thought) if Lonoxia, should have discovered us? There Is no fear of
that (says the other) he knows us not, and this was mere chance that he was
from home this night. It was well for him (replied the other) I had soon
dispatch him else; we must not miss the next nights opportunity, lest he leave
this place, which might cost us a world of pains to find him again, and we
must do it before we return or else Marcipsius will hang us for our pains.

I do not care (said the other) how soon it be effected that we may return and
receive our reward, for I tell you truly that I do it for no affection to him,
but for that which he promised if we effect it, and when I have received that,
if another will give me as much I Will serve him the same sauce. You need not fear
(says the other) but he will be a master good enough, Lonoxia wont be the last
that he will desire to rid out of his way, his father is a hindrance to be his
ambitious thoughts, it may be Atropos may lend us her sheeres to cut the thread
of his life, I have all ways (says the other wicked one) that may be to rid
men of the burden of their lives, those that fall under my hand seldom know
who hurts them, but the best way to rid him will be by the art of venesicium.
But talk no more you pretty counterfit impe disvest, Lonoxia will never
suspect you under that habit. Whilst I lay confounded at what I had heard from
these assasins, that countersit unclothed himself of his womanish apparel,
having under the habiliments of a man, a long skene hid under his vestments.
Those garments that he had put off, he bundled up and put them into a vacuous
hole in the wall, placeing some loose stones at the mouth, which as soon as they
had done they both departed, before I had power to awake my self out of the
confusion their wicked intentions had cast me in; and the assasinous intent of
Marcipsious, who was not content with my banishment but also must play the
fratricide. But as soon as I could recall the banishment of my senses; with more
fury than judgment I followed them, to have anticipated their expectations,
and have given them their condign punishment for their wicked intentions, but
passion being guide I suppose I erred in the way, for I could not recover the
sight of them after they had entered the City, having traversed those places
where I thought to have met them, and failing in my expectations, vexed as I was
I returned to the place where I first saw them, that instant producing an
invention which proved very advantageous to my desires, though difficult in the
undertaking. Denoteing the place where that assasin had hid his deceiveable
garments; I thought it no variation from the point of honesty to rob him of
those wickedly-used vestments, and having gotten them into my possession I
returned (being very late) into the City to my habitation, not without thanks
to the Gods, who not only gave me the so-much desired intuition of Atalanta,
but by that very means also preserved my life, so wonderful are their works,
and unsearchable are their ways and so contrary are their designs to those of
men, for those garments which were ordained by those assasins, for to have been
a means for the accomplishment of my death, and under which they had intended I
should have received my destruction, proved the only means of my life and joy,
and under which I received all pleasure and content.

That new injected project, which represented it self as good to my
Imagination, still working upon my fancy made me leave my habitacle of rest
with the earliest light, in order for the performance of that design out of
which I had raised to my self a structure of delicious hopes. Having acquired
those things which I thought necessary for the execution of my design, I spent
the rest of the day in an unusual, but sedulous observance, of the
accouterments and deportments of women, I seldom observed the faces of any,
having so deep a character of one in my heart, but my eyes like those of
Tailors seemed to take pattern by every vestment, and to make all their
deportments praeceptors to mine. By this you may easily guess at my
intentions, and that I sought for precedences how to become the more womanish.

This indeed was my design to illude fortune, and under a new disguise to hide
my self from her injuries. I had indeed a mind to try, (since misfortunes had
ever accompanied my vi^ill estate) whether in changeing the facies of my habit,
I might change the face of my misfortunes. But this was not the alone
inducement to that abject condition; had there been no greater persuas^on I
should never have transformed my self for fear of being the But for all the
envious darts of fortune; I too well loved man, to become woman on such an
occasion. No it was Love (that powerful perswader to any action) that induced
me to that Metamorphosis, and charmed me to forgo my proper shape. Love can as
well make Hercules spin as fight, and not only change habits but natures also.
This was the only means that I could have to enjoy Atalanta, and there was no
difficulty but would have been easily undergone for that enjoyment. This was
the reason that my eyes were such indagators of their deportments, and such
observers of their vestments, since I was to assimulate their Genus: a thing
which I could not accomodate without the species of danger. Having approperated
all that my Imagination could contain, I committed their Idaeas to my memory
till I had occasion to bring them into act, or convenient place to exercise
these feminine gesticulations. And to avoid encumbrances I disposed of my
horse and arms, and all things but a few Jewels, and gold which could
faciliously be deported.

The earth-loving Phl^gon with is jugall companions, had almost performed their
diurnall course, having drawn the Quadriga of Sol, to the utmost limits of the
occidentall Hemisphere, when I left the City, and went into the most abdite
place, on the river of Tagus, where I was hid from all eyes by the close
growing trees. In this place I began to Metamorphize my self, and to divest my
self of my man-like garments, which having done putting a stone in the midst
of them bound together, I slung them into the midst of the river, and my self
after, to delave all spots, since I was to become a new creature. There was now
no going back from my determinations, my clothes were lost in the river, and I
must now revest my self with that new change or return naked; but the
refrigerous river could not cool my desire, those flames were too ardent to be
quenched with those waters. At last wearied with laboring my arms in that
Crystal element I swam to the bank, and drying my self I put on those
vestments, not without the apprehension of fear, how I should deport my self
in that habit: but hope suppediting me with resolutions I totally adorned my
self with those accouterments. The river was fain to be my Speculum, and my
own hands the addorners of my self, but I made a shift to concinnate my self
in handsome manner, and to adapt every thing, in its right mode. Having a while
Considered my self in the faint reflection of the water, I saw nothing
dissonant to the form I had taken, and I believe had my own progenitors seen
me, they had not known me. Nature seemed to conspire to this change having made
my body exiguous, and not too procerous, and the infallable token of virility
not yet appearing on my Chin, made me to refer the sex I had feigned so much;
that had not my self known to the contrary I should not have immagined any
fiction, I should have thought I had suffered a true Metamorphosis, had I not
known that I retained something that belonged to man, and I swear others must
have known the like before they could have suspected any thing, so much had
that form transformed me. A little formosity that in those young days nature
had bestowed upon me seemed to be much increased, and it may be would in a
vulgar eye have been called beauty, which I sought to augement by laying out
some cincinnat hair, that that might plead for some pity in the eyes of
Atalanta, I found a great delight, and pleasing my immagination in beholding my
self in the water, but at last fearing to run the fortune of Narcissus I
withdrew my self from that aquatick intuition, and began to exercise my
thoughts to frame some sigment to allude Atalanta, a sin I confess, but not to
be voided at that time.

I ran over the whole index of my memory to find out the choicest and least
suspected invention, adapting all circumstances with an adequate congruity,
least to my ruin I should be found a counterfeit. Love that sharpner of
invention, and insufer of wit, furnished me with many ratified conceits, and
helped me to frame that which never was in esse. Having condited what I thought
convenient, I began to exercise my knees to the peculiar flections of women,
and to use my feet to their abulent gesture. But whilst I spent the time in
these exercises of body and mind, Sol had drencht the wheels of his flagrant
carruck, in the Atalantick waves, and had given leave for his silvered sister
to exhibit her borrowed splendour in his room. Nevertheless although I had
assimulated, the Species of women, I had not altogether lost the heart of a
man, my inside was not changed with my outside, for fear, the inseparable
concomitant of that weaker sex, did not possess me in those tenebrous shades,
but walking in that happy Ambulachrum where I had seen Atalanta the night
before, I expected her with ardencie and fear. At last my legs lassated with
those inambulations, and all my body weakened by the continual concurse of my
spirits to my heart, which through diverse extraordinary apprehensions caused
continual and unwonted palpitations, I sat me down at the root of Jove's
fair spreading tree, whose body becoming my pillow I suddenly dropped into an
unexpected dormitation, for having slept but little the night before by reason
of my continual agitations, nature lacking some allevament, contrary to my
will stole the easing of her self.

Time insensibly elapsed in that privation of my senses, which otherwise I
should have past away in great care, and anxious expectations, and may be it
might not have conduced to the taking away of suspiscion so, as that somnolent
posture did. In the midst of this sleeping, in a place very disagreeable to the
form I had assumed, I was awakened by the taction of a hand upon my face,
which caused (through the unexpectation thereof) a sudden start, and exhibition
of fear, but beholding Atalanta whose soft hand had given me that
resurrection, it cast me into so great an amazement that it was a long time ere
I could resettle my self. This subitane surprise, and hasty exuscitation from a
condition, in which I did not dream of her approach, had put all my
praemeditated inventions and expressions clean out of my thoughts, and left me
in such a condition that without faining I acted to the very life the part of
that imbeciller sex I represented; At last recovering my surprise, and seeing
Atalanta with her nurse, and four or five of her maids about me, all amazed
at my amazedness, and expecting when my tongue would break the prison of my
lips, I was forced to leave collecting what before I had imagined, and make use
of new injections agreeable to that unexspected evenement. Casting my self at
the feet of Atalanta with a tremulous posture, my eyes scarce daring to aspire
to the intuition of hers; I created these words out of amasse of confused
thoughts.

'Divine Goddess and protectress of our Chastities; has the deplorable estate
of a persecuted virgin invok't your divinity to her succor? Let it be no
offense if my weakness cause an amazement at so Celestial a sight, since the
reflection of my unworthiness, would put me besides the confidence of this
seen happiness, and persuade me that I am still in that sleep from which the
touch of your divine hand has awaed me. All of them amazed at my speeches,
either thought me distracted or else not thoroughly experrected, but their
silence giving me leave to proceed. Chaste Goddess (continued I) make known
your pleasure to the distressed, and assure me that my eyes are felicitated
with a true intuition. May your Divinity use that excess of mercy; (knowing
that for fear of pollution I am driven to this exigent, and that I have
conserved incontaminated that badge of your society) as to enrowle me, amongst
the number of your Nymphs! since there is no happiness, like to that of
becoming one of the meanest servants of Diana. Atalanta finding my mistake
reached forth her hand to lift me up, which whilst she spoke I carried with
excess of ravishment to my mouth. Sister (said she) I am not that Queen of
Chastity, and Goodesse of us virgins, as you suppose; but am endued with the
same mortality as your self; I could have wished I had not been the object of
your mistake, since I am thereby become the dissipator of your hopes. Would at
least I had but power to give you some allevament by all the means my
weakness can contribute. My mistake Madam (returned I) is pardonable since
that beauty caries with it some species of divinity apt to conduct a more
settled soul than mine to so glorious an error, and I cannot account my hopes
but very little undervalued since your benignity has resented my misery. I am
so little able (replied that courteous one) to perform the desires of my will,
that I am almost ashamed to invite you to my habitation; but the necessity you
are in will excuse my trouble, if that I entreat you to command what I have to
your service. The small accommodation I am able to afford you is near at hand,
where, if you will be pleased not to disdain the utmost of my abilities, we
will all seek to give your distresses some levation; and it may be take the
boldness to enquire by what Tyranny you have been driven to this misery.

Ah Madam (replied I) use not this excess of bounty to one who will account it
the highest and extremest part of happiness, if I may so far ingratiate my
self into your favor as to obtain to be regester'd amongst the meanest of
your servants, which will cause me to bless that Tyranny which (through the
mercy of the Gods) drove me to find such felicity. I most willingly lay hold
on the least part of your liberality; and take the boldness (through your
favorable exhibition) to tell you that it will be impossible for me without
sinking under the hand of fate to lose your presence by a returning: And indeed
if you will admit of this intrusion I will consecrate all the strength of my
body to your service. My estate will not aspire to a higher condition, neither
will I wroung your bounty to accept of any other place, since that will
felicitate me beyond all my deserts We wont force your will (replied Atalanta
smileing) we see the Nobility of it by this exhibition; you must not think to
obscure your self, when you have already betrayed your self to our
judgments: then taking me by the hand; come (proceeded she) think not but I
shall be as unwilling to consent to your return, as you to yield to the
Tyranny you have fled from; And since you have devoted your self to my
commands, the first is that you use what I possess with the like freedom as
if it were your own.

I will obey you in all things Madam except you command me not to love you,
said I: omitting with it so deep a sigh that it might have betrayed me to any
suspicious souls; but the distress I exhibited my self in, caused all my sad
deportments, and my sighs to be attributed as due to my fortune. Led along by
that hand whose gentle heat penetrated to the ardour of my heart, (first taken
from the flames of her eyes) and agumented its slagrancies, on the one side:
and on the other by the nurce of Atalanta, who saluteing me with great gravity
showed me as much kindness, all being pleased with my deportmenr, and pitying
my misfortunes; I went ravished almost besides my self with so great courtesy
of Atalanta, and the propitiousnesse of my designs till we came to the boat
fastened to the bank side; into which we entered, being rowed by those females
that attended her.

Tagus which before seemed envious to my desires by denying an access to that
glorious object of my wishes, now gave me cause to bless its waves for this
happy transportation, for the acquirement of all its golden sands would not
have given me the hundredth part of that contentment I then received.

Had you seen the tranquillity of its motion, and the smoothness of its
superficies, you would have said that it had been sen^ible of its portage, and
that it gloried in nothing more than that submissiveness to her, who so much
resembled the s^oth in^endred Goddess. And you could not but have said when at
another time you might see its waves seem to threaten the skies with his forky
flashes, that his disturbance proceeded from the long absence of his imperial
dame, than in whose pertage he seemed to have no greater Glory. Or else the
Tagae^n God in Love with Atalanta tranquillated his streams, for the exhibition
of his duty, and by his stillnesse, sought to retard her boat, thereby to
retain his own happiness. Whilst the duty of the streams, exhibited it self in
its tranquillity, and that we were passing over to that little I Will which had
often been a prospect for my eyes, and a receptacle for my heart, Atalanta in
these words told how she found me. Sabane (said she; for so had I nominated my
self) certainly there is something more than the caprichiousnesse of fortune in
this encounter, and it was something more than common curiosity that called me
to your help. I have often to divert my self transpast this river, when that
darkness obumbrates me from the eyes of men, and delighted my self in that
subdiale walk, where till now nothing was obvious to my ^ight, but those
inanimates which continue there. This night leaving our attendants (as we use
to do) to awaite our returning, my mother and I occupying our selves in
ordinary discourses, we measured the earth with our paces till we were come
upon you, and then I suddenly espying you, not discerning your sex, or
consulting with my Judgment, affrighted as I was I ^an back screeching. But
meeting with my maids, all running to lend me their feeble aides, I remembered,
I had left my mother to that danger I fled from, to repair which shame I
returned with as much speed, being encouraged with the Company of my maids,
but I met her returning, who, not so timorous as my self had approacht you, and
perceiving by your habit that you were of our own sex, she was returning to
tell me that (as she believed) you were dead.

Having gathered strength by decussing my fear, I greatly pityed your case, by
reason of Sympathizing with our genus. It may be, mother (said I) that she may
yet have need of our Charity, and since she is of our imbeciller sex we will
not fear to satisfy our selves with a better discovery, and see to what acts
of charity the Gods conduce us. with this, strengthening our selves with a close
adjunction we aproacht you, and not perceiving you to breath, I forced my self
to so much hardiness as to feel whether your body had been destitute of heat
by the relinquishment of your soul, which ^ction it seems awaked you. I madam,
(replied I) that gentle touch has raised me from the grace of my distresses,
and your continual presence will consolidate all my happiness; for which
felicite evenement I am indebted a hundred thousand prayers to the Gods, and as
many lives (if I had them) to your service, other discourse we had till those
maiden strokes had brought us to the landing place where we left our floateing
house, and set our feet upon the more solid element.

The envious darkness wrapped in obscurity all the rarities of the place, and
denied me the intuition of those pleasant gardens that circundated the
habitacle of Atalanta. But by the sick sight of the nights gubernatrix I could
perceive, that the place gloried no less in its site^, and all the happy
adornments nature could out of her greatest benignity afford, than in being the
blessed habitation of one of the greatest bauties in the world. Art could
likewise challenge no less share in the conservation and imbellishment of its
pride, and deserv'ed no less praise for its exact and exquisite Imitation;
every thing being methodiz'd into a natural wildness so that it was hard to
say whether nature Imitated art, or art nature, in those compartments and
indentments of groves and walks. It was a place fit indeed to be the
receptacle of so fair a creature, and where pleasure seemed to glory in
becoming a servant to her greatness. Between that object of all my desires and
her tutoresse I was conducted along a most pleasant walk which led from the
place where we landed to the house, being set on each side and mingled
alternately with yellow and orange color fruit-bearing trees, which gave so
fragrant a smell that would have revived a benumbed sense, and which surpassed
the odours of the Arabic forests.

The fruits like those of Alcinous hung with a continual fairness, and
those golden apples fairer than those of the fabulated Hesperides hung like
aureated studds amoungst the fresh verdure of their tremulous leaves, which
delighted the optic sense with their sight, and the odorate with their
fragrancies. Between these pleasurable trees treeding upon a continual spring
of virdant grass we walked till we came to the house, which in all things
equaled the concinnity of the best, and corresponded with the greatness of
Atalanta. Being entered Atalanta renewed her welcomes with many strickt
embraces, and at last saluted me as a token of her Love and frindship. The
touch of those Rubies had almost extracted my soul totally from my body, which
fled to the portalls of its structure that it might with more ardency receive
the impression of her lips. My senses hardly exerciseing their functions for
some time after the receipt of that inflaming kiss, I exhibited an amazedness
in my looks, and hardly answered sense to what she said, but at last recovering
my self, and perceiving she took notise of it, I excused it the best I could
with these words. Madam Truly I had lost my self in the Maeanders of your
goodness, which contemplation had so implicated me that it was imposible for
me suddenly to return. I cannot but see that my greatest acknowledgement will
be but as it were ingratitude if compared to the excess of that goodness you
exhibit: for in beholding the exiguitie of my deserts I find the immensity of
your favors. No marvel then if I am amazed being none besides your self could
persuade me that my senses had the fre exercise of all their functions, but
that these immense favors were but the pleasing phantasmes presented in the
Kingdom of Morph^us. Atalanta answered me with no less grace than the Queen
of Heaven, her words exhibiting her to be the daughter of Mercury. I beseech
you (said she) do not magnify these small testifications of my amity to so
great a magnitude; for I profess they are so much below the desires I have to
accommodate your goodness, that I will not own them farther than the
diminitive of my will, and that by this minute service you may Judge the
cordiality o^ my affection.

Other discourses we had in which she exhibited her wit and goodness, till she
had conducted me into a chamber where riches and decency strove to accomodate
beauty. After she had put off an accessory mantle which served to keep off the
cold blasts of the night, and that we had seated our selves, Atalanta in very
good terms prayed the audition of my foruntes. I then (not without fear of
triping) told her at large this sigment with many circumstances and
imbellishments which I will tell you in two or three words. I feigned my self to
be niece to King Juba, though I was borne after his death. I told her a brother
unto that King hearing of the voluntary death of Juba, and that he saw the hand
of fortune resolved to sling that kingdom into the lap of the Romans, loath to
follow the example of his brother and yet loath to become a slave to the Roman
greatness fled from that unfortunate place, and passing beyond the mountain
Atlas natures bound-mark to the Roman Empire, he found a habitation in the
court of the King of the Getulans, where at last he was married to a niece of
the Kings, from which conjunction I feigned my self to be produced. My father I
told her dyed when I was very young and whom I could not remember, my mother (
I feigned) lived till I was fourteen years of age who in her life time had bred
me in an extraordinary way of behavior and civility contrary to the custom of
that Rude people. And that after her death my small formosity increasing with
my years made one of the chiefest in the kingdom desire me, but that I, not
enduring the great incivility and rude nature of those Getulans, despised him,
and forbad him ever to mention his suit any more. But he (I told them) more
enflamed with Lust than Love sought one day having an opportunity) to have
forced me: a crime of the smallest nature amongst them, and seldom punished but
by laughter. However I made my force to resist his violence and with help to
preserve my chastity, and that my complaints and tears to the King at last
procured his banishment; which filling that wicked Getulan with enragement,
laws being of too small force to curb his Insolency, watching his opportunity
stabbed the King, and having a party ready, set the whole Kingdom into a
combustion and flames of war. I said that hearing the truth of the Kings death
and fearing death less than to fall into the hands of that parricide I fled
with some few attendants toward the mount Atlas, but being pursued by him was
there taken and every one of them that accompained me slain, my self brought by
him to the sea and embarqed in a ship to return with the more speed to the
Court, where his party was like to get the better. But the wind crossing the
intentions of the Tyrant drove him along the Coasts of Mauritania as far as the
straight, where he was set upon by pirates and slain, my self becoming their
prisoner. I continued that the chief of them considering me as his slave,
appropriated me to himself, but perceiving some of his companions that would
have had a share in the prize he had reserved to himself, and that he might
with the more security force me to his sensuality he caused me with himself to
be set on shore not far from that place, where he was about to force me to his
will; but my sckreeks and cries calling some country men to my aid, they
oposed him and that whilst they fought for my defense, fearing the pyrate would
get the better, I ran away toward some trees I saw for shelter and following a
path that brought me to the river, I at last was surpised by the night, where
being weary with my flight and disturbed with my distresses I was for'd to sit
down under the covert of those trees, and that not having slept for along time
by reason of my fears, I was suddenly surpised with a sound sleep, where
being awaked by the divine hand of Atalanta, I thought she had been no other
than the Chaste Diana who had appeared for my rescue, but that now I understood
it was Atalanta the unparrallel'd peer of courtesy and under whose tuition I
hoped to find an end of my miseries. This discoutse took up a Larger extent of
time, being then told very formally and so patheticall that it moved the benign
Atalanta to tears, and made them all condole my feigned miseries. Atalanta
again redoubled her favorable expresses of the desires she had to retain me
continually, and with renewed embraces sought to require that which was the
only desire of my soul, so that I easily yielded and told her that I would tire
her benigni^y with a continual stay, and spend the rest of my days at her
charge. After a collation which she caused to be brought in, night being a
quarter spent she led me to my chamber where the officiousness of her maids
made me fearful of my discovery, but I carried every thing with so much care,
that I freed my self from all suspicion and detectment.

You may Imagine that I spent good part of that night in the reflections of my
fortune, and happy success of my Inventions; indeed the wit, the grace, and
ineffable courtesy of Atalanta stirred up adaequiate flames with her beauty, So
that there was no part of her but was amiable and divine. The pleasing ^d^a of
that matchless marvel being still obvious to my thoughts agitated them till
nature reassumed that allevament out of which Atalanta had exuscitated me.

The night being past our next meeting renewed our embraces, and more than
common civilities. The day gave us both a perspicuous intuition of each other,
which we had received before but at a distance, and by the deceivable light of
tapers. Atalanta contrary to the property of the fairest pictures (which at a
distance exhibit a most exquisite formosity, and amiable looks; but the nearer
you approach them with your eye, the less amabibity is found in their looks)
showed the most admirable work of nature, and most venust complexion in more
near intuition. The sun discovered all the perfections of that face wherein
there was nothing but what was admirable, and past the skill of nature her
self to mende. Her ornaments more rich than before I had seen her in, gave new
splendour to her brightness, or rather received brightness from her splendour,
which filling her all over with charms gave a second captivity to my
before-enthralled heart. Whilst my eyes fixed with a certain intentivenesse
upon her, she no less regarded the lineaments and make of my face. I had
consulted a more clear mirror than the day before, and use beginning to make
perfectness I forgot not any thing that belonged to the pride of women. But
perceiving her eyes reading I know not what charecters in my face, (I could not
think what I might exhibit to that discernable eye) which through the
vicissitude of fear and shame, first disrobed it of all its redness, and then
again returned it with a new accretion. But at last Atalanta breaking her
silence. Ah! foolish and fantastic Idea; (cried she out) have thou a desire to
torment me eternally? Have I not Symboles enough of my crimes, but that thou
must exhibit the species of my tormenter in the face of my solacer. No no this
is not a true air which I see in the face of Sabane (said she embraceing me) it
is the strength of my Imagination that gives impresses on all objects, or else
it is some envious Demon that would ma^e you whom I have chosen for my
greatest allevament to become my greatest torment by exhibiting the species of
one (whom I cannot call to mind without a fatality) in your face. Sure (said
she unfolding her arms and casting her eyes upon me) it is but the delusion of
my eyes, or mock of my fancy. But (continued she with another tone and
wonderful grace) pardon these transports, though they clearly represent to you
my insulsities. I was somewhat amazed at these obscure speeches, but at last,
Madam (said I) I beseech you rather let me perish, and rather let me become a
prey to the most inhumane, then that I should be the least cause of your dolor,
or cause you to remember those whom you desire to drive from that felicity. It
will be impossible that I should take any allevament to my self when I think
my company through such a fatality is the exuscitator of your grief. No no
(said she interrupting me hastily) I have vowed you my friendship and nothing
but the stroke of death shall be able to deprive you of it. It is the highest
of my ambition (replied I) to desire the honor of you commands, but seeing you
resolve to make me so gloriously happy I cannot but wish for occasions daily
that I might sacri^ize my Life for your service, to show you the least part of
the affection I bear you, which is so immense that it may be compared to
nothing but to the excess of your own goodness. Other discourses spun out
the morning where in she exhibited a world of f^een^sse, she related to me how
their fall had proceeded from the Roman greatness, and gave me the knowledge
who she was, and told me what before I had heard by inquiry in Olissippo,
hiding nothing of her common affairs from my knowledge, but sought with all
freedom to satisfy me in every thing.

You will say that I had attaind to a great hight in my felicity and that the
Gods themselves had a finger in my prosperities: True indeed I received so
great happiness and content in the pleasing conversation of Atalanta, that I
blessed the time, though not the occasion that I left my fathers house, whose
terrible remembrances were now swallowed up in my blessed felicities. In a
little time the habit, and gestures which I had assimulated, were grown so
natural and habitual as if I had accompanied them from my Infancy, so that I
had no fear of discovering my self by any inassuety. Think not but Shame
sometime set before me my muliebrity, and upbraided me with meanness of spirit,
in leaving my more noble for so ignoble condition, and in accommodateing my
self to so great imbecillitie: And in representing the future I found so many
difficulties and unlikelynesses of effecting what I desired that sometimes I
began to repent my designs. I feared I should instead of her love acquire her
hatred when that she should know how greatly I had deceived and abused her. And
to think of living allways in that condition without discovering my self would
have given adaequate pain to my pleasures and have rackt me between two
contraries. But all objections both of honor and danger fled at her presence,
and then I found it as possible to think of leaving my condition as to
transform my self in verity, into the sex I had assimulated, so great was the
pleasure I received in her company, and so great was the power of affectionate
Love to hold me.

I remained seven weeks in this Sardanapalean condition, my flames still
increasing with my pleasures, in which time Atalanta exhibited so perfect a
friendship that it was impossible in the condition I was in to desire more. To
unite our amity in the greatest nearness she would have had me lain with her,
but fearing to be overcome with so great temptation, I was almost incivill to
deny her! But by her imposition we called one another sisters, and seldom but
when we rested were one minute out of the fight of each other. Sometimes though
in the midst of these pleasures I should evaporate sighs, and in spite of all
my delights the charctars of sadness would be wrote upon my face, which
proceeded from the suppression of my flames. Atalanta taking them to be the
reflections of my former distresses, would apply such pleasing comforts and
adapt such endeared expressions that I could not but find solace in them,
though the cause was far from that she supposed: So that at the same time she
was both the object of my sighs and Joy. Although that extremely courteous one
sought to dispell my sadness with her dear expressions and actions, and to
administer all the solace she was able, yet I perceived that her heart was full
of mestitude, and that her dolor no ways decreased. She had not as yet
communicated the cause of it to me, and I perceived she did not desire I should
take notice of it, so that I would not exhibit my curiosity by asking it;
Besides I feared least in knowing it I should find my own ruin, and that Love
preoccupied her mind, and was the cause of those troubles: which best
corresponded with that which I had secretly heard from her own mouth. But that
I might allevate Atalanta I exhibited a greater alacrity than the consideration
of my pensive thoughts would willingly have admitted, I sought all
divertisements, and made it my sole pragma to administer solace by diverse
recreations.

Some times I would endeavor to divert her mind by the relation of diverse
stories and accidents, some fabulated and some true, and by many discourses on
several Subjects. Sometimes again I sought to make her find some refreshment
in the delicate viridias of the gardens, and pleasing places of the groves, and
sometimes again I would exercise her in running in the Hypaethryums and
paradromes of the house, and when the imbrick Auster irrigated the ground in
the Xystus. And when the calmness of the evening gave leave, we made use of her
wonted solace upon the Tagus, where my self often times used the oar for her
transportation, and I never visited the walk where in I first saw her without
a benediction on the place. She was naturally very nimble, and she allways
would be very well pleased with any exercise I would challenged her to, wherein
most times we did not exhibit our utmost industry or strength out of a desire
to make our adversary conqueror. One day having challenged her to run a race
for some small jewel or other (to such innocent sports had love made me to
condescend) I let her win the prize by a voluntary retardation. But that
cursory motion had dyed the cheeks of Atalanta of such a scarlet hew, which
rendered her so lovely that I could not but cry within my self. Ah! murtherous
Atalanta, Schaeneis wounded only the Calydonian bore, and used her shafts
against the ferocious beasts, but you insensibly wound my heart with inumerable
shafts which proced from those lovely eyes, whose sharp Cuspides has split
the stony rock of my heart, and given issue to whole streams of Love. But
coming up to her, Atalanta (said I facetiously) you inherit as well the nature
as the name of the Sch^nean maid, yet I hope you will not prove so rigerous to
the vanquished, but were I a man I should despise all danger to adventure for
such a prize though I think that he must obtain the same gift of Venus which
heretofore she bestowed on Neptun's nephew who must overcome you. You are very
pleasant sister (replied she smiling) but I may thank your voluntary tardity
that I am victoresse. In many such innocently loveing striveings we sought to
give each other victory, glorying more in looseing than in winning. And indeed
I could not find greater content in the world than in the sight and content of
Atalanta, whom I had made the sole object of desires and sole business to
serve. If she was content I thought my self happy, and if I saw serenity in her
face from the clouds of Sorrow I received more Joy than if half the world had
been given me to possess.

Atalanta's governesse seeing the Love and care I bore to her, and that I made
it my whole business to divertize her, perceiving also that Atalanta bore me a
great deal of Love, remitted her wholly to me, finding a great easment of that
burden which I had so willingly taken upon me, so that I was very often alone
with her and had opportunity enough to discover my self, had not a timorous
respect continually banished those Cogitations, and represented her just anger
more terrible then death, so that I was forced to smother those thoughts, and
content my self with the felicities I enjoyed.

But whilst my resurging flames were suffocated with a continual depression,
they were as much sufflated by a continual presence, which gave me an
intolerable inustion, and made me do things almost enough to have discovered
my passion, had they not been so extremely blinded by my habit. The continual
intuition of that deity gave innumerable incitements, and exuscitated such
scorching and lively flames, that after a while it was imposible for me to
exhibit the coldness and indifferency I did at first, and not to excurr
almost into extravagancies in the reception of those incomparable pleasures
Atalanta gave. But seeing I could not acknowledge them, nor give my passion any
vent by my mouth, I was fain to do it by my eyes and actions, and thereby
silently to express that which I dared not to do with my tongue, oftentimes
when we were alone, I should behold her with so great intentivenesse, and so
avidiously devour those rarities, till I had quite lost my self in those
Labyrinths of perfections, and running from the contemplation of her auborne
hair, to the intuition of her fair forehead, and from that to the perfect
rainbowes of her face, under which two suns exhibited such splendour that I was
not able to behold them long without occecaton, then intuiting her nose which
was raised to a perfect proportion, thence her mouth which was lovely and
little, whose corals with a magnetic virtue used long to detain my eyes, but
at last gave leave to behold her dimpled chinn, and fair basis of those
matchless mirrors. Then ascending back again never weary of those pleasing
contemplations, nor findeing any way out of those intricacies, till the blushes
of her cheeks showed me the way forth, and as it were brought me to my self
again; which sometimes was accompanied with so many ingeminated suspirations,
that they seemed Querimonies for my loss, and sometimes it was accompanied
with such extravagances both of words and gestures, that I have wondered that
she had not perspicuously seen my passion which sometimes so shamed me, that I
had little power left me to make excuses. This growing frequent, she thought it
had been some indisposition, and would have sought for to have acquired
something for my health had I not over-perswaded her to the contrary. I
received a world of other felicities which gave daily and more strong
inflammations to my passion, and desires of entire possession of what I saw,
sometimes pressing those delicate and fair hands, and interweaving those
slender and ivory fingers with mine I should carry them with such passion to my
lips, where I should give them thousands of ardent kisses, and almost inflame
those lilyes with the continual pressure of my burning lips. Which to require
reciprocally she would return some on my forehead, cheeks and lips, which
though I received with excess of pleasure and unuterable, yet was it much
mitigated by the thoughts of the injury I did her modesty; for I could not but
blame my self that I did so egregiously abuse one so courteous and affable, but
love answered all scrupl^s, and forced me greedily to desire those sweets. At
other times when my officiousness has made me help to pin on those veiles
that obscured that snow-surpassing witness, and religeously hid those
rarities from our profane eyes, I should (transported at those sweetly riseing
tumors) basiate those fair orbs whose tender touches would have inflamed a
soul composed all of water, judge you to what an extasis these enjoyments drove
me. Oftentimes also being in her chamber when she has beraken her self to
repose, after her devestment, I have beheld her only in her smock, which was
too fine to hide any of those attracting beauties from the eye of a Lover, but
the rare simmety of that composure with all its beauties enough to have
enamored the whole world, was perspicable through that carbaseous tegment. Oh?
how I was feign to contract all the powers of my soul to retard the present
motions of my desires and passions at such a sight. By these continual and
forcible exsuscitations of my flames you may judge with that difficulty I
suppressed them. And although I did digress sometimes by the too violent
pressure of my passion, my habit gave me security and freedom in those
digressions, and Atalanta took them all as tokens of my entire Love and
affection.

In this manner full of deliciousness, and imparadiz'd in the fruition of
these sweets I spent many weeks, which seemed but so many moments so insesibly
had they past away. But now that caprichious Goddess who all this while had
seemed to have forgotten me, or else to have ^ost me in the habbit I had
assumed began with a new vengeance to make known, the power of her will, and to
make the happiness I enjoyed momentany.

One day walking with Atalanta on the Tarrasses of the house we spied a man on
the other side of the river waving a white cloth of piece of silk upon a long
stick about his head as if it were some signal for his admission, as soon as I
had shown it her I perceived a hundred vicissitudes of white and red in her
face, with a general disturbance and tremour in all her limbs, at last fearing
I had taken too much notice of her, she took me by the hand and lead me down
into the Court, and immediately giving order to some of her servants to fetch
him over that was on the other side, It is one that must be admitted (said she
to me) Ah! (continued she softly to her self, but so as I made a shift to hear
her) fatal messenger either of life or death how great emotion has thy presence
wrought! Sighs began to follow in abundance but that I perceived she suppressed
them with great pain for fear I should take notice of her. By that time we had
walked a few turns in the orange walk her maids had wasted him over, whom we
saw approaching us alone. Atalanta as soon as he had put one knee to the ground
not permitting him to speak cast her fair arms about his neck and kissing his
forehead had like to have swounded in his arms through the disturbance she
felt. At last leaving those embraces, which began to exuscitate envy and
jelousie in my breast, she turned about to me her countenance bearing the badge
of modesty, I hope your goodness (said she) has not misinterpreted my action
though indeed I have given you too great an occasion to make you judge wrong
of my pudicity, had I told you before who this is I might have hindered it. It
is one of my maids who you thus see whose obsequiousness has made her change
the habit of her sex to do me service. Go (says she to the maid) divest your
self and verify what I have said by your presence. Sister (said I) though I
wondered at your action, yet I suspended my thoughts knowing your virtue would
never permit you to transgress the laws of modesty, for I believed that you
had ground for what you did. After a little time the maid, the chief
confident of Atalanta returned clothed in habilliments consentanious to her
sex. Making some excuse which was very willingly admitted of, I left them to
their private conference. Two or three hours after having, me thought, been a
long time weaned from her presence the very comfort of my life, I returned to
find her, and after I had searched all the walks, groves, and topiares about
the house, I found her in a virect which was enclosed with ramiculous trees,
very low, at the further end of that I let, close by the river side. The maid
I met at the entering into the place returning toward the house: her eyes
exhibited by their redness that they had been paying tribute to grief in moist
tears. But passing on without exchanging any words, I saw Atalanta, but so
changed that I was amazed, and admiration stopping the motion of my body, I
stood as if I had beheld the head of Medusa. She was laid upon the gramineous
earth, her head leaning against a low cypres tree, her arms in a careless
manner cast abroad, her eyes with a kind of ^emisse intentivesse were cast up
toward heaven, the bottoms big with limpid tears, which were but newly stopped
through the extremity of her grief, her cheeks bearing the dry marks of those
silver currents and her strophium rorated with their moistures, the stilness
and obscurity of the place agreeing to make every thing doleful, it seemed to
me a kind of horror to dwell there. After some time I approached her, and
endeavored with all the words I was able to exprom out of a heart truly
sensible of her grief, to give her some consolation. But all that I could do or
say gained nothing from her but abundance of tears and sighs, that I was very
troublesome to her, grief having a kind of pleasure in it, and thinks it
self wronged by the interruptions of any. When I saw I could give her no
allevament by my words, I sat me down opposite to her and looking upon her with
eyes springing forth tears I accompanied her in her lacrymations. When she
looked upon me and saw the torrents, than ran over the swellings of my cheeks
and trickled to the ground (like another Alpheus running after his Arethusa)
shaking her head she wept the more, and her tears still exhausting mine we
made a torrent betwixt us of our mingled waters tears still begetting tears,
and the sadness of the one still continuing the sadness of the other, that we
sat like two Niobes drowning our cheeks with continual tears.

In this posture we were found by her governesse, who together with her maid
came to endeavor to draw her out of her great sorrow, and by her grave counsel
to absterge her tears, what with the power she had over her, and with the sound
speeches she used she something mitigated the efluence of those argenteous
currents, and at last caused her to leave that place, when we werein her
chamber, perceiving that she desired privacie I left her with little less
mestitude than her self, finding my self interrested in her grief, and troubled
for being ignorant of the cause. The next day I visited her, and I found that
grief had not altogether so powerful an opperation upon her, but that she had
power now to ask pardon for the trouble she had put me to the day before, and
for the little regard she had of my consolations. I proceeded to comfort her
all I might; and though I knew not the occasion of her plangor yet speaking
generally of grief I told her, that tears were but a vanity, and tormenting
our selves for things irrecoverable, past, and done, was but a weakness, and
that it was a passion whose excursions ought to be stopped and moderated, and
that it might be effected by a resignation of our wi^ls to the superior powers,
to be content, with whatsomever accidents they shall be pleased to send, and
that we should not immoderately desire any thing, by whose loss we might run
into despair. Such other counsel I administered, which my self was not able to
follow; but she answered me not but with abundance of suspirations, thereby
testifying that her grief proceeded from more than common causes, and that
there was something extraordinary in it. The space of a whole week she
continued in this manner though not with that excess as at first, yet growing
more upon her and taking at last root it became the more dangerous. When I saw
that I expected in vain when she would tell me the cause of her trouble, and
that with all the art I could use I gave her very little comfort, I was so
troubled that my looks exhibited how grear a share I bore in her sorrow. One
day Atalanta having given me the slip to feast her Melancholy thoughts with
funebrous meditations I at last found her in a solitary place amongst the
taxeous shades, compassed about with those sepulchrall trees, mingled with the
fruitless Cipresse. She had newly began to bedew the fair roses of her cheeks
with the most pertious liquor of her eyes, and those pearl-bearing rivulets
springing from the marvellously limpid fonticules ebbed and flowed according to
the variable tide of sorrowful thoughts. My presence gave some check to their
outflowing, and made her wipe away those moist characters of her grief with her
ricula; but their impressions on my heart could not so soon be absterged. I ran
to her with my wonted confidence, and flinging my self on the grass by her I
took her fair hands, and giving them many suaviations, and bedewing I at last
broke forth my resentments thus. Ah sister Atalanta, (my tears accommpanying
my words) have you not so much confidence in my fidelity to entrust me with the
cause of this dolor? how can I live and behold you in continual mourning and
give no comfort? and how can I administer consolation, correspondent to your
grief, and be ignorant of the cause of it! either let me dye, or else not live
so great a stranger to your thoughts! If there be any thing that may be
acquired for your allevament, though with never so great danger make use of my
Service, and you shall see my affection so strengthen me that I shall be able
to overcome all oppugnances, and what you (it may be) may think
impossibilities. ^ive me not cause to think I inherit not the place of a
sister, when I am an alien to your thoughts. But consider not (I beseech you)
this auda^ity as an effect of my curiosity, but of my affection, for did I not
think my self capable of serving you I should be content to ignore it for ever:
yet seeing you have interessed my affection far beyond my deserts, let me
conjure you by that Love you bear me, and in the name of a sister which your
goodness has imposed upon me to let me know the cause of this trouble which
you so carefully hide from me. Atalanta joining her face and tears to mine
stopped the rest of my words. When she had cleared the passage for her words with
a thousand heart-labouring sighs, her tears also suffering a new reflux she
said. Dear Sabane! It is not thy fidelity that I mistrust, nor any other
consideration but shame has hindered me from imparting the knowledge of it to
thee, and fear that in knowing it you will for ever detest me. Oh (replied I
suddenly) let not such cogitations prove obstacles to my desires, for those
bonds wherewith my amity is bound are to be solved by no consideration but
death. I see you know not the depth of my affection, for if you did you would
not have Judged so wrongfully of me. It is impossible for you Sabane to help me
in the least (said she again) for if you knew it you would not (questionless)
stop my tears, but say all my days will be too too little for my penitency,
and were my days lengthned to years, and should every day shed rivers of
tears, they would be all too little to make satisfaction for my fault. Nothing
hinders me but the shame I know will acrue thereby, and I know not how to
confess my crime and outlive my shame. Here giving way to some sighs she went
on. Ah sister if I should not tell you ere, long my crime would be too
perspicable and then I must be forced to let you know it when I can no longer
hide it. I will confess (continued she strictly embraceing me) I will confess
all my crimes and not hide any thing from you though I am sure to be worthily
condemned by your virtue, you shall know that which has cost me many tears
and which you will Judge worthy of more. I knew not how to explicate her words,
but I found that they caused an extreme emotion in me, which was a true
presage of that which was to happen. I still feared to find my own ruin in
what I desired to know, which was at last effected by versatilous fortune. In
beholding Atalanta I perceived the desire she had to express her self, and her
pudicity, strove in her breast so that it was a long time before she could
master that passion to emit these few words.

What words shall I adapt? or what expressions can I use! whereby I may lessen
the infailable symbol of my shame! How unjustly (continued she weeping) did
you give me the title of Diana at your first meeting? alas! I have ran the same
fortune of Ly^^onian Calisto, but here is the disparity! she was gloriously
deceived by a God, I perfideously betrayed by a man! Must I say more! can I say
more! I have lost that which should be the everlasting honor of virginity,
that Zone which should not have been loosed but in the Thalamus, that
inestimable jewel, which is impossible to be recuperated, that honor that can
never be regained: and now I bear the quick burden of my shame and dishonor
within me, which lives but to reproach me of my infamy. Oh weak spirited woman
so long to outlive this action! with this plunging her head into my bosom she
lay near a quarter of an hour senseless at the apprehension of her crime. My
self no less astonished stricken with horror became as an immovable statue, or
like one stricken with thunder. Coming to our selves both together Ah! (said she
lifting up her head) her face being imbued with an extraordiry redness, which
made her glideing tears seem like blood, can you love one so polluted? shall
not I contaminate you in being so contiguous? ah! for ever abandon such a
wretch, and no more count her worthy of your friendship, who has so far forget
the precepts of virtue, the fear of ignominy and of the Gods. As full of
trouble as I was I sought to comfort her what I could, with so altered a
counttenance, and incongruity in my speeches that she but could not but take
notice of it. But at that instant her Goverensse found us out, who was never
long from her, since that last accression of sorrow.

I left them together, and in a mavelous astonishment I betook me to a place
where I might with more freedom vent forth my grievous lamentations, and with
sighs, tears an groans mittigate the torment caused by this sudden and most
grievous misfortune. It was a long time ever I could get out of the
benummednesse and torpor I was in, but at last falling into a consideration of
my loss, her beauty, her wit, her good nature and my deep desire proving
exaggerations of my evil; I fell into a kind of Syncope, out of which
returning I beat the air with such like complaints as these. Ah cruel
fortune! (cried I out vehemently) have thou found out the very worst of plagues
to torment me with! for what cause! for what reason! oh all ye Gods do you thus
conjoyne for my overthrow! Oh great thunder-dart visit me at this instant with
thy threeforck't arrow^! and transpierce that heart which the winged God has
already transfixt with his envenomed shaft; which fortune has pierc'st with an
envious stroke, which sad Erinyes has compunged with scorponian stings. Oh!
sad fate, to be brought to the brinke of bliss, there to find a precipice, to
the heaven of Joy and content to find a Hell of torment, and woe! what could be
more great then the Joy I hoped for! what can be thought worse than the misery
I find! Alas! by how much the more joy I conceived by so much the more torment
I endure! Ah Atalanta, would thou had be^n more chaste, or less beautiful,
or would, that the angry Gods had first o^bated me of the light of my eyes
before I had seen thee. Then almost raving with the excess of trouble: what
shall I continue my love to that defiled one? (cried I to my self) shall I
languish in flames of love, for one already consumed, in those of lusts? one
who yet grownes under the burden of her shame. Leave leave this place oh
unfortune Lonoxia, and abhor a beauty already contaminated. Why art thou so
slow? why do not fly this wretched place? strive to banish her thy memory,
think not on her beauty, view that egregious imperfection which renders her
contemptible in chaste eyes, can thou think of Loving her who has been
defiled by the embrac's of another? and who will become a mother before she be
a wi^^: An v^w the folly of Love, and see into what precipices his illecebraces
d^aw. By and by having placed the Imago of that fair one before the eyes of my
mind, I was converted to a contrary judgment and enforced out of the depth of
my passion to cry out; Dear Atalanta! I alas augment your misfortune by my
wronging conceptions, pardon my injurious words, pardon my interpretations,
pardon my exclamations, seeing they proceed from the heat of Love. Ah insulse
Lonoxia do think thy chains are so easily excussed? is thy heart so little
fixed, as to be retracted by the knowledge of this thing? has she wronged thee?
has she promised ought to thee? why accusest thou her? Do not see her every
minute ready to Sacrifice her life as a victim for the expiation of her crimes?
have no pity of her life? of her tears? no compassion on that fair sex? that
weak sex? may not their virtue be o're-powered and mastered by men? It may be a
violent devirginator has given her this defilement by force. Excuse her and
rather turn thy fury on thy self for that thou art of a sex so injurious, or
on all other men for the sake of the contaminator. But think, can thou
withdraw that Love which binds the insollubly to the object; can break those
irrefragable bonds of Cupid, where with thy heart is linkt to that criminal?
try try thy strength, but 'twill be in vain. Ah cruel and unmercifull power of
love, to cause me love that which I desire to hate, to make me still dote on a
beauty defiled with pitch; and though I know that which (may be) would make
others loath and an abhor, yet it is not powerful enough to remove my desires,
or abate the force of my Love. Ah lovely Atalanta I must love thee as well with
thy blemishes as with all thy glo^ious indowments. This will give her occasion
to see the strength of my love, this it may be will make her hear my state, and
cause that spirit to bow, which otherwise might have been too too lo^ty, and
have scorned to stop at so low a prey. She is not the less lovely for her
fault, Love hides thousands, let us find a place in ours to hide this.

Such like complaints as these were continually emitted by me, Love and hatred
wracking me miserably, sometimes I detested my love, by and by blamed my self
for detesting, sometimes I thought to depart, and then again I found it
impossible, for I no sooner beheld Atalanta but all my resentments ceased and I
found that my chains were nothing loosned with the knowledge of her crime, her
eyes still transpierced me, and my flames burnt as ardent as ever. However a
week passed away in which I daily lamented my misfortune in hers, and with that
excess of trouble which could not be concealed that they wondered at the
interest I took in hers. She poor soul dared scarcely to behold me, so much
shame was seted in her eyes, which made her with an humble dejection, project
them on the earth, her countenance being clothed with so much sorrow, and her
penitential tears were so many, that they were strong motives for the taking
away all ill opinons of her, and to move one rather to pity and compassion,
than to any upbraidings, or to the increasing of her grief, which was so
excessive. Ah! Sabane (would she sometimes say) can thou now blame my tears?
does not my crime deserve greater penances? is it possible that thou do not
detest me, do not you think me worthy of death, and unworthy of your company
and friendship! Oh, Gods how unjustly ye prolong my Life! no no it is just,
that thereby ye prolong my misery. But may I not violate your restraining
Laws, and give my self liberty by a voluntary expiration, as well as I have
violated those of chastity! Speak Sabane by what death shall I redeem my
honor? Alas it is now too late, I cannot break the chains of life but I must
murder the innocent. In this manner she would run on, whilst my tears kept
pace with her words, both in consideration of her grief and my misfortune! All
the comfort I could administer was too weak to stop her complaints, or the
effluence of her Crystal fountains, which with a kind of miracle carried
flames in the midst of those waters? Sorrow it self giving a kind of I know
not what luster to her beauty, and her tear bedewed countenance spoke so
eloquently and pathetically, that it made me (forgetting my self) to run out
into such fury against our sex devowing to be revenged with my own hands on him
that had caused that fair on such dolor, and had done her such despite. For
that end, desiring her to let me know who it was, I beseech'd her to give me
leave to let him feel the fury of my so just resentment. To give satisfaction
to my desires, and that I might see she would withold nothing from me, she
commanded her maid, and chiefest confident, to give me a brief relation of her
fortune, who in obedience to her commands gave me the relation in these terms.

Who would give any audition to the oaths, to the vows, and invocations of
men? Who would believe them when they swear, who would pity them when they seem
to groan themselves to death? And who would grant them the least favor before
Hymen tie the indivissible bond of matremony? when they are so wicked, so
deceitful, so instable, such egregious Imposters, delighting to deceive our
weaker sex, and when they have vitiated our honors, leave us to reap the fruit
of shame and ignominy.

My Lady I confess has exhibited the weakness of our sex, and shown how easy
our natures are to be beguiled, who for wit and judgment in so tender years,
for beauty in so springing a blossom, and for all the other endowments of
nature is not to be paralleled in all Iberia, yet has been beguiled by the
most false and abominable among men, and has been betrayed by the
deceitfulness of Love, and the susceptibleness of her own nature into the arms
of folly. But to tell you briefly how, and by whom this misfortune happened,
know; My Lord Prince of the Turditanes and father to the Princess Atalanta
being forced by the chances of war, and fortune to vail his Crown to that of
the Romans, took up his residence in the pleasant City of Hyspalis, and under
the tuition of those generous enemies lived with the same security as amongst
friends. I was then given to Atalanta to be her consort and her servant, my
duty and my love bound me indivisibly to her interests, and from that time she
made me her Confident, and Repository of her secrets. For beauty beginning to
break forth through the clouds of her infancy, and that fair and decorous bud
beginning to expand it self in the blossom of riper years, perstring'd the eyes
of many a warlike Roman, and made them languish with desire to crop so fair a
Rose. Every day added new luster to her eyes, and every week planted fresh
roses in her cheeks. Each hour brought new captived hearts enchain'd to render
adoration at her shrine, and the Ma^tialists, receiving the fire of their
courage from that of her eyes, confessed that the power of Venus was far greater
than that of Mars. Whilst thus she increased the glory of the City, by the same
of her beauty, and whilst she had as many Lovers and Adorers as Spectators,
Love (seeing her inexorable to all) was hatching a man to plague her for her
cruelty. She was now in the prime of her beauty, her fair flower fully blown,
and in its chiefest luster, when the most perfidious vagabond Marcipsius (being
expulsed Africa arrived in the Amaene City Hispalis. To see Attalanta at that
time, and not to love her, was impossible. Fame made Marcipsius covet the sight
of Atalanta, which intuition set that wicked one all on fire, he being the
tinder of Cupid, and inflamed him with I know not what kind of lustful and
furious ardency.

I sat (said Lonoxia to Euripedes altering his tone) immovable at these words,
but the immotions within exhibited themselves so perspicuously in my face, that
the Confident of Atalanta might have seen them, had she not been so intentive
upon her relation. I had much ado to withold from crying out when I heard
this second surcharge of my misfortunes, for I feared whither 'twould tend, but
amazement, fear and trembling tied my lips, and I heard her without
interruption continue her discourse thus.

That imperious fire raging in the breast of this stranger, he sought for
nothing but to allay its heat by the waters of fruition, for the gaining of
which he relied more on his facundity, and outward graces of his body, than on
any virtues that accompanied him. Its pity that golden boxes enchac'd with
precious stones should be the Conservers of poison; but it is more pity that
men adorned with all the outward gifts and embellishments of nature should be
possessed with souls implete with Stygian vices, and obsest with incarnate
wicked Demons. This Marcipsius soon out-went all his Corrivals, and gaining
the heart of Atalanta's father with a wondrous dexterity, he admitted him to
lodge in his palace when he knew he was the Nephew of King Bogadus, and using
him with all the respect his birth obliged him to, he gave him convenience and
opportunity (though unwillingly) to vitiate his own daughter. Never was there a
more indulgent father, Atalanta being the comfort of his age, and her mother
and sisters being dead, so that he gave her all the liberty she could desire,
believing her discreet and wise. She began now to loose her self in Marcipsius,
and abated that pudicit severity which she had shown to all others. She lent
some ear to his flatteries, and without check gave him leave to court her. In a
word, she began to love him, and to feel the tyranny of that cursed caitiffe
Cupid. The first day that she saw him ended her happiness, and began her
misery. On the other side that caitiffe Marcipsius played his part so
cunningly, that neither Atalanta's father, nor she her self could perceive,
that he loved her, or rather had a desire to abuse her. He had a peculiar way
of speaking very graceful and taking, whereby he would charm ears to his
discourse, with many other natural endowments (which were all obscured by his
vices) he was possessed. In a short time he had wholly overcome that severe heart
of Atalanta's, and subjected it under the yoke of his Tyranny, before she knew
from him that he sighed only for her sake: At last believing by the affability
of my Lady that his suit would not be molestious, he very secretly, but with
wonderful passion, made it known, vowing (with wonderful execrations to light
upon him if he broke them) to live only for her service, and to resign at her
feet his life and liberty. It is more hard to dissemble our joy than any other
passion, it being apt to exhibit it self with a sprightliness in our eyes; my
Lady yet so much mastered her self, that although she desired nothing more, she
seemed very cold to his addresses, and showed part of her natural severity,
contrary to the motions of timorous Love: But yet she did not absolutely forbid
him the addressing himself any more in those terms, if she had I doubt he would
not have credited her tongue to run parallel with her heart. Not to exaggerate
these works of repentance in sum he nothing abashed at this first redargution
continued his protestations with such passion, that it was no easy matter for
Atalanta to withstand the letting him know she accepted of his services,
considering how she loved him. Almost a whole year expired before she let him
understand that she bore him any affection, or that his services were accepted,
in which time he showed the greatest passion and obsequiousness that could be
imagined. At last Atalanta believing that his fidelity and his love could not
have ended but with his life, gave him that happiness of knowing her mind when
he least expected it, and in letting him understand that his services and
devoyrs were acceptable to her when he almost despaired of it. If I should
recount the oaths, the vows and the Stygian attestations that he made at that
time, with the horrid and Erebous execrations he invoked if he proved
perfidious, it would make you tremble to think that any man should be guilty of
such perjurations and curses. For our parts we thought it impossible for him to
illude the gods, or that after those vows and oaths he could violate them for
fear of being punished with their thunders, so that we gave the more trust to
his words, and innocent Atalanta, as it were rendered her self up to him. Who
would think that wicked men should take upon them the habit of virtue, the
better and more securely to act their impieties, and to attain their vicious
desires? O flagitious Marcipsius, could not see thy happiness! was it not
enough for the desire of the whole world to do thee homage, but that thou must
seek to vitiate and desile so precious a soul! Oh base twy-faced Hypocrite! so
to dissemble the actions of vice under those illustrious ones of virtue! Ah
Madam Sabane never was there a greater dissimulator breathing, nor one who so
often vowed what he never intended: I cannot make use of words too bad for so
impious a wretch, the very double-fac'd dissembler that is, and very abstract
of wickedness. We had time enough to try his virtue, and in another year which
for the most part he spent in the company of Atalanta, (largely recompensing
her father with many Princely gifts) he seemed to continue his love with so
much ardency and obsequiousness, that it was impossible for us ever to expect
the least change. My Lady, if it be not a crime to confess it, loved him
entirely, and granted him all in honesty he could request, so that at last,
pressed by his continual prayers, and judging him worthy of what he desired, in
my presence she desponded her self to him, and promised him to confirm it by
the Hymenaean pact so soon as he could dispose her father to it. He seemed to
desire nothing more, and exhibited all the Symptoms of joy a man could be
capable of. He a thousand times confessed his own unworthiness, and her goodness,
with the great felicity and content so free a promise gave him. This nefarious
man harboring naught but desires to scelerate innocent and beguiled Atalanta,
never sought to ask her of her father, but plainly seeing the love she bore
him, began with wonderful adulation to gain favors from her hands, and from
trifles proceeded till he had subverted the fortress of her chastity. From
leaving the empresses of his lips upon her hands, he gained them off her lips,
and then her bosom, till at length she had rendered her self too weak to
withstand his flattering incitements. And having such opportunities his love
never suspected by Atalanta's father, her love making her forget the thoughts
of her honor, believing his passion, and crediting his vows, being as it were
confident he would never forsake her, yielded a complacency to his passion, and
lost her virginian gem between the arms of that Stuprator. Madam, my Lady
strictly charged me not to extenuate her crime, but to exhibit to you the
utmost of her weakness, but I hope you will consider that the great love she
bore to that detestable one, confiding in his oaths and vows, with the
irresistible allurements and incitments he prosecuted her with, were strong
inducements to the subversion of her feminine resistance. I hope your
commiseration will rimate some idoneous causation for her frailty, and saply my
weakness in that particular. Nevertheless if your rigorous virtue retard the
exsuscitation of your pity, to help it, consider with how many tears, with how
much dolor, with how much grief, and with how much pain she has endeavored
not to expiate, but to bewail her folly, and to have deprived the earth of that
happiness of bearing one so amiable, and you will confess that her misery has
satisfied for her fault, and that virtue when she did it was not lost but hid.
But now I Will tell you this wicked Marcipsius's perfidy; When he had
sufficiently abused my dear Mistress, and that he had satiated himself, and
gained the end of his long suite, on a sudden he pretended letters from his
father, and that there was a necessity of his returning if ever he hoped to
attain the Crown he ambitioned. I imagine the consternation this put Atalanta
into, were all the Muses conjoined to represent the passion she was in, and the
grief she exhibited, they could not be able to express the third part of it. It
is as much as I can say that she was seized with a general stupor and
astonishment, insomuch that I feared I should never bring her to her self
again: That scelerous wretch standing by impassible, I thought she would have
died in my arms, had he not ingeminated his vows for his sudden return, at
which time he would obtain her fathers leave for her marriage. But her grief
was so violent that these promises could hardly give any relaxation to it, a
sad Omen and sure presage of his perfidiousness and her miseries. Cruel heart
not to be mollified with those tears able to have penetrated the lapidian
rocks! No, he with his specious pretenses and fair promises did as it were
force himself from between her arms, so that at last he left her but in a
condition far more likely to crave a passage of the S^ygean Ferryman, then to
live till he returned. He took his leave also of Atalanta's father with the
same specious pretenses and promises of returning, the last words that I spoke
to him were to be mindful of that condition wherein he left Atalanta, and that
he should not discover her dishonor by his long moration in Africa. He was
very profuse of his oaths, and made no conscience to delude both gods and men
by an emitting thousands that he never had intention to perform. This to be
detested Marcipsius being gone, all that I was able to say or do to Atalanta
was too little to give her one minutes rest, for Althea opening her
love-blinded eyes, gave her a clear view of Marcipsius's deception. Her
virtuous soul returning as it we^e out of an enchantment began to detest its
own act, and virtue, and honor appearing with their refulgent beams, gave her
light to see her own contamination. Fear and horror, like two ^uries seizing
upon her, presently fell to racking her soul, and with remorse gave her Tityan
torments, so that had I not watched her narrowly, she had perpetrated a
Lucretian Tragedy. I was fain to fling by my respect, and offer violence to
those fair hands in wresting from them a sharp pointed bodkin wherewith she
violented her breast: she had undoubtedly slain her self had not my force
proved stronger than my oratory. What (said she to me whilst I strove to hinder
her design against her self) will you disoblige me now in this last exigent?
have I entrusted your fidelity hitherto, and will you not prove obedient and
faithful to the end? Ah! let me not outlive my crime. See thou not that I
am exposed to the shame and ignominy of the world? Let me die! ah let me die!
Think not that thou can restrain me long; neither think that thou do me any
savor; for thou do but detain me in torment and misery.

Ah tell my father my crime when I have expired; and beg; ah beg! in my name
his pardon for contaminating his blood, but let him see that I have spirit
enough to revenge it on my degenerating carcass; and that I abhor my self for
it. Ah Madam (wept I forth) you shall never have cause to complain of my
infidelity, but I cannot obey these too too rigorous commands. I will make
satisfaction hereafter for my disobedience by my own punishment. Pardon me,
pardon me, Madam, (cried I out when I endeavored to force the weapon from her
hand, seeing my words not prevalent enough) if my audacity exhibit it self in
the room of my woonted respect. But she darting an angry look upon me quailed
my boldness; yet seeing she persisted, I rent open my bosom, and presented her
my naked breast, with a voice more vehement than ordinary. Ah cruel one (cried
I out) if you are resolved to die, at least grant me the favor of not seeing
it; here, here pierce this breast, the only obstacle to your design, for think
not that I will permit you to offer violence to your self whilst I live, send
me first out of the world, and then follow if you are so resolved. No (replied
she feebly) I Will spare thee, and lifting up her head at that instant, she
sought to have plunged the bodkin into her breast, but her safety making me
nimble, and despising all danger, I clapped my arm upon her breast, and received
the stroke which ran a good depth therein. I took the blow very patiently; for
smiling a little, Ah! I have prevented that fatal stroke, strike as many more
such as you please: Whilst I spoke, the blood circulated my arm, and running
down on the flore, began to make Meandres under our feet.

Dear Atalanta beholding what she had done, had not power to pull the bodkin
out of my arm, which I held extended, and looked upon it as the best act it had
ever done, glorying in that badge which it had acquired (though unwittingly on
her part) from the hands of my dear Lady. See now the great strength of us
females, she that even had now so much heart as to have violented her self to
death, lost all her strength at the sight of my blood, and at the reflection of
what she had done, her face presently growing pale and her ey^ stiff she sunk
down on the floor, and I had much ado to regain her senses by flinging cold
refrigerous water in her face. Ah (said she, deeply sighing) is this the
gurdion then that I must give thee for thy fidelity, her eyes shedding the
fairest of pearls, see see (continued she) to cure that which my unfortunate
hand has acted, let not this reproach me of my cruelty. No Madam (reanswered
I) I will neither seek to cure it or wag from this place unless you promise me
to leave off such unlawful and bloody designs against your self. I promise it
(said she) I will endure that impatible shame rather then injure thee, seeing
thou will interesse thy self in my miseries; rejoicing at these words I soon
bound up the wound, and playing the part of the Surgeon my self, lest I
should discover the cause of it, with bal^oms I at last effected the cure of
it. In the mean time my Lady though ^he had promised me not to do any violence
to her self, yet her grief and torment was so excessive that in few days it
cast her into a violent feavour, which brought her even to the portalls of
deaths sable City. Her father almost dead with the grief his daughters
sickness procured him sought for the skilfullest in Chiron's art to give her
ease, and then he sent for this ancient Lady who brought her up from the
cradle, who had been absent almost a year with some of her neeces in the
further part of Spain, she always loved Atalanta as her own daughter, and my
Lady loved her reciprocally, which made her very comfortable to her,
nevertheless she would not consent, that I should tell her the true cause of
her sickness.

At last through the favor of the Gods in blessing the Aesculapian means she
recovered, though some months were first past over, in all which time we heard
nothing from that sinful perjuror and causer of our miseries: The thought of
which often afflicted poor Atalanta in so much that I feared a relapse. Her
governesse that good old gentlewoman wondering that her eyes were oftentimes
swollen with grief and her face looking pale and wann, would often object to
her, that grief was the greatest promoter of her distempers: but she could not
wrest the truth from her till at last accedentally it was thus discovered,
Atalanta emitting a flood of tears was entered into most sad complaints of the
injury of Marcipsius, and blaming me for the retardation of her death, I feared
her violences would have led her into new extravagancies. I had cast my self
upon my knees to give her all the consolation I could, and with my tears and
prayers sought to allay her distempers. Her nurse suddenly surprising us in
this posture, and hearing some words that I speak to comfort her, would be no
longer denied the knowledge of that which she was too certain afflicted
Atalanta. For what reason (said she) do you thus exclude me the knowledge of
your grief? why must I be ignorant of the cause of it? have you not confidence
enough in me to entrust me with your secrets? am I not in the place of a
mother? yea and my affections supply the place of maternall interest as well as
my outward appearance. The love I bear you is able to overshadow all faults,
and to administer help to your distresses by the experience of my longaevity.
Atalanta could now no longer hide it from her, nor could she know how to
declare it, her tears supplying the place of Speech. At last terging the fluid
pearls that slid from those two Magaritiferous founts she gave me a permission
to let her governesse know the sad cause of her dolor. When I had performed my
relation she well saw that Atalanta's condition would not admit of any
chideing, but that comforts and relaxations were more convenient for her, she
wisely made use, of her best oratory to comfort her, and omitted her severity,
which would have augmented her dolor, and made her have sunk under the burden
of it. And truly I am verily persuaded but for the continual persuasions, and
comforts of that wise Lady she had not graced this place with her presence, at
this time, but would have been resident in the Elysian fields. To satisfy our
selves conerning Marcipsius we sent one into Afric to know what was become of
him. The messenger returned with certain intelligence that he was not returned
thither and that his father had not heard of him since his departure from
Africa. This was a renewing to Atalanta's sorrows so perspicuably to behold
his deception and falsities.

The fourth month was now come since the departure of unworthy Marcipsius, and
the growing pledge of his perfideousnesse receiving Life from the influence of
genial stars, gave notise by its lively moving to Atalanta that she was likely
to become the mother of some fair infant. The old lady careful of her honor
and to prevent the ignominy that might accrue by the appearing tumor of her
belly; obtained permission of her father to change the air for her healths
sake.

He would have accompanied her but the lady with many reasons persuaded him to
the Contrary, promising in little time to bring her from her melancholy, and to
restore her to her perfect health. He knowing the wisdom and discretion of her
Governesse, and hopeing to see the clouded brows of Atalanta reclear'd, and to
possess their former luster, gave way to this separation and assigneing this
place, (which the Romans had left him with many others) for our retirement, we
passed hither with these few servants, avoiding all public invisagements,
awaiting the time when she shall disburden (that which she terms) her shame.

We had been but few weeks in this place so commodious for our sequestration,
and so delectable for the tired senses of Atalanta, but that her grief rather
increasing than diminishing made us almost despair of her recovery.
Nevertheless she was so much taken with the place that she resolved never to
leave it, finding so much convenience for her melancholy. There was nothing
that wit could produce or the power of Love imagine that we did not make trial
of for her diversion. For my part when I heard her exclame against her self;
and with most bitter remonstrances endeavor to make her self odible; I on the
contrary, and more justly, spit out the anger I had conceived against that
wretch in dire execrations for his perfidie, who was the cause of all her
misery. O strange power of Love! O wronged innocence! do you think she could
hear the least reproach uttered against him? no alas! she had not loved him so
poorly as to hate him for his baseness. She would not permit me to speak
against him but even sought with many excuses to justify his breach of promise.
Blame him not (would she say) let all reproaches be laid upon me, and it might
in justice be so, account me as the loosest wretch that lives, as the most
dispicable thing that breaths, as the insulsest animal voy'd of reason, wit,
or Judgment, so to part with my honor, so to obscure my virtue. But blame not
I say Marcipsius, it may be he is not living, how know we but that the seas
have proved his grave? how know we but that his Ghost silently reproaches us
for thus falsely accuseing him? it may be fetters detain him, and who knows but
he dies a thousand times a day for fear I should reproach him for his stay? he
is not returned, why then should we conceive thus ill of him? he has not yet
been in Africa, why then should we not think that either death, bonds, wounds,
imprisonment, or some such accident detaines him, and deprives us of the
happiness of seeing him? Ah! madam (I Would answer) how good are you to this
criminal, but I fear you wrong the laws of charity, I rather think that
having forgotten you, or at least remembting you with derision he is
endeavoring to beguile some other; and to betray some such innocent creature
with his facinating looks. Let it be so then (she would reply faintly)
nevertheless speak not against him, I cannot endure it, 'cause I love him,
would I had one I could entrust, I would send once more into Africa, it may be
he may be returned by this. Why madam (said I) have you lost the confidence you
were wont to repose in me? can you say you want a confident whilst I am with
you. No dear one (said she) but thou art not fit for such a voyage, I meant one
of the robuster sex, who might have sought him out where ever he is, and
satisfy my doubting mind whether I have accused him wrongfully or no. My Love
is not so small madam (said I) but that I could undertake a far greater voyage
than this for your sake, and for your content engage my self into greater
perils, say not I pray you then that you need any, since I am both willing and
ready to undertake it. At last I gained her consent to let me take the voyage
upon me, and investing my self with those viril garments you saw me in I
crossed over to Mauritania leaving her big with the expectation of the issue of
my voyage. Making a deligent perquisition I understood at Lixus that Marcipsius
was with his father, and how that his youngest brother ^ad slain the day before
my arrival the other named Massanissa, and that Lonoxia, being very young, who
did it, was banished by his father. These things being tragical, yet not any
thing concerning me I resented nothing but on Marcipsius being there. The next
day I went to speak with him and gaining at length private audience I asked
him if he had forget me: and when I saw he did not know me, I pulled out a
letter which I had received from Atalanta and gave him. After he had read it,
with passion little enough. Is it posible (said that cursed wretch) that she
should complain on me? attend (said he to me) to morrow and I will return an
answer to your lady's letter. My eyes at these words flamed with indignation,
and my heart ^iseing against him, I felt great pain in striving to smother
those reproaches I had prepared for him, which I did by reason that I would see
the utmost of his wickedness, and that I would not exasperate him before I had
received the letter from him. As little notice as he took on me he knew me well
enough, for my lady had in her letter given him notise that it was I presented
him with the letter, and knowing this, I was out of measure enraged, but
without venting on word I returned, giveing him notice I would wait on him
according to his appointment. Hardly sleeping all night for the passion the
carriage of that devil, (for he deserves not the title of humane) had put me
in; the next day I went to enquire for him, when his servants told me that he
was departed without the notice of any, presently after I had left him.

At this news I was so disturbed that they Judged by my actions that I was
distracted, I stamped, tore my hair, my face and clothes, and called him a
thousand traitors. But at last I vowed never to return to Atalanta till I had
found this traitor out, and vented my reproaches to his face. Guided by fury
and rage I left the city, being assured by diverse that saw him leave it, that
he was gone and with most diligent pervestigations I spent five or six weeks in
vain, visiting all the chiefest places in Mauritania, and inquireing after him
with unweariable pains, till at lest I heard of him in the city of Tingis.
Resolving to give him no opportunity to escape I awaited a time till I spied
him without the City walking under the shade of some trees not far from the
palace wall of King Bogadus. After a little while I perceived him to draw a
kind of tablet out of his pocket on which he busied himself with great
intentivenesse, so that I had the opportunity to come behind him and spied the
effigies of some lady I knew not. But suddenly taking hold on him. Traitor
(said I) you shall not easily escape my reproaches now, for what reason have
thou thus abused me? He turned hastily about and perceiving it was I, I saw he
was amazed, but struggling with me sought to be gone. My small strength at that
time so engaged him that he could not easily disentangle himself, from my arms
and legs. Stay traitor (said I) stay and hear what I have to say: then I asked
him again whether he had forgot his vows and oaths, and why he had abused
Atalanta: See here (answered that ungratious and boldly impudent one, holding
to me the tablet which he held in his hand) the cause of my change; this beauty
has a crown to give as well as pleasure. Ah vile monster! (cried I out aloud)
right African brood, doubly deceitful Marcipsius! can thou thus impudently
behold me, the witness of thy Crimes, of thy oaths, vows, imprecations?
do not remember (perjured wretch!) the execrations, vengeance, and plagues
thou invoked, and wished might fall upon thee if thou brakest thy promise?

Ah devil! are the Gods so unjust to foreslow their vengance on thy accursed
head? Vilaine! who shall restore Atalanta the honor thou have robbed her of?
Scelerous wretch! let the God of Hospitalty the great Jove, plague thee for the
wrong thou have done to thy entertainer! let all the Cyclopean weapons be
thrown upon thy neck, let new invented torments, and everlasting plagues be
sought for thee! Promethean pains are too easy for thy nefarious heart:
Sysiphean labor is too gentle; Ixionian grinding not bad enough, an eternal
Marsyan excoriation will hardly suffice for to reward thee for the wrong thou
have done to one who is worthy to triumph over the whole world, and now
languisheth in misery through thy means, did I think it would be accepted of
Atalanta I would endeavor to deprive thee of thy wretched life with these
hands: but the Gods will e're long plague thee with thy own wishes, and
exterminate thy life for thy perjury. As I ended these words I perceived a back
door of the palace to open, and a young lady with her attend^^ts to come forth
thereat, who it may be were excited thither by my vociferation. Marcipsius
fearing his wickedness should be discovered drew his sword and pres^nting it
to my breast swore if I departed not immediately he would transpierce my heart.
I was nothing solicitous of my life being enraged at his wickedness so that I
stopped not for his threats but continued calling him, traitor, stuprator and
what ever rage first exhibited. He made a thrust or two at me, although he knew
I had no weapon, nor was of a sex to contend with him, but I shifted well
enough; and to plague him the more I ran toward the Lady crying beware of this
villain, this facinorous Marcipsius, that trator, that violator of faith, and
honesty, that corruptor and vitiator of virgins.

The wicked Marcipsius cried out to them; have a care of that mad man, and
running with his sword drawn made as if he had defended them, till they were
got within the posterne, when he following them left me still craving the Gods
to punish him for his Scelerity. After I had wearied my self with exclaiming I
returned into the city, and embarquing for Spain I at last (after some
retardation by the winds) got safe to this place, where I gave my fair
mistress this sad relation, which was the cause of that heavy dolor you found
her in when your sympathizing tears mixed with hers. Wonder no more at her
excess of Laments, since you know what cause she has to complain.

Atalanta's confident thus ended her discourse, and casting her eye upon me to
expect those words which I ought to have expressed against so egregious a
perfidy; she saw that I sat like an image wherein neither life nor soul had any
residence. She spoke to me, she touched me, she pulled me, but I neither heard,
nor felt, for indeed grief, so much augementd by the knowledge that I must loose
the sovereign of my soul, caused through my brothers wickedness, had taken
away the use of all my senses, and left me altogether impassible. If before I
could have loved her after her pollution, I could not think now of enjoining
her, after I knew it was my own brothers defilement. Grief and amazedness held
me a long time in this benummedness, which the maid seeing and fearing some
sudden sickness, screem'd out, being affrighted at my palenesse. Atalanta came
thither before I had recovered my self from that kind of Syncopy. But in
coming to my self, ah cur'st traitor! sighed I out: ah inevitable ruin of my
Life! Atalanta wondered at the extraordinary passion and interest I showed at
the knowledge of her misfortunes, which did endear me the more unto her: But
seeing me in that condition they would have conveyed me to bed, till I at last
perfectly recovering my self diverted their intentions, and ashamed at the
trouble I had put them to, I excused it as well as I could. Dear Sabane (said
Atalanta) you are too much moved at the misfortunes of another, I cannot but
wonder that your magnanimous soul bearing your own so well should be so much
troubled at the audition of mine. The most saxean hearts madam (replied I)
cannot but commiserate your condition, nor none that shall hear your
misfortunes but will curse that perfidious Marcipsius. But that which so much
amazed me was, that that wicked vitiator should be so blinded as not to see his
own happiness, but should forsake a beauty to which the Gods themselves might
have laid a clame; as being too good for the best of men.

These words imbued the native virmilion of her cheeks with a deeper crimson in
grain: See see continued I poynting to the wall which at that time (by reason
of a damp) stood full of moist drops on his hard side the very stones send
forth their sudor, and seem to generate tears out of their rocky substance,
that they might make you see by their weeping they have some kind of feeling
of your misfortunes, can you then wonder how I should be so much moved, when
inanimates else would convince me of obdurateness. I see (replied she a little
smiling) that there is no contending with one that out of all objects will
raise some evincing argument. I that before was a comforter, lacked now to be
comforted, I that always coveted the company of Atalanta, now oftentimes
shunned it that I might secreetly vent my complaints, and feed my sadness with
solitary soliloquies, all things were quite altered, and I could not but be
amazed as grieved at the versutous power of that mutable Goddess. They all saw
my change but they could not well divine what might be the reason often, I was
now wholly eaten up with sadness, and consumed my time in trouble, in tears,
and complaints, against heaven, earth, Marcipsius, and my self. In the very
extreemity of my trouble I should often cry out ah! I am constrained I am
constrained to leave thee! Atalanta began to repay those comfortable speeches I
was used to solace her with, and to become my physician as I had been hers,
which indeed insted of comforting me encreast my dolor, when I thought on my
loss, for by how much the more she was good to me, and by how much the more the
goodness of her nature was exhibited, by so much the more I bewailed my loss,
and considered the greatness of my misfortune. This grief and trouble
continuing, it at last induced me to a sickness, which perplexed every one of
that small family by reason of the Love they bore me, but Atalanta principally
seemed to forget her own trouble to engage her self into mine, and sought the
acquireing of my health almost with the loss of her own. In this sickness I
found some relaxation of my grief, and by degrees began to overcome it, and to
be contented with my fortune. Not that I lost any part or jot of the love I
bore Atalanta but framing my self, seeing I could no longer love her as a
mistres, to love her as a sister, and to keep my love entire without desire of
any other possession then I enjoyed. To comfort and please my self with this
kind of Platonic love: to love only for virtues sake, to have a passion with
out carnal defires I sought many arguments to maintain it to my self, that it
was the best love, and seemed most Caelestiall. I would thus sometimes say to
my self.

What is a little moment of pleasure that I should endure thus much pain for
it? For what is all this grief but because I cannot enjoy Atalanta? It is not
because she loves me not, or because she despises me, but because I have lost
that carnal pleasure which I had hoped to enjoy. Surely that Love cannot be
good which so poorly covets for its own ends. I love her, why? because I might
enjoy her. Shall I not love her ^ow I am sure I shall not enjoy her? or shall I
pine my self to death for that which often times quenches the flames of love?
No doubt but Marcipsius loved her before he enjoyed, but in enjoying her his
love was quenched. Seeing therefore after some small pleasure the flames of
Love are often extinguished, or abated, is it not better to love without ends
or any other desire of enjoyment than that which is between a brother and
sister; which is pure and caelestiall and not subject to decay? Let it be so
and then there will be no obstacle for this love; no doubt but her amity if she
knows me, will grant this in consideration of my love and honesty. I may enjoy
all the pleasures that may be, except that which serves but to put out the fire
of glowing love. Has not my pleasure been excessive, in this small time that I
have been here? and have I not thought that possession could give me no greater
pleasure? This same I may still enjoy, which is purer than ordinary love,
uncontaminate, full of chastity, free from vicious thoughts and desires, and
kindled not by Cupid but by Jove, being a spark or scintilla of the same fire,
where with he enflames our souls with love to himself, and which we exhibit
in loveing virtue, which is his gift: this love will not fail, this is past
the power of fortune to cross, with many such discourses as these I sought
prettily to beguile my self, and at last I resolved to love her as my sister,
since I could not enjoy her as my mistress.

In this resolution I persisted, and beguiling my grief, recovered my health: I
began (and verily at last effected it) to banish not the love, but the
immoderate desire I had to Atalanta. I did not present her to my imagination
(as I used to do) in my arms, or in those close unseen embraces of lovers; yet
did I not banish her thence but looked upon her as part of my soul and for
whose content the sacrifizeing of my life was but a trifle, and (whether it was
my imagination or no I will not determine) I thought I felt stronger flames and
stronger love than ever, it seemed to be a far different fire, more pure, more
celestial, seemed to afford more content and pleasure than the other.

Whilst I thus pleased my self in this new kind of love and every day enjoyed
the utmost of my wishes, time who had seemed to me to borrow penneous sails
for his greater speed, brought forth that month wherein Atalanta expected her
lying down. The time was very near that she had so long expected, and now a new
grief possessed me, in that I must be forced to leave her, and new fear possessed
me in that I must be forced to make my self known to her. I still boar her a
passionate love and dreaded her anger as much as Jove's thunder. But there was
a necessity of it, Modesty would not permit me to stay any longer to be present
at an action which required only the presence of the bearing sex. I could not
tell how to depart, nor to be absent at the time of her delivery without her
knowing what I was, seeing this necessity I resolved at length to make my self
known to her, but fear and trouble so long detered it, that Atalanta fell sick
and kept her bed and looked every hour for her paritude, when I saw there was
no time for any cunctation I embraced the first opportunity which was the next
day after she had taken her bed, and being alone with her I sat down by her
upon the bed side, but so full of fear and trembling that I was not able to
unglew my lips, and my face so pale that it exhibited I was going about an
action on which depended the quiet of all my remaining days. I know not any
thing like to the trouble I was in at that time knowing my self guilty of
deludeing that innocent. I sat a while with a wondrous emotion within me at
last disturbing her repose with my ingeminated sighs, I could not refrain from
shedding some love drops. Atalanta fixing her eyes upon mine, and reading the
trouble in my face, what (said she) are these tears to supply the place of
mine? indeed I have through excess drawn my springs dry, but it is unequal
that you should so much sorrow for my crime. No Maddam (said I tremblingly) it
is for my own crimes that I weep, and for the trouble I have that I must leave
you. I emitted these words with so languishing an air, that they peirc't her
gentle soul: leave me? (replied she) I hope you will not leave me in this
distress: By your comforts I have been preserved and now I have most need of
them do you speak of leaving me; what is the reason Sabane? alas! I am too
unworthy for thy company, I am too contaminate for thy purity. At those words
reaching out her hand which might have been compared with the mountain snow
she locked it within mine, and with an action full of love, pressed it between
hers, her eyes then showed that her springs were not utterly dry, or else that
love had caused new ones. This action piercing my heart I was not able to do
any thing but suspire, but at last bringing forth words and sighs together. Ah!
maddam (said I) the time is come that I must be forced to leave you; the Gods
for these few months have made me happy by your sight and now they will make me
more miserable by forceing me to leave you. There is but one thing that I can
hope for, and that is your pardon without which my death is inevitable, but my
crime is so great that I can expect no mercy from you, did I not know that your
goodness far excells all others that live.

I saw by her amazedness that she knew not the meaning of these aenigma's, But
(proceeded I) the time is now come, according to the appointment of the Gods
that my deceit must be manifested, that I must implore your goodness for my
life, and pardon for my crime, or dye for the expiation of my fault: behold an
impostor, (flinging my self upon my knees as I spoke) that has wronged you,
that has deluded you, say, can you find in your heart to forgive one who has
abused your goodness by an imposture? Sabane (said Atalanta much amazed) what
mean you* can you have committed any thing against me that should deserve
this? Let it be what it will I pardon it, if it be any thing that you think you
have committed against me, my soul is not dearer to me than thou art, draw me
out of this trouble which thou have caused quickly, dear Sabane! I must not
suffer you any longer in this error (returned I) you have been abused long
enough, I am no longer Sabane but (as you may well know my deceit) I am Lonoxia
brother to the wicked Marcipsius, he it is that was banished his fathers
palace, that accidentally was transported to Olissipo, that espied your
charms at a distance walking on the river Tagus, that then ost his heart and
vowed it to you as his peculiar Goddess, and lastly investing himself with this
habit, to enjoy that happiness without which he was no longer able to live, he
invented a figment to deceive you, and all this time has been an impostor, and
now knowing through a strange providence how nearly you have been engaged to
his brother, he quits all pretensions of being your servant any further than
the laws of civillity and duty bind. Atalanta at that instant let go my hand,
and looking upon me with an eye, in which I saw at once both pity and anger,
killed and revived my soul at the same time. Blushes and palenesse took their
turns in her cheecks, and amazed she stayed in a suspense, not knowing how to
answer, which caused me to speak thus. Maddam behold a criminal that implores
your goodness, though I must confess my crimes of so high a nature that they
are almost impardonable with the most merciful. I deserve to be hated if I had
been innocent, in that I am allied so nearly to hateful Marcipsius. But ah
Atalanta! forget these resentments, and let pity exuscitate your pardon,
remember that you have promised of what nature soever my crimes were to grant
it! remember the love you have borne Sabane, let it not be converted to hatred
to Lonoxia! That is it I beg may be continued, that your opinion of my
goodness may not be diminished by this knowledge. Alas to forgive my crimes
and to hate me is but to kill me through grief, I will freely offer my life as
an expiament for my imposture, so that after my death, you will but retain me
whole in your memory without remembering my crimes. Remember that Sabane, though
an impostor never did any thing that may make your virtue blush to remember it.
It was love made me excurre into this crime, on that I lay all the fault, that
you may be the better induced to forgive me, since your self have been
deceived by him. Love I say Love has been of such force as to make me thus
disguise my self, happy disguise, under which I have received so many favors
of divine Atalanta, under which I have received that content which might have
been envied by the Gods, under which I have enjoyed the sight of my titular
angel. But cursed disguise! under which I have proved an Impostor to innocent
Atalanta. I have loved you hoping rhat time might have made me worthy through
my long services, to have attained to that which now is not lawful to think
on: But by a peculiar providence of the Gods finding that my brother has made
you his, though (accursed!) he has forsaken you, my designs which were
honest, are diverted, and I forced at length after my sorrow and sickness to
confess it; nevertheless, though I desire nothing at your hands, my Love is
inconvertible, but it bears the same stamp that a brothers has to a sister,
or is the same that your self (divin Atalanta!) bore to the feigned Sabane,
after this free agnition let the remembrance of Sabane stir up your pity, your
pity your pardon, and your pardon give life to Lonoxia, who else dies to
satisfy you for his imposture. I ended with these words, and my eyes being
full of tears I awaited her sentence. Remaining thus for sometime I saw that
this sudden and unexpected accident had made her immovable. What maddam (said
I) cannot you yet determine what sentence to pass on this wretch, whether life
or death? Alas! though you are lought to emit so severe a sentance from so meak a
soul, I perceive you would have the impostor dye, but you are lought to pass the
sentance from your mouth: you are not in a suspense whether he ought to live or
no, but whether you ought to command it. Well! i will satisfy you without
bidding; the crime is too great to be pardoned, yet say (dear Atalanta)! as I
have been an impostor, so ^ have been obsequious, and faithful in the love I
bore you, consider all the ancidents of Sabane and you will be forced to say
that although Lonoxia followed the motions of his love and passion, yet he
never transcur'd the bounds of virtue, and lastly say I was wlling (as far as
able) to satisfy for all my crimes. At that instant trembling and casting my
eyes about I espied a knife at the beds feet which I suddenly snatched, and
plucking open my bosom. I will, I will Madam (cried I) give you satisfaction,
this shall execute your will. As I lifted up my hand to have let her seen that
I regarded my life less than her love, and feared the loosing of it less than
the acquiring her anger, she caught hold on my arm; Sabane (said she) so I
must yet call you, I cannot consent to this rigorous chastizement. I confess
you have much amazed me, and I should be more difficult to believe what you
tell me, did I not see the same virtue Sabane has hitherto exhibited to remain
still in Lonoxia. But I command (if my words may have any power) that you
forbear to injure your self, and give me some time to revolve this accident in
my mind. Madam (said I letting go the knife which she took from me) I obey you,
I have wholly devoted my self to your service, and though I may have purchased
your hatred and displeasure, it shall never be acquired by my disobedience.
Saying this I kissed her hand and departed.

I betook my self to the solitary walks, and found a great relaxtion in my
mind in that I had passed over that difficulty that so oppressed me, and that I
perceived the Love she bore me in the faign'd condition of Sabane, had taken
too great an impression to be obliterated by the knowledge that I was Lonoxia.
I had not walked two hours but that the confident of Atalanta came to invite me
to her mistris's chamber. I followed her with perturbation enough. I there
found her governesse with her, to whom she had related who I was, who riseing
from her bed side as I came in, I know not (said she) what compellation to give
you, not how to behave my self toward you, since the knowledge of your sudden
Metamorphosis. We are so accustomed to Sabane, that we know not how to call you
Lonoxia. But since you are no longer what we have taken you for, you must not
be discontented if we are more severe, since modesty commands it. You have put
Atalanta into no small passion by the knowledge of what you are, since she has
shown those favors to Sabane, which shames her to think they were given to
Lonoxia: And indeed it was enough justly to purchase her hatred, had not the
love she bore to Sabane, made her consider the virtuous deportments of Lonoxia,
and forces her not to follow the dictates of her irritated humor. I have at
last pacified her, and she has given me leave to tell you, that she will
equally balance, the virtuous carriage, care, love, and troubles of Sabane
against all the crimes of Lonoxia, and the Love she bore you under that name,
against the hatred you might have acquired under this: So that she seals your
pardon, and will not think amiss of your virtue. Ravished at these words I
cast my self at her feet. Ah Madam (cried I) now I can dye content! this is
more than I have merited, but it pleases the goodness of Atalanta to be
equally merciful with the Gods. The ancient Lady raising me from that humble
posture led me to Atalanta's bed side, who blushing gave me her hand in sign of
confirmation of what her Governesse had said. Ah (said she sighing) have I made
known my weakness to a man! strange providence! the brother of the causer of
my woes. The fidelity and Loyalty of the one (said her Governesse) shall repay
the perfideousnesse and disloyalty of the other. Who'd think nature* could
produce two such contraries out of one Venture, the one is not so wicked, but
the other is as good, the one is the abstract of Iniquity, the other of
Goodness and constancy. Many such praises that lady out of the depth of her
Goodness was pleased to give me. At their request I gave them the relation of
my life, and how providentially I was brought to Olissippo, with the beginning
of my Love. Me thought (said Atalanta) I saw the lineaments of Marcipsius face
in yours, when I first saw you, but I attributed it to the effect of a vain
imaginatioin: That treacherous one has not alone proved perfidious to me, but
a foe and traitor to you. They were pleased to Commiserate my condition,
although their own were enough to employ all their thoughts. The deception of
Marcipsius held us in discourse the rest of the day, at last they concluded,
since the providence of the Gods was so manifestly seen in bringing me to that
place, that I should take care of the Infant that should be produced into the
world, and to bear it thence, least the Crime of Atalanta should be made
conspicuous to the world. Thus past I over the difficulty that affrighted me,
and after my discovery became serviceable to Atalanta.

They thought it not convenient to discover me to the rest of the servants, and
therefore I was permitted to wear the habit I had assumed and enjoy the
happiness of seeing and being often with Atalanta, who many times complained
that I was not Sabane, that she might express her Love with that endearednesse
she had used to do: And for my part I loved her as entirely as if we had been
produced out of one Venture. Five days after my discovery the hour came
wherein Atalanta was to undergo the pains of childbirth, and to become the
unhappy mother of some fair Infant. Whilst? with painful throws she was
produceing into the world the fruit of her furtive pleasures I walked in my
usual places of solitude, and with continual prayers invoked Lucina to her
aid. But surely some envious Juno retarded her paritus, and made her endure an
Al^mae^ean travel, for before Ilithya eased her throws, by giving birth to a
fair and pretty boy, she counted twice twelve hours in those bloody sweats,
and was left with little hope of life. After I was made acquainted with the
birth of the Infant, I departed to Olis^ippo to prepare a barque for my
transportation to Lixus, where I knew I had friends enough that would keep the
child secretly. I soon hired one for that purpose, and appoynting the time when
I would come, I returned and being admitted to see Atalanta I sound her so weak
and faint, that all their endeavors could hardly keep life in her. After they
had made that little one ready, and had endued it with mantells, and rich
jewels suitable to its quality, they gave it to Atalanta to take her leave of
it, which she did with many bitter tears, and scalding sighs. Go (said she in
delivering it to me) b^be of sorrw, the Gods may give thee life to revenge the
death of thy mother on thy ungrateful father. Go seek thy dessiny in this
miserable world, thou art born in Sorrow, and art exposed in thy tender days
to the inexorable rage of Fortune.

May the Gods be more propitious in thy growing years, and change these thy
miseries into Gladness. Though thou art the fruit of my crimes, innocent
babe, yet thou art part of my self, and I cannot part with thee without
bewaileing thy loss with tears that spring from the depth of the fountain of
sorrow. Alas! innocent, thou must suffer for thy mothers crimes, and be exposed
to miseries for to save her honor. We seeing that she would spend the
remainder of her strength, in these querimonies, took the Child out of her
sight, but at parting, Lonoxia (said she) it is to you I commmit this infant,
and to your care and tuition, his life and nurture: by that love you have bore
me forsake him not whilst life shall last, but in him allways call to mind the
distressed Atalanta. Her weakness would not permit her any more words, but
tears and sighs inherited their room. Mine gave me leave at last to take my
leave of her, and to assure her whilst I lived, my life should be only for the
protection of the Infant. I parted but with a heaviness that presaged my
ensueing miseries. Most of the servants still ignor'd the cause of Atalanta's
sickness, so that we were fain to conveigh the child enclosed in a chest to
Olissippo, where I embarked, and with all the speed could possible be made set
our prow toward Lixus.

A gentle gale set us off that shore on which the humerous mares conceiving
with the aur^'s of the favonian wind, brought forth their short lived colts. We
were come almost in sight of the desired shore when the caprichious element
leaving its tranquillity assaulted the sides of our vessel with its liquid
billows, and the inauspicious apparition of the parted twinns gave the mariners
an assured sign of an ensuing storm. Presently the furious winds mustering
their forces on the plains of the ocean, began to astuate the face of the
waters, into living mountains, which moveing with a horrible sight, threatened
us with a tumulation under their liquid ruins, but our barque forceing its way
to the top of those watery rocks, with the like impetuosity descended down their
^^ideing backs.

The other Element angry that the force of the winds, nor the fury of the
waters, could neither overturne, nor drown our vessel, seemed to promise our
deaths by the fires that assaulted us; and day betraying us to the
discomfortable shades of night, left us no light but what the sudden flashes of
the threatening lightning gave, which was accompained with a tonitruous echo
that took away the audition of those cries, our wretched copartners in these
miseries made. For my part I had sorrow enough to behold into what danger
fortune had cast that Infant as soon as 'twas borne, who yet without
perturbation, and insensible of its own death satisfied it self with the dulcid
liquor of its nurses breasts. Our ship slead for many leagues before the fury
of the winds, on those roughned plains, the strength of the mariners proving
too weak to strive with the violence of that impetuous storm, they committed it
to the mercy of the winds and water, and prepared themselves to receive an
inevitable death. Morning appearing, but the storm not ceasing, we still rode
upon the dangerous waves, till at last our barque shattered with the continual
batteries both of Boreas and Neptune, gave entrance to that aquatick enemy into
its very bowels, and running a leak presantly was filled with water. Every one
sought to save himself, but there was no means to escape perishing, some cut
the tackle, others the masts, others cast themselves before hand into the sea,
at last the ship sanke, at which so horrible and lamentable a cry, proceeded
from those deplorable wretches that I thought it would have relented the Gods
of their Cruelty to have saved them miraculously. The child being laid in the
chest which admitted no water, was tossed upon the waves, and carried out of my
sight in a moment: The desire I had to see Atalanta made me endeavor, to save
my life, which I cid by gaining the mast of the Ship, on which I sat and beheld
the rest perish in the sea, without being able to afford them help.

I was driven for Some hours by the waves, which many times had almost made
me forgo my hold, with their violences, and playing with my looser garment had
put me to much trouble to keep steady on that dancing pole, when at last by the
favor of the Gods I was espied by a vessel which yet tryumph'd over the
storm, which at that time slackning its violence gave them the liberty of
saving me. The vessel was bound for Spain, so that they were easily induced to
land me at Olisippo for the rewards I profer'd them, all the jewels and things
of worth that were about me I bestowed on them. The pilot being very skillfull
in his art set me ashore in the Haven of Olissippo in spite of the raging
waters. I presently repaired to Atalanta's I Will, and being admitted, I was made
acquainted that she had not many minutes to live. The grief that then afflicted
me its impossible to relate, I ran to her bed side and like one distacted asked
her many foolish and impertinent questions, as why she for sake us? and why she
should not endure any companies in this world? and why she would not overcome
her grief and sorrow? The old lady with her chiefest maids weeping by her made
a very sad and doleful spectacle, but she glad that she was departing from
this world, wherein she had received so much sorrow and grief, lay smiling at
the frowns of death, and embraced him with a cheerful countenance.

As Soon as she saw me she invited me with her dying eyes to draw near; in the
mean time those that stood by her bed side seeing she desired privacy withdrew
a little. She first asked me concerning the child whose misfortunes I hid from
her, lest the knowledge of that might have shortened those few moments she had to
live. I told her that it was safly provided for, and that she should not fear
but that I would employ the remainder of my days in fullfilling her desire.
This is all then said she, besides what already I have told you, that you let
Marcipsius know he was the cause of my death, and if he publishes my dishonor
I hope though he be your brother that you will desend me. One thing yet grievs
me and that is that I must part with Sabane; her tears and weakness stopped
her here; and I with the excess of passion could not answer her one word, but
kneeling down I gave her an assurance by my eyes that I would effect what ever
she commanded, my tears showed her with what resentment I beheld her dyeing,
and the greatness of my grief clearly deprived me of my senses. At that time
arrived Atalanta's father whom they had sent for, and coming where his daughter
lay, he showed his love was excessive, for, beholding her ready to expire, he
fell by her side, and had almost deceived all their hopes of ever fetching him
again, but at last coming to himself he embraced the dying Atalanta, who had
the content to expire in his arms. When they saw she was dead, then began a
heavy ejulation, all seeking to express their passion by their several gestures
and actions. The old man to^e his hair, and beard, and calling aloud on his
daughter seemed as if he would have made his voice pierce to the center of the
earth, and revoked the absent spirit of his daughter, every one was copartner
with him in his grief, so that 'twas difficult to know who were most interested
in her death.

A heart of slint must have melted at those lament^ble mournings, and
bewaisings and it was not a few hours that gave them respite in their passion.
I had got on the further side of her bed, and placeing my self hard by her dead
ca^casse, I fell on her pillow with the extremity of my passion, and there lay
so senseless that it was hard to judge who was deadest. But after a long time
my senses returning to exercise their functions, I cast my eyes obscured with
tears on that face which triumphing over death carried yet weapons enough to
have captivated the stoutest hearts. The conquering lillies began now to
overcome the roses in her cheeks, and they as it were yiedling to the hand of
fate sunk their blushing heads under the snow of her cheeks, which gave a kind
of a dying tincture to the white. There was nothing to be seen of death but
want of heat and motion, and had you but seen her you would have said that it
was the fairest of the graces, that in the kingdom of Morpheus was taking her
sweeter repose. My grief permitted me not to read to my self lectures of
mortality, but by stimulating considerations put me into motions of sury, Oh!
how often I secretly cursed that cruel brother, how often I vowed her revenge,
and how often resolved I to sarcrifice the Life of Marcipsius, on the altar of
vengance, 'twas these resolutions that kept me from following that fair one to
the Elisian shades, and tied me to endure those sorrows by living, which I was
necessitated to undergo since she was dead.

But the old Lady having f^r different considerations, fearing (as 'twas
supposed) the indignation of the Prince, since she was the seeming cause that
his daughter was removed thither, where she dyed, retiring into a closset
pierced her ancient breast with a poniard, and so emitted her soul to follow
Atalanta's. Atalanta's maid, with some others whose others whose love to her
had transported them had effected the same emission of life had they not been
hindered by others, so that the opinion of the Indians seemed to possess them,
that souls want the service of others in the other world, and that they out of
a sense of love and duty would follow Atalanta to the Elisium.

When that they had tired, but not satisfied themselves with weeping, they were
sain to resolve for the interment of that lovely carcass which was yet vain
without its more heavenly part the soul. I will not stand to discribe that
funeral pomp though the stateliness and richness of it gave admiration and
matter of discourse for all Sp^ine. For the old prince having lost that rare
and inestimable jewel his daughter for whom he preserved his other riches, so
little regarded them, that he bestowed his whole treasure in her interment, and
buried with her, a mass of Gold and precious stones. I was an assistant in
these sad ceremonies, but my grief took from me all observance. The father of
Atalanta being conversant with the Romans observed many of their ceremonies in
the interment, and many things he had which was new and of his own institution.
That lovely corpse having lain extinct seven days in which were emitted a
thousand Conclamations if that could have recalled her from her eternal sleep,
it was eviscerated and condited by some Roman pollinctors: And on the Acerra
was offerred a continual and daily incense till the day of her exequial show.
The prince sparing for no cost employed so many workmen that he had prepared
all things against the time of burial to his mind, and showed the little
value he set upon riches since his daughter was dead. I should darken the
splendour of that pomp should I go about to tell it you, for it far surpassed
both for riches and funerary heaviness, all that ever the Romans showed in
their exequies. Above a thousand small vessels whose sides were of black ebon
oar's, of the same, and sails and tackle of obnigerous silk with many
precious stones fastened to them, which glittring seemed like so many stars in
a black firmament. The night being witness of these sad ceremonies they
supplied the want of Sol with I know not how many thousand tapers which so
enbrightned the place that the vessels with ease saw how to place themselves
in order, and the Tagus groaned under the weight of so great a multitude, and
hid his head for fear of so many fires; least they had been come to have burnt
up all his waters. In the fore part of these funeral ships were placed
certain men with trumpets and other instruments who sounded them with
tristfull notes according to the heavy plangor and ejulation of the praeficae
and funcrae that followed. six vessels richer than the former followed, three
of which were filled with little youths dressed up like little Cupids all in
mourning attire, who with a Lydian strain sung the Thornodia with heavenly
voices, which would have drawn tears from slinty hearts, had not the sadness
of the occasion been a greater motive to a total dissolution into tears. The
three other vessels was filled with the fait'st puella's that part of Spain
could afford, who in their black attires dressed like Nymphs (which seemed to
vail their beaties) accorded with sweet harmony their voices (which surpast the
music of the spheres) to the sad notes of diverse harpes, Lutes, Lyres,
Citterns, and other music on which they played. In the midst of them one
taller than the rest representing Melpomene sweetly and sadly Citharizeing to
her voice, sung the Epicedium with accents ravishingly sweet.

After these in order followed the other vessels filled with those that came to
accompany Atalanta to her interment. At the end of which train a greater
vessel than the rest shining on all parts with the splendour of rich stones
encompasted about with diverse vessels full of lights sadly followed the rest,
in which was Atalanta's corpse, placed in a bed in fashion of a throne
inestimable for the richness that adorned it. About which sat the Prince, my
self, and her servants, making a concention with sighs and groans. Behind that
bed in another lay the Lady, with other servants paying their last duty in
tears and fighs about her. In this manner we went to Olissippo, and landing
went to a temple consecrated to the Superbious Juno where in a vault arched
over with marble and embos'd, with precious stones she was laid with the
ancient Lady, and all the riches that addorn'd her. After the Vale pronounced
by the praefica's every one returned almost dead with sorrow and grief, for
never was there seen such a general lamentation and consent in mourning
before. Whilst they were returning the Cupids and Nymphs singing Elegiaic
verses before them, my sorrow bursting out a fresh in thinking to have
Atalanta, I got away unseen and remained behind: And getting into the vailt, I
lay bewailing my destiny over Atalanta, till those that were set to close up
the vault plucked me thence by violence, for my desire was to be closed up with
her. But when they had closed up that sepulcher and raiz'd a little Pyramid
over it of Jasper, I caused to be engraven on the side of it these words in the
Roman tongue, and burnisht with Gold.

EPITAPHIUM
HEVDOLORY

inscribed epitaph

AFter I had given thousands of kisses upon the cold Jasper, and with my tears
renewed the fading cypress branches which adorned her tomb I departed into
the City, and chainging that long-kept habit, I endued those garments proper to
my sex, and in a most sad and deplorable condition I ombarqu'd my self for
Lixus. As Soon as I arrived there I met with a new and excessive accretion of
sorrow. I found my father dead, not without suspicion of poison, and my mother
too weak to overcome her sad resentments of my brothers wickedness, my other
brothers death, my banishment, and lastly my fathers murder, she gave up the
ghost that day I arrived at Lixus some few days after my father. This joined
to the remembrance of Atalanta had surely overcome me, but that I was obliged
to perform the injunction of Atalanta, and to revenge the death of my father
by emitting the blood of my brother, that wicked paricide, for without doubt he
had compassed his death by poison. Fearing his malice and wickedness I kept my
self unknown, and disguised saw their bodies sepulized, which was performed
with great ceremony and funerary pomp by that hypocrite Marcipsius. The sight
of that Traitor so irritated me that I was about to have sacrificed him on the
tomb of my father, and to have immolated his blood to the Ghost of Atalanta, at
the interment, but not desiring to make my self known before all those
mourners with some other considerations, deterred me from putting so bloody a
catastrophe to the Funeral. The next day I prepared my self to encounter him,
and was resolved no longer to defer his punishment: But I understood he had
anticipated my design by departing from thence toward Tingis, where he was in
Love with his Cousin the princess of Bogudianae, and daughter of King Bogudus
by whom he hoped to attain the crown of Tingitania. I thought his love
extremely great, or his sorrow very small that de departed so suddenly after
the interment however I resolved to follow him and perpetrate my design though
in the arms of his beloved. With this resolution without discovering my self
I left Lixus and at last arrived at Tingis. Some few days I awaited an
opportunity to meet with him, which at last was given me as happily as I could
wish; for walking in a little grove hard by the palace, it being almost
evening, I saw him come forth of a back door of the palace garden only with
one squire. He descended into the grove and musing with himself gave me
liberty to come very near him before he espied me. when I was come up to him,
my resentments stimulating me to a revenge, Traitor (said I laying my hand upon
my sword) at this very instant thou must give satisfaction with thy blood and
life for two murders committed by thee, that of thy father and that of thy
wife. Marcipsius was startled at this sudden encounter, steping back and being
nothing daunted drew his sword. I am lougth (replied he) to take away your life
for your temerity, but you ought before you encounter any with your tongue, to
observe them well with your eyes, and not let your rashness induce you into
errors that would, with one less merciful than my self, before this time have
cost you your life. No, Monster (replied I) am not deceived, it is you that are
deceived in thinking so, I see you know me not, but know I know you to be the
most perfidious and patricidicall Marcipsius, to be the ravisher and vitiator
of divine Atalanta, who suffered the stroke of death in bringing into the world
the infant formed of thy most lustful seed: it is to her Ghost that the
expiation of thy life in the first place must give satisfaction, and in the
next place to thy empoysoned father who through thy venefication (scelerous
wretch!) has ended his days: and this must be by the hand of Lonoxia who has
lived hitherto but to give satisfaction to their Umbrae by immolation of thy
life. He was much amazed in seeing me, and seeing me ready to sacrifice his
life with the sword of vengance, he saw there was no time to delay defending
himself, for I assaulted him with a free violence. His fury and despair
assembled in him an unwonted force, and had I not with the like agility evaded
his first thrust he had stocadoed me, and given a period to my Life and fury,
our duel lasted some time, till at length he fell, having a thrust through his
right arm, and another through his body, so that I thought him dead, and
leaving him I departed that night in a vessel for Spain. As we were passing the
narrow frete that divides Spain from Africa, we were set upon by a vessel of
resolute pirates, we were but few in number to them, and they thought it a
folly to gain death by a resistance, but I that sought ardently for that megre
champion, since I had obeyed the commands of Atalanta, resolved to loose it
desperately amongst them, and at the last extinguishing of my taper, to give
the greatest blase of my valor. As Soon as they had boarded us, I alone
resisted them, and leaping amongst them, irritated them by the blows I gave
them, at first thinking me mad with folly or rashness, they did not much
regard me, but when that they saw how fast I felled them, they all began to
dispute it with me with their swords, and to deprive me of the life I was
resolved to loose, but with their deaths. In this encounter fell their captain
with nine more that expired through their blood and wounds, at last everpowred
I was born down, and expecting death, fortune, to spite me gave me, life. I
looked for no generosity amongst those Barbarians, nor no pity from such
irritated souls. But they made it appear that valor had some estimation
amongst them, and that they were not altogether so Brutuall as I thought them.
Taken with the small puissance that I had showed amongst them they preserved my
life, and proffered me my liberty, notwithstanding the slaughter, I had made.
And seeing their captain dead they all jointly prayed me to accept of their
vassallage, and his place, and power. I many times denied them, and proffered
to be their companion, but they told me that my valor which they so much
respected deserved the preeminency and that they should account themselves
happy under my protection, and that they would fear nothing under my conduct,
but if I would accept of their proffers that they would swear a blind obedience
to my commands, and would follow me to death it self. I pondered for some time
on their words, and believing that to be the readiest way to find the death I
sought, I yielded to them, and accepted of their offer. For my sake they spared
the vessel they had assaulted, and carrying me to a strong fort on the side of
Affirica placed between two rocks sufficient to frustrate the efforts of a
strong army, where when all their pyratick vessels were come in they proclaimed
me with a general consent to be their captain; and with ceremonies peculiar
amongst themselves crowned me with a Diadem made of cable ropes untwin'd in
which was placed many precious stones, and swore their obedience to me, never
to forsake me though in the greatest peril, never to disobey my commands, or
thwart my designs, or to ransaek the prey but to stand to my division of it
amongst them. By this means they ever were in obedience amongst themselves, and
in their common storehouse had treasure enough to defray the charges of an army
of an hundred thousand men.

I led this pyratick life about two years in which time I received a thousand
proofs of the Pirates valor and obedience, which was as perfect as the greatest
monark could receive from his meanest subjects. In it I found a life (if I may
say so for the consideration of the unlawfullnesse of it) that was pleasant and
free from the versatilousnesse of Fortune, and I seemed now as if I tryumph'd
over the power of that deity. There was nothing the world could afford or the
industry and power of men could gain, so absolute a regency had I acquired
over the hearts of those that served me, that if I desired it they would
sacrifice all their lives but they would content me. All outward bliss attended
me, and I wanted nothing of the pleasures and deliciousness of the greatest
princes. But yet Atalanta was a spectre that always appeared before my eyes,
and seemed to desire my company in the Elisium. Indeed I sought death every
where, where I hoped I might find it, I led them to most apparent dangers,
which yet their valor still conquered, and in the greatest atchivements came
off victorious, and without murmuring at my actions, and with a desperatnesse
of a man resolved for death I fought against all opposers, and incurred all
dangers, which rashness they accounted the effects of an extreme valor, and
their love made them as resolute as my self: by which means, as fortune had
robbed me of my content and dispossessed me of my greatest riches, so now
becoming her executioner I made others miserable by their losses who seemed to
be her favourities, and enriched the coffers of my praedonians with
inaestimable treasure taken on the Seas. It was now that fortune gave me a very
happy encounter, and made me some amends for her former injuries, I was gliding
over the Tuscane sea when I perceived one of my vessels in fight with another,
I bore up to her to afford her my help and to make sure of the prey but before
I came, I perceived that she was taken, and my men slain and prisoners, a thing
not usual it was, to see them overcome, which made me believe I should find so
stout a resistance that I should not seek any further for the death I wished
for, I came up encouraging my men to revenge the death of their fellows, and
falling abord on them I expected a sufficient number of them to resist me, but
I wondered to see so many slain and taken prisoners by the prodigious valor of
one man. A shamed to assault him with so many, I commanded them to keep their
ship, and to leave me the glory of that combat. They obeying me I entered the
ship wherein Euripedes had done such wonders (for it was he) and encountering
him I found that I had need of the assistance of all my men to overcome him. I
sustained the sury of his arm at least an hour, but not without wounds, and
undoubtedly I had fell under his strenuous arm, had not my men at that time
breaking their wonted obedience through the great fear they had of my life
rushed all into the ship to assail him. I was extraordinarily moved at their
baseness and fearing their temerity I turned about and defended my enemy. What
(said I opposing them with my sword) after all your loyalty will you now give
me proofs of your disobedience, I had thought you had not been capable of such
baseness. I have hitherto opposed my self against a valor that is invincible,
but now i will defend my enemy rather then suffer this ignobility. These words
stoped their motion and made them retire: turning about to Euripdes, Sir (said
I) you shall have no odds, lets finish what you have so bravely begun.
Euripeles being truly generous, replied, It is a folly to opose you, since you
have two weapons which make you invincible, valor and generosity, it is enough
that you have overcome me with the first, let me not be altogether conquered in
the last. I proffer you my sword and service, and give you all the signals of
victory. Alas! (said I) how unjustly you attribute this to me, which I ought to
have given you: But we must finish our combat, it is not out of hopes that I
shall prove the victor, it is a thing I desire not, but out of a desire I have
to receive the death I have so long sought by the hand of one so valorous. You
shall never find it under mine (replied the generous Euripedes) I will not
commit so heinous a crime as to offend my defender, but if you will honor me with
your friendship, I shall prize it above the victory; if not, yet give me leave
to render you proofs of my servitude. With that he offered me the pummel of
his sword: I was vexed at his refusal to fight, and stepping back I bid him
stand upon his guard, and thinking to irritate him with my blows, I renewed the
fight; he indeed defended himself, but would not strike to hurt me. What (said
I very angry) you esteem me not worthy enough to exercise your valor upon:
with this giving him a forceable blow, his guard being low, I cut his hand
wrist, and as fortune would, a braslet which surrounded it. This put a period
to my anger, for I no sooner saw it, but I knew it by a remarkable stone in the
midst of it, to be the same that I had put about the neck of Atalanta's child.
I took it up, and with an action that testified my amazedness I beheld it, and
assuring my self that it was the same, I was not slack to know of him how he
had acquired it. He very courteously satisfying my demand, I must live now
(cried I out) since duty binds me to perform what I owe to Atalanta. O gods!
what ought I to expect from that infant, since ye have preserved it so
miraculously: I presently craved pardon for my insolences, and it was as soon
granted by generous Euripedes. I gave him a brief relation of Atalanta's
misfortunes and my own, whereby he saw what interest I had in the child, and
entering into a very near league of friendship, I conducted him and the fair
Amenia into the Issick gulf. He gave me direction to find Marinus (which name
he kept for the imposers sake) and with wonderful expression of his amity, he
left me to go and redeem the child, which by a miracle, fortune once more gave
me.

I hasted back to my fortress, and from thence to the place where Euripedes had
left Marinus: I found him, redeemed him, and brought him back to the fort, he
was so well grown for those few years, that I should scarce have believed it to
be the same child that the storm had rapt from me, had not the semblance of his
mother, and these tokens which were yet preserved, that were lost with him,
sufficiently testified it. It was a long time before I could get from the
Pirates, so loath were they to part with me, but at last I effected it through
my continual importunities and desires, and landing at Lixus with Marinus, I
discovered my self to my friends, and was welcomed with as great kindness as
the sense of former obligations, and a strict amiry could work in generous
souls. I was forced to make my self known but to few; and those whom I knew,
neither the power of gold, nor the sea of ruin, could have any power upon to
induce to prodite me, for fear of the implacable h^^e and revenge of my
brother; who not dying of those wounds I gave him, had been recovered, and sent
out diverse to murder me if I could be ^ound. In this manner I spent many years
in a private life among my friends, having treasure enough to recompense their
kindnesses, and to serve me (though I spent prodigally) all the rest of my my
days, which the Pirates compelled me to take with me. The remembrance of
Atalanta so often dejected me, that had not the care, education, and protection
of her Image, put a necessity upon me of living, I believe I had not reached
these days. I made it my duty and delight to give him all the education both
in literature and arms that others of his rank used to learn; which he received
with a nature propense to the highest seize, and proved so good a
proficient in both, that he was equally loved and admired of his ^utors.

Whilst I spent my years in bringing up this plant, my brother Marcipsius
having taken upon him the crown of Tingitana, and gaining the confirmation if
it from Augustus, by his presents and bribes to his chiefest favorites,
promising an annual tribute, and acknowledgment that 'twas from his donation,
married his co^sen the princess of Bogudiana, and enjoyed that basly purchased
crown some years in peace. Marinus now entering into his fifth luster, I made
known to him his parents which till then I had hid from him, and exhorting him
to virtue and patience, and to the exercise of H^roick actions and generosity
which would obliterate the blot of his mother and his own extraction, I gave
him all the Instruction and admonition of a father, and by my indulgency
exacted from him a filial reverence and fear. At last I desiring he should be
known to his father I would not permit him to lie any longer in such obscurity,
and accompanying him my self to Tingis, no^ imagining the fire of malice and
hatred could have been preserved alive so many years in the King my brother, I
presented him to him, and discovering my self and Marinus I made known to him
how he was his son. But that wicked one having laid aside all sense of nature
and humanity instead of forgetting my injuries and remembering I was his brother
and that his son, caused us to be imprizon'd and that very closely for fear we
should be known who we were, lest that the anger of his Queen for his crimes
past, or the discontent of his subjects for my imprisonment might cause some
disturbance to his quiet

We endured this restraint with a virtue which we made out of necessity, near
five years, when on a sudden and unexpected by us our prison doors were broke
open, and we carried to the head of an army of thirty thousand men to be their
guides and conductors against Marcipsius. This was occasioned through the evil
reign of my brother and the discontents of his subjects, and the great a
version they always had to him, so that many, and that of the chief about
him, conspireing together procured, this revolt, and raised this army with
great secresy in his further provinces. They had not kept our imprisonment so
close but that 'twas known to some of these, who knowing who I was designed me
presently for his successor, and for their General.

They made very large remonstrances to me of the equity of their doings, the
wickedness of their King, and the affection they had to have me succeed.
Ambition and injury both at once solicited me, but remembering that he was my
brother and King I told them, As I would not approve of the follies and
weakness of their King, so I could not tell how to take arms against a
brother and a Prince whom I ought to obey, I told them that the Quallity of a
brother prohibited me revenge, and that of a King swallowed up all Injures. And
that what before I had acted against him was not for injuries done to my self,
but being bound by the obligations of love, greater then those of Nature I was
forced to what I did, and having sufficiently compensated for that, I could
not revenge injuries done to my self. And if they could not persuade themselves
but that they ought to perpetrate their designs, that at least they would not
make me the executioner, but rather return me to the prison from whence they
brought me if I must be necessitated to obey one. I had wholly frustrated their
expectations if Marinus being more sensible of my injuries than of nature to a
father so monstrous and obdurate, had not engaged himself to them, and so
persuaded me at least to bear him company in the field, and see whether he
could perform the practick, of the Theory his tutors had taught him. Father,
said he, if the Pellaan hero (as my tutors have dictated to me) acknowledged
himself more beholden and bounden to the Stagyraean Sage for his learning and
precepts than to Philip his father for's life, who loved him, left him a
kingdom, and means to raise him to that stupendous greatness he attained to;
How much more ought I to acknowledge you, and to revenge your injuries, that
have given me life by saving it, that have educated, cherisht, and spent your
self upon me, on a father that begot me into misseries, that hates me, that
imprizons me, that seeks my death and ruin? Let me give you this proof of my
affection, and show you how sensible I am of injuries done you, and that for my
sake suffer me to make my father acknowledge me for his son by force, and when
it lies in our power to use mercy, I Will make him give satisfaction for injuries
done to the best and chiefest of my fathers (and then we will put on the duty of a
son, and beg pardon for our selves. Not to use any more of those arguments he
used to persuade me, the Love I bore him and the discretion I perceived in
those young years tied me to him inseparably and made me to accompany him in
the war, which lasted long and was very Tragical. This war continued five
years in which time we had many great battles, many slain, towns taken, Cities
and places dismantelled, houses burnt, the country forraged, and all those sad
disasters which inseparably follow a civil war. The three first years victory
still attended us, and a sensible success made us doubt of nothing that might
cross us. But Marcipsius having gained notable experience in the wars of
Caesar kept himself so secure by the certain intelligence he had of all our
counsels by his agents, so that there was nothing that we resolved on but he
had notise of it before hand, and still frustrated our projects, and designs,
whether it were in knowing our intended marches that he might way-lay us with
ambuscadoes, or our intended besiegments that he might sufficiently prepare it
against us, or our sudden assaults that he might prevent us, and having money
and men enough, he keept us from advancing very near Tingis. The fifth year we
came to a pitched battle which proved fatal to us, all the whole strength of
both sides engaged, and on the victory depended the decision of the Quarrel,
and Crown. Both sides were very resolute and fought it out to the last man, at
least thirty thousand fell on both sides, and the plain was like a sea of blood
the contrary side proved victors, Marinus was slain covered over all with
wounds, falling upon a rampart of dead bodies that he had slain. My self killed
in Marinus and having lost all the blood in my body fell amongst the dead. But
being preserved against my will by those that came to gain by the dead, and
cured of my wounds I left Africa, With the like sorrow that I left Spain after
the death of Atatanta. I retired amongst those Pirates that I once commanded,
and the love they bare me not being extinguished in that intervallation of
years that I had been absent, they received me with Joy and according to my
desire let me live the remainder of my days in a solitary cave (but
accommodated with things convenient) which was within the rock of the
fortress. After almost twenty years solitude (time a little making me
insensible of those things so long past) I began to be more conversant amongst
them and enquiring after the passages of the world I understood by them (that
were ignorant of few public transactions) that Marcipsius enjoyed his fortune
very little after that fatal battle, for his neighbor, King Juba a prince
endued with the learning of the Grecians, and the valor of Romans in his
rising fortune had swallowed him up and buried him under the ruins of his
greatness, I used sometimes to take the sea in some of their vessels to
recreate and relaxate my tired spirits not to dispoyle any of their goods as I
had formerly done, and one time fortune at last to please me after these
storms shipwrack'd our vessel upon the coasts of Asia, but it was to give me
the greater calm; for, gaining the shore, I traveled up into the country,
(having some jewels and gold which I saved from the shipwreck) where I met
with Euripedes traveling with a few servants, but both of us being altered by
our years, we knew not each other, till in discoursing as we went together I
knew him to be Euripides, and making my self known to be Lonoxia, we renewed
our former amity with tears of Joy. Understanding the design he was going
about, and agreeing so fit to my wishes and desires, I joined my self with him
and ever since have been his companion in this beloved grot. I have given you
the relation of my life with which fortune has as often played as any, and
has made it one of the greatest examples of her mutability. I cannot but
wonder what kind of deity it is, that should take so much delight in the
vicissitudes of things, being a matter of impossibillity for her to permit any
man to enjoy a content that is permanent, nor is she to be won by sacryfices,
prayers or vows.

Lonoxia thus concluding; Argelois stayed some time reflecting on the many
remarkable passages of his story: But at last taking hold of the shutting up of
his narration, spoke something of that clausion. I have (said he) given good
attention to your narration, wherein there are many things worthy of
denotation, and wherein that Goddess you speak of has manifested her power.
But (if you please) I Will tell you the opinion of a philosopher (whose dictates
I well remember since I learned them in the Academian shades) concerning this
Fortune, which thought it may be different from the Common opinion, seems not
to deviate from reason, nor to be dissentaneous to truth. The common sort of
people are constantly ignorant of the true notion of the Gods, and meaning of
those figures which they see represented to their eyes ^ framed by the hands of
men; and only follow the vulgar opinions, and common notions and dogma's,
testifying their obedience to receive upon trust, what the priests or the wise
men tell them, fitted to their Jgnorance, without any Inspection into
mysteries. So it is then that the Romans, and other nations, worship those
Images whether of Jove, Cyllenius, Venus, Fortune, or any of the Gods as if
they themselves appeared, or their divinities were comprehended within those
materials, when to confute that blindesse we often see them abused by
sacrilegious persons without restriction or punishment. The wise men themselves
were the cause first of all of this infulse and false adoration; for they
knowing how frail the comprehensions of vulgar minds were, and that they were
not able to conceive beyond the power or dictates of their senses; nor
comprehend a deity that is the Invisible Gubernator of all things, framed
certain Images, to represent the power, and different effects of one sole
powerful Numen; that by those ocular demonstrations, sitted to the abject
capacities of the vulgar, they might be put in mind of a supreme, invisible,
all-ruling power, lest otherwise they might fall into an Impiety to believe
there was no such Power: or at least should be unmindfull of it without some
thing formed to the sense to mind them of it, and help forward their devotion,
seeing that things presented to the eye immediately stirs up our rememberance,
and causes a renewing or commemoration of those things we had forgot. But of
this their good intention there sprung up a great Impiety, for the vulgar
placeing divinity in those carved and gilded Images, adored them for that
uncontrollable power, and imposing certain names, and offices on them, never
look beyond those wooden objects. And since for their confirmation, through the
covetousness, (and to the enriching) of their priests or conservers, some
wicked men adding sorcery and charms, caused certain illusive miracles to be
done or shown by these Images. But this error is too inveterate to be
contradicted, or spoken against; and so generally embraced, that very few of
the wisest Philosophers have preserved this verity. But he that instructed me
in these things (wiser than the inspired Sybills who were instated by this
power, and prophefied of some glorious star, which is about this time to
appear, that shall dispel these clouds of error and impiety) has them out of
writings, that he accounts as sacred, as others the Delphick oracle, and
delivered them to me as his choycest secreets, and greatest proof of his Love.

But to this Fortune you speak of, a power or Goddess that is accounted so
caprichious and unstable, the Romans according to their apprehensions of her by
her effects, have depicted her and placed her in the Pantheon in the form of a
woman, 'cause that sex is most mutable, faining her the daughter of the sea, to
show her inconstancy; and the servant of the Gods, because they accounted all
sublunary things to be at her dispose, and to be effected by her. She was
placed upon a globe, to show she praesided over the earth. She had Cornucopiae
in one hand, to show she gave plenty; in the other a wheel, to show the
mutability of it, on which was the Image of Favor of a vitreous substance, apt
to be broken and lost. She was also painted blind, and drawn by 4 blind
horses, they accounted her so by reason of the indifferency of her actions, in
sparing neither the princes nor the plebeians as Justice is, and by reason of
her confused and miscellaneous actions, which seemed a Chaos in their eyes, and
the productions of a blind deity. But this, (said my tutor) is but the
Fantasies of those that cannot perceive the great Divinity who rules all
things, and by his providence effects all this that they atribute falsely to
Fortune, a blind Goddess indeed: Nor are we able to comprehend this power;
for what we think disorderly and confused is most regular and agreeing, as we
see in some Machine or clock whose wheels move contrary ways yet all in an
exquiset harmony and order, so may the actions of this providence (which are
not contingent to it self, because it knows and foreseeth what will come to
pass, and all things come to pass that he foresees, though no necessity be
imposed on contingent things) seem to be confused and without order, but there
is nothing effected without Harmony and Concinnity, and that happens which he
judges best, and most convenient for his creatures, though their irregular
thoughts may Judge other ways, and exclame against a power (through a false
notion) that does nothing but what is good. For though some (being ignorant of
the incomprehensible wisdom) wonder at the contrarity of things which bring
about like effects, and variety of things which bring ofttimes contrary effects
according to the innate disposition or order of things, or men, as we may see
that riches may make this man vicious, poverty may do the like by another.
Prosperity and Fortune may make some careless of a good name, and conscience.
Prosperity and Fortune may make others desire to keep (and exhibit the greater)
virtue. So that, that incomprehensible Gubernator that seems so instable to us,
is most stable in respect of himself: And who seems blind unto us, sees
perspicually, and orders all things according to the good of his Creatures, as
best knowing, what is best for them; and best agreeing to their constitutions,
for were there no adversity we could have no sense of pleasure in prosperity.
Therefore rail no more against Fortune in adversity, for in so doing, you
speak against a providence that knows what best befits you, and is most
convenient for you; but learn to be content with whatsomever state or condition
shall betide you, and think that to be most convenient for you. These were the
words of my good Tutor (and the scholar of Cratippus) who loved me and enriched
me with the fruits of his labors.

At this instant Euripedes entered the room, and so diverted Lonoxia's reply,
The time is insensibly elapsed (said he) since you first entered into discourse,
I am come to do the same office for you Lonoxia, as you did for me yesterday in
the grove. I could not satisfy the natural appitite of the body in turning
over my books, neither do I believe your discourses to be more efficacious. I
have been hearing (replied Lonoxia) the opinion of an Athenian philosopher
concerning our religion, which if true, makes the better part, and the most
knowing, of the world, fools, and Idolaters. Argelois is as much against
fortune as you against Love, both blind deities and incompetable, but let us not
innovate any thing here, for they are both banished our Cell. But let us go
take some refection if you please for I doubt I have done Argelois great injury
in detaining him so long, and you as great in robbing you of his company. Both
returning his complement in very handsome terms they followed a servant that
came to give them notice that dinner attended them. After they had taken that
repast wherein temperance showed something of state, Argelois of a sudden as't
were coming out of a dream, and rising up from the place where he sat. Your
company Friends (said he) is made up of charms, and I profess it has wrought
that mirracle that could not have been effected by all the world besides, you
have made me insensible, of the trouble I have put my frinds in to find me, I
know my absence will be insupportable to some, and their care I know has put
them to much trouble: But alas! this is not all, you have detained me from
beholding those eyes that have enkindled so many flames in my heart, and made
me forget, that I live not but by their gracious aspect. Give me leave generous
fathers to pay what I owe to my friends and my self. I promise you to visit you
often, and some other time to satisfy you in what you may desire to know of me,
and shall account my self happy if I may have an occasion to employ my life in
your service. Euripides smiling at his passion, well we will detain you no longer
(said he) I see you are not able to take warning by others harms, your passion
is too strong to be converted, but I am so zealous that I must needs represent
to you the evils of this passion, and give you some arguments for my aversion,
but it shall be in the grove, where you may have the libery to leave me when
you please. Well we will hear what you have to say (replied Argelois) and I make
no question but Love will inspire his champion with words to defend him.
Argelois taking his leave of Lonoxia with abundance of obligatory speeches
followed Euripedes out of the grote, and walking to the place where he first
encountered Euripedes they sat down on a pleasant bank, under the covert of
the thickest trees, come adversary (said Argelios smiling) let us hear what you
have to say against love. Euripedes after a very little pause began thus.

I might well declame against Love if it were for no other thing but for the
evils I have acquired by it, so that I know it not altogether by oppinion, but
experience tells me it is evil, and all the effects of it evil. And on my
side are those whom we term Philosophers and searchers out of wisdom, who
knowing both the causes and the effects, have found this passion vicious and
full of absurdities, and have given it most worthily the name of detestable and
insipient, and those enviegled with it, fools and Madmen. I know this is too
corrosive in the presence of so strong a lover, but I know your generous soul
will give me leave, without adulation to speak my mind freely, and take it as
the effect of my love and affection that I desire the same good to you as to my
self, and that I cannot see another occupy that which is become odious to my
self. And though I know that it is almost impossible by natural reason, and
the exhibition of never so perspicuous truths to persuade any from his passion,
especially when it has fixed its roots in the breast, and spread it self in
the branches of desires: yet I will exhibit to you the reasons I have to hate
this passion, being an evil, and therefore worthy to be hated. But before I
show the evil often, I must confess that love placed in some generous souls
who can command this passion, not to be evil, but then, as (I think) I told
you yesterday, that it is not a passion, but some extention of the soul, which
it can continue or withdraw at pleasure. But this that I speak of is evil of
it self though it may be more or less perspicuable according to the
generosity and baseness, the purity or impurity, of such souls that it is
placed in: to show this to you, according to the weakness of my capacity, I
will begin first with the cause of this passion. I omit to speak of Love in
general, whether of natural, and simpathizeing Love, or Love proceeding from
similitude of qualities, or manners, or of moral love general, or particular
to men, or natural to children, or parents, all whose causes are indifferent,
and besides that passion on which I insist, and which cannot be without
diversity of sex as the other may. But the cause of this (as generally the
chief cause of all love) is an attractive power, which causes an expansion,
or emotion, of the soul and spirits to an object which she thinks convenient
for her, and which must be a conception of need, or want of the object. Now
privation it self is evil, and love being privation and want of an object; is
therefore evil; for the effect of it being desire, seeks the possession of
that object, and so makes the love circular, to attract that to the soul which
she seems to want; Now if we then wanted nothing we should not desire any
thing, which shows we are not complete in our selves, and desire being the
exhibition of want, and the effect of love, shows that the foundation it self
is evil, for that it is grounded on want. Then besides if you look upon the
outward cause of attraction, whether it be beauty, or any other exterior
quality of the object beloved, and the possession of it desired, (which is
always suffulted with hope) the very causes themselves being vanity or not
worthy objects for the souls egression to, or opperation upon, that desire,
and that love cannot be good, the causes themselves being not absolutely good,
but vain and transitory. But this by the way, the chief thing I proposed was to
insist on the effects of this passion, which plainly exhibit the evils of it,
and out of which as from the fountains head, all other evil passions have
sprung. This also we may consider in relation to the body, and to the soul.

First consider this in relation to the body, and that must be relatively, and
as it is joined with other passions? whose motions cause the diversity of
motions in the body. Through this the body, which is as it were the case of the
soul, is imbued, through the conjunction of the soul with the body; with pain,
with languishing, with restlesseness, and all the senss feel the effects of
this passion upon the soul, by exposing the body to danger by wounds, by
torments and often times by death, all which happen through the exuscitation of
other passions. Now the soul suffers innumerable evils for first all
passions, as grief, hatred, envy, wrath, malice, revenge, disdain and diverse
other particular passions which spring from this love, all which falling upon
the body, agitate it to diversity of motions, and without rest causes the soul
to a continual solicitous care of obtaining, the object of its desires, which
if once hope fail, then despair the foretunner of mischief, carries the soul
into wonderful precipitancies, and if in its best estate, that hope continues,
it is never without fear, jealousy, and a so^icitrous care of conserving the
object of its love; so that the soul is under a continual agitation by those
pa^sions that necessarily accompany love, and so cannot enjoy the rest it ought
to have.

But now to leave this kind of Philosphicall discourse, let us speak of it
morally, and let us consider the evil effects it has produced in the world:
and then we will define it thus. Love is a most fatal plague, a most venomous
poison, a most ardent and foolish desire, and the source and fountain of all
evil. Men when once they are entered into this passion, quite lose their former
natures, for this passion contaminates their reason, tyranizeth over their
wills, makes them subject to the egregious fancies of the object they seek to
acquire, it deprives them of Jugdment, ^^ills them with all manner of passions,
which caries them into a^l mann^^ of preciptation: their minds are continually
tossed to and fro on the wheel of love, being stimulated with that Oestrum, they
are jacted, c^^^^ted, agitated, versated by this passion, and filled with
exanimation, distinction, direption, and accompanied with cares, fears,
jealousies, false, and faint comforts, disquiets, languishings, longings, rage
and what not that is evil, and all but for the acquiring of a little vain
pleasure, which vanishes as soon as it is caught. And besides all these folly,
lust, sin, doings, turbulent motions, and precipitancies wait on lovers. And
if we should go about to sum up the bad consequences and effects of this
passion, with the evils it has caused, we should find them innumerable; for
what disturbances, what commotions, what hurly burlies, what distractions, what
battalls, what slaughtars has it caused? and what rapes what sins, what
polutions, what sueds, and what murders has it committed? was it not the
cause of the destruction of ancient Troy? was it not the cause of the banishing
Kings out of Rome? Was it not the cause of the abolishing the Decemveri? has
it not been the cause of many murders? was it not the cause of the wicked and
inhumane slaughter of Absyrtus the brother of Medea? was it not the loss of
Megara when Nisus lost his fatal hair by his daughter Scylla. Alas! it would be
endless to recount these things so well known, and general hated, and yet
this dispicable unprofitable, and dangerous passion, cannot be shunned but
embraced by those who acknowledge the evils of it, but yet wilfully maintain
its interests: They cannot take example by others, nor shun the precipicies
they see others fall into before their eyes, but that they also must rush into
them. Neither can I see any good at all that this passion does produce, but on
the contrary those that are free from it enjoy all the quiets, felicity, ease
pleasures, and freedom which the other are incapable of, and which is most
miserable of all, of free men, and unconstrained, they become slaves, subjects,
and bound to obey the motions of their own passion; and will of an
inconsiderate mistress, who it may be is, as dispicable in the unblinded eye of
another, as she is lovely in his. Nor let it serve any to excuse it by saying
they are forced and cannot decusse it, for it is impossible for all men, to
mastre this passion, if they resolve to set their wills to do it, but so long
as they account it good and best for them, they are not able to overcome it,
because they do not seek it truly, but cherish and obey every motion that
comes from it. But if they were once convinced of the evil of this passion
and were resolved to forsake it, I make no question of the possibility of their
effecting it. There may be diverse ways proposed for the decussion or
prevention of this evil, the chief of which as I suppose, is a constant
employment of the mind, either in study, or arms, whereby it may have no time
to fall into that which (as they say) is accquired by a supine and idle life,
fit to entertain such a guest, and justly sent as a plague from the Gods to
such a soul. Other ways may be taken, as they lie convenient to the person;
but chiefly the diverting of the mind from thoughts which feed the fancy, and
inflame the soul, and a separation from the object, with an intention of the
mind on some other thing, is the way to acquire a freedom from that slavery. I
have given you freely my oppinion of this passion I have so well experienced,
though indeed I enveigh not against it for the detrement I have received by it;
but for that it seems to me evil in it self, and worthy of greater
condemnation. I know (generous Argelios) that your generosity will pardon this
freedom of speech, against that in which you are so interested. Argelios
seeing he had concluded, returned him an answer thus.

I will not spoke for this passion because I am immerged in it, thereby to
justify my self or oppose your gravity, but because I think it justifiable,
therefore I will give you my poor conceptions of it. There is scarcely any
thing here on the earth that is so pure, but that in it there may be found a
commixion of dross, nothing so good, but in it there is retained some bad, and
nothing so convenient, but it may have its discommodities. We must not be
therefore all spiders to extract the poison and leave the virtue, by that means
we shall make every thing odious and abhorrible. But we must as well denote the
good as the evil, the benefit as the discomodity of this passion, and then you
will see the balance prepond on my side. The last night I gave you some
touches, as I was able, on the enormities of this passion, which was the only
thing that was evil in it. But that I may answer so mething to what you have
spoken against it (since you are pleased to let my weakness exhibit it self) I
will briefly touch upon what you have said in order, and (as far as my memory
will accommodate me) show that you have only considered the evils and
exhorbitancies of this passion, against which all those wise men (you mention)
of all ages have declamed, but the good it has (and is able to) effect, you
have omitted; it is against the irregularities that they have declared and not
against the passion it self, which is neither good nor evil of it self, yet
if it be as you say, it effects all evils generally, and is therefore to be
condemned. But I will show that it is as capable of effecting good as evil,
and if I grant that evil is most commit monly effected by, yet that is the
fault of men, not of the thing. But to answer what you have said, I will
presuppose that your goodness will not be offended at what I shall deliver,
and that you will think it, if I err, to be the weakness of my judgment and
not the desire of my will; and since truth is to be found out by opposition and
discussion I hope it will be no peccation to oppose my conceptions to yours.
First I must deny what you say, that this passion is evil of it self, which
is the chief and main point.

For if we conclude so, then we must grant that all the passions of the soul
are evil of themselves, for they were all implanted in man at the same time,
and they are simply of one nature, though different in effect; which thing
cannot be consentanious with the purity, and justice of the Gods, who created
every thing good, for what is evil we acquire it of our selves or have it
infused by evil genij, so that passions naturally are not evil but are made
so by the use, (or rather the abuse) of them. Now if you grant as you cannot
deny that the Gods created man good and pure, what you have said to prove the
evilenesse of this passion is to no effect. For though this passion be
conjoined with desire; which I grant is a token of need or want, yet that want
is not evil of it self; for the Gods so created man, and made him not alone,
and of himself able to subsist; but indigent of some things. For if man wanted
nothing he were God, for not to want is to be a creator, therefore that
privation you speak of is not evil, for to desire (which you call the badge
of the wan^) is as natural as to eat and drink and if to want be evil, then
man is wholly evil, for he is made up of indigencies and desires.

In the next place you say that the objects of our love, and desire, are not
absolutely good, so that the causes or foundations being evil or rotten, the
effects or building cannot be good or found. I say as all outward objects (or
any thing besides the Love and beutitude of the Gods themselves) are not
absolutely good, so are they not absolutely evil, but rely on our use or
abuse of them. For beauty is not evil of it self, nor any outward
accomplishment, neither is it evil for us to desire it, but the excess or
exorbitancy of desire may make it evil, for if we do desire that which we
cannot have without detriment to another, or wrong to our selves, or too much
exceed in our desires, then it is evil. But when we bound them regularly they
are not evil but may be used, but further, desire of it self is good, for the
only scope of it tends to the seeking of good (as aversion the eschewing of
evil) but now if our desires are illuded by our judgments, or are guided by
our sense, and not truly placed by our understandings and will, then they are
exorbitant and become evil, and we oftentimes desire evils, not as evils, but
(being illuded in our judgments) as good, for so they are represented to our
understandings and embraced by the will. But now to the effects both upon body
and soul I believe that I may parallel as much good that they receive by this
passion to your evil. For as Love and hatred are the Springs from whence all
passions slow, and receive a mixture of, so these evils which you recount stow
not soly from them, but also those passions or emotions of the soul which we
call good, such then is joy, estimation, generosity, humility, magnanimity,
hope, courage, boldness, pity, compassion, good will, gratitude,
lightheartednesse and the like, all which serve as much to the comfort of soul
and body, and those you mention to the discomfort. But now to follow you into
your morality where you consider the evil effects proceeding from the
exorbitancy, so I will only balance and exhibit the good that follows the
regularity. And first I will give it a contrary definition thus, regular Love
is a plant sprung from the Gods, which sharpens virtue, quickens fortitude,
produces boldness, makes smooth the rough, makes accute the understanding,
and opens a passage for all virtues. Love in its regularity causes men indeed
to forsake their former rough hewn natures, and to become humane, it is as
pollishment to (or as a foil to set off the luster of) stones: to such it makes
them become plyant, gentle, meek, humble, indues such as enter its school with
loquacity, elegant speech, quickens their obtuse understandings, makes the
ignorant to become wonderful learned by infusion, fills the mouth of the
rustic with complements, causes rare and exquisit inventions, helps to
wisdom, makes the soldier magnanimous, the coward valiant, the timorous
fearlesse, furthereth great archivements, it also excites bounty, liberality,
patience and fortitude: and what indeed cannot the force, virtue, and power of
love do? for it often times so transports nature that it makes her capable of
effecting things that seem impossible, and puts such vigor that it will
adventure on any difficulties. It despises all dangers, nay seeks to acquire
them out of a hight of generosity to free the object beloved. It overcomes
death not with a foolish precipitancie, but out of a settled resolution, and
joy, for the object it delights in. And though in the way to the end, there
be many vexations and troubles yet the enjoyment is thereby made more sweet,
and strengthened the more by it, and recompenses all troubles with it is
deliciousness. Now to what you allege concerning the effects of it in the
world, how wicked and abominable they have been I will grant you that it has
effected more evil than good, but this arises from the evil and poysenous
nature of men, and must not be laid upon the passion, and though I grant what
you infer concerning its exorbitancy, you err much to think this passion
effects nothing good, and though I cannot cite so many and notorious examples
as you may for the other, yet I know there are those worthy of notation and
reco^dation.

And again as it has been the occasion of much strife, so it has been the
cause of much concord, amity, peace and quietude. And is it not the greatest
ligament in the world to concord, when it joins either sex in the bands of
Hymen? unites Kings, states, Lords, and private men who are enemies and
opposers of each other, and causes them to become friends and in amity? Is it
not the chief effectriss of life, when it attains the object of its desire? We
should never be regular in our lusts if we were not in the bonds of Love, for
that hinders the fancy from flying to diversity, and causes an immoration on an
object which it counts worthy of its emotions; so that it is the conserver, and
not the destroyer of government and good order.

But to conclude I say the only thing to reconcile us is to put that just
difference between the passion simply, from whence all the good proceeds and
the exorbitancy of it, whence all the evil proceeds. For in a pure soul it is
like water in a Crystal glass, but in a polluted contaminated soul it is like
clear water put into a polluted vessel, whereby it becomes naught and good for
nothing. And though I have said it is a thing impossible to love without desire
of attaining, and enjoying, yet in some it is made not the proposed end, and
does not altogether partake of that brutality of lust but is of a purer nature,
not desireing the use of the object, but to become one with it, to be
incorporated with it, and not to take any thing from it, but to immerge it self
in it, and very like the true love of friendship, wherein is exercised all
virtue, and where love is of a more celestial nature, though that be not
without desire, of the good and of the welfare and continual presence of the
object; and this love to a different sex may participate much of that of
friendship, though it rarely is so perfect because we desire something to our
selves. But lastly to the close of your discourse I am not clearly of that
opinion which you infer that this passion may be shunned or discussed by
labor and industry, by all. I grant that we may become masters of it, and
regulate it to our wills, and that time may slaken it or take it clean away in
some, the mind exerciseing its functions, and in difuseing our love, on more
general objects; whereby it may be recalled from intention by expansion and I
believe that it may be long prevented by means, but that it may be decussed at
pleasure or that we may so prepare our selves as not to be agitated by it, I
cannot grant. For it is so suddenly caused that we have not time to fore-arme
our selves, for sometimes an exquisite beauty, or other object wherein we are
surpised with admiration, which causes desire, which accompanied with hope,
gains a possession suddenly, sometimes it insensibly slides into the heart,
when through long conversation with an object natures sympathizing through a
similitude of qualities, it is fixed in the breast, which innate Love growing
to maturity, and furthered by desire is hard to shake off, and almost
impossible. And as you proposed means for the shaking off, of this passion, so
I say those that are imbued with it, though they may not have the power to
decusse it, yet they may have this power (which the Gods in justice leaves
them) not so absolutely to give over their wills to another, as to be ruled by
their own passion; for we may do the same thing in error and in judgment, and
it shall be evil in the one, and not in the other, though it be not evil in
the act but in the manner, for if we commit any indifferent thing by the
guidance of our passion only, without the examination of the understanding, and
ordination of the will, it is evil: But when we do the same thing out of a
clear Judgment that it ought to be so, and will it to be so, then we do it not
out of passion but out of Judgment, so that the passion quickens the
understanding when it gives it leave to work, and leads to precipitancy through
obcaecation when it is guided by its own temerity. Therefore they must look to
all exorbitant motions whatsomever, and to the regulation of their desires, and
to the freedom of their will, though they have passion for their mistresses,
and then their virtues will be exercised, their graces will be exhibited, and
their end will be glory. Argelois thus ended and Euripides smiling; I did not
believe (said he) you had been so strong in arguments for your passion, I
thought you could better have deffended it with your sword then by reason, but
I see there is nothing wanting to your compleatment. I will no more differ with
you, and if it be possible I Will make my self believe you; however I will injure
you no longer by keeping you from a happiness you so much esteem, but let me
desire you to make my grote happy by your visits so long as you reside so near
me, for other obligations I remit my self into the arms of your generosity.
Argelois replied with his wonted grace and sweetness, and promising him to
visit him as often as his passion and opportunity would give leave, they
parted, Euripides returning to his grot, and Argelois returning from whence he
came.

The end of the forth Book.
ELIANA.
BOOK the fifth.
ARgelois having left Euripides, walked gently toward the Castle from which he
came the day before, but entering into his deep musings, of that beauty which
absolutely possessed his soul, and played the Soverain Tyrant over his heart, he
deviated by the side of the grove he had excited. His philosopy was too weak to
make him insensible, and his passion too strong to permit him to regard any
other dictates then those of Cupid. The moderation which he confessed (to
Euripides) ought to be in Lovers, was not to be found in him, he knew what
ought to be, but had no power to practice.

He had this only to excuse him, that as the beauty he served was the most
supereminent of all that part of the world, so his passion ought to be the
strongest of all other. Had you seen him whilst in the deepth of his
meditations he walked by the side of the grove, with a majesty that is seen in
the most accomplished princes, you would have thought him something more than
mortal, and that heaven strove to show its wonders in his Countinance, and
nature here is in his symmetry; It must have been a heart of stone that must have
beheld him long indifferently, for the severest virtue, and most accomplished
beauty, might have found somewhat in his looks that might have sattisfied them.
Eliana might triumph and count her self happy that she had conquered and
subjected that heart in which was nothing but virtue and generosity, and to
whom many accomplished beauties (stroke by the arrows of the Cyprian archer,
and tipped with the flames of his eyes) had reno'red their devotions, though he
had proved to all as insensible, as he was was lovly. His looks participated
much of the nature of the Caelicola's, for all that beheld them said they were
Angelical, in them appeared a majesty, so equally mix't with modesty, that it
made a kind of an ocular harmony. His eyes black and sparkling with vivacity
(unless clouded with melancholy) gave a kind of chearfullnesse to the
beholders, and sent sparks of divine lightning into the souls of those that
conversed with him. His mouth (which when it dilated it self into smils had a
peculiar grace and pleasant) was the seat of Eloquence, and the muses chiefest
grace. His complexion was more than ordinary fair for a man, yet those that saw
him could not by it judge him effeminate, if they did, the world could have
justified the contrary by his prodigious valor, his hair (of a brightish
brown, and a great ornament to his face,) was something long, and making a
kind of Meanders which cast themselves naturally into fair curles, which at
that time the wanton wind playing with, as he walked, had cast backward upon
his shoulders. It had been a thing wonderful, if so fair a case should not
contain a rich and precious Jewel, and that nature had prepared so rair a piece
to contain an ordinary soul. But so great imbellishment of nature was made for
a soul, which partak'd wholly of the essence of the gods, and rarefied from the
dross of the world carried in it much divinity.

The quickness of his wit was unexpressable, both for comprehension and
invention, and briefly, there was nothing requiset or capeable for a mortal
man to acquire but was seated in him, and which he could use without
ostentation or affectation, his soul being made of the purest substance was
imbued with the heav'nlyest accomplishments. In fine he was the mirror of
courtesy and the most accomplished darling of nature. This Hero vissibly
accompanied with all the graces and virtues that attended him, and with a pace
altogether Majestic continued his musings, till summoned by the noise of
certain voices he was exuscitated out of the depth of his thoughts. Casting up
his eyes which till then had been fixed on the grownd, he perceived he had not
taken the direct way to the Castle, but the oblique path which he had followed
had brought him to the further side of the park adjoining to the Castle, at
which place was a posterne, which over an arched bridge of stone gave an
introition into the Vivarium. Hearing the noyce to approach toward the
entrance of the park he abscur'd himself behind the sallows that grew on the
side of a little hill that circundated the park. Casting his eyes toward the
posterne he saw that 't was the incomparable ELIANA who attended, with her
maids and her old conservator the good Tribulus had left the Castle to refresh
themselves with the air of the pleasant evening.

The bright lamp of the day then declining, had painted the sky with blushing
roses, and with a serenity envited them to that ambulation. Argelois was
presently stricken with a chilling tremor through every part, and with a fear
usual to Lovers, had no power to stir or move any part of his body at that
unexpected sight. But his eyes fixed intentively on that amazing beauty they
avidously devoured her perfections, being almost starved by that small absence.

I lack the pen of Thalia, to give you here a description of that matchless
Eliana. Supply my defects with your thoughts, and imagine her more Majestic
then Saturnia the Queen of Heaven, more fair than the Paphian Queen, more
learned than Minerva, more chaste than the Delian Goddess and of better
utterance than the Graces and the Muses, and you will not surpass the hight of
her perfections. I Will endeavor to give you some small libament of them, though
they will exceed whatsoever I am able to utter. Not to trouble you with the
clothing and garnishing of her body, (which gave rather aluster to her clothes
and ornaments) they were befitting the season of the spring, and answerable to
the quality of a Princess. Her pace and port was full of Majesty, and her very
shadow seemed to have something worthy of Courting. Had you seen her going, you
might have observed the Graces measuring forth her steps, and the germinating
grass aspiering to kiss her feet, and as if it had taken life by that gentle
compression, to raise its tender head with more vigor. Her stature was taller
than ordinary women, her body slender an of an even make, and every part in so
just a symmetry and perfect harmony, that nature seemed to excel her self, and
to exhibit this piece of hers only to gain her admiration and devotion. Her
hair which was bound up under a caul made of silk and set with precious
stons, showed its brigtnesse through the Cutts of the net-worke, and her locks
naturally curling, hung in so comely (yet careless) order, as if the Graces had
bestowed that day in composing their mode. Her countenance, which at the same
time carried, the Majesty of Juno, the fairness of Venus and the modesty of
Diana, could not but strik with wonder and astonishment, whatsoever eyes dared
to offer so great prosanation as to behold so divine an object. All that was of
raire and admirable esteem in the most famous beauties of the world, were at
once to be found in the face of Eliana, So that there was no part thereof but
showed perfections enough to ravish extraordinary Souls. But her eyes, which
had enkendled thousands of flames, and where the Paphian Lad kept an arcenal of
arrows, were so commanding, that they inspired unusual chastity into the souls
of her adorers, and gave virtue to those shafts which he shot thence
unwillingly, to cause flames of wonder and adoration. One glance of those
luminaries killed all exorbitant desires and unchaste thoughts, and made her
beholders think it the greatest sacriledg to have any praved thoughts of such
divinity. In them shone so great severity, but yet mixed with so pleasing a
grace, that it caused desire and fear at the same instant, and confounded them
that were taken with their loveliness, with fear and trembling at their
Majesty. There is no simily whereby we may represent her complexion, or any
thing in the world comparable to it. The skies has some little semblance, when
the glorious lamp of light, gives us warning of his appearance; by the crimson
blushes of the ^erulous sky, almost such a rosy dye, carried Eliana on her
snowy cheeks, where the blush and the snow were so equally mix't, that it gave
a complexion altogether celestial and adoreable, which made hearts freze and
fry in one moment. It is too common to compare her lips to coral, or call
them crimson cherries, let it suffice to tell you they were the virmillion
portalls, within which were locked a treasure of pearls, and through which
proceaded the fragrancies of the happy Arabia, and by which the graces formed
words ravishingly sweet and charming; happy in their own kisses, and too divine
for any others compression. All the rest of her face was a like ravishing, and
you would never with draw your eyes, but for the charms of her neck and
breasts; the one proud of its portage exalted it self, and was compassed about
with pearls, which seemed foyles, and diamonds which were umbrella's to the
surpassing whiteness of her skin; the other, half covered with a carbaseous
gorget, swelled yet like two small mountains of new fallen snow, in the
beholding of which, a man must have lost all his senses, if he had not found
fires injected invisibly, from those niveous tumors, and not lost himself
absolutely, in deeper contemplations. All this is but the shadow of that soul
locked up in this incomparable structure, and which had carried her through her
misseries with such wonderful wisdom and deportment. Her wit was correspondent
to so noble a birth, and the greatness of her soul was seen by all that
conversed with her, her speeches were delivered with such aptitude, and
vivacity, and with so much wit and readiness, that they carried as many charms
as her beauty and sub^ued as many hearts as her face. Her discourses were
sweetness it self, and her voice angelical, that souls even dead in misseries
could not but en^iven at the tone. The virtues always in habited in her and the
graces in her breast, face and tongue. In a word she was the wonder of the
world, the mi^ror of beauty, the chosest piece Nature ever brought to light,
the beloved of the Gods, and on whom they had bestowed more gifts than ever
they gave Pandora, and whose peer was not to be found in the universe, to whom
by right all hearts ought to bow, and acknowledge themselves her vassells
eternally. This was the object on whom Argelois spent so many thoughts, and who
had clearly deprived him of every thing but a will to serve her. He stod along
time insensible, and as if he had been nailed to one of the fallows did nothing
but follow her with his eyes, till at last a row of thick growing Cypresses
enviously deprived him of his further pleasure.

When that she was vanished from the eyes of his body, he yet held her fixed
before those of his mind, but at last coming to himself, he left his station
and crossing a little wood, that he might not be noted to come from the
Castle, he met her at the end of the walk. Eliana was not sorry to see him,
for the graces wherewith she was endued, sympathizing with his virtues knew
what it was to want so good company, so little time, and she must have have
been altogether blind if she had not seen his noble endowments to have
surpassed the greatest births of that age, and insensible, if through
complacensy she had not affected his company. Argelois after congy done to his
visible Goddess, had spoke, but that she thus prevented him. Sir (said she) we
were fearful that you had abandoned us, or that your melancholy had carried
you unto some precepice, but I see now that it was the will of the Gods, by
this small absence to give us a taste of our misseries if we should loose you,
and to make us the better to resent your company, whilst they give us that
happiness of conserving you here. The Prince is gone himself to seek you, but
whilst he searches the words, favorable fortune makes me find you. Maddam
(replied Argelois) you might well think that melancholy had carried me into the
most inconsiderate precipice that could be, if I had forgon wilingly so great a
happiness as I receive by your sight. The Gods cannot give me a greater heaven
than what I find in your presence. You may be sure that those moments I have
been detained from you, seemed years in my fight, and that I had not been so
song absent but for some extraordinary accident. I am very sorry (went he on)
that the Prince by my absence should be engaig'd to this investigation, I would
(if it were lawful) accuse him of inconsiderateness for leaving a divinity to
seek such an object as my self. Your virtues (replied Eliana) are to be prized
more than so; all the content we are able to give you, is below their deserts.
All the duty we are able to perform (returned Argelois) to that goodness
wherewith you are endued, is far below what it ought to be, and I esteem those
unworty to Live that acknowledge not, that the Gods gave us lives but to protect
the perfect Images of themselves. Trebulus interrupting their discourse showed
them the Prince Dardanus who having returned to the Castle and not finding
Eliana there was come to meet them. Fonteius Argelois's squire first seeing his
master, not staying for the Prince (with whom he had been to find him) ran
before and falling on his knees embraced his masters, as if he had been absent
many years, expressing the ardency of his affection, by the manner of his
action. By that time he was got free from the embraces of his squire, he met
with those of his friend, the prince, who clasping him about the middle, and
pressing him on the cheek so, that it could not but give great content to those
that beheld them to see the effects of that noble love of Friendship. They
embraced each other as if their absence had been for years and not days, and
were along time e're they could express their joy by word. I may safe say that
they were the mirro^ of friendship, and that they were another Pylades and
Oristes, or as fast friends as Th^seus and Pirithous. After their embraces had
given way for speech, and that Dar^anus bad expressed his civilities to Eliana,
Argelois excused his absence, and craved pardon for the trouble he had put the
prince to, in very handsome terms, but Dardanus forbidding those terms of
subjection, and humility, which Argelois allways accosted him with, desired him
to tell him how he had hid himself being so near the castle, since he had
searched all the woods about, and places capable for obscuration. Yesterday
(said Argelois) stealing from you in the morning to give way to my musings I
went some few surlon^s from the castle and entering that grove which adjoins to
the spacious wood toward the west, being taken with that place, which before I
had not minded, I met with a place which all the word could not have found out.
He then relateing to them his adventure, gave them the knowledge of his stay,
but lest he should prejudice Euripides he would not discover who or what they
were. After the knowledge of this, and other ordinary discourses they returned
all together to the Castle.

The next day Eliana and Dardanus expressing their desire to see that grot
which Argelois had discovered, he led them to the place, where they had a very
good reception by those two generous old men. Dardanus desiering to know their
fortunes, expressed as much several times, but Euripedes knowing that it was
Dardanus, and believing that Argelois would not discover him, he put it off, by
telling him that they were men of another country, and of a mean quality, only
wearied in the wars, and troubles of the world, having a parity of fortunes,
and of years, they at last after much travel found that place of solitude,
which they had made fit for their habitation, and in which they resolved to
spend the rest of their days. Euripedes noteing the extraordinary beauty of
Eliana, taking Argelois aside told him thar he could not now blame him seeing
that the object of his passion was so glorious, and that as great a St^ic as he
was he could not behold her without admiration, Argelois smiling a little at
his approbation, would have figh'd out a few words but that Eliana drawing near
to the place with Dardanus broke of his determination, and made him turn about
to receive them. Your Grot is so pleasing (said Eliana) that were I in a
condition I should prefer it before the stateliest palace of either Europe or
Asia. It was never happy till now, Madam (replied the venerable Euripides) and
I doubt not but it shall receive that luster from the graces that attend you,
that it shall for ever afte^ bear the virtue of this visit. Other speeches past
between them, wherein Euripedes acquitted himself so well, that they had a good
opinion of his virtue, and importuned him to have gone and visited their castle,
but they could not draw him beyond the limmits of his grove, though he partly
ingaig'd himself some other time to see them. Dardanus at his parting would
needs force Euripedes and Lonoxia to accept of two large diamonds from his
hands, though they often denied them, and told him their solitude was
incomperable with riches, and that since they had left the world, they had
disavov'd those things: But he not being to be denied, they received them,
telling him they would preserve them, as monuments of his bounty. After they
had left these two generous fathers, Dardanus, Argelois, and Tribulus entering
into discourse walked a little before Eliana, who with her maids purposely
lingered behind till they came near to the side of the great wood which was
within sight of the castle, where seeing a very pleasant place she sat down
with her maids, to rest her self. Dardanus looking back and seeing the
princess out of sight would have returned, but meeting one of her maids that
desired them to s^ay a little in that place for her, telling them that she
desired to rep^se her (...) a little in that pleasant place, and that in the
mean time they should ^^nd one of their attendance for her palsray, for that
she had a desire to visit all those pleasant places about the castle, which
yet she had not seen. They observing her commands dispatched one presently to
the Castle, and sat down themselves not far from the place where the princess
was. Dardanus and Tribulus being entr'd into a discourse Argelois leaning his
head on his hand was also entered into the deep consideration of his fortunes,
when on a sudden they heard a great screach among the maids of Eliana, which
made them leave the place like lightning, especially Argelois whom passion made
swifter than the wind. They had no need to enquire the cause of that
aff^ightment, for they saw it was two Bears, who smelling them in the wood,
had broke in amongst them. One of them following the seeble steps of Eliana had
caught hold on her garment! just as Argelois came, his soul suffered
wonderful torments through the fear that surpised him to see in what danger
she was, and his face growing extremely pale would have showed his interest, if
it had been a time wherein any could have noted it. Yet in his heart he was
glad that fortune had made use of that occasion wherein he might engage his
life for her safeguard, The danger she was in was so emminent that he had no
time to draw his sword, but not regarding his life, with his open arms he
slung himself between the open mouth of the Bear, and Eliana, who at the same
instant fell being out of breath, and affrighted. The bear being very strong
and mass took hold on Argelois, where he had like to have suffered much,
having no weapon to anoy him, but wrestling with that rabid creature he
overthrew him to the earth, and though the Bear all lacerated his shoulder yet
he kept him down with matchless strength, till Dardanus came, who seeing the
danger of his friend soon piere'd the beast in many places with his sword, and
freed his Argelois out of those Philosous embraces. Dardanus turning about saw
the other Bear had almost seized on Celia, which made him have to her succor,
who with the help of her father Tribulus, who came to help his daughter, at
last they jugulated. In the mean time Argelois getting up turned about to
Eliana, who through the fear she had taken, lay all that time in a sown,
approaching her he kneeled down by her, and vewing her face he beheld nothing
but the matchless lillies displaying themselves there, not loosing so fair an
opportunity he ravished some kisses from her hand, which transported him beyond
the measure of conceit. At last the natural roses of her cheeks, returning by
degrees imbued that witness which tryumph'd with a punicean color, and
coming to her self she beheld her preserver on his knees, having her hand
insolded in one of his. Argelois was conscious to himself that he was too bold,
which thought stroke him into such a tremor, as if he had committed some
grievous crime, which was taken notice of by the princess, and caused some
kind of alteration in her face, which he knew not the meaning of.

They were both mute for some time, but at last Eliana suppressing her
thoughts, gave him many thanks for what he had done for her, and minding his
wound which the Bear had given him, desired him to go dress it, lest it might
prejudice him. He returned her thanks for the care she expressed toward him,
and told her he had done nothing but what humanity bound him to, and that it
did not merit the least acknowledgement from one so fair and divine. Dardanus
and Tribulus with all the affrighted troo^ coming in broke off their further
communication, and advancing toward the castle they beheld some coming with
their horses, which was welcome at that time to the weary and affrighted Eliana.

Those messengers to gether with their horses brought them word of the arrival
of the princess Panthea since their departure, this news caused joy enough in
Eliana to shake off the fear which she had been put to, but whosoever never had
seen Argelois, might have beheld the agitations of his soul, by the changes in
his face. Panthea is come to see us (said Dardanus to Argelois smileing) though
we have been so ingrate as to leave her. This nipt Argelois, but the trouble he
was in s^ffe^ed him not to reply. Taking their horses they hasted to the
Castle where they were received by the fair Panthea, who lay long ensolded in
the arms of Eliana, who dearly loved her, and their faces meeting showed the
lilies, and the roses kissing, for Panthea was yet very pale, since her last
sickness. After these first transports she received she welcomes of her
brother, but Argelois approaching her, she had like to have discovered, the
trouble of her soul by that sudden blush that arose in her face, but its
meeting with so much palenesse, and contrary thoughts a^ising it dyed
presently, and those agitations oppressing her vitalls, she had fell to the
ground, but that Argelois and her brother caught her as she s^^l. They
presently laid her on the bed, and Eliana attributing it to her jo^ney after
being so lately ill, gave her those things that were cordial and caused them
to avoid the room that she might rest her self. Argelots and Dardanus reti^ing
together, both troubled with diverse agitations, looked on one another with eyes
that injected each others thoughts without speaking. Ah! miserable (cried
Argelois at last) ah! cruel fortune that have made me unworthy those favors,
that the favors of the Gods, and the goodness of men would sling upon me. How
happy should I account my self if my life were this moment to be sacrificed for
that beauty which accounts me ingrate.

They spent an hour in this sadness together, interjecting sometimes such sad
ejaculations, when at last there came one to Dardanus to tell him his sister
had recovered that fit, but for that she was weary by reason of her jorney she
had betaken her self to a repose, and had sent him some letters from the King
and Queen to peruse in the mean time. Dardamus withdrawing read the letters to
himself, but for that he used not to keep the least thought from his dear
Argelois, he gave them him to read, who sound there a new and a great addition
of trouble, insomuch that letting them fall out of his hand, he fell backward
on a bed by which he stood. Dardanus not imagining the true case of this sudden
alteration imputed it to the trouble that formerly agitated him, and so applied
his speeches to comfort him. After he had got him to himself, And is it
preordained (cried he out) that I must of necessity either loose so dear a
sister, or so good a friend, oh heavens let me! ah let me be substituted to dye
for either of them! But if I must make so cruel a choice, ah! Tyrannical
heavens! rather let me preserve that love of friendship, than that natural,
rather take that sister among your selves, and in ^ue her with the nature of
your deitys, than deprive the earth of the perfect image of your selves, and me
of so dear a friend, Ah! cease to blaspheme! said ( Argelois being exsuscitated
by these speeches) miscreant that I am! let me rather dye then hear you speak
so unnaturally of a sister, and a beauty, that deserves to be prosered before
millions such as I. They continued such like discourses a long time, but the
chiefest cause of Argelois his sudden passion at that time was the contents of
the Kings letter, which was that he charged Dardanus to acquire the good
likeing of Eliana with all the speed he could, and that he had wrote to
Tribulus to hasten his desires, and upon whose word he was preparing things in
a readiness against the day of his Hymenean, triumph. And how that he desired
it might be hastened because he intended at the same time to crown him King of
Pontus and invest him with the robe of government, that he might ease his
ancient shoulders of so great a charge. These were the thunders that invisibly
struck the soul of Arg^lois, and that gave him such cruel cruciations. That
night was spent in most sad agitations, which were the foretuners of a
wonderful melancholy, sighs pressed to be emitted, and the have of the one
impeded the passage of the other. But those, nor the pitiful complaints he
made, could give any case to his troubled soul. Dardanus visited him in the
morning before he left his chamber, and understanding that he had not rested
well that night, he feared lest his wound might have hindered his repose, but
that being looked upon, they found it almost well, and Dardanus considering
that that was not the cause of those sad characters he read in his face, he
found the true sympathy that is between friends. He spent more words in
comforting him, than ever he did in courting Eliana, though he accounted her
worthy of the Love of the greatest monarck. He found no passion for any but for
the good of his friend, whom he loved far better than himself. That morning
they renewed their visits to the two princesses, and Panthea having fortified
her self, showed but little alteration at that time. Dardanus having drawn
aside Eliana to the window, where he obeyed his fathers instructions, and let
her see that he was endued with all those qualities that were requisite for his
birth. In the mean time Panthea glad of that occasion invited Argelois to sit
down on a Holeseric couch, he could not be so uncivil as to avoid speaking
with her at that time, though he trembled to be alone with her, and could have
wished himself farther from her but for the attractions of Eliana. After he had
obay'd her, she looked upon him a pretty while, with great confusion, at last
she broke her resentment thus.

Cruel man! (said she softly) with what heart art thou able to despise one
that lies wounded at thy mercy? how can thou triumph so insultingly over
those wounds thy self has given? Ah! inhumane that have forced me to break
those chains of pudicity that should be inseparable to our sex, and especially
to those of my quality. Was not my death able to move thee? no I saw Joy seated
in thy eyes when thou thought this wretched life would have expired! would
to all the powers of heaven, I had lost these poor remains of Beauty and life
together, since they have not power enough to compel so stuborne a heart to
pity. Argolois not endu^ing to hear her go on, Madam (said he) give me leave to
tell you, you wrong me, in saying I rejoiced at your sickness, or hoped for
your death, the gods know how innocent I am, and what resentments I endured for
your sake, I had deserved to be eternally accursed if I had not preferred your
life and content before my own. But how often have I told you that the cause of
my neglect of those favors you would do me? which are so far beyond the
capacity I am in; that I cannot wi^^hout sinning against your greatness, have
the least shadow of a thought of receiving them. Does your highness do justly
to call me cruel and inhumane for my respect? No Madam, could I obey you
without dishonoring you, by so abject a creature as my self, it should be seen
how unwilling I should be to loose the crown of so great happiness. I know
madam that the prince Arizobanes, who adores you to be so far before me in
desert and able to give you that crown which he hopes once to possess, that I
should deserve the worst of torments, if I should dep^ive him of his hopes, and
you of a happiness I am no ways able to give you, by obaying you in yielding
to amatch so inequall. These are the ordinary caprichioes of a goddesle that
torments chiesly the estates of princes (replied the fair Pannthea) bur your
excuses cannot hinder you justly from my accusations, you are to cruel to take
any pity on a wretch that is forced by a power uncontrollable to beg it of
you. No I look upon your excuses as feigned, and as invented to deprive me of
all hopes of obtaining him that I most Love whilst I live. Ah Gods would you
had made me less noble, or this cruel inhumane more pitiful. Madam (said
Argelois extremely troubled at her words) I truly honor you, and I should
account it the greatest happiness the Gods could send me, if they gave me but
an occasion wherein I might show you how little I esteem this Life when it
might be employed in your service. Dardanus casting his eye aside saw by his
friends looks he desired to be eased of that pain he was in, which made him
return with Eliana to the couch, and placing themselves by them passed away
the morning in diverse discourses.

That strange fire of Love burnt so inlie the heart of Argelois, that at last
its hidden flames began to appear in the pale ashes of his face, and to
discover to others the torments he suffered so secreetly. He never beheld that
bright Sun, but that his heart breathed forth scorching sighs enkindled by its
beams, and endured perpetually a torment unexpressable, when he fancied her
conjoined to his friend Dardanus. He in the mean time not imagining the true
grief of his friend; hid nothing of his procedings from him, but told him the
progress of his suit, and how reserved he found Eliana.

But one day above the rest finding forth his Argelois; I am come (said he) to
tell you that Tribulus has promised within a short time to accomplishmy
^esires, he says that the princess looks upon me worthy of the blessing of
her self, but she is extremely avers to marriage. However it will not belong
my dear Argelois that we shall stay in this melancholy castle, we will remove
to the Court that we may have devertizements for you: For I intend our Hymenean
triumph shall be glorious, which cannot be except you discuss this sadness.
This was but small comfort to Argelois, who found cruciations in every word,
yet endured the torments because they came from his friend. I know none (said
he sighing) that is worthy of the fair and virtues Eliana, but your self, and
I admire that she can be insensible of all those charms which accompany you,
and which are enough to allure (the whole world to your obedience. Modesty must
be found in maidens, and it is out of a pudicity, and desire of being courted,
that makes her seem so negligent of that which she most desires. you are a
good Interpreter of her thoughts (replied Dardanus smiling) but shall I believe
the like by you, and take your words to be contrary to your desires, if so, my
sister were happy after all her torments. My Lord said Argelois, I cannot hear
those terms, said Dardanus, it is contrary to the law of our contracted
friendship, you put me in mind of them when you speak of the princess
Panthea, (replied Argelois) or else the transports of that Love you honor me
with, would make you utterly forget what I am, and make my self unmindfull of
my own condition. Love (replied Dardanus) is not to be limmited to laws, it
respects persons more than conditions, you cannot but be assured that her Love
is entire, and you know that her pudicity would not have let her discovered the
torments of a small flames they are unuterable and unexpressable, were you
sensible of the Cyprian torment yout self, you would at least pity another.
Argelois could not refrain from ingemminated sighs at those words, but fearing
he might discover himself by their continuation. I am not (said he) so
insensible of the princesses trouble, and of that trouble which you impute to
me the cause, but that I have wished my self a thousand times of a birth
sufficient to satisfy her desires, and it is only for her sake that I deny my
self so great a happiness, it may be others would not be of my mind but I
cannot do so great an injury to a princess and the sister of Diadanus as to
compare my baseness, to her greatness. This might and should have been
remedied at the first (if I am the cause) by my abscession, but your commands
made me stay to her detriment, you know that this removal was chiefly for that
end, that she might forget that sight that was so fatal to her, and now she is
come hither you are the only soliciter of her suit. Alas! give leave that I may
either die or depart, rather than be the tormenter of so good and fair a soul
or yield to that conjunction which would be contrary to the will of the King
and disgraceful to the princess and your self. I Will speak no more of it dear
Argelois (said Dardanus) since it is so contrary to you, yet give me leave to
admire the greatness of that soul that can deny a happiness with so much
generosity. Such like discourses had these two perfect friends when occasion
gave leave. Panthea in the mean time suffered all those torments incedent to
despareing lovers, which were the more augmented by that engagement that lay
upon her to hide her from the eyes of Eliana, and by suppressing those ordinary
allevaments of a love sick heart, least her abundance should discover her
weakness. All the comfort that she had was but to increase her ardences with
beholding that face which was the cause of her misseries, which daily grew pale
under the smoke of its own fires.

Love had made a kind of contrary mixture, in these souls, and bestowed shafts
of a contrary opperation, in their vulneration. Panthea sought all occasions of
acosting Argelois, and he all means to avoid her speeches, which he effected so
cunningly that she could never have the liberty she desired. The complaints she
made to her brother were very bitter and deplorable but the love of friendship
was too strong to be shaken by that of affection, so that she gained little
comfort from either, which when she saw she was feign to continue the martyr of
Love, and silently endure those torments, which had almost finished the life of
that fair and lovely creature, the luster of whose beauty came little behind
that of the incomparable Eliana. Argelois not only avoided! with all
diligence, the company of the princess Panthea, but even that of Dardanus
began to be disgraceful to him, which made him seek out new places of
retirement in the woods where he often made deplorable speeches amongst the
Driades, and thought to quench the fire in his heart by the waters of his eyes,
some few weeks passed over, in which time, the excess of torment, he
continually, without any intermission endured, had so dejected him that he was
hardly to be known. That fair face in which majesty and loveliness, strove for
Mastership, was become wholly the seat of palenesse. Those eyes who vivacitly
enkindled ardors in the hearts of beholders, seemed to have left all their
fires, and were become dead and without motion. He seemed to be but the shadow
of what he had been, or as if sickness had enchained him to his bed many
months. There is nothing can alter the body like the extreme passions of the
soul, and their is no passion so terrible, as that of love, and almost
impossible it is, not to discover it in the face, for by how much the more
secreetly it burns, by so much the more furiously it flames. These fires had
so long inusted the heart of this noble Hero, and so secreetly that now he
began to sink under its power, and to yield his life to despair. Panthea whose
love interested her in his looks, found there also augmentations of her
troubles, but all that palenesse, could not hide from her eyes that loveliness
which was wont to exhibit it self, she at least fancied she saw it through the
clouds, the eyes of love being more piercing than any others or else she fed
her fires with those ashes that she saw strewn on the face of Argelois. She
daily solicited her brother to his comfort, who accused her for being the cause
of his miseries. It Is nothing but because of your passion (said Dardanus) he is
so sensible of your trouble (but being too generous, he thinks he cannot
satisfy you without debaseing you below that quality, which you were born to)
that he does penance for the injury of his looks; do you leave to love him,
and he will leave these sadnesses. Ah! cruel fair (cried Panthea) cannot you
be only insensibly but envious too? is your disdain so of great, that you will
force me not to love by such severe means? Tell him ah! tell him, that he
shall have the comfort to see me die, to rid him of that trouble to which his
disdain praecipitates him. Let him no more trouble himself Panthea will triumph
over all her misfortunes, and with a second thrill free that heart love has
already peirced. Dardanus much troubled at his sisters transport, It is his
pity (said he) that afflicts him, his heart is not capeable of that evil you
accuse him of. Torment not your self except you desire to drive him to a
further despair. Panthea at leisure thought on these words, and when she was
by her self; can I believe this! (said she) ah! false brother to inject it!
alas! can Argelois be so pitiful and cruel in one instant? Can contraries mix
in one body? Ah! how happy should I be if this were true! if that insensible
one should leave to be impassible, and should alitle resent my miseries and
pity my afflictions, though he never intends to fulfill my desires. Ah!
strange generosity that can withhold one from enjoying a happiness desired,
ah! vain thought, foolish Panthea can thou believe it? no, no, it is too fond
and foolish a vanity to think it.

These thoughts agitated this fair soul some time, and made her in a silent
kind of stupor walk a great while about her chamber. At last as it were
awakeing out of a dream wherein some strange thing had betided, she stopped with
a sudden scriech ah! straing injection cried she out, and then stopped. Some
moments after. Ah! blind eyes (cried she) ah! foolish and insulse Panthea,
where has been thy senses? Where has been thy wits? how was it possible,
that thou could be so foolishly blind all this time? do thou doubt it? no
no call to thy remembrance all his actions passed, and you will see it as clear
as the day. Doubt no longer, it is Eliana that he sighs for, it is she that has
brought him to this pass. Thy beauty is not so despicable but he would have
accounted himself happy to enjoy what thou proferest, without those vain
considerations, were not his heart already conjoined to Eliana. Ah! cruel
Eliana to rob me of a heart that thou have no passion for, and which thou art
not like to enjoy. What say I? alas! can she behold that fair one, that wonder
of nature? that mirror of men? and not behold him with passion, doubt it not,
though she has that power to conceile it. Well, heaven has so ordained it,
thou must dye, and Eliana must enjoy that, thou art not accounted worthy of.

These thoughts extremly added to her torments, and cast her into utter
despair, for whilst she thought him free, she had some hopes to have mollified
his obdurate heart, but these thoughts lost all her hopes. She confirmed her
self in her opinion by denoteing the actions of Argelois. Jelousy opened her
eyes and made her see what she had taken no notise of before, she observed his
looks, his carriage, and his speeches before Eliana, she took notise of his
sighs, and by all gestures, words, and signs, she gathered something to
confirm her opinion, and admired with her self that she had been so blind so
long. The next time she was alone with Dardanus as she was walking, she
suddenly stopped, and speaking to him, Brother (said she) you accused me for
causing the trouble of Argelois, but I tell you, his life lies in your power,
and none besides your self can recover him. Dardanus wondering at his sisters
speeches replied. If it lies in my power this shall be the last moment of his
trouble, were it with the parting of my Life. It may be (said Panthea) it may
be something dearer than your life. Pray (said Dardanus) hold me no longer from
the knowledge of that thing that may give ease to the better part of my life.
Brother (replied that afflicted one) I have hitherto hid nothing from you, I
have communicated to you all the thoughts of my heart, as you may well judge in
that I have not hid my insulsities, nor been ashamed to confess to you my
Love, yet I am afraid to tell you this, left you will not be so generous as
you think you can be. Fear not (said Dardanus) but my love to Argelois will
carry me to impossibilities, why then (said Panthea) Argelois is in Love with
Eliana. It Is for her he daily sighs, it is she that has made him loose those
formosities that were so exceeding in him, it is she alone that has consumed
him, and that has brought him to the sadness that you see. Dardanus was
startled at these words, and standing still he exlubited by his looks he made
some difficulty to believe them. You hardly can credit what I say (went on
Panthea) truly I would not believe my own thoughts till I had satisfied my self
by observing what I never denoted before, it is too true, and by that time you
have considered his looks, and marked his actions, you will say as I do. It Is
very strange what you tell me (said Dardanus) but I must satisfy my self with
those observations you speak of, before I can force my self to believe it.
Dardanus in few days satisfied himself, and though none in the world could be
mo^e cautious in that secret of Love than he, yet Dardanus gathered enough by
the sighs that escaped him unawars, and that forced their way through the
impetuosity of his passion, and by those pity-praying looks that he cast at
Eliana. But for that he hoped to draw it from his own mouth, the next time he
was alone with Argelois he begun thus. Dear Argelois I must accuse thee for
breaking those linkes of amity by which we are conjoined, and by which of two
we are become one: This is contrary to the nature of union for you to smother
those thoughts in your own breast, which by the right of friendship I may
claim interest in. None can be so blind as not to see the trouble of your
soul by the delineated sadness in your face, and none can be so ignorant as to
think that sadness to proceed from no cause. Hide not from me my dear friend
that which is able to give you such cruciations, let it be what it will be the
Love I bear you will carry me to do those things that you may account
impossibilities, my life is the least thing that I esteem, so it may free you
from this sadness. Leave these impieties against your self (said Argelois) I
am too much honored by the least notice you are pleased to take of me. Indeed
the excess of Love you have shown me, has made me forget my own condition,
and sure you forget what I am when you speak so lavishly. Cease dear Argelois
(said Dardanus) I have often told thee that it is thy virtue that has conjoined
me to thee, and thou art not to dispute that now, since thou have granted me
that entire and indissoluable Love which is compacted between us. Now it is
that you begin to rebel, and to break those reciprocal Laws of friendship
made between us, by withdrawing the knowledge of those things that causes these
sad and pityfull looks. Do not think I will be put off for I cannot live and
see you so grieved: certainly you know not my affection that you dare not trust
me. I have not the least suspicion of your love and constancy (replied
Argelois) it is far beyond what ever I have or can deserve, though my life were
to continue in your service to the end of the world. Had I any thoughts worthy
your knowledge they should not be hid from you, but this sadness that has
lately exhibited it self in my face is a kind of a strange humor which has
stolen upon me by degrees, and will suddenly vanish. Every thing must have its
period, and I am conscious to my self this is almost at an end. That is it I
fear (said Dardanus embraceing him very passionatly) thy life and it will end
together, well I must and will remedy it and you shall see that I will think
nothing to dear to give content to Argelois.

Dardanus with these words lest him, but essayed at many other times to gain
the knowledge he desired, which was as soon to be done as to gain water out of a
slint, for Argelois determined to end his life and make that known together. He
tried all ways to gain that from him which he kept so secretly, but he could
never extract it out of him, which made him give over at last to solicit him,
and to gain the knowledge of it some other way. In the mean time what ever 'ere
the thoughts of the fair Eliana were, she did not much denote those wan looks
of Argelois, but when that she beheld that they exhibited the danger o^ his
loss, as insensible as she appeared to be, she at last let him know that she
pitied him those sadnesses. As they were walking together one day Eliana
observing very narrowly those shadows of former beauty in his face was moved
with a great deal of pity toward him. He answered to most of her discourses so
broakenly and confusedly that she saw the agitations of his mind not only to
alter the form of his body, but also to disturb his intellectualls.

I wonder (said Eliana) at this great alteration in you, surely it cannot be
the effect of a small trouble that can have such dominion over your body and
mind, as to alter the one and disturb the other. Argelois startled at these
words, seeing she took notice of his agitations. Madam (said he) such is the
effect of Melancholy that it gives to them that discourse with such persons
matter enough to exercise their patience to hear their tautolig^s, and for
their goodness to pardon their insulsities. This is not (replied she) the
effects of melancholy as it is naturally a passion, without some extraordinary
cause; for it is contrary to your constitution, it is some strong passion which
you smother with so much art to your own detriment. These words raiz'd him
quite out of his stupidity, and as if he had received some quickening from that
angelical voice his cheeks indu'd a faint blush. It is impossible to let you
know the palpitations of his heart at that time but, Madam (said he trembling)
I know not what it is you call passion, but I rather think it is some growing
disease not ordinarily known, for (if I dare say so) I find in the midst of
these sadnesses a strange kind of pleasure, which yet is afflictive, and yet
desired. So that I cherish, my disease and wish for no remedy, for what appears
so grievous in the eyes of others. It Is very strange (replied Eliana) that you
should Love that which is your torment. It Is the part of a resigned soul
(answered Argelois) to be content with what the Gods shall send, if their hand
has afflicted me with this strange sickness I ought to accept of it as their
gift, knowing it proceeds from the powerful hand of an uncontrouling deity.
The Gods seem unjust (replied Eliana) to punish so severely the virteous, and
to let the most vicious go untouched. We are not (said Argelois) to prescribe a
way to heaven or to tell him who they are that ought to be punished, for we are
not able to pierce into the sins of men, which are perceivable only to the
penetrating eyes of Heaven. He that seems most holy in the eyes of men, may be
most vicious in those of Heaven. You know not (Madam!) what I have deserved;
Truly my aspiring mind in that it has given me audaciry above those of my
quallity to so glorious a converse with your self has deserved these thunders
of dejection. Virtue cannot sore to high (returned Eliana) and it is but a
vanity that possesses the great ones of the world to consider great births more
than virtue, for true honor proceads from virtue and is regulated by it,
therefore the Gods cannot do so great injustice as to punish you for making
others happy by your company, I rather think it is the meannesse of our
deserts that make the Gods to interrupt the felicities we received by your
conversation. Men cannot be more pitiful than the Gods, and I pity your
dejection with all my heart.

That is enough (said Argelois) to make me happy and to establish me in my
pristine condition, for your pity is restorative. Dardanus coming to them put
an end to their discourse, but Argelois finding the virtue of her speeches to
operat much upon his soul, and to relax the continual agitations of his
thoughts, he often engaged into the like discourse, but with a great diligence
lest he might discover the cause of his sadness and Melancholy.

Whilst he enjoyed that happiness of conversing with Eliana, her words still
proved a Nepenthe to his soul, and gave some relaxation to that sadness that
pe^petually afflicted him: But it lasted so short a time, that 'twas scarce
perceiveable, and no sooner had he left that Sun, but his heart was contracted
by the cruel frost of despair, which ushered in those killing thoughts that
were most commonly his Companions, and which very often had like to have
precipitated him to death. Dardanus seeing he strove in vain to persuade him
out of that mestitude, or to gain the knowledge of it from him, resolved to
satisfy his desire (being his intent was only for the good of his friend) by a
secret auscultation of his miseries. He often perceived that he stole out to
secret places of the woods, where he believed he played the usual part of
afflicted people, who not having to whom they may commit their secrets, blab
them to the senseless trees or dumb animals, whereby they find some ease, but
no remedy for their complaints. Dardanus watched him one day, and following him
unseen to the wood, crope near to the place where he lay, amongst the thickest
of the bows which intexed their leavy arms in one another, and sheltred him
from his sight sufficiently. It was a long time before a world of ingeminated
suspirations would give him leave to speak, but at last casting his eyes up to
heaven, having laid himself upon an oblique bank, he began to disburthen those
oppressing thoughts by most pitiful complaints. O Heaven! (said He with a
pitiful tone) will you force me to be my own executioner? Will you not yet
give leave to Atropos to conclude my destiny and free me from misery? It is an
act of your mercy to take away a life so unsupportable. I beg not to be eased
of my grief any other ways than by death, since it cannot be but by wronging
the best of friends. But what say I? Do I ask for that death as will be so
prejudicial to Dardanus since he loves me? No let me live only for his sake! O
Gods ye are just! and it is sit that I endure these torments for the crimes I
commit. Ah! dear Dardanus! Can you? ah! can you forgive me the crimes that I
daily commit against you, in loving that beauty which is ordained by heaven for
you, and which is too divine for any other mortal than your self? Yes Dardanus
that shall be the last thing I will request when I leave this Love consumed
carcass, and I doubt not but thy goodness will forgive thy Argelois a crime
which is forced upon him by the uncontrouling power of love; who though he has
made me to love Eliana, shall never cause me to injure thee by a thought of
obtaining her, were my birth answerable to her greatness. No Dardanus, dear
Dardanus, I hold that tie of friendship too dear to be broken for all the
content of the whole world. My life shall be sacrificed to maintain it, and it
shall be kept inviolable though for it I expire. After some time of silence
breaking forth with another tone. Ah damnable thoughts (cried he) what evil
Demon is this that gives these injections that tells me, Love considers no
friendship; that for the consideration of Love we may lawfully break that tie:
That Rivals in love are unsupportable though friends or brothers: That I ought
to account him my enemy that is so to my desires and content: That I ought to
afflict my self when I may take the obstacle out of the way by a noble Combat
which will be allowable in a rival. O wicked, cruel and deadly susurrations!
avoid all evil thoughts, and know that it is my self, that is rival to my self.
It is Dardanus, it is no other that is my rival; were it any besides him, he
could not have lived so long to my torment, though I had reaped nothing by his
death; Love must be satisfied, and Rivals must share the prize by their deaths.
But it is Dardanus to whom I ow more lives than one, and it is a great comfort to
me (ah my dear Dardanus*) that!it is for thy sake I endure this torment. Yea were
it far greater (which is impossible) it should not be murmured at by Argelois,
but borne with patience as the most glorious trial of my ftiendship. After
some little time of pausing and sighing. Ah! more pleasing thoughts (said he)
but yet unjust and unrighteous, and that do not thoroughly consider the nature
of friendship. You Would have me to make my love known to Dardanus; you persuade me
he will pity me; you tell me it is possible he may seek to content me, and to
leave his interest for me, nay seek to gain Eliana to me. You mind me that he
beggs to know the cause of my sadness, and that I do ill to deny it him, and
that it makes him suspect my love; you tell me it will ease my miseries, and
put an end to my trouble. Ah! pleasing thoughts, true indeed, I doubt not of
genero^^ty, and excess of friendship, all this may be. But must I be so
selfish to rob my friend, of that which is so much estemeed by my self? No it
is contrary to the nature of friendship to covet that for my self which will be
a loss to my f^iend. No, no friends lay down their lives willingly for one
another, and how easy could I sacrifice many (if I had them) for to save thine
Dardanus, but this is far greater, to endure a living and continual death, and
to deny my self of what I love with so much passion, this is the highest act of
friendship, and did thou know it (Dardanus!) thy self would say so. Yea
Dardanus I can be content to deny my self, and to see the fair Eliana thine
without repining, thou alone do deserve her, I will continue my abnegation
and persevere in it till I am utterly consummated by my silence. No Dardanus
were I sure thou would satisfy me and give me what I can wish, and what
alone will make me happy, I mean the possession of Eliana I would not discover
it to thee. No no it is far better that Argelois should dye, than that Dardanus
should be deprive'd of that happiness of enjoining Eliana. It is better for to
let thee suspect my friendship than to discover this to thy hurt, for it is thy
generosity, that I fear and thy Love lest it should make thee consider me more
than thy self. How soon should thou know it, were I sure thou would put a
period to my life with thy poniard for the wrong I do thee, and for my audacity
in loving Eliana. How willingly should I receive it from thy hand, and how
glorious should my death be! No no thou will be apt to pardon such a wretch as
I, therefore thou shall not know my passion 'till death has sealed up these
eyes nor then neither but to clear my self of the suspicion of breach of
frindship. But ah misserable wretch! (cried he out more vehemen^ly, and looking
discontentedly upon himself) what unpardonable crimes have thou committed and
do daily commit against that divine princess, in whom is seated something
more than mortal, in taking her name into thy mouth, Oh unpardonable and
deserving the worst of torments, that thou who art ignobly (and it may be
spuriously) borne, thou that know not thy self, and only raiz'd by the
excess of love in Dardanus, that thou should dare to offer to raise thy
thoughts, and so audaciously, sublimely love a Princess, the fairest and
divinest of princesses, oh horrible! thou deservest not one moment of life for
sinning against Eliana, and abuseing the goodness of Dardanus.After the
sending forth a few sighs and tears. Ah divine Eliana! (went he on) pardon me!
ah pardon me! I confess I love, but it is impossible for me to contradict a
power so unconquerable. Ah I do but conserve those flames in my heart that took
their origenall from your eyes. I preserve flam^s presumptious ones I confess,
yet are they pure and ch^st flames, and those that make me but adore you as a
deity too good to be poluted by our defiling thoughts. I confess my self
punishable in the hi^ he^^ de^re^, but yet am I unable to help my crimes. I am
forced to sin against you, but pardon me, ah divine Eliana! that shall be one
of the last requests I will make Dardanus that he gain your pardon after my
death, and that you may at last confess though I was presumptuous and
incomperably bold, yet withal that I was conscious of my duty in repressing
those flames that consumed me with so much impetuosity, and also that I knew
that none was worthy of the incomperable Eliana but the matchless Dardanus.

Dardanus who heard this generous and pitiful complaint was oppressed with
extreme agitations in his mind. Fancy and friendship struggled for the victory,
and love, and desire equally opposed each other, it was sometime before he
could overcome his resentments, but at l^st that noble and invincible mind to
whom both love and generosity were inseparable, gave the palm of victory to
his friendship, and resolved to do an act worthy of so Heroic a soul. What?
(said he to himself after long struggling) will thou have thy Argelois overcome
thee in all things? do not thou hear his immense generosity, (ah! true
friend) and will thou love less or less generously than he? But greater
considerations ought to move you than these, it is the love, and life of
Argelois. How often have you said that the beauties, nor other considerations
of the whole world could be able to rob him of one grain of the love you bear
him? and shall the love of your self now stand in competition with it? shall he
dye for you, by denying himself, and cannot you foregoe that princess, for
whom you have no passion, to save his life? dear Argelois I have committed a
crime by expostulating so long, that cannot be cleared but by gaining thee the
object of thy passion, and full fruition of thy desires. It Is done Argelois? be
content thou art mine more than all the world, and thy interests shall
disengage my own: And what hitherto I have sought for my self, I will seek to
acquire for thee. Whilst he was in these silent disputations Argelois had
renewed his complaints, ah! heavens (said he) in what perplexities am I brought
I am not able to endure the torments of life, and yet I dare not wish my ease
by the stroke of death, love forbids me to live, and love forbids me to dye.
At these words Dardanus not able to forbear longer, 'rose from in the place
where he was hid, which action causing a rusling amongst the bows so near to
Argelois put him besides his complaints, and made him forsake the earth and
cast himself upon his feet to see what it was, Dardanus rushing suddenly from
among those close woven trees, cast himself upon the neck of Argelois, No
Argelois shall not die, (said he) but shall enjoy what he so passionatly
desires: Dardanus loves him too well to see him expire when it is in his power
to help it. Argelois showed by his countenance how amazed and angry he was at
this accident, for not able to utter one word, he cast his eyes about as if he
would accuse the trees, the birds and the heavens for contributing to this
discovery, or for having some intelligence with Dardanus; I know not how many
changes in his countenance were seen in a moment, and whilst Dardanus powered
out kisses upon his cheeks, and kept his neck prisoner with his arms, he made a
shift to draw his poniard. It is lawful, (cried he, just as Dardanus left
imbraceing him,) it is better than to injure Dardanus. Dardanus looking about at
those words, saw he had lifted up his hand to give a fatal stroke; to such
resolutions had the anger of being discovered brought him. But he extremely
affrighted at that action, caught hold on it, and so diverted the blow; but the
impetuosity of the stroke being so great he could not hinder it totally from
doing some execution, so that it stroke into his left arm quite through the
flesh, the blood sprinkling in the face, and upon the clothes of his friend
Dardanus, Argelois vex't that he had mist his blow, pulled the dagger out of
his arm, and strove a long time with Dardanus to have thoroughly perpetrated
his desire. At last Dardanus seeing he could not bring him to leave his design
against himself, with any remonstrance or striving, suddenly left him and
pulling forth his own poniard, and making bare his breast, ah Argelois? (said
he lifting up his arm) Thou shall see I cannot live without thee! Argelois
flinging by his poniard, flung himself upon the arm of Dardanus, and hindered
him from emitting that soul that was truly conjoined with Argelois. Dardanus
once more casting his arms about his neck, What have I done that I should
deserve this injury at your hands (said Dardanus) you little think you have
wounded me more then your self. Argelois troubled at these words sought all
about to see where he had wounded him. No (said Dardanus) it is by sympathy,
do thou think I do not feel the wound in thy arm to cause dolor in my
heart? you utterly mistake your self if you think you could have slain your
self, and not have deprived me of my life at the same time. Let this knowledge
cause you to preserve that life on which necessarily mine depends. I am not
worthy to (live replied Argelois) nor can I without doing injury to you, and
since I have discovered unwittingly what of all things I desired to have kept
secret, judge whether I ought not to punish my self for my audacity and
false-hood. 'Twas the only excuse I have made to your sister, which I have
violated by loving another. O heavens what have I done to deserve this
extraordinary vengeance! Peace (said Dardanus) be content and think not that
the gods have ought against the perfect image of themselves, they seem to
conspire for your felicity, and to promise you what you desire by many
circumstances. I will not blame you for hiding from me thus long, the cause of
your trouble, since it was no other consideration than your generosity. But now
the gods have discovered it envy me not if I would desire to be as generous as
your self, and in resigning my own interest promise you I will effect that for
you which you shall account the highest of your felicities. Oh gods (cried
Argelois very passionatly) with how much of your divinity have you filled this
Prince! This is it I feared, and this is it for which I deserve to dye! ah
Dardanus let me not think of such an injury, shall I be the cause of so great
ruin of your felicity, and of depriving you of a princess who is not for the
capacity of mortals but your self? consider my baseness ere you go about so
great a detriment to your self? and consider you will but draw upon you the
indignation and wrath of so divine a princess. All these considerations
(replied Dardanus) are far below the love I bear Argelois) therefore let me
entreat you that you speak no more words against it, nor no ways contradict
what I am resolved to effect. I may leave Eliana without detriment to my self,
since I enjoy her in Argelois, who is more worthy of her, than Dardanus: and
since I am ignorant of that imperious passion, love. Its true I love Eliana as
she is the most perfect piece of Nature, and as I am obliged too by the
goodness and virtue of her disposition, but it is not with that peculiar
passion, as to love her beyond another if (altogether as fair and virtuous,
she is not to be found in the universe (said Argelois) that is your opinion
(said Dardanus) but I believe the gods are not so scanty in their productions,
as not to match her. It is impossible (said Argelois) and I swear by all the
powers of heaven that I will not wrong you by causing you to forgo such an
extraordinary happiness. You will do me no wrong (said Dardanus) it is but
justice, and it may be a pleasure to us both, for if that powerful and
impetuous fire which has so secretly overpowered you, should hereafter, singe
the wings of my says to Eliana, for another, what injury should I do that
fair one, for whom I never had any passion, for it is the wont of that God
seldom to let escape those who contract without tasting of his burning flames,
so that it is dangerous for me to marry Eliana having no such passion for her,
lest hereafter I may wrong her through the impetuousnesse of another fire.
There is no fear (said Argelois but her charms will hold you eternally. Your
wound (answered Dardanus) will not permit no more talk at this time, but this
I must needs engage you to before we go from this place, unless you intend to
see me expire before you, that you act nothing that may be prejudicail to your
life, and that you leave the managing of your Love to me. After very many words
Dardanus obtained it from Argelois, but it was so faintly that Dardanus not
added, if you deceive my expectations assure your self I will not servive one
moment. This was the only thing that kept Argelois in awe and impeded that
petpetraction which otherwise he had resolved against himself.

Dardanus tearing his shirt made a shift to bind up Argelois wound and leading
him by the arm they returned to the castle. As Soon as they were within the
second court, they met with the two princesses who were walking under the
shadow of a row of jessemines. Panthea had no sooner cast her eyes upon
Argelois, and seeing him so extraordinary pale with the loss of blood, and all
his garments distained with the eflux that came from his wound; but that the
palenesse of her face discovered the pangs of her heart. Her passion and pain
was increased by the restraint she was feign to impose upon her self before
Eliana, and she had been no longer able to endure those effects had she not
vented that passion which she was big of. She had espied her brothers clothes
sprinkled with the crimson dye of Argelois his blood, from which the acies of
her love drew a colorable deceit to hide what her passion enforced her to. She
ran toward them, ah Ar -- (cried she) love being too nimble for her other
thoughts had made her almost to discover what she endeavored to hide, but
presently smothering that word. Ah! dear brother (said she casting her self
upon his neck, but turning her face toward Argelois, and looking upon him with
eyes that exhibited her passion) how come you thus wounded! come let us leave
this place where nothing inhabites but ravenous and cruel beasts, or some
lethiserous and inhumane creatures. What hand was it that could be so immane as
to wound thee? ah! brother -- ah Argelois where were you at this perpetration?
let us know these assassins that we may revenge our selves on them. Dardanus
perceiving to whom she spoke, and believing the pleasure he did her to let her
vent her passion, let her go on a great while without interrupting her.
Argelois beheld her with wonderful compassion, being none of those insensible
ones, that cannot be moved neither with blood not tears, he knew too well the
insufferable pangs of love, which made him extremely sensible of that poor
princess: passion giving a kind of doleful air to these words she uttered,
and her eyes showing the languishing of her heart increased his commiseration.
Madam (said Argelois at last) the Prince is not wounded, the Gods have more
regard to his person, his clothes are only stained with blood that flowed
through a small wound which I have accidentally received. Eliana glad of
Panthea's transport made good use of it to settle in the mean time I know not
what signs of inward emotions which appeared in that beautiful face. But the
prince and Argelois had cast their eyes upon her before she had thoroughly
recollected her self, and found that excess of snow had obvolved the
Hyacinths in her cheeks, and that her eyes showed a kind of disturbance, which
they knew not how to apply: She noteing their looks soon gave life to those
blushing flowers which use to expand themselves upon sheets of snow, and
resetling her self, Panthea (said she) intends to ingrosse all to her self,
and give me no interest in your wounds. They are not many (said Dardanus) it is
only Argelois that infortunately hurt his arm, which will be no hindrance at
all to your defense if need were. You think us very selfish then (replied
Eliana) and that we desire your welfare but for our own ends, you are much
mistaken, our natures are not immane we cannot choose but pity our enemies in
distress, much more our friends. I had no such uncharitable thoughts (replied
Dardanus.) Argelois was ready to sink under the cruciations that he felt
within him through the encounter of thoughts that suffered an Antiperistasis,
which the Princesses attri*buting to his wound desired Dardanus to give him
ease, by speedy dressing. They went into the Princes loging together where his
surgion presently applied what was requisite, and promised them a speedy cure.

Whilst he lay under the cure of his self-given wound, that which he had
received from love having no such charitable surgions, grew worse and worse:
blood and spirits, continually effused themselves there at, and had scarcely
left enough to maintain the vital part. The palenesse that displayed it sel^^
in his face showed that his sickness was more visc^rall than the wound in his
arm, and that the pains he endured from that, were nothing to the pang^ of
that of his heart. How ever as the one grew worse, the other amended and
healed, and though it be strange, it was the same ^a^ve that wrought such
contrary effects, that cured the one, and feste^'d the other: you may believe
that Love and pity attracted the eyes of these fair princesses to an intui^ion
of his wound at every dressing, and you may also believe that the virtue of
Elian's eyes was the panacea that ^anated his wound, and that the aspects of
those heavenly o^bs conjected more life, and virtue than all the medcines,
could be applied. But on the other side, those piercing flames that darted from
her eyes were too corrosive for that tender Cyprian wound. They made too great
incision, and attracted too strongly the small remainder of life which was
preserved by the care of Dardanus. This generous prince is the sole preserver
of his life, and his comfortable remonstrances are lenitives to his wound. He
daily and continually diswades him from his purpose of dying, and by speeches
as full of virtue and power, as of nobleness and generosity, at length compells
the languishing Argelois to be ruled by him and to consent to that abnegation
so worthy the noble spirit of Dardanus. Alas! (cried Argelois resenting his
favors) I must then be overcome by generosity noble Prince! I yield my self
captive to those chains you offer, and will indue them since it is your
pleasure. But think not that I can ever think of enjoying Eliana, were I in a
capacity, or to desire the satisfaction of my love till your passion leads you
to the adoration of some other star, which the Gods must parposely create for
to repay your exceeding generousnesse, whilst Dardanus thus sought to ease the
passions of Argelois, love which was altogether tyrannical stimulated the
princess Panthea, and giving her cruciations which were intolerable, made her
do that which otherwise she would have accounted inaequitable. Cythera's little
son in these few persons exhibited his tyranny, and his blindness, the one by
those raging ^its with which he agitated these poor lovers, the other by his
promiscuous dartings which thwarted each other affections. Jealousy which
seldom can keep secrecy, made Panthea slacken those favors she was wont to
show Eliana, her love being but extrinsecall must give way to that caused by
the imperious shaft's of the amorous Deity. And her affection giving way to
anger and jealousy, cau^'d the sight of the lovely Eliana to be troublesome
and irksome. Panthea was no disembler, nor could she have power to hide her
resentments, which made her exhibit somewhat more then she was willing of her
passion and aegritude. Livor began to be exuscitated by Love and to be
entertained in a breast which never had spot till it entertained love, and to
find residence where till now nothing could be found but the purity of the
incontaminate lily: it is very contrary to the nature of this princess which is
all charity, and out of which envy can scarcely draw poison enough to maintain
her self, so that you are to ho^e this snaky hag will soon desert her, and you
are also to judge so charitable of so ^^ir a soul, as to believe it could not
have entertained the least ill thought, if it were not impressed by a power
altogether imperious. But whatsoever signs of discontent she exhibited, there
was not found the least on the part of Eliana, but rather a nearer uniteing of
her love and affection, so that it is to be hoped those suavous carriages, and
overcoming attractions, will soon dissipate those clouds envy begins to
raise in the breast of Panthea.

In the mean time the careful Chiron as skillful in his art as the sabulated
Centaure, had perfected the cure of Argelois's wound, and had rend^'d him sound
into the arms of his master the Prince Dardanus. He had no sooner expressed
his first joys for his recovery but he prepared to leave him, resolving for a
journey that might be conducible to the good of his friend. Argelois utterly
gainsay'd it, and told him that the affection he bore him surpassed all amorous
attractions, and that it was not possible for him to endure those penetrable
darts jaculated from the eyes of Eliana, without the support of his presence
and comfortable speeches. I go (said Dardanus) to divert the thoughts of my
father concerning my marriage with Eliana, and to hinder those proceedings
before they come to an unresistable height, you may be sure that I shall count
the minutes that I am absent from my Argelois, and that the purchase of a
Kingdom shall not stay me no longer than it is conducible to his happiness.
It Is not requisite or convenient for you to accompany me, nor will it be seemly
for us both to desert the company of the princesses, with many such
remonstrances he won Argelois at last, to let him go, out of an hope that his
return would not be long. He signified his departure to the princesses and
having made every thing ready for his jorney, he went to take his leave of
them. I have been very cruel in my self (said he) to be kind to you, for I
have denied my self the protection of the invincible Argelois for your safety,
you need not fear so long as you have so safe a shield, for I know that he
preserves his life only to do you service. Argelois not in during to hear
himself praised, My ^ife (said he) is indeed conserved for their service, and I
should account myself happy if I might loose it therein, but you traduce them
into false oppinions of my valor, and make them to think themselves more safe
under my weak protection than they are. Eliana was not able to speak one word
by reason of the inpetuous motions that disturbed her, which might have been
judged by an indifferent eye, by the flushing in her face, and motion of her
eyes, which gave suspicion to Argelois that she extremely loved Dardanus, and
made him angry with himself that he was the cause of her discontent.

But Panthea joying that she should not loose Argelois replied that they did
not account themselves unsafe under the protection of either, but yet that they
did acknowledge that they lost half their strength by his departure, and that
they jointly did entreat him to make a speedy return. After some such
discourses, where wit and modesty accompanied each other, he departed with
Tribulus and Argelois, who accompanied him to the outward gate, where renewing
his embraces, it was a long time before he could get from between the arms of
Argelois, and dry up those drops which the love of friendship had extracted for
his departure; but at last comforting each other with hope of a sudden meeting
they parted, Argelois, and Tribulus returning into the castle, and Dardanus
proceedings with some few servants that accompanied him toward B^zantium,
where King Palemon (being in favor with the Romans) kept his court.

I may say Argelois is left alone since the preserver of his life is gone, and
since he is left a prey to those inutterable sighs and groans caused by the
strength of love. He has indeed the content of seeing Eliana, but that also was
troubled with I know not what kind of disastrous aspects. He never looks upon
her but he sees in her face an efflux and reflux of a crimson tide, and her
eyes oftentimes fixed upon him exhibited pity and disdain by turns. The eyes of
Lovers are no good Physiogmonists, they are very partial, and either through
fear or desire, misinterprit every motion. Their desire interprets favorable
for themselves, till fear casts in a thousand injections which overthrows their
pleasing thoughts. And thus racked between two extremes they endure
insufferable cruciations, and are on a continual watch to confirm their
suspicions either of fear or desire. Argelois had nothing to rely upon but the
graces of his person and the favor of love, for fortune having made him
ignorant of his birth, impeded those joye's otherwise he might have re^p'd if
she had openly given him the character of Prince. So that you will say he took
the way to make himself be disbelov'd by mace^ating his body and face by those
continual passions, since the charms of attraction were seated there, but the
true character of an heroic spirit his virtue, could not be extinguished,
which was the best and greatest charm of that hero, and which tralucedly
shined through all the dejections of his body and mind. Whilst he adored
Eliana, himself was no less beloved by the princess Panthea, who rejoicing
that she enjoyed his presence though with disturbances enough would not have
exchanged her fortune to have been empress of the world.

You must imagine she neglected no time to be near him, and that she still
assaulted his constancy, but with words full of love and modesty. But he is
invincible and cannot the remit the love he bears Eliana though despairingly,
for the assured affection of Panthea. It Is the charms of Eliana that makes him
so obdurate, who otherwise would be too too weak to withstand those of Panthea.
He indures the assaults of the one, and the flaming darts of the other, the
space' of a month; having only the comfort of b^eathing forth his love
-El^gies to the inanimates of the woods, and of the continual emitting those
common refreshments of lovers, the ardent sighs of his soul. Seeing that
Dardanus came not, he secretly sent one to Byzantium, who returning brought him
word that Dardanus had not been there, and that they wondered at the Court that
they heard no news from him, supposing him to be with Eliana. Argelois
extremely troubled at this ne^s, acq^inted Tribulus with it, and making
himself ready he prepared to begone to seek him. But whilst he was taking his
leave of the Princesses, who expressed by their countenances how unwilling they
were to part with him, especially Panthea; they brought him word that
Dardanus's chiefest Squire Ep^dauro was newly come thither, and that he desired
to speak with him. Argelois presently returning with the messenger went to him,
Epedauro doing his humble reverence presented him with a letter, he knowing the
character of Dardanus presently broke it open and read as follows.

Dardanus to his Beloved Argelois.
YOu will wonder at what I am about to tell you, but you may also rejoice that
the Gods conspire for our common happiness. Therefore that affliction may
cease, by knowing that a vaticinating spirit possessed me when I told you, it
was impossible for me to avoid the fate of Lovers, You cannot injure me in
loving Eliana, for now I am necessitated to leave her free, being compelled
thereto by the igneous darts of the Cnedian God, shot from the eyes of the
princess Philadelphia, sister to Arizobanes. Be not troubled at my absence but
consider what love is able to do: I shall have a nearer sense of your trouble,
than ever; and already I cannot but wonder at the greatness of your courage in
undergoing that torment, which I find by the first libament to be intolerable.
I confess there wants more courage to be a lover than a soldier, and that the
wounds of love, are far more dangerous than those of war. Despair not of Eliana
for by this manifest providence of the Gods, you are bound to believe that what
they do is conducing to your felicity, and that that fair one was created for
no other than your self. As Soon as if I have satisfied these first
impetuosities of my affection, I will return, in the mean time be careful of
your own life, as you regard the welfare of your inseparable friend.

Dardanus.


Argelois could not but find some comfort, amidst all these sadnesses by that
letter, in that the providence of the Gods had so ordered the love of his
friend, that his own passion should break that marriage which he would have
frustrated for his sake, yet it was a long time before he could frame himself
to believe, that he who had withstood the charms of Eliana, should be pierced
by the shafts of any other. Epedauro was brought to the two princesses who
desired him to tell them what was become of his master: he following the order
he had received from D^rdan^s told them that in his way toward Bizantium, he
had met with an accident that had diverted his jorney, and that he was then in
Paphlagonia, intending a sudden return, from whose mouth they were to expect a
relation of what had happned. They seeing Epedauro was not to make known what
they desired, would press him no further, but contented themselves with what
he had told them. But he as soon as he had the opportunity to speak with Argelois
intimated to him that he had something to deliver to him and the princess
Panthea apart Argelois meeting with the princess told her the commission of
Epedauro, and desiring her not to defer the audition, they walked into a
pleasant Aestiva, and sending for Ep^dauro told him that they expected to hear
what he had to say. The princess having commanded him to sit down, which he
was forced to after many refusals, he began thus.

My Lord the Prince Dardanus having rod hard all that day, he parted hence, and
good part of the next, stopped about the hottest time of the day under the
umbrella's of certain trees, which stood hard by a great forest, whose skirt
reaches to the Euxinian sea. After we had refreshed our selves, the Prince,
moved by I know not what good Genius, commanded me and Chiron to follow him,
and walking amongst the thick-growing trees of that wild place he thought he
heard the sound of some plaintive voice. Standing still the better to inform
himself, he was assured what he heard, was a humane voice, which seemed to be
at some distance, the wispering wind bringing it by intervalls, and
inarticulate to his ears. Desireous to know who it might be that was in that
place, which seemed to be altogether desolate, or a habitation fit for none but
Philo^ophers and despairing lovers, we crope very softly toward the place from
which me Judged the sound came. We came so near at last that we could
dissinguish the words, some of them being these interfalk'd with sighs and
groans. Yes fair princess! I do obey your severe command; I believe you were
ignorant that the same words that banished me your presence, also commanded me
die, it being impossible for me to be deprived of that sight, which made me
happy and Live. Ah! I must never more behold those fair eyes that gave life and
vigor to my soul, cruel banishment! but now thou art almost at an end, and
these testimonies of my martyrdom it may be will exuscitate a pity in that
breast which could never entertain Love. These words were uttered with so
moving an air that it extracted tears from all our eyes. The voice seemed as
if it had not been altogether alienated to our ears, but for the present
neither of us could tell who it was, being somewhat changed by that doleful
air, and sighs that interfalcated almost every word. Presently we heard
another voice, which with sobs and tears implored the other not to persist in
so cruel a manner to murder a soul so far surmounting others.

At least (said he) if you will fall under these cruel and detestable laws of
love, permit me not to survive! ah tie me not to I execute so horrid a
perpetration! but let me have that comfort to serve you in the Stygian shades,
as faithfully as I have served you here. Peace (replied the other) the remains
of my life are but small, give me leave to finish what I am about, before
A^ropos cut the twine. The Prince was not able to call to mind where he had
heard those voices, for the more he heard them speak, the more he called to
mind that he had formerly been acquainted with them. At last we crope so near
to them amongst the bows that we discovered them with our eyes, but the
spectacle was so horrid and amazing that we had schreckt out had it not taken
from us that power by the astonishment it caused. Those we saw were clothed in
very mean clothes, agreeing in everything with the Rustic, he that seemed by
the duty and obedience he owed the other to be his servant, kneeled before him
with his back toward us, so that we could not discover his face, mingling his
tears with the others blood, which has made a little torrent by its effusion.
The bows environing his head so obscured his face that we could not satisfy
our selves, or know who he was by that sight. He sat upon the side of a
fountain which seemed to be the habitation of some Naide, or only f^amed by
nature for the refreshment of the animalls of the wood. Before him stood a
stone which served him for a table on which was spread a very smoth rine of a
rtee, on which he was writing with a stick sharpened for that purpose, but that
which was so amazeing was a large wound in his side from whence slowed a purple
spring, and into the which he dipped his reed, forming crimson characters with
his latest blood. The grass was distained with its color, and the abundance
that ran from his wound had made a riverse larg enough for love to swim in. By
his action he seemed as if he desired to inspire his pen with the last breath
of that fair soul, or to make those bloody characters speak more pathetically,
mixed spirit and life with his blood. Whilst he was in his action and our
amazedness permiting it longer than we ought he that kneeled before him seeing
his palenesse bespeak his approaching death, could not but break the silence
his master had imposed. Ah! cruel Panthea! (said he) insensible princess.
Behold a Prince sacrificed to your obdurateness. Ah! wretch! ce^se (said the
other faintly) cease to exclaim against one who can do nothing injustly, and
from whom I ought to receive far more torments without murmuting. These words
bringing the Prince Dardanus, out of one astonishment into another, made him no
longer doubt of that Prince but that it must needs be Arizobanes. Pity brought
him presently from his amazedness, when he saw he had forsaken his pen with
these words. Lamedon (speaking to his squire) I can write no more, my sight is
gone, but be thou my faithful depository, and deliver this, poynting to what
he had written) into the hands of the fair Pan --, he sanke at these words. The
Prince Dardanus running to him caught him in his arms, and by the words he
spoke and tears he shed exhibited his sad resentments of his death. See here
(said Epidauro pulling forth the rine wrapped up) what love dictated at that
time, it may be these sanguinious characters may speak more movingly, by
insusing some part of that spirit that wrote them, than I have done. Argelois
took them of Epidauro and turning to Panthea, asked her if she would be pleased
to hear them. That princess who was all Goodness and pity when she saw her
interest in Epedauro's discourse was immovable. She could object nothing either
against the nature, person, or behavior of Arizobanes, he had quailities
winning enough, and a Prince worthy of that title, by this action you have
heard, you may judge of his courage, and to what exigent Love had drove him.
'Twas nothing but the imperious Love she bore Argelois that made her disregard
that Prince, and drive him to that despair. Remorse seized on her, and she
repented of her last action, that drove him to that precipitancy. Pity and
compassion sometimes is the procurer of Love, and ushers it under their
disguize. Panthea felt something more moving than ordinary, and she had
believed at other times that she could have heard of his death and have been
impassible: But now she found the contary and all the courage she had could not
suppress those sad thoughts that oppressed her. She looked upon her self as
the murderer of that Prince and imagined that his wound spoke very dolefully,
and upbraided her for her obdurateness. Whether love or Pity, it is hard to be
decided, or both caused her tears, but unwilling to discover them to Epedauro
she turned her head toward Argelois and gave way to those drops which could not
but be expected from so tender and susceptable a soul. At last fixing her eyes
upon Argelois she seemed to accuse him, and to make him the cause of the
disaster. She suppressed her resentments what she could, but yet there
secreetly escaped some of those assured messengers of an afflicted soul. After
she had continued in a sad and silent posture for some time, turning to
Epedauro, and is the prince dead then? (said she) could he not be recovered?
yes maddam (^ replied Epedauro) if it may be any comfort to you the
incomperable Chiron has showed the wonder of his skill, and has made known
that he has done as great a cure, as Esculapius when he recovered virbius. But
yet madam (went he on) although he has as it were been new born into this
world, he has not forgot his old love, and though Chiron has sanated his
wound, yet it was impossible fot him to cure that of Love, it must be a fairer
hand than his that must close up that. It is the chiefest cause of the Prince
Dardanus's stay, to persuade the newly recovered Arizobanes from perpetrating
the like. For fearing least he should be compelled to break your severe
command, he is daily ready to offer a second sacrifice of himself. There is no
consideration can work with him, for he thinks it his duty to die, since you
have banished him your fight. Panthea was very joyful that he was recovered,
though she found a great abatement of that pity which but now stimulated her,
the consideration of Argelois being too powerful for its continuance. But
(said she to Epedauro to put him besides that discourse he was in) how did you
recover him? and how got you this writing you have brought.

Madam (went he on) my Lord the Prince having for a long time deplored the case
of Arizobanes, at last asked Chiron whether it were impossible to recover him,
and whether he could not show he deserved the name he bore, by making known the
utmost of his care and skill. Chiron immediately searching the wound with a
probe, found it large, but not very deep, and that the intestines being
intacted, he said he could with facility enough heal up the wound, had he but
blood and life in his body. Life had issued out with his blood, for that having
had so large a passage, had scarce left one drop in his body. Ch^ron dispair'd
for ever reviving him, and would not have done his devoyres, had it not been
for the Prince. I cannot believe (said he) that the gods will be so unjust as
to let so great a soul die so i^n^bly, being forced to it by the most spurious
of all the gods, who shows his malice to all the other Olympic Numens, in
forcing the virtuous and the righteous into such Lethal precipitances. Try,
Chiron, you know not what virtue may accompany your endeavors, it may be
Vitunus may inspire life through your means, and recover a soul that has
nothing in him to be condemned, but that he bears the insignia of so cruel a
God. Chiron more to please the Prince than of any hopes he had to recover him,
desired he might be carried to some place where he might dress him with
convenience. Having called the rest of the servants, and being conducted by
Arizobane's Squire, we carried the Prince in our arms to a small cottage, about
three hundred paces from the wood, in which was none but two decrepit people,
who seeing the Prince dead filled their little Domicil with ejaculations; we
laid him in a bed, and obscuring the room, le^ no light come in but what we
received by tapers. The Prince Chiron, and my self being lest alone with
Arizobanes, and his Squire, Chiron nearly stitching up the wound, applied those
things which he believed most condu^e^n, to its cure. Presently we poured down
his throat essences, and other things that the incomparable Chiron had
prepared, and with hot clothes and frications, the Prince himself contributing
his charitable hand to those labors, sought to give new fire to that inanimate
body.

We had labored so long, and found so little sign of life; that we believed we
had attempted a vanity, and were about to give over, a work carried on by the
extreme desire of the Prince, when Chiron assured us the operation of his
essences, had played the part of Prometheus, and had injected fire from their
hidden virtue. Before it was night we could all discern that there was life,
and that it was not impossible for us to revive him. The Prince would not leave
him all night, but indefagitably continuing his charities showed with what
ardency he desired his life. It was two days before he opened his eyes, but
then being insensible of those images they received, he shut them again. The
third day he spoke, which extremly rejoiced the Prince; these were the first
words of that revived man;

Dear Panthea! have I satisfied your severity? or is there yet any thing more
to be done? Chiron has conducted me to the walk of Lovers, and I find many as
gloriously tragidized as my self amongst these Stygean shades. But surely
Charon has not dealt so charitably with me as others; they seem to have
forgotten their past-miseries, and are not tormented as I am. Surely I mistook
and drunk of Mnemosyne instead of Lethe. But it is no matte^, I ought not to
forget Panthea, and though death has taken me, he cannot take the remembrance
of that glorious Princess, which shall be my comfort in the lower shades, as it
was my life above. We perceived by these speeches that he thought he had been
dead, but Chiron told Dardanus that it would be very prejudicial and dangerous
for him to talk, which made the Prince endeavor to make him sensible where he
was, but he could not effect it. Weakness made him leave speaking, but in lieu
of that, he emitted abundance of suspirations. The wound of his side began to
heal, and all things agreeing with the desires of the Prince, he began to take
that rest which his love and charity had denied him. We were accompanied with
what the meaness of that Cottage could afford, which although it were but
evilly, yet it greatly contented the Prince in that he never had tasted the
like morsels, nor lay so hard, but when he was a soldier. The Prince
remembering that he had not heard how Arizobanes was brought to that exigent,
sent for Lamedon, and telling him his desire, he relatee it in these words.

Sir (said he) the Prince Arizobanes being called from the Court of the King
your father by letters from his, (which imported that a Prince amongst the
Parthians, called the stout Pampatius, being in that Country, was fa^n in love
with his daughter the fair Philadelphia, and had desired her of him in
marriage, and that he would not give him any answer till his reture) with
wonderful regret, and had it not been for so important business, all the world
could not have withdrawn him from that fair Princess whom he so passionately
loved, her attractions being stronger than all the world besides. Panthea
blushed at these words, and interrupting Epidauro, you may (said she) save your
self the labor of relating such circumstances, and only tell us the matter.

Madam (replied Epidauro) I hope you will pardon me, seeing I do but render the
words of another, and being I should be both unfaithful and a Detractor,
should I leave out such glorious expressions of Lamedons. It Is but reason (said
Argelois) that he should give us the relation entire. I I will not contradict
you (said Panthea turning to Argelois) though I little deserve them. Their
silence inviting Epidauro to proceed, he continued his relation thus. The
squire (said he) thus went on.

It Is impossible for me to represent with what passion the Prince was
accompanied, and how often he sighed out of the glorious name of Panthea in his
jorney. He went by the motion of his thoughts, and all our speed seemed like
that of a snail to those desires that hastened his return. We were not long in
getting to Sinope, where the Prince was wellcomed home by the joy of his
Parents and his sister: there he found that stout Prince who rendered him a
great deal of civility, and was reanswered by Arizobanes with the like. The
good King Pharmach, knowing the wisdom and great discretion of the Prince his
son, was resolved to be ruled by his Counsel in this match. The Princess whom I
dare compate to none but your sister, having her spirit as full of meekness as
her face of beauty, found a great antipathy in her against Pampatius, and could
by no means away with his rough nature, being every way more fit for a soldier
under Mars than Venus, and his looks accompanied with so much fierceness, that
they were rather a terriculum than an allurement to Ladies. There was nothing
in him that was amiable or to be regarded but strength and valor. Philadelphia
being afraid lest she should have been given a prey to this Monster, soon
discovered her mind to the Prince, and assaulted him with so many tears, that
he assured her no consideration of state whatsoever should make him yield to
any thing contrary to her mind. This resetled that fair one, and expelled the
fear that had a long time cruciated her. Arizobanes stimulated by the
remembrance of Pan^hea, hasted to dispatch this affair what he could, and
delivering his opinion to his father, accompanied with many reasons, made him
resolve o^ give his answer in the negative to Pampatius, who having received
the answer and seeing his hopes and vain expectations frustralled left the
court with as much brutishness and incivilty as might be, threatening that they
should know whom they had offended. The King was something fearful of the
sequel, but being comforted by the Prince he was resolved to stand to his
determination. Philadelpha (she received her name from the City in which she
was born) rendered her brother abundance of thanks for what he had done for her,
and thank't the Gods for that delivery mo^e than she would have done for the
preservation of her life. Pampatius having heard that Arizobanes was the chief
frustrator of his desires, intended to wreak all his fury upon him, and within
two or three days after his departure sent him a challenge very secretly. The
Prince knowing him valiant would have no suspicion of treachery, and being
valiant himself promised to meet him, at the place appointed. Arizobanes having
called me to him commanded me to bring him his most approved arms as secreetly
as I could into the back garden belonging to the palace. Having performed his
will, whilst he fastened his armor I brought a couple of horses, and mounting I
followed him not dareing to ask him his intent. When we were a dozen furlongs
from the city he told me that he was going to parley with Pampatius about his
sisters marriage. I understood him presently and erected my thoughts to the
caelestiall deities for his preservation. We were come to the place appointed,
which was in a valley about two miles from the City compassed about with hills
and woods, where we found Pampatius with his Squire according to the agreement.
Their armours were both chosen for the strength, and not for gallantry, there
being no spectators to behold the beauty of their arms, 'twas no tornement in
a theator, and the shining steel was not aureated nor enricht with stones. The
Parthian coming up with much boldness told Arizobanes that although he had
denied him the possession of his sister, he should not deny him (for recompense
of it) his life. The Prince told him, that speech, was the least of his graces,
and that he came not thither to talk but to fight. The Parthean claping fast
his cask retired a little and taking a Pathean javelin flung it with a terrible
fury against my Prince, that had it hit him, his arms would hardly have p^ov'd
of force to have withstood it Arizobanes collimated his lance with better
fortune for meeting him in the cutrere gave him so terrible a shok that all his
endeavors could not keep him from falling over his horses cro^pe^, The Prince
scorning advantage alighted, and meeting Pampatius with his sword they began an
encourter worthy of Romes theater. When I saw them engaged I allighted and
drawing my sword, I told Pamaptius's Squire that it did not become us to stand
in that posture whilst our Masters were in that engagement. The Squire not
refusing me, we did our devoyres to take each others life. Fate not my valor
after near an hours dispute gave me the victory by the death of my adversary.
This encounter hindered me from beholding the admirable actions of my Master,
and so deprives you of the best part of that combat. As I had concluded my
victory I perceived Arizobanes had meet with a champion who would him the
victory at an easy rate, and I saw him covered with blood and wounds before
Pampatius fell, not so much wounded as the Prince but mightily disabled through
a cut on the the joint of his right arm, and by a gash in his forehead which
yielded so much blood into his eyes that it blinded him. Arizobanes seeing him
fall set his sword to his throat expecting he would have implored his life.
I Will never confess my self conquered (said Pampatius) so long as I have a
heart to resist, I confess fortune has declared you the victor and I cannot
resist a Fate that is uncontrollable, but neither fortune, you, nor the world
can conquer my heart that is invincible, take my life but when I am dead then
confess that dyed spontaneously, and that though you kil^'d me, you never
overcame me. The Prince seeing his resolution and courage. No (said he) I am
none of those who desire to rebate such great courages who are able to conquer
death, upon a point unworthy any generous spirit. Live then Pampatius I will
not say I have given you your li^e, but that 'twas the greatness of your own
courage, neither will I attribute the victory to my own valor, but to the
justice of the cause, and your teme^i^y. At that mstant came two of his Squires
came into the place, it being almost night, to whose care he left Pampatius who
retired with them to his train. Before we could recover the City we met a
great many knights and gentlemen going to seek the Prince, whose departure was
not kept so secret but it came to the Kings ear, whose care and vigilance had
en^aged the whole court in our pe^quisition. The Prince having lost much blood
which continually destilled at many wounds, fainted in sight of the City, and
was fain to be carried to the court upon our arms. The court was in great fear
for his recovery, and the general love he had acquired of all men, made all
interested in his welfare. But coming to himself he assured them he was not in
such danger they thought him in. Ah! brother (said Philadelphia) it had been
better that I had been prey to that truculent Parthian, and that I had endured
the worst of miseries rather then you should have engaged the whole Kingdom
into danger with your self, and our parents into sorrow for your hurt. He
satisfied that fair one with many fraternal words, and told her the combat
was as well for his own honor as her safety. The Chirurgions giving them hopes
of his sudden recovery returned part of their former joy into their faces. The
wounds I had received by my adversary were not considerable enough to make me
keep my bed, so that I had enough to do to be the praeco of the combat, which
was enternain'd by all with joy for the valor of the Prince.

His love and desire to see the Princess your sister, contributed much to his
cure, and made him willingly undergo what they told him would festinate it?
They could hardly congratulate him for's victory after he had recovered his
wounds which had enchain'd him to his bed, but that he left the court, full of
heaviness for his departure. As Soon as we came to Byzantium the prince
understood that your self, Argelois, and the princess El^ana, were removed to
some castle in Asia for pleasure and repose, and that the Princess Panthea
having been sick of a feavour was not thoroughly recovered. Did not I tell thee
(said the Prince to me) that the princess Panthea was in some danger of her
life, those palpitations I felt were not caused by absence, but through a
simpathy that my soul had with hers languishing. Love is Magical and distance
of place, is not able to hinder us from those knowledges which we receive from
the hidden and secret virtue thereof. Arizobanes was received by the King your
father with his wonted courtesy, and kindness. As Soon as he saw the
princess, he perceived that the fire of her seavour had left its ashes in her
face and had much dimed that luster that formerly displayed it self in her
eyes. But whatsomever the matter was he trembled at her first fight, and told
me afterward that he saw an^er in those looks she exhibited, and though it
could not alter the suavity of her countinance, yet he found that it terified
his heart. After some few days that he had been there, the Princess leaving
her chamber was walking in the garden where Arizobanes met her, and being
transported by his passion he confessed to me afterward that he approached her
with too much audacity, and did not show all the respect he ought to have done
to that visible Goddess, proceeding with the precipitancy of his passion he
^ell toward that tended only to the exhibition of his, and all though he knew
she was not ignorant of his Love, yet he proceeded too far, and the princess
not accustomed to speeches of that nature left him with anger, and hardly saw
him in a week after. I cannot tell you with how many tears, and words he
repented his insultity, he endured torment enough to expiate a greater fault,
and he desired but to live to gain her pardon for his boldness. This made him
seek out all occasions of meeting her alone, that he might fling himself at her
feet and beg her pardon for what he had done. But Panthea as dilligently
avoided him as if she had known his desire or fe^r'd his intentions. His desire
led him to all places where he might find the P^incesse, which she perceiving I
beleve she attributed to impudency or importunancy. At last he espieo Panthea
and her gentlewoman Arselia one evening to enter a close Umbraculum. Ventering
all his hopes at that cast he surpised her in her deepest meditations, and
casting himself at her feet would have spoke but that her anger prevented him.
For rising up extremely moved at his presence pierced the soul of that prostate
Prince with whole showers of angry darts which she sent from her eyes; and
before he was able to open his mouth stopped it for ever with these words.
Disturber of my repose! I cannot bear your sight but with impatiency. If you
intend to oblige me, you must never more see me. These words more killing than
the greatest thunder bolt struck Arizobanes as dead at her feet, she departed
from the place with Ar^elia and left him miserably extended on the grass, when
he saw she was gone he got up and looking after her with eyes that testified his
distress, perceived that she said something to me. I hasted to the Prince
(being in the garden all the while) and expected by the Princesses words to
find him as I did. Lamedon! (said he) hide not the confirmation of that doom
which but now I have received, hide it not from me but tell me truly what the
Princess said to you. I did not dare to dissemble with him, so that I told him
the truth which was this. That she bid me tell him she was forced to infringe
the laws of civility since he was filled with so much importunancy, and that
she could no longer break her repose for his pleasure, and therefore she
desired him to leave her and disturb her no more with his presence. These words
wrought the like effect as the former, and it was a long time before I could
recall his senses from a banishment which had like to have been eternal.
Ushering his words with heartbreaking suspira's, Yes Panthea I will obey and
give you that repose you desire, it may be my death may be grateful to your
ears, when you are assured you shall be free from your tormentor. I confess I
have been too impudent and too bold, but I will endeavor to exterminate a
monster so horrible to your sight. He was not to be comforted and therefore I
permited him to ease his passion with such ejaculations without interrupting
him. That night he closed not his eyes but imagined all the precipitances as
could be, hardly tormenting enough to expiate his crimes.The next morning
pretending business into Itali he left Thrace and landing in Asia, after he
had traversed all the woods and solitary places he found out this cottage free
from neighbors and very solitary. Resolving to end his life in these woods he
would have sent me away, unless I would swear by those oaths which we account
damnable to break, not to contradict him but to let him follow those dictates
which his love and despair gave him. I was forced to to do this strict
obedience rather then I would leave him I hoped that my persuasions might
prevail against all precipitances, and that at least if he dyed I might have
the honor to accompany him. We came to this cottage and freeing our horses of
their burdens gave them the liberty of these spacious woods, we exchanged our
clothes for these you found us in, by the help of these two anent people, and
enriching them with all the gold and jewels the Prince had about him, purchased
our living and their love. The wood where you found us was the entertainer of
my Prince where he spent all the day and sometimes most part of the night emiting
the complaints that would have forced the heart of the princes to compassion
had it been of stone or never so obdurate if she had hard them, every day
increasing not diminishing his sorrows, he resolved to live no longer, being
too weak to undergo a burden so insupportable, he hid is intentions from me,
till this day, bringing me to the place were you found us, the ordinary place
for his lamentations having pared the rine of a young tree to writ on with a
reed for that purpose. He sent me away to seek him such another, but before I
returned he had made the wound in his side, and was characterising with his
blood. I ran to him, and screching out would have stopped it, but he taking up
the dagger, put me in mind of my oath, and commanded me not to disturb him, but
to let him finish what he had begun to write. I beseeched him not to let me
behold so horrid a perpetration but to let me die with the same weapon. No (sad
he) you are to survive me, and if ever you bore me any affection, show it at
this instant in promising to obey my desires: you must deliver to the Princess
Panthea, what I am about to write with my heart, that is loyal though
miserable. I gave a great screech at these words, and begged I might not be tied
to such an execution. But that power which always forced me to obey him,
constrained me to be silent, and permitted him to finish his death so
strangely. I intended to have obeyed him, but no^ to have survived my obedience
a moment. But the gods pitying this Love-distroyed Prince has sent you to do a
miracle, and to recall a life (certainly) past into the lower shades.

The Prince Dardanus having heard this sad and deplorable relation, could not
but blame you of too much temerity, to precipitate a Prince so ^ffectionate.
Lamedon having fetched him what the Prince had w^o^ dyin^, his Highness could
not read it without sighs, so moving it was. After he had read it, he put it
up, and promised the Squire to satisfy the Prince concerning it. In a weeks
time Chiron had brought Arizobanes to his senses, and Dardanus presented
himself to him, and told him by what means he had been saved. Ah! Gods (said
Arizobanes) I cannot contest with your Divinities, yet pardon me if I cannot
give thanks for the saving of my life. But is it Dardanus that is my
Conservator? how little reason has he to preserve that which is unsupportable
to his sister? The Prince comforting him with words naturally sweet and moving,
persuaded him not to afflict himself so much, and promised him to use the
utmost of his power to make him happy. Arizobanes presently called for what he
had written, the Prince believing his intentions, got some more of that kind of
paper, and giving the right to the Squite, bid him give it to his Master. After
he had looked it over, and sighed, he commanded him to burn it in his presence.
Dardanus unwilling that you should loose the sight of that strong testimony of
his passion, conveyed the blanks into the fire, and preserved these unseen.
Arizobanes every day recovering of his wound, began at last to leave his bed.
The Prince seeing the place so discommodious for his recovery, would have
persuaded him to have accompanied him to Byzantium, but Arizobanes would not be
brought to it for fear of disobeying. At last the Prince persuaded him to
return to Paphlagonia, and his wound being whole enough to permit him travel,
Dardanus would not leave him till he had seen him safe in Sinope. Leaving that
poor Domicile with riches enough for these two entertainers to raise themselves
a better fortune. By easy jorneys we came to Sinope, the Prince Dardanus
receiving a great deal of honor from the King in consideration of those
courtises Arizobanes had received in your fathers Court. After we had been
there a little while, the Kings courtesies, and the Princes disquiets, engaging
his Highness to a longer stay, he sent me expressly to let you know of his
divertisements, and to give you these bloody testimonies of Arizobanes's
affection, with the relation of these accidents. Epidauro having thus finished
his relation with a low reverence left the place. The Princess Panthea must
have forgot her self, and have changed her nature, if she had not resented
these actions of passionate Arizobanes. She found them too moving to leave her
impassible, and though they could not force her to love, yet they compelled her
to a loving pity. No consideration but that of the incomparable Argelois could
have been able to have dissipated those clouds which a new Love began to raise
in her thoughts. She found more pity toward him than she willingly would have
given him, and that amorous deity had like to have surpised her, had she not
at that instant cast her eyes on Argelois, which dispel'd all those thoughts
which began to assault her. She found him busy in reading what Arizobanes had
writ. Let Us hear (said she) what that rash Lover has wrote, does not he charge
me with his crimes; Argelois beginning those sanguinious lines, read as
follows.

The dying Prince ARIZOBANES to the incomparable Princess PANTHEA.
BE not affrighted at these sanguinall characters, nor account me imman^ for
sending you the picture of my Death, delineated with my blood. I possess a
place that could afford no other implements, and I am sure none could speak
better than these I have made use of. This red ink has a commixion of Love,
which should mitigate its territion, and induce you to believe that it is but
the modesty of this rustic paper which blushes between those lillyes that hold
it, having never received such honor before. But these blushes have a language
which tells you that they were not formed by that extrinsicall blood which
flows in the veins, but that it is that which always incircled the heart of
Arizobanes, and that it is made purer than the rest, by its vicinity to that
fire, which was injected into this heart from those fair luminaries that
behold it. This heart Madam! has a mouth too which tells you that it yet
preserves that fire which is immortal, and knowing you to be the Creator of
it, it comes to resign the last sparks which it yet conserv, eunder its
palenesse. It tells you silently that Arizobanes has obeyed you commands, and
has lived so long as he was able without that life you had deprived him of;
But it tells you too that he could sooner dye than break your comands, and that
without murmuring since it is for your repose I have but few minutes to live
and that crimson stream which I freely shead has almost exhausted its
fonntaine, and therefore I must contract those deprecations I had intended into
this one, that you will pardon all those insulsities caused by the vigor of my
passion and believe after my death, that his heart speaks true when it tells
you I Lov --


The Prince (said Argelois) was forced, to this imperfection by that fainting
which accompanied the loss of his blood, but I verily believe if strength had
permitted that he would have added, love with a passion un^atchable, and entire
to last the gasp the fair princess Panthea, and that there was no content to
that which he received in dyeing in obe^ience to your commands. You have
concluded it very well (replied she) but the greatest enemy poor Arizobanes has
is your self. And I maddam (said he) profess my self his greatest friend, and
it is both contrary to my will and knowledge if it be otherwise. It cannot be
unknown to you (replied the princess) though it may be contrary to your will,
for I have broake through all those obstacles pudicity would have exhibited to
make you know it. At the end of these words she gave Argelois so languishing a
look that it peircede to the noble seat of his soul. But being willing to
divert her from those thoughts which he saw agitate her. Truly (said he) if I
maynot be too bold I should tell you that Arizobanes did deserve a less
rigorous chastizement, and his passion might have been some excuse for any
fault he might heve committed through the ardency thereof, for I know it was
too pure to cause any thing unpardonable, pray madam what was the reaason that
moved you to such a sudden severity? Do you ask that (replied she) her
resentments were so strong that it forced some tears from her eyes. Yes
Argelois I will tell you though thereby I must upbraid you with your inhumanity.
You were not ignorant, Cruel one! that the fire of Love was the chiefest
inflammation of my blood, and that which caused the greatest fire of my
seavour. You know that my debility had chained me fast to my bed, when you,
desireous to kill me, left me with an inhumanity innate to none but Tigers. Yes
you and my brother with the princess Eliana left me and though I was
recovering yet you know that it might have been the only remedy to have cured
me of my love and life together. I will not trouble you (for I know it is
erksome) to tell you of those cruciations proper to those are diseased by the
Cyprian ague. It Is enough to let you know I was in the midst of those unequal
sits when to augment them Arizobanes came to court. He might well observe in my
face that I badly resented his company, and that 'twas intolerable whilst I
sometimes fried in flames and at other times was frozen in Ice. I endured his
ardences and company as long as I could, but when I saw that it hindered me from
those thoughts I had given my self up to, I fell into impatiences and unusual
angers, which made me I confess at last prohibit his stay any longer, but I
did not judge his passion would have led him to such a praecipice. But I see
now I revenged my self on the wrong object, for after his departure I found no
ease of that torment that before possessed me, every thing seemed to disturb me
and indeed if I may say so, I was not my self. Arselia fearing I would have
been distempered and have relapsed into my feavour persuaded the Physicians
that solitariness was not agreeable to me, and that my love to Eliana made me
extremely wanting of her company. Those Aesculapians believing that the chainge
of air would do me good, persuaded the King my father to let me come hither to
Eliana, which was effected and you may believe if you please that it was
nothing contrary to my will. After she had beheld him a little while immovable.
Fatal face! (cried she) to attract, but more fatal and cruel heart to
despise, and to be so invincible against Love. How? what said I? No no
Argelois! those pale cheeks discover the secreet flames of thy heart. Thou art
not exempt from his tyranny that wounded me. Yes you cannot deny it, and it is
Eliana too. Argelois was extremely troubled at these words, but Dardanus having
before made him acquainted with her suspicion, he was the better able to answer
her. Madam (said he) I hope you will have more charitable thoughts than to
think I should offer so much dishonor to a princess, as to set my affection
so aspiringly. You judge of me by the greatness which I am ariv'd at by your
immens favors, and not by that which otherwise I am. You may (said the
princess) deny it if you please, but these are no arguments to contradict what
I say, for it is no voluntary action to love, and I cannot account that an
injury which one is impelled to. Yes Argelois I know her charms to be more
attracting than mine, and I will yield her the victory, but it shall be with my
life. Argelois would have answered her but that Eliana and Tribulus walking by
the place caused them to join company with them, where they passed good part
of the day in those umbracula's, in several discourses, whilst their hearts
entertained diverse Cogitations.

The next day Argelois having not visited Euripides a good while, was walking
toward his grot, when meeting with Epidauro they discoursed together of
several particulars till they came to the Grove. Argelois believing he should
do Euripides a pleasure to let him hear some actions of Dardanus, took his
favorite with him. Euripides embracing him gave him his wonted reception,
which was all kindness, being as it were tied to him by those charms that
always accompained his presence. Euripides understanding for what end he had
brought Epidauro gave him many thanks, and presently prepared for the audition.
Epidauro understanding from Argelois what they desired of him, was nothign
difficult to perform that task, at the request of his masters greatest friend.
Argelois being desirous to repose himself, or rather to give way to his wonted
amorous meditations* slung himself upon a bed. Euripides and Lonoxia taking
Epidauro by the hand, led him into another room, where having placed him
between them, they invited him by their silence to what he knew they expected.
After a little recollection he began thus.

THE HISTORY of DARDANUS.
MY years not exceeding those of the Prince, declare that what I speak from his
infancy, were the dictates of those who were both this masters and his
servants. Palemon after that notable overthrow of Mark Antonie living in great
fear of the Romans for the affection he had shown that Prince, retired amongst
the Getes and pitching in Tomos lived amongst a people civilized by the
swan-like notes of the Sulmonian bard. Marying with Agauue the nece of
Tarcondemus King of Celisia, they produced Dardanus the fruit of that
conjunction into the world. About that time by a strange misfortune, Palemedon,
son to Palemon by his other wife was lost, being ravished out of the arms of
his nurse by some wicked Assassius. [Euripides could not but but show his
interest in that speech by a sigh that he emitted, but it not being noted
Epidauro continued thus] But sure the Gods foreseeing the virtues of the
prince my master, showed by this action that he deserved to be something more
than second to the Crown. There was great lamentation for the loss of that
young Prince, and the King had not been to be comforted but by the sight of
Dardanus, who now received the whole influence of the Kings love, which else
must have been shared between them.

After that the Romans had reduced Capadocia, Comagena and other kingdoms into
provinces, and that the King saw they did not disturb him, they removed to
Chalcedon, where he made his peace with the Romans: And for some tribute which
he was forced to pay them, they assigned him Byzantium for his court, and gave
him good part of Thrace, and in Asia all that along the Pontic sea. In the mean
time the young Prince Dardanus, having tutors that were most excellent, grew
so expert in all the sciences, that he showed that the barbarity of the place
where he was born, had contributed nothing to his nature, and made all expect
the incomparable fruit of so fair blossoms. He not only excelled in
litte^ature, but also in arms, in which in a very little time, he seemed to be
rather a master than a tyro, and soon exhausted all the knowledge of his
preceptors. In a word Nature had with a lavish hand bestowed those favors
which might make him excel all men. He was but young in years when the King
perceiving that his tutors was not sufficient for his large cappacity, sent him
to Athens, where in that nurse of the muses, his pregnant wit ran through and
pierced into the profundity of Philosophy. I had then the honor to accompany
him and to be his servant. In that place it was that he fell acquainted with
the amiable, and no less generous Argelois. The parity of their years, their
consimilitude of their featurs, the profundety of their wits, and the
correspondency of their affections, composed an amity indissolvable but by the
power of Eternal Night. They were seldom a part, and for all the submission
of Argelois knowing Dardanus to be a Prince yet he would give him no other
appellation than Brother, and commanded him to do the like. They were the
mirror of Athens both for frindship and all things else, at prizes they strove
to make each other conqueror, and to con^er the honor from themselves upon
each other, glorying more in one another victory than for their own. There was
no prize that could be got from them, nor no ^^^rell crown but it addorned one
of their heads, whether it were for learning or Martial sports. This continued
until Argelois was sent for home by his too indulgent father, this mesage
raized a war betwixt love and obedience in Argelois, but the last lecture he
had read being so full of paraenetick instructions concerning obedience to
parents, he was forced to leave his friend Dardanus, by the strong impressions
thereof. This separation was not without tears, and reciprocal engagement on
either side, to overcome time and absence, by their constant and entire
affection. They vowed that friendship which was to last eternally, and which
was not to be defaced by any accidents of Forune or Time. He had not long lest
the Tritonian towers but that my master found the miss of that incomperable
man; in his eyes, the Muses had accompained his friend, and left their ancient
seat. The graces were no where to be sound, and the City seemed dissolate and
melancholy since the absence of Argelois. Epidauro (said he to me) I can no
more find that delight a suavity in these dull lucubrations since the absence
of Argelois, as formerly. These schools are too melancholy and sedentary. I do
not intend to be a docter or sophus, I am well enough skilled in this
speculative knowledge, arms ought to be my profession, and though literature
and the sword have an equal share in the regiment of a Kingdom, yet there is
no policy like to that of experience. Nothing like to example; precepts are
nothing so vively represented, nor so soon caught, nor so long retained. A
great pollitition in the school most times proves a mere fool in the Court. As
if that variety of changes, and actions of men were to be tied to the rules of
the school. No Epidauro, I shall learn more experience, and gain more knowledge
in being on year at Rome, than I shall in spending ten here. But if it were for
no other reason but to divertize me from the trouble I receive by the absence
of Argelois, I am resolved to put it in execution I will to Rome and view that
City that imposes Laws to the whole world. I had always a great fancy to
travel, so that he jumped with my desires, yet knowing him to be a Prince on
whose life the happiness of a kingdom depended, and my master, I did my duty
in persuading him to the contrary, and in declaring the dangers, perils and
accidents that always attended travel. I represented to him his minority, his
parents trouble, the Kingdoms sadness, with every thing that duty, and the
exiguty of my intellectualls were able to dictate. But he that was non of those
that could be turned every way by the wind of persuasion, stuck to his first
resolutions, and commanding me as a master, I obayed him as a servant. After I
had according to his command prepared every thing ready for his voyage to Rome,
we left Attica and with a very prosperous wind a rived at that City which
extended her authority from the orient to the Hesperian wave. That City had
not recovered those sadnesses and habits of mourning she had assumed for the
death of Drusus, when we came so that its luster seemed obnubilated with a
sable veil, and i^s glory a little yiedling to the occasion of the time. But
yet it had so much beauty in it, as to inchant the mind of Dardanus, and to
make him resolve for to stay some few years. The Prince hiding his condition
took a lodging amongst the Knights of Rome: And though it were not altogether
correspondent to the Quallity of a Prince, yet it might answer to that of a
noble man. He soon grew acqainted, and with that winning carriage, and
attracting speech proper to himself, he bound many slaves to his courtisie, and
civillity, and overcoming envy it self, made those who were enemies to virtue,
to acknowledge him scarscly to be parrallel'd. Three whole years remained we in
that City, in which time it is incredible to declare the policies, the
experiences, and the observations he had gained. His greatest divertizment was
in the Martian field in which he gained the praise and acclamations of the
whole City. Amongst the rest of his numerous acquaintance was that monster of
men the wicked Caligula son to the good Germanicus, and whom now for a fatal
plague to themselves Rome has chosen Emperor. My master soon saw the evil of
his condition, and though he keept them from public noteing, it may be hoping
for the Empire, yet those that used his company saw his vices perspicuous
enough, and his frequent, and intolerable debauches odious. I verily believe
now he has attaind that dignity in which he may commit them without fear of
taxing, he will not stick to exhibit in public what before he Committed in
private. The good nature of my master was not able to work upon that monster,
who like the spider extracted poison out of the fairest flowers. He would have
been less engaged to him, but that the innumerable favors which he received
from him caused him to answer his civillities, with his company and to endure
those insulsities which he saw him daily commit. That monster Caligula seemed
every day more affectionate than other to my master and as if he had been
courting his mistress he would with new coined words seek to exhibit the
affection he bore him. My master being but a child in impieties could not
imagine that turpitude that was lodged in the putrified breast of Caligula.

After a while he brought him acquainted with Sejanus that great favourit of
Tiberius, and his great instructor to all cruelties and impieties. This was he
that was to usher in the beastly and abominable desires of Caligula, who had
made him his counceller, and deputy to effect his wickdnesse. Dardanus after
that Seajnus had one day with the best of his Rhetoric and with many words
exhibited the extreme love and affection Caligula bore him, and that it rested
in him to make Caligula happy by a continual and more near convers, promised
very innocently that there was nothing that Caligula could desire from him, but
he should be both ready and willing to pleasure him, and that he should count
it no small happiness to enjoy his company often. My master here served
Sejanus with some of his own Cities compliments, speaking what his heart
denied, for I am sure of all men living he cared least for those two Sejanus
and Caligula. But Sejanus had enough, and I believe judged my masters words by
his own beastly thoughts. As Soon ^s he was gone, the Prince called me to him. I
cannot but wonder Ep^dauro (said he) at Caligula, he knows well enough that my
resentments of his debauches are nothing corresponding with his, he sees that I
am not inclined that way, and yet, if he speaks true, he loves me more than all
the world. What do you think Sejanus came for? it was but to tell me with the
best of his language the great love and affection of Caligula. For my part I
would soon ride my self of their convers, but that, it may be, the Gods has
designed me for their instruments to reclame them from their vices, and for
that end haith stirred up this affection in Caligula; which I cannot believe to
proceed from his own wicked nature. See how innocently he interpreted the
affection of that beast: but I having heard of the common crimes and abominable
actions not sitting to be named done upon men by the beastly buggerers of that
City, I suspected Caligula's affection, and desirous that the prince might
beware of him, Sir (said I) your thoughts are too pure and inno^ent to imagine
the turpitude and abominable vices of this age, inormity is the greatest desire
of Great men, for not being content with that gender which Nature has given,
for the venting of their Lusts, they harbor desires so odious that they are
not to be named. In the fairest grass lurkes the greatest serpent, and under
the most specious words the greatest deceit. I have good reason to suspect
Caligula, for his evil nature and frequent debauches declares he cannot love
the virtuous. This which he bears you is nothing but a lust that would lead
him to actions unfit to be spoken, and for which end he has made Sejanus his
pandar. Dardanus was amazed at these words, being not able to speak a great
while. At last, But do think it Epidauro? (said he extremely irritated) Oh
heavens can man be guilty of such crimes! I Will make Caligula sensible he has
no effeminate in hand, and Sejanus repent that ever he served him in this
action. Sir (said I) I beseech you do not praecipitate your sel^ into actions
that may acquire the anger of Tiberius, and so endanger your life, upon my
thoughts and imaginations, at least have clearer knowledge from their own words
or actions before you make such considerable men your enemies, and run your
self into inevitable ruin, by a temerity that can do you as little good, as you
can do them hurt. I had but just laid the Princes passion when Caligula came
in: my Master gave him a reception without exhibiting any disturbance, or show
of anger. Methought I saw at his first coming in, I know not what flagrancies
in his eyes, which I believe was but the exhibition of that abomiable lust
which boiled in his veins. He expressed his wonted civilities, and sought to
express the ardency of his affection, by the stricktnesse of his embraces. My
master entertained him, with many ordinary discourses, which he seemed to
endure with wounderfull impatience, and often turning his eyes like comets on
Dardanus thought to make him understand his desire, by that ocular
demonstration. At last the prince as 'twere complying with his desires, which
he did to see the utmost of his inrentions, led him into a chamber, which was
his or^inary place of repose, and seating himself upon the side of the bed gave
liberty to Caligula to exhibit what he was. It was a long time before the
strength and sury of his Lust could overcome that awe which the gravity and
Majesty of young Dardanus had struck him with, 'twas that suspended his
embraces, till night began to veil that Majesty, and seemed to lend its
darkness, to shoddow a crime unworthy the least of any light. The darkness
beginning to hide those fair eyes of the Prince, which stroke an awe, into the
soul of Caligula, and which with their lightning carried such a virtue that
over power'd the vicious thoughts and instigations of that wretch, he began to
cast his lascivious arms about his neck, and pressing his cheeks with his
lips. Ah dear Dardanus (said he) how surpassing is thy beauty all the Roman
dames!Thou have robbed them of all their glory, and the beauty of the fairest
could never gain that power over my soul as thine has done, with that he
pressed the Prince backward upon the bed, and began to use uncivil actions,
which were the preparitories to his crimes. Dardanus thoroughly heated with a
generous disdain, forced himself up, and thrusting Caligu'a backward
overturned him in the flore. Base Paedicator, (said he) was this the scope of
your faind love and affection? Did you think me some Sp^do that could endure
the embraces of a monster fraught with impieties, and the most horrid of
crimes? This moment ought to give termination to that impious life of thine,
but I spare it for the sake of Germanicus, who never did act worthy repentance
or crimination but in giving life to thee. Caligula was so amazed at this
repulse, that 'twas a long time er'e he could recollect himself to speak.
Dardanus (said he at last) I should take this at no man's hands living besides
yours, It Is I that am abused, for you gave leave for that perpetration which
otherwise I should not have dared to have ventured on. When? replied the
Prince. By Sejanus (said he) this day. He has both deceived and abused you:
(replied Dardanus) For such horrid impieties never entered into my breast, but I
shall rew^rd his lenocinium and make the hilts of my sword kiss that breast so
full of impieties. The Prince calling me commanded that Caligula might be
lighted forth with a tapor, and turning from him went into another room: he
stood a great while with his eyes dejected, at last seeing the Prince not
there, he followed me muttering I know not what revenge. Tell your master (said
he to me at parting) that he will repent what he has done; he should have
considered my quallity and power when he affronted me. Dardanus little regarded
his threats when I told him, but smiling, I did not (said he) believe such
vicious desires could have been harbourd in the breast of man, as I now see by
this paedo. This City (replied I) as it has in it the most eminent virtues, so
likewise has it the greatest vices, they are both intermixed, and neither are
wanting in this populous place. The next day Dardanus met Sejanus in the
street, and not being able to moderate his anger, told him very roughly, that
the day before he had relinquished his office of captain to play the Pandar or
worse and for reparation he desired to accompany him into the field where the
should see he was neither woman nor child. Sejanus being of a temper extremely
cholorick, gave command to some of his soldiers that followed him (he being
captain of the Pretorian Cohorts) to cut my master in pieces. They who were not
to dispute the legality of his command, showed they were true soldiers by
their blind obedience, about ten of them evaginated their swords, whose
glittering had been enough to have sent a mean spirited man to the lower shads.
The Prince as young as he was, nothing terrified at their number, or power,
drew his weapon, and with the first thrust had almost sunk Sejanus with giving
him a sight of the effusion of his own blood. Go base stuprator (said he) the
life of Drusus and the whordome thou have committed with his wife, should in
justice have long since finished thy days. The soldiers in the mean time had
let fall their weapons on Dardanus and had made way for the effusion of that
blood which was too royal to be so basely spilt. I gave him my weak asistance
and the love I bore him made me more valiant than ordinary. But the wonders
that the Prince did are incredible; he fought not like a man despaireing of his
life, or desirous to dye in a kind of furious precipitancy, but like one of
Judgment and wisdom, so guarding himself, and so offending them that he laid
eight of them at his feet, to accompany the other two which fortunatly I had
slain. These were Romans and of the stoutest of the Romans, and therefore you
will look upon it more then the routing of an hundred Asians. But this extreme
valor could not have long deterred my masters death, for twenty more of those
soldiers drawing their swords had divided us into as many pieces if at that
instant Caligula had not come to our assistance, who seeing so great hurly
burly in the midst of the City, pressed through the crowd, being desired by
all the people to save the life of a youth whom Sejanus sought to murder. He
arrived just at the instant of this fresh assault, and beholding Dardanus in
that danger, went below his greatness to implore Sejanus for our lives.
Sejanus believing one day he might prove as good a master as Tiberius, did not
dare to displease him, and though his anger were implacable yet he seemed to
comply, and commanded his soldiers to restrain their hands. My master was more
vexed that he was succored by Caligula than at the death he should have
received. Sir (said he softly to Caligula) why do you not perfect your
threatenings, now you haveso fair an opportunity? for do not think that this
obligation shall make me think you less monstrous, and impious than before.
Caligula replying nothing, caused us to be conveyed to our lodgings, where he
saw our wounds dressed, my masters were many but not very deep nor mortal, mine
were fewer and less dangerous he being the chief ^utt of their endeavors.
Caligula left us not til 'twas very late in which time he bestow'dmany foolish
and impertinent speeches on the beauty of my master and told him that his eyes
had given him more wounds than he had received from the hands of Sejanus's
soldiers. My master told him that those words did him mo^e hurt than all the
wounds he should receive in all his life. About the middle of the night the
smart of my wounds keeping me awake, I heard a murmer of voices, and whispering
in the street, with the noise some made in forceing the gates of the house. I
got presently to the window and putting my head through the grates I espied
Sejanus by the light of the torches, and about thirty soldiers with him,
endeavoring to force the gates with iron bars. Affrighted at the man's
wickedness I ran to the prince's bedside and suddenly awaking him, told him
that he had but few moments to live if he did not save his life immediately,
after I had told him what I had seen. Come (said he) let us die willingly,
however I will not be slain in my bed; it may be this wounded arm may yet give
that impious Sejanus a just reward, and I may have the content to see him
expire with me. He presently left his bed, and made himself ready with more
agility than I could have imagined. Taking his sword come Epidauro (said he)
let us not await their coming to us, let us meet them half way, and show that
our courage is not exhausted with our blood. I seeing his resolution flung my
self at his feet, and told him with tears that he ought not so rashly to
precipitate himself, but to save that life which was not to be at his own
dispose, since so many had interest in it, and whilst there was a way open for
our safety. What said he must I fly then? have I been thus long in learning to
fight? and must I learn now to fly? I replied that to precipitate himself into
such an unequal fight was not a sign of valor but of despair, which was the
badge of a coward, and could never enter into an heroic breast. And though he
had learned to fight yet he never learned to cope with such a multitude, and
that it was no sige of cowardice, or would be any stain to his honor to save
his life by a retreat from an inevitable death, when no extremity pressed him
to it. And that in his slight he would show his wisdom, but in his stay folly
and madness, well then (said he at last) I Will save thy life since thou art so
unwilling to lose it.

By that time he had said thus they were got to the chamber door which I had
fastened with two great iron bolts, which secured us whilst we gained a back
door at the end of a gallery into which our chamber door opened. Fastening that
door after us we descended a part of winding stares which brought us into the
garden, out of which we got into the street, and so escaped to a friends house
of my masters. He told us that there would be no safety for us in the City so
long as Sejanus was our enemy. My master being willing to leave Caligula
procured horses of his friend and departed before it was light. He was out of
the City before he had resolved whither to go, at last being througly irritated
at this unworthy doings of Sejanus, he told me he was resolved to go to the
Emperor Tiberius and complain of his debauches. I sought with all the
arguments I had to cause him break that resolution, knowing that the Emperor
had put to death some of the chiefest men in Rome for speaking against his
favorites, so that the danger he incurred was no less then that we escaped.
But not being able to alter his resolutions we road directly to Neapolis where
the Emperor was. When we were there we understood he was in the Isle Capra.
Our journey, although I had been careful to dress my masters wounds, had so
disturbed them that they bled afresh, and put him into great danger,
nevertheless he would be conducted to the Isl^ which was not far, being come
thither and admitted into the presence of the Emperor, he put one knee to the
ground, and bowing with a very handsome grace. Sir (said he with a tone that
ravished the ears of his auditors) I come now from Rome bloody as you see, and
full of wounds, having received them from the hands of Sejanus though unjustly
and most cruelly, he making those Pretorian bands which are for the safeguard
of the City, to become the destruction of the commonwealth. I doubt not but
your Majesty knows what belongs to the rules of regiment, and I know you are
too good a Prince to suffer your subjects to groan under the tyranny of a man
who is grown insupportable, and whose frequent debauches and cruelties have
almost subverted the order and rules of that City, which heretofore has been
the harbor for the distressed, but now is become as the most dangerous rock in
the Ocean: strangers shun the place, the Citizens are weary of it, and all cry
out of the insolences of that man, who, whilst you are here for your repose,
plays the Emperor, does what he list, commands all, and abuses the authority
you have put into his hands. The reason Sir, why you have not heard of this
before now, was for fear of the danger they might incur by your severity who
should adventure to speak against one so highly favored by your Majesty: but
I having less fear of death than desire of doing good to the commonwealth,
bringing these wounds to testify the verity of my speech, have adventured upon
the clemency of your Majesty to let you know the insolency of him who
dominering over Rome debaseth your glory and authority; and makes that sacred
name be spoken evil of, which otherwise would be had in reverence and
estimation.

Tiberius stood still a great while after the Prince had spoken, being amazed
at the port and animosity of a youth, at last resenting what my master had
spoken. Sejanus shall not long abuse us thus (said he) Those that were about
him, who were all enemies to Sejanus, and to his greatness, seeing so fair an
occasion, confirmed my masters speech, and so irritated the emperor that he
told them he would do them justice.

We returned to Neapolis where we stayed some weeks for the sanation of our
wounds, the next news we heard was the death of Sejanus by the Emperors order:
Goodness can never rejoice at another fall, Dardanus no sooner heard of his
death but he bewailed him, as if he had lost a friend, and repented him that
ever he had instigated the Empe^our against him: I had no thoughts (said he)
that the Emperor would have taken away his life my end was that he might be
but humbled by the loss of his authority. But I see both the favors and
displeasures of Princes can keep no mean, they are always in extremes and
fatal. Our wounds being cured Dardanus went to see the chiefest places in the
City, and walking by the temple of Mavors accidentally met with Caligula; He
was not so glad but my master was as sorry at that accident. Caligula
embraceing him, you need not fear Sejanus now (said he) he has expiated the
fault he has committed against you with his life, you may return now to Rome
and be secure. I did not think said he to find you here, I came about some
business to the Emperor but I see now 'twas my good genius that has been my
conductor, since I have met with a happiness I did not expect. Dardanus would
presently have taken his leave of him, having a perfect antipathy against him,
but Caligula would needs accompany him to his lodging. After that beast was
departed, I fear said Dardanus lest this base paederastes should make use of
his authority here so near Tiberius and endeavor to force me to consent to his
abominable vice, I am resolved Epidauro to leave this place tomorrow and to
return either to Atheans or Byzantium, for I cannot endure the thought much
less the sight of this Caligula. I encouraged him for this departure knowing
that the King his father was in no small trouble for his departure from A^hens.
But before night we were taken prisoners by order from Caligula, ten of them
lost their lives in the attempt, but being overpowred, we wete deprived of our
weapons, and our hands bound, and put into a liter, we were carried privately
to a very fair house and put into a room well furnished, but as strong as any
prison. Being at liberty we had time to consider the wickedness of Caligula,
and by what means we might escape this imprisonment. Whilst we were in these
considerations he came to us and told my master that which he had done was only
out of fear least he should have left his company, on which his life depende^,
and that he should fear no other injury than that of his restraint. The Prince
not permitting him to go on: do what you can monster (said he interupting him)
but it shall be neither prison nor torment that shall make me yield to your
monstrous brutuallity. The Prince was too, angry to be contested with, and
Caligula was feign to depart without more words. He visited us constantly twice
a day for a week, but seeing there was no persuading Dardanus to hear him so
much as mention his wicked desires he departed in a rage and told him that he
was resolved he should never escape from that prison till he had consented to
those embraces he desired. I was very much troubled for fear Caligula would run
to extremities and force my master to that abhored act, searching and trying
every bar of the window I at last sound one loose, which after almost a whole
days labor I got out of the Fastening, although it gave no means of escaping
through the window, it being too high and other cross bars hindering, yet we
preserved it for a weapon against the last exegent. The next day Caligula told
the Prince he was resolved no longer to depricate for a thing which was in his
power, and to which he was resolved to force him. He bid him take his choice
whether he would consent willingly, or be forced, for he would stay no longer,
Dardanus was so vexed that he would not answer him one word, but his looks
exhibited the aversion he had to his motion. Caligula departed, vowing before
the morning to have his will. We expected he would be as good as his word, and
therefore we would not go to bed that night. I gave the Prince the iron bar for
his defense, and so awaited the pleasure of Caligula. About the middle of the
night we heard our prison door unlock, and by the torches they brought we saw
Caligula, enter with his sword drawn, and eight men more with planks and bords.
They knew we had no weapons to resist them, and therefore they thought it a
very easy matter to bind us according to the directions of Caligula whose
sword was to be their defense. The Prince having a weapon, and seeing them
weaponlesse, accounted this conquest so poor that he would not so much as rise
from his seat to oppose them. As Soon as they were entered they made fast the
door on the inside, and laying down their planks, joined them together, at
whose ends were sower iron stables with loops, into which they had intended to
have locked the Princes arms and legs, and so to have exposed him to the
enormous lust of that poedo. When they had made every thing fit, come (said
that brute I mean Caligula) we must force the modesty of this young man, who
like many virgins will out of pudicity be forced to what they desire, see how
he sits, you need not fear his struggling, with that these hangmen advanced with
every one a cord in his hand, but the first as came with in the reach of the
Prince, paid for his boldness, the blow being delivered with a sure hand, and
animated by a fury that possessed him at the sight of Caligulas's wickedness,
the bar entered his skull and beat his brains into his companions faces. This
amazed those pucill souls, and the animations of Caligula, were to no purpose
for they did not dare to come within the reach of the Prince his weapon.
Caligula with his sword did his endeavor to deprive the Prince of his life,
but he with one blow broke it in the middle, and left him as weaponlesse as his
companions. In the mean time I gained the door and getting thence the Keys,
deprived them of all hope of flying, after the fall of four of those wretches
the Prince told the rest that they were not to expect their lives but by
binding Caligula after the same manner, as they had purposed to have bound him.
They would have accepted of any conditions for their lives, and they thought
this but a poor ransom, for what they had deserved, they presently bound
Caligula and fastened him to the board, who was so enraged that he endeavored
to have tore his own flesh, but that he could not reach it with his teeth, for
his neck, arms and feet were so fast that he could not stir any way. After I
bound the hands of the other four behind them (who never resisted) that they
might not unbind Caligula. After the Prince had upbraided that monster
sufficiently with his wickedness we departed (locking the door after us that
they might not pursue us) and left them to be found the next day with scorn and
laughter. We immediately went to the port, and finding a ship just at break of
the day bound for Africa and putting off, we embarked our selves and with a
fair wind arrived on that shore, the Prince being extremely contented at the
retaliation Caligula had met with.

We stayed not long on that shore, but imbarquing in a vessel bound for
Byzantium, we crossed good part of that archipellago, when the usual
Caprichiousnesse of that element displayed it self, and after a long aestuation
of the waters, our unfortunate vessel struck against a rock on the coast of
Cilicia. We were forced to make our arms do the office of oars, and by dividing
that liquid element gain that more stable and sollid one. After we had
recovered the shore and had lost our weariness and wetnesse by the
refreshments we purchased of the inhabitants of the place, we traveled by
land, going directly to the Propontis, intending to cross over there to
Byzantium. We were almost at our intended place when we were set upon by ten
men who lived on the spoil and ruin of others. We opposed them at least two
hours and the incomparable valor of the Prince had laid three of them at his
feet when they found that he was neither invincible nor invulnerable, for the
loss of blood at so many wounds which he had received had taken away the
vigor of his arm, and made his blows but weak and inconsiderable, he was
falling to the earth, and those desperate assasins were about to perpetrate a
villainy, which would have extracted tears from the eyes of a whole Kingdom,
when one arrived at that exigent, who dissipated those murderers sooner than
the bright shine of Sol could the smallest mist. That inpious one who had his
arm and sword a loft, with an intent to have plunged it into the breast of the
Prince, lost it before he could execute his determination for the sword of our
deliverer amputing it close to his shoulder made it fall at the feet of
Dardanus, as it were out of humility for his superbous insurrection.

Flying like thunder and lightning amongst the rest, he did such actions that
must needs loose their glory and their grace by being told by a humane tongue.
But two escaped his fury for which they were beholden to their agility and
slight. What we had seen made us doubt whether it were not Mavors himself, and
made us approach him with reverence; but the Prince and our deliverer no sooner
beheld one another, but they fell betwixt each others arms, and with a joy
inexpressable continued a long time without utterance. To keep you no longer
from the knowledge of this content, and wrapped, 'twas his dear friend Argelois
who so fortunately came to our succor, and whose sight, with the consideration
of what he had done, had almost caused Dardanus to expire in his joys. After
the first ardencies were over, Argelois and my self leading the Prince between
us, with the help of Fonteus, his Squire, we went toward the house of Miletus
a wealthy merchant and father to Argelois. By the way we saw a man who crossing
the path before us was taking another way, but looking at a distance upon us,
and seeing us lead the Prince with some difficulty, he turned toward us, and
coming near. I think (said he) that this Gentleman whom you lead is wounded,
If you are destitute of a surgeon, being (as I think) far from houses, and
if you dare trust my fidelity, I shall apply that which shall soon stop the
efflux of his blood which else will be much to his detriment. The man coming
nearer and looking very earnestly upon the prince, Oh Gods! (cried he out) what
see I here! And with that embraceing his knees, Ah! my prince (said he) have
you forgot your servant Chiron. The Prince at these words embraceing him, asked
after the health of his parents. There is nothing lacking to make them happy,
but your company (said he) ever since the King heard of your departure from
Athens he has sent most of his servants to all places, whither he could think
you were gone, to seek you. Twice have I returned after several investigations
to no purpose, and now was I returning the third time when my charity forceing
me to help the wounded, has repaid me with the fin^ing of my Prince. See what
it is to be charitable, had I not had pity on others I had lost this happiness
I have found. Presently this able su^gion causing us to set the Prince on the
side of a green hill aply'd something that stopped the blood, and left dressing
of him, till we could come to some house for fear of the wind. Causing the
Prince to mount his horse we presently attained the house of Miletus, where we
were very generously received, and where we stayed the recovery of the Prince.

The excellent remedies of this vulnerary Physician soon recuperated Dar^anus,
and gave him the liberty of leaving his consinement. He was no sooner well, but
preparing to be gone, he desired Argelois to accompany him to Byzantium. Sir,
(said Argelois) there is no happiness that I esteem like that of your company,
and these ligaments both of friendship and favors which I received, make me
inseparably yours. But my word (which every generous man ought to keep
inviolably) being already eng^ged, I must deny my self of the happiness you so
freely proffer me. So it is, that I have already promised to meet the general
of those Legions which lay here abouts, about seven days hence, and to
accompany him into Armenia against Artabanes, who has begun the war in those
parts against the Romans. The Prince hearing this would not u^ge him to break
his promise but told him: seeing 'twas so that he could not accompany him he
was resolved not to return, but to accompany him into Armirinia. Love ^oth not
so much consider our own pleasure and delight as of the object beloved, there
was nothing more agreeing to Argelois than the company of the Prince, and yet
he persuaded him not to go, exhibiting the hazard and danger he should incur,
and the trouble he should cast on his father and Country. But no remonstrance
shaking the resolutions of Dardanus, he wrote a letter to King Palemon his
father, in which he desired to be pardoned for the liberty he had taken, and
that seeing he had sufficiently profited in his studies, he would give him
leave to follow the exercise of arms, that if ever he came to possess that
Crown which his father enjoyed, and which he wished might sit long upon his
head; he might know as well how to make use of his arms in war, as of his
learning in peace, that by the one he might quell the rebellious, and by the
other maintain in peace the disobedient. With this letter he dispatched Chiron
with hopes of his sudden return. The day being come wherein Argelois according
to his promise was to meet those forces destined for Armenia, we departed from
Miletus, the Prince using that liberality that evermore accompanies able and
generous spirits. Miletus and his wife could not restrain those tears which
natural Love extracted at the abrepsion of their son, whose virtue indeed every
where acquires the Love of the most barbarous. When we were come to the place
of randezvous the Captain of those Legions, made Argelois a Centurion, whose
authority he equally shared with the Prince, being at the height of his
contentment in having so dear and noble a Companion. If it might be lawful to
commemorate the actions of Fonteus and my self, with those of our Masters, I
would tell you that we sought to imitate them in an affection so cordial and
entire. Fonteus and my self then began that amity, which ever since we have
kept inviolably, and which cherisht our duties and love to our masters. We
having the honor to attend on them, we marched into Armenia, enduring those
hardships which are attending on sudden and hard marches. We there found a
potent enemy to deal with, but the courage of the soldiers, and I may say the
valor and judgment of the Prince and Argelois made us rather victors, than
else, though their number almost trebled ours. Tiberius was too slack in
sending forces to this war, which was maintained a long time with the ordinary
Legions, but at last perceiving the consequence of it, He made Vitellus General
of all the forces in the Orient and Lord President of Syria. Whilst he was
gathering his forces together that he might come to us with a considerable
body, we gained a notable victory against Artabanes, in which conflict my
Prince through the heat thar animated him, had so far engaged himself, that he
was surrounded with his adversaries, and had undoubtedly lost his life in a
Corona of two or three hundred Parthians, if his tutular Angel the invincible
Argelois had not with a kind of prodigy broke that troop with the force and
fury of his arm, and made them know by the terror that he brought, that there
was nothing impossible for him to effect when the life of his friend was in
danger. Two more scirmishes we had before the Arrival of Vitellus, in both
which the Prince my master encountered with Arsa^es son to the King of Parthia,
and by the valor that he showed, made himself feared of the Parthians, and
esteemed of the Romans. Artabanes supplying the slain with fresh men, made up
the breaches we had made, and had got a very considerable body before Vitellus
came to us. As Soon as he was come, he gained in Pharasmanes to assist him, King
of Hyberia, to whose troops those were adjoined which Argelois led. We came at
last to a battle with Orodes another son of Artabanus, and one whose valor was
much esteemed. Dardanus, that day made himself remarkable by the terror which
he carried where ever he went. He had cut himself a way through the midst of
his enemies, and with a lane of dead bodies came where Orodes was animaring his
men, and both by words and deeds instigateing them not to sink under the force
of their enemies. To him the Prince buckled, who entertained him with courage
and skill, a long while they fought, hemmed in with intermingled troops of
Parthians and Romans, who for the defense of these two leaders made the
greatest conflict of the battle. Dardanus at last wounded Orodes in many
places, who had undoubtedly died by his victorious hand, had not a fresh supply
thundered in amongst us, seeing the danger of their Prince, and carried him
wounded as he was from under the sword of the Prince. It was on him they sent
all their fury, for sleying those that opposed them, they hemmed him in, and
thought to have triumphed over his life with their numbers. I that was bound to
follow him, accompanied him in that exigent, and saw those marvels he did,
which should I relate, they would make you think I hyperbolized his actions, or
spoke more by the rule of my affection than the verity of them. So many
death-giving weapons which surrounded him, were not able to take away his life,
the boldest sell under his sword, and served for Rampers of defense against
other invaders, he defended himself, though wounded in many places, and drowned
in blood and sweat. It was impossible but he must have yielded to their number,
wounds, loss of blood, and saintness, and at last have fell amongst the
extinct, if Argelois had not arived, who hearing of the danger of the Prince
broke through with some resolute followers, and there doing some of his usual
wonders. gave life and freedom to Dardanus, and an absolute victory to the
Romans. By these, and other exploits Argelois and Dardanus, acquired so great
fame amongst the Romans, that they thought them somewhat more than men, and
gave them more applauses than their modesties would permit them to take. The
most noblest sought to acquire their friendship, and both the Generals and
Soldiers sought to give them testimonies of their common resentments, with
their applauses and civilities.

At last the Parthians were beaten, and Vitellus with the chief of his Army
retired to Artaxata, where they made great preparations for the crowning of
Tyridates King of Arminia. At the same time the Clites a people of Capadocia
rebelled, against whom Vitellus sent Tribulus with four thousand of the
legionary soldiers, with the choicest of the Auxilliaries. This Tribulus above
all the rest had in great estimation the Prince Dardanus, and had showed his
affection by his many civilities. Dardanus on the other side showed that his
virtue and his valor had won him to a very great familiarity, and that he
presered him to all the Romans in the Army. There being now no longer occasion
of showing their valor in Arminia, that being the chiefest cause of their
jorney they put themselves amongst the forces of Tribulus, who extraemely
joyful of their company, told them, that he accounted his enemies already
slain, fince he was accompanied with that valor that was invincible. He gave
them the chief command under himself, and by many other civilities made it
appear that his love and affection was sincere.

You must not doubt but that those people we went against, were soon over come
having to deal with the conquerers of Nations and the two invincible youths, my
Prince and Argelois. We indeed routed them and quieted that nation
notwithstanding those scopulosous and nemorosous places which sheltred them
from our fury. Dardanus and Argelois showing their valor daily to be augmented
with their travel and labor, made Tribulus for the good service they had done
him to build two trophies on the two hills, Codrus and Davarus on both which
they had exhibited the utmost a mortal arm could be able to effect. Valor
has a secret force in gaining of hearts, and causing Love, but not only the
valor of these two heroes, but their amiable carriage, and pleasing
conversation had so won Tribulus, that he wished his enemies yet to subdue that
he might longer have enjoyed their company.

For these wars being finished the Prince resolved to return, that he might
ease the hearts of so many hundreds that languished in his absence. Before we
lest the generous Tribulus he opened (as I may say) the secrets of his heart to
the Prince, and discovered some things conserning the Princess Eliana which but
few in the world knew of besides himself, and showing him letters which he had
received from his wife at Rome, complained much against the insolences of Piso
son to the murderer of Germanicus. These freedoms caused the Prince to
discover himself to him and to proffer him the shelter of his fathers court
against those enemies Fortune had raised him.

And promised him to go and visit Eliana, and to be her guardian till he could
disengage himself from those wars to come to Rome. These generosities caused
Tribulus to embrace the Prince, and to desire his pardon for that his ignorance
had made him not to treat him as a Prince. Tribulus seeing Dardanus his
resolutions gave him his tables for his wife, and after a thousand embraces and
expresions of the nearest amity he parted from the Prince, and Argelois;
leading his victorious troops toward Artaxata to meet with Vitellus, we
presently began our journey to Rome, and before we came thither the Prince
accidentally heard that Caligula had employed abundance of emissaries for the
finding of a man that had abused him in Neapolis, whose head he had set a large
price upon, and that he had offered large sums for a Praemium for him that
could bring him either alive or dead. The Prince perceiving the danger he ran
in entering Rome, would not for all that break a promise which he had made to
Tribulus, but sufficiently disguizing himself under the habit of a woman, my
self assuming that of her waiting maid, we entered that Metropolitan, which
inferred chains on all the world, Argelois owning the Prince, for his wife. We
spent ten days very securly, but all our endeavors to find out the wife of
Tribulus was in vain for she had forsaken her house and was retired so
secretly that none of her friends could give us any directions where to find
her. We had given over that investigation and were about to leave the city,
when in viewing the palaces and other rarities of the City Caligula had espied
the Prince in his womanish habit, but not knowing him, he sent one of his
^ervants to Fonteus to desire that he might know who she was. Fonteus told the
messenger that she was the wife of his master, who was a stranger, and who had
not been long in those parts. He presently coming to Argelois with a great deal
of Eloquence, begun his civilities, and acquaintance, to which Argelois
answered in very obliging terms, and resolved all his questions with
extemporary fictions. That brute at last casting his eye on my Prince, Your
wife said he to Argelois does so much resemble a man that lately did me the
greatest injury in the world, that did not you aver her to be your wife I
should think 'twas that impostor under a female habit. He parted after these
words, and we not mistrusting the least from that dissimulator, (who verily is
one of the greatest in the world) passed along, laughing to see how neatly we
had beguiled him. But whether it were the extreme beauty that accompanied the
Prince under that dress, or whether the same face now more beautifully
garnished, stirred up the hidden fire of Calugula I know not, but so it was he
was all on fire, and in Love with the wife of Argelois, and before we could
gain our lodging met us again with so many men that in spite of all the
Resistance of Argelois, he forced us two counterfeit females from him leaving
him almost dead with the wounds he had received in our defense, having no other
guard than his sword, we were presently carried to a strong house as prisoners,
but not knowing whether we were discovered or not, we counterfeited the woman
as much as we were able. After those that had brought us thither had left us
within the liberty of several chambers rich enough to have entertained a
princess, and strong enough to have retained a Hercules, Caligula came to us,
having dressed up and perfumed his deformed and rotten carcass, that had my
mistres been in Love with clothes and perfumes she had there met with the
object of her desires.

He approached her with a great deal of respect, and told her, that 'twas only
Love had made him commit that violence, which was contrary to his nature and
disposition, and that deity had not wounded him by halves, but that he had
bestowed all the darts in his quiver upon him, so that he was all wounds, and
all flames, and that no other hands than hers could recuperate him. The Prince
making but a jest of this danger, seeing he was not discovered was resolved to
play upon him, and faining not to understand him: Sir (said she) I am very ill
acquainted with the language of Rome, and I know not how to interpret words
that carry another sense with them: They are paradoxes to me, you tell me you
have fell into the flames, and received many wounds, when I see neither scarr
nor burning. But if it be so and that my hand has that virtue which I was
ignorant of, you needed not to have used this violence to one who accounts it
the highest degree of virtue to be charitable. Ma^iam (said he) these flames
are too internal to be seen, and are far beyond the scorching of the
elementall fire, it is a metaphor which we take up to express the ardencie of
our Love, and were there any thing that could better express it, mine is so
real, you may be sure it would have dictated it to me. Sir (replied my Prince)
I can never trust a double tongue, for how can I believe him that speaks one
thing when he means another? We women do not understand your mysterious kind of
speaking, and had I known that they had spoke in Rome by metaphors I would have
brought one of those priests who use to interpret our Hierogliphiks, it may be
he might have given me the true sense of your words, and told me it is some hot
burning feavour that you have got, or else the Erysipilas, which to cure I am
utterly ignorant of. Alas madam (replied Caligula) I do not believe you are so
ignorant in the terms of Love, as not to understand my meaning, I Love you
madam and that so ardently that I am willing to shed the last drop of my blood
to do you service. Would you be let blood then? (returned this pleasing
counter^it) my husband though he does not use it, yet for a need can do it as
well as any man in R^m^, if you please to send for him. I doubt not but he will
endeavovr to pleasure you. No, madam, you mistake me, (said he) and seeing you
do not understand these amotous terms I Will tell you I Love, yea and it is you
that I Love: and that with an ardency that cannot be parrallel'd. What Me^aphor
is that? (said the countersit madam) you told me flames signify Love, what does
Love signify? adoration and affection (said Caligula) you will make me believe
that I am some divinity anon (said the prince) I do not love to be adored, and
therefore surcease those terms lest being taken for a Goddess I should be
fixed to some altar, and there starved to death with devotions. Caligula was
between vexed and pleased with these kind of answers, but whilst he was
considering what to return, the prince remembering in what condition he had
left Argelois, left these rallaries, and told Caligula, that if he loved her as
he said, or did ever expect any thing at her hands he should send immediately to
see what was become of her husband. Caligula told her he would do that, and any
thing else she would command, and leaving us sent his servant to see after
Argelois, but all their diligence could not find him, nor hear whether he was
alive or dead. This news extremely afflicting my prince, made him consult which
was the best way we could take for our escape, and finding our prison too
strong to be broke, we found it the best way as to counterfeit a compliance
with Caligula and by that means enlarge our freedom. We were honorably
attended, and lacked nothing but our liberties, and that monster seemed so far
in Love with the Prince that he was never out of our companies, he sought to
rectify nature, and to cover those deformities which made him displeasing with
art and care. He fell at last to doting, and rendering himself to the will of
his mistres, became an absolute lover. As Soon as ever he could escape from his
wife he was with us, where he spent most part of his time in discourses as
ridiculous as impertinent. At last he gave us the liberty of a garden to walk
in, and permitted me to go into the City to fetch any thing my mistress wanted,
when he saw that she began to understand him, and to give him hopes of
obtaining his desires. I sought all Rome but could not hear of Argelois, which
made the Prince fear he had been dead, and gave him the true feelings of the
greatest trouble could be raised by the nearest amity. We had been now a month
in this imprisonment, when I being permitted to go into the City bought two
scaling ladders made of silk twisted, that I might carry them undiscovered,
with these we had plotted to have got over the garden wall, which was very
high, and so have escaped, but we were never left there alone, but either
himself or some other company was with us, which frustrated our intent. The
Prince knowing no other means to escape, feigned to be overcome by that
monster, and promised that night to admit him into her chamber, but feigning a
modesty, desired him, not to let any be privy to his escape, and to satisfy
her fear, made him promise to sescure those in the house from coming to the
knowledge of her amoreta's. His thoughts prelibateing his pleasure, presently
testified his Joy in his eyes, and promised to perform every thing punctually.
The night being come the Prince resolved to show him that he had more strength
than an ordinary femal cuting the cords of our bed with which we had resolved
to bind him; we a waited his coming, having a taper burning in the room.

He sailed not to come as he had appointed, but finding my mistress up, I hope
madam (said he) that you have not chaing'd yours resolutions, and out of the
highest of my contentments, to sling me into the greatest misseries by denying
me the fruition of that happiness which I hoped this night to have possessed.
Fear need not cause this change, for I assure you I have taken such order that
your self could not desire more. No Caligula (said my Prince) I hold my
resolutions. Still, and you shall enjoy those embraces you so much desire. With
that rising up he called me, and taking the cords out my hands. You shall see
Caligula what a femal strength is able to do. Caligula was so amazed at this
action that he stood immovable till the Prince had taken hold of his hands. But
when he saw that his mistres had an intent to bind him, between smiling and
frowning not knowing whether to take it in jest or anger, he went to thrust her
from him but he met with a strength that was not so easily to be repulst,
Cailgula (said the Prince) you have been mightily deceived in taking me for a
woman, these hands ought to be fatal to you for your enormities, I am the same
that heretofore by your own instruments bound you to the planchets, when you
had intended a crime against nature and Heaven. With that flinging him on the
flore bound both his hands and feet together notwithstanding all his struggling
and force. When he had bound him so that he could not sturr, your life (said
the Prince) is now at my mercy, but I spare it in hope that by these exemplar
exhibitions of the justice of the Gods, ye will leave you crimes and not force
them to greater severities after your contempts of their mercies. With this we
left him raging mad for this capricio of fortune, and finding the way open into
the garden mad use of our scaleing ladders and so escaped. The next day
chainging our habits into that proper to our sex, we left Rome with the
earliest light, and taking shiping at the mouth of the Tyber we embarked for
Byzantium, where being arived you may conceive with what Joy, and triumph the
Prince was received after so long absence. But he not finding Argelois there,
whom he had hoped might (if he had escaped) have gone theither was so dejected
that he was not sensible of those pleasures they prepared for him, and would
certainly have once more ventured his life in Rome to have heard of his friend,
if his arivall with Tribulus and Eliana had not diverted it, and filled him
with that Joy his presence allways brought with it. They were all entertained
according to the desires of the Prince, Argelois as his friend, favorite and
deliverer, Tribulus to his estate and condition, Eliana as a Princess and
daughter to the Kings ancient friend and ally. They had not been long at the
court before the beauty virtues and comely grace of that Princess, though left
destititute of a crown through the usurpation of the Romans, gained so the
heart of the King and Queen that they thought her a match fit for my Prince
Dardanus, on which there has been many treaties with Tribulus who is to
dispose the princesses mind unto it, who without doubt will not deny to her
self so great happiness. The King is already preparing for this marriage, at
which will be those tryumphs, which this part of Asia never yet beheld.

After Euripides and Lonoxia had made known the pleasure they received by this
relation, and had given Epedauro thanks for his pains, they went to Argelois
whom they found amidst his ordinary musings in the place where they left him.
'Twas almost night, and therefore contracting his stay after some ordinary
discourse he would have took his leave of them, but they proffering to wait on
him to the utmost limits of their praecincts, they went forth into the Grove
together. Euripides joining himself to Argelous went a little before Lonoxia
and Epidauro. Sir (said he softly to Argelois,) I cannot blame this sadness
which I read in your face, I am very sensible of your affliction. Love and
generosity make a kind of war in your breast, the one pleads against Dardanus
the other speaks for him. I confess Fortune could have found out nothing more
Cross, than to make your great friend, deprive you of that felicity you might
have expected in obtaining Eliana. The Gods can witness (said Argelois
sighing) that I could never frame a thought of so much happiness to my self.
No Euripedes that were too high presumption. I am criminal enough in Loving,
which yet may have some Color of pardon, for that it is not in my Power to
forbid, but thoughts being at my own dispose would render me in the highest
degree guilty, should I to please my fantasy think of any other happiness
than that of being her slave and servant. Sir (said Euripedes) your have not
acquitted your self of the promise you made, which was the Relation of those
remarkable passages you have run through; what we have heard from Epidauro, and
which was contingent with the Life of Dardanus is defective, though by the
pleasure we received in that, we may judge what we shall receive in the
relation of the whole. I will not contradict your error (said Argelois) though
I can assure you there is nothing left worthy of your audition, because I hope
it may prove attractive, to draw you past the limmits of your domicile, to
visit that place where I reside, where I engage, if the hearing of my fortune
can do it, to give you that content you propose to your self. You may be sure
(said Euripedes) it shall not be long e're I obtain it, seeing it may be so
easily purchased. As they were about to proceed in their discourse, they heard
the sound of certain voices which by the cicumlation in the air struck their
ears. Stopping that they might the better hear from whence the sound came,
they heard the grons of a man which with a plaintive voice seemed to speak to
some injurors. Desire of helping the distressed, as well as Curiosity caused
this small company to press through the thickest of the trees, following the
sound by their ears: they paced a great way amongst the trees, which being so
thick debarred them of the sight of the men whose voices they had heard. They
were come very near when stopping, they heard very distinctly these words.
Obstinate man! (said one) is it not better for you to give me the knowledge of
what I desire than to endure these torments? when what you preserve is for a
man whom you have sought for in vain these five years, and whom without hope of
ever finding, and your self believing him dead, have given over your search?
Leave being thus injurious to your self, and disclose that treasure which
otherwise must perish with your self. Wee'lshare it betwixt us, and I promise
you more than enough to make you happy for ever, if not, more rigorons torments
than these shall force you at last to confess or else death shall assault you
by my hand. Cruel and false wretch! (replied the other) think not that either
your flatteries or your threats shall be able to extort that from me which I
am resolved never to disclose. All the torments that you are able to inflict my
fidelity to my master shall make me able to bear. No assassin, there are
weapons not fit to be touched by such murtherous wretches as you are for then
they might become distructive to the whole earth, why ceasest thou thy
tormenting; you see I am willing to suffer for that I account these punishments
justly inflicted, in that I have been so foolish as to declare those secrets
which I ought not to have done. And my years might have experienced that a
covetous desire neither regards the laws of Humanity, no^ of the Gods, After
these words they heard the strokes that were inflicted on the complainant, and
being desirous to free that miserable man out of the hands of his tormentors
they hasted to the place where they found a man with his arms bound round about
a tree, and his feet in like manner bound; and being stripped from his shoulders
to his wast, was all over blood; caused from the stripes of two who executed
the commands of another that stood by. They had worn to pieces several reeds
wherewith they tormented him, and were receiving new from the hands of their
master, when these diliverers came. They were exceedingly abashed at the sight
of Argelois and his companions: but their master forcing them to stay, expected
to know who they were. Argelois coming to him demanded what reason he had to
inflict such crueltyes on the man they say tormented. He to^d him that he was
his slave, and that they might punish them without breaking any Laws or giving
any account to any, of their chastisements, and that 'twas not without good
reason that he used such rigorousnesse to the man they beheld; he that was
bound to the tree hearing this expostulation and turning back his head, showed
that his face carried no character of a slave, and his hair and beard which was
grown white with either time, or cares, exhibited an age that might have caused
pity and reverence in his tormentors, Who e're you be (said he) that are
arrived to behold the cruelties of this man, believe him not, for I never yet
was a slave to any one much less to him. I have a persuasion that ye are
generous enough to release me from this man's unjust persecutions, without being
persuaded, by any other oratory than that of my blood and wounds, which are
praevalent enough to exussitate pity in any heart that professes humanity. He
spoke these words with such an indifferency that was incapable for the heart of
a slave to have entertained.

Argelois commanded those who had been his tormentors to become his releaso^s,
and being unbound he came and gave them those thanks that so great a mercy
could require. I ever thought (said he) that just Heaven would at last ease me
of those miseries I underwent without murmuring, and that he would with some
kind of miracle exhibit his goodness to me. I see at last my suggestions were
not in vain, and he has made you the happy instruments of my release. To you
therefore I devote my self, and will for ever term my self by that name,
which my tormentor but now imposed upon me. I am your slave and shall think it
no disgrace to acknowledge these mercyes by that title and place. Stopping at
these words on a sudden he fixed his eyes upon Euripedes, and showing by his
sudden alteration in his face I know not what emotion in his heart, he was not
able to speak or stir; they all took notice of this emotion, and imputeing it
to his pains were about to exercise their Charities about him, when crying
out, O Gods! (said he) either now you complete my joys, or I am extremely
deluded. Certainly this face I behold bears some marks of that which I so long
have sought, and though time since I saw it, has spread it with a silver down,
yet its species being thoroughly impressed in my mind, I am extremely mistaken if
it be not that which must consummare my happiness, and give end to my
investigations. Oh assure me my deliver! (keeping his eye sixth on Euripedes)
that my joy is not a vanity, pluck me out of this doubt, and end this emotion,
by telling me if you never knew Euripedes. He was startled at these words and
looking very intentive upon him told him he did not know him, but for him whom
he had named if he meant Euriped^s of Cilicia he needed no longer doubt but he
beheld him. Those countries wh^^h I have past, and those torrid climates (said
the stranger) which our ages poets have falsely sung to have been uninhabitted,
through which I have wandered, may very well through the heat of that oriental
deity have altered my countinuance, that you may not therein see any Printes of
that of your servant Meadors. But (continued he casting himself at Eurip^des
his feet) behold him who once gloried under that title and who could never
account himself happy, so long as he was separated from Euripedes. The Gods
who in plucking me out of the midst of my mi^eries, and with a kind of miracle
and so unexpectedly placeing me in the midst of my joys and happiness,
proclaim to the world ^y me that there is nothing so pleasing to them as that
resignation to their wills which they will receive before they effect our
desires or Prayers.

Euripedes astonished at this accident fell almost insensible upon his squires
face, and by the embraces that he gave him, showed that though time had defaced
his image in his memory, yet that it had not rooted out the affection he bore
in his his heart. After their first joys had given them leave to recollect
their dissipated spirits, Argelois came and was partaker of their content.
Presently clothing Meador they departed, and dismissing his tormentors, carried
with them the chief, whom they bound resolving to make him feel the effects of
the like scourges. By the way asking after Araterus, I left him (said Meador)
in that prosperity which the greatest Monarchs in the East enjoy. I intend to
give you the relation of all that is remarkable since our unhappy separation,
and thesore I will not anticipate my relation, by declaring the condition of
your kindsman, They were just then arrived at the grot, and being almost night.
I must take my leave of you (said Argelois) but let me desire you to deny your
self that contenment and pleasure of hearing the relation of your Squire till
the morrow, that I also may partake of it: In the mean time you may make him
acquainted with those visissitudes Fortune has engaged you in. I shell deny my
self this and much more to pleasure you (replied Euripedes) I will follow your
Council and Crucisie, my desires till you come. Argelois gane him many thanks
for that favor, and told him he would secure his prisoner in the Castle,
having a more convenient lodging for such persons than he could afford in the
grote. Leaveing them in their contentments, he returned with his prisoner and
Epidauro to the Castle, where according to his order he was secured. Night
having endued her sable Mantles, and the princesses being in their Chambers, he
went directly to histen to take that repose for which the night was ordaned.

The end of the fifth Book.
ELIANA.
BOOK the sixth.
THat bright and glorious Eoan Deity, had no sooner dissipated the Nocturnal
sables, but the amorous A^gelois leaving his repose, went to suspire forth his
prayers to love, in the air of the refrigerating morning. His meditations which
were ever large on that Subject, kept him imprisoned within the bounds of
certain walks, till the Princesses willing to participate of the comfortable
freshness of the morning, had unexpectedly to both, supprized him in the midst
of his thoughts. The sight of these two fair ones, startled him, and hudling up
those indigested thoughts which either Love or desire had spread before his
fancy; he would out of a kind of bashfulness have left the walk free for these
two blushing Aurora's, but both at once giving him a sign to the contrary, made
him convert his civility into obedience, which ought to be coessential with
ardent love. He approached them, and with a kind of timorousness proper to
Lovers, rendered them his good-morrows, in terms obliging, and full of civility.
He was a little in disorder at those extraordinary whitenesses which his
searching eyes dicovered, for Eliana having only slipped on her morning gown,
with a pinck blushing mantle about her neck, had left a free passage for the
busses of the soft-liped wind, to those o^bes whose altitude and fairness had
cast our Lover into new contemplations which lasted till Eliana's cheeks
out-vi'd the color of her mantle. Panthea perceiving with what appetite the
eyes of Argelois sed on the exposed beauties of Eliana, a little ambitious and
envious at the same time, sighed and spoke together, something, to very little
purpose, but that it served for a divertiz^ment, and with drew Argelois from
following the bent o^ his thoughts. He had not often seen his mistress in that
dress, which made it seem in his eyes, more setting off than the richest
dress, ordered by the hands of her most accomplished maidens.

All those loose garments which were but slipped on and which hung with a kind
of ordered disorder, seemed to him, to make a perfect harmony, and what it may
be, might not have been becoming to one less fair and handsome, seemed by the
luster it received from her, very becoming to her. Indeed beauty gives a grace
to the ornaments it wears, and in what dress so ever it appears it is still
ravishing and charming, there is none though never so ugly that can detract
from its luster, and through which it will not shine with a splendency able to
overcome it. 'Twas not clothes that made her, but she that made her clothes
beautiful. And as the richest ornaments cannot contribute beauty to a face in
which there is none, so the meanest cannot detract from a beauty of it self
naturally sweet; though I confess ornaments are not without their peculiar
graces and settings ost to meaner beauties, but Eliana's was so transcendent,
that as the meanest dress could not detract from her beauty, so the richest
could add nothing to it. Argelois being diverted by Panthea from beholding
that fair skin, which carried albitude extraordinary, and a heat, through the
gentle live of her bed which concorded with that of his heart, he walked some
turns with those fair Princesses's, and telling them the reason of his stay,
the last night, made them acquainted with his engagement that day to visit
Euripedes. Panthea unwilling to be deprived of his company so long, desired to
accompany him, and proposing it to Eliana, she consenting, they told him their
intentions. I had thought Madam (said he to Eliana) that you durst not have
adventured into those woods again, considering the danger you were in the last
time you see there. You see therefore (said she) I fear nothing under your
protection. Panthea interposing told them they ought not to let Euripedes
expect Argelois, whilst they spent the time in those discourses, and give him
cause to think he was capable of breaking this word. Eliana following her
council they left him, joyful that he should enjoy their company, and went to
put on those robes suitable to their qualities and estate. They spent little
time in dressing them, having but very little humor to that court vanity, and
yet their ornaments we so rich that they seemd to vie with their beauties.
Eliana had dressed her self like one of the Nimphs or the goddess Flora, and as
if she meant to suit with the time of the year, she had put on a gown of a
verdant hew branched with leaves and flowers so artificially, that they made
raire knots and poses which served for compartments to her gown. Panthea's was
a bright azure, in which shone so many bright stones that it represented the
firmament in its greatest luster of stars, and by the which she would have
intimated the constancy and charity of her affection. Having sent for Argelois
they entered a clariot, and putting off their train took none with them but
Tribulus and their two confidents, with the squires of Dardanus and Argelois.

Being arrived at the grove they sent back their Chariote, and entering
Euripedes groate, received all the welcomes of that generous old man. You will
not increpat me for my stay (said Argelois) seeing I have brought such company
that may excuse it. It Is enough (said Euripedes) and this company is so
glorious, that could my wishes be effected, I should break that law, which I
have imposed upon thy thoughts since I have turned Philosopher, and wish now to
be great and potent only that I might give an entertainment some ways
corresponding to their virtue and greatness. But were I a Prince it were
impossible for me to recompense the decima of this favor, in illuminating this
dark grote, with the incomparable luster of their beauties. Eliana and Panthea
reanswering him vicissively made him at last leave these terms of perfection.
Meador who by the virtue of those ointments which his careful master had
applied, found so much ease, that he would not put this Princess to the
trouble of coming into his chamber, but being helped on with his clothes he was
led into the chamber, where Argelois and the two Princesses with the rest of
the company stayed to hear him acquit himself of a relation which he knew they
expected at his hands. Euripedes had entertained them before with those
civilityes that were to be expected at his hands, and therefore there being
nothing now to be done but to audite his relation they caused him to sit down,
who obeyed, and after he had taken some pleasure in beholding the beauty of his
auditors, directing his speech to Euripedes, he began

THE HISTORY of ARATERUS.
VIrtue (what ever the vicious think) although she be often banded against by
that power to which we attribute the name of inconstant, and mutable, at length
overcomes her, triumphs over her, and wears the crowns of her victories with an
immutable fortune. But yet, should she not receive this reward whilst the soul
remains in the domicill of flesh, I am confident the Justice of the Gods would
return it a hundred sold after she is departed to the Elysiume some indeed they
reward here, yet not denying those hereafter: and pay their perseverance, with
rewards corresponding to their deserts. Amongst the rest Araterus has tasted of
their bounty, which is in consideration of his virtue, and though what we are
able to do in consideration of those deities, is nothing and not worthy the
least rewards, yet they are just and repay our wills and devoyres, with
happinesses transcending our merits, and actions. Had you seen the perils and
dangers we past, and the continual prosecution of our ill fortune with the
marchlesse patience of Aratearus, you would have thought, there had been no
other powers than those which continually seek the destruction of mankind,
especially the virtuous, but as he endured all mischances without murmuring so
at last the Gods have repayed him ( I think) without example. I know by your
own relation that the elapsion of so many years has not made you forget the
place and manner of our loss, and I believe that your kinsman had the sight of
those implorations of yours to the Gods, which may be, were the cause of his
preservation. After we had got those small preservations of life, which grew on
the verging branches of the green trees, we returned to that place where we
left you, but finding neither you nor the child, which fortune had cast on that
place, I know not whether, we were more amazed or grieved. At last grief
bursting forth into words and tears Araterus wept forth such complaints, that
testified how ardently he affected you, but amazedness sometimes stopping his
speeches, gave him time to consider which way you could be gone: indeed
sometimes he accused you for leaving him, sometimes he inveighed against
heaven, and then against himself that he dared to speak against either. But at
last turning all against fortune, he made her the sole cause of this accident.
For my part, seeing you gone, and believing that 'twas impossible for us to
escape death by famine in that pl^ce I would have anticipated it, by a voluntary
precipitation into the sea, which like a mad man I had effected had not
Araterus by force more then entreaties deterred me.

After we had somewhat mitigated our grief by the effusion of our tears, and
emission of our complaints, that we might not be guilty of our own deaths,
Araterus having changed my mind with his good instructions, we e^t that food
which was ready prepared by the maturating sun, and which extended themselves
upon the verdant branches. In this condition we lived some weeks, till the
slenderness of of our diet had so macerated our bodies, that we could hardly
make our quotidian walks to the sea side, in hope to find some winged
transporter. In the time we were there Araterus researching that cave in which
the Phantasmes apeared found in the tomb a lose stone, which being taken away
discovered a large plate of copper, on which was insculpted the sea, with that
great lamp of the world emerging it self, with this word in decumanal
characters Oriens, under which was wrote in G^eek this prophecy.

The Praediction.
I B^rcellizeg Druidae having visited the better part of the world for the
acquirement of an art, whereby I might be as wise as the intelligences, or
celestial deiti^s, in the fore knowledge of future things, at last in this
desola^e and solitary Island took up my last habitation, and in this natural
structure ended my days, having attained to the perfection of my art and to
the two hundred and third year of my age. The estate of the world is laid open
to m^ for these many hundred rears to come, but for that I will not make men
acquainted with their own miseries, nor the Arcanum of the Gods I bury all with
my self in this tomb, only this Prediction I leave to be considered by him
whose name is SuretarA, and who I am sure will visit this place.

Praedictio.
Thou shall never more return to thine own country, but shall be a continual
vagrant for many years, from the immergency to the emergency of Sol shall thou
go, wherein recompense of thy virtues, travel and miseries thou shall attain
the greatest Diadem of the Orient, with the fairest and wisest Princess:
Wherethou shall lead thy life in pleasure and end thy days in peace, this is
decreed of thee. S. U. R. E. T. A. R. A.]

After Araterus had read this he showed it me saying there were large promises
for some that he believed were not yet arrived the^e. After I had a while
considered it, I was about to depart, when perceiving the last letter of the
name to be made different from the rest, by a more notable character. I took
more notice of it, and presently found that Suretara was read backwards
Araterus. Immediately calling Araterus, who was gone to the mouth of the cave,
I told him that praediction belonged only to him, and therefore I desired him
to relege it. Smileing at my words he did it, but not finding what I had done
asked me the reason why I said so. I presently showed him his name, and told
him that with out Contradiction the wise Druide had foreseen his fortune, as
well as his coming thither. He could not deny but that was his name, but yet he
could give no credit to the Praediction, but rather believed that 'twas his
fortune to be starved in the Island. Whatsomever he thought, I could not get it
out of my mind, but revisiting the place, I made it a potion against despair,
placeing a faith on what I desired might be, for desire is apt to cause a
belief on any thing that may seem corresponding to it.

We were become mere skeletons, and my says began to waver, when traversing
the sands on the side of the Island, more out of use than hope of seeing any
deliverance, Fortune or rather Providence, permitted the fury of that liquid
Element, to cast a ship into a harbor of that Island. We soon made known the
miseries we had endured, our faces testifying to the verity of our speeches.
They admitted us into their ship, and being of Africa, as soon as the
impetuosity of the storm was allaid, which by its sudden ceasing seemed
created for our preservation, we hoised the sails before the adjuvating wind,
bidding adieu to the Island, but not to our miseries: For we had not been long
on the sea, before we were assaulted by two stout Pirates. Araterus was too
weak to make any resistance, and those in the ship too few to withstand their
assaulters, so that we were all made prisoners without any great labor.
Araterus and my self were put into a Cabin, where we found amongst other
prisoners the captain of that ship which brought us to the desolate Island.
Having saluted him in Greek he told me that whilst we were gone into the Island
those pirates which had taken us prisoners having discryed our ship, made to
them, and in spite of all their resistance took them prisoners with the barque,
and conveighing them to a peninsula on the coasts of Africa not far from the
greater Atlas, they were keept close prisoners, excepting when these rovers
scoured the seas, they were put into the ship to use the owers when they were
be calmed. To this peninsula we were had, being the habitation of these
pirates, and a place that the Conspirations of Nature and Art had made
impregnable. There was from the sea but one admittance, all other places
riseing with high cliffs were butterresses sufficient to keep of the invasions
of men, or waters. This admittance was by a river deep enough to carry ships of
burden: on each side of which the declineing rocks made a kind of Arch, on
which with certain ginns there placed, two men by letting down strong pieces of
timber framed Cross wise, were able to impede the entrance of any ship, On this
place they kept continual gaurd, and from whose summit they could discry all
ships in the ocean for many Leagues. Being admitted we sailed up the river into
the midst of the peninsula, in which place, through a great breach there was
made a very safe and spacious bay. Here disimbarquing we were chained to
certain barges, and rowed up to the neck of land which adjoined it to the main,
and through which the river ran. In this place those pirates had built a fort
with a wall and dike from one side of the neck to the other, whereby they had
made themselves impregnable. In this place we were imprisoned amongst others
which they had taken, where we endured their indignities almost a twelve
month. Araterus had sufficiently enquired into the Condition of the Island and
their captain: He felt the pulses of many beating toward a change. And the
perceived that nothing but want of an opportunity and introductions hindered
their motion. Their captain was covetous, cruel, and unjust, depriveing them
of their rights and liberties, and induceing a Tyranny without controulment.
Araterus as soon as he had found their alienation augmented it by the charms of
his voluble tongue, and telling some that began to hea^ken after his words)
that 'twas contrary to the nature of men, and the end of their creation to be
restrained and subjugated by their fellow creatures. That the Gods had created
them free, and had imposed no such tyranny upon them. That Kings, Lords, or
Tyrants, were not first made and then others, for to be their slaves, but that
the Gods made them Lords of the earth, and all the creatures: That one ought
not to usurp such authority over another: that they were coequall with their
captain, and that 'twas no other thing but subtilty and ambition that at first
destroyed this coequality. That they could by no other argument justify their
occupation of Piracy, but by being conscious that they had an equal right, to
the goods and creatures of the creation: and that 'twas contrary to the nature
of their occupation, being Piracy most commonly is maintained with community,
or at least an equal distribution of those goods which fortune h^d given them.
And that their Captain contrary to all this had usurped an authority not given
him, that he had dealt cruelly with them, that he depived them of their goods:
that he made slaves of their persons, and that in following the dictates of his
ambitious desires he would become something more than they could be able to
bear; that then they would seek to ease themselves too late, after that with
gifts, promises, hopes and flatteries he had tied enough to his interest to
make him formidable to the rest, and lastly if they did not desire to be
enslaved 'twas no hard matter at that time to give a period to his ambition and
their own thraldom. I say by inculcating these maxims into those that were
ready enough to imbibe them, he inspired them with resolutions, which they
followed and effected.

Araterus in this sought not only his liberty, but to have it accompanied with
their ruin, which he could easily judge, would be effected by his counsel, for
the confusion into which it would bring them, would induce their extermination.

These Praedonians fired with their resolutions soon augmented their party, and
beholding the actions of their Captain with a prejudiced eye they aggravated to
the degree of heinous whatsomever he committed. Being no longer able to
restrain their fury, they rebelled under the notion of liberty and breaking the
prison made all those retained therein on their side. They make Araterus their
Captain, and with that impetuosity which accompanies sudden and temerary
actions assaulted their Captain, who at the first inckling having gained a
party, met them with little less fury. All the Pirates were engaged in either
party, it being too great a shame for any to remain neuters: so that almost
half of them fell at the first encounter. There was on our party one wiser than
the rest, who perceiving the effect of their loss, and foreseeing their ruin
if they persisted, began to stop their fury by laying open the insulties of
their actions; He told them that their actions had rendered them odious to their
neighbors, and that being most of them banished men, they dared not to return
to their own Countries: and that if they thought to live in others they must
become slaves to the natives. That they had chosen a place, in which fertility
and commodity resided, that out of several Nations they had composed one
little Colony, which for many years had been maintained with ease and a little
valor, which he foresaw must be left: for that they could not be able to
maintain it, they depriving one another of their lives. That they lived too
happily, because 'twas wantonness had caused this distaste at their Captains
actions, who he confessed had taken too much liberty yet not comparable with
their rebellions: that though the head were infected they should not presently
kill the body or cut it off, but should have recourse to means suitable to the
disease. That they might have represt their captains authority without slaying
one another, upon the advice of a prisoner who under the petence of counsel
sought their destruction. He would have gone on but that Araterus having
received notise of it and knowing, that the speech of a wise man might easily
overthrow his Maxims, and deter his designs, ran presently to the place, and
crying out he was a traitor to their liberties that he was suborned by their
Captain and that he deserved immediately to dye, converted the hearts of the
wavering multitude, and inspired them with their first fury. They immediately
stoned him to death as a traitor, and insinuator, showing by that action how
incapable the common prople are to judge of verity, and making that Maxim good
which says they are a most violent torrent, full of mutability and
instability, doing all their actions with temerity and precipitancy. This
obstacle being removed Araterus pursuing his designs placed all the prisoners
in a band by themselves, and gave them most commonly the rereward, that he
might lessen them as little as he could. Not caring much which side overcame so
their men were but lessened: he engaged them in very desperate incounters, in
the last of which they slew their Captain. Araterus now fearing their agreeing
most subtly sowed these seeds of discord that he expected the crop of his
desires, by making the one demand unreasonable terms of the other, and by
sending me serectly to the other party to manifest to them his affection to see
their union, and that his party demanded unreasonable satisfaction contrary to
his desires, and that they did not intend to prosecute it if they showed
themselves resolved to withstand them, and that they should send to demand
higher reparations of them.

These and other practices being agitated by Araterus bred so great a feud
between them, that they came to another battle by which they were so lesned
that he believed he might effect his desire Those that remained of the adverse
party gained that which they called the Impr^gnable Fort, being somewhat higher
than the other upon a hill. This they kept knowing themselves secure from all
attempts; for indeed 'twas impossible to take it, however Araterus busied them
about the seige of it, as if he had made no difficulty of taking it. All this
while Arat^rus had kept good correspondency with the adverse party through my
secret embassies, he sent me once more, and by his directions I told them that
now they should see that his affection to them was not feigned but sincere and
real, that the next day their eyes should see him give that defeat to their
enemies they would desire, upon their promise that they would let their gates
be ready to receive him and those of his party if the other should be too
strong for them. This they willingly agreed to, being their eyes were to be
judges that Araterus meant not to fain. He had yet communicated this to none but
my self, but in the morning holding his party in hand that he would effect some
strange stratagem, wiled them to embattell themselves, and that they should be
ready to engage against him in a false skirmish before the fort, telling them
that he doubted not but their enemies seeing it and believing they were fallen
out amongst themselves would sally forth hopeing to obtain a notable victory,
and by that means betray themselves into their hands. The pirates never
imagining his deceit, having seen him hitherto so cordial, and active in all
encounters applauded it as a notable stratagem. Prepareing for this business
he drew out the band of prisoners, telling them that it would color the
stratagem the better from their enemies, and leaving them instructions what to
do, he with drew out of the fight of the rest of the pirates and seeing none
with them but those that had been prisoners he told them what he had done,
letting them know he was in earnest and not in jest, that they after had
destroyed those, they should enter the fort where they should extirpe the last
of that viperous brood. He aggravated their crimes, and how pleasing 'twould be
to the Gods, and how acceptable to men. The unlawfulness of their actions, and
cruelties of their natures, he extold their valor, told them he enduced them
to nothing but what was glorious, and to what they should see him lead them
with a free hand. The sense of their miseries and indignities received
stimulated some to revenge, and others accounting it an act meritorious to
extirpate such destroyers of human society, were excited to perpetrate it, some
out of fear to be repugnant, and others out of compliance, so that there was
none dissenting but all gave him their hands to do their utmost for their in
extermation. Araterus presently appearing was met with a false skirmish
according to his appointment, but they found to their cost that 'twas a true
one; they saw they were betrayed when 'twas too late to help themselves. They
from the fort seeing the verity of Araterus's promise rallied all their men and
issued out to help to end his enterprise. Araterus seeing them, let them
destroy their adversaries, whilst he rallying his confederates took breath and
as soon as he saw the others had done their work, he intimated to his that now
was their last part to be played, they fell upon them wearied with slaying
their fellows, and amazed at this surcharge were half slain before they could
recollect themselves. Araterus as if he had conserved himself for this last
part, did such amazing actions that they attributed the sele overthrow to the
vigor of his arm. Most of them were slain very few escaping from our fury,
and by this means our selves were left free, and those monsters and robbers
exterminated, their deaths and destruction exhibiting how dangerous a thing it
was to trust an enemy.

Araterus having divided the Pirates treasure amongst their exterminators stayed
but few days before he departed, and accompanying some of the prisoners that
were of Gaul, we put into the river Ligeris. Parting with his company as soon as
he was on shore, he resolved to travel over that country. Having followed our
intentions some few days, as we were taking the fresh refrigerating air under
the umbrella's of the trees we heard the confused music of the yelping hounds,
which having run down a fair stag deprived him of his life close by us. The
company coming in, amongst the rest we observed a gentleman of a very handsome
port, who seeing Araterus so night, came and saluted him very courteously.
Araterus having returned his complement with an increment of words, describing
you as well as he could, made an enquiry after you; and at the gentleman's
request told him how he lost you and your name. He had no sooner heard it, but
with open arms embracing him, he told him that the prison of his arms should
retain him 'till he had padroned that crime which Love, Duty, and necessity had
made him commit against him. Declaring presently what had happened to him, and
you, made himself be known to the Bruadenor Prince of the Veneti: Having in a
word heard of your exploits and knowing by him of your going into Spain. Full
of joy for this encounter we would have immediately departed, but Brua^enor
expressing the great affection he bore you, forced us to accompany him to a
fair lodge, where he entertained us after a most royal manner, continually
praising your virtue and valor, with an affection as ardent as his words were
suaveous. Two days being expired we left him, contrary to his desires having
pressed us much to have gone to his palace with him, where he promised Araterus
that entertainment he was unable to give in those woods, whither he had retired
to divert himself. We left him (sure) in an unfortunate hour, for taking our
journey directly to Spain, we were come to the Pyrenaei when a very violent
feavour seizing upon Araterus imprisoned him in his bed all that summer, the
next spring arriving before he was able to go abroad. His feavour was augmented
by the dolor he received at his stay, having fed himself with the hopes of
seeing you: I could not leave him in that barbarous place among mountains, and
those messengers we sent, we never more heard of, the wars being then hot in
Spain 'twas very difficult for any to pass without being taken prisoners or
slain. As Soon as he was able to sit his horse, he left his habitation and past
the Pyre^aei, but we were no sooner in Spain but we were taken by a band of
Romans, who delivering us to the camp martial we were detained amongst other
prisoners which the fortune of war had given them. We were sent immediately to
Ta^racon, and to the extreme grief of us both detained there all that summer,
till that the Austures, Gallicians and Cant^brians were wholly subdued and
settled under their government. Then the Prisoners being distributed with other
prizes amongst the Captains we were allotted to so generous a one, that he
seeing something more than common in the behavior of Araterus freely gave us
both our liberties, which we accepted with immensity of thanks for an act so
worthy a Roman.

Seeing our selves free; I unripped my doublet, and with some gold I there kept
in banco furnished our selves with horse and arms. Hope of finding you yet in
Spain made Araterus res^lve a through search of that country, and directing our
course toward the C^ntabr^^ns, we went up the river Jberius, extenuating the
discommodities of heat* by the coolness, and pleasantness of the rouling
waters. The excessive he^t of the Sun made us spend the meridies under the
shadow of the fair spreading trees which made a kind of grove all along the
rivers side. Araterus being extended on the grass, was taking that repose the
meridiall heat insensibly draws one to, when not far from us, I heard one who
with a kind of angry murmur reiterated your name, and Amenia's, with Epithets
that showed that rage and revenge were his chief simulators, awaking Araterus
at this accident, I told him what I heard, and invited him to hear more,
creeping on our knees and hands upon the grass, we came close to those thick
bushes that interposing hindered us from seeing him where we heard him in close
and an angry tone, invoke the Gods for your destruction, and petition them that
he might but find you to revenge himself for the injuries you had done him.
Amongst many other words that his fury and distemper made him utter, I retained
these. Cruel mischance! (cried he out) just as I hoped for the fruition I had
so long expected! but who can conquer Fortune, that mocker of our hopes? I
thought I had been past all danger of her mockeries, I thought she had done her
utmost against me, I thought the cruel Goddess had given me Amenia for to
recompense the loss of the Kingdom she has taken from me. Cruel destiny,
inexorable goddess! thou art nothing but illusions! no thou know no other
way to make Mandone thoroughly miserable but by this last ereption of all my
comfort, with Amenia, furies! snakehaired sisters! asist me: Fill me with your
veniferous potions! add fire to my flames, and let your stings give me no rest
till I have revenged my self on that cursed vagabond Euripedes, and that
strumpet Amenia. Assist me in my invention, and they shall know there is no
rage like that of love, converted to fury and revenge; your selves shall be
less cruel than I will be in inflicting those tortures, rage, wrath, and
revenge provoke me to. No Euripedes thy weak arm cannot help thee now I am
assisted by the internal Furies, wrath and revenge. Thou shall find that my
arm is stronger than it was, and the inspiration of rage has augmented my
forces. And thou Amenia shall repent thee of thy folly, thy beauty, nor tears
shall move me to any pity; no, I will blind my eyes with revenge, and answer
thy demerrits with whips of steel.

Araterus after he had listened a while to the rage and fury of this man,
impatient of longer delay, and hoping by him to learn some news of you, lest
his secret ausculation, and presenting himself to that mad man; I have heard
(said he) accidentally what your fury has made you vent against a man whom I
go in Quest of, and who is my friend and kinsman: The ardent desire I have to
meet with him induces me to pardon your crime, upon condition you direct me
where I might find him, otherwise consan^tinity and f^iendship ties me to
chastise the irregularities of your tongue. The man who by th^^e words was
sufficiently roused, cast himself upon his feet, ev^ginating his sword, Gods!
(cried he) I thank ye for sending one that dares maintain the Quarre^l of
Eurip^des, how great e^^e will this be to me that his friend shall bear the
first Stigma's of my fury. Without other words he assaulted Araterus, with his
ey^s that showed rage and des^e^atenesse, and with so much strength, and fury,
that it made me doubt of the event.

Araterus opposed him with a sufficient courage and animosity, and oppo^ed to
his strength and fury, skill and Judgment. The battle hung long in suspense,
blood and wounds having been equally shared, till at last after three hours
endeavor, Victory began to declare her self for Araterus, Mandone be^inning
to faint with the loss of blood and courage. I expected every minute when he
would fall, when Fortune showing one of her usual p^ankes, had like to have
given away the victory and life of Araterus to Mandone. Araterus warding a back
blow of Mandone's and stepping back stumbl^d at a shrub, which intangling his
leg flung him on the ground. Mandone no^ loosing that opportunity thrust his
sword in at the buckling of his Curace, which nevertheless with the sudden
turning of Araterus mist his body and piercing the other side pinned him fast
to the ground. Mandone drawing his dagger sell upon him, and had there put a
period to the life of Araterus, If I, seeing the danger he was in, had not,
whilst he was busy in taking away the life of Araterus, deprived him of his,
with a thrust which I gave him in at the back. Araterus arising pulled off the
cask of Mandone, and finding him stone dead, instead of the thanks I expected,
very angerly told me that he had rather, he had died than that his honor
should be destain'd by so cowardly an act. Abashed at this insulsity I replied,
that no wise men but would disowne such generosity, which had rather lose a
li^^ that ought to be preferred to all the world, before the breach of such a
foolish pun^illo. I told him that I did not do it till necessity urged me to
it, and that it was no stain to his honor, himself not consenting to the
fact; and that I hoped he would not be angry at my care of his life, but rather
that he should have accounted me a monster to have stood by and have seen him
murdered without lending him my assistance. My tears having more power than
my words, and promising to offend him no more in the like, pacifyed his anger,
and reconciled him to me. Leavin^ the place, and the dead body of Mando^e, we
rode to the next village, where we spent a mon'th in the cure of Araterus his
wounds.

Their sanation being perfected, we searched all those places where we had any
hopes of meeting with you, the last Country being the Cantabrians, where not
finding you, and believing that you were returned home, we took shipping at
Flaviobriga, with an intent to do the like. Our sails swelled with a
prosperous wind, till we had compassed Spain and were almost come to those
straits that give entrance into the Mediterranean Sea; A re^^^ting gale arising
by little and little, the ship notwithstanding the endeavors of the mariners,
far from the entrance of the strait, and withstanding their art and pains bore
them into the midst of the Ocean. The sky began to befrown his serene face
with spissous clouds, and to muffle himself with an unwonted obscurity,
darkness and horror began to empale us round. The eyes of heaven continually
shot down upon us fulmineous flames, his voice, bespeaking our deaths with a
tonitruous echo. Every man had his deaths symptoms in his face, fear having
tainted the cheeks of all the Passengers with a pallid hew. The winds breaking
their Hyperborean prison, fomented the waters, which with a kind of imperious
greatness swelled into liquid mounrains, opposing it self to the agil lightning.

Our ship, left to the mercy of the winds, ran far into those traceless paths,
ore which Dedalus's wings had never soared, where, lost in that new world of
waters, it sometimes mounted to the Poles, and by and by sunk to the valley of
Stix, between the aqueous rocks, which perpetually threatened with an eternal
Tumulation, those poor souls with whom fear and sorrow were continual
Concomitants. Driven thus with a perpetual Hurricano for ten days together
toward the Antartick Pole, we found the Sun almost in our Zenith, which
penetrating us with its ardo^, made us know the intolerable heats of those
Climat^s. The storm now tired with assaulting us, or else giving a trace to our
almost quite-spent Barque, abated: and heaven unfrowning his face, seemed to
smile on our miseries. There were no gods left unthank'd for this serenity, and
being revived from that death Despair had cast them into, they fell to mending
the tackle which had been shaken by the wind, and to do their endeavors to
return out of that incognitous sea.

Bearing for some days to the North-East, a youth at last from the summit of
the Mast discovered land, which was no small joy to the wea^ied Mariners, and
affrighted Passengers. Having attained to that shore we had seen, we entered a
large river, which after many ^alls from the mountain embosom'd it self there
into the Sea. Clearing the mists of sadness from our eyes, we went on shore,
where we found a sufficient shelter against the penetrating beams of the Sun
(falling almost perpendicul^r ore our heads) in large and overgrown woods,
which were stored with the light-heel'd-harts, and branched horned stags.

After we had stored our ship with Venison, and with the crystal liquor of the
river, we left that land, and the Pilot, necessitated to make use of the utmost
of his skill, bore toward the West, and being got into the main, we tacked
about, setting our prow opposite to the Artick Pole: we had but just then shaken
off that fear, which the impetuosity of the last storm ^^d put us into, when
the wind saluting us with a whistling noise, made us (...) it was but the
Praecursor of his Forces. We soon found by reitera^ed (...) that he had given
us that truce, that he might overcome us with the mo^^ glory. His forces being
augmented from playing with our streamers, he began to toss our ship, and
contradict our passage with an impetuosity f^r greater than the former. The
storm still increasing, made us reassume our ^e^^s, and many to deprecate those
Deities which in safety they scarce though^ of, and who they would as soon
forget after their dang^r* This lasted thrice as long as the former, and with
an extraordinary swiftness, drove us continually to the South, as if it had
purposed to have driven us to the utmost end of the earth. At last the storm
ceased, but left us destitute of all kno^ledge where we were, we saw nothing
but waters, which seemed yet to threaten us, the world seemed turned up side
down, for we had lost the sight of the North Hemisphere, and then beheld a new
heaven of stars, which before we had never seen. The Sun was North of us, which
had like to have deceived the Pilot; for, bearing toward the South, we
perceived by the s^ars, and new face of the heaven, that we had passed the
Equinoxial. We imagined our selves irrecoverably lost, the Pilot professing his
art at an end, knew not which way to steer. Sometimes we ran a hundred Leagues
one way, then as many another, but espying no land, we had no hopes of
returning. To augment our miseries, our provision failed us, our water was
spent, and what remained stunk, and was corrupted, so that many in the ship
with the extremity of heat, and lack of Victuals, died. Araterus endured these
adversities with wonderful patience, and amongst all the imprecations that
anguish wrung from the mouths of those distressed people, there was not heard
the least murmur fall from his. At last in our greatest distress we espied land
to the East of us, which sight was extremely welcome to us. Having attained the
land before we could disembarque, we experienced that the torrid Zone, contra^y
to the opinion of Poets was inhabited, for upon the shore we saw a^^embled a
great many people which continually wore Sables. The Sun had with its excessive
ardour imbued their skin with this innate black, wearing nothing that might
hinder the penetration of his beams, so that their Children were born with the
same nigerous hew, their hair crisped* and short, seemed just like wool, their
noses flat, and something deformed, their stature mean, but their envy and
malice implacable. These people which at first sight seemed like so many
Demons affrighted those in the ship, who naming the place the land of Devils,
would rather have endured the misery of starving, than to expose themselves to
the mercy of such Creatures. Araterus wearied of the sea, persuaded them to go
on shore without fear, telling them without doubt that those creatures were
humane, and of necessity they must perish, or gain some sustenance at their
hands. At last he persuaded them to land, which they did, but were opposed by
those blacks, who at a distance shot at them arrows, the points made sharp, and
hardened in the fire (for they had not the use of Iron or Steel, which wounded
many, and slew some: But Araterus encouraged them, and with great hazard to his
person fell in amongst them, who affrighted at us, and our glittering weapons,
with a terrible howling and noise sled from us; some of them we slew, whereby
the people of the ship were satisfied, that they were poor, simple, naked
people, rejoicing that they were landed, they quenched their thirsts with a
river that we found, and stopped their hunger with some wild fowl which we
caught, without any other cooking, than rosting it against the Sun.

We had but just satisfied our selves with our late caught food, when we
perceived coming down the mountains, an innumerable company of Negroes, who
being reared by those that sled from us, came to repel us out of their
Country. We sought to retire to our ships, when we perceived their subtilty
had deprived us of all hopes of escaping, for a whole troop of them getting
between us, and the ship opposed our passage. I know not by what G^nius's good
direction it was, but a little before I had brought Araterus's armor out of
the ship, which had saved his life in this Exigent. He had hardly buckled it on
before we were assaulted at a distance with a cloud of arrows, which falling
upon his armor rebounded back to the amazement of those that jaculated them.
But many of our companions ended their lives in the first brunt, for although
they were but slightly wounded, yet those wounds being made with empoysoned
arrows, they immediately dyed.

Despair, oftentimes the mother of great exploits, made our companions fight so
vigorously, that they obscured the earth with their dark bodies, and made a
kind of a sable and sanguine field. But what avails valor and animosity when
it is overpowered? strength may be mastered by a multitude, and courage made
effectless. The power of these Monsters increased, and the more we slew, the
stronger they were, by the continual supplies that came. It was a kind of
miracle to behold how many lay breathing their last, and slain by so small a
company. Indeed they were naked and almost weaponless, their chiefest being
empoysoned arrows and clubs, to whose tops were made fast a kind of stones of a
plumbeous substance, but their numbers were so great, that the weight of their
very arms had been enough to have depressed us all to the earth. Our
companions slew so many of them, and had bespread the whole face of the field
with their carcases, that had you seen them, you would have judged by the
Clades, that it had been the depreliation of two great armies. Their strength
could not run parallel with their courage; their minds and wills fought, though
their arms were no longer able to strike a stroke. They fainted, and were
slain, being overcome only by their own courages; and with the heat of Titan,
not being accustomed to that ardor which they there felt. They died, but yet
with victory and triumph, thousands lying about them, whose souls they carried
in triumph into the nether world. I had almost forgot to tell you Araterus is
yet invincible, though he cannot wrest his companions out of the arms of death,
he sees them die with regret, oreprest with the number of those melaneous
Aethiopians, this instigates his fury, and causes him to make Structures of
their carcases, and sable rivers of their blood. There was not any survived but
Araterus and my self, he being my buckler against their number, receiving their
darts upon his armor that did him no hurt, which so amazed those ignorant
ones, that they believed him to be invulnerable, and seeing the prodigious
strokes that he gave on their defenseless bodies, they did not dare to come
within his reach, but assaulted him afar off with their darts and slings.
Araterus at last not longer able to endure the intolerable heat of the Sun,
under the burden of his heavy armor, fainted. They no fooner saw him fall,
but with a strange howling noise they came all running toward him. I was
fallen upon my knees to have given him breath, being almost distracted at the
misery to which we were reduced, yet at last recollecting my self I hoped by
their ignorance to work our delivery. As Soon as they came, I strove, by
pointing up to the heaven, and then toward Araterus several times, to impress
into them that he was some celestial Deity. They understood my meaning, and
with a kind of admiration beheld him, touching his armor, and striking their
javelins ends against it. Araterus at last coming to himself, seeing them about
him began to struggle, which made them immediately deprive him of his sword, and
holding him, made a shift to bind his hands and feet. Having served me in the
same manner, they carried us upon a kind of a Chariot on their shoulders
thousands of them following us, making most hellish noises. In that manner they
carried us two days to the Palace of their King, which stood in a wood, built
with mud and timber, after a course manner. After they had waited some time at
the gate of the Palace, we entered a kind of Court in which stood a large Tree,
under which on a kind of Throne sat their King naked, having a kind of Diadem
made of Ostridge feathers, with a kind of linen Mantle about his middle. Round
about him stood his noble men, who with dejected countenances showed the
reverence they bore to his Majesty. At his elbow stood one different in habit
from all the rest, having a strange kind of fantastic garment, composed of all
sorts of feathers: his head was shaven, and covered with a cap of the same.
This man (as we afterward understood) was the Oracle of the King, and the high
Priest of the Country, and to whose Council all adhered. After the King had
with great admiration satisfied himself with the sight of Araterus, and with
feeling, and trying his darts against his armor, he made many signs to us,
which I supposing were to know from whence we came, pointed up to the heavens,
endeavoring to make them think Araterus a god. The Priest till then stood
mute, but seeing the King bow his head to Araterus he fell into a fearful
ejulation, and afterward, as if he were possessed, uttered some speeches, which
we understood by the signs of the people, and their often nominating their
great God, that he made known, we were to be given for food to their great god
Arqcebusqez. Interest had possessed him, for surely he believed that Araterus
being taken for a God, he would have been some detriment to his order. By the
signs that were made us, we understood our doom, and wondering what their god
might be, we expected our expiration with patience. We were presently carried
into another spacious Court, compassed about with high poles stuck fast into
the ground, and intertexed with smaller sticks. At the further end of this
place was a kind of Temple, it seems the habitation of their God, which shone
with gold, and corru^cing stones: Right against the entrance of this Temple
were we set upon the earth bound, the King retiring to a window that looked
into the place, and the people beholding us through the Poles that encompassed
the place. The Priest after a certain ululation, called upon his God to come
accept the vi^tim he had prepared. By and by we heard a wonderful fibilation,
and presently came forth a monstrous Serpent, at whose sight the people fell
flat upon the earth, as also the King and all his black Candidates. Araterus at
the sight of that monster forced himself so strongly, that he broke the bands
about his arms, and taking forth a dagger that he had under his Cassock, cut
those that tied his feet, then presently freeing me, he met that monstrous
serpent, and assaying his skin in many places could find no entrance for the
point of his dagger. The Serpent with his anguinious tail beat him down several
times, which made me fear that he would have yielded his life between the jaws
of that Hydra. After a long resistance he found the belly of the Monster
passible, for plunging his dagger several times into it, he let out a stream of
veneniserous and stinking blood, with the life of that monstrous Serpent and
false Deity.

The King, Priest and People all amazed at the puissance of Araterus and the
death of their God, expressed it by their countenances and posture. At last the
oraculous Priest seeming to be possessed, howled forth certain words which we
know by the effects were to persuade the King that Araterus was the chiefest
Deity in the celestial orb, and that I was an under god who had left the
heavens to attend him, and that he should place us in the Temple, and cause us
to be worshipped in the place of that ancient Deity which they had worshipped so
long. The King that never contradicted what he said, came into the place to us,
and falling on his knees before Araterus, with erected hands, which through our
ignorance of their language, we could not understand. The Priest doing the like
(whether out of ignorance or subtilty, I know not) engaged all the people to a
profound devotion. I persuaded Araterus not to contradict them, telling him it
was the only way for us to escape them. He permitted it with a heart that
attributed nothing of it to himself, and did but accept it for his own safety.
After many ceremonies they conducted us to the Temple, where having seated us
in an high seat, placeing me at the seet of Araterus, there entered many
under-Priests decked after the same manner as their High Priest, with censers
in their hands.

These fuming us with certain sweet odors, of a magical operation, so stupefied
us, that we fell both asleep. In the mean time according to the direction of
the high Priest, with a kind of hoop made of a fishes bone, and bound behind
with cords, they fastened us both to the backs of our seats, and our arms they
pinioned in such a manner above the elbows, that we could make no other use of
them, but to feed our selves. In this manner we found our selves when we
awaked, the Temple clear, and abundance of sacrifices slain, and offered to us
on Tables made after a curious fashion, and almost like an Altar. Araterus
laughed, and was angry at the same time, to see, that whilst they went about to
make us gods, they made us less then men. This Priest (said he) is more subtle
then all the Nation besides, the King, his Candidates and people believe us to
be gods, and with the zeal of blind devotion, cordially offer to us their
prayers and sacrificial rites: But this subtle Imposter knows us to be men, and
seeing that I have slain his Arqcebusqes which was the maintainer of his
greatness, he most subtly punishes us, and by the punishment conserves his
former greatness and glory. O blind people! whereby is manifest that ignorance
is the mother of your devotion: What a sad thing is it that Religion should be
made the decoy of Politicians! see but with what awe this impostor governs the
whole kingdom, under the specious name of Religion, and by it makes those of
great capacities to condescend to things below sense and reason. He made them
first worship a Serpent of a stupendous greatness, a very Monster or devil,
and now for all they see it was mortal, and therefore no Deity, yet are they
brought to another devotion as ridiculous, to adore us men. This power has
Religion, when men deprive themselves of the eyes of Reason, and following the
tradition of others, believe the dictates of such impostors without examining
the verity of them. Whilst he was speaking thus, there entered the Temple four
Priests, who with two large chargers, and two vessels of water kneeled before
us, and having mumbled I know not what prayers, they placed the chargers filled
with the best diet their Country afforded, and the water close by us, and so
departing, left us to satisfy our appetites; which we were fain to do, to keep
our selves from starving. Three weeks space were we thus deified, in which time
we were often almost choked with their fumigations, and sacrificed to by those
Priests that were ordained to attend us. Araterus used all the signs he could
to prohibit them, but he could not make them understand, and every time he did
but wag himself, the rustling of his armor made them in presence fall
prostrate to the earth, and with grievous ejulations desired this Mars-like God
to be quiet, and pacified with those oblations they should offer, so that his
prohibitions still begot new sacrifies. After three weeks we heard two Priests
discoursing together in the Egyptian language, Araterus wondering to hear them
speak that language, and having learned it in his youth, lisned to their talk.
What (said one) do you believe these to be gods? I believe them as much gods as
the former was (says the other) for that steel case that one wears, if you
remember when we traveled into Egypt, we saw abundance of the Romans wear
such. It Is true (replied the other) I always believed them men. But you must
believe them to be gods (said the other) though you do know that they are men,
for thereby our greatness is maintained, for should the people think they are
men, we are utterly undone, and it was the subtilty of our High Priest to salve
his loss of Arqcebusqez with deifying these strangers. Araterus no longer able
to retain himself, spoke to them in that language, and with words so prevalent,
that he won them to him, and made them promise him to release him, and to shift
him out of the Country. Araterus having asked them how they came to speak that
language, they told him that being Natives of that Country, they were then
prisoners by a mighty King their Neighbor, who sold them amongst many others
to one who carried them into Lybia, from whence escaping by flight, they went
into Egypt, where they learned the language and manners of the Country, which
done, they returned on Cammels, after some whole years travel into their own
Country, where relating the strange things they had seen in their travels to
the High Priest, he presently conferred on them the order of Priesthood,
accounting it a crime for any to be knowing, but those that attended on the
Altars of the gods, charging them on pain of death not to discover what they
had seen to any other, seeing that the people would become disobedient, when
they ceased to be ignorant. And least they should invite others to the like
travels, who in time might induce the manners and customs of other Nations he
charged them to forget the language they had learned, and that ever they had
traveled out of their own Country. They said that they had obeyed his
Commands in every thing, but that, for being loath to forget what they attained
to, with the hazard of their lives, they sometimes discoursed together in that
language, though in great secrecy and fear. After they had promised again in
few days to released us they parted from us, and left him very joyful that he
should be so soon ^i^ of his God-ship, and you must think I was no less
joyful than he when I understood it from him. These blacks not varying from
their word, come the next night, and giving Araterus his sword, which they had
stole from the high Priest, unloosed us and gave us our liberty. All sower of
us leaving the place sled allnight, and never rested till we were out of the
Kingdom. The blacks being our guides we traveled through vast hot countries,
sometimes over mountains, sometimes through forests, deserts and sandy
plains, then over great lakes, not without danger of drowning, or of being
killed by the inhabitants, who were liker beasts than men, or of being devoured
by wild beasts, and immense serpents. After we had overcome all our
difficulties passing many strange nations, we came to a sea that ran far into
the globe. There we embarked, determining to have returned by the Erythrian
sea, but being driven beyond the mouth of it with impetuous storms, we at last
arrived in the Persian gulse.

Having for many weeks incurred the dangers of the Sea, and daunced over those
vast plains of waters, we at last landed, to refresh our bodies with the
allevaments of the earth. Our pennigerous guides were past their own knowledge
and as ignorant of those places we had attained to as our selves. Those people
had not such sable skinns, nor was the Sun of that force as in the climate of
the blacks, but their bodies generally mean of stature, and of a swarth
complexion, had something of handsomnesse and beauty. Araterus although he
longed to have returned into his own country, and though our travells (as all
others) were accompanied with danger and peril, yet novelties breeding a
desire, and curiosity, he past into the country, finding a wonderful pleasure
in seeing the variety of places, people, conditions, manners, and climates.
Spatiating for some few days that region, we past a large extent of land,
which like a tongue ran far into the sea. Being arrived on the other side we
espied another large sea, into which Araterus would needs commit himself,
resolving now to visit the utmost limits of the earth. Indeed we stayed very
little in a place, but were continually peregrines, not knowing which way to
return home. Those seas were very dangerous at that time of the year in which
we sailed them, and in few days after our imbarquement we were incountered by
so violent a storm, that it is past the skill of a better capacity than mine to
describe it. The end of it was our shipwreck almost within sight of land. The
blacks being almost half fishes, and most expert swimmers, scorned those helps
we were glad to make use of, and trusting to the strength of their arms, and
skill in swimming advanced before us toward the shore. The gods (I believe)
angry at their p^esumption, took away their souls out of those dark
Lanthornes, the one before he was out of our sight was devoured by some great
fish, the other we afterward found dead, his brains having been beaten out
against the rock, and his body cast upon the sand, where we at last were thrown
by the beating of the waves with those pieces of the ship on which we saved our
lives. Having returned thanks to the Gods for our preservation, and having
bewailed our faithful blacks, and buried him we found dead on the sand, we
went into the country, to know into what place this dire chance had cast us. We
presently found that we were in a rich soil, fruitful, pleasant, stored with
all things fit for life, and ornament, not so hot as those countries we had
passed, but we perceived we were very near the Orient.

The Land was full of Cities of a vast greatness, and Towns so stupendous
that they exceeded the quantity of our ordinary Cities, besides very popolous,
and well stored with delicate woods: and watered with abundance of rivers. The
people were extremely civil, courteous to strangers, witty, pleasant, and very
well favored. We found nothing of barbarism or rudeness there, but all
things in a kind of Harmony, and great politennesse. Araterus was extremely
taken with the country, being one of the pleasantest he had ever entered. You
are not to doubt (said I to him) but that the prophecy of the Druidae will be
fulfilled, seeing that the Gods with miracles have effected thus much of it, we
are now in the Orient, from whence it seems we are like never to return, but
it is no great matter, seeing that you shall possess so rich, pleasant and
fertile a Kingdom, which will be great inducements for your forgetting your
native country, especially when you shall be joined to so sublime a beauty as
the prediction specified. I am not (replied he) so much in Love with my
country, as that I cannot live any where else, if that I see the will, and
providence of the Gods so ordering it; but yet were it now in my election, I
should rather choose my little estate in my native country, than to enjoy the
greatest monarchy here. But yet I shall cede to the will of the Gods, let them
prepare what they will for me.

And indeed I do not flatter my self with the accomplishment of the
Praediction, although these occurrences might induce me to believe its verity.
We had traveled some few days from the sea side, and entertaining our selves
with such like discourses we came to the side of a very large river, which
rolling down with liquid-silvered waves, made us suppose it another sea, but
that the clearness and freshness of the water contradicted that opinion. We
traveled up this river with wonderful delight, viewing the ships and boats
that continually sported upon its surface, till we met one of the country, who
by the signs we made him to know the name of the river, told us 'twas called
Ganges. This man, seeing we were strangers lokt upon us very wishly, and
finding I know not what pleasing air in the face of Aratreus, he caused us to
go with him to his house which was fituate hard by the river, and encompassed
with a wood, 'twas built flat on the top, after the fashion of the country
four square, and of an indifferent bigness. It Is impossible for you to imagine,
with what affection and love this man entertained Araterus, and there wanted
nothing but language to make their friendship complete, and though 'twas in a
mute language that he expressed himself, yet love was perspicuously, seen in
every sign and gesture. In few days Araterus had so won upon our entertainer
with his sweet carriage that he would not permit him to depart, but as we
understood him by the signs he made, desired us to continue with him, and
learn the language of the country. Araterus being well content, returned him by
signs, that he would obey him, and give him thanks, and service for his
kindnesses. Being settled in this resolution, we spun out the thread of two
years, continually obliged to this man for his manifold courtesies and
favors. In this time we had both of us perfectly attained the language, which
sounded almost like the Arabic, and our entertainer accounted himself
sufficiently recompensed with the admirable discourses he heard from Araterus,
and the recital of his life and fortune. Araterus having often requested him
to let him understand the condition of the country which he was in, one day as
we were in a house of pleasure on the famous Ganges, he acquitted himself thus:

This country (said he) wherein you are, is one of the fairest, richest, and
pleasantest that the glorious star of Day sees in his perpetual course. If the
Gods grant that you reside amongst us, you will experience this verity, and say
that it is worthy of all Eulogies and commendations. I am persuaded that in the
small time that you have been here, and in the like experience you have had of
us, that you cannot but see we are no Scythians or Hyperborean inhabitants, but
that there is a certain politenesse in our words and actions. If it were
handsome for me to praise my own country I might expatiate, in the
collaudation of its site, fertility, delectableness, continual verdure,
wholesomenesse, richness and populosity. Besides in the conditions of the
people, their formofity, gentle nature, virtuous actions, and warlike spirit.
And lastly of its government and tranquillity, in which it has exceeded all
the Kingdoms of the East. But this a little time and experience will manifest
to you, better and fuller, than the best of Rhetoric can. I believe I shall
give you some satisfaction, to tell you briefly in what posture, at present we
stand. This Kingdom has by a peculiar providence for these three hundred
years been most commonly governed by Queens, neither sex being debarred from
the regency, and by our laws the first partus of his or her Majesty that
reigns, is evermore proclaimed successor to the crown, whether it be male or
female, and although many males afterward be born, yet the first succeeds
although it be a female. The reason for this is, because we believe that the
Gods having the sole disposing of the conception and forming of the Embrio
will create it according to their sole wills and pleasures from them as
disposed and ordered by them to govern and rule us. But if the eldest dye then
the next succeeds according to the order of their birth.

If we have a good Prince we rejoice and thank the Gods for him, and if we have
an evil Prince, believing it to be the wills, and pleasure of the Gods to have
him so, we yield to him without murmuring. And if it may be accounted a
blessing to a Kingdom, as sure it is to have good and wise Princes, we have
been extremely happy, and as I have said, though we have not had but two Kings
this three hundred years, yet we have enjoyed all those blessings under the
female sex that we could have expected from the other; the Gods having poured
upon them all the influences of the regal and Majestic stars, and inspired
them with prudence, and Magnanimity. But least we should receive any detriment
by the marriage of our Queens 'twas so ordained that they ought to have the
consent of their council, which consists of the chiefest men in the Kingdom,
before they may contract themselves to any, but yet this good law has not
always been kept, and many have married without putting it to the council.
Indeed I liked it so well that I would have made it to have reached Kings as
well as Queens, and I urging it, when the father of our reigning Queen was to
be married, being very young, and fearing least he should choose one not
Qualified for the place, and considering that we were in little leffe danger by
the marriage of our King as well of our Queens, when they permit them by their
affection to incroach upon their authority: I say urging it that the King might
be brought under that Law, I gained his disfavour, and being ever after looked
upon as one repugnant to his interests I was ejected from being one of the
council. I took it patiently enough, and retireing from the court have ever
since enjoyed the sweets of a private life, without the least aspiring to my
former dignity. He dying about fewer years since left his daughter (and his
only) Amarillis to succeed, a princess I confess filled with the divinity of
the Gods, who bears the perfect image of themselves. So glorious and
transcendent a beauty our Eastern world could never yet glory of, she is beyond
compare both in the goods of body and of mind, she is filled with all the
rarest endowments the Gods, and nature could infuse, and though she has scarce
completed the fifth luster of her age, she has exhausted all the learning of
the Gymnosophists and Brachmans. We have lived hitherto extremely happy under
her reign, she always mixing lenity and prudence with all her actions, but
now some evil Demon disturbing our quietude has set the whole Kingdom into
a combustion. We are environed with many great and formidable Princes on all
sides, with whom we have continually kept a very good correspondence, and
maintained our interests with policy. Most of them, seeing the beauty of
Amarillis our Queen so transcendent, have desired the possession of her either
for themselves or their sons: but she showing her self averse from marriage,
by her gentleness and good behavior has pacified most of them. On the East
side of us is the most mighty Kingdom Sinana, the greatest and largest in the
whole world, being divided into fifteen provinces, every one of which is as big
as most Kingdoms in the world, the one side of it butteth upon ours and
runs all along to the great gulf of Bengan. It is incredible if I should
tell you of the number and vastness, of their Cities and towns, and of the
innumerable company of people that inhabit them. Those are the subtillest
people in the world, but indeed they a^e pufillanimous, and fearful cowards,
as the weapons with which they annoy us may well declare. They seldom dare to
encounter us with weapons like to ours, wherein m^nhood and strength does
consist in the using, but with a strange diabolical engine murder us at a
distance, and with which the most saint hearted coward may do as great
execution as the most valiant man, these engines are made of Iron and steel
mixed, about four foot or more long, hollow throughout, into which they put a
composition framed in the stygian Kingdom, and I believe taught them by some
of Tl^to's servants; it is of a sulphurious matter, to which they give fire with
reeds twisted together, at a little hole made on purpose at the higher end of
the engine. After they have put in their hellish powder, they ram down upon
it certain stones of a plumbeous substance, or pieces of Iron, or such like
matter, then collimating it at us they give fire it with their reed, which
sends the globulus's, with such a lightning flash and thunder clap, that they
strike us often dead above have of the same sort so big that they drew them on
hundred pace distance. Besides those they carrs, with which they batter batter
down our towns, and slaughter above a hundred of us at a time. With this sort
of weapons they have made themselves so formidable that himself King of Kings,
governor of the whole Earth, and son to the Sun. They are feared of the whole,
east who otherwise are the veriest cowards in the world. Those that make the
engines, and that black dust which causes the slaughter, they keep continually
prisoners in a large house made on purpose, containing about ten thousand of
them, not suffering them to pass beyond the limits of the walls, lest they
might teach any other nation the use of them. And though that we have gained
many of the engines from them; yet, not knowing how to make the composition,
they are inservicable to us, so that we have slung those murderers (for so we
call them) into the rivers, not knowing what use to make of them. The King of
this potent and formidable people, calls call the Sun their genitor because he
arises at the utmost limits of his Kingdom.

The Son of him that now reigns in this Kingdom of Sinana was lately at the
court of our Queen, where he styled himself her servant, in hopes to possess
her, but going away not long since in great discontent, has sent a Herald
that Proclaimed wars against us, threatening the utter ruin and subversion of
us all, unless the Queen yielded her self to his demands: we daily here out
of Sinnana of the great preperation that he makes to invade us, which enforces
our Queen to raise her forces for her defense, resolving to withstand his fury,
and defend her self against his injuries: So that peace is now leaving the
stage which she has Kept so long, and Mars is coming to act a new and bloody
scene.

Cleoputulus (so was our Entertainer called) thus ended, suscitating a desire
in Araterus, by this relation of the Wars, to go and present himself to the
Queen, and desired to be listed amongst the number of her Soldiers. He made his
Hospitator acquainted with his mind, who immediately commending his intentions,
strengthened his desire, and proffered him any thing that might further his
intentions Araterus after he had resolved upon it, and had clothed himself
after the manner of the Country in loose thin garments, he took his leave of
the kind and generous Cleopotulus, and according to his directions took the way
toward Sinda the chief City in that kingdom of Sornalea, which stood at the
ingulfing of a very long river into the sea of Bengan, and which sprung from a
lake amongst those mountains which serve for an impregnable Mure against the
Tartars incursion into Sinana. In this famous City Queen Amarillis kept her
Court, and to which after a few weeks travel we arrived. All the Cities that
ever we had seen before was nothing to this, both for the extent, fairness and
pleasantness of it. Should I tell you the bigness of it, you would think it
incredible, and believe that I fabulate, but those that are any thing
acquainted with the buildings of the East, will not so much wonder at it, we
entered it when the Sun had scarce ran two hours of his diurnal course, and
before we could attain the Palace which stood in the midst of the city, and
though we went on horse back, he had past as many from the Meridian. It was so
populous that you would have thought all the people of the Kingdom had met
there as at a fare. The houses were extreme fair and well built, being most of
stone. Round that large City ran a wall with battlements and towers with about
a hundred gates, so strong, that it rendered it impregnable on the one side, as
it was washed with the river, and the South side butted toward a kind of sine,
which breaking forth of the gulf came through the City to the Palace walls, on
which continually floted thirty thousand boats. And though there were so many
people, and that it was so vast a City, yet every thing seemed so decent, and
in so good order, that in all that ever we had seen there was no thing like it.
At that instant one of Euripedes servants came to give him notice that their
dinner waited on them, which made Meador stop, and give liberty to Euripedes to
incite his guests to accept of that small repast which his Grot could afford.
Every one showing the pleasure they received in Meadors relation could hardly
be persuaded to spare so much time, but at last following Euripedes they entered
another room, which they found furnished so deftly, that it expressed, he had
been one of great estate. After the handsome excuse of Euripedes for his mean
accommodations for so illustrious persons, they fell to their repast, which
they soon finished, having a great desire to hear the conclusion of Meadors
relation. After they had dined, they returned to the same place where they were
before, and being seated Meador knowing their desires, directing his speech as
he did before to Euripedes, he thus proceeded in his relation. Having glutted
our eyes with beholding the variety of Objects, as we passed through the City,
we came at last to the Palace about the time I have mentioned. Having provided
for our horses in those houses for entertainment, we went to view the Palace,
which we found agreeable with the rest of the City, full of state, and the
structure mixed with strength and beauty. It was mounted upon a little rising
hill, which made it show to the City as the head to the body, both for ornament
and command. It was not only the head of the City, but of the whole kingdom at
that time, for in it sat her Majesty with her great Council to determine
concerning those things which the necessity of their affairs made them to
resolve upon. Having viewed the external part of it, Araterus somewhat boldly
for a stranger, ascended a pair of stairs which led us into diverse stately
Halls; passing many of them we at last had lost our selves, and knew not which
way to return, at last trying every turning and entrey, we descended a pair of
stairs, which brought us into a very large garden, in which were near an
hundred Partisans. At the farther end of this garden was the Council Chamber;
in which the Queen and her Council then was, these Partizens being their common
guard. Ignorance often causes boldness, for not knowing the custom of the
Country we entered the garden, which it seems was present death for any to do,
whilst the Council sat, without the Certificate of the High Priest, to show
their urgent occasions.

The Partisans presently flocking about us, asked us for our Certificates, but
our looks demonstring to them that we were ignorant of what they meant, they
streight-way cried out Traitors, and Spies, and collimating their Javelins at
us, began to make us know into what error we had run. Araterus would fain have
had them understand that ignorance an I fortune had brought him to that place,
but their noise and eagerness of endeavoring to deprive us of our lives, took
away the audition of his words, and made him see that if his sword could not
prove more effecacious th^n his speech, he was there to finish his life after
his travels and miseries. We both drew for our defense, and did what ever could
be expected from men hemmed in on every side with death-threatning weapons. We
had both received many wounds, but for every wound Araterus gave a death: and
for every drop of blood, he shed whole pools of theirs, and did things through
desperateness, that were ever after esteemed Miracles. Valor must have at last
given place to number, and life to death, if we had not been immediately
rescued. The noise, that proceeded from this Encounter was heard amongst the
Council, which at the first approach imbued them all with fears of treachery
and complottings. All desired to know the cause of what they heard, but every
one was afraid to leave his seat, least at their first peeping forth of doers
they should meet with the instruments of death, many of them knowing what
belonged to a gown, but very little to a sword; they could order, but not act.
At last Peomontile uncle to the Queen, and one in whom Mars and Mercury made a
pleasing conjunction, left his seat, and entering the garden, found us both at
the last exigent. When he saw the inequality of our fight, although he knew
they might justly put us to death for entering that place, yet he commanded them
to leave us. His authority made them re^ire, and I am persuaded some of them
gladly enough, being sufficiently satisfied in what Araterus could do. He
beheld what Araterus had done with a countenance that betrayed his
astonishment, at last demanding our design in entering the place contrary to the
custom and Law of the Country, Araterus told him by what accident he was
conducted to the place, his ignorance of their customs, and his being a
stranger in the place, which was easily verified by our faces which carried
more hair then twenty of those Eastern people, (the Sun contracting the pores
of the body, and hindering the excernation of those pilous excrements) with our
not attaining to the perfect pronunciation of their language. Peomontile told
him, it was requisite, if he desired his life, that he cast by his weapons, and
yield himself, and that before they arose, they would send for him, to give an
account of this action to the Queen, and that if he could prove his integrity
as he said, or that it was done through ignorance without any design, he made
no question, but that he should gain his pardon, but if otherwise that he were
guilty of any design he was to expect what the Laws and Justice of the land
inflicted. Araterus slung by his sword, and offered his hands to be bound, I
doing the like, we were carried into a room close by the Council, where we
expected their leisure. Peomontile returning gave them a brief account of what
he had done, desiring we might be brought before them before they broke up, to
answer what we had done. Every one resetling those disturbances fear had
exsuscitated in their breasts, they proceeded upon those weighty debates on
which they entered before this disturbance. And because that afterward Araterus
was made acquainted with the result of the Council, and of what pass^d at that
time therein, it will not be amiss for me in this place to give you the
knowledge of it too.

The approaching Wars had necessitated the Queen to call her Council;
consisting of the chiefest of the kingdom, and those whom experience had made
prudent, and knowing, that nothing might be undertaken without the consent of
the whole, or at least Major part. But how often is it! that Councels are
called, out of mere formality and custom, not to council, but to confirm the
resolutions of their Princes. Private passion and interest (especially in
women) is very dangerous, for being settled in an inflexible b^east, although
the most prudent Council is given, if it contradict their humors, it must cede
to their follies. I speak not this of Amarillis, because her resolutions had a
good effect, and so all faults were smothered in the end, but in this regard it
reaches her. She, as most Princes do, had first consulted with her own
thoughts, or with her nearest favorites, who most commonly apply their
verdicts to the inclinations and humors of the Prince, and out of that had
framed her resolutions and private decrees. She then convocated her Council, to
which she came, not with a heart susceptible of impressions, or with
resolutions to follow their dictates if they contradicted hers, but with desire
and passion to have them confirm (and conform to) her desires. I will not say
but that the Queens resolutions were reasonable, and it may be better than the
opinion of her Council, I will not say but that she might be as clear-sighted
as they, or that they might not be biased by private interest as well as she.
But after she had told them the occasion of their Convocation, and had made
known how that she would not undertake any thing without their Council and
approbation, with applauding their wisdoms, and tried experience, the question
was proposed amongst them. Whether it were better to resist the Prince of
Sinana, or the Queen to yield to the marriage he desired? This was sufficiently
scanned and debated for many days, but that day on which we arrived there, was
to put a period to it. The Queen was utterly against marrying the Prince of
Sinana, but she found her Council divided, and the major part against her. But
indeed those that opposed her, were many of them suspected of bribery, having
been too much acquainted with that Prince, others spoke out of a spirit of fear
and pusillanimity, and others biased by their own interests, their Estates
lying in the way, and most exposed to the ruin of wars: so that the major part
was against the inclinations of the Queen, but the melior part was for her,
amongst the rest was her uncle Peomontile with some of the gravest, and most
esteemed heads. The reasons of the adverse part in brief were these. They first
expatiated themselves upon the felicity of peace and tranquillity, showing how
happily they had lived for so many years, not being disturbed by wars, they
illustrated this by showing at large the incommodities of War, which were the
spending their Treasure, their goods, their houses, the loss of her subjects,
the impoverishing their land, bringing death, scarcity and famine, the stopping
of Trade and Manufacture, spoiling of Cities, sacking of Towns, demolishing of
houses and Castles, and finally bringing all to ruin and confusion: Then
passing to particulars, they exhibited what manner of Prince they had to deal
with, his patience, the number of his Armies, his Weapons, Prowess, and every
thing that might make him formidable. Then they showed, that though they were
numerous in people, yet not being accustomed in War, but having enjoyed a long
tranquillity, they would be ignorant in their weapons, and not able to
withstand them. That all this trouble, dan^er, loss and destruction might
easily be prevented by the marriage of the Queen, that it was not dishonorable
for her, he being the greatest Potentate on the earth, but that it would be for
her greater glory, and her kingdom and peoples safety. The Queen seeing most
of her Council adhered to this, and fearing that her party would not have been
able to have withstood their reasons, showed that she was a woman, for being
stimulated with their pressing her to marry the Prince, she stood up, and not
being able to smother her discontent, told them, that for her part she had been
always willing to give her people content, though it were against her private
inclinations, but in this she was not able to yield to them. That she hoped
they would not force her to marry one whom by no means she could affect. That
if they feared these wars that so much threatened them, and that if they were
persuaded they would be the ruin of the kingdom, and people, seeing they were
weary of her government, she would rather resign up the interest she had to the
Crown, and retire her self to a private life, whereby she should both satisfy
her self, and not be compelled to marry a Prince contrary to her inclinations,
and take away all occasions of War from them, in leaving the Government and
Kingdom for their sakes.

This speech of the Queen troubled the adverse party extremely, but the other
party having reasons enough on their side told them by the mouth of Peomontile,
That they were very sensible o^ the commodities and felicities of Peace, and of
the happiness they had enjoyed under it, and also that they were not ignorant
of all those discommodities, ruinations and subversions that are incident to
War. That they should consider that Peace was maintained by War, and that War
was the mother of peace. That there was no War more just, than that which was
to maintain their liberty: that the liberty of their Queen, was the liberty of
themselves; and that her captivity would prove their destruction. That although
War was terrible, yet not being to be avoided, the end would be pleasing. That
they were not altogether to consider the potency of their enemy, but to expect
the adjuvation of the gods, who consider the justness of the cause, and who
effect great things by weak instruments. That for that end, and no other, but
to defend themselves, were they furnished with weapons; and if that any made
use of them to offend their Neighbor wrongfully and unjusty, that for the most
part they fell by them, notwithstanding their potence and greatness. That the
war was unjust, is manifest, they but defended themselves from the violence of
a superbous enemy, who it may be made the marriage of the Queen but a pretense
to usurp their Crown. That although the soldiers being unaccustomed to their
weapons, they hoped the example of their Leaders, and the witness of their
cause would infuse such animosity into them, that they should have no need to
complain of their defects. That they should very willingly hearken to them,
(having the same lives, liberties and estates as they to be hazarded in the
wars) could they propose any way, (with safety to their honors, and without
detriment to the kingdom) to divert the approaching storm, and to stop the
effusion of blood by the Wars. That what they already had proposed was a cure
far more dangerous than the wound, and from which they could expect no other
than their utter and inevitable subversion. That 'twas the poorest of Polices
to avoid a War by so dangerous a peace, which although it might be honorable
for the Queen, would prove very unhappy fot the Kingdom. That both reason and
example might teach them, that an Heir and Heiresse of a Kingdom made no happy
conjunction for their people, the one being necessitated to obey the Laws and
Rules of the other, and of a free state and kingdom, to become a Province and
subjected. That if their Queen married the Prince of Sinana, 'twould bring them
into more hazard and danger than the wars could effect, that they must expect
to have their Kingdom translated into a Province, subjugated to strangers,
ruled by Viceroys allied to the Prince, that they must be subject to their
Laws, observe their Ceremonies, and loose both name and nature in that of
Sinana. That they could not expect any help from the gracious influence of the
Queen, she being in another Country, ignorant of their miseries, and it may
be, if knowing them, may not have power to help them. That it may be, the
Prince of Sinana having through this pretense sufficiently strengthened their
kingdom for his best advantage, and sufficiently subjugated them, may then
expose their Queen to scorn and ignominy, they not believing he could love her,
whose subjects he seeks to invade unjusty, and to gain her forceably. Lastly,
That it were better for the Queen to marry any younger Prince whom she might
invest with her Crown, or else as they have done heretofore to prevent the
dangers that ensue exotic marriages, marie one of her Subjects, which is
nothing dishonorable, being maintained by frequent examples, and so their
Laws will not be changed, their rites altered, nor their customs subverted,
but their kingdom would continue in its pristine condition, flourishing and
happy. And that (to conclude) if they were not able to see the percipice of
that marriage, with the Tyranny, bondage and slavery they are like to undergo
by it, but persisted still in their opinions, for their part they had done
their duties in discharging their consciences, and that knowing the affection
of the people to the Queen, they were resolved to live and die in her defense,
and to run the common hazard of the kingdom: That if there were any there that
would not, they might sit still and show their disaffection to the common good,
whilst they rose to proffer their service to their Queen and Country. With
that Peomontile with all that party arising up, offered their service to the
Queen, which the others seeing, did the like, some through fear imagining some
design in Peomontile's behavior, and others convinced by the reasons they had
heard. Thus the Council ended to the great satisfaction of the Queen, who it
seems had resolved to have run any hazard, rather then to have married the
Prince of Sinana.

The Council being ready to break up, Peomontile desired the Queen that we
might be brought before them. Presently we were had in by an officer that
attended them. The room where they sat, was more stately than any we had seen,
but the gravity and order of the Senators, caused a kind of reverence and awe
in the beholders. But the place was more illuminated, by the beauty and Majesty
of the Queen, which if the one rendered the place awefull, the other rendered
his sacred and adoreable. Beauty was hemmed in with Majesty, and both the one
and the other was incomparable, there being a Kind of pleasing severity mixed
in every act and gesture. In all those peregrinations which I have for so many
years undergone, I could never meet till this hour any beauty that could
furpass, or equalize that which our eyes then beheld. But now indeed I must
confess, my eyes beheld in this sequestered grote those beauties that eclipse
the splendour and pulcritude of that Eastern Star, and make me justly pass by
those praises I had intended for her. Indeed both hers and all the worlds must
cede to those which now illuminate and glorify your Grote.

This raised the tincture in the faces of the two Princesses, but being loath to
disturb him in his discourse, they permited silence to preside ore their lips,
and heard him continue thus. As Soon as we were entered, I cast my eyes upon
Araterus, and found that the beams of beauty and Majesty had dazzled his eyes
and understanding. Being surprised with an object so ravishing, he was amazed,
and stood in the posture of a Criminal. His eyes fixed upon the Queen, lost
themselves in their intuition. His color vicissively changing, would have made
the Spectators believe that he had been guilty of some ill intent, or that
'twas through fear and pusillanimity. He was the Queens prisoner, and before he
went out of the place, he was more really so: For Love, as if he had meant to
make a kind of Triumph in his subjugation, sat enthroned and environed with all
kind of advantages in that place. He stood a long time receiving those darts
that were continually ejaculated from the two luminous orbs of Amarillis, by
that god who extends his dominion from the rising of glorious Titan, to his
immergency in the occidental waves, and who leaves no part of the world free
from his subjugation and tyranny. The Queen with no less fixed looks beheld
Araterus, and it seems receiving reciprocal wounds from his looks and actions.
Araterus as you know, was every way handsome, and in his face especially, no
despicable Throne for love. They were mute all this while, though their eyes
spoke an occult and magical language, having indeed sometimes as great a power
in love, as the most rhetorical and pleasing tongues. At last Araterus
recollecting himself, dissipated that kind of amazedness, and conforming his
body to his speech, endeavored with all the ski^l he had gained in that
language to express himself. Madam (said he) my silence (it may be) might cause
you to suspect me, and my stupidity render me as guilty of noxious intentions:
'twas nothing but the daz^ing luster of your Majesty, with the gravity of these
Senators, not being used to behold such state and glory, that at first sight
took away the power of speech, and contracting all other faculties, sent their
powers to assist my sight in an intuition so pleasing and glorious. I am a
stranger, Madam! as you may well perceive by diverse marks that make me
different from your Nation: And I was (as I may say) of another world, but
being upon the most caprichious element, hurried on by the blasts of fortune
and of storms, I was cast on unknown Countries, through which I have traveled
with danger and peril enough, and at last being shipwrack'd on your Coasts, I
found an entertainment by one of your Subjects, as generous as good, till I had
gained this smattering in your language which you hear; who telling me the
occasion of your approaching Wars, he inspired me with a desire to serve you.
For this end I left his habitation, with an intent to make you a proffer of my
service. Having devoted my self to you, and entering the City this day, being
utterly ignorant of your Customs and Laws, and without any other design than
of viewing the ornaments of your Palace, I have through my boldness and
ignorance incurred a danger, and I fear your Majesty's displeasure. But I hope
my ignorance will exuscitate your clemency, and gain a pardon for him who has
already devoted his life to your service, and who desires no longer to live,
than that his life may be serviceable to your Majesty.

He had a very favorable audience of the Queen, there being something of
charms both in his tongue and face: we were caused to withdraw, and after a
little while being brought in again, Peomontile told Araterus, that the Queen
according to her wonted Clemency, and natural inclinations of mercy to
strangers, and to those who were not wilful Criminals; had pardoned him his
temerity, and did accept of the service he profer'd. That he should attend her
after the Council was risen, to receive those testimonies of her liberality
which she was accustomed to give to those, that so freely desired to serve her.
Araterus bowing to the ground, with a very good grace gave her thanks for her
favors, which purchased him the kissing of her Robe, a favor but seldom
showed, they accounting all that belong to their Princes sacred. Being
departed, we went to our lodging, having our liberty by order from the Queen. I
perceived a great deal of trouble in the face of Araterus, and discomposure in
his looks. Our long conversation and mutual miseries had made me very bold with
him, so that I asked him the reason of it. He was unwilling at first to tell
me, accounting the cause ridiculous, but at last he told me it proceeded from
the beauty and splendour which accompanied the Queen, and that he had
endeavored to allay those emotions, knowing the disproportion between them,
but the more that he essaied it, the more violent they grew. He confessed he
had imbibed that which began to disturb his repose, and which began to make him
feel the inquietudes of those that love. But accounting his most insulse and
vain, he was angry with himself for entertaining those motions, though he knew
not how to shun them. I encouraged him in them, and told him, that 'twas so
decreed by heaven, and that he was not to doubt it, seeing that part of the
prediction of Baercellizeg was fulfilled in our being brought to the utmost
limits of the East: That he had undergone the worst of the prediction, and that
he should not fear to see the best part also fulfilled. I told him that this
was the rich kingdom he should possess, Amarillis the fair and wise Princess he
should enjoy. That he might assure himself of her, and therefore he should
entertain those penetrations of love with joy and content: Indeed whatever he
said, the thoughts of this Prophecy conduced much to his quie^ude, inspiring
him with hopes, and banishing that despair, the disproportion would have
injected, much supported his as^iring Love.

The Queen (as we afterward understood) having felt those violencies and
emotions which were raised in her breast at the sight of her prisoner, and not
being accustomed to the like, wondered from whence they should proceed. She
could not imagine at first, that it should be Love, having to vigorously
withstood all the Charms of her Adorers, being the greatest and chiefest
Princess in the East. Endeavoring to divert those cogitations that this new
disturbance raised, she employed her self in ordering those ^mergent affairs,
which the necessity of state introduced. Araterus presenting himself sometimes
before the eye of her mind, put her in remembrance of her promise, and caused
her to command Peomontile to see for Araterus, whom he found walking in the
Antichamber recogitating on the beauties and Majesty's of Amarillis. After
their first civilities Araterus followed Peomontile, through many Chambers into
a fair Gallery, supported with Pillars of Jasper, and the Cornishes of Ebony
set with Emralds and Saphirs. At the upper end sat the Queen in a seat of lvory
inlaid with Gold and precious stones of the Orient, her elbow resting on the
frame of her seat, and her Crimson colored cheeks kissing the lilies of her
hands. She was in a deep musing, but at the first sight of Araterus she started
into a composure, and with a generous violence gave him a reception free from
any open perturbation. Araterus after his first reverence, and permission to
kiss the lower end of her vestment, with the best of his language told her the
immemsity of his desire to serve her. This he performed with so pleasing and
taking a language, that not only the Queen, but all those that stood about her,
confessed he was the most accomplished stranger that ever they had seen. The
Queen conversing with him, asked him many questions concerning his Country,
and Nation, and concerning his birth and quality, with diverse other things of
our Manners, Customs and Laws, to all which Araterus answered so promptly, so
gracefully, and with such satisfaction and pleasure, that they found no
wearisomness in a discourse that lasted two hours, nor had been scarcely broken
off then, but that the Sun revisiting the western parts of the world, began to
leave the Orient destitute of his light and splendour. Both being well satisfied
with each others wit and behavior, Araterus at the Queens command retired, she
telling him that he should the next day attend her in the Camp, where there
being a general Muster, she would assign him a place to serve her in, promising
that he should not find her ungrateful to his services. Araterus returned more
fired than before, and so full of ardencies, that he vowed to serve her all the
rest of his days without ever thinking of returning to his own Country again.
He thought her worthy of all honor and esteem, and believed that the
sacrificeing of a thousand lives in her defense, would not be a victim
sufficient to obtain the least favor or grace. Whilst Araterus spent the night
in those unusual agitations Love and Desire caused, the Queen with no less
disturbance, past it over in the silent meditation of him. She sought
oftentimes (as she told Araterus afterward) to interdict his appearance in her
memory, and to banish him into oblivion, but he pressed on so heard, and
appeared armed with so many charms, that 'twas impossible for her, not to give
him admission into her thoughts. This night being passed over with very little
sleep on the part of Araterus, he appeared on the morrow at the place
appointed, which was in a large plain on the North-side of the City. In that
place was met the whole strength of the kingdom, in so gallant an equipage,
that we accounted it the greatest rarity we had yet seen. I doubt what I shall
tell you will be scarce credited, when you shall compare the Armies of the East
of Asia with those of this part, or of Europe, not considering the vastness of
their Countries, and populosity of them, the land not being sufficient to
contain them, is fain to borrow habitations for millions on his neighbor
element. The plain (which was only covered with trees toward the City) was of
an extent of many Leagues, on which was spread milions of Tents, made of a thin
kind of stuff imbued with diverse colors, being branched forth into rare works
and compartments. On the top of the Chieftaine's, or (according to their
language) Birebassa^'s Tent of each Province or Shire, hung the Insigna of each
Province, to which all of that Province were to repair. Of these there were
seven Tents that carried Insigna's, six of the Provinces, and one of the
Cities, which had an Insigna by it self, besides the royal standards of the
Queens which appeared more superb then all. These head or capital Tents stood
an equal distance each from another, and although it were on a plain, on which
the Horizon might be seen a vast way, the lines lying plane and level, yet the
tops of the one could hardly be perceived from another. They were placed four
square, making a small intrenchment for many Leagues about each Tent, leaving
large spaces betwixt for the exercise of arms. Within these entrenchments were
the Tents of all the under Captains, with their Companies, which consisted
most commonly of five thousand. The tent with the insigna of Sinda was pitched
next to the City, all their Companies being stretched along by the wall of the
City, the other standing like a large Quadrangle enclosed the royal Tent of the
Queens, which at a distance exhibited it self like a large Castle, in which was
variety of rooms and conveniences, and yet made with such art, that in six
hours it could be either set up or taken down, its greatness nothing hindering
its portage, there being Elephants for that purpose. The Tents set forth with
variety of paintings, and imbellished with streamers, rendered themselves very
pleasing Objects to the sight, but the innumerable companies of men and arms
amazed us, and made us believe that 'twas impossible they should be overcome,
yet they confessed they expected their enemies with far greater force. Whilst we
were amazed at what we had seen, we saw another thing which would at first
sight seem a great wonder amongst us. 'Twas a Chariot which coming on the
left hand of us, ran a great pace over the plane without the drawing of any
living animal. You would have thought it had been enchanted, or that your eyes
had been deluded, we indeed counted it strange at first, but having often seen
them used 'twas no wonder to us. The first inventor of them was a Sinanan, who
intended to make the land navigable, that they might sail as well upon the land
as the sea. They were made in form of a boat, with four wheels, with springs
and engines that rendered it flexible every way. The guidance was not without
art, and was managed by one, who as the Pilot in the ship, kept it direct
before the wind: In the middle it had small Masts, on which were spread the
sails, that being swollen with the wind, moved the Chariot a great swiftness
over the plane. This Chariot which we saw, we soon knew by the richness and the
insigna to be the Queens, which took the way to her royal Tent, being followed
by all her Court. Araterus rode not far from the Chariot, all the while
contemplating of those things which are memorable to Lovers. Afte^ she had
entered her Tent which illustrated the whole plane, and a while reposed her
self, Araterus was had in by Peomontile. The Queen was seated in a kind of
Throne, advanced by some steps in a spacious room, where she expected all the
Chieftains of the Provinces to render up their Muster rolls, that she might
know the number of the men and arms. I will remit the nominating of their
Captains or Provinces, being only names, harsh and barbarous in your ears, and
only give you an account of their number and order, that I may not render you
weary with my prolixity. Peomontile being the Chieftain of the City had the
first place of presenting the number of men under his charge, which were an
hundred and fifty thousand, with five thousand Elephants with Castls, divided
into troops, and subdivided into Companies, every Captain of a Company having
under him five thousand, and of a Troop fifty thousand. The other Chieftains in
order presented the Queen likewise with their rolls after they had been
admitted to kiss the end of her robe, the first Province brought two hundred
and eight thousand men, well armed and appointed with a thousand Elephants, the
second as many, the third ten thousand more, the fourth brought five hundred
thousand, the fifth and sixth two hundred thousand men and five thousand
Elephants, a beast ordinarily used in wars in those Countries, so that all
their Army consisted of sixteen hundred and eighty four thousand men, and
fifteen thousand Elephants. The Queen having the absolute dispose of the
Militia, gave order to the Captains concerning their pay and rewards. In their
Wars the Chieftain of the City uses evermore to be Generalissimo, and therefore
it was conferred on Peomontile, one indeed capable of the place, the other
Chieftains having the leading of those of their several Provinces. Araterus not
being forgot, was made Captain of her life-gard, a place of honor and trust.
Passion indeed always blinds reason, and makes the most prudent err in his
judgment: The Queen, one of the wisest of the East, having felt the violent
agitations of a growing passion, lost her judgment, and followed its dictates.
In all other things she was of a solid judgment, and could distinguish right
by the light of reason, but in those that touched her private interests, where
she could not keep out passion. She knew that she had erred, and yet she could
not but err, Araterus was already one, more to her than another, and she began
to show her partiality in this action. She could not resolve to love him, and
yet she could not hate him, or hazard him: she loved to see him, and therefore
she ordained that place to keep him nigh her, and to oblige him to her. It may
be she did not see that this was the dictates of her passion, but rather
thought it those of her good Genius or titular angel, but she could not be
ignorant, but that this action would be strangely resented, and that it would
beget Araterus more envy and enemies than love or friends. Such sudden
favorites are always envied, and sometimes ruined, especially being
strangers. Araterus indeed believing the danger to be greater than the honor,
civilly refused, and begged her not to make him superbly such immense favors,
but to reward him according to his merits, but she pressing it he could not
with safety refuse it, his passion pleading for so advantageous a place.

He being settled in the place according to the orders of the Queen, it was
presently known throughout the Camp, and very odly resented, but the authority
of the Queen made them but whisper, not speak aloud by their ill resentment of
it. Their wondering and muttering did but very privately arrive at their ears;
so that she took no notice of it, hoping it would soon be hushed, and the virtue
of Araterus would quiet their spirits.

Things remained awhile in this state, Araterus being very sensible of the
favors of the Queen, and his place obliging him to it, he often visited her,
and had conference with her. Amongst such a numerous Army 'twas a wonder to see
so much order and quietude, the City showed no sign of all these preparations,
or of War, but by a little more vigilance: The soldiers were all kept without
the City, that they might not annoy it. The Queen had word brought her by her
Curriors, that the army of her enemies was advancing toward the frontiers, and
that they seemed to take the way of Cherlozth, and that besides this Army there
appeared a fleet coming from the lower Provinces of Sinana, which seemed to
cover the whole gulf of Bengan. The Queen calling her Council, and having
advised together, they gave order to one of the Borebassae's to advance with
half the Army toward the place where they expected the enemies to enter. And
the rest to enter the City under Peomontile to secure it, half of them entering
into the ships, under the Alquebuzque, or Admiral of the sea. Every thing was
put into a posture of defense, most expecting their enemies with impatiencies.
The Queen experimenting the wisdom and knowledge of Araterus, let never a day
pass without discoursing with him, concerning one thing or other, and finding
him so rational in all his answers, she began to make him oraculous. Being in
discourse with her concerning the War, and having a longng desire to be
bickering with the enemy, that he might exhibit his valor, believing that the
only way to render himself gracious in her eyes, and knowing that this place
would oblige him not to leave the Queen, nor to be present in the Encounter, he
entreated her to restore her former captain into her favor, and to permit him
to serve her under Peomontile, or if she dared to repose her trust in his skill
or fidelity, to grant him the defense of the haven, where he might be more
serviceable to her Majesty, than in that place she had honored him with. She
was somewhat difficult in granting this, both in consideration of his danger,
and of her peoples murmuring. But he pressing her two or three times, she was
fain to let love overcome reason, and to grant what he desired. He was no
sooner settled in that place by the Queens order with a hundred thousand men
under his charge, but the rest of the Captains and Soldiers* being highly
displeased, lost their wonted respect, and ceased not openly to deprave this
action of the Queens, some believing him a s^ie, and that his intentions were
to betray them to the enemy, others that he was a Coward, and not fitting for
a place of such consequence and trust. They proceeded so far in their
disrespect, and spoke so loud, that they had almost mutined, had not Peomontile
satisfied them by promising to make the Queen acquainted with their council,
care and fidelity. He presently made the Queen acquainted with it, and told her
she might incur extreme danger by their evil resentments, and therefore advised
her to recall him, and not provoke the Soldiers in this exigent. The Queen
heard him, but being of a humor always resolute, would not alter what she had
done, but told him, that she confided very much in Araterus, knowing him to be
valiant by what he had done at his first coming thither, and that his discourse
exhibited that he was not ignorant of military aff^irs, but that he had both
Judgment, Prudence and valor. That 'twas true she had entrusted him with the
Key or strength of her Kingdom, but that it would rather encourage him to
treachery than stop him to suspect him, now, That it was not safe to enrage a
man from whom she expected much, to degrade him now: That if he had any
intentions to betray her, her generosity and goodness would oblige him to the
contrary, That if he had any such intentions he could not effect them, not
having gained the affections of the soldiers, and she knowing that her
Captains would not obey him farther then they might see that it tended to the
safety of the Kingdom, and lastly, That she gave him leave to set a private
guard about him to observe his actions, which if they tended not to the safety
of the Kingdom, she remitted him into his hands, to do what he pleased with
him* Peomontile seeing the resolutions of the Queen, and not having any
sinister opinion of Araterus seemed contented, and leaving the Queen with his
authority, and persuasions, he at last pacified the soldiers, and begat a
better opinion in many of Araterus: who hearing of these passages extremely
desired to rectify their thoughts concerning him by his actions, which he
effected soon after.

Every one expecting the enemies with much impatiency, prepared all things that
were necessary for their defense. The City was every where fortified and well
guarded, the ports all along the gulf secured, the fine that came into the
City chained up, with a kind of fort made of boats to defend it, and at the
mouth lay their ships and boats ready prepared, most of all the bigger vessels
being armed with sithes, and hooks, and their prowes set with sharp Irons, to
spoil their tackle, and ships. There was nothing wanting that those Kingdoms
could afford, either for their own defense or to oftend their enemies. Araterus
also animating his soldiers to the defense of their Queen, their own lives and
liberties, set them on fire with a longing to be fighting with their enemies,
that they might testify the courage his words had inspired into them. After
some few days the fleet of the enemies was discovered from the summit of a
high tower, which consisted of such an innumerable company of vessels that the
sea seemed to groan under their weight. The noise of their enemies instruments,
as Clarons, Trumpets, Flutes and such like, being heard, they were reanswered
from the fleet of the Sornaleans, with the like, and with shouts that exhibited
they were nothing feared with their approach. Two days they lay in the gulf
within fight of the fleet without showing the least sign of engageing, the
third, being favored with a full wind, they came up toward ours; with such a
shout, that the foul which flew over their heads through the clarification of
the air, fell as dead among their ships. The ^u^mits of all the towers of the
City were filled, to behold this first naval encounter; and the Queen, with the
chief ladies in the Kingdom being mounted on a high tarrasse, had a very fair
prospect on the sea. As Soon as they were come within shoot of one another the
Sinana^s let fly a volley of shot from those murderers which I before spoke
of, which so beat the air that it shoke the firmest buildings in the City, the
smoke of the sulpburious powder arising in curles cast so great a mist that it
deprived us of the sight of both the fleets.

This kind of weapon amazed us, having never before beheld the like, and made
us in the midst of that confusion consider its danger. The Sornaleans
reanswered their shot, with another of darts, and slings, which breaking their
way through the smoke gave many of their enemies their deaths: Knowing that
'twas not for their safety to keep at a distance with them, they tacked about
and gaining the wind came in upon them with a fury not to be depainted. Their
prowes rushing one against another made a horrible crash, and riving many in
two, let in the indomitable water into their bowels, valor was exhibited on
both sides, and strength and fury reigned every where: but the Sinanans having
galled our ships with their great shot between wind and water, many of them
sunk to the bottom of the gulf. We could not perceive that before they
grappled they were pitifully shaterred, both in their tack^ing and men, but
when outs came to a close, they repayed them double, our enemies ships being so
thawc't with men that they hindered the performances of one another, so that
ours where ever the stroke felled some, and made a flaughter that lightened
whole ships of their numbers, and imbued the whole gulf with the tincture of
their blood.

Blood and Death reigned every where, and this encounter lasted many hours
accompanied with all the horror and slaughter that can be framed in the
immagination. All the ships being intermingled one with another made a strange
confused noise made up of groans and shoutes. Araterus had beheld this naumachy
with wonderful impatiency, and transports from the forte that defended the
sine, being ready at every shout and disadvantage to leap into the sea, but the
remembrance of his charge kept him in the fort, and tied him to his duty till
that he saw the Sornaleans, loose ships apace, and began to faint, being too
much pressed upon by their numerous enemies. He was then no longer able to
contain himself, but causing all the small vessels which lay within the rode to
be got together he manned them with thirty thousand men, and leaving the rest
under command to secure the Key, he advanced toward the fleet, and with
undaunted courage mauger all the endeavors of his enemies, himself borded
their viceadmirall, and clearing the decks took her from a whole squadron of
enemies. The rest emboldened by this action, fought so stoutly that the
disadvantage perspicuously appeared on our enemies side, having lost all those
ships they had taken with many of their own. Night coming on, the sleets
separated with a considerable loss on both sides, ours indeed had lost most
vessels, but they by far most men.

'Twas dark before they left them, and both cast anchor within sight of each
other, making a show of another battle the next morning. Araterus returned to
the sort highly commended by his followers for his valor and courage. Love had
directed the eyes of the Queen to observe his actions, which made her to send
for him the same night, where she gave him those collaudations and Eulogiums
which his modesty would not have accepted, and which did but raise up the envy
of others, though she rewarded all alike lest any should take notice of her
partiality, she also commanded her own Chirurgions to dress those wounds he
had received which were a thrust into the left hand, which he got in boarding
the vice admiral, and a shot through the same arm by one of their Murderers.

By this action Araterus gained the favor of many, by clearing those
suspicions they had of him, and especially amongst the rest Peomontile, who
highly carressed, and esteemed him. The next morning appearing, each side had
light to view their loss; which was so considerable that they showed no desire
of a second encounter, before they had repaired their breaches. In this posture
the Sinanans continued eight days, and being well satisfied with the courage of
the Sornaleans they feared to hazard another battle by sea. They saw that the
ports were too well guarded for them to land, and notwithstanding their great
puissance they saw 'twas a matter of impossibility to endammage the City. Land
they must, and therefore they endeavored to effect it without our suspicion or
knowledge; having considered all places that were any thing commodious, they
pitched on an obscure place which indeed was too weak to make any resistance.
In the night time as silently as might be they passed most of their men into
half of their vessels, leaving the other in the place with a command to spread
wide that their departure might not be perceived by us. This was done so
silently that we had no notice of it, till by the firing of certain beakons, we
understood that they were in danger and presently after the curriors brought
word that they had landed their men in a bay where they were notable to resist
them.

Peomontile calling all the chief of the officers together ( Araterus being
among the rest) desired their counsels in this case. After many had spoken
Araterus was of this opinion: That delay would be very prejudicial to their
affairs, that 'twas requisite the whole fleet should advance toward that of
their enemies, when he was persuaded 'twas left but poorly manned and left on
purpose but to amuse them, that in the mean time Peomontile should advance by
land toward the place where the Sinanans were landed that they might not
advantage themselves too much, by the use of the country, and that they might
appear before that they could order so great a body. This council seemed so
reasonable that 'twas followed, and Peomontile leaving enou^h to secure that
great City drew out most of his forces, and advanced toward the enemy.
Araterus being unwilling to sit still in Sinda, got leave of Peomontile that he
should add his thirty thousand to the ships and leave the desence of the port
to any he should substitute. Having joined then with the sleet they weighed
anchor and made to that of their enemies with full sail. They knowing their
own weakness did not dare to hazard a battle, but perceiving our intention
gained the Point and sled before us. We could not fetch them up before they had
entered the bay amongst their other ships. Believing it best to stay for the
appearance of Peomontile on the land we lay at the mouth of the bay wide of one
another, the sea favoring us with a happy tranquillity. Peomontile using all
possible expedition, and being well accquainted with the ways, appeared at the
backs of his enemies very unexpectedly, some few days after our arrival. The
enemy were encamped in a very disadvantagious place, and where they could make
very little use of their great Murderers, which they had but newly unshipped.

Peomontile being very expert gained a hill which they had neglected to their
great disadvantage, not expecting them so soon, spreading his men he almost
environed them, most of theirs continuing on the shore, fearing an assault from
our ships, which as it were besieged them. The Queen having a dasire to be an
eyewitness of the actions of her soldiers and I believe especially of
Araterus, from whom love persuaded her to expect some great action, left the
City with a guard of sive thousand partisans, and drawn in her Royal Chariot,
made of the fairest Elephants tooth, inlaid with gold, the wheels of Ebony,
with bands and nails of silver, covered over with cloth of gold and tissue,
drawn by two white Elephants the fairest the East ever produced, crowned with
golden crowns, and covered with silk, in which was embroidered the arms of the
Queen, which was the Sun Orient. In this equipage she came to a rock on the
left hand of the camp from whence she could perceive both the armies and the
navies, and distinguish those she knew from the rest: presently after her
arrival she sent a small boat to Araterus, with an express that she desired
to conser with him. He immediately returning with the messenger presented
himself to the Queen with a most pro^ound obeisance, who received him with a
grace very pleasant and familiar. Peomontile with some of the chief of the
army, being sent for by the Queen, they entered into counsel concerning their
affairs, the conclusion whereof was, that they should adventure a battle,
having the advantage of the ground, although their enemies exceeded them in
number, that at the same time they should begin it both by sea and land, at the
firing of a beakon, which should be as soon as the Sun appeared the next day,
and that in the mean time they should rest and prepare their soldiers for it.
This being concluded, they gave Araterus an Order to give the admiral for the
execution of what they had concluded.

Araterus being about to depart was met with by a damsel from the Queen, who
presented him in the Queens name a crimson scarf embost with the fairest pearls
that ever eye beheld, which made up the name of Amarillis in great letters, the
length of the scarf, at each end was her arms set with the embossment of
diamonds, and fringed with gold and long tassels of Pearls. Araterus was amazed
at the richness and bravery of the scarf, and receiving it with respect
desired her to tell the Queen that before the morrow night, he hoped to be a
means to render her tryumphant over all her enemies, or to loose his life in
the action. That what ever he was able to perform should not be attributed to
himself, but accounted the effect of a power which inspired him through the
immensity of her favors and goodness.

Being returned to the ships he gave the Order of the general to the admiral,
who thereby knowing his intentions spent the rest of the day in the preparation
of his vessels, and in encouraging his men to do bravely. Araterus being
agitated by his love, expected the next day with impatiency, resolving to
signalize his actions, and make him self worthy of the high favors of the
Queen, by perpetrating to the utmost whatsomever the immense force of his love,
and innate valor could carry him to. The next day appeared some hours after
Araterus had expected it with waking eyes, after he had saluted the Gods with
his prayers, and especially the deity of Love, he caused me to help him on with
his arms, which he had caused to be made in that country: They were made of
the best steel, the umbraces and bucklings of plates of silver; his cuirace set
out with great bosses of gold and pearl, and his caske, of a mixed metal, was
shaded with a plume of Ostrich feathers tinctured with ostrum, which imbued it
with a purple, upon his left arm he tied the signal of the Queens favor
which she sent him the night before. In this manner he awaited the signal:
which was given at the time appointed. The ships presently moved toward their
enemies, who expecting the encounter received them with resolution and valor.
Whilst the two fleets were performing all that could be expected from their
force and puissance, filling every place with horror, death, blood, and
confusion; Peomontile having divided the army into four battalions, moved
deliberately and in good order toward the Sinanans. The general of the
Sinanans being both valiant and Politic, and seconded by the Prince himself
who led the Van of the cavalrie, a Prince valiant enough, but withal furious
and temerary, had notice of our intentions to fight and therefore was fully
prepared for us. He saw the disadvantages that they had in the ground, but
being supernumerary in men, he hoped to overwhelme ours: Besides they had the
advantage in weapons; half of their men carrying those hand-murtherers. He had
divided his army into 6. battalions, every battallion equalling ours, if not
exceeding. It will be needless to describe this battle to you, though it were
one of the bloodiest, and greatest, that ever was fought in the East, both for
that your self have been in many, and therefore know the heat and Mars-full
Enthusiasme that then agitates generous, and courageous spirits, and that I may
not terrify these Ladies with the relation of nothing but horror, blood and
death. Besides, should you desire it, I could not give it you exactly as it
was, because I had no time to observe that congression on the land, being
engaged so hotly in that on the Sea. The Queen with the most considerable
Ladies in the Kingdom was mounted on the utmost summit of the Rock, that they
might the better assault Heaven with their prayers, and that they might behold
a battle that made the strongest amongst them yield themselves to fears and
fainting. As for the Queen, believe me, she could not permit her eyes to behold
whether her army we^e like to prove victorious or not, although on it depended
her crown, riches, state, honor, and it may be life, such a power had love
above fear in her soul. Her eyes were inseparable to the navy, and you may
believe that 'twas for Araterus's sake that she was so partial as to regard
that battle on the sea, more than that on the Land. Indeed her eyes sought for
Araterus, 'twas a very easy matter for love to make her find him, he
rendering himself so signal and remarkable. She saw him do wonders and
miracles, and as if victory still attended him she could not withdraw her eyes
from observing him, and indeed his actions were so immense that they chained
her eyes to him with a kind of pleasinng charm and enchantment.

They followed him through the thickest press, and accompanied him amongst
blood, wounds, and arms. I need not tell you that every time she saw him in
danger, she was struck with fear of loosing him which presently made her change
color a thousand times, and which would have been observed by others, had not
so general a congression attracted all their eyes with an intensity on their
actions. Araterus after he had brought terror, wounds, and death to all that
opposed him; and begat an admiration in all that beheld, with an undaunted
courage being grapled with the admiral entered his ship, and there giving death
and mortal wounds to all that withstood him, made the rest fly, whom he
pursued into the hold, where finding a great deal of combustible matter he
flung some of their black powder amongst it, and after that some fire which he
had got in the ship; This incontinently taking fire, set the ship into a light
conslagration which being drove with a gale of wind amongst the rest, caught
hold of all that came a near it, and the ships lying so close grapled together,
took it with such futy, and so immense a flame, that there needed then no other
enemy to contest with. Our admiral caused as many ships as possibly could to
be saved of ours, and turning their prows about got forth of the bay, and left
those flames the victory, which gained a very absolute on over them, for their
ships being so numerous, and conjoined so thick one to another 'twas impossible
to hinder the progress of the flame, which running from one ship to another at
last consumed the whole navy to ashes, with thousands of their men: For some
flying the fire, perished in the water, and others thinking to escape drowning,
got into the ships and were burnt.

Then it was that the flames, smoke, and consusion had obscured Araterus from
the eyes of the Queen, she feared that she had utterly lost him, and that he
had perished with thousand others, this made her, as if the victory depended
wholly on his life or death, to turn away her head from that fatal place with
dispairing eyes, as if the combustion of her enemies ships had been to her
loss and detriment. And (if it be true as she said from whom I learned this
afterward) she could not abstain from shedding some tears at the conceited
loss of Araterus. But her eyes were soon reclear'd, for she had no sooner cast
them on the midst of the battle, but she saw him victorious, and conquering,
and doing his ordinary wonders, at the Head of her army. He but narrowly
escaped the danger of being drowned or burnt, but when he had set the ship on
fire he gained a little boat by my help, and sled to the shore amongst the
rest, ^h^t (...) nothing but the saving their own lives. B^ing g^t to the shore
(...) our selves amongst the multitude; and finding some (...), and rode to the
two armies who were now in the mi^st of all (...).

The battle there was no less blody than that had been on the S^^: and the
whole place was become a Sea of blood, wherein ^ailed nothing b^t Death and
Horror. At the beginning our men had the worst, loosing four to one; but
Peomontile, perceiving the odds in their weapons, knew that to overcome them
'twas necessary to conjoyn an^ to come to handy-strokes with them, which they
(knowing the advantage they had) declin^d with dexterity enough. After he had
endeavored it for some hou^s in vain, he caused about fifty thousand
Elephants to advance, from the top of whose Castles, the Sornaleans did gallant
execution, and under whose shelter the right wing of the army advanced.

The Sinanans endeavoring to shun the close si^ht had like to have disordered
themselves, and have given away the victory with a kind of running retreat. At
last perceiving 'twas inevitable, and that their enemies were too pressing,
they met, with a fury that caused thousands to dye on either side. The valor
of our first battle had declared them the victory when they received the shock
of the second, and being augmented by ours they opposed them with a continued
violence. Theirs beginning to shrink, their third battle advanced led by the
Prince himself, which was met by ours with a shout that equalized the noise
that their instruments of death made. After many hours dispute the fourth
battle, in which were both the generals met, and that instant 'twas when we
came to the army, Araterus placing himself in the head of them, led them on
with a courage that inspired the most cowardly with a desire to do bravely.
'Twas then indeed that he rendered himself so signal, that all that beheld his
actions, cried out miracles and wonders. Desi^ing nothing so much as glory, he
was ever tired with shedding common blood, he finds them too weak and unable to
resist him, and pressing in amongst the thickest he makes his sword taste the
flesh of those whom he perceives to be most daring, and valiant. At last he
espies the general of the Siranans doing actions that presently made him
envious of his glory. Not examining the danger he made way th^row the opposing
troops, and coming to handy strokes with him, might have given him a satall
testimony of his courage had not his horse to his great misfortune fell dead
between his legs, through the wounds that he had received. Then it was that
fear, and grief depainted it self most virely in the eyes and face of the
Queen, Who not able to see him in that exigent fell into a sown, in the arms
of her Ladies, who attributed it to the working of her immagination on these
dreadful, and dying objects. This made her loose the sight of the bravest
actions in the world, for he despairing of life, resolved to sacrifice as many
as he could to love, his actions were incredible, and he soon made him a
rampart of dead bodies, still defending his life from the most daring, till the
general loath to loose a man of such importance rescued him out of that danger,
and mauger the opposition of the enemies mounted him on another horse. Ours
began to get the better when their last battails joined with so great
impetuosity that it rendered the victory doubtful, and made them make use of
the utmost of their courage and force to withstand them.

I shall not lie if I say that the actions of Araterus disposed the victory on
our side, for they were so signal and daring that they both encouraged the
Sornaleans, and made desperate our adversaries. Whilst Araterus gave hopes of
the victory on one side, Peomontile had almost lost it on the other, for
loosing above fifty thousand men, himself was taken prisoner by the Prince.
Araterus hearing this, with enough that readily followed him made have to that
place of damage, but by the way meeting with the General of the Sinanans,
engaged himself a second time with him in a particular combat, and at last
(notwithstanding the resistance of the enemies) he deprived him of his life
through two or three mortal wounds. Flying like lightning through the midst of
the enemies, he recovered the General, and gave him that liberty which they
were about to deprive him of: following his good luck he encountered next with
the Prince, who coming at that instant woun^ed Peomontile very dangerously on
the head, for requital of which Araterus wounded him in the thigh, and pressing
hard upon him, made him shelter himself amongst the thickest of his Troops.
Then it was that victory having hung a long while in suspense, came and settled
upon our standards, for at that instant all those of the Navey being landed,
came on them with a fresh encounter in their flanks, and crying out victory,
victory, did such execution that it terrified them all, and seeing their ships
burnt, their General slain, and their Prince wounded, they began to despair of
victory, and to retreat disorderly. The Sornaleans perceiving the fear of their
enemies, renewed their courages, and crying out victory on every side,
persuaded their enemies that it was so, before they had it. At last they forgot
their order, and sled confusedly, being slaughtered on every side by their
enemies, who then slew more then they had done all the day before, and of so
numerous an Army let very few escape the punishment of the sword. Araterus
being in the chase, took the Prince prisoner, and so saved his life from the
enraged multitude, some few escaped to those ships that the fire had left, and
so recovered the sea, the rest escaping into woods, and such places of shelter,
saved their lives, and left the Sornaleans victorious and triumphant.

The Sun weary of beholding so bloody an execution, hid himself in the
occidental waves, and the obscuring night drawing on a pace, sought to hide
that blood and horror that was spread ore the superficies of those plains. A
hundred new springs of crimson waves ^an along the fields, to find a passage
into the Ocean, where ingulsing themselves, they converted the waters into a
sea of blood. It is impossible to tell you the number of the slain on both
sides, but they were so many, that they moved the cruelest to pity when the
first heat of their fury was over. Neither will it be much to the purpose to
tell you the number of the wounded, or prisoners. Araterus sinning himself
wounded in two places in the arm, and in the face, retired to the Generals
tent, and finding that his wound in his head was very dangerous, he left him,
and went into another hard by set up by the Generals order, where he had his
wounds dressed by Peomontiles own Surgions. The Queen having seen the end of
the battle, saluted the gods with her prayers, and gave them innumberable
thanks for the protection they had sent her, in the person of the valiant
stranger. She immediately descends into the Camp, and having visited the
General, she came and carressed Araterus with so much joy, and giving him those
praises and Collaudations, that he accounted himself over and above satisfied
for the pains and travels he had taken. He told her what he had done was but
his duty, and that it did not merit the least of those acknowledgements she was
pleased out of her goodness to give him: That 'twas the merits of her cause
that gave her the victory, not their valor; That the gods could not in Justice
deny their protection to the innocent, and 'twas her own prayers which were
more prevalent than their arms, that had vanquished her enemies, and sacrificed
so many thousands in the place: that for his part all that he had done that
could be attributed to manhood or prowess, was but the effects of her goodness
upon his soul.

Such like speeches passing between them, Araterus presented the Prince of
Sinana at her feet, who having a soul that yielded to the disaster of fortune,
did not dare to lift his eyes from the ground, on which he fixed them.
Receiving him from Araterus with very many thanks and acknowledgements:
Degenerate man! (said she to him somewhat enraged at his base spirit) this
meanness of spirit little becomes a Prince that has dared to pretend so high,
and who in prosperity used the highest insolences and insufferable Pride.

This dejection does but illustrate the baseness of thy heart, and tells us
that it was never capable but of the blackest of crimes, wherein was nothing
either of ambition or of love, things which make crimes sometimes pardonable.
No, thine has proceeded from nothing but pride and insolency, accompanied with
rage and temerity. You have often told me you have been my prisoner, now you
are really so, and we shall have time to consider your deserts: with this
turning from him she gave order for his securement, and appointed him to be had
to Sinda, which was done accordingly. The night coming on apace, she gave order
to the Chirurgigions to have as much care on Araterus as on her self, and
returned with her guard to the next town, where she was accommodated as well as
the time and ^lace would afford.

As soon as the Sun appeared in the East, chaceing away the horrors of the
night with his splendid beams, the General gave order for the burning of the
bodies of the slain, and the inte^rement of the chiefest Captains, being very
many slain on both sides. This being effected, and the Chirurgions permitting
the General to travel, they returned to Sinda, with their banners displayed,
the insign^'s of their enemies trailed on the ground, trophies of their arms
carried in Chariots before them, and with all the signs of joy, triumph and
magnificence that could possibly be imagined. They were scarcely lodged in
Sinda before the Queen received word by the Posts, that her other Army in the
Frontiers had received a great overthrow, through the unskilfulness of their
Leader, and that the enemies troops advanceing apace, came accompanied with
victory, fire and sword. This news put a damp upon the Generals rejoyceing, and
made them see their danger was not over. The Queen sending for Peomontile and
Araterus, told them this news, and withal, that she was not to expect victory
from any other hands than from the sage Peomontile, and the valiant Araterus:
that it was for their glory that her army had received the overthrow, the gods
having ordained, that none besides themselves should contribute any thing to
hers, and her kingdoms happiness: And that it was them alone that she ought
justly to style her Protectors and deliverers. These speeches were answered by
a great deal of submission and humility by them both, they testifying that
pride could make no advantage on their souls by the praises of the Queen, but
rather inspired them with a generous valor and desire of serving her. After
they had assured her of their utmost endeavors, and given her their Council
how to proceed, they received her commands to go meet them with their
victorious army. She could not choose but express her sad resentments for their
so sudden departute, which she did with notable address, and in general terms,
but Araterus might have seen that if it might have stood with his honor and
her safety, he should have stayed behind. The Soldiers having received a
largess from the Queen, with promises of greater rewards, marched with a
courage and resolution that already assured them of the victory over their
enemies. The General that received the former overthrow, hoping to regain what
he had lost, was so rash and unadvised to hazard another battle, wherein he
resolved to dye or regain his former honor, knowing it would be an in
supportable disgrace to appear any more before his Queen, having lost it
through his own unskilfullness, more then his cowardice; But fortune resolving
the victory for Araterus, he lost both his life and the better half of the
Army in the Conslict, so that the enemies came flesht with their victories, and
tryumphing, till they heard of the loss of their other Army, which gave such a
check to their exultancies, that it half conquered them before the other Army
could come to oppose them. Fortune that seemed to be sworn now to Araterus's
side, gave us the first victory, in which the enemy lost a hundred thousand
men, and twenty thousand Elephants. Seeking still to engage them, we obtained
two or three one after another, in all which sights Araterus did such actions,
that the most envious of them all could not but contribute to his glory, seeing
they tended to theirs, and their kingdoms preservation. 'Twas more then once
or twice that he saved the life of Peomontile, he slew with his own hand two of
the enemies Generals, and by his examples inspired others with such courage and
animosity, that he often turned the fortune of the battle, and although reduced
to extremities and Exigents, he still came off victorious and tryumphant.
Having oftentimes discom^ited them with extraordinary loss, strong holds there
not being regarded to retard a War, but determining all with pitched battles,
the War was soon finished, and in half a year there was not an enemy that
dared appear in the Kingdom, and of so many hundred thousand men very few
returned into their own Country. Peace being settled in those parts, we
returned to Sinda, where Peomontile and Araterus were received by the Queen
with such caresses of joy, and in such state, triumph and magnificence, that
the East never beheld the like.

These public rejoyceings after many weeks beginning to lessen, the Queen who
was generous and noble, (having before acquainted her Uncle Peomontile and
Araterus with her intentions, who gave her their approbation) sent for the
Prince of Sinana: He who thought it had been to receive the sentence of death,
came with so dejected a countenance, that he disgraced the quality he
represented, and the apprehensions of which, made him speak, and do things so
misbecoming a Prince, that the Queen had much ado to endure him in her presence
whilst she told him: That he now saw the fruits of his insolency, pride and
temerity, and that although she had respected him above his demerits, and
according to that regality which he bore, yet that he had unworthily, and
altogether misbecoming a Prince behaved himself. That he saw how the number of
his men, his threatenings, insolences and pride were overthrown by the gods,
who protected her innocence against his violencies. That being her prisoner,
and guilty of such hor^ible crimes she could justify his death to all the
world, and that she ought not to have deferred it so long; but yet for all this
that she had given him his life clearly, with his lib^rty, not that he had any
ways deserved the least favor, but rather more than death by his
pusillanimity and dejected carriage so unworthy a Prince; but that she
accounted him unworthy her revenge, or anger, and she permitted him to live
that she might conserve him for the Subject of her hate and scorn. The Prince
received this sentence with some sign of joy, and though it was so little to
his glory applauded the Queens Mercy. According to her order he was conducted
to the Frontiers of the kingdom, with all the other prisoners which she had
taken, with them she sent a letter to his father the king of Sinana, in which
she old him: That 'twas her desire to live in peace and amity with all her
neighbour-Princes, but especially with him, the interests of whose kingdom her
Ancestors had always made their own. That she wondered he was so unadvised to
follow the temerity of his son, and to engage himself in a War so unjust and
illegal, thereby breaking those Leagues which she ever had kept inviolable.
That what she had done, was but in her own defense, and to keep her and her
Subjects from ruin and destruction, and therefore that he was to thank himself
and fortune for his overthrow and loss. That for her part she desired not to
make use of her good fortune, nor advantages that she had against him, either
in assaulting him in an hostile way, although her Armies were ready, and
sufficient enough to endamage him, or to use that violence to him in the person
of his Son, which might satisfy to all the world. That as the gods and the
justness of her cause had rendered her victorious, so her generosity and innate
goodness had rendered her merciful, that thereby he might see she had no other
ends then to conserve her kingdom in peace and prosperity, though as he now
knew, she was able to defend her self from his and others Tyranny.

And lastly, That she had sent him his son, and had given him his liberty
without ransom or intreary, notwithstanding the wrongs he had done her, and
the ruin he had endeavored for a requital of all her savours she had showed
him, whilst he remained in her Court. This letter so full of generosity and
obligements wrought much on the King of Sinana, who was raising an Army twice
so big as the former to repair his losses, and made him presently desist, and
receive those the Queen had sent with his son, with caresses and
acknowledgements. The evil nature of that Prince was nothing moved with the
Queens generosity, and seeing himself out of her power, he would have
instigated his father against her, and have persuaded him to go on with his
levies, but notwithstanding his insinuations, the King sent an Ambassador to
the Queen with so many rich presents that it sufficiently ransomed the Prince,
and discharged the charges of the war, giving him in charge also to conclude a
peace more strict than before between them. This was effected, and they
returned from the Queen very well satisfied with her generosity and liberality,
with presents worthy of her quality to the King their Master, which (as we
heard) he received with wonderful acknowledgement and address.

Peace being thus concluded, and every thing settled with prudence and care, the
Queen began to give ease to her thoughts, and entertain those pleasing Idea's
which in the midst of all her troubles often interrupted her. The first thing
she did was in rewarding those who had done valiantly, and served her
faithfully. Araterus you may be sure, tasted of her liberality, she made him
Birebasse or Governor of a province, making him by her savours and his places
the second in the Kingdom next to Peomontile. There was none but said he
deserved it, and that the favors of the Queen could not be better bestowed;
the mouth of envy it self being stopped by his virtues, and by the port that he
had carried amongst the people: Indeed all spoke for him, and desired to render
him caresses and acknowledgements: his valor and virtue still lived in their
memories, and his continual Courtesy, made it spring there eternally. Truly
his mediocrity was admirable, for if in all his formet misfortunes I had noted
a constancy hardly parallelable, and that without dejection, I could not
observe in all his height of glory the least exultancy or pride, but what he
received was with a spirit full of tranquillity, and he would never have
received such high favors and honors, but that he thought it would render him
more considerable for his aspiring Love. Indeed that still conserved its
flames, and all those heats that had agitated him in the wars, proceeded from
that, he making me his confident, often told me of its ardencies, and how
unsupportable they began to grow, notwithstanding the hopes, the prophecy, and
inclinations of the Queen inspired him with. Those indeed maintained him in a
tranquillity not usual with Lovers, and conserved him from their disquiets a
long time. He found the favors of the Queen so obliging, and her caresses and
endearments so favorable, that he began to hope he should arrive at the sum
of ^his happiness. The Queen being of an imperious humor, had grievous
contests with her love, so that her soul was agitated continually with contrary
and opposing thoughts. And as she related her self to Araterus afterward, they
were such as these. She considered the inequality between Araterus and her
self, that he was nothing but by her creation, that her self was one of the
potentest Queens of the East, that she had out of an imperious humor refused
the greatest Princes in the world, that such a match would be a blur to her
honor, a grief to her Subjects, and make her a scorn to her neighbors, and to
those Princes whom she had despised. That to think to enjoy him any other way,
her virtue did prohibit, and she believed that her kingdom could not tempt
his. Therefore she believed her love was to be despised, rejected and strove
against, seeing it led her to such prejudice and inconveniences. This made her
resolve often to chastise her self, to hate her self, and to account her self
worthy of ignominy and scorn: sometimes she would banish him or confine him to
his Province, or prohibit him the Court; and by banishing him out of her
memory, repress those flames his presence fomented. But this his innocence, and
what he had done for her opposed; but chiefly love it self could not yield to
his separation; that exsuscitated for its defense such thoughts as these: That
although she were a Queen, and enjoyed all the riches, pomp and pleasure
imaginable, yet that Love was a content that far furpassed them all, and so
that if she should enjoy the greatest Prince on the earth, it could not render
her so happy as the enjoyment of one she loved should, though never so mean.
That Araterus considering the disparity would without doubt want the imperious
humors of Princes, and make it the whole scope of his actions to serve her
faithfully, and love her continually. That the gods never make any distinction
of persons by their greatness, but by their goodness; not by their Nobility,
but by their virtue, and that the meanest on earth if they follow the Precepts
of virtue, are capable of an Apotheosis and deification: That seeing the gods
respected not the Nobility of persons, so much as their virtue, they should
endeavor to imitate them, for the nearer they appproached to the gods in their
actions, the nearer they should be to them when extinct. That her greatness and
regality depended on the mutual wheel of fortune, as if she should be cast
from her Throne, there would be but little sign of her highness, greatness and
regality: That the Original of Soveranity was only usurpation, got by the sword
and fortune, that in right the most virtuous should be the most noble. That she
was able to make Araterus equal with the greatest Princes in the East, that
what he had done for her had merited it, that his valor and virtue deserved it;
that his person, both for behavior and make, was not to be equalled, that
there was nothing to be objected to him, but that he was no Prince, which her
love was to dispense with. Between such diversity of thoughts she was
continually cruciated, and made her undergo a torment that could not be eased
by all those pleasures that accompany the conversations of such eminent
personages. These troubles continuing, put her into so deep a melancholy, that
every body wondered at it, knowing it contrary to her nature and disposition.
And for that she had not revealed it to any, she received the more torment and
pain. Amongst all the Confidents, she had a kinswoman, whom she loved above her
rest, and to whom she always poured out all her secrets, but this she
accounted so criminal, that she had not as yet spoken of it: However remembering
the wisdom and good counsel she had always found in Marina (so they called
her) she was constrained after a long time of sadness to discover her thoughts
to her, and commanded her to tell her what she was to do in that case. Marina
(as Araterus knew from her own mouth afterward) was surprised at the Queens
discourse, and would fain have excused her self; but she pressing her, and
reiterating her commands, she spoke in these words.

I confess you may wonder that I have so faithful a memory to recount things
so many years ago acted, but I must tell you, that I had wrote down most of
these things, knowing that if ever I should have the happiness of seeing you
again, I should be obliged to relate these passages. And in my jorney that I
made hither, I received my Notes, and gave them a new impress in my memory,
that I might be able to recount to you these things faithfully and exactly. Let
this then serve for all, that you may not be incredulous, nor account my memory
prodigious, though some things, were I to live eternally, I could never forget.
Marina I say being constr^ined to it, spoke in these terms.

Madam! I confess I am extremely unfit to advise you in a matter I had never
any experience of, when it may be too, that I shall contradict your opinion, if
I tell you I think there is no necessity or compulsion, but a generous and
resolute soul may discuss, I mean, that we may disengage our selves from that
troublesome passion, so much cried out upon by all the world, when we will; if
we resolve not to betray our selves to its allurements. This is so ticklish a
subject, that I fear to speak any thing of it, lest if you follow my advice,
and it should not succeed, you would put the blame upon my Council, rather then
on that inevitable fatalitie which oftentimes accompanys the transactions of
love. It is very dangerous, Madam, and I know that those who use to advise in
such affairs, have that quality which I have not; that is, flattery: for it is
always known that those troubled with this passion that blinds the reason and
understanding, though they ask the Counsel of others, and seem much to desire
it, yet they seldom follow any but the dictates of their passion, or that
which is agreeable, or corresponds with their own inclinations. It may be you
may wish that my Counsel may not be repugnant to your Love, or to say better,
that I may flatter you, this might please best your passion, but not your
reason, and so long as passion is strongest, those Counsels will be best
pleasing that are most agreeable to it. I confess I had rather be silent, but
seeing I must obey your commands, I think it my love and duty to speak my mind
apertly and freely, without considering whether it be pleasing, so it be
profitable. I confess my judgment may be weak, and I may not see so clearly
into things as your self or others, yet seeing it is your pleasure to have my
Counsel, I had rather err for lack of wisdom, and in sincerity, than out of
interest and subtilty. In a word, Madam, what I advise is, that you give no
entertainment to this passion, but seek to forget it with all possible speed
you may, seek always to divert your mind, let not your thoughts entertain
themselves upon it, separate Araterus from your sight, for undoubtedly if you
entertain it, 'twill do you more hurt than all those enemies you have subdued
could, and so Araterus, though innocently, is a rebel, a traitor, and deprives
you of your liberty. I cannot tell which would have been worse, the loss of
your kingdom, or this which has befallen you, if you do not speedily remedy
it, for the privation of your reason, understanding and judgment, is worse
than the loss of all the pleasure of sense, or what ever you now enjoy, so that
although Araterus has given you your life and kingdom, he has given you too
these disquiets, that are less supportable than death, and by it he is become
as great an enemy, as he was a friend. I know, Madam, that he is innocent, and
I speak not this because I have any prejudice against him, I confess that he is
worthy of all the honor and grace that your Majesty has shown him, and his
merits cannot be too highly rewarded, but by your self. You love him, Madam, I
know your virtue will not permit the least thought arise of any base and
infamous enjoyment of him: you would I know love him lawfully, and therefore
you must seat him on the same Throne with your self. I confess I wish him a
Crown that he might deserve you, for do but consider the difference between
you, and you cannot but confess your action will be something unworthy of your
self. I heard you say for your self, that the gods were no respecters of
persons; What then? in this we are not to regard them so much as men, for
things indifferent they leave to our own judgments and reason: I confess it is
no sin for you to marry the meanest of your Subjects, neither is it any thing
to the gods, but yet it would be an action that would render you a scorn to
men. But I cannot but think that it is the will of the gods that Princes should
join with Princes, and in my judgment it seems to be more agreeable to them,
because they have a more peculiar care over them than over other men, they
representing the persons and Majesty of the gods, and are exempt from
punishments, but from the hand of heaven. The Queen here interrupting her
Consident. I am much pleased with thy zeal (said she smising and blushing
together) but thou do see it has carried thee from the purpose. Let me
answer thee thy last inference, which is, that it is the will of the gods we
should match with Princes, I am sure that it is the will of the gods that we
should imitate their actions, Do not they I pray create Princes, and Kings, and
not regarding greatness give it to the virtuous? And shall not I do so too, in
matching with this generous stranger? If the virtuous be worthy of Crowns, why
should we be ashamed to conser it on them? But what do thou speak of the gods
protecting of Princes more than others? be it so, is it for their own sakes, or
for the sakes of those under them; It Is true, the gods do seem to have a
greater care over Princes than every private man; Why? not because they are
born great and noble, but because they rule others: so that in protecting and
directing them, they protect and keep their whole kingdom: And I make no
question, that if a beggar came to the Crown (which must be by the help of the
gods, or the influencies of the stars, their inferior operators) the gods would
more seemingly regard him on the Throne, or coming thereto, than before,
because then they work generally, and their actions are more inspected;
therefore it is not the person, but the place, or the person for the places
sake, that the gods seem to have so extraordinary care of Princes more than
others: And again the actions of Princes are more noted and inspected than
others, every one looks what befalls them, and a little preservation makes a
general rejoicing, being all interressed in the person of the Prince: And I am
persuaded that if the actions and lives of many of the vulgars were known and
inspected, the providential care of the gods would be no less seen than in
those of the Prince. So that their protection will be no less favorable to
Araterus when he is made a Prince, than if he were born so.

Love (says Marina) can never be disputed against, for it always furnishes
its desenders with subtle and unanswerable arguments, I know I must cede to
your judgment if you undertook to answer me, but let it be so then, Madam,
that Araterus shall have the protection of the gods, if he has yours, yet I
shall never yield to think well of this amorous evil on which I have heard so
many complaints, that I even tremble to think that you are infected with it.
The Queen seeing her Consident so zealous in a cause she was ignorant of,
smiled, and told her she would do her utmost endeavors to decuss a passion
which she could not approve of.

She did so indeed, love and reason continually combated, and she thought she
had gained the victory; and to do it more effectually, she began to eloyn her
self from Araterus; she very seldom saw him, she did not caress him as she had
used; and she used all the means she thought requisite for so hard a matter.
But it was in vain for her to contest with so potent an enemy, a Deity that
overpowered her, and made her, spite of her teeth, break all her resolutions at
the very sight of him; what ever she had resolved and intended, his sight
carried so many charms that it made them fall to nothing. She saw at last that
'twas impossible for her to recover her former quietude, which made her tell
Marina after many months disquiets and endeavors to follow her Council, that
her fate was inevitable, that there was nothing but death, or Araterus, that
could terminate those pains and torments, that her passion made her undergo.
Seeing that is so (said Marina, troubled at those continual agitations which
she saw in the Queen) and that there is a necessity not to be avoided, that
Araterus is destined to be your tormentor. Let us believe that it is not without
a special design of heaven; lets seek to content you, quiet your passion, and
make him happy. Madam, what ever aversion I have to this passion, added she,
your interest shall make me plead for it, seeing you cannot follow my counsel,
make use of me, and I will follow the Dictates of your love, for I profess it
is impossible for me to see so much trouble in you, without endeavoring your
content. The Queen imbraceing her, told her, that she should never do any thing
unworthy her self, or contrary to the virtue she had professed, That she would
sooner die than exhibit her passion, and that she wholly remitted her self
into her hands, professing that she had rather die and banish Araterus, than
blemish her honor, although nothing in the world was more pleasant to her
fight, and though it was impossible but that she must still love him. In the
mean time Araterus perceiving the eloynment of the Queen, and being debarred of
that happiness of seeing her often, for all his hopes, fell into so deep a
melancholy that all his friends perceived it in his looks, and notwithstanding
the caresses of Peomontile who affected him as much as if he had been his own
son, and his other friends which his generosity and goodness had gained, he
could not be comforted. But what ever they read in his face, he was too advised
to discover the least thought of his heart to any but me, and they all believed
that it was an effect of his eloynment from his Country. This made all his
friends use those divertisements which they thought capable to make him forget
it, never a day but he was caressed in such high terms and manner, that the
greatest Prince of the Orient could not have more. Sometimes music, balls and
dancing was his divertisement, sometimes running with horses, sometime
Charriot-races, sometimes fighting on Elephants, a pleasing and delightful
sport, and sometimes hunting: but all these being constrained, and contrary to
his humor, it abated nothing of that sadness which triumphed over him. The
Queen having not seen him a great while, being on purpose retired from the
Court, with an intent to overcome her self, when she saw him, was wonderfully
troubled to perceive those assured marks of trouble and sadness in his face,
she could not forbear asking him if any one had disobliged him? Who had given
him cause of discontent or anger? if that any of the Court had oppugn'd him? or
any of her kingdom offended him? what it was he wanted; if that it was the
remembrance of his Country? she told him what ever was in the kingdom was at
his service, that he was amongst his friends, and that there was nothing in her
power to grant him, but he might assure himself of it. To all which he
answered, with a respect that such obliging speeches required. But still
dissembling his trouble, he gave her very little satisfaction. Not being
contented, she returns to Marina, and having opened her mind to her, and
wondering at the trouble of Araterns, Love having already made her suspicious,
she by the advice of her Consident sent for me. One for that purpose having
watched their opportunity, told me the Queen had commanded them to conduct me
to her: wondering what should be the matter, I immediately followed the
Messenger, who having led me to the palace, I was had into a chamber by one of
Marina's Maids, where I found the Queen and Marina together. After that I
showed the respect that I ought, the Queen commanding me to rise, enquired of
me for my master, for so I called him all the while I had been in that
Country) and very dexterously began to speak of the sadness she had noted in
his face, which she said she believed was the effect of some discontent that he
had taken, telling me that his generosity having hid it from her, she believed
I could not be ignorant of it, and that it was requisite she should know it,
being best able to remove it, for she doubted not but that some of her subjects
had given him some cause for discontent unjustly, and that I should therefore
discover it, though my Masters generosity would not permit himself to do it,
that she might punish the author of it, for an example to others. After I had
heard this, I told her that 'twas requisite she should be obeyed in all things,
that I was sorry I could not exactly obey her commands, for that I was ignorant
that any of her subjects or any other had given him the least cause for
discontent, that I believed he had so acquired their loves by her favors, that
none would be so malicious as to do any extraordinary action that might
disquiet my master, and that I knew it was no small thing could move the
tranquillity of his mind. This answer nothing satisfying, she pressed me to tell
her if that none o^ her Subjects had given him any cause for this sadness, and
whether I were ignorant of the cause of it? I knew not what to answer presently
to this demand, but bethinking my self I told her, that certainly, that though
her favors were so immense, as to make any man forget his own n^tive Country
with joy, having the happiness to be entertained in her service, yet that I
believed he could not remember his friends without a just and unblameable
regret, seeing at what a distance fortune had brought him from them. I know not
what it was, whether she could perceive any thing by my countenance, she did
not believe me. She told me that Araterus had given her the knowledge of the
passages of his life, and that not being tied by the bonds of affection, she
did not believe those of nature could cause so great trouble: and that if it
were so, she knew he would have desired her assistance for the reward of all
his pains and good services, for to have returned into his Country. I replied
that it might be, he could not be so disrespectfull as yet, considering the
esteem she had of him, and the favors she had done him, as to ask a thing
which he imagined might be displeasing to her, that although he were inferior
to no Prince in his own Country, and that the gods had given him an estate
according to the Nobility of his birth, where he might enjoy all the
happinesses there, that he now enjoyed except her presence and service, yet I
believed that he preser'd that to all the rest, and made him so back-ward in
asking a thing which he could not but desire. This I spoke for the interest of
Araterus, and to beget a good opinion of his Nobility and birth in the Queen,
which took very good effect, and much advantaged his love. I am sorry (said
she) that Araterus never intimated thus much to me before, and I must lay all
the blame on my ignorance that I have not respected him as I ought: I know,
Madam, (replied I) that he esteems your service the greatest honor and
happiness in the world. That shall not excuse him (said she) for hiding from me
his birth and quality. But is it so as you tell me, added she earnestly. I saw
that it would be for the interest of Araterus, and if he prosecuted his Love, I
thought it would be impossible otherwise to arrive at a happy end, thetefore
being imboldened, I amplified his birth, and gave her such an ingenuous
relation of him, making him no less than a Prince, that I saw a kind of joy
sparkling in her eyes, before I had finished my relation. Many things
concerning his Country, and our adventures on the sea, she had heard from him
before, and finding them to agree exactly with what I speak, she made no
question of the rest, and believed that he hid his birth out of a generous
humor, having told her never any thing exactly of it. Have you told me every
thing? (said she) have you omitted no passages. But one, Madam, (said I) which
I am not sure that I may tell without an infidelity to my master. This made her
the more pressing to know, and I at last seeming vanquished by her
impo^tunities, told her how he met with a Prophecy that had foretold him all
had happened to him since, and that there were somethings in it yet remaining to
be effected, which it might be, was the cause of his grief, but that he kept
them so secret, that I doubted I had been unfaithful for speaking so much.

I thought, said she, that you were not ignorant of your Masters sadness, and I
know not what good genius made me not to believe you: but for your fault you
must of necessity tell me what it is. I seem^d extreme unwilling to tell her,
though I did all this out of a design, but after that she had commanded me many
times, promising me that it should be no prejudice to me. I told her I thought
it did not become me to captuilate with her highness, yet if it would please
her Majesty not to ask me any more questions. I would answer her. I promise
thee, said she. It Is love then Madam, said I, that causes Araterus's trouble,
I am conscious I have spoke too much, but neither entreaties nor torments shall
extract any thin^ more from my mouth; and I hope, Madam, that you will keep
this last thing as a se^ret that I ought not to have told, lest the knowledge
of it cause my master ^o reward my infideli^y. At that instant that I told her
the c^use of Araterus's sadness, the Queen changed her countenance, and
notwithstanding her endeavors, she could not hide some alterations in her
face: But I taking no notice of it, made her an obeisance for a chain of
Diamonds which she caused to begiven me, and so dismissed me, bidding me not to
fear, but that she would do as I begged of her.

Returning presently to Araterus I gave him an exact account of what I had
done, telling him the oppinion of his birth would prove very advanta^ious for
his Love; nevertheless I could hardly persuade him to acknowledge that for
truth which I had spoke of him, so far was he from accumulating honors to
himself which he was conscious did not belong to him, though he were assured
that none there could convict him of an untruth. I was fain to tell him if he
would not acknowledge what I had said of him for a verity, I should be
accounted an impostor to the Queen, which would reflect on him and it may be
bring himself into such disesteem as not to be believed, That what I had done
was for his fidelity, that on it depended the good or bad success of his love,
that 'twas impossible otherwise to arrive at the end proposed That he would
both ruin me and undo himself, and both he looked upon I not better than
impostors: with such like reasons I was forced to persuade him to a thing which
others would have been too apt to have taken upon themselves in such a place
and on such an occasion. The consideration of his Love was the chief motive
that caused him to give his consent, and he had no sooner done it, but
Peomontile came to his palace to complement him from the Queen; and to tell
him that she desired him to justify himself of a crime she had objected
against him.

Our ignorance, my Lord (said Peomontile) must plead for your pardon that we
have not rendered you those civilities which we ought, but truly we are hardly
excusable, and our reason might have told us, that those actions we have seen,
could not proceed but from a man of merit and of quality. It would have been a
kind of injustice, my Lord, (replye^ Araterus) for me to have mentioned my
birth or nobillity, since the goodness of her Majesty has raised me to that
pitch of honor and glory that it has obscured whatsomever I was before: and I
must profess whatsomever I hold of noble or High is from her donation. But
lets go wait on he^ Majesty, since she honor us with her presence. Peomontile
is reselved to accompanying him, they went immediately to the Queen. She
received Araterus with a galantry peculiar to her self, and by a kind of
gentle crimination blamed him for dissembling his birth. Araterus answered her
with wonderful submission and compliments, telling her that I had committed an
error though glorious for him, yet unpardonable because it had put her Majesty
to the trouble of taking notice of it, I am become Meador's protecteresse said
the Queen) and since it is through my default that he has confessed it, you must
not be so injust as to blame him for it. It Is by his pardon that you must
acquit your self for the wrong you have done us, in making of us so
disrespectful to your quality by the ignorance of it. You may command me Madam
(returned Araterus) and since you are bocome his protectriss, there is none in
the world can hurt him: But I must profess that the honor you have done me
was the thing that made me forget that I ever was, before I had the happiness
to see your Majesty. This convertation it may be might have lasted longer but
that one of the officers of the Queens came to give her notice that some of the
chief of the City whom she had sent for attended her pleasure. The Queen
telling Araterus she would not be long e're she returned, desired Marina to
accompany him; and being led by Peomontile she left Araterus. Marina after much
ordinary discourse, being 'twas toward the evening, led him into the palace
Garden, where the beauty of the place found them discourse for some time, but
at last having seated themselves in a house of pleasure in the midst of the
Garden, you are indebted to me fair Marrina (said Araterus) a relation which by
the ^ueens consent and your own promise you ought to have paid me before
this: and this opportunity is so fair that I cannot let it slip without
putting you in mind of it, and telling you that I am ready to hear it, if it
will not be troublesome to you to relate it. Marina having nothing to say
against so just a request told him she would defer it no lon^er, but give him
the content he desired, after she had sat silent a little time she began thus.

The Queen being the daughter of Amarisia King of this mighty dominion, and a
Princess of the neither India, was brought up in her infancy according to the
way and manner of this Kingdom. She had two younger sisters but they and her
mother dying when she was very young, they left her to receive all the care and
love of her father who indeed brought her up according to the tenderness and
delicateness of her spirit. Her beauty in her infancy gave an assured sign
that 'twould be raire and admirable, and her wit in every thing was seen
comparable. She had the features, and beauty of her mother, the wisdom and
understanding of her father, the one being the beautifullest of her time, the
other the wisest and most prudence of his, so that this conjunction in the
daughter, gave the whole Kingdom hopes of an extreme happiness as soon as she
was capable to Reign, Amaisia as if he would not hinder her from making use of
those gifts the Gods had given her, dyed. It Is five years since, and though she
were then but fifteen, yet the whole Kingdom can testify, they never enjoined
a more peaceable, and happy time, till those late wars. Her prudence and
wisdom being shown in a thousand occasions, both that the same of her beauty
spreading through the whole East, begot her as many lovers and adorers as there
were Princes in the Orient. There is hardly any of them but either came or sent
to lay their Crowns at her feet, and all desired the happiness of possessing
her. All propositions of Marriage she carried with so much address, that she
still kept her self free, and incensed none.

But at last the Prince of Sinana having heard of her by the mouth of fame
through the large extent of his fathers dominions, came as others had done, with
a train suitable to the quality of so great a Prince, to Sinda. This Prince
though indeed he is the most potent and mightiest in the world, yet pleased the
Queen less then all the rest, of those that proffered her their service. For
she having a noble and transcendent soul, regarded not so much the greatness
of their Kingdoms, as the habit, and virtues of their minds. She had also a
pierceing Judgment, and could take an exact knowledge of their inclinations, by
the least of their actions. She presently found this Prince of a most turbulent
spirit, rash, heady, and fierce, which was very inconsonant to her gentle
disposition, which made her little regard either his beauty, handsomeness, or
greatness, believing that she could not be happy but with those, whose
dispositions should agree with hers, as well as their affections. However she
used him according to his birth, and though she had a great desire to be rid of
him, yet she entertained him nobly, and royally. The Prince no sooner saw her,
but being very susceptable it seems, fell in Love with those ardencies and
impatiences, as she had not seen before, though truly Iam persuaded 'twas
rather an effect of his ambition than his Love; and truly I think he loved his
Kingdom better than her, and if I am not greatly mistaken 'twas that he sought,
and these wars has made it appear so. Nevertheless the Queens speeches
neither gave him hope nor dispare but using him gently according to her own
nature, he remained with her agreat while. I will never stand to trouble you
with the protestations of his love nor addresses, since they were all false and
feigned: but her replys were still modest, and agreeable to her condition. At
last he grew so troublesome to her and, preffing, that she was fain a little to
make show of her dislike, and finding his humor imperious, and base, she saw
that gentleness and gallantry could not work upon him. Likeing him worse every
day than other, she would not permit him so often to see her as he used, and by
many other ways a well as words she showed her dislike of him, though she
entertained him with as great state as ever, and omitted nothing of
formalities, for him to take exceptions at. But she continued her cartiage so,
that he too well saw he was slighted, which so dispighted him, that it inspired
him with more heat and anger, than love: for he thought the Queen respecting
his greatness would not have denied his suit. Madded as he was, he yet
dissembled it, and caused the fight on the Elephants to be kept in the City in
honor of the Queen proposing the effigies of the Queen for the prize, making no
question but the adverse party would permit him to carry it away at last, being
a usual partiality where rivals do not meet, if that he were not strong enough
to oppose them. The Queen willing to make use of this occasion, sent for some
of the chief of the adverse party, and charged them not to use their usual
respect, but to do their utmost endeavor to obtain the prize. The thing was
effected as she would wish, for when the sport was almost finished, and that
the Prince thought they would have retreated, and left him victor, he found
himself deceived, for pressing forward with exceeding violence they gained the
place where the prize stood, and in spite of all resistance took it away, and
according to direction offered it at the feet of the Queen, who gave them a
chain of pearls and diamonds for a requital. The Prince was extremely vexed at
this disgrace, though he dissembled it as much as he could, but the Queen on
every occasion brought it into his memory, and in a way of gallantry jeared him
handsomely, but so as he could take no occasion to be angry. In fine having
received many repulses, and beginning to despair, seeing the averseness of the
Queen, he began to set other instruments a work, and employing all his art and
subtilty, by gaining those whom he perceived the King most favored, and by
exceeding rich gifts and presents, engaged them to fill the Queens ears with
Encomiums, and to persuade her to marry him, by endeavoring to exhibit how
advantageous it would be the kingdom. The Queen notwithstanding all this would
not conent, but finding out his practices, detested him the more for such undue
ways and actions. Her prudence b^ook all his machinations, and rendered all his
ways fruitless, none da^ing at length to promote his designs. When he
perceived that he had l^st himself, and that he despaired of obtaining h^^, he
beg^n to break forth into sury and rage, and his looks exhibiting the evil in
^is heart, made the Queen so circumspect, that he found it impossible to commit
any outrage or violence. Having assigned his depa^ture to the joy of the
Queen, and shipped most of his train, he prepared to take his leave, but chance
favoring him, he did it in an extraordinary manner. That very morning which he
intended to depart, the quarter where he lay not being far from the Queens, he
was come to the gallery which looks into the garden to attend the Queens
rising. It seems from that place he had espied, that one who attended the Queen
came into the garden by a private pair of st^irs, which was always barred up
but at such time as the Queen made use of them, which was some evenings for her
private recreations, or when she went to bath in the night. The Queen having
gone that way but that night, those bars that render the passage secure were
not put up, and the Prince knowing whether those stairs led, and seeing the
door open by the maids negligence, had a desire to take leave of the Queen
privately, that he might the better testify his displeasure. Getting into the
garden he ascends those stairs, and finding the passage free, he entered the
Queens Chamber so unexpectedly, that we were amazed.

She was but just risen, and there being none but my self and two more of her
Attendants with her, she was afraid. But whilst he stopped to take a view of her
neck and breasts, which were not covered, she recovered her surprise, and
taking a Mantle which I gave her, she cast it about her neck, attending what
the Prince would say. Rage was already painted in his looks, and forgetting all
the respect which he ought to have had, he told her very boldly, that he was
not to excuse himself, seeing fortune had so happily favored his design, for
breaking a civility which he was not ignorant of. That he could not say it was
love that had caused that transport, but that it was the desire he had to
propound one question to her, which was, Whether she would grant him that
grace, for which he had so long sued, or to see her Kingdom destroyed with an
Army of twenty-hundred-thousand men? The paleness which fear had painted in her
Majesty's cheeks, anger at this demand had converted into red, and answering
with indignation, she told him, that it was impossible for him to gain that by
threats, which he could not obtain by entreaties: That for her part she had
long ago resolved in her self, that she had rather meet him as a so, than
consent to what he desired. And in fine, that she made no question, but that if
his temerity did participate him to such actions, she should find men enough to
chastize him for his folly.

This answer so enraged him, that he could not distinctly speak a word more,
but mutteringly we understood that he vowed he would be as good as his word,
and make her sue for that, which now she so superbously denied. Hastening
thence, within an hour he had set sail, leaving the Queen very much satisfied
with his departure, and very little fearing his threats. When he was arrived in
his own Kingdoms, holding his resolutions, he sent an Herald to denounce War
against her, if that she had not bethought her self, and would not consent to
his desires. The Queen sent him word, that she could not yield to his demands,
but that if he would break that ancient League between the two Kingdoms, she
should be ready to defend her self against all his threats add endeavors.
After this she gave order to Peomontile for the mustering of her forces, and
the raizing enough, sufficient to defend her Kingdom, which was done
effectually, and augmented by your self for the Kingdoms happiness and your
own glory, the gods having determined their subversion by your hand.

Araterus had but given her thanks for this which she had told him, when there
came one to give them notice that the Queen was returned, to whom they
presently went; Araterus spending that evening in her company; for some
following days he was wholly taken up, in receiving the visits, caresses and
complements of his friends, all of them testifying their resentments for his
disguiseing himself, and that with so much address and civility, that he stood
amazed to see it so far from Rome. The Queen desirous it should be known,
caused it privated to be declared, so that it was soon known publicly through
the whole City, every one regarding him as a Prince, and worthy of that which
he aspired to. And notwithstanding Araterus's desire to the contrary, she
caused him to be served with more state, and after the manner of the Princes of
that Country, increasing both the number of his servants, and the riches of
his palace, so that his train and port was little less then the Queens, his
quality stifling envy, that having a kind of respect to greatness. The Queen
had now nothing to oppose against Araterus, and her joy had been complete but
for that which I had told her concerning him, that it was love that troubled
him. This caused a new Certamen in her thoughts, she began to be jealous, she
feared Marina, she thought on the fairest in the Court, she watched Araterus to
see if she could discover her: she hoped it might be her self, and yet she
feared to have it so, lest her severity should increpate his boldness. She was
loath it should be any other, and yet she could not consent that it should be
she, so that she feared what she desired. She found trouble enough in these
Cap^icho's, but advising always with Marina, they thought it best to discover
it if they could, though she told the Queen, that she was confident none could
be so powerful as to captivate Araterus but her self. Marina, the first
opportunity sought to make me confess who it was, that was the object of
Araterus's passion: I not daring to discover it, wond my self out of her
entreaties, and told her that it would be no hard matter to draw it out of
Araterus himself, when that he had confes'd that he was in love: and that she
might see I had rather hazard his displeasure, then not to content her, she
might use her own discretion, whether she would tell him that I had intimated
so much to enduce him to discover it himself. Not long after Marina being alone
with Araterus, they sell into a discourse concerning the Prince of Sinana,
Araterus complaining that the gods had not furnished that Prince with virtues
suitable to his other qualities and greatness, that he might have been worthy of
the happiness he sought for; calling it an oversight of the gods to give any
one the goods of body and of fortune, and not those of the mind to employ them
rightly, when all three conjoined together, makes the Possessor happy, the one
illustrating the other. Marina, who has wit enough, told him, that it was a
kind of impartiality of the gods so to distribute their favors, that none
might be wanting of their gifts, and that (it may be) according to their own
wishes, this man has honor and riches, another beauty and wit, a third virtue
and grace, all which in one man would be too much, and which is not seen in an
age, every one contented with his own, shows the variety of gifts of the gods,
and their impartiality. But faith she, were it in your choice, which would you
choose? I should quickly choose those of the mind, before those of the body or
fortune (replied Araterus) for to have the other without the first, is to have
the ring without the stone, and truly without wit, will, power, judgment, and
the like, the goods of fortune cannot be made use of rightly, and they are
rather fair beasts then men, but the most deformed man is more excellent than
the loveliest beast, so in my judgment those that have the goods of the mind,
are to be preferred to those that have either those of body or fortune: You
speak not like a Lover (says Marina) for he profers the object of his passion
above all things, which you know is to be accounted amongst the goods of
fortune, for if he sacrifices his life, and I am sure, he looses his reason,
judgment and understanding, with all the goods of the mind. Fair Marina, said
he, I would not have you count me among these unreasonable men. No, says she,
I have observed of late a great ^adness in your face, and I am apt to call all
sad and melancholy men, Lovers, knowing it to be a great symptom of Love.
Araterus would very fain have avoided this discourse, but Marina pressed him so
far, that he could not avoid telling her, that he esteemed one more then all
the world, and that (may be) it was that which was usually called Love. But he
told her, that it had not made him loose his reason, nor understanding, for
that he did it not so much out of inclination, as choice. But when Marina would
have known who his Mistress was, he told her, secrecy was the first and chief
rule of Love, and that to do so was to show his disrespect to her he loved, by
making known the unworthiness of her servant: whatever Marina said she could
not draw him to a confession she so much desired, but contented her self that
she knew from his own mouth that he loved, which gave the Queen more trouble
than she thought she would have gained through her curiosity, being crucified
betwixt hope and fear.

Half a year past away, Araterus still continuing in his estate, and
continually burning in those amorous flames, which scorched his soul, more then
the heat of the Country his body. The Queen was not free from the like
cruciations, though every days conversation with him, gave her a clear sight
that she was the object of his love. Love and her high humor had a long
certamen, but at last love remained victor, and left her contented with the
inclinations of her servant. The more she considered his virtues, the greater
her ardencies grew, and was almost angry that his love had not forced his
respect; for in all that height of honor he had not forgot himself, nor had
the ardency of his affection made him oblivious of the Queen, he showed her as
much submission as at the first, and as much affection as would stand with
respect. He was too quick-sighted not to perceive the affection of the Queen,
and yer he forbore an agitation, which he had some persuasions might have been
well accepted, but he contented himself that he had covertly given her to
understand his affection, and that he saw she understood him. Their
Conversation was always free, and pleasing to each other, I remembered this
above the rest, because it was remarkable for Araterus's discovery of himself.
He was in the company of the Queen, when his love, causing a more then ordinary
disquiet in his soul, exhibited a kind of sadness in his face, the Queen
noteing it, I perceive (said she to him) that you have not forgot your Country
nor your friends, their remembrance, notwithstandinging our endeavors, still
exuscitate a melancholy that deprives you of the pleasures of your life, and
frustrates all our devoyers to make you merry. The favors, Madam, replied he,
which I have received from your bounty, are capable of making one forget her
native Country and friends without regret* I Will assure you I could not account
my self more happy were I in my own Country in the midst of my friends and
kindred, than I do at this time, having so free an access to your Majesty: and
that which you did call melancholy was nothing but a muse which had carried me
to the consideration of the immensity of your favors, and the meanness of my
deserts. I can tell you how to pay whatsoever you think you are indebted to me,
said the Queen. That is impossible, Madam, answered Araterus, were the whole
world at my dispose. It Is very easy, said she, for it is but the resolving of
one question. That Is too easy indeed, Madam, replied he, to repay the least of
your favors: you may command it if you please, and assure your self of a
resolution if it be in my power. It is enough, said she, this is that which I
desire to know then, you have confessed to Marina that you affected a Lady of
this Court, I would desire to know who she is, that I may cause her to accept
of your love and services. Araterus was startled at this question, not
imagining that the Queen would have asked it, and not knowing what to answer he
stood confused a great while. Study no excuse, said the Queen) for you have
promised to resolve me, if it were in your power, and this I am sure is,
therefore I expect you should not vary from your word, but tell me directly. I
will seek for no excuse, replied Araterus, since you prohibit it, but I must
crave your pardon, If I beg you to add this to the rest of your favors, to
remit this question, for it will be too much honor for me, and too much
trouble to your self, to take notice of my Loves. And for the favor you
profer, I am not capable to receive it, my love extending only to admiration,
not to any possession or enjoyment. Whether I can do you any favor or no, it
matters not, however you must satisfy my desire, said the Queen. I am willing
to do it, Madam, said he, but I fear lest in doing it, I shall purchase your
displeasure, and cause you to wish that you had not desired it: for I profess,
Madam, that the object of my love is of so eminent condition, that I ought not
to proceed further than admiration, and to obey out of duty and respect. You
cannot think that I will be angry, said she, at a thing that I command. I fear
it, Madam, said Araterus, for what, and if such a wretch as my self should
confess that you were the object of his passion, would not you be extremely
angry at his audacity? my crime will be the same if you commanded a confession
of my love. The queen knew not what to answer, she saw he had confessed enough,
and she knew not how to behave her self; whilst she remained in this confusion
Araterus casting himself at her feet, I see, Madam, said he, that I have
offended you, what should I have done if I had confessed? alas! you may easily
know how to revenge your self on my folly, my life is at your disposal: I
assure you I can dye without regret, because it will be glorious that I dye for
obeying you. The queen was in such confusion that she knew not how to speak,
but permitting him in that posture, he was seen so by the queens uncle, who
coming in suddenly put a period to their discovery any further. They were both
exceedingly troubled that Peomontile had seen Araterus in that posture, for he
showed that he wondered at the action, but it brought forth a good effect, and
rendered them both happy according to their wishes. Araterus taking his leave,
departed, leaving Peomontile with the Queen, who presently desired to know the
meaning of Araterus's action. The queen knowing the virtues of her uncle, and
resolving, if she could possible, to regulate her affection according to his
counsel, told him all that had passed between* Araterus and her self, omitting
nothing either of her desires or trouble. Peomontile after he had considered
what she had said, told her for his part, he agreed with her choice, and that
he did believe the virtues of Araterus had made him worthy of the honor, and
that he doubted not but that it would redound to the happiness of the kingdom,
he seeing as it were a special hand of the gods guiding him from so remote
Countries to theirs; and which he hoped might be for their future happiness.
And lastly, that if she resolved to admit him to the Throne, he would endeavor
the accomplishment of it to the content of all, and that she should leave the
management wholly to him. This extremely rejoicing the queen, she consented to
what he said, and remitted the management of it to him, desiring him to carry
it so, that it might be no blur to her honor nor quality, for that he had
rather die the Martyr of love, than commit any indiscrete action. Being it was
requisite that Araterus was to be made acquainted with it, Peomontile sent for
him, and after he had made him acquainted with the queens resolutions, he told
him that he should find him ready to serve him cordially. You may judge into
what an ecstasy of joy this news cast him in, he presently ran to the Queen,
and falling at her feet, protested that the possession of that Crown wherewith
she intended to invest him was invaluable, and disregarded by him, but the
possession of her self rendered him so happy, that he would not change condition
with the gods. That the whole world was disre^arded by him, as being nothing
comparable to her: That if the gods had been studious to have made him the
happiest man on the earth, they could not have more fuller effected it than by
her possession. The Queen gave him a gracious reception, and with a pleasing
brow, gave him her hand, a sign that she confirmed her self his, and upon which
he sealed the first impressa's o^ his love, with such rapts of joy, that
suffocated the pleasure he received.

There was nothing now to be hone, but that Peomontile might render their
desire pleasing to the whole kingdom, and that according to the Laws of the
Land, it might be according to the consent of the Council, for the Queen was
studious to observe all the ancient Laws and customs of the Relam. Therefore
nothing could be done till the meeting of the Council, which was to be some few
months after, in the mean time Araterus and the Queen, making known their
affections, breathed continually in the air of joys and delights, and both as
'twere conspiring in one, made a harmony by the conjunction of their souls.

Araterus (not being unmindfull of his friends advanced them to dignities and
honors; and amongst the rest Cleopotulus, our first entertainer was received
into the favor of the queen, and restored to all his former places and
dignities.

The time at last came, and the grand Council of the kingdom met: After they
had spent some days in their Ceremonies, and had made an entrance into their
affairs, Peomontile very secretly caused the marriage of the queen to be moved
in counsel, and after some debates it was concluded that the desire of the
Council should be drawn up in a petitory way, and presented to the queen,
wherein they would desire her for the good of her people to enter into the
conjugal state, and to be pleased to make her choice of any of those Princes
that had so long sued to her for that grace, whilst the Council was convocated,
that they might accerding to the antique Custom give their approbation and
consent. This was done accordingly, and delivered to the queen, who by the
instructions of Peomontile the next day went to the Council, and having given
them thanks for the care of the welfare of her people, she told them that for
her part there was nothing but the good and felicity of her people, that could
make her change a condition in which she found so much happiness and content,
and to share a kingdom, and resign some part of her liberty, when she might
rule freely and alone: But having no other interests, but those of her people,
she was both free and ready, to do any thing that might be conducing to their
happiness and welfare. That therefore she was willing to submit to the yoke of
marriage, because thar state wherein she was would frustrate the expectations,
and hinder the happiness of her people. And that they might see how clearly she
made their interests hers, and how studious she was to render them happy in her
choice, and how willing to observe all customs, she remitted it wholly to her
Uncle and them, and looked whom they pitched upon, without any other
considerations than those of the good of her people, (which she was sure they
would endeavor) she would admit him into her Throne and bed. They all
exceedingly applauded this speech of the queens, and having given her thanks
for the honor she did them, they told her it would be too much presumption in
them to make that choice which she left to them, that they were only to
confirm, and not to elige, and that therefore she would be pleased to nominate
him her self whom she would account worthy of that dignity. She replied, that
she resolved already to stand to what they should decree, and that she left the
whole dispose of it to Peomontile and themselves: having said this she left
them, all praising her for the best of Queens, and happiest of Princes. She
being departed, and seeing that 'twas left to them, they all began to consider
on whom they might pitch. Some presently declared for the Prince of Sinana,
raising up their old interests, saying, that although they had been at Wars,
yet the peace being concluded, it would be a greater honor for the Queen to
accept of him now, when they might see that it was not any thing but the Queens
greatness and magnanimity that made her refuse him, being able to withstand
him, and that she might declare that none could compel her to what they
desired, that thereby they purchased the amity of the greatest, formidablest and
richest Monarch in the world. But this was opposed by most, who renewed the
reasons before the War, and made known the indignation of the Queen to him above
any, and that the Queen could not have imagined that any would have proposed
him. Others, they nominated the Prince of Cuipumoe, vicinity being their chief
motives: Others, the Prince of Jarequee: fairness and features being their
chief motive: Others, the Prince Marchacin; without Ganges wisdom and prudence
being their chief motives. Others, the King of Can^bojaa: strength and prowess
being theirs: many others were nominated, every one bringing reasons for their
choice, which were also by others opposed as strongly. At last Peomontile
nominated Araterus, giving many reasons for it, which was seconded by
Clcopotulus, and many other friends of Araterus's, but most opposed him, and
especially Maurishia, one who had not declared for any, endeavoring to
overthrow Peomontile's arguments. This Maurishia was father to Marina, and one
who envied Araterus's glory more than any other which was the chiefest motive
that made him declare against him, and being very plausible in his tongue, he
drew most to his side against Araterus. The Council being much divided, debated
it till the time of breaking of, and ordering it against the next day they
broke up, every one believing that it was not without the queens consent and
knowledge that Peomontile nominated Araterus.

The next day they met again, every one desiring to promote their interests:
when they had begun their debates, Peomontile told them, tha^ he was joined to
them in an especial mavner by the Queen: that they should consider well on him,
whom he had nominated, that they should all say aside their private interests,
and respect only the good and welfare of the kingdom. That it was a weighty
affair, and therefore that they should not passionately, and without
deliberation proceed to any thing: That his whole endeavors were for the good
of the people, and welfare of the R^^lm, that for that end he had nominated
Araterus, being utterly against the admission of foreign Princes, for those
reasons which he had delivered, when they had pleaded for the marriage of the
Prince of Sinana. And lastly, that he was very willing to hear what they had to
say against it, that he might endeavor to satisfy them in his choice, or cede
to their judgments, if he perceived that they were more consonant to reason.
After a little pause, Maurishia seeing they looked upon him, he having most
opposed it the day before, stood up, and delivered himself in these terms.

Meador here made a little stop, but presently beginning again; you may very
well think my memory very prodigious (said he) if that I could render you a
speech of some length delivered so many years since: I must let you know that
the queen believing there would be so strong debates that day, commanded one
(that she retained only for his speed in writing, being able through the help
of certain brief Characters that he used, to write as fast as any spoke, if he
spoke deliberately) to be conveyed into a private place hard by the Council,
where he might hear perfectly, and where he wrote verbatim what was spoken,
which having been copied out fair for the Queen, after she had perused it, she
gave it to Araterus, who keeping it by him, gave it me when I returned from
those Countries, that there might not be any thing wanting in my relation. In
saying this, he ripped a part of his sleeve, and took out certain Papers which
were written with strange characters, from the top downward. After Euripedes,
Argelois, and the Princesses had satisfied themselves with beholding them, they
delivered them again to Meador who translated them into his vernacular speech,
and made them speak thus.

MAURISHIA HIS ORATION.
Seigniours,
THis which my Lord Peomontile has moved in the Counsel, I must confess (with
him) is of great concernment to the kingdom, and ought not to be proceeded on
temerariously, or without deliberation. Every one here ought to speak their
minds freely and fully, and not to be swayed by the favor or fear of others.
And I hope, noble Seigniours, that you will heartily interpret what I shall
speak, and believe that the scope of my speech is for the good of my Prince,
and welfare of my Country. I must needs then declare that in my opinion, this
marriage which my Lord Peomontile moves, cannot be for the good and welfare of
the people: My reasons I Will give you in a word, because I will not tire you
with prolixity. A little reform your judgments, and do but consider the
disparity between them, I mean not in age, but in quality: Is he any more then
what the goodness of our Queen has made him? Has he any thing but what
depends on her sole donation? Some say he is a Prince, what proof have we of
it, but himself? and who would not attribute Titles of honor to himself where
he knows he cannot be disproved? a likely matter that a Prince should be driven
so far from his own Country, and be so willing to remain here without the
least desire of returning. I will not give you my thoughts of him, because the
Queen has made him honorable. But -- I pray consider in opposition to his
inferiority, the Queens greatness. Look on her as a Queen, as having a^ her
command a kingdom, nay one of the greatest, richest, and most potentest in the
East, and tell me then the great disparity that is betwixt them. She is a mark
fair enough for an ambitious man; and who would not pretend greatness for so
great a glory? The Queen out of her generousness and goodness has left the
management of this affair to us, and we ought now to regard how to confirm our
future happiness, and to provide for a continual peace, that our posterities
may enjoy the fruits of what we in our wisdoms have acted for them: It may be
that we may never have the like occasion as this, let us not therefore conjoyn
such disparing pieces, and make a structure, that may not out last half our
days. Methinks I heard you ask me why this disparity should be any obstacle to
the happiness of the kingdom, or should be a just let to this marriage? I
answer you, that concord, amity, and peace, things so essential to the
happiness of the kingdom cannot harbor long in persons dispar in quality, age
or manners. Disagreement is like to happen, and the disparity after some small
time will quickly breed dissentions. Do you not think that the queen, knowing
him to be her Creature, and so inferior to her, will not still exercise her
authority over him, and though he be in the place of an husband, account him in
that of a servant? Do you not think that he having attained the dignity of a
king, and the place of a husband will be ever able to bear it, and not rather
endeavor to subjugate her to his Will? will not this think you breed
divisions, discords and dissentions, will not the queen still consider her
dignity, and his inferiority? and will not she think you be obedient, or
obsequious to him whom she has raised, as her place, and case of matrimony
requires? will she not rather look that he should obey her, and cede to her
will in all things? which thing consider your selves how prejudicial it would
be to a kingdom, where a King cannot freely act but by the consent and will of
another. A thousand other ways is this disparity of births capable of
begetting disunion, disagreements, and disjunctions, which were they in a
private family, or in lesser persons of quality were nothing, but in this case,
in persons so eminent as the King and queen, disunion and disagreement cannot
but be very prejudicial to the kingdom, and greatly to its disadvantage. This
is a thing so obvious, that I need not mention what sideings, jealousies,
factions, that complotings, what treasons this may produce, what murder it may
cause, what ruin and confusion it may infer, when through disunions and
disparity the one seeks the destruction of the other. Examples of this kind are
frequent, which might induce us to be wise by others harms. But suppose that
none of this happen (as the gods grant it may not if this marriage be
effected!) but that they live in peace and happy concord, and agreement,
nevertheless consider that Araterus is one of whom we have had but small
experience.

It Is true that he has showed himself valiant and a good Captain, but every
good Captain may not make a good King; he may prove fortunate in the field, and
unfortunate on the Throne; good in the Camp, but bad in the Court; the
discipline of which are far different. He may know how to govern an Army, and
yet not know how to rule a kingdom; Princes are only endued with a capacity
from the gods to rule, others to obey. It may be you object in your thoughts,
that he has merited the dignity by his valor, and having saved the kingdom,
deserves the Queen: But consider has he not been royally rewarded? and must he
of necessity have the Crown for his pains? he has saved it, and (may be) may
also show you he has the art to ruin it. Some (let me tell you) have been very
partial in ascribing so much valor to Araterus, that has ecclipsed that of
all the Sornaleans, against all equity and justice, and as if he himself had
beaten all the Sinanans, without either help or assistance. Did not many other
valiant men venture their lives as freely, and exhibit their valor as
courageously, though they came off not so fortunately, nor their deeds so much
acknowledged? It Is true, my Lord, Peomontiles life was saved by him, but yet I
hope, my Lord, knows how sufficiently to gratify him without making him King.
Some of you it may be at this instant would tell me of the affable, courteous
and loving disposition of Araterus, his excellent parts, sweet and winning
behavior, his many virtues, moderation and generosity.

I cannot deny but all this appears in him, but who knows not that these are
suitable exhibitions, purposely prepared to forward his high designs, And who
knows but that he endures it with regret enough through aspiring hopes of a
kingly dignity, till he has attained that place, wherein he may exhibit his
own nature and disposition freely and uncontroulably. This difference there is
between a Prince, and one of his condition, the one hides himself through fear,
the other exhibits himself freely, having power enough to back his enormities:
so that his virtues will appear nakedly, he acting without fear of punishment,
or hope of reward. A Prince is left to his will, so that his true nature will
appear, either vicious or virtuous, when such as Araterus, are often exceeding
vicious, humble, courteous, generous, and what not, in that estate which
fortune has brought them into in the world, when coming to a Crown, or higher
pitch of dignity, their former virtues are oft-times changed into vices, and
have made themselves as odious as they were before loved and esteemed. Seeing
then that men of mean conditions are so apt to fain those virtues they have
not, and to restrain those vices they are naturally prone to, out of a lack of
ability to act them, and that if possessed with real virtues, the danger of
change, of dignities and places, most commonly works a Metamorphosis upon the
heart, especially from virtue to vice, it will be far more safe for the Queen
to take a noble Prince, who having power to act what he pleases, will not be
changed when he comes to rule, than one who it may be palliates his vices out
of hope of reigning. For you shall know how he acts as he is a Prince, so may
you expect him when he is a King. Again consider how dishonorable it will be
for the queen to stain that royal blood with the conjunction of so mean a
person: and for my part I believe that when the queen gave us this liberty of
electing one to the dignity of enjoying her; she never imagined that we would
pitch upon one so inferior to her, nor could she think that we could have any
such thoughts as to believe she would ever act so unworthy her self. She could
not but think that we would elect a Prince, amongst her Neighbors, and many
Sutours, and because she would not be led by affection, but by that which might
conduce to the good of the Kingdom, she remitted this election to us, to
choose which we thought best amongst those Princes that sued to her: and I
verily believe that if we nominate Araterus to her, 'twould make her take away
the liberty she has given us, and repent her for our folly. Do you think the
people will subject to Araterus as their Sovereign, to one whom they number
among themselves, and so inferior to the Majesty of a Prince: The Sornaleans
'its true affect him much, but not so much as to create him their King; and I
believe if ever he arrive to that dignity, many which now love him, will then
hate him, for these people were always ambitious to have noble blood to rule
them. To conclude, consider that the gods create Princes to rule, and gives
them only ability to reign well, others indeed may usurp the place, but they
most commonly bring all men to ruin. What I have said, I hope, tends only to
the good of my Princess, and the welfare and prosperity of my fellow Subjects.
Let all things be well weighed and considered, that this man who has ended a
war happily, may not bring upon us a peace implete with more misery.

Peomontile having heard Maurishia with a great deal of impatiency, seeing him
thus conclude, and having an excellent memory, he thus reanswered.

PEOMONTILE HIS ORATION.
My Lords,
I Beseech the same favor that you have granted my Lord Maurishia, that is,
your patience, and diligent attention to what I shall say: I shall endeavor to
answer this declamation, and detect both his errors and weakness, and I fear
his maliciousness. As we ought to speak here fully and freely, for we ought to
speak apertly and sincerely, and as not swayed by the favor or fear of others,
so not drawn aside by the secret malice or grudge of our selves. My Lord I
doubt was conscious to his thoughts, that he needed your candid interpretation
of that which was not heartily spoken, and covers the malice and envy he bears
to Araterus, with the vail of his; it is for the good of his Prince, and welfare
of his Country. I should not speak thus bitterly, but that the malice which
runs along the veins of his speech urges me to it.

This business is weighty, for by this conjunction we and ours hope for halcion
days, and therefore it is not to be concluded without debate. The reasons and
arguments, against the election of foreign Princes I have before laid down,
which being yet unan^wered, I think stand in some force among you: I
endeavored then to show you the conveniences of our queens marriage with some
younger Prince, or if possible with one of this Nation. The Queen having
graciously left it to our dispose, ye all gave your opinions, and I mine. I had
sought the whole kingdom in my thoughts, and finding none fitter than this
stranger, I nominated him, and that not without reason on my side. I could give
you many, but they will be prolix, and it may be I shall have a fitter occasion
after I have removed those obstacles which my Lord Maurishia has cast in
against the approving of my Lord Araterus. Their malignity is perpicuous
enough, though their weight is hardly considerable. He first tells us of their
disparity, and therefore infers it is impossible to have a happy conjunction.
This may be answered in a word, that there is no such disparity as he speaks
of, and although he cannot believe him to be a Prince, yet the queen has, and
has honored him according to his dignity. Those that are acquainted with him
cannot but see all the marks of honor and nobility in his breast; neither was
it his own assumation or bragging that made it known, but by an extraordinary
way, and contrary to his desire. And why is it not a likely matter (I pray)
that a Prince should suffer such common disasters as shipwreck, and causial
exil? And what if he show no desire to return, being at such a vast distance
from his Country, and which cannot be effected without apparent danger of his
life? what and if he had no such ambitious mind, but had rather serve the
Queen, than rule in his own Country, must he for this be defamed, and not
counted what he is? I am sure that as yet we have not found the least cause,
but that we should believe him, and therefore I know no reason why we should
not. But however grant it were as my Lord Mauris^ia would have us believe, and
that there were such disparity as he speaks of, yet that disparity of persons
might not be any obstacle to agreement in affections, as he would make us
believe. For the Queen I make no doubt will resolve to love, and obey (as duty
requires) him whom we shall choose, and therefore it is but a defacing those
noble virtues of our queen, to suppose that she should be so full of pride and
disobedience, as not to yield to him and the laws of the gods, being they
require it. If then she love him whom we choose, you need not fear but that
amity, concord and peace will continue, they being altogether maintained by
love, There is no fear then that she will think either of his inferiority, or
her greatness, but of her place and duty; Love is the mother of obedience, for
who obeys the gods better than those who love them? neither fear or honor can
beget so true obedience as love; the other are servile, this free and
ingenuous. There is then no fear of those disunions, disjunctions and
disagreements which he imagins, Love being the conjoyner; no fear that she will
usurp more authority over him than is meet, and that she has gained over his
affection: But these are vain and idle suppositions; for may not the gods cause
a disunion and disjunction where they please? These things must be left to
them, who take a special regard over Princes and Kingdoms, placing titular
Demons or inferior spirits for their safeties. If they are minded to unite
hearts for the prosperity and felicity of a kingdom, what disparity can be an
obstacle? but if they will disunite and disjoyn the hearts of the Princes for a
plague to us, what love can bind? For this we should make our daily orations,
this should be the subject of our prayers and petitions to the gods, that they
would continue their unity and concord. In the the next place my Lord was much
besides himself, in saying Araterus was one of whom we have had but small
experience. I wonder what experience he would have, can there be greater than
we have had? can there be more? Has he not given us an essay of his valor,
prudence, magnanimity, policy, courage and animosity? Has he not been
sufficiently trusted with the Army, with the Navey, with the City? what
mischief might he have done us, had he been false? how beneficial has he been
to this kingdom? and how much experience have we had of him? what greater
would he have? what greater can he have? and yet this man tells us, that he is
one that we have had small experience of, when for this two years he has been
sufficiently employed by the Queen, who with all others that are, not as
malicious as himself, have had sufficient experience of his virtues and
generosity. I am sorry I have said so much to evince a truth so obvious, and
which in spite of envy, himself was forced to confess, when he goes to eclipse
his valor: What, and every good Captain, may not make a good King? yet it is
requisite that every good King ought to be a good Captain; and he that proves
fortunate in the field, is most likely to prove fortunate in the Throne; and he
that is bad in the Camp, is not likely to prove good in the Court. Their
discipline is not so far different as he imagins, and though it be granted,
that he who knows how to rule an Army, may not know how to govern a Kingdom:
I am sure he that knows not how to to govern an Army, cannot rule a Kingdom:
for how can he that cannot rule few, govern a multitude? Is it not most likely,
that he which can rule himself, should rule others; and he which can govern an
Army, govern a Kingdom. How can he which cannot rule himself, govern a family?
How can he which cannot govern a family, rule a City? And how can he which
cannot govern a City, rule a Province? So how can he which cannot rule an Army,
govern a kingdom? But Araterus can tell how to rule an Army, therefore we have
no fear but that he knows how to govern a Kingdom. He has showed himself
valiant in the Camp, and therefore most likely to show himself wise in the
Court. And truly good Kings ought to be good Captains: for where a good Captain
comes to be a King, there most commonly is the best Government, for he which
cannot rule few, can never govern a multitude; At last he would fain insinuate
into us a Maxim of policy framed to beat down aspiring minds: That Princes
were only endued with a capacity from the gods to rule, others to obey; which I
deny, and though it be little to the purpose I cannot let it pass unanswered. I
could stop his mouth thus by telling him that Araterus was a Prince, and
therefore by his own Maxim of a capacity to reign. But the falsity is so
perspicuous, that I need but mention to you the experience we have had of many
Princes about us, that have lacked a capacity to rule, and of others far from
the line of Nobility, which have received their Titles and Kingdoms, and have
not only had the capacity to rule, but to rule well. Is the gods inspiration
into Princes any other than education? They having a greater means to beget
Majesty and magnanimity, knowing (besides the excellency of Teachers) that they
are born to a Crown, and to rule. And were they ignorant of their birth, and
not nursed up in those princely employments, we should see that the gods
inspiration is secondary through education. But again, my Lord mistakes to
think we would make our Queen mercenary; we know he has merited much, and he
has been well rewarded, and we know his modesty would not have accepted the
honors the Queen has given him, neither is it his seeking, nor our desire as
he thinks to reward his deserts with the Queen and kingdom: But that my Lord
might see that he has the art to continue its happiness and peace. Alas! how
weak has he showed himself in repineing at Araterus's valor, when the enemies
themselves acknowledge it! And though he pleads that his praise was against
equity and Justice, I never heard him yet superlaudated, nor did I hear any
ascribe more to him than he deserved. Shall we repine at the valor of a man
though it eclipsed that of the Sornalians, so long as it was for their safety
and welfare? is this according to equity and justice? is this his best
gratification for his being instrumental in saving the Kingdom and us? What if
he beat not the Sornalions himself? He cannot deny but that he was the chief
cause of their overthrow: what if many others ventured* their lives as freely?
what if they were not equally rewarded? was there any that did deserve it? I
believe though, that none returned with life from the wars ever complained to
him, or any else of the ingratitude of the Queen, or that they were not
satisfied. But Araterus's glory is too splendent to be eclipsed with this dirt.
What he is pleased to reflect upon me, I value it not, though it be contrary to
the use and custom of this place to move secret suspicion: If he thinks me
guilty of any thing worthy condemnation, let him accuse me, according to the
way and order of our Laws. For I protest I do it not in any way of
gratification to Araterus: for that life which I confess I hold from his
valor, but that I think in my conscience it will be for the happiness and
prosperity of the Kingdom. Alas! what avails it to be virtuous, since it
cannot shelter from the Calumniator? How wickedly and maliciously goes he about
to defame Araterus, and to make all those virtues he is endued with to be the
effects of his dissimulation. I need not go about to clear him, since he is so
well known to you all, and I verily believe none of you had such thoughts of
him, as my Lord Maurishia. His suppositions are so far from reason, that it
would be a folly to answer them; those virtues which Araterus exhibited, are so
genuine and natural, that those who see not with the eye of malice, may know
that they are not feigned or forced. I know you could not but smile, that my
Lord should go about to make you believe that Princes could not dissemble as
well as other men. I wonder what was his reason to say so, when in my mind they
have most reason of all to dissemble. Is it not often seen that the vices of
Princes, before they have come to the Crown, have given cause to others to
usurp their places, and to repel them from their rights, the people never
pitying the vicious? Had not a vicious Prince then need to cloak and palliate
his vices for fear, lest they might alienate him from the hearts of the people,
and make them glad to embrace any opportunity of depriving him of ruling,
rather than subject themselves to one who shows himself so vicious before he
attains his power? Is it not for this very reason that many Princes have
dissembled, and palliated their evil natures till they have attained their
aims, and have been able to warrant their enormities? My Lord tells us too,
that many are courteous, generous, good, etc. in a meaner condition, but that
dignities and places change their hearts and dispositions: Will he exclude
Princes from this change too? do not we frequently see that good Princes have
become very evil and vicious Kings? Why then must we needs expect the Prince to
prove the same with a King, and have not the like thoughts for Araterus? In the
next place, my Lord mistakes, and would fain draw you into an error, to
insinuate that the Queen limited us to her suitors, or neighbor Princes; No,
she gave us our liberty to elect any whom we pleased, and thought most
convenient for the good of the Commonwealth, whether of the Princes or
Nobility. My Lord need not speak of the Queens dishonouring her self by so mean
conjunction, being that it is not so. But if it were, that were a thing
inconsiderable to the good and benefit of a Kingdom, and the Queen shows her
excess of love to the people, in accepting one, though mean, if chose by you
for the good of the Kingdom; and in this she does most worthy of her self and
place, regarding the good of her people before any thing else in the world. I
would not have you think, that the Queen is not so weak as not to stand to what
you do, or if you should nominate Araterus to withdraw the liberty she has
given you; No, I believe she will stand to your election, and rather accept of
him than any other whom she has partly denied. Do you not think the people
would be glad of such a Sovereign as Araterus, whom they so much affect, under
whose banner they fought courageously, and came off victoriously; one whom they
never accounted among themselves, but rather for the Majesty he bo^e, the
virtues he showed, the wonders he did, they accounted descended from the gods
and themselves happy in his company: you need not fear then that they should
malign what they have desired, or hate him whom they have so fervently loved.
As for their ambition: I am sure it always ceded to their own good. His
conclusion I have answered before, and if Araterus be chosen by you, and
accepted by the Queen, I hope (with my Lords leave) it is no usurpation, and
therefore a happy issue to be expected: pray let all things be well weighed and
considered, and I hope if you elect Araterus, that as he has ended a war
happily, so may he conserve us in peace continually.

Meador having finished reading these speeches, proceeded thus: This business
was mightily debated amongst them, and Maurishia at last was quite silenced.
Cleopotulus that he might render some service to Araterus, endeavored all he
could for him, and speaking after Peomontile, he told them, that he much
wondered that they were so opposite to Araterus, being a man that was every way
fit and capable of that charge. That although he were a stranger by birth, yet
that they had full trial and experience of his virtues, and that having learnt
their language and manners, the Queen had made him as one of the Country. That
she had honored him, and styled him with the Title of Prince, so that he would
be no dishonor to the Queen. That virtue was more to be considered than any
other thing, yet in him they would find youth, beauty, courage, prudence,
magnanimity, generosity, and every thing that should accompany a Prince. That
they should be mindful of what he had done for the Country, and observe the
hand of the gods, who by things so unusual, had brought him from his own
Country, opposed him to hazards and dangers, and all as it were purposely for
their safeguard: so that the gods themselves, as it were, had elected him, and
that it would be no part of their wisdoms to resist the hand of Providence.
That in him they were sure to run no hazard of change, either in government or
religion, which was to be expected in stranger Princes. That he was extremely
beloved of the people, honored at Court, and respected by the Queen. That this
fame had spread far into the Neighbour-Countries, so that none would dare to
oppose, or injure them, having so valiant a Prince for their leader; in fine,
that 'twas the best way to conserve their peace, and to enrich the
Commonwealth by the election of so good a King. This was so closely followed,
and pressed so much by P^omontile and his party, that at last they carried it,
and causing their consents to be drawn up, they sent it to the Queen, who the
next day gave them notice that she confirmed their Election^, being it was for
the benefit of the Commonwealth. It was then made known to Araterus, who
accepted it with a great deal of humility and joy, more for the possession of
the Queen than the Kingdom.

Things being brought to this issue, Maurishia seeing it concluded, thought it
no policy to gain Araterus's disfavour by not subjecting to him. He no sooner
craved his pardon, but it was granted with a great deal of freedom and
obligement. Araterus and the Queen conspired in their joys, and there was
nothing now that could prove any obstacle to the fruition of Embraces: But lest
fortune might turn her wheel, and dash all their joys with some cross, as she
usually does; they determined the time for Arateruus's marriage and coronation.
That time at last came, and it was effected in the City of Sinda very
celebriously, and with much rejoicing. The City ecchoed with long-live Araterus
King of Sornalia, and his fair Queen Amarillis, and every part of it shone with
fires of rejoicing. It was every way glorious, and graced with domestic and
neighbor Princes, who with the stateliness of their trains, added luster to
the Hymenaean triumph. There was all manner of triumps, turnies, balls and
sports exhibited after the manner of the Country, which lasted for many days
without intermission. After those rejoycings and sports had expired their time,
and that Araterus had sufficiently tasted the pleasures of his bride, he betook
him to graver and weightier affairs; as in settling the Kingdom, making of
Laws, ordaining of Councels, rewarding his friends; all which he effected with
so much wisdom and prudence, that his very enemies were forced to confess,
that he was worthy of the dignity he had gained. After a years enjoyment of all
the happinesses and blisses heaven can afford on earth. I solicited Araterus to
let me return, that I might bring you the tidings of his felicity; but he
unwilling to part with me, caused me to marry, which he thought would be a
sufficient tie to keep me there. Indeed it was so, for having a wife and
children, I was engaged to continue there; and under the bounties of Araterus I
lived all my days with content and pleasure. Araterus had a very fair issue by
his Queen, all partaking of the external and internal blessings of their
parents. In so many years there was not the least difference, nor a cession of
those flames that possessed them in their youth.

The Kingdom never florisht in so happy and continued peace, nor with such
prosperity and felicity before. Never was there Wars, Tumults, or insurrections
amongst the people, but a continual concord and amity, and every one praising
the gods for giving them so good a Prince. I was always conversant with him,
nor did his greatness abate any thing of that familiarity which he used to me
before, and because he would not forget his own language, there was never a day
but we discoursed in it, and when by our selves, for the most part altogether
in it, so that you may not wonder to hear me speak it so readily, after so
many years absence. I know not what it was, but I am sure all the pleasures
that I there enjoyed, could not utterly extinguish that Love I had to my own
Country, and desire that I had to see it. The gods, I think, for the purpose
took away my wife and three children that I had that I might have no obstacle
to hinder my return. Araterus's entreaties stayed me two years, but at last
seeing I persevered in my entreaties, he yielded to them, though with much
regret. Having at length consented to my abscession, he knew not which way to
return me safe, the voyage ^^ng long and dangerous: At last he resolved to
write letters to all such Pr^nces through whose dominions we should pass,
desiring them that they would grant me a free and safe passage through their
dominions: to induce them to which he sent very costly and rich presents to
every one, which indeed freed us from a great deal of danger and trouble, and
gained us not only a free passage through the Eastern Princes dominions, but
also a Convei^h in the most dangerous places, the fame of Araterus being spread
through all the East. The day being come, and every thing prepared for my
departure, he caused twenty Camels to be laded with the most precious things
that those Countries could afford; Presents indeed worthy so great a Prince, to
be given to you, and some to be presented to those Princes through whose
dominions I was to pass. It was not without a great deal of trouble that we
parted, and indeed had it not been the desire of seeing my native home, and my
master, whose image still lived in my breast, I should not have been induced to
have left him, who with an extraordinary affection loved me. He told me that
(had it not been to have returned to his Cozen, and that he had some hopes to
see me again, or at least to hear from me, and of your health and happiness by
my means) I should not have gained his consent for my departure. At which words
he gave me this letter (which he then pulled out of his sleeve, and presented
to his Master) which I have kept till now, that it might also jump with my
relation. Euripedes taking it from his Squire, and perusing it, seeing nothing
but what was communicable read it to those noble Auditors, the contents of
which was thus.

Araterus to his Cozen Furipedes Health and Happiness.
I could have wished that I might have had the happiness and content of seeing
your face, which neither time nor absence has obliterated in my breast. The
variety and vicissitudes of things has not extinguished that love and
affection I have always born you, and nothing grieves me more, than that I am
forced to live so remote from you. I profess it is not the glory of a Kingdom,
that could have detained me, nor any other thing, but Love, which is of it self
excusable, and had I not been engaged by those bonds which are irrefragible, I
should have preferred your company to all the Kingdoms of the East; But seeing
so many providential accurrances in bringing me hither, and in establishing me
in a Throne of unexpected happiness, (the relation of which I leave to Meador)
I am enforced to abide where the gods themselves, as it were, have placed me.
However I hope that these may come safe to your hands, with those small
testifications of remembrance, and finding you in all prosperity and happiness,
may tell you I want nothing to complete my happiness but your fight, which to
purchase, I could part with half my Kingdom, and that however my fortune is
raised, that I am still your affectionate Kinsman,

Araterus.


After the reading of this letter, Meador went on. Having, said he, received
this letter, we parted, after I had promised that he should hear from you as
soon as I was returned. Leaving Sinda I began my voyage, and by the care and
tuition of the gods, passed through all those large Kingdoms betwixt this
place and the East, presenting the Kings and ^rinces of the Countries with
Presents that bought our way through their dominions. After long and tedious
travel I arrived in Cilicia with that joy that every one has to behold his
native Country after so tedious a separation. But my joys were soon quelled,
when I heard by my friend of your disastors, and leaving of your habitation.
This made me dispose of many of those servants that came with me, keeping but a
few of them; and knowing a trusty f^iend of mine, I committed the treasure that
I brought with me, (being but five Camels load, the remainder of that which had
bought our passage through the East, but it was of the choicest and richest
things that I had) into his hands, but without discovering the treasure I
trusted him with, lest so great a temptation might overthrow his fidelity. All
the persuasions of my friends could not detain me from seeking you, which I
did, helped also by my friends, enquiring through all the Neighbor Countries,
Cities and Towns, but after many months search in vain, I returned, not so
much as hearing any news of you. To content my friends, I stayed almost a year
with them; but not enjoying my self without you, I took a special care to
secure that treasure which I preserved still untouched for you, which being
laid up safe, without the knowledge of any of my friends, I departed, having
vowed never to return, till I had either found you out, or heard certainly of
your death. Having in this resolution searched through all Cilicia, Capadocia,
Paphlagonia, and through all the lesser Asia; I passed over to Greece, and
searching through all those Provinces in vain, I returned to Asia again
sorrowful and dejected: But coasting all long Pontus, and visiting these
parts, I fell very dangerously sick, when meeting with the man you found
tormenting me, whose name is Proculus, he very generously, after some small
acquaintance conducted me to his house, which is not far from this place, where
I endured a sharp and tedious sickness, but so carefully and tenderly looked
after by him, that I was in an especial manner engaged to him. After I began to
be well, not believing any thing had been able to shake that love in him which
I had beheld so strong, I gave him (to gratify him) the best relation of all
my past adventures. But O the power of that Stygian vice, avarice, which is
able to convert love into hatred, and make friends turn foes, and take away
that life which they have preserved: This was the cause of my stripes and
tormenting, for he having heard of the Treasure which I brought with me, (for I
concealed not any thing from him) it so troubled and tormented his mind, that
he could not be satisfied without it, such was his thirst of gain. He at first
sought by all fly and cunning means to pump of me in what place I had hid it,
and whom I had entrusted with it, his enquiry made me mistrust him, and I was
now very sorry that I had spoken any rhing of it, my heart misgiving me some
disaster, so that his inquiries were in vain, for I still left him unsatisfied.
But when he perceived that I grew well, and that I was about to leave him, he
in plain terms told me, that he must know where the Treasure was, counselling
me to devide it betwixt us, seeing you, (as he said) after so many years search
not heard of, were in all likelihood dead and rotten, so that it belonged to
me, and to him in preserving my life. But when he saw threats would not do, he
sought to extort it out of me by torments, which he also found too weak to
break my resolution, for he had in that place which you found me in, in the
like manner tormented me thrice before, which so enraged him, that he had sworn
I should never return to his house alive, if I would not confess it to him,
which I resolved not to do, though I had suffered an hundred deaths: And I
verily believe he would have been as good as his word, if that the gods
miraculously had not sent you to my relief, and out of such afflictions brought
me to my investigated happiness. A happiness I have sought for this five years,
it being so much since I returned out of the East, therefore it cannot repent
me of my torments, which has been the means to my finding of my Master. Meador
thus ended his narration, which had given great content to the Princesses to
hear Araterus's story, to end with so much pleasure and solace. But the day
beginning to decline after they had engaged Euripedes and Lonoxia to visit them
at their Castle, they departed. The Charioter being returned to the entrance of
the grove, according as they had appointed, the Princesses mounted their
Chariot, and Tribulus and Argelois their horses, which being done, they
presently arrived at the Castle, whose Gates stood wide open to receive the
beauties and the glories of the East.

The end of the first Part.
FINIS.

