ANSWER TO George Keith's NARRATIVE OF HIS Proceedings at Turners-Hall, On the
11th of the Month called June, 1696.

WHEREIN His CHARGES against diverse of the People called QUAKERS (Both in that,
and in another Book of his, CALLED, Gross Error and Hypocrisy Detected) Are
fairly Considered, Examined, and Refuted.

By THOMAS ELLWOOD.

London: Printed and Sold by T. Soul near, the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street 1696.

AN ANSWER TO George Keith's NARRATIVE, etc.
IT is not surely, without good Reason, that the Church of Christ, here on
Earth, is called the Church Militant: For (besides the inward and spiritual
Enemies, which her several Members have to encounter with, in their Pilgrimage
through this troublesome World) such has been, and is, her Lot and Portion,
that she has rarely been free from outward Enemies of one kind or other; her
great Adversary, Satan, continually raising up some evil Instruments or other,
to fall upon her, all aiming at her Ruin, though after diverse Ways and
Manners. Sometimes the Civil Powers, under which she has lived, have been
stirred up to proclaim as it were, open War against her; and to inflict severe
and heavy Penalties upon her, for her faithful adherence to her Lord and
Master, Christ Jesus. When, through Faith and Patience, she has overcome, and
the Wrath and Fury of Men has been assuaged, so that she has had some respit
from those outward Sufferings: Then has her old Adversary (the common Enemy of
Mankind) bestirred himself in another way, to raise up Persecution against her
of another kind, by instigating some or other (either such as were always
avowed Enemies to her, or such as for some time appeared to be of her, but by
the sweep of his Tail had been struck off from her) to speak or write against
her, falsely to accuse her, and load her with the foulest Reproaches, and most
infamous Slanders and Scandals; that by so misrepresenting her, they might
hinder others from joining to, or favoring her, and stir up the Civil
Magistrate again, to persecute her afresh. This has been the Lot, this the
Condition of the little Flock of Christ, in former Ages, as Ecclesiastical
Histories declare. As for the present Age, and with respect to the People
called Quakers (whom God by an Invisible Arm of Power has raised up, and held
up, and made a peculiar People to himself) Experience gives sufficient Proof,
the matter being yet fresh in Memory. For (not to look back so far as that
which was called the Commonwealth's Time, wherein many of the leading Men, in
most Professions, put forth their utmost Strength against us, both in Preaching
and Printing, raising those false Reports concerning us, and chargeing many
false Accusations upon us, with respect both to Doctrine and Practice, which
others of our Adversaries, that followed after, have taken up upon Trust from
them) no sooner was that great Persecution a little abated (which soon after
the Restoration of K. Charles the Second, through the fault of some Dissenters,
fell upon* All, but most heavily upon Us) and that a little Calm and Quiet
ensued; but out came several Books against us, written by some of those
Professors, who either in some Measure did suffer, or (if they had been
faithful to their own Principle) should have suffered in the same storm with
us. By that Time the Dust, which those Books had raised, was laid by our
Answers thereunto, a fresh Persecution from the Government arose, upon the
Informing Act, the main weight of which, it is well known, fell upon us; they
who before, and afterward, assaulted us in Print, finding Ways then to hide,
and save themselves from Suffering. But when that Storm was a little over out
they came again, and in diverse Books, written by Faldo, Hicks, and others,
heaped up many wrong Charges, Defamations, Slanders and false Accusations
against us; all which were refuted, and wiped off in our Books, Printed in
Answer thereunto: Nor have those of other Professions been so forward to
attaque us since. But now, that Liberty of Conscience, in the free Exercise of
Religious Worship, is by Authority granted, and thereby outward Sufferings in a
great measure abated; our old Enemy, envying us so great a Benefit (though but
in common with others) has contrived ways and means to raise a new War against
us; by stirring up some, who have formerly walked with us, and for sometime
professed to be of us (but upon some peevish Discontent or other, have turned
aside and left us) to turn now against us, and oppose us, and to pour forth
Floods of Reproach, slander and false Accusations upon us. His chief Agent, at
present, in this Work, is George Keith, a Scotchman, whose ambitious Aims not
being answered, nor his absurd and fantastical Notions received; by and amongst
the People called Quakers, he is now become, of a seeming Friend, a real Enemy.
He having published many Books against us, and in defense of those Books
wrangled with us for a while in Print, till he found himself too closely
pinched, to be able to give an Answer fit to be seen in Print, has at length
bethought himself of a Wile to excuse himself from answering, which was, to set
up a kind of Judicial Court, of this own Head, and by his own Authority, in a
Place at his own Command, on a Day of his own Appointing, there to Charge and
Try diverse of us who are called Quakers, whether present or absent, concerning
matters of Faith and Doctrine; and that the rude Multitude might not be wanting
to his Assistance there, he gave public notice of it sometime before, by an
Advertisement in Print, and therein a sort of Summons to some of us by Name, to
others by Designation, to be present. This Arbitrary Proceeding, and Usurped
Authority, as we judged it unreasonable in him to impose, so we did not think
fit to submit to, or own; and therefore forbore to appear at the Time and Place
by him appointed. Yet lest any whom he should draw thither, might mistake the
Cause of our not appearing, the Reasons thereof, drawn up in short Heads, were
sent thither to be read, and given among the People, which they were. However,
according to his before declared. Intention, to proceed whether any of us were
there or no* he, being Judge in his own Court, overruled our Reasons, and went
on to Arraign, and Convict us Absent. The Pageantry of which days Work, as
acted there by himself, he has since Published, with his Name to it, under the
Title of An exact Narrative of the Proceedings at Turners- Hall, etc. Together
with the Disputes and Speeches there between G. Keith and other Quakers,
differing from him in some Religious Principles. How idle is this in him, to
pretend in his Title to give an Account of Disputes and Speeches between him
and other Quakers, whenas his Narrative it self gives no account of any Dispute
there, nor any thing like it, and of that little that was said by any of those
few Quakers, that were present, most was to the People (tending to show them
the unreasonableness of his undertaking, and desiring them to reserve one Ear
for the other side) very little of it to him.

Before the Narrative, he has Reprinted his former Advertisement, by which he
gave Notice of his inteded Meeting. Now in as much as he has done so, why did
he not also Print with it the Reasons given for our not Meeting him then and
there, that the Reader might have judged of the sufficiency of them? In this G.
Keith has not been just either to the Reader* or to us. He that pr^tends to
give an exact Narrative of a thing, ought to do so, as well as say so. And
whatsoever was in that Meeting communicated to the Hearer, ought to be in like
manner communicated to the Reader, if a Narrative of the Proceedings thereof be
made, otherwise such Narrative is not^exact. Now he acknowledges that such
Reasons were ostered, and Read; for he says, p. 13. At the opening of the
Meeting, when G. Keith stood up to make some Introductory Speech, to give an
Account of the occasion of the Meeting, H. Goldney, with some other Quakers of
W. Penn 's Party, came with a Printed Paper, giving some Reasons why W. Penn
and G. Whitehead did not appear, which he desired might be Read. Then adds, It
was readily granted, and the Reasons why W. Penn and G. Whitehead did not
appear, were Read by G. Keith. This made those Reasons part of the Proceedings
of that Meeting, and therefore they ought to have been Published in the
Narrative, that wherever that had been read, they might have been read with
it. The blame for this falls upon him, in as much as he acknowledges, in his
Title Page, the wh^le to have been Published and Revised (instead of Revised
and then Published) by him. And this shows his partial Dealing, and how willing
he was to keep his Reader in the dark as to any thing that made against him.
However, that I may give my Reader that Information and Satisfaction, which he
has withheld from his, I here insert those Reasons, as follows.

REASONS, why those of the People called Quakers, challenged by George Keith,
to meet him at Turners Hall the Eleventh of this Month called June, 1696.
refuse their Appearance at his Peremptory Summons.
WHereas G. Keith has, after his wonted irregular and unruly Manner,
Challenged diverse of us to defend our selves against such Charges as he has to
exhibit against us at Turners Hall: These are to Certify all whom it may
Concern, That the Reasons why we decline any such Meeting, are as follow.

1. Because the said G. Keith has given us such frequent Proofs of his very
Passionate and Abusive Behavior, at the many more Select Meetings we have had
with him, in all Manner of Sweetness, long Suffering and Patience, on our side,
to satisfy, and preserve him from these Extremes: That we cannot assure our
selves now of any better Entertainment, or that the Meeting can have any
desirable Success, for a through Information.

2. We decline to Meet, because it is not an agreed Meeting on both sides,
which it ought to have been; and where that is not, or cannot be adjusted; the
Press is the next fair Way and Expedient, which he has began with, and now
seems to decline; nor has he sent us a Copy of his Charge or Indictment
against us, which also he ought to have done.

3. That he has two of our Books which lie hard at his Door; in Vindication of
us and our Doctrines from his Exceptions, and which he has not yet answered; so
that he is not upon equal Terms with us; and therefore we think his Challenge,
Appointment and Summons unfair; and that all that are not partial will be of
the same Min^ with us.

4. Such public and unlimitted Meetings are too often attended with Heats,
Levity and Confusion, and answer not the End desired by sober and enquiring
Men. Besides, that it lets up a Practice that Authority may Judge to be an
Abuse to our Liberty, and so draw that under Reflection, as no Friend to the
Civil Peace.

5. We know not what Religion or Persuasion this Wavering Man is of, or what
Church or People he adheres to, or will receive him, with his vain
Speculations, that have led him to desert us; nor who are accountable to us for
him and his Irregularities and Abuses; the generality of such Assemblies
usually making ill Auditors, worse Judges, and no good Security for our
Satisfaction. And we must therefore take leave to say, it seems to us an
indirect way of disquieting and invading our present Liberty, that so
Irreligious a Meeting should be held, whose End is to abuse other Men for their
Religion. If this should be imitated by all the several sorts of different
Persuasions in this City, what Heaps and Confusions must necessarily ensue!

6. Wherefore Lastly, Be it known unto all, That for the sake of Religion, the
Liber^y granted us, and the Civil Peace, we decline to Meet him; and not from
any apprehensions we have of his Abilities, or our own consciousness of Error,
or Injustice to the said G. Keith, whose weak and unbridled Temper we know is
such, that what Learning and Parts he has, have not been able to balance and
support him on less occasions, so that we may say they are in ill hands; and if
he proceeds as he begins, they will be employed to an ill End, which his (poor
Man!) cannot but be, unless he change his Course; which we heartily pray for,
that a place of Repentance he may find; and through a true Contrition, the
Remission of his great Sin of Envy, and evilly Entreating the Lords People and
Way* which we profess, and which he the said G. Keith has long and lately both
professed, and zealously vindicated, as such.

What weight there is in these Reasons, I leave the Reader to Judge. G. Keith,
in his Pref. says, p. 7. They are so Frivolous and Weak, that they are scarce
worth noting. And in Nar. p. 13. The Reasons are so slender, that I hope every
Judicious Person here can answer them, and he pretends (Pref. p. 7.) that he
did answer the Chiefest of them on the Place, and refers to the Narrative for
it. How Slender, Weak, and Frivolous, his Answers were, appears by the
Narrative, in which he says little to the Reasons; and that little, as little
to the purpose. To the First he sa^s, Nar. p. 13. If I am such an angry Person
as they represent me, I shall lay my Self the more Open, and they shall have
the greater advantage; you know well enough, says he, that they would be ^lad
of any advantage against me. How could those Auditors know this, when it is
false in it self? We would not be glad of any Advantage against him, especially
not of such an advantage as should arise from his Intemperate Tongue, and r^de
^ehaviour: We have had too much of that kind of advantage against him already,
at other Meetings we have had with him, when there was more Reason to have
expected Sobriety and Temper from him, than there is now. Had he as publicly
Renounced the profession and name of Quaker, as he has plainly departed from
the Spirit and Life of Jesus, in which the People called Quakers Live and Walk
(and in some measure of which he once Walked with them we might have been the
sooner induced to have m^t him, as an Open and Professed Adversary to us, our
Principles and Profession. But since, to do us the ^^eater despite, though he be
gone from us in Spirit and Mind, and has Openly separated from us in Worship,
and has been also disowned by us, he chooses yet to retain the same name, and
make a pretense to the same Profession with us, (both the Title of his
Narrative pretending to relate Disputes between G. Keith, and other Quakers,
implying himself to be one, and he expressly saying, p. 31. l. 15. I am a Quaker
still:) We were not willing, nor are, to give, or admit an occasion for him to
expose our Profession (how unjustly soever) to the Censure and Contempt of the
Inconsiderate and Undiscerning Multitude, by his unruly Passions and Rudeness,
which we had reason from our frequ^n^ experience of him, to expect would break
forth, if we were there to oppose him. Nor do we think that any Advantage which
c^uld have been made for it, could have m^de amends for the disadvantage that
might have ensued, if he thereby should have raised an Hurly Burly, or Tumult
among the People.

To the Fourth, (for he seldom keeps method) which had respect to Civil
Authority and the Public Peace, he only says, he had the Lord Mayor's Leave,
who sent his Marshal to preserve the Peace, and therefore there can be nothing
in that. But, besides that he gave no notice in his Advertisement, that he had
the Mayors Leave, (which renders it suspected that he had not asked the Mayor's
Leave, till after he had Published his Advertisement) not only we, but others
(as judicious perhaps as himself, and more immediately concerned in the
Security of the public Peace) Considering the present state of things, the
Kings absence, and the great discontent which many, especially of the Lower
Rank of People, are under, by reason of want of Trade (occasioned by the
present Scarcity of Current Money) did think there might be more of danger in
that, than was fit to be hazarded on so needless an Occasion. For if, upon the
Invitation given a Month before; but a few Thousands of Discontented (and some,
perhaps, not very well affected) Persons, should have got together and taken
head, they might soon have Increased to greater numbers and strength, than the
City Marshal (how sufficient soever to his Office) might have been able to
disperse. The number of Reasons in our Paper is Six. He has given these Slender
Weak and Frivolous Answers to two of them; and says, This is enough at present
to answer this Paper, Nar. P. 13. Yet four lines after, in the same page,
bethinking himself further of it, he adds, They say, I did not exhibit to them
a Copy of my Charge against them (an Indictment they call it, they would
represent me as a man setting up a Spiritual Court) but my Printed Paper says,
W. Penn, and G. Whitehead, are justly desired to be present. This, says he, is
no Indictment nor Summons, as they falsely call i^. It Is true, the word
[Summons] is not used, but the nature of a Summons is implied. He did not
indeed expressly say, They are required to be present, but used the word [
Desired] But it is a desire Sub poena (as I may say) for he backs it with a
Declaration of his full Intention, to proceed against them, if they shall not
be present; so that if they stay away, be it at their Peril, of being
Calumniated and Traduced behind their backs. Whether he will call his Meeting a
Spiritual Court, or a Temporal, let him choose: Certain it is, that a
Jurisdiction he usurped, not belonging to him, over such as he had no Power
over. And after what manner he intended to have received and treated us, if we
had been there, may well be gathered from what his Narrative says he spoke
about the close of that Meeting, and what he has added in his Preface since.
That in the Nar. is in p. 50. where he thus says, I am persuaded the Reasons
given in the Paper, read at the beginning, were no just reason for their not
appearing. But though some Comparisons are Odious, yet give me leave to make a
Comparison. May a Malefactor make this excuse, You shall not call me before a
Justice without my consent? If a Man Robb me, I may Complain of him as a
Robber, and without his consent call him to account. But here is a strange
thing, Injuring Men may not be called to account without their consent, it will
trespass against the Law, and intrenches upon Liberty of Conscience: Judge now,
Reader, by the Comparison he has made, Whether we have done him any wrong in
calling his Advertisement a Summons, his Charge an Indictment. He compares us
to Malefactors; But Malefactors do not use to be desired to appear, but
Summoned, Required, Commanded at least, if not Compelled; and Indicted when
they do appear. Had not we been finely helped up (as they say) if we had been
there, only to have stood there as Malefactors, to have Pleaded our Cause
before Judge Keith and his Associates, the Mobb, and I know not whom else? Though
he spoke not so plain in his Advertisement, as he has done since, yet there
was enough in that to give us to understand what entertainment we were to
expect there. There was nothing like Equality proposed in it, nothing of
Indifferency; no liberty reserved to us, to charge him, if we saw meet, as well
as he us. No, no, the Scene was laid only for us to hear our selves Charged and
proved Guilty (for that we should be proved Guilty, was, it seems, determined
beforehand) And to what end then was it o^fered, that we should be freely
heard, to answer to our several Charges? This was worse dealing than is used
toward Malefactors. For when they are Summoned to hear themselves Charged,
they have full Liberty given them, not only to Answer for themselves, but to
Object (if they have cause) against their Accuser, against his Witnesses, Yea,
and against the Jury too. But they are not called to hear themselves proved
Guilty; (as it seems we were) whether they shall be proved Guilty or not
Guilty, is left upon the Issue of their Trial: But in our Case, it was resolved
before hand; We were called thither to hear our selves Charged, and proved
Guilty. Now though G. Keith's Malefactory Comparison shows his both Envy and
Folly in making it, yet it answers not his case. For although a Malefactor may
not say, You shall not call me before a Justice without my consent: Yet I fancy
a Malefactor might say, You shall not make your Self a Justice, and then call
me before your self, without my consent. Neither shall you call me, without my
consent, before any Man else; that is no otherwise a Justice, than of your
making, till I better understand your Power for making Justices. No wonder this
little Man speaks so Bigg, if he has entertained a Notion, that he has Power
not only to convene Persons, at his pleasure, before himself; but also to
confer Iusticiary Authority on such others as shall assemble on his
Advertisement. He threatens, if he be not humoured, to repeat his
Advertisement. If he should do so, such as are ambitious of such an Employment,
may hasten to Turners-Hall, if they would be made Justices by G. Keith. He
pursues his Comparison further, saying, ib. If a man Rob me, I may complain of
him as a Robber, and without his consent, call him to an Account. He may so,
but he must complain then, coram competenti Iudice, Before one that has a just
Authority over him: For if he complain coram non Iudice, Before one that has
nothing to do with it, he may go as he came, without Redress. In his Pref. p.
8. he says, And as Insignificant is their Excuse of declining to meet, because
it was not an agreed Meeting on both sides: As if Guilty Persons are not to be
tried without their Consent and Agreement. Observe here, he reputes us Guilty
first, and talks of Trying us afterward. What else is this, but to condemn
first, and try after? As if (says he) Guilty persons are not to be tried
without their consent. When Persons are pronounced Guilty, it is to be
supposed, they have had Trial: For it is from a Trial and Conviction that they
are Denominated Guilty. The Law calls no Man Guilty, until upon due Trial, he
be proved and found Gui^y. Till then the Law supposes him Innocent. If a man be
justly suspected of any Crime, he may and ought be fairly tried, in a due and
right Method, that it may appear whether he be Guilty or Innocent. But none I
hope, except G. Keith, is so weak to think, that any one who has a mind to it,
may take upon him to try such a man, and pass Sentence on him. He adds there,
Their upbraiding me by Insinuating my assuming a Spiritual Jurisdiction over
them, and Summoning them to appear before me, is Idle and Vain. The Injurer is
Debtor to the Injured, and Accountable to him. Though his representing us to be
the Injurers, and himself the Injured, is but precarious, and a begging of the
Question, which we deny: Yet his urging, that the Injurer is Debtor to the
Injured, and accountable to him, in Justification of his appointing a Meeting
for us to appear at, does imply he assumed a Jurisdiction over us, and thought
he might Summon us to appear, which was Idle and Vain in him to think, much
more to do. What should induce him to think so highly of himself, and take so
much upon him, I know not, unless he has some little Ecclesiastical Preferment
in the Wind; which if he has, perhaps it may never rise higher than an
Apparitor, or some such small Officer.

But he says, ib. Let them tell me what Spiritual Jurisdiction they had over
me, to call me several times to them at their Yearly Meeting, 1694. more than I
had over them, to call them to our Meeting at Turners-Hall, 1696, unless they
will fly to their common Pretense, common to them with the Church of Rome,
their Infallibility? First let me tell him, His Contempt of, and Scoff at
Infallibility (asserted and maintained by himself in his Book of Immediate
Revelation not ceased, p. 36, 37, 38. Second Edition, 1676.) is an Infallible
Proof of his Apostasy. Next I Will tell him (seeing he asks it) what Power we had
then, to call him, more than he has now, to call us. Every Religious Society
or Body, has a certain Power within it self over the particular Members that
make up, or pretend to be of, that Society or Body; by virtue of which, such
Society or Body may call to account, deal with, and (if they see cause) deny
any such Member as shall walk disorderly, contrary to the Rules, and against
the Safety or Honor of the Society. Now G. Keith, knows full well, that at the
time he mentions, in 1694. he pretended to be a Member of our Society, and
thrust himself amongst us, and upon us, which gave us Right to deal with him as
we did. But since the the time he was disowned by us, as one gone out from us,
we never pretended to fellowship with him, or to be Members of, or any way
related to, that Society he is of (if indeed he be of any.) And therefore he
has not the like ground to call us to his Meeting (which we were never of, but
against) as we then had to call him to our Meeting, which he then pretended,
and professed to be of.

He asks, p. 7. Why should Disputes viva voce, be more offensive to civil
Peace, than Disputes in Print. I believe (says he) they can give no Reason. I
believe I have given a Reason already, and that Demonstrative too. He might as
well ask, Why should the gathering together of many Hundreds, or thousands, of
Men* in a time of Faction and great Discontents, be more offensive to civil
Peace, than People's Reading Books, privately in their Houses or Closets? I
believe if he cannot, (because he will not) every body else can see the Reason.

From our not answering him, viva voce, he is willing to infer that we should
not answer him in Print neither. For he says, ib. If I be not worthy, nor fit
to be answered by word, nor am I to be answered by writ. It is not his
worthiness that Inclines us to Answer him at all; but the defense and clearing
of our Principles, and our selves, from his Calumnies and false Accusations. In
doing which we think not our selves obliged to follow his Direction, or to
alter our Course, as often as he is driven to alter his. When he was in
Pensilvania, where he was answered viva voce, (and indeed could not well be
answered otherwise, the only Press in those Parts being then at his command) he
voided Books, against his Opponents there, thick and threefold, (as the saying
is.) He complained not then of lack, either of Time to Write, or outward
Ability to Print, but conceived and brought forth Book upon Book, as fast, in a
manner, as the Press could deliver him. When he came first over hither, if any
one displeased him, his ordinary Threat was, I Will put thee in Print. And it was
not long before he fell to Printing here, and ran on for some time, as if he
would have driven down all before him. But having undertaken an Evil Cause, he
quickly found himself unable to maintain it, or defend himself; and that has
made him weary of Printing, because indeed he cannot answer what lies upon him
already in Print. And because he is not willing to own that, nor would be
thought to be driven out of the Press, he now pretends want of Time and Money
to Print with; and in his Advertisement gave that as his Reason why he declined
Printing, and appointed a Meeting to talk out his matter by word of Mouth. But
that that was but a false pretense, is evident; for it appears by his
Narrative, that he intended, after he had got such a Meeting, to fall to
Printing again: For he says, p. 24. If I wrong the Quotation, it will appear in
Print, for we intend that the Quotations shall be Printed. This shows his
design was not so much to shun Printing, as to shun Answering our former Books,
by shifting the Controversy into another Course. For as soon as that Meeting
of his was over, he (or some body for him) could find Time and Money too, to
publish a Narrative of what he pretends to have delivered then, with large
Additions to it, a Book of 12 d. price, and the biggest, I think that he has
Printed, since he came last to England, and yet has left our Books unanswered.
Whereas, had he been able to have answered at all to the purpose, and to have
cleared himself of what is therein charged upon him, a l^ss Book, and of less
Price, than the Narrative he has now published, might have done his business.
But it is evident he did not want Time, so much as he wanted Truth on his side;
And that he did not so much want outward Ability to Print, as inward Ability to
Defend himself, and the Cause he had undertaken. And indeed, as to his pretense
of want of outward Ability to Print, seeing he sold his own Books, one might
reasonably think, he should rather be enabled than disabled by that. But if it
be true, that he says in his Narrative, p. 50. That he has weakened his Estate
by Printing, it is the Effect of his own Folly and Wickedness, in Printing
false and frivolous matters: For he might probably have rather increased his
Estate by Printing, selling his Books as he has done, had he written matter
worth the Reading. But if want of Time and Money, for Writing and Printing, had
been the real Cause of his not Answering our Books, how comes he to be so flush
of Both now; that, since the publishing his Narrative, he could find both Time
to write, and Money to Print another pretty large Book against us, leaving my
two former Books yet unanswered? Has he sprung a Mine at Turners-Hall? Or have
some of his Auditors made a Gathering for him, to put him in stock, to go on
with his Work of fighting against God and his People?

To our Objection, That he did not exhibit to us a Copy of his Charge (or
Indictment) against us, he says, Nar. p 14. And for the Particulars I in^end to
prove against them, they were expressly mentioned in my Advertisement,
containing four Foundamental Doctrines of Christianity by them opposed. This is
not true, as will appear by consulting the Advertisement. In the first head of
it, relating to W. Penn, Nar. p 9. he says, I charge him to be guilty of false
Accusation and De^amation, and offer to prove him to be so; As also I offer to
prove him guilty out of his printed Books, (but names no Book) of most
Erroneous and Hurtful Principles, contrary to the Fundamental Doctrines of the
Christian Faith and Religion, etc. (but names no particular Principle) and also
that he is guilty of gross contradiction to himself. (But says not wherein.)

In his second Head, relating to me, He charges me to be guilty of false
Accusations, Perversions and Forgeries, contained in sundry defamatory Books
printed against him. (But shows not wherein.) As also of most Erroneous and
Hurtful Principles. (But names no particular Principle.)

In his third Head, relating to G. Whitehead, he offers to prove G. Whitehead,
out of some of his printed Books (but names no Book) guilty of most Erroneous
and Hurtful Principles, etc. but names no particular Principle. This is all in
general, both as to Books and Principles; no one Principle, nor any one Book,
particularly mentioned. Yet in his Narrative, he says, The Particulars I intend
to prove against them, were expressly mentioned in my printed Paper called An
Advertisement, containing four Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity by them
opposed. After he had dated, signed, and thereby closed his Advertisement, he
added an account of the Cause of his intimating such a Meeting. In that he
says, I appeal to all moderate Persons, whether this my Intimation of such a
Meeting, in the Defense of the Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, as the
necessity of Faith in Christ, as he outwardly suffered, etc. Justification and
Sanctification, by the Blood of Christ outwardly shed, The Resurrection of the
Body that dies, and Christ's coming without us, etc. All which I offer to prove
have been Opposed and Contradicted by Some of them, be not justifiable, etc. If
this be the passage he refers to, wherein he says the Particulars he inteded to
prove against them, were expressly mentioned, yet here is nothing but
Uncertainty still: For here he only offers to prove that those Fundamental
Doctrines have been Opposed and Contradicted by Some of them, not by them All.
He had summoned and charged Four Persons by Name, and a whole Meeting besides.
He offers to prove that certain Fundamental Doctrines had been opposed by Some
of them, but names not by which of them. How should they, or any of them, know
by this, which of them he intended to fix it on? How should they severally be
prepared to make Defense, when they did not know which of them in particular
should be charged, what in particular should be charged on each, and out of
what particular Books the Charge would be drawn? No considerate Person, I
suppose, could think, that Men in their right Wits, would appear on such a
Summons, or discourse on such uneven Terms. If the Trumpet give an uncertain
sound, who shall prepare himself to the Battle? If a Dispute had been intended,
no Man, that understands the Rules of Disputation, would have engaged on such
unequal, unfair, uncertain, blind terms. Even in Duelling, he that gives the
Challenge, does withal give notice what Weapon he intends to use, and of what
length; The Reason of which is obvious.

He says, Pref. p. 8. They think such a Meeting at Turners-Hall, is but in a
Corner, and not in the face of the Nation (and so I suppose will every one
think, in comparison with the Press.) But (adds he) they are like to find it
has been so much in the face of the Nation, that many in the Nation will
notice it. Like enough, but not without Printing. For the Advertisement that
gave the first public Notice of it, and was to beget the Expectation of it,
and to draw People to it, was Printed: (as when a New Play is to be acted,
printed Papers to give Notice of it, are spread abroad some time before.) And
now since it is over, the Narrative of it is Printed, without which little
Notice would have been taken of it. So that after all, he is fain to come to
Printing again, where we told him beforehand he must come, and where we knew
we should have a time to meet with him, and talk with him with less danger of
Disturbance, in a more sedate and quiet manner, and before more comp^tent
Judges, than the shouting Mobb at Turners-Hall. (For twice in one page, viz. p.
45. he says the A^ditory shouted, and no wonder, considering what an Auditory
it was, and how he acted the Terraesilius or Prevaricator (not to say
Merry-Andrew) to stir them ^p thereto. What a sort of Auditory he had got, how
sit for his purpose, and how disposed to his service some of them were, may be
gathered from the Account himself has given of them and their Behavior, in his
Narrative. For at the very opening of the Meeting, when the Paper giving some
Reasons for our not being there, was read, and G. Keith had said, I offer to
answer to every one of the Reasons, if you desire it; his easy Auditory
immediately replied, No, it is ne^dless, Nar. p. 13. When a Friend of ours
proposed a most just and reasonable thing, viz. That the Scriptures urged
against us by G. Keith, should be read, and introduced his Proposal in such
soft and modest terms, as, I beg a Favor, G. Keith had an Auditory (or rather
perhaps some ready prepared and disposed in his Auditory) which he makes to
answer, There is no need, go on. Nar. p. 27. When G. Keith had told a strange
and improbable story against three Persons whom he called Quakers, concerning
words which he said they spoke in the year 1678, (about 18 years ago) on
purpose to defame both them and us, and did not name them, and thereupon a
Friend of ours pressed earnestly on him to name them, he had an Auditor ready to
help him off, by saying, He has done enough, Nar. p. 39. Nay, when G. Keith had
read a passage out of a Book of G. Wh^tehead's, and a Friend of ours, desiring
to know when that Book was writ, did thus modestly say, If I might, I desire to
have liberty to speak; When was the date of the Book? He was immediately thus
taken up by the Auditors, If you will undertake their Cause, you may speak,
otherwise not. Nar. p. 15. Yet in p. 45. he had an Auditor at hand, who seeing
him at a loss, says, G. Keith, I see you are almost spent, I will answer for
you. From these few instances the indifferent Reader may see, how far from
being indifferent that Auditory was. And from the whole, I doubt not but it
will appear, That G. Keith had no Reason to appoint that Meeting, and summon us
to appear at it; That we had good Reason not to come there, and that he was
very unfair and unjust to traduce and defame us there, behind our Backs; when
he knew we did not shun him in the most open way of Trial, but provoked him to
it. It is very idle therefore in him to insinuate (as in his Pref. p. 7.) that
W. Penn has shown great Cowardice; and his Party charged, by not appearing at
all; Since as it is no sign of want of Courage, in a Man that uses the outward
Sword, to refuse Scuffling with his Antagonist in a Chamber, while he boldly
offers to meet him in the open Field: So it can never be judged, by considerate
Men, a token of Cowardice or Diffidence in us, to refuse to meet a Brawling
Adversary in a By-Place, (especially upon unfair terms) while we most readily
offer to meet and engage him in the most open, free, and clear way of deciding
Religious Controversies, the Press, where he first began, as himself says, Nar.
p. 38. What (says he) is the last Remedy against Oppression? Why Printing:
Therefore I began. And seeing G. Keith himself first opened the Press to this
Controversy, by ^alling upon us in Print, we needed not have given any other
Answer to him, than he formerly gave to his and our Opponent, Rob. Gordon, in
the like case, viz. Seeing thou came forth in Print against us, (though under
a Cover) what ground had thou to expect another way of Answering, than by
Print? See his Postscript to a Book called, The Nature of Christianity, in the
true Light, Asserted, p. 60. This was his Answer to Gordon, and this might have
been sufficient from us to him. But because we were willing to inform and
satisfy others, we published the foregoing Reasons, which I doubt not have
given, and will give satisfaction to all dis-interessed and impartial Persons.

Now as to the Errors or false Doctrines, which he has charged upon any of us,
and which he pretended to prove against us, at his irregular Meeting at
Turners-Hall, they being mostly such as not only he himself has formerly held,
maintained and defended, (while he was amongst us) but has since his departing
from us charged before in Print upon some of us, and his Charge has been
already Answered and Refuted in Print, particularly in a Book of mine published
the last year, called Truth Defended, which he has never yet Replied to,
(though he once made as if he would:) Although we might, with reason excuse our
selves, from giving any new Answer, until our former Answers, already given had
been enervated (at least replied to) by him, and only refer thereunto; yet for
the sake of others, whom he endeavors, be false Accusations, to prejudice and
harden against the holy Truth and Principles which we hold and profess: (Partly
also, because he has added, in his Narrative, some few passages to his former
Charge, to make i^ seem not wholly the same) I am content to follow him through
his Narrative also (which comprehends another Book of his, called Gross Errors
and Hypocrisy Detected) and hope to manifest both that we are sound in the
Faith in those very Particulars wherein he charges us to be unsound; and that
he is unjust, envious and wicked, in his falsely accusing us. Yet do I not
intend hereby to acquit or discharge him from answering in Print, what Books
already written lie at his door unanswered; but rather to engage him the more
to answer both the former and this also.

The Doctrines he sets down, ( Nar. p. 14.) as denied by us, or some of us, are
these four, 1. Faith in Christ, as be outwardly suffered at Jerusalem to our
Salvation. 2. Justification and Sanctification by the Blood of Christ outwardly
shed. 3. The Resurrection of the Body that dies. 4. Christ's coming without us,
in his glorified Body, to judge the Quick and the Dead.


The first Head of G. Keith's Charge, (viz. That we deny Faith in Christ, as he
outwardly suffered at Jerusalem to our Salvation) Considered.
The denial of this he charges directly on G. Whitehead; on W. Penn but by
consequence, for approving G. Whitehead's Books.

After he had made his Enumeration of Doctrines, he says, Now, if you please, I
shall proceed to my Proofs. Most of my Business is, to Read my Proofs out of
their Books. Who from these words would have expected any other, than that he
would have read some Sentence out of some Book of G. Whitehead's, wherein he
had denied Faith in Christ, as he outwardly suffered at Jerusalem; because he
said, Most of my business is, to read my Proofs out of their Books? But instead
of that, he attempts to prove it Logically: Thus he begins: That this is
opposed by them, I prove thus, says he, The Object of Faith is opposed by them,
and therefore the Faith it self must needs be opposed: I hope, says he, the
Consequence is clear enough, it needs no Proof. Let us see then how he proves
his Premise: The Object of Christian Faith, says he, is Christ, both God and
Man, and yet but one Christ. Here he has shifted the Terms of his Proposition
already. First he spoke of Faith in Christ, as he outwardly suffered at
Jerusalem. By the words [ outwardly suffered at Ierusalem] I take him to mean
(as is thereby generally understood) his suffering Death upon the Cross. Now he
says, The Object of Christian Faith is Christ, both God and Man. But did he
outwardly suffer at Jerusalem as God? Was the Godhead crucified and put to
Death? He will not say it sure. If then the Object of Christian Faith be
Christ, both God and Man, why did he before place it only in Christ, as he
outwardly suffered for us at Jerusalem? I only touch this transiently, and that
not to deliver my own sense, but to show how he blundered at the very entrance
of his Work, and that he is not an exact and clean Disputant. However, he goes
on thus, I offer to prove that G. Whitehead has denied Christ both to be God
and Man. (To the same purpose he spoke in his Gross Error, p. 14.) How! Denied
him both to be God and Man! What does he own him to be then, if no^ her God nor
Man? There have been some, who have denied Christ to be God, acknowledging him
to be Man; there have been others, who have denied Christ to be Man,
acknowledging him to be God. (Both Condemnable.) But who ever heard of any
before, that denied Christ both to be God and Man? Yet this he charges on G.
Whitehead. And first offers to prove that G. Whitehead, in a Book of his,
called The Light and Life of Christ within, has denied Christ to be God. It
were strange, one would think, that G. Whitehead should deny Christ to be God,
and yet, about the same time too, write a Book of above 20 sheets, to assert
and prove the Divinity of Christ, calling his Book, The Divinity of Christ, and
Unity of the Three that bear R^cord in Heaven, with the blessed End and Effects
of Christ's Appearance, coming in the Flesh, Suffering and Sacrifice for
Sinners, Confessed and Vindicated by his Followers, called Quakers. Which Book
G. Keith cannot pretend Ignorance of, for he picks somewhat out of it, (though,
as his manner is, perversely) in this very Narrative of his. The proof he now
offers against G. Whitehead, is out of a Book of his called The Light and Life
of Christ within, p. 47. in Answer to VV. Burnet, a Baptist Preacher, who
writing of Christ, said, As he was God, he was Co-Creator with the Father, and
so was before Abraham, and had glory with God before the world was, and in this
sense came down from Heaven. To which G. Whitehead replied, What Nonsense and
Vnscripture-like Language is this, to tell of God being Co-Creator with the
Father? Or that God had glory with God? Does not this imply two Gods, and that
God had a Father? Let the Reader judge. In these words G. Whitehead blamed not
the matter expressed, but the manner of expressing it: He did not deny Christ
to be God, nor that as God he was Creator, and before Abraham, etc. But he
excepted against the word Co-Creator, as unscripture-like Language, and
implying two Gods. For since [ Co] contracted from the Prepositive Particle [
Con] signifies ( Cum, or Simul) with, or together with, he that says God (or
Christ, as God) was Co-Creator, must intend he was Creator with himself, or
Creator with another. To say God was C^eator with, or together with, himself,
is that which G. Whitehead called Nonsense. To say God was Creator with, or
together with, Another, is to imply two Gods, two Creators, which is that G.
Whitehead called Vnscripture like Language. For as God is a pure, simple,
undivided Essence or Being, so the Language of Scripture concerning God, is,
that God is One, Gal. 3.20. Mark 12.29, 32. And although, in some respect this
One is said to be Three, 1 John 5.7. yet in this respect of Essence, Being, and
Godhead, those Three are there said to be One: Not only (as of the Three that
bear witness in Earth, verse. 8.) to agree in One, but to be One. And Christ
himself (with respect to his Godhead) says, I and my Father are One, John 10 30

G. Keith adds another Passage of G. Whitehead's, or rather the same Passage in
another place of the same Book, wherein he says, p. 15 G. Whitehead denies the
Divinity of Christ, and that he deceives the Nation and the Parliament, by
telling them, They own Christ to be both God and Man, and believe all that is
Recorded of him in the Holy Scripture. In this G. Whitehead has not deceived
either the Parliament, or the Nation, or any one in it. For certain it is, that
the People called Quakers do own Christ to be both God and Man, and do believe
all that is Recorded of him in the Holy Scriptures. But G. Keith did endeavor
then to deceive his Hearers, and since to deceive his Readers, by suggesting to
them that G. Whitehead, or any of the Quakers, did ever deny the Divinity of
Christ, or not own Christ to be both God and Man.

The other Passage which G. Keith now brings, Nar. p. 15. taken out of p. 24.
of G. Whitehead's forementioned Book called, The Light and Life of Christ
within, whereupon the Baptist's calling God the Word, Co-Creator with the
Father, G. Whitehead answered, To tell of the Word God, Co-Creator with the
Father, is all one as to tell of God being Co-Creator with God, if the Father
be God; and this is to make two Gods, two Creators, etc. For God, Co-Creator
with the Father, plainly implies two. This, as I noted, is one and the same
Passage in Sense, and almost in Words, with the former, and the same Answer
serves to his Cavil against both. It is plain, to any considerate and unbyassed
Reader, that G. Whitehead did not by these Words deny the Divinity of Christ,
or disown Christ to be God; but rather that he did own Christ to be G^d, and
both the Father and He to be one God, and one Creator, not two: And therefore
blamed the Baptist for using such Expressions [ God Co-Creator with the
Father,] as employed two Gods, two Creators. But that G. Whitehead did then (as
well as now) own Christ to be God, is plain from several passages in that very
Book (though that Book not treating so directly of that Subject, has not so
many Instances in it, as are in other Books of his.) In that very Page (47.)
out of which he takes his first Quotation against G. Whitehead upon John 17.5.
And now, O Father, glorify me with thine own self, with the Glory which I had
with thee before the World was; G. Whitehead says, Was not he the true Christ,
the Son of God, that so prayed unto the Father? And in the same Page (just
after the Words G. Keith carps at) upon the Baptist's saying, Which Word was
God, yet he was not a Savior as he was the Word or Creator of the World, etc.
G. Whitehead replies, How then does He say, I am God, a Savior, etc. And in
Page 48. upon the Baptist's saying, He was not a Savior, as the Root and
Creator of Man, but as he was to be the Offspring of Man, etc. G. Whitehead
Answered, Do but mark the Confusion and Darkness of this Man, who has denied
that God, the Word or Creator of Man, is a Savior; and Christ, as he was the
Root and Creator of Man, and as He was the Eternal Son of God, from the Days of
Eternity, he has denied to be a Savior, but as he was the Offspring of Man.
Do but Eye the tendency of this Doctrine; thus to deny the Son of God to be a
Savior; -- whereas it is through the Son of God, that Eternal Life is
received, John 3.16. And God's Love was manifest, in sending his only begotten
Son into the World; -- So here the Efficacy of the Son of God, and the Eternal
Word, is proved against the Baptist's false and unscripture like Distinction.
It was in the Year 1668. that this Book was Printed. In the Year 1669. G.
Whitehead writ another Book (which I mentioned before) called, The Divinity of
Christ, and Unity of the Three that bear Record in Heaven; with the blessed End
and Effects of Christ's Appearance, coming in the Flesh, Suffering and
Sacrifice for Sinners, Confess^d and Vindicated by his Followers, called
Qu^kers. In that Book, between the Epistle and the first Chapter, giving a
brief Account of what we own, touch^ng the Divinity and Godhead of Christ, he
says, That there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and
the Spirit, and that these Three are one both in Divinity, Divine Substance and
Essence; not three Gods, nor separate Beings. That they are called by several
Names in Scripture, -- yet they are Eternally One in Nature and Being; One
Infinite Wisdom, one Power, one Love, one Light and Life, etc. Then adds, We
never denied the Divinity of Christ, as most injuriously we have been accused
by some prejudiced Spirits, who prejudicially in their perverse Contests have
sought occasion against us; as chiefly because (when some of us were in Dispute
with some Presbyterians) we could not own their unscriptural Distinction and
Terms. -- The Father's begetting the Son, and the Spirit's being sent, we
witness to, and own. -- Yea, the Son of God is the brightness of his Glory, and
the express Image of his Substance. -- So the Manifestation of the Father, of
the Son, and Holy Spirit, we confess to, etc. -- And that Jesus Christ being in
the Form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, and yet as a Son,
was sent of the Father, etc. -- So that the Deity or Divinity of Christ, in his
Eternal, Infinite, Glorious State, we really confess and own. In the Book it
self, p. 18. He says, He ( Christ) was equal with God in Glory, before the
World was. Again, p. 19. It was never any Design, or Plot of ours, to endeavor
to prejudice the Minds of any against the Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost,
as falsely and blasphemously we are accused by this our prejudiced Opposer.
Again, p. 22. We never disowned the Deity of Christ, or Holy Ghost, as falsely
and injuriously is insinuated against us. Again, p. 26. Charging us with
designing to blast and overthrow the Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost; upon
which, Blasphemers, and Blasphemy, and damnable Speeches, are hideously cast
upon us, but most unjustly and falsely. For no such design ever had we, as
either to blast or overthrow the Deity of Christ, or Holy Spirit, we having
openly professed and declared the contrary, both in Words and Writings. Again
p. 32. That the Divine Essence, or Godhead, can be but one, and this in each of
the Three, we never denied. Again, p. 38. I have heard of some, beyond the Sea,
who were accused with denying the Divinity of Christ; but I know of none here,
that either deny the Divinity of Christ, or him to be of one Substance with the
Father. Again, p. 41. Christ being the Brightness of the Glory of God, and the
express Image of his Divine Substance, as also truly called the Son of his
Love, etc. Second Part of the same Book, p. 3. We never denied the Deity or
Divinity of either Father, Word, or Holy Ghost. Again, p. 39. His Opponent T.
Danson, having charged the Quakers with denying Christ to be God, G. Whitehead
Answers, This is an apparent slander cast upon us, as our Books and Writings do
show, that we never denied Christ to be God, or his Divinity, etc. Again, p.
54. As to Socinianism, as he calls it, we are neither discipled in it, nor
baptized into Socinus his Name, neither do we own him for our Author or Pattern
in those things which we believe and testify; nor yet do we own several
Principles, which I. O. relates, as from Socinus, and principally that of
Christ's being (God, but) not the most High God. It was never our Principle;
for though we do confess to his Condescension, Humility and Suffering in the Days
of his Flesh, wherein he appeared in the form of a Servant, being made in
Fashion as a Man: Yet his being in the Form of God, and being glorified with
the same Glory he had with the Father before the World began, and his being God
over all, blessed for ever; These things we professed and believed in the
beginning, and do the same still, it never being in our Hearts, in the least,
to oppose or desert them. Again, p. 58. As to a great part of his ( I. O's)
Book, wherein he goes about to prove the Divinity or Deity of Christ, etc. We
are unconcerned therein, having never denied Christ's Divinity. Here one would
think, were Instances enough, of G. Whitehead's (and ours) owning and
confessing Christ to be God, to make G. Keith blush for charging him with
denying it. But because I know G. Keith has too far, and too long, abandoned
Modesty and Virtue, to be easily drawn to blush, I will add some more, out of
another Book, written by G. Whitehead, and Printed the same Year 1669. called*
Christ ascended above the Clouds, etc. in Answer to one John Newman, a Baptist;
who having it seems, asserted that, The Word was in the beginning, but Christ
was in time, not till he had taken Nature upon him, and became in the likeness
of sinful Man, being born of the Virgin Mary, etc. G. Whitehead Answered, p.
12. This Assertion opposes the Deity and Divinity of Jesus Christ, and
contradicts the faithful Testimonies of the Holy Men of God in the Scriptures
of Truth. Again, p. 14. Though Jesus signifies a Savior, and Christ Anointed;
yet to co^sine those Names only to the Manhood, still agrees with the erroneous
Doctrine before, that Christ was not the Word from the beginning; whereas he
took upon him the Manhood in Time; in which, though we own him as the anointed of
God; yet he was also Gods anointed, as he was his only begotten and Delight
(and so the Son from his Eternal Being or Substance) before the Mountains and
Hills were settled. And in p. 15. he expressly calls that Opinion Heretical,
that denies the Divinity of Christ. Again, p. 16. To say Christ cannot dwell in
Man, does not only oppose his Spirituality, Deity and Omnipotency, bar, etc. --
And if He be perfect God, he can dwell in his People, as he has promised.
Again, p. 18. It still strictly limits, or ties up the Name Jesus Christ to a
Body of Flesh and Blood, and so cover^ly denies his Being, before he took on
him that visible Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, and so opposes his Divinity
as before. Again, p. 68. What a gross Error is it to affirm, that Christ was
not from the beginning (or that he was not the Word in the beginning) and what
a denial of his Divinity, like the old Heretics? Again, ib. Much more might be
said on the behalf of the Divinity of the Son of God, or Christ, who was the
Word in the beginning, and with the Father in his Glory before the World began.
In another Book also of G. Whitehead's, called, The Nature of Christianity,
etc. Printed in the Year 1671. (to which G. Keith himself writ a Postscript) in
the Epistle, p. 3. G. Whitehead speaking concerning the true Savior, or the
Man Christ Jesus, says, Whom we have frequently Confessed, both as to his
Divinity, and as to his taking upon him the Body, prepared for him to do the
Will of God in, according to the Scriptures of Truth; yea, both his outward and
inward Appearance, his suffering Nature and glorified State, and his Divinity;
in both we have always truly Believed and Confessed, even his Dignity,
Spiritual outgoing from of old, from Everlasting, as also his outward Birth,
etc. And in the Book, p. 36. G. Whitehead replies upon his Opponent, What is
this, but to deny the Divinity of Christ, etc.? Again, p. 40. That the Holy
Prophets, Apostles and Ministers both pointed and testified unto Jesus Christ,
both as Man born of the Virgin (or to his coming in the Flesh) and unto his
Divinity; and Manifestation in Spirit, this is owned. Again, p. 41. I perceive
he is ignorant of Christ, both as the Son of God, and as the Son of Man: For
according to the Spirit, he was the Son of God, etc. Again, p. 52. says he to
his Opponent R. Gordon, Thou having confessed, that his (Christ's) outgoings
were from Everlasting, have thereby granted to what I said, that the Son of God
and his Light are not under a Limitation as to Time and Place, especially if
thou will own his Divinity, or that he ever was the Son of God before he took a
Body in the Womb of the Virgin; but if thou do not own that the Son of God
was before then, than thou do not own his Divinity, nor him no more than a
Finite Creature.

I choose to confront G. Keith out of these Books, rather than others, because
these are some of the Books he has cited; and out of which he has pretended
to make good his Charges against us, and therefore he may not be supposed to
have been ignorant, that these Passages were in them. But how horribly unjust
and wicked he must be in charging G. Whitehead with denying the Divinity of
Christ, or that Christ is God, who has so fully and frequently asserted and
maintained his Divinity against others, and that at the same time wherein he is
charged to have denied it, I leave to the Reader's Judgment.

The next part of his Charge against G. Whitehead is, That he has denied Christ
to be Man, Nar. p. 16. For proof of which he cites that Book of G. Whitehead's
which I lately mentioned, called, The Divinity of Christ, etc. p. 18. (but the
Reader must take Notice, It is in the Second Part of that Book, for the Book is
by its Pages, divided into two parts.) The Words G. Keith cites first, are
these, If the Body and Soul of the Son of God were both Created, does not this
render him a Fourth Person, etc. There G. Keith breaks off with an etc. But it
follows in G. Whitehead's Book thus; For Creation was in Time, which
contradicts their Doctrine of three Distinct, Increated, Coeternal,
Co-Essential Persons in the Deity, seeing that which was Created was not so.
This shows the occasion of those Words, and that they we^^^ ad hominem, to show
his Opponent (T. Danson) the absurdity of his Assertions about the
Personalities of the Deity. But this Passage, though G. Keith mentioned it, to
make the greater noise and flourish, he leans not on: For without Commenting on
it, he says, But the stress I lay is in the Words following, which he gives
thus. But herein, whether does not his and their ignorance of the only begotten
of the Father plainly appear. (There he leaves out these Words [ And their
denial of Christ's Divinity] which he knew would make against him, and then goes
on thus) Where does the Scripture say, That his Soul was Created? For was not
he the brightness of the Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Divine
Substance? But supposing the Soul of Christ was (with the Body) created in
Time, etc. There G. Keith breaks off again with an etc. But in G. Whiteheads
Book it follows thus; I ask, if from Eternity he was a Person distinct from God
and his Holy Spirit, without either Soul or Body? And where does the Scripture
speak of any Person without either Soul or Body? Let Us have plain Scripture.
This further shows, that this whole Passage related to Danson's strange Notions
of the Personalities of the Deity, to show his Confusion therein, and also to
bring him back to the Scripture, which he, with the rest, (for there were
several other Priests concerned also at that time in the Controversy) had set
up for the only Rule in Religion, but would not keep to. Therefore did G.
Whitehead put it upon them, Where does the Scripture say? Let Us have plain
Scripture: But G. Keith perverts the whole Passage, and abuses G. Whitehead,
for he tells his Auditors, Here ye see, He will not own that Christ had a
Created Soul. Th. Danson, being a Presbyterian Minister, (says he) did plead,
That Christ as Man had a Created Soul. Nay hold there, Tho. Danson spoke of the
Son of God. And to those Terms, G. Whitehead answered, To this, I say, if the
Body and Soul of the Son of God were both Created, does not this render him a
fourth Person? For Creation was in time, which contradicts their Doctrine of
three Distinct, Increated, Coeternal, Co-Essential Persons in the Deity,
seeing that which was Created was not so. Plain it is from hence, that in this
whole Answer, G. Whitehead did not so much express his own Sense, as expose
Danson's, and the other Priests, their Confusion, and Contradiction to
themselves and one another. Therefore he asks Danson, If from Eternity, He (the
Son of God) was a Person distinct from God and his Holy Spirit, without either
Soul or Body? And where says he, does the Scripture speak of any Person without
either Soul or Body? And because you Priests contend so hotly, that the
Scripture is the only Rule of Faith and Life (for that was part of that
Controversy, p. 45, etc.) Let Us have plain Scripture? Where does the Scripture
say, that the Son of God, the only begotten of the Father, one of the Three
Distinct, Increated, Coeternal, Co-Essential Persons in the Deity (as ye call
him) that his Soul was Created? Thus G. Whitehead hampered his Adversaries, by
putting the Questions, which showed the a^surdity and inconsistency of their
Notions and Assertions; a way of dealing with G. Keith has sometimes used
toward an unfair Adversary himself. And though he says, such a way of
questioning plainly imp^rts a Denial, now that he writes against Truth, and the
Friends of it; yet when ^ormerly he wrote in Truth's Defense (a Book under that
Title, Printed in 1682. in Answer to his Countreyman John Alexander of Leith)
he told him, p. 59. I. Alexander ought to know, that to query a thing, will not
conclude that the Questionist does positively affirm or deny what is Queried.
But it is common to him to forget himself, as often as he has a Mind not to
remember. However, I think those Words (where does the Scripture say that his
Soul was Created?) which G. Keith would have taken notice of, and which he says
he lays the stress in, will not bear the stress he lays, if right notice (with
respect to the occasion, drift and manner of Speech) be taken of them. But that
G. Whitehead has fully and frequently owned the Holy Manhood of Christ, with
respect both to Soul and Body shall be showed, by more Instances than one. At
present let me show G. Keith what he has written concerning the Soul of
Christ, in his Way cast up, p. 104. And therefore, says he, let all the
Scriptures be searched, and it shall not be found that Christ became Man* and
took to himself the Soul of Man, at his Conception in the Womb of the Virgin
Mary; but only that he took Flesh, and was the Son of Mary, of David, and of
Abraham. And in p. 103. Yet before this, even from the beginning, he was the
Heavenly Man, and had his Soul and heavenly Flesh and Blood, etc. Here G. Keith
is positive, that Christ the heavenly Man, had his Soul from the beginning,
before he did partake of our Flesh and Blood by his outward Birth. And he is as
positive that Christ did not take to himself the Soul of Man, nay that he did
not become Man, at his Conception in the Womb of the Virgin Mary. How will he
escape now from falling into Appollinarius his Error, or contradicting himself
to escape it.

G. Keith brings another Passage out of another Book of G. VVhitehead's, in
order to prove that G. Whitehead has denied Christ to be Man. He brings it in
thus. Next I prove (says he, p. 16.) that G. Whitehead says, He (speaking of
Christ) has not the Body of a Man. See his Nature of Christianity, p. 29, 41.
This were an home Proof, if he could make it good. But, being conscious to
himself of the falseness of this Charge, and how easily it may be disproved out
of G. VVhitehead's Book, he staggers in his undertaking, and before he recites
G. VVhitehead's Words, makes his own excuse thus. If he has said otherwise in
any of his late Printed Books, I am glad of it. But let him retract these, for
these have done much mischief. Now, says he, when I said he was Orthodox, I
mean no^ as he was Heterodox: For there is a G. Whitehead Orthodox, and a G.
Whitehead not Orthodox. I did not know G. Whitehead not Orthodox till lately, I
do not say there are two Persons in G. Whitehead, he is but one and the same
Person (in this and some other things) Orthodox and not Orthodox. -- I own it,
that I have cited diverse Passages out of his later Books that are Orthodox to
prove him sound, etc. This plainly shows, that G. Keith knew G. VVhiteheads
Judgment to be otherwise than he has represented him. But is it not a most
horrible Wickedness, for one Man designedly and wilfully to represent another
Man's Judgment quite contrary to what he knows it to be? Now let us return to
G. Keith's Charge and Proof. His Charge is, that G. Whitehead says, He
(Christ) has not the Body of a Man. His Proof is from the Book last mentioned,
p. 29, 41. thus. Or do thou look for Christ, as the Son of Mary, to appear
outwardly in a bodily Existence to save thee, according to thy Words, p. 30.
If thou do, thou may look until thy Eyes drop out, before thou will see
such an Appearance of him. Is this a Proof that G. Whitehead says, Christ has
not the Body of a Man? I expected, when G. Keith said, I prove that G.
Whitehead says, He (Christ) has not the Body of a Man; he would have
pretended, at least, to have produced some place, wherein G. Whitehead had
expressed those very Words. But instead of that, he brings a place, that has
neither those Words, nor any thing like them. There is not in these Words of
G. VVhitehead's a Denial, either that Christ has a bodily Existence, or that
he will appear in that Bodily Existence: But from them may be gathered, that
that Appearance of Christ shall not be to save, but to judge the World at the
last Day, and that that Day was not so near at hand, as R. Gordon seemed to
expect or think! For the Words are, or do thou look for Christ, as the Son of
Mary to appear outwardly in a bodily Existence to save thee, according to thy
Words, p. 30. If thou do, thou may look until thy Eyes drop out, before
thou will see such an Appearance of him, to wit, only as the Son of Mary and to
save thee? The Word [ Such] may respect the End of his Appearance, as well as
the Manner of it. The End, viz. to save thee; as if Man should not be saved
until the Day of general Judgment. The manner, viz. As the Son of Mary, as if
Christ should come in no higher, powerful and more glorious Appearance than as
he was the Son of Mary. And as to the Time of it (if R. Gordon be dead) his
Eyes may be already dropped out, without seeing it, and yet the Appearance of
Christ in a bodily Existence to judge the World at the last Day, be yet to
come, and owned to be so. These things I mention, to show the feeble grounds G.
Keith has for his Cavils. But from the Book it self, out of which G. Keith
took these Words, it is manifest that G. Whitehead used these Words only to
manifest his Opponent ( Gordon's) Confusion and Contradiction, for they were
not treating then concerning the Existence or Body of Christ, but concerning
Justification, Redemption, Salvation by Christ, which R. Gordon (it seems) had
asserted was wrought and completed by the Sacrifice of Christ's Crucified Body
upon the Cross, and yet would put off Believers from being made Partakers of
that Salvation, till after their bodily Death, that they should be raised from
the Grave; yet granted, that it must be done by Christ's Appearance in
Believers, through Faith by his Spirit: Whereupon says G. Whitehead to him (
Nature of Christian. p. 29.) See thy manifest Contradiction, viz. A perfect
Justification and Redemption (of Sinners) without them, when no good is wrought
in them. But ( in Contradiction) now it must be done by Christ's Appearance in
Believers, through Faith by his Spirit. As also thou grantest, that his
appearing the second time is without Sin to Salvation: But when think thou,
that must be? Is it in this Life, or hereafter? Thou say, that after the
bodily Death, you, shall be raised out of the Grave, and made partakers of that
Salvation, p. 13. It Is strange the Salvation of Sinners, yea, of the whole
World, as thy Word is, should be completed at once, above 1600. Years since,
-- and yet to be so long after Death looked for, how long, is not known to thee;
or (do thou pretend to know, or think thou know, and thereupon) do thou
look for Christ, as the Son of Mary, to appear outwardly, in a bodily Existence
to save thee, according to thy Words, p. 30. If thou do, thou may look till
thy Eyes drop out, before Thou will see such an Appearance of him.

This says G. Keith, is but one place, that is, that Christ will not so appear:
But why, adds he, will he not so appear, but because he has no bodily Existence
without us. G. Whitehead said not so. That Is only G. Keith's wrong Inference.
And That, says he, p. 16. I come now to prove. So then what he has hitherto
said is no proof of it, for it seems he is but now coming to prove it. For
which purpose, Nar. p. 17. he cites another Passage of G. Whitehead's in p. 4^.
thus. And that he existeth outwardly, bodily, without us, at God's right Hand:
What Scripture Proof has he for these Words? And then what, and where, is
God's right Hand? Is it Visible, or Invisible? Within us, or without us only?
And is Christ the Savior, as an outward bodily Existence or Person without us,
distinct from God, and on that consideration to be worshipped as God, Yea or
Nay? And where does the Scripture say, he is outwardly and bodily glorified at
God's right Hand? Do these Terms express the Glory that he had with the Father
before the World began, in which he is now glorified? These last Words, from
Where does the Scripture say? Is, he says, the thing that Rivets. But if, by
Rivetting, he means Fastening a Proof upon G. Whitehead, that he denies Christ
to have a bodily Existence without us, G. Keith himself has cut off the Head of
his Rivet, and made it incapable to hold, by saying (which I showed before,
from his Answer to his Countryman, John Alexander) He ought to know, that to
Query a thing, will not conclude that the Questionist does positively affirm or
deny what is Queried. Truths Defense, p. 59. Especially, when it is only used
in a Socratical way of Disputing or Arguing against an Adversary (as it is used
here) and which he observes to be G. VVhitehead's way of Writing. And indeed
from the whole Answer (which fills near two Pages) out of which G. Keith has
cropped his Quotation, it appears that G. VVhitehead's drift was to show the
Absurdity and Inconsistency of his Opponent's Assertion; which was (as in p.
40.) that Christ's Apostles, and all his Ministers in all Ages -- pointed to
Jesus the Son of Mary, this Son of Man, with an Hosannah to this Son of David,
and to none before him, or to any ever since. These Words [ The Son of Mary,
this Son of Man, this Son of David, and to none before him] had a tendency to
deny the Divinity or Godhead of Christ, and to set up the Body, that was born
of the Virgin, for the only, whole, entire Christ and Savior. And therefore,
to this G. Whitehead answered, That the Holy Prophets, Apostles and Ministers,
has pointed and testified unto Jesus Christ, both as Man born of the Virgin
(or to his coming in the Flesh) and unto his Divinity, and Manifestation in
Spirit, this is owned. ^ut that they all cried Hosanna to the Son of David, is
a mistake: For it was the Multitudes that went before and that followed ( when
Christ rid to Jerusalem) that cried Hosannah to the Son of David, Mat. 21.9.
Adding, Many (...) cry Hosannah, who never knew his Salvation within, nor
believed in his Power; but rather spiritually crucify him. And the Scribes and
Pharisees could talk of Christ's being the Son of David, -- when they neither
truly believed nor owned him (that was the true Christ) either as the Root or
Offspring of David. But Christ asked these Pharisees and Scribes ( who said
Christ is the Son of David) this Question, What think ye of Christ? Whose Son
is he? They said unto him, The Son of David. He said unto them, How then does
David in Spirit call him Lord? -- If David then call him Lord, how is he his
Son, etc? Now says G. Whitehead there, Was not this the true Christ, whom
David in Spirit called Lord, before he took upon him Flesh, or came of his
Seed? There Is another Question put to his Opponent, who had asserted, That all
the Apostles and Ministers of Christ in all Ages, -- pointed to Jesus the Son
of Mary, this Son of Man, with an Hosannah to this Son of David, and to none
before him. Was not this the true Christ, whom David in Spirit called Lord,
says G. Whitehead? What then? Did this Question imply, that G. Whitehead
denied Christ according to the Flesh (or as he was born of Mary) to be the Son
or Offspring of David? Nothing less: For he says, he took upon him Flesh, and
came of David's Seed, and is owned, as pointed at, and testified unto by the
Holy Prophets, Apostles, etc. as Man born of the Virgin. No more does his
asking his Opponent* for it is not a general Question, but particular, to his
Opponent, grounded upon the particular Terms his Opponent had expressed himself
in) thus, Whereupon I ask him ^ seeing he would restrain all to the fleshly
Appearance, and make all the Apostles, etc. to have pointed to Jesus the Son of
Mary, this Son of Man, with an Hosannah to this Son of David, and to none
before him) If he has so considered him to be God the Savior, or the Son from
the Substance of the Father, as some of his Brethren have confessed the Son is?
And what Scripture Proof has he (who pretends so highly to Scripture, and
blames us though falsely; for not holding to it?) for these Words, He existeth
outwardly bodily without us, at God's right Hand? And where does the Scripture
say, He is outwardly and bodily glorified at God's right Hand? Do these Terms
express the Glory that he had with the Father before the World began, in which
he is now glorified? The Exception here is not against the thing, but the Terms
by which it is expressed. The Thing that Christ has a bodily Existence without
us, and is therein glorified, and that at God's right hand, is so far from
being denied, that it was never doubted. But that this should he expressed in
such Terms as the Holy Scripture does not afford, and which would limit Christ
to any certain place, or exclude him (by the Word outward) from being in his
Saints, is justly excepted against, as contrary both to the Nature of Christ,
and Scope of the Scriptures. And therefore G. Whitehead asks his Opponent,
what Scripture Proof has he? Where does the Scripture say so? And the more to
lay open his Opponents absurdity in this Case, goes on questioning him, in the
same place, p. 41. thus. And then, What and where is Gods right Hand? Is it
visible, or invisible? within us, or without us only? Now G. Keith might as
well from hence infer and charge G. Whitehead with denying that God has a
right Hand, as he does from the other Questions, That Christ has no bodily
Existence without us; and both a like absurdly and falsely. For he himself says
in another place also of his Book called, Truth's Defense, p. 165. When his
Opponent would have drawn a Conclusion, and inferred a Charge, from a Query,
What is proposed in the Query is not positively concluded one way or another,
as the Nature of a Query does plainly demonstrate. And blaming his then
Opponent, for urging Matters of Doctrine in unscriptural Terms, he says, in
Truth's Defense, p. 169. Why is it, that the Scriptures are so full and large
in their Testimony to the Doctrines and Principles of Religion, but to let us
understand, that all the Principles and Doctrines of the Christian Faith, which
God requires in common of all Christians, are expressly there Delivered and
Recorded? And therefore, says he, for my part, what I cannot find expressly
delivered in Scripture, I see no Reason why I should receive or believe it as
any common Article or Principle of the Christian Faith or Life: And p. 170. he
adds, Now if this were but received among those called Christians, that nothing
should be required by one sort from another, as an Article of Faith, or
Doctrine, or Principle of the Christian Religion in common to be believed, but
what is expressly delivered in the Scripture, in plain express Scripture Terms,
of how great an Advantage might it be to bring a true Reconcilement among them,
and beget true Christian Unity, Peace, Love and Concord? Yet G. Keith himself
(who but in the Year 1682. wrote thus) does now (which shows his inconsistency
with himself, and Injustice to G. Whitehead) charge G. Whitehead with denying
the thing it self, because he did but ask his Opponent for a Scripture Proof,
of a thing laid down not in Scripture Terms. So industrious is he now to seek
an Advantage (instead of furthering a Reconcilement among them called
Christians) to hinder any such Reconcilement, and cause a greater distance
between them; and instead of begetting true Christian Unity, Peace, Love and
Concord, to break and destroy (as much as in him lies) that Love and Peace that
has been, and (but for him, and such other Incendiaries) might be, and
increase among them. But though G. Whitehead did reject the Baptists
unscriptural Terms; yet that he owned the Manhood of Christ, as well as his
Divinity, may be seen in another Book also of his called, The Quakers Plainness
detecting Fallacy (a Book not written the other Day* but in 1674. two and twenty
Years ago) where p. 18. answering an Objection, that we own nothing but the
Divine Nature to be Christ, he answers, Where proves he these words to be ours?
Have we not plainly and often confessed also, that the Divine Nature or Word,
Clothed with the most holy Manhood, and as having taken Flesh of the Seed of
Abraham, was and is the Christ.

Before I pass to G. Keith's next Proof, I must here take notice of a Marginal
note which G. Keith, makes in his seventeenth p. relating to the Book he last
cited, of G. Whitehead's, called The Nature of Christianity. The Reader may
take notice, that in p. 15. when it was Objected to him, that the Book which he
then mentioned was written An^^e^tly, and that he had written in Vindication of
our Principles since; He there, to turn off the Objection, says, I do say, If
it were my last Word^, I know no^ that I over Read a line of this Book, till I
came last to England. But here, quoting another Book of G. Whitehead's, which
he could not pretend Ignorance of, in as much as he himself, was not only
concerned with G. Whitehead, in the controversy on which that Book was written,
but had also a part in the same Book against his Countryman Rob. Gordon, (whom
he, Principally, had undertaken to Answer in another Book, called The Light of
Truth Triumphing, Published but the Year before) Now to secure himself (if he
could) from the like Objection, he adds here, his Marginal note thus, Note,
There is an Additional Postscript by me G. Keith, put to this Book of G.
Whitehead, Nature of Christianity, the which Postscript I left in a Manuscript
at London, and with the Quakers: Printed with this of G. Whitehead. I
acknowledge (says he) my want of due Consideration, that I did not better
consider G. Whitehead's, words in that Book, having many Years ago Read it, but
too overly, and not having seen it since, for many Years, till of late. Does
this sound likely? Does it savor of Sincerity and plainness? Or does it not
rather look like a silly shifting Excuse, for his Condemning that now, which he
owned then, and yet pretending to be the same in Judgment, that he was then? He
goes on in his note thus, But I am sure, I did really then believe (as I now
do) that Christ as man, did outwardly and bodily exist without us; for proof of
which see my words in that Additional Postscript, p. 73. where at N. 11. I
blame R. Gordon, for saying, That the now present, Glorified Existence of that
Body (or man Christ) that suffered at Jerusalem, is denied by some Teachers
among us. And to be sure, he did then really believe (and had good cause so to
do) that G. Whitehead, and all the Quakers, did so believe as well as himself
(which he had no cause since to disbelieve) and therefore he did than Vindicate
them all, as well as himself, charging Gordon, with a Lie, and false
Accusation, for saying the contrary. And yet, whatever pretense he may make of
his Ignorance, what was in other Books of G. Whitehead's, written but a little
before, he may not be supposed Ignorant of what was in that Book (which he
himself had a share in) out of which, yet he now makes his greatest Cavil, on
this Head, against, G. Whitehead. He adds in his note, I confess I happened to
find Diverse Passages in G. Whitehead's, and other Quakers Books, that seemed to
me unsound; but in an excess of Charity, I did construe them to be better meant
than worded, and that they had rather unwarily slipped from them, than that
they were the expressions of their unsound mind, etc. How long it is since this
Accident befell him, that (as he words it) he happened to find those diverse
passages which seemed to him unsound, he does not tell. But the tenor of his
words import it to have been long ago: For (if ever he did) to be sure he has
not exceeded in Charity toward the Quakers, of late Years. But whenever he had
found any passages, either in G. Whitehead's, or other Quakers Books, that had
seemed to him unsound, had he been really sound himself, and soundly (though not
excessively) Charitable, he would have Charitably, and Friendly, in a private
manner, have opened such passages to the respective Authors of such Books, and
have understood from themselves, their Sense and Meaning therein, that thereby
he might have both informed and reformed their Minds and Judgments, in the
passages, if they had been really unsound; or they have rectified his mistaking
understanding, by manifesting to him the soundness, both of their minds and
words. And this Friendly Office, he might more easily and inoffensively have
undertaken, if (as he says) he construed those Passages, which to him seemed
unsound, to be better meant than worded, and that they had rather unwarily
slipped from them, than that they were the expressions of an unsound Mind. But
though he has not told us when, that excessive Charity of his began, yet he
pretty plainly intimates when it ended, and why, by saying, I construed those
passages, better meant than worded, -- until that of late, I had found them to
Justify the same, and the like unsound words, in my Adversaries in Pensilvania,
and to hate and excommunicate me for telling them of them. Ay, there is the Hing
of the business! their Excommunicating him, as he calls it (that is, their
declaring him to be gone out from them, and their Communion, and to be no
longer one of them) From that time forward, (and some time before) his excess
of Charity turned to an excess of Enmity, and then he saw the same things, and
Persons to be far worse than he saw them before, because he saw them with a far
worse Eye. But to go on to his Charge and Proofs.

The next Proof he brings, that G. Whitehead has denied the Existence of Christ
in a body without us, is out of a Book of G. Whitehead's, called Christ
ascended above the Clouds, Printed in 1669. in answer to Io. Newman, a Baptist.
The Quotation begins thus, p. 17. Io. Newman, his Opponent's words were from
Rev. 1.7. Those that pierced him in his Body of Flesh, shall see that Body
Visibly come again, p. 21, 22. G. Whitehead, answers, These are not the words
of Scripture, but a^^ed, although to add or diminish be forbidden under a
Penalty, Rev. 22.18, 19. Yet this Man's presumption leads him to incur that;
There G. Keith, breaks off with a dash, thus, -- thereby leaving out what
follows next, in G. Whitehead, which is thus, See also for answer to him, Rev.
1.8. and 13, 14.16. In none of which is Jesus Christ either called (or
represented as) a Body of Flesh, Blood, and Bones, visibly to come again. The
leaving out these words, was not fair in G. Keith, because they show upon what
ground G. Whitehead, opposed the Baptists, and what sort of Body it was they
disputed about, viz. a Body of Flesh, Blood, and Bones. Certain it is indeed,
that that Body which was pierced on the Cross, was a Body of Flesh, Blood, and
Bones. And the Baptists, from Rev. 1.7. said, Those that pierced him in his
Body of Flesh, shall see that Body visibly come again, not so much as
mentioning any change in it. G. Keith, thereupon, Nar. p. 17. says, Is there
any thing here offensive? Nothing (adds he) but what is the declared Opinion of
the Church of Rome, the Church of England, the Presbyterians, Independents,
Baptists, and mine all along. He had forgot it seems (though I lately put him in
mind of it) that in his Book called The way cast up (Printed 1677. long after
the Book he carps at) he said, That Body that was crucified on the Cross at
Jerusalem, and is now ascended and glorified in Heaven -- is no more a Body of
Flesh, Blood and Bones, but a pure, Ethereal, or Heavenly Body, p. 131. And
although (to show his own Confusion) he there says, That Body, notwithstanding
its being changed from being a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, to be no more a
Body of Flesh Blood and Bones, but a pure Ethereal, or Heavenly Body, re-mains
the same in substance, that it was on Earth, making the change (from being a
Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, to be no more a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones)
to be a change not in subs^^^ce, but in mode and manner only of its being: Yet
he had no reason to cavil with, or blame G. Whitehead, for opposing the
Baptists notion of a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, now in Heaven, since he
himself declares, it is no more a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, but a pure,
Ethereal Body, which the Baptists, I am confident never dreamt of, and which, I
suppose, none of the Churches or People, he has named, will agree with him in,
if he will now agree with himself. But he would have found less cause, or
color to quarrel with G. Whitehead, about that description of Christ, in Rev.
1. if he had considered what himself has writ, further upon that Subject, in
his said Way cast up, p. 141, 142. N. 6. Where treating of Christ the Heavenly
Man, he says, And as John, Rev. 1. describes him, he is a wonderfully great
Man, even that Son of Man, whom John saw, after his Ascension, in the midst of
the Golden Candlesticks, even he that lives and was dead, ver. 18. to show
that it was the Man Christ, and he had in his right Hand seven Stars, which are
expounded to be the Seven Angels or Pastors of the Seven Churches. Now mark.
This shows (says he) it is not his external Person, or outward Body that is
here described, for it is impossible to conceive, how he can hold a number of
Men, in the right Hand of his external Person. Therefore by his right Hand is
signified his Power, as he is the great Heavenly Man, which can well hold all
the Men that ever were in the World. So also in the same p. 142. N. 7. upon the
words of Christ, John. 1.51. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall
see Heaven Opened, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son
of Man; he says, This cannot be the external Person of Christ.) But if it was
not the external Person or outward Body (as he says) of Christ that John spoke
of, in Rev. 1. much less was it a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones; and least of
all does G. Whitehead's opposing the Baptists carnal notion of Christ's having
a Body now in Heaven, of Flesh Blood and Bones, and his being to come Visibly
again in that Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, deny Christ's existence in his
Glorified Body without us. G. Keith, says, Io. Newman, here only uses the word
Body, to his coming again, and G. Whitehead, finds fault with that. But in that
G. Keith, slips, for I. N. used not only the word Body, but the words [that
Body] to show he meant a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones. And it is well known,
that many of the Baptists (as well as others of other Professions) do hold the
Body of Christ now in Heaven, to be as really and materially, a Body of Flesh
Blood and Bones, as it was, when upon the Cross; which G. Whitehead might as
well find fault with then, as G. Keith, did afterward. He quarrels also with
G. Whitehead, for citing the words of Christ, John. 14.19. Yet a little while,
and the World sees me no more. Upon this, he carps at the Translation of that
Scripture, and says, It may be better Translated [ as yet] But I think it were
better for him to let the Translation alone as it is, which he cannot mend; for
though he has declared himself to be one in Opinion, with the Church of Rome,
the Church of England, the Presbyterians, Independents, and Baptists, Yet I
scarce think he will find any among them, to be one with him, in altering the
Translation of that Scripture, at least as he would alter it. Yet upon his
confident altering the Text from [ no more] to [ not as yet] he says, Does this
prove that Christ has no Body at all? This is very bad reasoning, says he. Ay
sure, so it is. But who reasoned so, besides himself? Can he see no difference
between Christ's not having a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, and having no Body
at all; he has a very bad sight then. When he formerly held, that the Body that
was Crucified on the Cross at Jerusalem, is no more a Body of Flesh, Blood and
Bones, did he urge that, to prove that Christ has no Body at all? If not, why
will he infer so upon another, without cause? He alleges that G. Whitehead
brings that Scripture for a Proof, that those that Pierced Christ in his Body,
shall not see that Body Visibly come again: And thereupon he cries out, Here is
a Proof that Christ was Evanished. But it must be again remembered, that that
Body which the Baptist there contended for, and which G. Whitehead opposed him
about, was a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones. And therefore does it not fall
unavoidably upon G. Keith, that herein he holds that Body only of Flesh, Blood
and Bones, which suffered death upon the Cross, to be the whole entire Christ;
seeing he infers, that if that Body (of Flesh, Blood and Bones) which suffered
death upon the Cross, be not now in Heaven, and to be seen come Visibly again,
a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, then Christ is evanished? But it appears from
G. Whitehead's following words, that he did not believe Christ was evanished,
but that he believed his existence in a Spiritual glorified Body, and that he
should so come again, and be seen of all, though not in a Body of Flesh, Blood
and Bones, or after a carnal manner. For he says (in the next words after,
John, 14.19.) But his second coming and appearance without Sin to Salvation, I
own, and witness; and that he is therein to be seen Spiritually in his Kingdom,
and Fathers Glory, (which is an Invisible Glory, not seen Carnally) Mark that.
Howbeit his appeaance shall be universally seen, both to the joy of the
Righteous, and universal Conviction, and Condemnation of the Wicked, who have
rejected his Light within, and his saving appearance thereby made manifest.
Yea, every Eye shall see him (both of good and bad) both those that have waited
for his second coming without Sin to Salvation; and they also which have
Pierced or Crucified him; which all those in general are chargeable with, (as
really as his Persecutors that Pierced him outwardly) who profess his name, and
yet Crucify to themselves his Life or Spiritual Appearance. He was Spiritually
Pierced and Crucified in Spiritual Sodom and Egypt, Rev 11.8. The same Jesus,
as he was seen ascend (when a Cloud received him out of their sight, who stood
gazing, Acts. 1.9, 10, 11.) it is said, shall so come in like manner, etc.
Which though every like manner is not the very same, nor all Clouds the same, yet
the same Jesus certainly comes, and in like manner, his coming being in the
Clouds.

This same Objecton G. Keith, had made against G, Whitehead, in his Gross
Error, p. 3. and again p. 6. In which latter place, reciting the foregoing
words of the Baptist, viz. That those that pierced Christ in his Body of Flesh,
shall see that Body visibly come again, and part of G. Whitehead's answer to
it, he taxes G. Whitehead, with having blamed the Baptist for useing the word
[Visibly] with respect to Christ's coming again, and yet that G. Whitehead, in
his late answer to some Queries, had used the word [Visibly] with respect to
Christ's Ascension. Upon which G. Keith, there says, Now I am sure there is the
same ground in Scripture for his Visible appearance and coming again, as there
is for his Visible ascending. But let me ask G. Keith, (as sure as he says he
is) whether he then considered the great and wonderful change, which himself
elsewhere has often said, was made in the Body of Christ, after it was taken
up into glory; and then, Whether there is the same ground, either in Scripture
or Reason, for the same manner of Visibility of his appearance and coming again
in his glorified Body, as was of his ascending before his Body was so
glorified. The Body of Christ in which he suffered, (being an outward Fleshly
substance) was at the time of his Ascension, as well as before, conspicuous and
visible to the outward carnal Eyes, of outward carnal Men. But will it be in
like manner Visible to outward carnal Eyes, when he shall come again, now that
it is so transcendently glorified, that it is become a pure, Heavenly,
Spiritual, Glorious Body? Is there, according to G. Keith's, Philosophy, no
difference, in point of visibility, and with respect to the Optics, and Organs
of sight, between a Body of Flesh not glorified, and the most glorious of
glorified Bodies? Is the one, with him, as perceptible by the Natural Eye, as
the other? If not: Why was he so inconsiderately bold to say, I am sure there
is the same ground in Scripture for his visible appearance and coming again, as
there is for his visible ascending? If he understand the same manner of
visibility in his coming again, as was in his ascending, he then makes no
difference in point of visibility between an unglorified and glorified Body. If
he understand not the same manner of visibility in each appearance, he does but
trifle, quibble, and play the sophister.

G. Keith cites two passages more, p. 18. out of the same Book of G. Whitehead,
(Christ ascended p. 24. and p. 69.) that in p. 24. he gives thus, First, the
Baptists words, By denying any Personal being of Christ, without all men, at
the right Hand of God, but only a fained Christ within, then remission of Sins
must die, and ^aith also, for want of the Object, Christ. This G. Keith says,
he looks on to be good Doctrine, though he cannot but know, that by a feigned*
Christ within, the Baptist meant that Light within, which G. Keith, confesses
^o be Divine. G. Whitehead's answer he gives thus, This manner of excluding
God's right Hand, and Christ to a limitation out of his People in a Personal
being (which are no Scripture Terms) still implies him to be a Personal God or
Christ, like the Anthropomorphite, and Muggletonians conceits of him: (This he
caviled also at in his Gross Error, p. 10.) to all which I answer; The word
Person, or Personal, with respect to God, or the Godhead, G. Keith, knows the
Quakers always excepted against, as unscriptural, and tending to beget or keep
up gross and carnal Conceits in People's minds, concerning God and Christ, as
if they were like Men, having the shape and appearance of Men, and so were
Circumscribed and Limited to place, as Men are. And that it was against such a
gross Notion as this, that G. Whitehead there contended, is manifest from his
answer it self. For he says, This manner of excluding God's right Hand, and
Christ to a limitation out of his People in a personal Being (which are no
Scripture Terms) still implies him to be a personal God, or Christ, like the
Anthropomorphites and Muggletonians conceits of him. The Anthropomorphites were
therefore so called, because they held God to have the shape of Man. Which
extravagant notion Muggleton resumed. And though G. Keith says, There is no
Church of England Man, Presbyterian, or Baptist, etc. That holds that notion,
That the Godhead has the shape of a Man: Yet he is too slight to make a
Voucher for all of those Communions, though his Et Cetera, had been left out.
Nay, he himself seems doubtful what to determine in that case for himself,
saying, What shape Christ's Body has now, that I leave, Nar. p. 18. However, it
is plain from G. Whitehead's Book, both there and elsewhere, that it was this
notion, and the asserting such a Personal existence of God and Christ, and in
unscriptural Terms, has tended to confirm that Notion, which G. Whitehead
opposed both here, in p. 24. and in that other place, p. 69. cited also by G.
Keith, where G. Whitehead, having exposed his Opponents, Self-cont^adictions
(as one while saying, Christ was remote from them, Christ does not dwell in any
Man, Christ in Person remote at the right Hand of God, etc. And yet otherwhiles
speaking of the Indwellings of Christ by his Word and Truth, being of the same
nature with him, and that Christ is setting forth himself to be the Vine, and
his People the Branches, and advises them, -- to abide in me, and I in you,
etc.) He makes this Animadversion thereupon, If the Indwelling of God and
Christ be such in his People, and the Saints in such near Union and Conjunction
with Christ, as the Branches with the Vine, and Members with the Body, then
it is false, and a lying Imagination, to Imagine either Christ, God, and his
right Hand so remote, as not to dwell in any Man, no, not in their own People;
[and these words Christ in Person, remo^e in his Body of Flesh, etc. And not in
any Man] are not Scripture, but added: What strange Conceits and Limitations
would J. Newman put upon the unlimitted God ( like the Old Here^ical Monks of
Egypt, called Anthropomorphites) contrary to his own confession. This shows it
was not Christ's Spiritual existence or being, in a Spiritual glorified Body
without us, That G. Whitehead opposed; but such a carnal Notion of a Personal
being or existence of Christ, at the right Hand of God, as confined both Christ
and God, to a remoteness from his People, and excluded them from being in his
People. And therefore G. Keith, abused G. Whitehead, in telling his Auditors,
that by these words of G. Whitehead, All Papists, Church of England Men,
Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists, who believe that the Man Christ has any
Bodily existence in Heaven, as he thinks, are Anthropomorphites and
Muggletonians: For there is a wide difference between holding that Christ has
any Bodily existence in Heaven, and that he has such a carnal Bodily existence
in Heaven, as excludes him out of his People, and confines and lim^s both him,
and God's right Hand, at which he is, to a remot^ness from them. Which gross
and carnal Notion, G, Keith, not many Years since, seemed sensible of the hurt
of, and writ against in his Book, called, Asreious Appeal, Printed at
Philadelphia, in 1692. (since he began to quarrel with the Quakers.) In which
he says, p. 11. We cannot approve of the too carnal Conceptions of many carnal
and ignorant Professors, that have too carnal Imaginations of Christ, and
confine him altogether to such a Remoteness, that they will not allow any
measure of him to dwell in Believers, plain contrary to the Scripture. And in
p. 24. he says to the New England Professors, How can ye Build on him, when ye
have no belief, that Christ is nearer unto you, than in some remote place
beyond the Skies? And yet now, in his Enmity against G. Whitehead, he charges
him with denying Christ, for but opposing those too carnal Conceptions, which
some carnal and ignorant Professors, in their too carnal Imaginations, had of
Christ, whereby they would limit him to a remoteness from his People. This
limiting Christ, by such a carnal Notion of a Bodily existence, as excludes him
out of his People, and confines him to a Remoteness from them, if it be not
now, was once an uncomfortable Doctrine to G. Keith, when he said, Surely it is
no less a Comfortable, than it is a true Doctrine, that we have the Man Jesus
Christ so near unto us, in virtue of his Divine Life and Soul, in his Divine
Seed and Body extended into us: And thus he is the incarnate Word, or Word made
Flesh, dwelling in our Flesh, etc. Way cast up, p. 133. And G. Keith, in his
answer to the Rector of Arrow, said, I put thee to prove, by any one place in
all the Scripture, that Christ has now any other Flesh or Body, but that which
is Spiritual, Rector Corrected, p. 24. and again, p. 54. As concerning the Body
of Christ, that was Crucified, was it not again raised up to be made a living
Body? And after he arose and ascended, was it not a Spiritual Body? Why then
(says G. Keith to the Rector) say thou, show a syllable, that intimates a
spiritual Body? Is not Christ's Body a spiritual Body, which he has now in the
Heavens? -- Show a Syllable, that Christ has any other Body, but that which is
spiri^ual. And p. 55 he says, What is that Body of Christ, mentioned by the
Apostle, Col. 2.17. which puts an end unto the outward Observation of Meats,
and Drinks, new Moons and Sabbath Days? Is that only the outward Body that was
Crucified? If thou say yea, then thou dividest Christ, whereas Christ is not
divided. And p. 44. he says, That there is no such a distance betwixt Christ,
that is gone into the Holiest, and his Saints upon Earth, as thou imaginest,
see but ver. 19, 20, 21, 22. of Heb. 10. And in p. 23. speaking of the Power
and Virtue of the Body of Christ that rose and ascended a spiritual and
glorious Body, he says, But this virtue is not any visible thing, nor is the
glorified Body of Christ visible Flesh; and therefore (says he to the Rector)
thou do grossly err, to say, as thou do, the Son of Man is visible Flesh:
For seeing the Body of Christ is glorified, and wholly spiritual (as the Body
of every true Believer shall be at the Resurrection) how can it be visible
Flesh? And (adds he) Christ, the second Adam is called in Scripture the
quickening Spirit, but not visible Flesh. Therefore (says he) in this (see how
he banters him) thou 'dost grossly err, and need Correction. None of these
Passages has ever yet been retracted by G. Keith (that I have seen or heard
of) and therefore he is the more to be blamed for blaming G. Whitehead for
asserting Christ's Body to be a glorified spiritual Body, not a gross, carnal
visible Body of Flesh, which he himself says it is not.

He has one Cavil more upon this Head against G. Whitehead, and a m^^r Cavil
it seems to be: He grounds it on a passage he takes out of a Book of G.
Whitehead's, called, The He goats Horn broken, written about 36 years ago, in
answer to two Books written by three Opposers, whereof one was named Io. Horn;
and G. Keith seems to fancy that this Book of G. Whitehead's had that Title, as
alluding to the Name of John Horn, and he took occasion from thence to make
himself and his Auditors some Sport about it, Nar. p. 19. But unless he had
be^ter ground to go upon than bare likeness in ^ound of words, he may be
mistaken for all that. For I could show him a Book, written some years before
that, by R. Hubberthorn, called The Horn of the He-goat broken, in Answer to a
Book published by one Tho. Winterton, betwixt which Name and Title there is not
the least likeness of sound. That which G. Keith objects to G. Whitehead here,
is, That he contradicts a passage in his Opponents Book, which G. Keith says,
if he understands any thing of true Divinity or Theology, is a sound Passage,
viz. That our Nature, Kind, or Being, as in us, not in Christ, is corrupt and
filthy in it self, yet Christ took upon him our Nature, not as it is filthy in
us by sin in it, etc. How sound this Passage is, I will not here dispute,
because I would not dilate Controversy to feed a carping Mind in a peevish
Adversary, neither will I presume to question G. Keith's understanding any
thing of true Divinity, lost I should be thought as ignorant as he is arrogant.
But yet I think it may be worthy of consideration, how far that Passage is
sound, which says, Our Nature, Kind, or Being is corrupt and filthy in it self,
(not only as in us, by sin in it, but in it self.) And how suitable it was for
Christ to take upon him a Nature that was corrupt and filthy in it self. That
Christ took on him the Nature of Man, (though it be not in Scripture expressed in
those terms, that I remember) may in a right sense (for the word Nature is
taken in diverse Acceptations) be admitted: The Scripture says, he took upon him
the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men, Phil. 2.7. And
that, Forasmuch as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same, Heb. 2.14. And in verse 16. it is said,
He took on him the Seed of Abraham: But the Margin expresses it (more agreeably
to the Greek, as G. Keith knows) thus, He takes not hold of Angels, but of the
Seed of Abraham he takes hold. Now I do not find by G. Whitehead's Answer,
that he denies that Christ took Man's Nature; but that he taxes his Opponents
with Confusion, in two respects^ one, for that they excepted against his former
wording of their Assertion, thus, That their Nature is restored in Christ; and
yet that their Nature is a filthy Nature, and Christ took upon him their
Nature. The other, that, to free themselves from the imputation of Confusion in
the former, they say, He might as well have taxed the Apostle with Confusion,
for saying, Men by Nature do the things contained in the Law, Romans 2.14. And
yet by Nature Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. In which two places, G. Keith, I
presume, will not deny the word Nature to be used very differently. Now to
this* G. Whitehead's Answer was, We may justly tax th^se Men with Confusion
indeed, but not the Apostle; for here they cannot discern between the sinful
Nature, and the pure Nature; for the Nature of Christ is pure, so that it is not
their Nature, for their Nature is filthy, and therefore it is not in Christ
(that is, as it is filthy.) Then he goes on to show their Confusion in the
other part; And their bringing that of Romans 2.14. and Ephesians. 2.3. together, to
prove their confusion, shows that they cannot discern between that Nature by
which Men do the things contained in the Law, and that Nature by which Men
break the Law, and are Children of wrath; but make as if it were all one. Now I
do not ^ind G. Keith is able to make any great advantage by his Cavil against
G. Whitehead. He says indeed, Our blessed Lord might well take on him our
Nature, and the Nature in us be sinful, and in him pure and holy. But will he
say, that that Nature which our Lord took on him was sinful (or corrupt and
filthy) in it self? Which he knows were Io. Horn's terms. But I observe he
takes occasion from hence to make Sport with G. Whitehead and W. Penn their
Philosophy, even so far as to ridicule Divine Inspiration: For he says, he has
often told G. Whitehead, that he and W. Penn will needs embrace false Notions in
Philosophy, they will needs seem to be Philosophers by Divine Inspiration, as
well as Ministers and Preachers by (...) Had not the Philosophy himself so much
dotes on, and glories in, been (as his own phrase was) a Ditch, and a foul
Ditch too, he would have been more cleanly in his Expression, and not have made
Divine Inspiration the Subject of his Frothy Flout. But it is high time for him
to tack about, and deny Divine Inspiration, if he aspire to Preferment in that
Church, against which he has formerly said so much for it.

Thus having answered all his Quotations against G. Whitehead concerning the
holy Manhood, or Divine Existence and spiritual Being of Christ in Heaven, as
he is the Heavenly Man, and showed that G. Whitehead has not denied it, I
shall give a few Instances out of G. Whitehead's Books (those especially which
G. Keith has picked his Cavils out of) to manifest his owning the Holy Manhood
or Bodily Existence of Christ in Heaven. In his Book called The Light and Life
of Christ within, p. 9. refuting the slander of his Opponent, he says, False it
is, That the Quakers Christ is not Gods Christ, or that they deny the Man
Christ, or the Christ that is in the Heavens. In his Book called Christ
ascended above the Clouds, p 16. when his Opponent had asserted that Christ
cannot dwell in Man; and given this as his Reason, For Christ is perfect Man,
as well as perfect God: He does not deny that Christ is perfect Man, as well as
perfect God, but denies the Consequence, that therefore Christ cannot dwell in
Man. Mind his Answer, which is this: To say Christ cannot dwell in Man, does
not only oppose his Spirituality, Deity and Omnipotency; but also is contrary
to the Apostles plain Testimonies of Christ's being in the Saints: And if he be
perfect God, he can dwell in his People as he has promised; and surely his
being perfect Man does not put a Limitation upon him, as a Let or Hinderance to
disable him from being in his People; whilst he who was Christ, as come in the
Flesh, was also truly Jesus Christ within, in his spiritual Appearance; and we
do not confine him under this or that particular Name. Again, p. 17. I grant
that Christ arose with the same Body that was crucifi^d and put to Death, and
that he ascended into glory, even the same glory which he had with the Father
before the World begun. Many more Instances might be added* But the Reader may
take notice, that in my last Book called Truth Defended, (written about a year
ago, in Answer to two Books of G. Keith's, and which he has not yet replied
to) I gave a dozen Instances out of those Books which G. Keith has carped at,
to show that G. Whitehead did own the Manhood of Christ; one of which (seeing
he has not taken notice of them) I may repeat here, referring the Reader to p.
161. of that Book of mine for the rest. That which I now repeat, is out of a
Book called The Christian Quaker, and his Divine Testimony, Vindicated, Part 2.
p. 97. where G. Whitehead says, To prevent these Men's scruples, concerning our
owning the Man Christ, or the Son of Man in glory, I tell them seriously, That
I do confess both to his miraculous Conception, by the Power of the holy Spirit
over-shadowing the Virgin Mary; and to his being born of her, according to the
Flesh, and so that he took upon him a real Body (and not a fantastical) and
that he was real Man, come of the Seed of Abraham; and that he in the days of
his Flesh preached Righteousness, ^rought Miracles, was Crucifi^d and put to
Death by wicked hands; that he was buried, and rose again the third Day,
according to the Scriptures; and after he arose he appeared diversely, or in
diverse forms and manners; he really appeared to many Brethren, 1 Cor. 15. and
afterward ascended into Glory; being translated according to the Wisdom and
Power of the Heavenly Father, and is glorified with the same glory which he had
with the Father before the World began, etc. Is it not strange, Reader, that G.
Keith should have the face to charge G. Whitehead with denying the Manhood of
Christ, who has so often and so plainly confessed to it? What else is this but
to pin a wrong Belief upon a Man, to make him seem erroneous, whether he will
or no? But this is worst of all in G. Keith, who has so often taken upon him
to defend our Principles and Us against Opposers, in his former Books; And even
but lately, in his Serious Appeal, printed in America, 1692. in Answer to
Cotton Mather of New England, having justified G. Whitehead and W. Penn, in
their Answer to Hicks and Faldo, says, p. 6. I do here solemnly charge Cotton
Mather, to give us but one single Instance of any One Fundamental Article of
Christian Faith denied by us, as a People, or by a^y One of our Writers or
Preachers, generally owned and approved by us. And in p. 7. he adds, According
to the best knowledge I have of the People called Quakers, and these most
generally owned by them, as Preachers and Publishers of their Faith, of
unquestioned Esteem amongst them, and worthy of double Honor, as many such
there are, I know none that are guilty of any one of such Heresies and
Blasphemies as he accuses them. -- And I think (says he) I should know, and do
know these called Quakers, and their Principles, far better than C. M. or any
or all his Brethren, having been conversant with them in Public Meetings, as
well as in private Discourses, with the most noted and esteemed among them, for
about 28 years past, and that in many places of the World in Europe, and for
these diverse years in America. This more generally. But with respect more
particularly to our owning the Man Christ, hear what he said in the Appendix to
his Book of Immediate Revelation, 2d Edit. p. 133. And here (says he) I give
the Reader an Advertisement, that although the Worlds Teachers and Professors
of Christ in the Letter, accuse us as Deniers of Christ, at least as Man, and
of the Benefits and Blessings we have by him; yet that the Doctrine and
Principles of the People called Quakers, as well as the People, do indeed more
acknowledge the Man Christ Jesus, and do more impute all our Blessings and
Mercies that are given us of God, as conveyed unto us through him, unto the Man
Jesus, than any of them all. And he gives the Reason too. Inasmuch, says he, as
we do believe and acknowledge that a measure of the same Life and Spirit of the
Man Jesus, which dwelt in him in its Fullness, and had its Center in him which
then came in the Flesh, etc. is communicated unto us, and does extend it self
into our very Hearts and Souls, and whole inward Man; so that the Man Jesus,
whom Simeon embraced with his Arms, according to the Flesh, is, according to
the Spirit, our Light, and Life, and Glory. And (in p. 246.) thus I hope it may
appear, how much more we own Christ Jesus, not only as God, but as Man, and
that both inwardly and outwardly; for through the Measure of the Life of Jesus
Christ, as Man made manifest in us, we have immediate Fellowship and Union with
the Man Christ Jesus also without us, who is ascended into the Heavens. He has
done, he says, as to the Object of Faith, at least at present; and so have I.
Wherein I observe he charges not VV. Penn at all directly, nor otherwise than
as having owned those Books of G. VVhitehead's, out of which G. Keith pretends
to prove his Charge. But before I follow him to his next Head. I would Note to
the Reader, that all he has said, or can say, against G. Whitehead or W. Penn,
concerning their denying Christ, the Object of Faith, either as God or Man, he
himself has plainly and fully overthrown, by a Story he tells in p. 38. of his
Narrative, where he says, that in the Year* 1678. three Persons (whom he calls
Quakers, but will not Name) did blame him for saying, it was lawful to pray to
Jesus Christ Crucified, and dared him (he says) to give an instance of one
English Quaker that he ever heard pray to Christ. Whereupon (says he) W. Penn
said, I am an English Man, and a Quaker, and I own I have often prayed to Christ
Jesus, even him that was Crucified. And he adds, that G. Whitehead to decide
the Matter, took the Bible, and read, 1 Cor. 1.2. To all that call upon the
Lord Jesus Christ, both their Lord and ours. This, it seems G. Whitehead did to
prove the lawfulness of praying to Christ Jesus, even him that was crucified.
And this, (whether the Story in all its Circumstances be true or no) proves
beyond gainsaying, against G. Keith, that G. Whitehead and VV. Penn were then
sound in the Faith, and of a sound Judgment concerning the Object of Faith,
Christ Jesus, both as he was God and as he was Man. And that is enough to show,
both that the Charge itself, of their denying Christ, the Object of Faith, is
false; and that the Quotations G. Keith gives for Proofs thereof, out of Books
of theirs (written mostly about that time, or not long before) are perverted
and wrested by him to a Sense quite contrary to their Judgments, who writ them.
And therefore ought not by a considerate and impartial Reader, to be regarded,
or received against them.

He now comes to that which he calls the Act of Faith, or the Virtue of Faith,
which he would have People believe has been denied, or contradicted by VV.
Penn, and for Proof refers ( Nar. p. 19.) to a Book of VV. Penn's, called,
Quakerism a new Nickname for old Christianity, written in 1672. in Answer to
John Faldo, whom G. Keith himself, within these four Years, called, A most
partial and envious Adversary (serious Appeal, p. 60.) and mentioned with
Approbation W* Penn's Answers to him, and in his Book, called, The Christian
Faith, etc. p. 6. refers his Reader thereto for satisfaction. The Words he now
carps at, he takes out of p. 12. of VV. Penn's said Book, where having set down
Faldo's Charge, that Christianity was introduced by Preaching the promised
Messiah, and pointing at his humane Person; but Quakerism by Preaching a Light
within; G. Keith first tells us what he would have said, if he had this to
Answer, viz. Any Quakerism (says he) I know of, that I learned, was introduced
into my Heart both by believing in Christ without, and in Christ within, at
once, and by one Faith. Here he makes a Transition from Preaching to Believing,
and from a General, to a Particular. I. Faldo shows how (in his Sense)
Christianity and Quakerism, so called (which, though one, he sets in
Opposition) came into the World; namely, both by Preaching: But that, by
Preaching the Promised Messiah, and pointing at his humane Person; this, by
Preaching a Light within. If it be true, which G. Keith says, that what he
knew, or had learnt of Quakerism, was introduced into his Heart by Believing in
Christ without, and in Christ within at once, and by one Faith: Yet certainly
he has formerly delivered himself much otherwise. And therefore, that he would
have given that Answer which he now does, had he been then to Answer Faldo, is
very unlikely, seeing in a Book of his, called, The Vnivers^l free Grace of the
Gospel asserted, (Printed but the Year before, viz. in 1671.) he says, This is
the true and only Method which should be used by Preachers, for the bringing
People into the Faith and acknowledgment of the Christian Religion, First, to
inform them of this Universal Principle, what it is, and turn them toward it,
that they may observe its Operation in them, as it appears against the Lusts
of this World, and for Righteousness and Temperance: And so as wise Builders,
to lay this true Foundation in its Proper place; and as wise Husbandmen and
Planters to place this Divine Seed, where it ought to be, in order to its
growth, that it may spring up in them, and the Life, Power and Virtue of God in
it may be felt; And this will naturally bring People to own the Scriptures,
etc. and to own Christ in the Flesh, his miraculous Birth, his Doctrine,
Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, etc. p. 92. And thus,
(says he again, p 93.) Men should be First turned toward this inward
Principle, Light, Word and Seed of the Kingdom, which being in them, and they
coming to feel it there, they may the more readily be persuaded to own and
believe it. And as they come so to join to it, that it springs up in them in
the Light and Glory thereof, they will see and feel the Scripture, and the
things therein declared, to be of God, etc. -- And this is good Method and
Order in the preaching of the Gospel. So that it is evident, says he, -- that
we have the Best and Only True Method in in our Words and Writings, First to
turn People to the Light, that they may believe it, -- and then to direct them
to, and inform them of the Scriptures, and things therein declared; which they
cannot receive, believe, or understand, but in the Divine Light. And in his
Book called The Way to the City of God, (written in the year 1669, though not
printed till 1678) p. 3. speaking of Christ's coming both Outwardly and
Inwardly, he says, The knowledge of this Inward coming is that which is the
More Needful, and in the First place, as being that by which the true and
comfortable use of his Outward Coming, is Alone sufficiently understood. And in
p. 154. having said, That this is the Only True and effectual way of knowing
the Use and Work of his Coming, and Sufferings, and Death, in the Outward, by
turning and having our Minds turned inward unto himself near and in our hearts,
in the holy seed, to know by an inward Feeling and good Experience, his Doings
and Sufferings in us, by being made conformable thereunto. He adds, p. 156. And
therefore, This is the True Method and Order, which we have found greatly
bl^ssed of God, which the Lord has taught us to hold forth unto People,
whereby they attain unto Holiness, to a being made conformable unto the holy
Life of Jesus Christ, and come to know the true and great End and Use of his
outward Coming, viz. In the First place, to point and turn their Minds unto the
Light of Jesus Christ, who has enlightened them and every one, and has sown a
Seed of his Light, Life and Spirit, in every one, unto which Seed they should
give the most inward of their Hearts. The Reader may easily see the difference
between G. Keith then, and G. Keith now. Now he says Quakerism was introduced
into his heart, by believing in Christ without, and in Christ within, at once,
and by one Faith. But then he told us, The True and Only Method, yea, not only
the best, but the only true Method of Preaching, for the bringing People into
the Faith and acknowledgment of the Christian Religion, is First (which word he
repeats over and over, again and again) and in the First place to inform them
of this Universal Principle (the Light within) so that they may believe it; and
not only so, but may also observe its operation in them. This he then made the
Chief thing, the First thing, the First step, (the Introduction) in the right,
the best, the true, the only true Method and Order of Preaching the Gospel. And
then, viz. after this inward Principle, this Light within, is preached,
received, believed, and its operation within observed, than to direct them to,
and inform them of the Scriptures, and things therein declared, which, said he,
they cannot receive, believe, or understand, but in the Divine Light. So that
whatever he may now pretend he would have answered to Faldo's Charge, (as he
call* it) if he would have answered according to what he has formerly writ, he
must have acknowledged that Quakerism (as it is called) was introduced by
Preaching the Light of Christ within, though not in opposition to Christ's
Appearance without, in that Body of Flesh wherein he suffered; which W. Penn
took particular care to express.

Now let us again set down Faldo's Exception, and W. Penn's Answer to it, so
far at least, as G. Keith cites it. I. Faldo said, Christanity was introduced
by preaching the promised Messiah, and pointing at his Humane Person; but
Quakerism, by preaching a Light within. To this, said VV. Penn, I answer, That
this is nothing injurious to the Quakers at all, but highly on their side; for
had they preached a Christ now coming in the Flesh, they had denied his True,
and only Great Visible Appearance at Jerusalem, which all true Quakers own (let
that be marked by the way) since then they believe that appearance, and
therefore need not Preach what is not to be again; and that the whole Christian
World besides, have so long and lazily depended on it, without their Thirsting
after his Inward Holy Appearance in the Conscience, etc. There G. Keith stops,
and having made a false and envious Comment upon it, p. 20, he says, But let me
again read out the entire paragraph, yet reads no more but these few words
(being the imperfect part of a sentence he read before) Since then they believe
that Appearance, but therefore need not Preach what is not to be again: and
there stops, saying, There it clinches. But with his leave, or without, I shall
Transcribe more of W. Penn's Answer, as what, I think conduces much to the
opening of his meaning in this; for after he has in many particulars, set
forth the Effects and Benefit of Christ's Inward, Holy Appearance in the
Conscience; he adds, Since he has been so much talked of, and depended on, as
to his then visible manifestation of himself, and so little, if at all, desired
after, as to his spiritual and invisible coming into the hearts of Men, to
finish Transgression, and bring in Everlasting Righteousness; therefore God
raised us up, and we are now gone forth into the World, to declare, That he is
spiritually manifested, as then fully in that Body, so now measurably in the
Conscience of all People, a Divine Light, reproving every unfruitful Work of
Darkness: So that here is the Mischief, says he, the Malice and Ignorance of
our Enemies do us in this World, that because we speak so much of, and preach
up and write for Christ's Inward and Spiritual Appearance, as a Light to
Mankind, therefore they conclude with a mighty confidence, that we deny his
outward Coming, Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, and the Benefits
thereof: O Darkness it self! We have our Witness with the Lord of Heaven and
Earth, that we own him to be the Savior General of the whole World, as to that
Appearance, and that he obtained precious Gifts for Men; but we say, (and our
Adversaries have not wherewith reasonably to unsay it) that First, the Divine
Light, Life, or Power that shined through that blessed Manhood, was excellently
the Savior, and the Manhood but Instrumentally -- And Secondly No Man or Woman
in the World is savingly benefited by his then appearing as a Savior, etc* but
as every such individual Person comes to experience his Internal manifestation,
to convince, condemn, wound, heal, break, bind up, slay, make alive, in the
Ne^ness of the Spirit. This is the state of Right Redemption and Salvation, and
thus is he particularly a Savior, and every such one is greatly benefited by
him, as he was, in that former Appearance, the general Savior of Mankind. Now
mind how he concludes, Behold then, O ye that are Impartial! how unworthily he
has injured us, to make People believe that we testify to Christ's Inward
Appearance, in Opposition to, and denial of his Outward; which is far from our
hearts, so much as to conceive. The like may well be said concerning G. Keith,
B^hold, O ye that are Impartial! how unworthily he has injured W. Penn, to
endeavor to make People believe that he would have Christ's Birth, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, etc. thrown over the Shoul^er (as hi^ Phrase is) given
up, and buried in Oblivion from Posterity, which is the wicked Comment he makes
upon, and false Consequence he draws from W. Penn's words, though far from W.
Penn's heart, so much as to conceive; and indeed far from his Practice too: For
it is well known (and G. Keith himself cannot be ignorant) that W. Penn (as
well as other Ministers amongst the Quakers) has many times in Preaching
commemorated the miraculous Birth, Holy Life, admirable Miracles, and most
heavenly Doctrines of the Man Christ Jesus, while he was on Earth, and
pathetically set forth his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, with
the blessed Effects, and great and manifold Benefits that arise and accrue
therefrom, unto all them that rightly receive him, believe in him, and obey
him. So that had W. Penn's Words been ambigu^us, and liable, without wresting,
to such a construction: Yet since his Known Practice explained his meaning to
be altogether contrary to what G. Keith would fasten on him, it was most
injuriously and unworthily done of G. Keith, to suggest so false and so base a
thing. But neither will W. Penn's Words rightly taken, bear or admit it. For it
must be considered, that as I. Faldo's Objection against Quakerism (a^ he
called it) lay in the different way or manner of introducing Christianity of
old, and Quakerism of later years: So likewise must W. Penn's Answer thereunto
be understood to relate to the way or manner of introducing each. Now touching
the Introduction of Christianity, Faldo said it was by Preaching the promised
Messiah, and pointing at his humane Person. This related to the very time
wherein he came, or when he was but newly come, and it was the main
Controversy of that time, and that whereon the Mind^ of Men did hang in
suspense, Whether he who was then come, was indeed the Messiah that was
promised; and therefore it was more especially needful at the first
Introduction of Christianity, to assert and demonstrate that he who was then
come, and did suffer on the Cross, was indeed the promis^d Messiah. But it is
no prej^dice at all to Quakerism (so called) or to the Quakers, that, when the
Belief of this had generally obtained, and was held throughout that part of the
World which is called Christian, they were raised up, and brought forth with a
Testimony, not so immediately and principally to the Outward Appearance of
Christ (the promised M^ssias) in that Body of Flesh, at Jerusalem, ( the Belief
whereof was still generally retained) as to his inward and spiritual Appearance
(and that too as the promised Messiah) by the inshining of his Divine Light in
the Hearts of Men and Women, the belief and knowledge of which was well nigh
lost in the World For it was as suitable and fit that Quakerism should be
introduced (or rather, that Christianity) Nick named Quakerism, should be
re-introduced) into the World, by Preaching up that inward Appearance of
Christ; which was to give it a Re-introduction, as Christiani^y was at the
first introduced by Preaching up that outward Appearance of Christ, which was
then to give it its first Introduction.

Upon this Consideration was W. Penn's Answer grounded: For Faldo endeavoring
to unchristian Quakerism, because it was not introduced by Preaching the same
Appearance of Christ, by which he said Christianity was introduced at first. To
this I Answer (said W. Penn) that this is nothing injurious to the Quakers at
all, but highly on their side: For had they preached a Christ now coming in the
Flesh (or then newly come, which was done at the first Introduction of
Christianity) they had denied his true and only great visible Appearance at
Jerusalem, which all true Quakers own. They ha^ not Christ to Preach as now
coming, or newly come, in the Flesh, as the first Promulgators of the Gospel
Dispensation had: But they had Christ to preach as now come, and coming in
Spirit, by his Divine Light in the Hearts of People, which there was no need of
his coming again in the Flesh, to re-introduce. Therefore said W. Penn since
they (the Quakers) believe that Appearance (of Christ in the Flesh at
Jerusalem) and the whole Christian World not only believe it, but depend
(though not rightly) on it, and therefore they need not preach what is not to
be again (that is, they need not Preach that with respect to the Asserting,
Evincing, Proving, Demonstra^ing, or Confirming the Doctrine or Message, which
they bring, of the inward or spiritual Appearance of Christ. Not that it is not
needful, that the Doctrine of Christ's Incarnation, Birth, Life, Sufferings,
Death, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. should be still preached (which is the
unjust and malicious Inference, G. Keith would draw from W. Penn's Words) But
that as it was not the End of the Quakers being raised up as a People, that
they should only inform the Christian World, that Christ, the promised Messiah,
was come, and had suffered, in that Body at Jerusalem (of which the Christian
World (so called) has through all Ages since, had at least an historical
Knowledge and Belief:) So since that was so generally believed, and was not to
be transacted over again, in order to introduce his spiritual Appearance, there
was no need on that Account (that is, for the asserting, or proving his
spiritual Appearance) to preach again his outward Appearance (which was
believed already) until his inward Appearance was preached, received, believed
in and subjected to; and then (which according to G. Keith himself, is the best
and only true Method) to direct them to, and inform them of the Scriptures, and
the things therein declared, which he said well, they cannot receive, believe,
or understand (aright) but in the Divine Light. And this, he says, will
naturally bring People to own the Scriptures, and things therein contained, to
own Moses and the Prophets, -- and to own Christ in the Flesh, his Miraculous
Birth, his Doctrine, Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Ascension,
together with the wonderful End and Design of God therein, etc. Universal
Grace, p. 92, 93. Besides G. Keith might have read, p. 5. of W. Penn's
Quakerism a new Nickname, etc. that W. Penn says, The outward History of
Christ's exceeding Love to Mankind, deserves all humble and reverent Credit, as
a Godly Tradition, and it should for ever bind Men to receive, and fear, and
worship him. This sufficiently shows VV. Penn was not for having the History of
Christ's outward Appearance in the Flesh, and what he did and suffered therein
for Mankind, thrown away, and buried in Oblivion from Posterity, but that it
should be preached, and kept in remembrance through all Ages, that it might
bind Men for ever to receive, and fear, and worship him. So that G. Keith is
doubly unjust, not only in perverting VV. Penn's Words, but inferring that VV.
Penn would have Christ's outward Coming, Death, etc. thrown over the Shoulder,
given up and buried in Oblivion, when as not only VV. Penn's Words last cited
imply the contrary, but even upon G. Keith's own Principle just before recited,
the Preaching the inward Appearance of Christ (which he also says, according to
the only true Method, should be first preached) will naturally bring People to
own Christ in the Flesh, and the things declared of him in the Scriptures. But
G. Keith is the more to be blamed for urging this against VV. Penn now, in as
much as it is (with respect to the Substance of it) an Objection he has
formerly made, and to which I answered at large, in a Treatise of mine, called,
An Epistle to Friends, Printed in 1694. from p. 51. to p. 56. And again in
another Book of mine, called, A further Discovery, Printed the same Year, from
p. 93. to p. 98. Which latter is one of those Books G. Keith has not replied
to.

He taxes VV. Penn with uncharitable Dealing in saying above, The whole
Christian World has lazily depended on it. Is there none, says he, in the
Christian World but the Quakers, that thi^st after the Power of God in their
Souls? I was never so uncharitable to think so, cries he. But had he had either
Charity or Justice, he would not have thought VV. Penn by saying the whole
Christian World, intended every individual Person in the Christian World. When
the Apostle John said, The whole World lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. Did
he mean there was not one Person in the whole World, but what lay in
Wickedness? When John said, All the World wondered after the Beast, Rev. 13.3.
Did he mean every individual Person in the World? No sure, the Woman that fled
into the Wilderness, Chap. 12.6. did not wonder after the Beast, for she fled
from the Beast. When Matthew says, The whole City came out to meet Jesus, Mat.
8.34. Did he mean, that there was never a man nor woman left in the City? G.
Keith knows that that way of speaking is Figurative, used Syn^chdochically, the
greater part being taken for the whole. And in his Serious Appeal, in Answer to
Cot. Mather, p. 9. he could urge that by way of Defense, saying, The
Denomination of a thing is taken chiefly from that which is the greatest part;
and he might have taken it so here, had not Enmity had too great a part in him:
For in p. 7. of the same Book, W. Penn mentions Churches (which is more
extensive than particular Persons) in these latter Ages, in whom there might
once have been begotten some earnest, living Thirst after the inward Life of
Righteousness.

This G. Keith might well have observed, for he makes another Cavil out of the
foregoing part of this very Sentence, which was this, p. 6, 7. The Distinction
betwixt Moral and Christian, the making Holy Life legal, and Faith in the
History of Christ's outward Manifestation, Christianity; (so it should be read,
the Words [ Christianity and Manifestation] being transposed and misplaced in
the Printing, as is obvious) has been a d^adly Poison these latter Ages have
been infected with, to the Destruction of Godly Living, and Apostatizing of
those Churches, in whom there might once have been begotten some earnest,
living Thirst after the inward Life of Righteousness. This Passage depends upon
the different Definitions of Christianity given by I. Faldo, and W. Penn. I.
Faldo, it seems defining Christianity, said, By Christianity we are not to
understand all those Matters of Faith and Practice, which Christianity does
oblige us unto. This W. Penn excepted against, as reckoning that All those
Matters of Faith and Practice which Christianity does oblige us unto, might
well pass for Christianity. Yet Faldo having granted that Christianity takes in
whatever is worthy in those Religions it has super^ed^d; yea, the very
Heathens. From those Words VV. Penn inferred, This then does not make
Christianity a distinct thing in kind, from what was worthy, as he calls it,
that is Godly, among either Jews or Heathen: This is in p. 2, 3. of VV. Penn's
Book called, Quakerism a New Nickname for Old Christianity; and having argued
upon it in p. 4, 5, and 6. and showed the hurt and mischief that ensues upon
rejecting Moral Virtues from being any part of Christianity, he there
concludes, in the Words G. Keith carps at, viz, The Distinction betwixt Moral
and Christian, the making Holy Life legal, and Faith in the History of Christ's
outward Manifestation Christianity, has been a deadly Poison these latter Ages
have been infected with, to the Destruction of Godly Living, etc. As tending to
persuade People (too apt to be easily persuaded to looseness) that a bare
historical Belief of Christ's outward Appearance in the Flesh, is of more value
and advantage to them, than a Virtuous, Pious, Godly Life.

To this G. Keith tacks another Proof (as he calls it) against W. Penn, and
then makes his Reflection on both together. That other Proof he takes out of W.
Penn's Address to Protestants, p. 118, 119. thus, For it seems a most
unreasonable thing, that Faith in God and keeping his Commandments, should be
no part of the Christian Religion: But if a part it be (as upon serious
Reflection who dare deny it?) then those before and since Christ's Time, who
never had the external Law nor History, yet have done the things contained in
the Law, their Consciences not accusing, nor Hearts condemning, but excusing
them before God, are in some degree concerned in the Character of a true
Christian. For Christ himself preached and kept his Father's Commandments; he
came to fulfill and not to destroy the Law, and that not only in his own Person,
but that the Righteousness of the Law might be also fulfilled in us, Romans 8.4.
Now, says G. Keith, comes the main thing: Let us but soberly consider, What
Christ is, and we shall the better know, whethe^ Moral Men are to be reckoned
Christians. What is Christ, but Meekness, Justice, Mercy, Patience, Charity and
Virtue, in Perfection? Can we then deny a meek Man to be a Christian? A Just, a
Merciful, a Patient, a Charitable and a Virtuous Man, to be like Christ? G.
Keith says, In this way of arguing there is a Fallacy. These Moral Virtues, he
says, are a part of a Christian, -- and belong to the Genus of a Christian. But
there are two things in the true Definition of a Man, the Genus and the
Differentia: They have the Genus, says he, but not the Differentia. And, I
pray, which is of most moment in this Case, the Genus, or the Differentia? To
have the Kind and Nature of a Christian, or to have only some outward
Character, or discriminating Difference, to distinguish a Christian from a
Child of God, as namely an historical Faith of Christ's outward Appearance in
the Flesh at Jerusalem? But since G. Keith allows these Moral Virtues to be a
part of a Christian, he needed not on this score, have fallen so foul on W.
Penn, for he might have observed in those Words himself has cited, that that
which seemed to W. Penn so unreasonable a thing, was, That Faith in God, and
keeping his Commandments, should be no part (that is, should by some be
accounted no part) of the Christian Religion. And the Inference he made, from
what he had offered to show it was a part of the Christian Religion, was, that,
If it be a part (he does not say, If it be the whole) Then those before and
since Christ's time, who never had the external Law or History, yet have done
the things contained in the Law, etc. are in some degree concerned in the
Character of a true Christian. But for that extravagant Inference G. Keith
would draw from W. Penn's Words, that a Man may be owned to be a Christian, and
yet disbelieve that Christ is either God or Man, it carries in its front, too
evident Marks of Envy and Injustice, to be regarded by any who bear not the
same Marks. For did W. Penn there treat of Jews, Mahometans, Pagans? Or of such
as have a general Faith of Christianity, but never adhered to any particular
Party, as his express Words are in that 118. p. Nay, does he not there directly
mention such as believe in God and Christ? For setting forth the Partiality and
Cruelty of those professed Christians, who would renounce a mere just Man their
Society, and send him packing among the Heathen for Damnation, he thus
expostulates the Case, And pray, What Is the Matter? Then subsuming the Person
of an Opponent, he answers, Why! though this Person be a sober Liver, yet he is
but a general Believer; his Faith is at large: It Is true, He believes in God;
but I hear little of his Faith in Christ: Then replies, Very well: Does he not
therefore believe in Christ? Or must he therefore be without the Pale of
Salvation? Is it possible that a Man can truly believe in God, and be damned?
But, adds he, As he that believes in Christ, believes in God, so he that
believes in God, believes in Christ: For he that believes on him that raised up
Jesus from the Dead, his Faith shall be imputed to him for Righteousness, Romans
4.22, etc. And in p. 119. having enumerated several Moral Virtues, and alluding
to the saying of Wisdom, Prove. 8.15. By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree
Justice; so may I say here, says he, By Christ Men are Meek, Just, Merciful,
Patient, Charitable and Virtuous. And, adds he, Christians ought to be
distinguished, by their Likness to Christ, and not their Notions of Christ; by
his Holy Qualifications, rather than their own lofty Professions, and invented
Formalities. Does not this plainly show, he treated there of those that
professed the Christian Religion, preferring such of them, as in their Lives
showed most of Moral Virtue, and true Goodness, to the highest Pretenders, and
most flourishing Talkers without it? But that which still falls heavy upon G.
Keith is, that he should thus cavil at W. Penn, who himself (in his former
Books not yet retracted by him) has so far out-gone W. Penn on this subject,
and has also expressly extended Salvation by Christ to the Gentiles, or
Heathens, that knew nothing of him outwardly. For instance, In his Book, called
Universal Grace, p. 28. he says, There was such a Principle in them (speaking
of the Gentiles) whereby they did the things contained in the Law. Therefore it
was a Principle of the very saving Light and Life of Jesus Christ, which is
that Divine Nature mentioned, 2 Pet. 1.4. And in p. 29. he says, These Gentiles
did the things contained in the Law, so that they were excused, yea and
Justified, and did receive the Reward of Glory, Honor, and Peace in so doing.
Again in the same p. he says, In diverse of these Gentiles the Seed was raised,
which is that Divine Nature or Birth, by which they did the things contained in
the Law, and so were Justified by him who gave them Power to fulfill it. And in
p. 30. Answering an adverse Argument, which was this, There can be no
Justification without Faith in Christ; but these Gentiles had not Faith in
Christ, therefore, etc. He says, I deny the second Proposition; for if they did
cleave unto, and believe in the Light, they believed in Christ, for he is the
Light; nor is the outward Name that which saves, but the inward Nature, Virtue,
and Power signified thereby, which was made manifest in them; and thus is
Christ even that (...), that which may or must be known of God, etc. I could
multiply Instances of this kind, out of that and other Books of his, if it were
needful; but these at present may suffice.

In p. 21. of his Narrat. he recommends to his Auditory the Book, called, The
Christian Quaker, and so do I to every Body, but with different Ends: He out of
ill will, I out of good will, to the Truth therein defended. He refers in
particular to p. 125, 126, 127. which Pages he says are bestowed to define what
a Christian Quaker is; and he Objects, that in all this large Definition, there
is not one Word of the Man Christ (who is God over all blessed for ever) to be
the Object, either of this Christian Quaker's Faith, Love or Homage. That which
he calls a Definition of a Christian Quaker, is indeed an Answer to a Question
put by Tho. Hicks, which was, Who he, or they are, that obey the Light? etc. In
answering which. W. Penn does not so much meddle with Faith and Doctrine, as
set forth the Life, Practice and Sufferings of such as truly obey the Light,
especially in those things wherein they are acted diversely from, or contrary to
other People: It is therefore no prejudice at all, (nor ought to be objected)
either to VV. Penn or the Christian Quaker, that in that Answer to Hicks's
Question, the Man Christ is not mentioned as the Object of Faith, etc. since
the Object of Faith, etc. is not there treated of, but presupposed, and taken
for granted. Yet G. Keith might have observed, that Christ Jesus was there
mentioned, and that with respect to his Manhood: For in p. 125. The true
Quaker, who obeys the Light, is represented to be one, That willingly drinks of
the Cup of bitter Mockings, and yields to be baptized with the Baptism of deep
Trials Christ Jesus, his Lord, drank of, and was baptized with; which Cup, and
Baptism, our Lord Christ took, and was baptized with, as he was Man. And there
is also, in p. 127. a Testimony born to the Blood of Jesus Christ, and the
Virtue of it, in these Words, So is the Light the Just Man's Path, that in
every Age still shined brighter and brighter, in which the cleansing Blood of
Jesus Christ is felt to cleanse from all Sin. And in Quakerism a new Nickname,
p. 5, and 6. Sect. 8. (out of which G. Keith picked a Cavil but lately answered)
he might have read these Words, Christianity then is not an Historical Belief
of the Exterior Acts, the true Christ did in that bodily Appearance (which is
but historical Christianity) -- But a firm Belief in him that so appeared,
lived, died, rose and ascended, both as testified in the Scriptures of Truth,
and more especially as he breaks in upon the Soul by his Divine Discoveries, as
the true Light inlightning every Man. This (said VV. Penn there) I call
Christianity.

His next Cavil is concerning the Mystery of Christ, with respect to his coming
outwardly in that Body, in which he suffered for Mankind at Jerusalem, and his
coming inwardly in the Hearts of Men, working the Work of Regeneration in them.
This he objected formerly, in his Book called, The true Copy, and I answered
largely to it, in mine called Truth Defended, from p. 148. to p. 155. which he
has not replied to. It Is true, he does not begin his Cavil now with the same
Quotation he did then; but ( for a blind*) brings it in now with a Quotation of
the same Matter in Substance, taken out of another Piece, viz. A Preface to the
Collection of R. Barclay 's Book (which he supposes, and I deny not, was writ
by VV. Penn) and then claps his former Quotation (out of VV. Penn's Rejoynd^r
to Faldo) behind it, to support it, taking no notice that I had answered it
before. This in him was neither Ingenuous nor Fair. He should have answered my
Book, before he had renewed the Charge therein answered. But instead of that,
he conceals that it was already answered, and proposes it as a new thing, as if
it had not been answered before. Now, seeing he has dealt so unfairly, I shall
take the less notice of what he now says in the Case, but (that I may not actum
agere) shall refer the Reader to my former Answer, in the Book and Pages
abovementioned; yet not wholly pass by what he says here.

First, I observe he quarrels with VV. Penn for saying (upon 1 Timothy 3.16. Great
is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, etc.) And if the
Apostle said it of the Manifestation of the Son of God in the Flesh, if that be
a Mystery (and if a Mystery, it is not to be spelt out but by the Revelation of
the Spirit) how much more, etc. From hence G. Keith infers, VV. Penn does not
say it is a Mystery, but he puts three Ifs to it. This Objection is childish,
in all but the Malice of it: For G. Keith knows VV. Penn has always
acknowledged that Manifestation of Christ in the outward Body of Flesh in which
he suffered at Jerusalem, to be a very great and wonderful Mystery. And he, and
every one else, that understands Words aright, knows, that the Particle If both
diverse Significations, sometimes it is Conditional, sometimes Dubitative,
sometimes Concessive, or Granting. Of which there are plenty of Instances in
Scripture, Romans 11.6. If by Grace, then no more of Works. The Apostle there
cannot be supposed to doubt or question, much less to deny, that the Election
is of Grace, for he positively affirmed it in the verse before. So ver. 12. If
the fall of them (the Jews) be the Riches of the World, etc. how much more
their Fullness? ver. 16. If the first Fruit, and if the Root be Holy, so the
Lump, so the Branches. ver. 21. If God spared not the natural Branches, etc. 1
Pet. 4.17, 18. If it (Judgment) first begin at us, -- And if the Righteous
scarcely be saved, etc. 2 Pet. 2.4, 5. If God spared not the Angels that
sinned, but cast them down to Hell, etc. And spared not the old World, but
saved Noah, etc. Might not G. Keith as well have charged the Apostle with
denying or doubting, that God spared not the Angels that sinned, and the old
World? Yet upon this, he asks, Pray was our blessed Lord a mere Shell? Was he
like the Shell of an Egg without the Meat of an Egg? I answer no; He was not a
mere Shell, neither was he like the Shell of an Egg, either without the Meat,
or with it: For he was full of Grace and Truth, John 1.14. And in him dwells
all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. For it pleased the Father that
in him should all Fullness dwell, chap. 1.19.

Again He asks, Was there any Holiness ever in any Prophet or Apostle, but it
is like a Drop to the Ocean to what was in our blessed Lord? If it were or
could be less than a Drop to the Ocean, that affects not us in this Case: For
we draw no Comparison between the Holiness that was in him, and that which is,
or ever has been, in any of the Saints, with respect to the Degrees thereof.
Grant it to be the same in Nature and Quality, and it suffices, which a Drop is
with the Ocean. But G. Keith's Comparison in his Marginal Notes in this p. 21.
run higher in Degree than a Drop to the Ocean. For he says, The same Seed and
Life is in us which was in the Man Christ, and is in him in the Fullness, as
Water in the Spring, and in us a^ the Stream; which is more than a Drop, and
bears more proportion in quantity to the spring it flows from, than a Drop does
to the Ocean. Again he says, As the natural Life is in all the Members, but
more principally in the Head and Heart, without any Division; so this spiritual
Life and Nature is both in Christ our Head, and in us, by which he dwells in
us, as the Spirit of Man does in the Body. But is the disproportion as great,
in the natural Body, between the Life in the Member, and in the Head and Heart,
as between a Drop and the Ocean?

He suggests, that W. Penn compares the Work of Regeneration to the Incarnation
of our Lord, so as to equal, yea, prefer it, with respect to Holiness, and
thereupon says, Nar. p. 22. I Appeal to you (the Auditors) whether is it not a
most abominable Error, and whether it does not make every regenerate Man not
only equal to the Man Christ, but greater? for, says he, We truly value any
Man as more Holy, according as the Manifestation of God is more in one Man than
in another. Now this is a great abuse in him. For the Comparison (if he will
have it to be one) was not originally W. Penn's, but his Adversaries; and it
lay not between the Incarnation of Christ, and the Work of Regeneration: But
between the difficulty of Believing the one, and Experiencing the other. So W.
Penn understood I. Faldo at first; and thereupon said, Regeneration is a slight
thing (meaning with I. Faldo) in Comparison of the Knowledge of Christ after
the Flesh. (Mark that) He did not say, in Comparison of Christ after the Flesh:
But in Comparison of the Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh. And thereupon he
added, The History is made ( viz. by I. Faldo) the greatest Mystery: And to
believe the one, matter of greater difficulty, than to Experience the other.
Rejoinder, p. 336. The Comparison here lay not between the Digni^y or
Excellency of Christ's Incarnation in that Body which he took of the Virgin,
and his spiritual Formation and Birth in his Saints (which is intended in the
Word [ Regeneration:] But between the difficulty of Believing the one, and of
Experiencing the other. Neither would the Comparison between the Incarnation of
our Lord Christ, and the Work of Regeneration (had such a Comparison been made)
have been with respect to the Degrees of Holiness in each: But with respect to
the greatness of the Mystery in the one, and in the other, which depended not
simply upon the Holiness in either. For though this Mystery of the Incarnation
of Christ, be by way of Emphasis, or Excellency, to distinguish it from other
Mysteries, called by the Apostle, The Mystery of Godliness, as being a great
part of that great Mystery: Yet it is not properly called a Mystery from the
Perfection of Holiness that was in him; but from the wonderful and miraculous
Manner of his Conception, etc. not easily to be apprehended by humane
Understanding. In which sense also, and for which Reason, the spiritual Union
betwixt Christ and his Church, is by the same Apostle called, A great Mystery,
Ephesians. 5.32. And in 1 Cor. 15.51. The Apostle treating of the Resurrection,
says, Behold, I show you a Mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all
be changed. The Mystery here lay not in the point of Holiness; but in the
strangeness of the thing, that whereas the general Change is made by Death,
some should be changed without dying. We shall not all Sleep, (that is, we
shall not all Dye; Sleep, in this Sense, being a Synonima of Death, Dan. 12.2.
John 11.11. and 14. Acts 7.60. and 13.36. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.) but we shall all be
changed. So that the plain import of W. Penn's Words is but this; Seeing the
Incarnation of Christ, which was his outward Appearance in the World, being
outwardly born of, and brought forth by a Virgin, was called a Mystery, because
of the extraordinary and supernatural Way and Manner of his Conception: Much
more may the Work of Regeneration, Christ's being formed in the Saints, Gal.
4.19. (So that according to G. Keith himself, they are his Mother that bring
him forth by a Spiritual and Divine Birth, Mat. 12.49. Way cast up, p. 111.) be
called a Mystery, seeing it is wholly inward and spiritual in its Operation,
and consequently more remote from outward Sense, and harder to be comprehended
by humane Understanding. In which W. Penn would not in any respect, lessen that
great and glorious Work of God in the Incarnation of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: But would exalt the glorious Work of Christ in his Saints. And as plain
also it is, that the Scope and Drift of those Words of W. Penn both here, and
in his Rejoinder to Faldo (which I have Answered elsewhere) was to persuade
People not to rest barely in an historical Belief of Christ's Incarnation, and
Manifestation in that Body of Flesh, wherein he suffered at Jerusalem, and
obtained Redemption for all them that should lay hold on him by a living Faith:
But to come to that living Faith, that thereby they might experimentally know,
and witness the great Work of Regeneration, to be wrought in them, Christ to be
spiritually formed in them, and to dwell in their Hearts by Faith; without
which, the most exact literal Knowledge of the History of Christ's Incarnation,
Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, will stand them in no stead, but
add to their Condemnation.

He taxes VV. Penn with thinking it is a matter of little or no difficulty to
believe, that God sent Christ to die for Sinners, and to reconcile God to Men
by his Death. How little of difficulty there is in barely and historically
believing this, the Common Faith of all that part of the World called Christian
shows, wherein all Professions, and the most profligate and profane in any
Profession, does so believe it. And though G. Keith talks of a true saving
Faith, and says, Nar. p. 23. None of all the Church of England Men,
Independents, or Presbyterians, say, the mere Historical, Literal, Traditional,
Faith of Christ, will save any: Yet I think it may, without breach of Charity,
be doubted, that too many in some, at least, of those Professions, have no
other; and certain it is, W. Penn's words related chiefly to such: For he says,
in the place quoted by G. Keith, At this rate the Lord, Lord-Crier is highly
privileged, alluding therein to the words of Christ Mat. 7.21. Not every one
that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: But he
that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. From which, and his Answer
in v. 23. Then will I profess unto them, I never knew you; depart from me, ye
that work Iniquity; It is evident that these knew not him aright, nor had true
Faith in him, notwithstanding their high pretenses, of having Prophesied, cast
out Devils, and done many wonderful things in his name, v. 22.

Again, G. Keith, says, p. 23. The matter is, there is a saving Faith of Christ
without us; there he stops, as to saving Faith, but too short: For Faith of
Christ without us, (i. e. a Belief of all Christ did and suffered in that
outward Body, which he took of the Virgin) without Faith in Christ within (i.
e. a receiving Christ by Faith into the Heart, to cleanse the Heart, and by his
precious Blood to purge the Conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God) will not prove a saving Faith. Then he goes on, saying, And Christ without
us, as he is both God and Man, the Emanuel, as well as his inward Appearance in
us, is the Object of saving Faith; but these Men would not own it. If by these
Men he means, either the Quakers in general, or any of those he has traduced by
name, his Charge is false. We own Christ without, as he is both God and Man,
jointly and together with his inward appearance in the Heart, to be the Object
of saving Faith to all those, to whom the knowledge of his outward Appearance
has come. But in as much as a great part of Mankind has not the Knowledge of
that outward Appearance of Christ, and what he therein did and suffered; Christ
without, with respect to his Manhood, and what he did and suffered in that
prepared Body, cannot be the Object of Faith to such, until revealed to them.
And therefore if G. Keith, will yet admit that such have been, or may be saved,
(and consequently that they had, or may have saving Faith, without which none
can be saved, because, Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11.6.) he must grant the Object of their Faith to be, not that outward
Appearance of Christ in the Flesh, but his inward Appearance and Manifestation
in and by his Divine Light, Life, Word, and Power, in their Hearts. I say, if
he will yet admit it, because he has of late so turned and wheeled about from
his former Principles, that one knows not where to find him. In his Way to the
City of God, p. 125. he said, Even at Man's Fall, the Seed of the Woman was
given, not only to bruise the Serpents Head, but also to be a Lamb, or
Sacrifice, to atone and pacify the Wrath of God toward Men. And this is the
Lamb, that was slain from the beginning of the World. And through the coming of
Jesus Christ, thus in the inward, even before he was outwardly come, or
manifest, many were saved, and attained unto perfect Peace and Reconciliation
with God in their Souls, yet not in unholiness, but in departing therefrom, and
becoming Holy and Sanctified unto God. In p. 152. of the same Book, in Answer
to a Question, Whether the knowledge of the outward coming, sufferings and
Death of Christ, is not of absolute necessity unto every one? He says, Though
express knowledge of his outward coming, sufferings and Death, is very
profitable to beget Faith and Love in Men toward God, as aforesaid, and ought
to be highly valued in its place. Nevertheless, this express knowledge, is not
of absolute necessity unto Faith and Love, etc. And in p. 153. How many
thousand have been saved before Christ's coming in the outward, who knew it not
expressly? And a little lower, Seeing then that some had Faith and Love to God,
and were saved, without the express knowledge thereof (to wit, of Christ's
coming in the outward) before he came outwardly, why not also after his coming,
where his coming outwardly has not been preached nor revealed? -- For now
Christ is inwardly come in a Seed of Life and Light, in all, which is the Word
of Reconciliation, by which men may be Reconciled with God, as they join and
apply their Minds thereunto. Such passages as these abound in his former ( not
yet retracted) Book, which it would be tedious to transcribe. Yet inasmuch as
he says here (Nar. p. 23.) that though Regeneration is no ^light thing, yet
comparing Christ's Incarnation with the Work of Regeneration, I do affirm the
Work of Regeneration is a light thing, though not light in it self; I will show
him (though it be some what beside the present Business) how much he formerly
preferred the inward Appearance, and Manifestation of Christ in Spirit, to his
outward Appearance in the Flesh. In his Book called Immediate Revelation not
ceased (nor retracted) p. 59. he says, -- If his Bodily presence was not
sufficient to the Church, his teaching them outwardly by word of Mouth, Face to
Face; but he said, It was expedient that he should go away from them, and he
would send another Teacher, who would do greater things, and more Manifestly
and Gloriously reveal unto them God, and the things of his Kingdom: If Christ's
Bodily presence in the Flesh, was not sufficient of it self, to Minister,
though he spoke as never Man spoke, yet I say, If this Ministration was not
sufficient, but a more Glorious they were to expect; and as they waited, they
witnessed it fulfilled, and come unto them: Then far less is the outward
Administration of any other Man, etc. -- Seeing the knowledge of Christ after
the Flesh was not sufficient, nor to be rested in; but they were to look for a
better, a more clear, and full manifestation in themselves, he appearing in a
Spiritual, Glorious, Heavenly, Mysterious way in their Hearts etc. And in p.
120. having cited before many Scripture sayings out of the Old and New
Testament, Concerning Christ, he says, All these Glorious things both he, in
the Days of his Flesh, and the Prophets, before that his appearance in that
Body of Flesh, declared, neither only nor principally, concerning his coming in
the Flesh, (namely, in that Vessel or Temple which appeared at Jerusalem) but
mainly and principally concerning his Spiritual Appearance in his Saints, after
his being Crucified, Risen and Ascended; for till then, the Son of Man was not
Glorified. And though he was Bodily present with his Disciples, yet he told
them, they were to see greater things. -- And p. 121. He told them, It was
expedient he should go away, that he might come again in a more Glorious and
Comfortable Appearance, by the Revelation of his Glorious Power in their
Hearts, for his Kingdom was not of this World, but an inward Kingdom, and he
said, that it was within; and pointed to this Spiritual Appearance, by his
Light in their Hearts, under many Parables and Figures, etc. Again, p. 107. he
says, The Jews and People of Israel who lived in Moses's time, and were saved,
it was through Faith in this Word, in this Prophet, raised up in them, in their
Hearts, not at a distance, but nigh; the Word is nigh in thy Heart. And this is
Christ in them, the hope of Glory, the Mystery hid from Ages and Generations,
but was ever made manifest in his Saints, but in the latter Days more clearly:
Christ in all that believe, the hope of Glory. Does he not here plainly make
that Mystery which the Apostle (and he from him) calls the Mystery which has
been hid from Ages and from Generations, Col. 1.2.6. to be the inward
Appearance of Christ, the hope of Glory, in all that believe, and says, It was
ever made manifest in his Saints.

He pretends, Nar. p. 23. to have some other principal Proofs remaining about
this Gross Error (as he calls it) of W. Penn: But he brings forth but one (that
I find) and that the same which he charged formerly, in his Book called The
True Copy, etc. And which I answered at large in my Book called Truth Defended,
from p. 113. to p. 123. Of which he takes no notice. Had he been either fair or
manly, he should first have refuted the former Answers, before he had renewed
his Charge. Yet not only here, but in his Gross Error, p. 18, 19. he repeats
this same Charge, without so much as owning that it had been answered to
before. So that, with respect to him, it is to little purpose to answer at all,
since he has so little honesty, as to wink over the answer, and repeat his
Charge a new, as if there had been nothing said to it. But for the undeceiving
of them, whom he labors to deceive, and by false Accusations and Calumnies, to
bring into a dislike of our Principles and us, I shall here wipe off some of
his Abuses, and refer the Reader, for further satisfaction, to my former Book
called Truth Defended.

The Quotation he now gives, is out of a Book called The Christian Quaker, p.
97.98. It is a Controversial Book, and the Controversy in that part of it is,
Whether Christ, as Christ, was before he took Flesh of the Virgin, or no? Which
the Adversaries denied; W. Penn affirmed, and gave many Arguments, from
Scripture and Reason, to prove it, which the Reader may there see at large from
p. 92. to p. 99. Amongst those many Arguments, one was drawn from the promised
Seed, which all acknowledge to be Christ, and therefore, as a fit Medium was
used by W. Penn, to prove that Christ, as Christ, was before he took that Body
of Flesh upon him; and therefore that that Body, simply considered as a Natural
Body (which was the Notion the Adversaries had of it, and from whence they
Spoke so much of Christ's Humane Nature) was not properly the Christ, but he (
most properly) who was the Heavenly Spiritual Man, who came down from Heaven,
and took upon him that outward Body; in as much as the Seed is a Spiritual
Substance -- Now to prove that the Seed is inward and Spiritual, he argued thus
(which is the passage G. Keith quotes.) As Abraham outward and natural was the
great Father of the Jews outward and natural, whose Seed God promised to Bless,
with Earthly Blessings, etc. And that they were Figurative of the one Seed
Christ, and such as he should beget unto a lively hope, etc. it will
consequently follow that this Seed must be inward and Spiritual; since one
outward thing cannot be the proper Figure or Representation of another: Nor is
it the way of holy Scripture so to teach us; the outward Lamb shows forth the
inward Lamb; the Jew outward, the Jew inward, etc. -- I have these two short
Arguments to prove what I believe and assert, as to the Spirituality of the
true Seed; and a clearer overthrow it is to the Opinion of our Adversaries, to
the true Christ. First, Every thing begets its like; what is Simply Natural,
produces not a Spiritual being, Material things, bring not forth things that
are Immaterial. Now because the Nature, or Image, begotten in the Hearts of
true Believers, is Spiritual, it will follow, that the Seed which so begets,
and brings forth that Birth, must be the same in Nature, with that which is
begotten, therefore Spiritual; then Christ's Body, or what he had from the
Virgin, strictly considered as such, was not the Seed. Secondly, It is clear
from hence; The Serpent is a Spirit: Now nothing can bruise the Head of the
Serpent, but something that is also Internal and Spiritual, as the Serpent is;
But if that Body of Christ were the Seed, then could he not bruise the Serpents
Head in all, because the Body of Christ is not so much as in any one, and
consequently the Seed of the Promise is an Holy and Spiritual Principle of
Light, Life and Power, that being received into the Heart, bruiseth the
Serpent's Head. And because the Seed, which cannot be that Body, is Christ, as
testify the Scriptures, the Seed is one, and that Seed Christ, and Christ God
over all, Blessed for ever; we do conclude, and that most truly, that Christ
was, and is the Divine Word of Light and Life, that was in the beginning with
God, and was, and is God over all, blessed for ever. And that this may yet more
evidently appear, let it but be seriously weighed, that before ever that
visible. Appearance was, the Seed bruised, in good Measure, the Serpent's Head
in the Holy Men and Women of all Generations, otherwise they had not been Holy
but Serpentine and Wicked; And if the Seed was before, and that Seed be Christ;
because there is but one Christ, as well as but one only Seed, it does clearly
follow, that Christ was Christ, before that outward Appearance. Which was the
thing intended to be proved. Upon this G. Keith says, W. Penn will needs have
this to be not Christ without, but Christ within. But W. Penn neither said so,
nor meant so. He does not deny the Seed to be Christ without. He says, the Seed
Christ is Spiritual and inward, that is, in Man; which does not hinder, but
that it may be and is outward also, that is, out of Man, or elsewhere, besides
in Man; but that, whether inward or outward, it is a Spiritual Substance. Yet
as it is a Seed bruising the Serpent's Head in Man, it is inward, working
against the Serpent in the Heart, where the Serpent puts up his Head, to
deceive and defile the Heart of Man, and draw him from his Duty and Obedience
to God. And indeed, in that great and most Eminent Encounter between the two
Seeds, when the Divine Seed had taken on it outward Flesh, and so was born of
the Virgin, (with respect to which he was Denominated, and was the Seed of the
Woman, and so of Abraham, and David, (of whose Seed she was) though the Serpent
could not assault him, from any thing in himself ( having nothing in him, John.
14.30.) Yet it was the Divine Word or Power which is called the Seed in Man
(the same which had bruised the Head of the Serpent, in Mary, David, Abraham,
and all the Holy Men and Women before) inwardly dwelling in that Immaculate
Body, by which he repelled the assaults of the Tempter, broke the Power of the
Prince of Darkness, vanquished and put him to flight, and Triumphed most
Gloriously over him.

Again, G. Keith says, p. 24. So the Paschal Lamb was no Figure of Christ
without. And when John said, Behold the Lamb of God! It was meant of Christ
within us, not of Christ without us, for our Passover is Slain for us. This G.
Keith sets down, as if they were W. Penn's words, and accordingly they are
Printed, with Coma's in the Margin, as the Quotations out of W. Penn's Books
are. And then G. Keith says upon it, You see, according to W. Penn, that
Passover that was slain for us, was slain in us, not without us: And so they
throw away our Arguments against the Jews. But this is an Abuse in G. Keith.
The words he gives before, as W. Penn's, are not W. Penn's, but G. Keith's
unfair inference from W. Penn's words. W. Penn did not say the Paschal Lamb was
no Figure of Christ without. He said the Outward Lamb shows forth the Inward
Lamb; the Jew Outward, the Jew Inward. And does it not so? And when John said,
Behold the Lamb of God, W. Penn does not say, It was meant of Christ within us,
not of Christ without us: For Christ within us, and Christ without us, is but
one Christ, not two Christ's, nor divided. But when John said, Behold the Lamb
of God, that takes away the Sins of the World! Did he mean the Body only, or
Outward Manhood of Christ? Or did he not mean more especially that Divine and
Heavenly Manhood, which then dwelt and appeared in that Body, with respect to
which he was called Christ, long before he took on him that Body, and is said
to be the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, Rev. 13.8. It is not
then according to W. Penn, that the Passover that was slain for us, was slain
in us, not without us; but it is according to G. Keith's perverse Inference:
For the Passover that was slain for us, was slain without us; but it was not
only an Outward thing, or the Body only, which was taken of the Virgin, that is
designed under that name of the Passover, but that Son of Man who came down
from Heaven, and took upon him that Outward Body, and suffered in that Body,
and so became a part, yea, a chief part of that Blessed Sacrifice, although it
was the Outward Body, or Manhood only of Christ our Spiritual Passover (as he
is called, Wilson's Christian Dictionary, verbo Passover) that in a strict and
proper sense was said to be slain.

Next he quarrels with W. Penn's Logic, in saying, Then Christ's Body, he had
from the Virgin, strictly considered as such, was not the Seed. This is rare
Logic, says G. Keith. Here Is a Fallacy, but I believe (says he) it proceeds
not from any design, but from his weakness in Logic. (But the Abuse he would
put upon W. Penn, proceeds I fear, not so much from his weakness in Logic, as
from an evil Design in him) He adds, You know, there should be no Term, nor
thing of Importance, in the Conclusion of any Syllogism or Argument, but what
should be in the Premises; but strictly considered is not in the Premises,
therefore it should not be in the Conclusion. Had he minded the Premises
better, he might have seen, that though those very Terms [ strictly Considered]
were not expressly in the Premises, yet equivalent Terms were; namely, the Terms
[ Material, and simply Natural,] (which last yet was used only ad hominem, upon
the Adversary's Opinion) therefore G. Keith might well have spared his Flurt at
W. Penn's Logic, but that he had a mind to crack of his own Skill therein. He
says, No Man says, The Body of Christ strictly considered without the Soul of
Christ, is Christ, or that either the Soul and Body of Christ strictly
considered, without the Godhead, is the Christ. But let him tell me what they
say, or upon their own Principle ought to say, Who affirm that Christ, as
Christ, was not in being, till he was born of the Virgin. He says, The Sense of
W. Penn's Argument is, That Christ's Body was no part of him. Herein he does
not say the Truth; but gives a wrong sense of W. Penn's words. Though Christ
was Christ, before he took upon him that Body, yet after he had assumed that
Body, it was a part of him, though but the Outward part. He goes on to pervert
W. Penn's both sense and words, saying as from W. Penn. The one Seed cannot be
an Outward thing; and then says upon it, This ye see is universal and exclusive
of any outward thing. W. Penn did not say, The one Seed cannot be an Outward
thing. His words were, as a Deduction from his Premises, It will consequently
follow, that this Seed must be Inward and Spiritual; which does not universally
exclude it, from being in some respect an Outward thing also. But if VV. Penn
had said, This Seed cannot be an Outward thing, intending thereby a thing
simply, and wholly outward, so as to exclude its being Spiritual and at all
Inward, Would G. Keith have consented to that? I think not. It is evident W.
Penn contended with such as would restrain the Divine Seed of Promise to the
Body, which Christ took of the Virgin, not being Spiritually-Minded enough to
apprehend any other Seed, than that which he then took of her; whereas the
Promised Seed, which was the Heavenly Man, Christ Jesus, was in being and did
operate, in the Hearts of Men, and bruised the Serpent's Head there, many Ages
before he took upon him, that Body of Flesh of the Seed of the Virgin. And
during that time, even from the making of that Promise, until the time of his
outward coming at Jerusalem, he was altogether Spiritual, working inwardly and
Spiritually, against the Enemy in the ^eart, and could not properly be called
an Outward thing, at least in the gross Notion wherein we commonly use and
understand the word Outward. Not that he was so Inward, as to be no where, but
in Man (for he was in Heaven with his Father, John. 3.13.) But when, in the
fullness of time, he descended, and took on him the Seed of Abraham (by taking
on him that Body of Flesh from the Seed of the Virgin) he was then, and in that
respect, Outward as well as Inward. Yet even then, and since, his Operation as
a Seed of Light, Life and Power, to bruise the Head of the Serpent in Men, has
been Inwardly and Spiritually felt in the Heart, working against, and subduing
the Enemy there, where the Serpent is, and where he works most to the hurt and
disadvantage of Mankind. And therefore it was idly done of G. Keith to ask (in
a Marginal note) Is not the Serp^nt or D^vil without Men, as well as within
many Men? Since his being without is not so Destructive, or dangerous to Man,
as his being within: And therefore the Operation of the Holy Seed within, to
bruise his Head, to break his Strength and Power there, and to cast him out, is
the more advantageous and necessary. And whereas G. Keith would infer from W.
Penn's saying, This Seed must be Inward and Spiritual, that he universally
excludes any Outward thing, because he adds, since one outward thing cannot be
the Proper Figure and Representation of another. He should have considered,
that though it cannot be so properly, yet it may be so improperly, or in a less
proper way of Speaking; which is not unusual in Scripture: And that therefore
to say, one Outward thing cannot be the proper Figure, and Representation of
another, is not universally exclusive of any other thing.

His charging W. Penn with a Sorites (an imperfect or confused Argument) in
saying, Because the Seed is one, and that Seed Christ, and Christ God over all,
blessed for ever, We do conclude, and that most truly, that Christ was, and is
the Divine Word of Light and Life, that was in the beginning with God, and was
and is God over all, blessed for ever; I say his quarrelling at this is Idle,
and shows he did not understand the Matter. But the Inference he makes is
worse: For he says, Thus you see, he makes the promised Seed to be nothing, but
an Inward Principle, God over all, etc. Why then, is God over all nothing but
an Inward Principle, with G. Keith? But W. Penn did not so confound things: For
though (with the Apostle, Gal. 3.16.) he said, The one Seed is Christ; And
(with the same Apostle, Romans 9.5.) Christ is over all, God blessed for ever:
Yet he did not say, that Christ was God over all, as he was the Seed, nor that
the Seed of God in Men, was God. So that G. Keith in his heat and haste, has
overstruck himself, and lost his Blow. So also he shoots at random, when he
says, But to say, Christ is only God, and not Man without us, as W. Penn's way
of arguing imports, is most false Doctrine. For neither did W. Penn say so, nor
does his way of arguing import so. The plain import of all his arguments in
that long Quotation given out of him (which G. Keith cavils at) is, that
Christ, as Christ, was from the beginning, before he took that outward Body of
Flesh, in which he suffered at Jerusalem; which is so far from a denial of his
being Man as well as God, that it is a fair acknowledgment of it, inasmuch as
he would not have been Christ, if he had not been Man, as well as God. As
therefore he was Christ from the beginning, so was he also both God and Man,
and that not only in his People, but out of, or without them also. And if he
was truly Man then, before he appeared in that outward Body, which was nailed
to the Cross, to be sure he is not less truly Man now, since that outward
Manhood became (as I may say) a Clothing to that Divine and Heavenly Manhood,
which he had before, and is glorified with it.

What he intimates of a pretended Contradiction between W. Penn and I.
Whitehead, is very Idle in it self, and wicked in him, and the worse, for that
he urged it formerly in his Book called The true Copy, etc. And I answered
then, in mine called Truth Defended, p. 131. (which he takes no notice of;) as
I did also answer in that Book, much of what he has now urged concerning
Christ and his being the promised Seed, from p. 113. to p. 123. Where also I
gave several Quotations out of G. Keith's Books, showing most plainly, that he
has maintained the very same things he now condemns in others, and yet will
not condemn in himself, as particularly in his Book called The Way cast up,
where, Sect. 8. p. 93. In answer to an Adversary's Charge, that we deny Jesus
the Son of Mary, to be the alone true Christ. He first answers, This is a false
Accusation; We own no other Jesus Christ, but him, that was born of the Virgin
Mary, who, as concerning the Flesh, is the Son of Mary, and the Son of David,
and the Seed of Abraham. Then adds, p. 93. And yet he was the true Christ of
God before he took Flesh, and before he was the Son of Mary, or David, or of
Abraham: For his being Born of the Virgin Mary, made him not to be Christ, as
if he had not been Christ before; But he was Christ before, even from the
beginning, as (says he^ I shall prove out of Scripture, etc. And having brought
diverse Scriptures and Arguments, from p. 93. to p. 99. to prove that Christ
Jesus, as Man, was from the beginning, and had from the beginning an Heavenly
Manhood, and Spiritual Flesh and Blood; He there concludes thus, This is the
promised Seed, which God promised to our Parents after the Fall, and actually
gave unto them, even the Seed of the Woman, that should bruise the Head of the
Serpent. And therefore, though the outward coming of the Man Christ was deferred,
according to his outward Birth in the Flesh, for many Ages; yet from the
beginning this Heavenly man, the promised Seed, did inwardly come into the
Hearts of those that believed in him, and bruised the Head of the Serpent, etc.
Here G. Keith, not only asserts, that this Heavenly Man Christ, was the
promised Seed; and did from the beginning inwardly come into the Hearts of
Believers, and bruised the Head of the Serpent; but also calls him, the Seed of
the Woman; and says, God not only promised him, but actually gave him, even the
Seed of the Woman (that should bruise the Serpents Head) unto our Parents after
the Fall, many Ages before his outward Birth in the Flesh. Surely, he that writ
this, had no cause to quarrel with W. Penn for saying, Christ's Body, strictly
considered as such, was not the Seed of Promise. G. Keith had more need to have
reconciled himself to himself (if he could) in these two opposite Expressions
of his, viz. [ That God gave the promised Seed, even the Seed of the Woman,
actually to our Parents after the Fall, many Ages before his outward Birth in
the Flesh; Way cast up, p. 99.] And [That Christ did not become the Seed of the
Woman, according to the Sense of Genesis 3. Until the fullness of time, that he was
made of a Woman, True Copy of a Paper, p. 20.] And he should have done well, to
have informed his Reader, how God did actually give unto our Parents after the
Fall (so many Ages before Christ's outward Birth in the Flesh) the Seed he
promised them, Genesis 3. Even the Seed of the Woman: And yet Christ, not be the
Seed of the Woman, according to Genesis 3. until so many Ages after he was
actually given, as the Seed of the Woman.

This is part of what I said to him in my former Book, called Truth Defended,
p. 117, 118. which rather than Answer, he chose to cut himself out new work at
Turners-Hall. He pretends he did not Answer my Books in Print, because he had
not time to write, nor outward Ability to Print. I have showed the Falsehood of
that pretense, in the fore part of this Book; yet let me now ask, If that had
been true, why did he not then, at his Meeting at Turners-Hall, Answer my Books
viva voce, which then lay at his door unanswered, and both Refute them, if he
could, and acquit himself from those many Clinching Quotations I had therein
h^mpered him with, out of his own Books, by explaining, defending, or
Retracting them? This, I think, every considerate Person will judge had been
more properly his Province, than wholly over-looking this, to spend his time in
impeaching Others, by Renewing his old Baffled Charges, before he had cleared
himself from being guilty of the same Errors (as he calls them) which he had
charged others with. For if they whom he has charged, were as bad as he
endeavors to make them; yet he of all men is not fit to charge them, till he
has acquitted himself from the Imputation he lies under of being guilty of the
same things. This is so plain a Case, that it may be hoped upon his next
Indiction of such a Mock Meeting at Turners-Hall, or elsewhere, some of his
Auditors (when they are together) will think fit to put him upon this just and
necessary Work, and, I had like to have said, hold him to it, but that I
consider he will be held to nothing. However, to furnish any such a little
further, with matter of that kind to invite him to, I will not think much to
transcribe another Quotation or two of his, which I gave him in my former Book,
p. 119, 120.

The first is taken out of his Appendix to his Book of Immediate Revelation, p.
256. where speaking of the spiritual Generation and Birth of Christ in us, he
says, Thus we become the Mother of Christ in a spiritual sense, or according to
the Spirit, as the Virgin Mary was his Mother after the Flesh. And this
Spiritual Mystery Christ himself did teach in the days of his Flesh, when he
said, Whosoever shall do the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is
my Brother, and Sister, and Mother, Mat. 12.50. And thus (says G. Keith)
Christ, according to his spiritual Birth in the Saints, is the Seed of the
Woman; for that the Saints are the Woman that bring him forth after the Spirit,
and are his Mother; as Mary brought him forth after the Flesh, and after the
Spirit also; so that she was the Mother of Jesus in a double respect; for as
she brought him forth in her Body, so she brought him forth in her Soul,
otherwise he could not have been her Savior, etc. Here G. Keith calls Christ
the Seed of the Woman, according to his spiritual Birth in the Saints; and yet
quarrels with W. Penn for saying, The Seed Christ must be inward and spiritual.

Again, In the Way cast up, p. 102. he says, For indeed, seeing he [Christ] is
called as really Man, before his ou^ward Birth in the Flesh, as afterward, we
have as good cause to believe him to be true and real Man, before his outward
Birth in the Flesh, as after. For it is not the outward Flesh and Blood that is
the Man, (otherwise the Saints that have put off the outward Body, should cease
to be Men; and Christ should have ceased to be Man, betwixt his Death and his
Resurrection) but it is the Soul or inward Man that dwells in the Outward
Flesh or Body, that is the Man most properly, such as Christ was even from the
beginning. And therefore (adds he, p. 104.) Let all the Scriptures be searched,
and it shall not be found that Christ became Man, and took to himself the Soul
of Man, at his Conception in the Womb of the Virgin Mary; but Only that he took
Flesh, and was the Son of Mary, David and Abraham, according to the Flesh: But
according to his Heavenly Nature, even as Man, he was the Son of God, and was
the Father and Lord of all the Faithful in all Ages, etc. Thus far out of my
former Book. Besides these, take the following out of his Way to the City of
God, p. 125. And thus even from the beginning, yea, upon Man's Fall, God was in
Christ, reconciling the World to himself, and Christ was manifest in the holy
Seed inwardly, and so stood in the way to ward off the wrath, etc. For even at
Man's Fall, the Seed of the Woman was given, not only to bruise the Serpents
Head, but also to be a Lamb or Sacrifice, to atone and pacify the wrath of
God toward Men. And this is the Lamb, that was slain from the beginning of the
World. Again, p. 154. And in this holy Seed, the Sufferings of Christ, and how
he bore the Iniquities of the Soul, and makes Intercession or Atonement unto
God, may be learned in some measure, with many other things concerning Christ,
in relation to him, and his Doings and Sufferings in the outward, which was an
outward and visible Testimony of his inward Doings and Sufferings in all Ages,
in Men and Women in the holy Seed. And indeed we find that this is only the
true and effectual way of knowing the Use and Work of his Coming, and
Sufferings, and Death, in the outward, by turning, and having our Minds turned
inwards, unto himself, near and in our hearts, in the holy Seed, to know by an
inward feeling and good experience his Doings and Sufferings in us, by being
made conformable thereunto. In which Holy Seed, as it arises in us, such a
clear Light shines forth in our Hearts, as gives unto us the true knowledge
of the use of his Inward Doings and Sufferings. In his Additional Postscript to
G. Whitehead's Book, called The Nature of Christianity, (which is one of the
Books he cavils at in his Narrative, and which very Postscript he mentions
there also, but does not retract any thing therein) he says, p. 66. to his
Opponent Gordon, Because Christ is called the one Offering, and that he once
offered up his Body, etc. Thou would exclude him, as in us, from being one
Offering, but herein thy work is vain; for Christ Jesus is the one Offering
still; and though he offered up his Body outwardly but once upon the Cross, yet
he remains still an Offering for us within us, etc. Again, p. 67. That thou
challenge it, that one said, Christ was never seen with any Carnal Eye; thou
have no more ground than to challenge himself, who said; He who has seen me,
has seen the Father; and yet he said to the Jews, who saw the outward Body of
Jesus, You have neither seen him, nor known him. Thus G. Keith. And yet in his
Gross Error, p. 14. he blames G. Whitehead for this Expression, and bringing
John 14. to defend it. Again, says he, We deny not but the Names Messiah,
Jesus, Christ, etc. were given to him as Man, even as in the Flesh; but they do
More Eminently and More Originally belong to him, as he was before he took that
Body on him; yea, more immediately and more originally to the Word, the Light,
the Seed, the Life, the quickening Spirit, that dwelt in that Body, which he
called This Temple, and it was called The Body of Jesus.

To give more Instances out of his Books would be redious, as to comment on
these would be needless, they speak so plain the same things which he now calls
gross and fundamental Errors in others. Wherefore leaving that to the Reader,
as he now says he has done at present with his first Head, so have I also. In
handling which, and Answering his many Cavils thereupon. I have been the
larger, because I look upon this to be the greatest and most important part of
his Charge: For if Christ were denied, both as God and Man, not only the Object
of Faith, but the whole Christian Religion would fall. But as I have proved his
Charge false and wrong in this part, so I shall endeavor to show it is in the
other parts also; in which I will be more brief, if I can.

The Second Head of G. Keith's Charge, (viz. That we deny Justification and
Sanctification by the Blood of Christ outwardly shed) Considered.
The Second Head (says G. Keith) is Justification and Sanctification by the
Blood of Christ outwardly shed; which he says, is opposed by W. Penn, G.
Whitehead, and others. Now before I mention his pretended Proofs, I think fit
to tell the Reader what this very Man has said of W. Penn concerning
Justification, within these four years, viz. in his Serious Appeal, p. 10. he
says, Nor are W. Penn's words so to be understood concerning Justification, as
if he excluded Christ's Righteousness, which he fulfilled in his own Person; but
only he denies that any can be justified by that alone, without Faith and
Repentance, etc. Did he write thus by rote, without reading what W. Penn had
written? Or had he then read, and upon reading did then approve and justify
what W. Penn had writ of Justification; and yet now condemn it?

The Proof he now pretends to bring, Nar. p. 24, 25. is out of W. Penn's Book
called Reason against Railing, p. 91. And forgive us our Debts as we forgive
our Debtors. Says W. Penn, Where nothing can be more obvious, than that which
is forgiven, is not paid; and if it is our duty to forgive without a
Satisfaction received, and that God is to forgive us as we forgive them, then
is a Satisfaction totally excluded. (This also G. Keith objected in his Gross
Error, p. 19.) Upon this G. Keith says here, I confess I was surprised with
this word totally excluded. Satisfaction (adds he) is not the strict solution
of a Debt in all respects and circumstances. When we consider the Dignity of
our Lord, that was both God and Man; his Sufferings (suppose they were not the
Thousand part of what the Damned suffer) yet it was a true satisfaction:
Therefore I was scandalized with these words, says he. But he needed not have
been scandalized with those words, (unless he be altogether run back to the
most rigid Presbyterians, in the strictest Notion of Satisfaction, rejected by
the Church of England, whose Hands he seems most desirous now to kiss, perhaps
that he may lick some Advantage therefrom) if he would have seen (what was so
obvious, that he must wink, to avoid seeing it) that those words relate to, and
are expressly spoken of that rigid or extreme Satisfaction which those
Presbyterians (and some Baptists) affirm God required and exacted of his Son.
For thus VV. Penn introduced those words which G. Keith cavils at, in Reason
against Railing, p. 90. I shall now, said he, be as good as my word, and that
is, to produce an Argument or two against the common Doctrines of rigid
Satisfaction and Justification, as they have been opposed by me in this short
Discourse, and that out of my Book called The Sandy Foundation shaken, etc.
Then out of that Book, he produced first an Argument drawn from Mic. 7.18. p.
90. and in p. 91. from Mat. 6.12. another Argument, in which are those words G.
Keith takes offense at. What sort of Satisfaction W. Penn there opposed,
appears from that Book called The Sandy Foundation shaken, out of which he
transcribed those words. Now in the Title Page of that Book, that which is
undertaken to be Refuted, on that Head of Satisfaction, is, The impossibility
of Gods pardoning Sinners, without a Plenary Satisfaction. In the Epistle, p.
8. it is called God's Incapacity to forgive, without the Fullest Satisfaction
paid him by another. In the Book it self, p. 16. the Doctrine oppugned is, That
Man having transgressed the Righteous Law of God, and so exposed to the Penalty
of Eternal Wrath, it is altogether impossible for God to remit or forgive
without a Plenary Satisfaction; and that there was no other way by which God
could obtain Satisfaction, or save Men, than by inflicting the Penalty of
Infinite Wrath and Uengeance on Jesus Christ, the Second Person of the Trinity,
who for Sins past, present, and to come, has wholly born and paid it to the
offended infinite Justice of his Father. This shows plainly enough, what a sort
of Satisfaction (or rather Notion of Satisfaction) W. Penn meant, which he said
is totally excluded; namely, a plenary (or full) Satisfaction, by inflicting
the penalty of Infinite Wrath and Vengeance on Jesus Christ, without which it
is altogether impossible for God to forgive; and there was no other way by
which God could obtain Satisfaction. Which too rigid Notion of Satisfaction G.
Keith himself, whilst he stood in The way to the City of God, was as much
against as W. Penn: For in his Book that bears that Title, p. 140. he says,
That he (Christ) did bear the wrath of God, either in that manner or measure
which the Damned in Hell do, or we should have done, had not the Lord recovered
us, I altogether deny; for he could and did satisfy the Father well and
acceptably, without bearing it in that way.

But though the Word Satisfaction (with respect to Christ) be not a
Scripture-term, nor was used by W. Penn's Opponents, in a Scripture-sense: Yet
that W. Penn did not deny the Thing Satisfaction (rightly understood) appears
in the same Book wherein he treated of it, Sandy Foundation shaken, p. 32.
where he says, I can boldly challenge any Person to give me one
Scripture Phrase which does approach the Doctrine of Satisfaction, (much less
the Name) considering to what degree it is stretched; not that we do deny, but
really confess, that Jesus Christ, in Life, Doctrine and Death, fulfilled his
Fathers Will, and offered up a most satisfactory Sacrifice.

But G. Keith himself, to his own Condemnation and Shame has justified W. Penn
(yea and G. Whitehead too) in that for which he now condemns them. For in his
Postscript to the Nature of Christianity, p. 63. he tells Gordon (who had
charged him with something of this tendency) Both G. Whitehead and I expressly
affirmed, that Christ was a Sacrifice most acceptable and satisfactory; so said
G. Whitehead, yea and W. Penn in his Book, said as much, whom thou falsely have
accused) and a Ransom, a Propitiation and Offering for the Sins of the whole
World; but not that Men should be justified while in their Sins, but in having
forsaken them. G. Keith observes, that W. Penn, in the Book he Quoted, gives
nine Arguments to prove that the Notion of Christ's Satisfaction for Sin brings
with it nine irrational Consequences and Irreligious: But he says they are so
weak and insignificant, that it were but loss of time to mention them here, or
answer them. From whence I observe, that those Arguments were not against
Christ's Satisfaction, but the Notion of it, that is, the Notion which his
Opponents (both Presbyterians and some Baptists) had of it, which I have showed
was, A Plenary, or Full, Satisfaction, by inflicting the Penalty of i^finite
Wrath and Vengeance on Jesus Christ, without which, they held it was altogether
impossible for God to remit or forgive; and the nine Arguments he mentions (how
weak so ever he may repute them) are levelled, he knows against that Notion;
which he himself seems not yet to be fully come up to: For he says,
Satisfaction is not the strict Solution (that is, Payment) of a Debt in all
respects and circumstances; yet their Notion makes it a strict solution, and
they say Christ has wholly Born and Paid it. And G. Whitehead in his Book,
called, The Divinity of Christ, etc. p. 45. (of the first Part) pressing T.
Vincent to prove by Scripture, that Christ did suffer under infinite Wrath,
says, He should have produced his plain Scripture; for Scripture we own, and
Christ's Satisfaction as rightly Stated, and what a most acceptable Sacrifice
he was to the Father for all: Yea, his Suffering as Man, or in the Flesh,
without the Gates at Jerusalem, was all acceptable to God; his Soul also was
made an Offering for Sin, etc. Yet so unjust is G. Keith that though he knows
it was that false Notion of Satisfaction which W. Penn opposed, yet he here
Charges G. Whitehead and VV. Penn (as also he did in his Gross Error, p. 20.)
with having thrust out of Doors by their false Logic, Christ's Satisfaction
without us; and then, that they own that Christ in us offers up himself a
Sacrifice, to appease the Wrath of God. For which he cites, VV. Penn's
Rejoinder, p. 284. and G. VVhitehead's Light and Life, p. 44. in both which
Places, the Words he mentions are a Passage taken out of a Book, called, a New
Catechism, written by VV. Smith Deceased, objected against by Burnet and Faldo,
and explained and defended by G. Whitehead and VV. Penn, But neither of them
admits, that those Words of VV. Smith have any tendency to make void the
Sufferings or Sacrifice of Christ without. But it appears, that the Words were
in Answer to a Question, about Christ's being a Mediator within, mediating with
God, on behalf of any, of his People, that commit evil, and so appeasing the
Wrath of God, by being a Propitiation for them, according to 1 John 2.1, 2.
This, one would have thought, might have gone down with G. Keith, it being so
agreeable to his own Doctrine. For in his Way cast up (a Book not yet
retracted) p. 157. he said, And thus Christ does declare himself to be the
Mediator betwixt God and Man, as he is in them, Thou in me and I in them; here
Christ is the Middle-man or Mediator, as being in the Saints: Which Confutes
the gross and most comfortless Doctrine of the Presbyterians and others, who
affirm that Christ as Mediator is only without us, in Heaven, and is not
Mediator in us, whereas he himself in this place has declared the contrary.
And lest G: Keith should again Cavil at the Words [offereth up himself, etc.] I
will remind him, that he himself (in his Additional Postscript to G.
VVhitehead's Book, called, The Nature of Christianity, p. 66.) answered his
Opponent Gordon thus, Because Christ is called the one Offering, and that he
once offered up his Body, etc. Thou would exclude him, as in us, from being
one Offering, but herein thy Work is vain; for Christ Jesus is the one
Offering still; and though he offered up his Body outwardly but once upon the
Cross, yet he remains still an Offering for us, within us: For he is a Priest
for ever, and every Priest has somewhat to offer; and he is both the Offering
and the Priest, who lives for ever to make Intercession for us. This is too
good Doctrine still in G. Keith to be retracted by him (for though he has
mentioned this very Postscript of his in his Narrative, yet ^e has not
retracted any thing in it) though he can condemn the same in others; unjust Man
as he is! Before I leave this place, let me put G. Keith in Mind (seeing he
seem to have forgot it) of a necessary Caution he gave in his Way to the City
of God, p. 127. thus, Therefore we are not too nicely to distinguish betwixt
the Influences of his inward and outward Coming and the Effects thereof, but
rather to take them conjunctly, as in a perfect Conjunction, having a perfect
Influence upon all Mankind, for their Reconciliation and Renovation unto God,
as obtaining that Measure of Light and Grace from God unto all and every one,
whereby it is possible for them in a Day to be saved. And again, p. 139. thus,
But as I said above, so I do again repeat it, that it may have the more weight,
viz. that we are not too nicely to make a difference betwixt the Influence and
Effects of his Outward and Inward Sufferings, but to understand them in a
perfect Conjunction, etc. And so the People called Quakers do, say I.

Having had a fling at VV. Penn, he says, Let me come to G. Whitehead again.
And that he might stir up the People to Lightness, he tells them, You shall
have here a rare Dish of Divinity; and then to provide himself some Defense or
Excuse, after he had done it, he adds, Not that I would provoke any to
Lightness. What Hypocrisy is this? Then to garnish his rare Dish, he says, I
have read many Books in my Time, but I never read such a Book (except the
Ranters) in my Life; Popery is Orthodoxy to it; no Popish Priest will argue as
he has done. (See how he Banters him, Nar. p. 22.) The Book he quotes is
called, The Light and Life of Christ within, etc. p. 8. where he says G.
Whitehead blames VV. Burnet for saying, The Blood shed upon the Cross
sprinkles the Conscience, Sanctifies, Iustifies, Redeems us. And in p. 18. of
his Gross Error, where he carps at the same Passage, and gives the Quotation
more at large, but not truly) he says, Note, Here it is plain that G. Whitehead
does altogether deny Justification by that outward Blood, or that it was the
meritorious Cause of Salvation. But this is a manifest Falsehood, and Abuse put
upon G. VV. For he did neither deny the outward Blood to be the meritorious
Cause of Salvation, Nor did he there undertake to discuss, blame, or censure
any of Burnet's Doctrines or Assertions. That was to be done, and (with respect
to some of them) was done, in the after part of the Book, to which that former
Part was but as an Introduction; wherein Burnet's Contradictions were collected
and exposed; and therefore immediately after those Words of Burnets, p. 7.
partly cited by G. Keith, viz. The Blood shed upon the Cross, the material
Blood, meritorious to Salvation, sprinkles the Consciences, Sanctifies,
Iustifies, Redeems us, etc. G. Whitehead added thus, But in Contradiction, p.
40. That Blood shed is not in being (says Burnet) but he compares it to a price
lost. Upon which G. Whitehead made this Observation, p. 8. Observe, said he,
here a twofold stress is laid upon that Blood. 1. Merit to Salvation; 2. Work
to Sanctification; and so he has set it up above God: For God could not save,
he says, and yet it is not in being (this G. Keith, in reciting G.
VVhitehead's Words, left out) gross Absurdity! Whereas Sanctification being a
real Work inward, that is certainly in being which Effects it. This plainly
shows, that that which G. Whitehead blamed his Opponent for was his
Self-contradiction, in saying that Blood shed, Sprinkles, Sanctifies,
Justifies, Redeems (which are all of the present Time) and yet withal saying,
that Blood shed is not in being. This part G. Keith (as I noted) concealed; and
then falls upon G. Whitehead (as he had done before, Gross Error, p. 22.) for
wronging Burnet, in charging him with having said, God could not save. And he
makes as if he would help Burnet out, but he quickly pulls in his Horns,
saying, Nar. p. 25. But I wholly wave that Dispute; I think it is above Man's
capacity, Whether antecedently to God's purpose, he could have saved us without
the Death of his own dear Son. Truly I doubted nothing had been above G.
Keith's Presumption, because I have scarce seen him stick at any thing before,
how much soever above his Capacity. But though he is willing to wave that
Dispute, yet to help off the Baptist, and fall in with other Opposers, he says,
But God having so ordained it, consequentially to his purpose, it (viz. That
God could not save) may be as safely and truly said, as when the Scripture
says, God cannot lie. Is it any Reflection, says he, to say, God cannot lie,
and that he cannot contradict his Purpose? But I would know of him, whether to
contradict (or to al^er) ones Purpose, be the same thing, as to Lie? But it is
probable G. Keith might borrow this Notion from Io. Owen, who in his Book
against the Quakers, called A Declaration, etc. has a touch of this kind, if I
mistake not, in p. 178.

G. Keith gives another Proof against G. Whitehead, out of the same Book,
called, Light and Life, p. 38. and having set down the Baptists Words thus, Now
the Quakers would be so far from directing Men to go to the material Temple at
Jerusalem, that they make it but a vain thing to look to Jerusalem, to the
Antitype of that Temple, viz. to Jesus Christ, as he was there Crucified, or to
that Blood that was there shed for Justification; he says, now see the Answer,
which he gives thus. The Quakers see no need of directing Men, to the Type for
the Antitype, neither to the outward Temple, nor yet to Jerusalem, either to
Jesus Christ, or his Blood, knowing that neither the Righteousness of Faith,
nor the Word of it, does so direct, Romans 10. And is it the Baptists Doctrine to
direct Men to the material Temple, and Jerusalem, the Type for the Antitype?
What Nonsense and Darkness is this? And where do the Scriptures say, The Blood
was there shed for Justification, and that Men must be directed to Jerusalem to
it? (Whereas that Blood shed is not in being, said G. Whitehead, out of p. 40.
of Burnets Book.) This Charge G. Keith exhibited once before, in his Book
called, The True Copy, p. 19. (And in his Gross Error, p. 1, 2.) And I have
answered it already in mine, called, Truth Defended, p. 108, 109, 110. Where,
amongst other things, I showed, that there is a Typographical Error in the
Passage he carps at, and that whereas it is Printed thus, The Quakers see no
need of directing Men to the Type for the Antitype, viz. neither to the outward
Temple, nor yet to Jerusalem, either to Jesus Christ, or his Blood; it should
have been, either for Jesus Christ, or his Blood. This G. Keith could not well
shun noting (though he does the rest of my Answer) Therefore he says, Nar. p.
27. T. Ellwood, thinks to put a Trick on the Reader, and says it is wrong
Printed, and that it should have been for, instead of to. (And in the
Postscript to his Gross Error, calls it, a dull and silly Juggle.) But I not
only said it should have been for instead of to, but proved it, and that I
think very plainly. For I did not only say, I find it has been so amended with
a Pen in the Book which I have (which, as having the least weight in it, G.
Keith takes notice of, and says, I do not say G. Whitehead mended it; which is
a very idle Cavil: For though I do not know, but G. Whitehead might mend it;
yet if he did not, what then? Could it be expected he should, with a Pen, mend
a whole Impression?) But that which I gave as a more demonstrative Proof of the
Place being misprinted, G. Keith takes no notice of; which was this, viz. The
former part of the Answer shows it should have been so; for there it is, the
Quakers see no need of directing Men to the Type for the Antitype (mark, for
the Antitype, not to the Antitype:) And as it is so there (to the Type for the
Antitype) so it must be here also, to the Temple, or to Jerusalem, for Jesus
Christ, or his Blood. This plain Evidence G. Keith willingly shuns, and says
nothing to it. But shuffles about, and says, G. Whitehead has it to, to, to,
several Times, for which he quotes, p. 38, 39. and 61. That in p. 38. is the
place in Controversy. In p. 39. he uses the Word to, as referring directly to
Burnet's Words, whose the Word to was, saying, Where do the Scriptures say, the
Blood was there shed for Justification, and that Men must be directed to
Jerusalem to it (to that Blood that was shed there, were Burnets express Words,
and therefore it was expedient G. Whitehead, repeating his Words, should use
it.) So likewise in that other instance, p. 61. where G. Whitehead setting
forth the Confusion and Self-contradiction of his Adversary, keeps in
expressing it, to his own Terms; and therefore says, Mark how one while W.
Burnet makes that Blood, and the shedding of it, his Justifier, Redeemer, etc.
which he has confessed is not in being. Then (which G. Keith quotes) another
while People must seek their Savior above the Clouds and Firmament, contrary
to the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 10.6. Another while they must look to
Jerusalem for Justification, to the Blood that was there shed. The Word to, was
expressly Burnets there; therefore G. Whitehead kept to it. But in the very next
Line, when he spoke his own Words, he changed the Word to into for, saying, But
if Men should look to Jerusalem for that Blood, it is not there to be found,
for it is not in being says VV. Burnet. Now as this, and what I have said
before, manifests that it was a mistake in the Printing: So G. Keith's
contending to have it wrong, rather than right, against the Author's Sense and
Mind, rather than with it, shows him to be not only an unfair Adversary, but a
Man of an evil and malicious Mind: For none else would have repeated a Charge
of Error against another, and persisted to urge it, as G. Keith has done this,
from a Word denied to be the Authors, and so apparently proved to be a
Typographical Error only, as this was before. In his Controversy formerly with
R. Gordon, he blames him sharply for serving him so, and tells him, Thou
abusest my Words, taking occasion from a small Error in the Printing, which is
a disingenuous way of dealing; and had not thy prejudice blinded thee, thou
might easily have Corrected it by the Sense. So might he this, had ^ot his
prejudice (not blinded him: For I suppose he saw it at first; however I showed
him it a Year ago, but) prevailed upon him to wrong G. Whitehead knowingly,
which is worse than if he had been blinded. Yet so earnest is G. Keith in
pursuit of his false Charge, that upon G. Whitehead saying Burnet's directing
Men to Jerusalem for Christ is contrary to Deuteronomy. 30.13, 14. and Romans 10. G.
Keith cries out, Is not this abominable Perversion of Scripture, to confirm his
Antichristian Doctrine? But as forward as he was to Charge another, he was as
backward to clear or defend himself. For in my former Answer to this Charge (
Truth Defended, p. 110.) I showed him that what he now calls in G. Whitehead
an abominable Perversion of Scripture, is not more than, if so much as, he
himself had written (thirty Years ago) in his Book, called, Help in time of
Need, (not retracted by him) p. 63. where he says expressly thus, And now we
need not say, Who will go down into the Grave, and bring up Christ to us? or
who will ascend to Heaven, to bring him down to us? or who will go over the
Seas, and bring us Tidings of him from Jerusalem where he suffered in the
Flesh? (Herein he had direct Relation to the Words of Moses and Paul in Deuteronomy.
30. and Romans 10.) Him, says he, (whose Name is the Word of God, Rev. 19.) we of
a Truth witness nigh us, even in our Hearts; so that we need not either ascend,
or descend, or go forth, etc. Upon which I then told him there, p. 111. By this
he may see how far he is degenerated, and apostatized from his former
Principles: Then he was not for ascending, descending, or sending to Jerusalem,
to have Tidings of Christ brought from thence; because he then witnessed him,
Christ, the Word of God, nigh him, even in his Heart: But now, being gone from
the Word in his Heart, and turned against it, he is (it seems) for having Men
directed to the Type, for the Antitype, to the outward Temple, or to Jerusalem,
for Jesus Christ, and his Blood. Thus far in my former; of which he takes no
more notice, than if he had winked with both Eyes, and never seen it.

His Cavil in p. 26. That they (the Quakers) in their Preachments (a Word he
uses in contempt and scorn, as other Profane People do) have used to stop at
the eighth verse of Romans 10. and go no farther; is both idle and false: For
they have not used to stop there, but have gone further, and from ver. 9 th.
have opened and showed what that Mouth Confession and Heart-belief there spoken
of, should be, which is necessary and effectual to Salvation, which in the 10.
ver. is called, a Believing unto Righteousness, the same that in the 6 th ver.
is called, The Righteousness of Faith, which directs, not to say who shall
ascend, or descend, to bring Christ down, or up; but directs to the Word that
is nigh thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart (which, says the Apostle, Is the
Word of Faith which we preach) that if thou shall confess with thy Mouth (from
this Word of Faith that is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth) the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine Heart (from and by this Word of Faith that is nigh thee,
even in thine Heart) that God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be
Saved; though thou go not to the Type (the material Temple) for the Antitype,
nor look to Jerusalem (the place where Christ suffered, whither the Baptist and
G. Keith would send thee.) to find him now there: For as it was said by the
Angel a^ the Sepulcher, after his Resurrection, Surrexit, non est hic, He is
risen, He is not here, Mark 16.6. much more may it be said, since his
Ascension, (with respect to those outward places where he was Crucified and
Buried) Ascendit, non est hic, He is ascended, He is not here. Now as the
Apostle, by dissuading Believers from saying, who shall ascend or descend, to
bring Christ down or up, and directing them to him, as the Word nigh in the
Mouth and Heart, did not reject nor undervalue the Death of Christ at
Jerusalem, or the Virtue of his Blood shed there: So neither did G. Whitehead
in blaming the Baptist for directing People now to go thither or look thither
for it, as if it were now to be found there. This, in effect, I told G. Keith
before, in Truth Defended, p. 109. Where I said, It was no Error in the Apostle
Paul to direct (according to the Righteousness of Faith) to the Word nigh, in
the Mouth, and in the Heart. Though he knew well enough, that Christ had
suffered at Jerusalem, and that but a little before; yet he did not direct Men
to the outward Temple, or to Jerusalem (though both then standing) to find
Christ, or his Blood there: For he knew, that Christ was not then to be found
outwardly, either at the outward Temple, or at Jerusalem; but they that came to
the Word nigh in the Mouth, and in the Heart, would both find Christ, and feel
the Virtue of his blood ( even of that Blood which he offered upon the Cross)
nearer home. So neither is it any Error in G. Whitehead to say, The Quakers
see no need to direct Men to the Type for the Antitype, viz. neither to the
outward Temple, nor to Jerusalem, either for Jesus Christ, or his Blood: Nor in
so saying does he deny, or disesteem Jesus Christ, or his Blood (for he
directs, with the Apostle, where Men may both find Jesus Christ, and may feel
the Virtue of his Blood;) but he rejects the Notion of his Opponent, who (it
seems) would have Men directed to the Type for the Antitype. G. VVhite^ead
therefore has not falsified the Scriptures, and made them to say what they say
not, as G. Keith falsely Charges him. But G. Keith has falsely accused G.
Whitehead, and grossly perverted both his Meaning and his Words, and that not
only here, but in his Gross Error, p. 15. also.

The next thing h^ offers is Solomon Eccles's Letter, a Copy of which he gives
in p. 28. But before he read it, he said, p. 27. Next, you shall hear Solomon
Eccles 's Letter, That the Blood of Christ is no more than the Blood of another
Saint. This he did to prepossess his Auditors with an ill Opinion of it, before
they heard it; and he also wronged S. Eccles in those Words: For he delivers it
as S. Eccles's, That the Blood of Christ, ( indefinitely, and without any
Distinction) is no more than the Blood of another Saint. Whereas it is evident
by the Letter it self (as he has given it) that S. Eccles did distinguish
between the Blood of Christ, which was offered up in the Eternal Spirit, Heb.
9.14. and the Blood that was forced out of him by the Soldier, after he was
Dead. The Blood that was offered up by Christ himself in the Eternal Spirit,
Heb. 9.14. he declares he did very highly esteem of, even to be more Excellent,
and Living, and Holy, and Precious, than is able to be uttered by the Tongues
of Men and Angels. But that Blood which he said was no more than the Blood of
an other Saint, was the Blood that was forced out of him by the Soldier after
he was Dead. So that, that upon which S. Eccles did ground the difference he
put between the Blood of Christ in one respect, and in another, was, that in
the one, it was a voluntary offering of Christ himself, in and by the Eternal
Spirit, before his Death: In the other, it was the forcible Act of a Soldier,
after he was Dead, and the Sacrifice completed. This G. Keith (had he been
fair, even as an Adversary) should have observed to his Auditors, how much so
ever he had disliked S. Eccles's Expression; which I know no Quaker did ever
approve, much less undertook to Justify, or Defend; I am sure I did not, nor
G. Whitehead neither, in his Answer to Burnet, out of which G. Keith Charges
him with it: For he therein (as I noted in my former) both disclaimed those
Words, by saying, I do not make S. Eccles 's Expressions therein an Article of
our Faith: and also for himself declared, that he did own the Blood shed to be
more than the Blood of another Saint, Light and Life, p. 59. And I called those
Words of S. Eccles's an unjustifiable Expression, Truth Defended, p. 112.
Therefore G. Keith is unjust in reflecting upon us as he does in p. 30. for
though he gave the Copy of the Letter in p. 28. yet (for what Reason, I know
not, whether to perplex the Cause, or that he himself was in Confusion and
Disorder when he delivered it) he interweaves another Matter, which takes up
wholly his 29th Page, and then in p. 30. returns to the Letter, saying, Now as
to the Letter, we go on, etc. But for what end soever he made that Irregular
Transition from one thing to another, though I might justly step over what he
has interposed, and follow the Thread of his Discourse upon the Letter; yet
that it may appear how willing I am to answer all his Cavils, I will suspend
what is further to be said to his Exceptions about the Letter, and go back with
him to p. 29.

There he sets down Burnet's Words, and as a Sign he did not well know what he
did, he sets them down twice over. They were these, All things under the Law,
in the Type, was purged with Blood, and this Blood was material Blood, and not
Mystical; and that Blood that Christ shed, in order to the effecting the
Salvation of Man, must need be Visible and Material Blood. To this G.
Whitehead's Answer, was, 'Do but mark here what a sad Cons^quence he has drawn;
as if one should Reason, that because the Type was Material, Visible, and not
Mystical; therefore the Antitype or Substance must needs be Material, and not
Mystical. By this all Mysteries, or Divine Things, are excluded from being
either Spiritual, Antitype, or Substance; whereas it was the heavenly things
themselves that are in Christ, in which consists the Substance and End of Types
and Shadows. But to say, that material Blood was a Type of that which was
material; this is to give the Substance no pre-eminence above the Type
(especially if neither of them be Mystical, nor in being (which was the
Baptist's Opinion) or like as if one should say, one Type was 'a Type of
another; there G. Keith makes a full stop, leaving out about half a score Lines
of G. Whitehead's Answer, without discovering that he did do so. I will put
them in between two Crochets, that the Reader may observe which they were,
thus, As to say, because Circumcision, which was a Type, was material or
outward, therefore the Circumcision of the Spirit, which is the Antitype of it,
must needs be outward too, and not Mystical (which would be sad Doctrine:) And
thus he might as well Reason, touching all other Types and Shadows under the
Law, and the heavenly or good things to come, prefigured or shadowed by them.
That because the Priests under the Law (at the outward Tabernacle and Temple)
were Ministers of outward, or temporal Things, carnal Ordinances, Shadows, etc.
Therefore those good things to come, those heavenly things, which Christ was
said to be the High Priest of, must needs be Temporal, and not Mystical; which
were absurd to assert;] Whereas both the heavenly and more perfect Tabernacle
and Altar, with the heavenly Things, are all a Mystery, and Spiritual; the
Offering and Living Sacrifices are Spiritual; the Passover Spiritual, the Seed
Spiritual; the Bread, the Fruit of the Vine, the Oil, the Flesh and the Blood,
(which give Life to the Soul) yea, the Water and Blood (which washes and
sprinkleth the Conscience) are all Spiritual and Mysterious, as the New
Covenant it self is, which they belong to, and these things known in; and this
is the new and living Way which Christ set open, through the Vail of his Flesh,
Heb. 10. Let them receive this who can, p. 59, 60. I would not have transcribed
this whole Answer, (especially having given it at full length before in my
former Book) but that I observed G. Keith had slily dropped a considerable part
of it, and I thought he might probably take advantage against me, if I should
have omitted any of the rest. From the whole it appears, that G. Whitehead did
not so much apply himself in his Answer to overthrow his Opponent's Argument in
that one Particular, as to show the general absurdity and mischief of the
Consequence of that Argument, which reached alike from the other Types in the
Old Covenant, to the other Antitypes in the New Covenant. This G. Keith
observed, and to help the Baptist off, he says, VV. Burnet does not express it
universally, but in this particular Case: And G. Whitehead extends it to an
universal. He says right in the first part, VV. Burnet does not express it
universally; but the Consequence of his Argument has such an universal extent:
Which G. Whitehead observing, attackt him there; not as G. Keith represents it
(who has the Art of Sophisticating) as if all the Types of the Old Testament
signified nothing internally and spiritually, (upon which he says, But W.
Burnet said no such thing) But as if all the Antitypes in the New Testament
must be altogether as external and void of Spiritual Mystery, as their
respective Types in the Old Testament were; which the Consequence of VV.
Burnet's Argument says.

G. Keith Notes that, by G. VVhitehead's Argument, as the New Covenant is
spiritual and inward, and not outward, so the Blood of the New Covenant is
Inward, and not outward, so the Passover is inward, which is Christ the
Mediator, and not outward. Now take notice, that the Words [and not outward] in
all these three places, are not G. Whitehead's, nor to be found in his Answer,
but are added by G. Keith of his own Head. And from this Addition of his, he
makes this Inference, This is a plain denial of the Man Christ without us, to
be our Mediator, our Passover, Offering, or his Flesh and Blood without us to
be concerned in our Salvation, otherwise than as the Type. Now I do not think
this proceeds either from his Ignorance, or Oversight; but from his Injustice
and Malice. For he knows, that when we speak of Christ, we do not put asunder
what God has joined together, but we take his Divinity and Manhood conjointly
and united, always acknowledging him to be without us, as well as within us.
And as little Justice as G. Keith shows to us, I have so much Charity for G.
Keith, as to think, that when, in his Way cast up, p. 157. he said, Thus
Christ does declare himself to be the Mediator betwixt God and Man, as he is in
them; he did not intend a plain denial of the Man Christ without to be our
Mediator. But he knows (if he would, or by this Time could, be Just) that the
great Reason of our so much asserting Christ's Inward Appearance and spiritual
Manifestation as a Mediator, Sanctifier, Justifier and Savior within, has been
(as to assert the Truth, so) to counterpoise (if I may so speak) the contrary
Doctrine and Assertion of those who deny him to be, with respect to these
Offices, at all within, and shut him wholly out, making the Work of Mediation,
Sanctification, Justification and Salvation, to be only and altogether outward;
whereas we acknowledge to the utmost whatever Christ has done, or does,
without us, in order to our Salvation; yet cannot exclude the inward Work. And
I am persuaded, this Consideration which I have now mentioned, had some
impression on G. Keith's Mind, when he writ those Words I last cited of his,
out of his Way cast up, p. 157. which made him (after he had repeated, from
those Words of Christ, Thou in me, and I in them, here Christ is the
Middle-man, or Mediator, as being in the Saints) add these Words, viz. Which
confutes the gross and most comfortless Doctrine of the Presbyterians and
others, who affirm that Christ, as Mediator, is only without us, in Heaven, and
is not Mediator in us, whereas he himself in this Place has declared the
contrary.

Let us go on to his Clinch: For he says, Now here I clinch the Matter; and he
attempts it thus. G. Whitehead (says he) says, But to say material Blood was a
Type of that which was material, this is to give the Substance no pre-eminence
above the Type (especially, if neither of them be Mystical, nor in being) or as
if one should say, one Type was a Type of another, (so also, Gross Error, p.
18.) Well, this explains it self, by those Words in the Parenthesis, (
especially, if neither of them be Mystical;) For those Words show that he no
otherwise opposes the Antitype's being Material, than his Adversaries Argument
excludes it from being Mystical, or Spiritual. This also appears to be his
Sense, from the very Entrance of his Answer, where he said, Do but mark here
what a sad Consequence he has drawn; as if one should Reason, that because the
Type was Material, Visible, and not Mystical (which was Burnet's Term)
therefore the Antitype, or Substance, must needs be Material, and not Mystical:
By this all Mysteries or Divine things are excluded from being either
Spiritual, Antitype, or Substance: And from hence it was that G. Whitehead
said, This is to give the Substance no pre-eminence above the Type, when the
Substance or Antitype is denied to be Mystical, and made only Material, because
the Type thereof was only Material, and not Mystical. As to the other part of
G. VVhitehead's Words, which G. Keith takes into his Clinch, viz. [Or like as
if one should say, one Type was a Type of another:] It appears from the Place
in G. VVhitehead's Book, that he spoke it of those Temporal and Carnal
Ordinances, which he there mentions, and particularly of Circumcision, which in
the very next Words he joins to those former, thus, As to say, because
Circumcision, which was a Type, was material or outward, therefore the
Circumcision of the Spirit, which is the Antitype of it, must needs be outward
too, and not Mystical. Wherein perhaps he might give a close Nip to those who
hold Circumcision to have been a Type of Water Baptism, and Water Baptism to
be a Type of the Spiritual Baptism; thereby making one Type a Type of another.

But I find G. Keith cannot clinch his Matter, until he has made an Argument
for G. Whitehead, therefore he says, Now the Argument lies here, If the
Sacrifices under the Law were Types of Christ's Blood, then that Blood must not
be outward Blood, but inward. Nay, nay; G. Whitehead said not so. He did not
say it must not be outward, but it must not be only outward: It must not be so
outward, as to destroy its being Inward. It is both Inward and outward, and
has always been so believed and owned by the Quakers in general, and G.
Whitehead in particular. Whereas therefore G. Keith says, This is a false
Consequence of G. Whitehead, and shows that he denie^ Remission of Sin, and
Justification by the Blood of Christ outwardly shed; I say, That false
Consequence is G. Keith's, and shows that he has renounced honesty and shame.
For G. Whitehead does not deny, but owns Remission of Sin, and Justification so
far, by the Blood of Christ outwardly shed; but not that Justification (in the
right sense of the Word, as it imports a being made Just or Righteous) is
wrought only by the shedding of the Blood outwardly, without feeling the living
Virtue of the Blood inwardly, purging the Conscience from dead Works, to serve
the living God. Thus G. Keith's Matter is left unclinched. Now let us return to
what he says upon S. Eccles's Letter, in p. 30. where he begins thus:

Now as to the Letter, says he, we go on to what T. Ellwood says. He (says G.
Keith) is so unfair, he will have it, that G. Whitehead owns, that the material
Blood of Christ is that by which we are justified. Of that I have newly spoken,
and showed how far, and in what Sense, that is, and ought to be owned. But
alas! Does he call me unfair for this? I rather thought he would have called,
at least have accounted, me fair in that. Would he therefore rather have G.
Whitehead not own, than own it, only that he might have a spiteful blow at him?
What an evil Mind is that! Yet in that evil Mind, he goes on thus; But here,
says he, is the Trick, G. Whitehead makes a Typical Offering of Christ, and an
Antitypical; the Typical was the Offering of Christ at Jerusalem, the
Antitypical is the Offering of Christ within. This is a Trick indeed, an
horrible false Trick of G. Keith's own devising. So again, a little below, he
says, If Christ's Blood outwardly shed was a Type, as G. Whitehead affirms it
was. (Where does G. Whitehead affirm so? I affirm I never saw that Affirmation
yet; but since he affirms that G. Whitehead has so affirmed, I put him to
produce that Affirmation.) See here then, says he, their Answer; It was
queried, whether they owned that (...) are by the Blood of Christ outwardly
shed, justified: Or that the Blood that was outwardly shed, did belong to the
Sacrifice? G. Whitehead has since of late answered, Yea: Here, says he, they
have sought to blind all the World; Christ, adds he, as he outwardly suffered,
was a Sacrifice, but a Typical Sacrifice. Therefore, says he, the next Question
to be put, must be, Whether he was the Antitypical Sacrifice? Ay, so let it:
And the Answer to it shall be, Yea, He was the Antitypical Sacrifice, of which
the legal Sacrifices were a Type; but that he was ever called a Typical
Sacrifice, I never heard nor saw from any Quaker's Mouth or Pen. Such foul
Falsehoods, and gross Slanders as these, neither deserve nor need any other
Refutation than a bare denial.

He is highly offended with G. Whitehead, about S. Eccles's Letter: He would
have had him blamed, and censured it severely and sharply, as blasphemous. If
G. Whitehead had been as hotheaded as G. Keith, perhaps he might: But
Blasphemy is an high Charge, and they that understand it aright, are not so
forward as G. Keith (it seems) would be, to brand Persons with it, for every
unsound Expression. G. Keith is too hot and husty to see aright. He can find
nothing at all in G. Whitehead's Answer to blame or censure the Letter: Yet in
p. 31. his Narrative tells us, A Quaker did observe to him, That G. Whitehead
did find fault with the Letter: G. VVhitehead's saying, He did not make S.
Eccles's Expression an Article of our Faith, (which is as much as to say, I
don't believe what he says in that matter, or am one with him in it) is not a
disowning, with G. Keith. But if he reasons well, when he says, p. 31. He that
does not testify against a thing, when he has just occasion for it, justifies
it: May I not, with as good reason, say, He that does not justify a thing,
when he is put upon it, disowns it. There is an implicit, as well as an
explicit owning or disowning of a thing. But G. Keith is in and out. In one
place he says, He can find nothing of blame or censure at all: A few lines
lower he says, But I find not that he censured it all. It did not all deserve
censure. Next (says G. Keith) G.W. tells you in what sense he owns it,
(understands by it not the Letter, but the Blood shed) viz. That Blood had a
peculiar signification; I told him (says G. Keith) so had the Blood of Beasts a
peculiar signification, for their Blood signified Remission of Sin, but was no
satisfactory Offering for sin. But the signification which that Blood had, did
peculiarly excel that of the Blood of Beasts: For the Blood shed was a
satisfactory offering for sin, and did obtain Remission of Sin for all those
that truly believe in, and faithfully follow the Lord Jesus Christ. But G.
Keith did not fairly by G. Whitehead, in saying, He tells you in what sense he
owns it, viz. That Blood had a peculiar signification; and stops there, as if
that were all G. Whitehead had said. For G. Whitehead went on, and showed
wherein he owned that Blood shed to be more than that of another Saint, in many
particulars of great weight.

He confesses that I say, G Whitehead does own, That the Blood of Christ is
more than the Blood of another Saint; But what Blood, says G. Keith? The Blood
of Christ within, says he, and then says, There Is the Trick. He is full of his
Tricks; and it were well that he had not more Tricks than are good: But such
Tricks as these he never learnt among the Quakers. Neither will his putting
these Tricks upon us, hurt us, so much as himself: For the Just God, who knows
our Innocence, and his Envy, will clear us, and give him, unless he unfeignedly
Repent, the Reward due to him for his wicked and unjust Accusations. In the
mean time, he himself shall Convict himself of Falsehood in this foul Charge.
Here he makes me to mean by the Blood of Christ, which G. Whitehead said he
owns is more than the Blood of another Saint, the Blood of Christ within. Yet
in the same page, (p. 30.) had said before, He (T. Ellwood) is so unfair, he
will have it, that G. Whitehead own^, that the material Blood of Christ is
that by which we are justified. How hangs this together, That I would have the
Blood which G. Whitehead then treated of, and owned, to be the Material Blood
of Christ: And yet at the same time I would have the same Blood to be ( not the
Material Blood, but) the Blood of Christ within? Besides, G. Whitehead spoke of
that Blood mentioned in the Letter, which S. Eccles said was forced out by the
Soldier, and expressly said, he owned the Blood shed was more than the Blood of
another Saint. And will G. Keith call that the Blood of Christ within? Do these
things square? Does not this manifest the Trick to be G. Keith's? Yet upon this
Trick of his, he cries out, Is not this enough to Cheat all the World? Have not
I more cause to say, Are not such false Trick as these enough to belie, abuse,
defame, slander all the World? What Man can be secure from such a Tricker as G.
Keith is! He goes on with his Trick further, They have, says he, a double
meaning, as Arius had. They say they own the Blood of Christ, and every other
thing said of him according to the Scripture; so, (adds he) said the Arians and
Macedonians, when at other times they discovered their meaning to be quite
contrary to Scripture. Is not this Man past shame? He says we have a double
meaning, as Arius had. He must say this either from Supposition, or Knowledge.
If from Supposition, what can be more horribly wicked, than to brand a People,
or Persons with so great a Blemish, upon Supposition only? If he will pretend
to know, that we have a double meaning, he must pretend to have that Knowledge
either from our Books, or our Mouths. From our Books he can know it no more
than another Man, they being public and common to all; neither has he proved,
nor can he prove it from our Books. If he will pretend to have had it from any
of our Mouths, let him name the Person; I provoke him to it. He says in his
Solemn Appeal, p. 7. He thinks he should know, and does know, these called
Quakers, and their Principles, far better than Cotton Mather (his then
Opponent) or any, or all his Brethren, having been conversant with them in
public Meetings, as well as in private Discourses, with the most noted and
esteemed among them, for about 28 Years past, and that in many places of the
World, both in Europe and America. Now if we had a double meaning, as he says
we have, so as to say one thing, and mean another; he who has had (as he
pretends) so close and intimate a Conversation with us, for so many Years, must
needs in that time have observed it, discovered it, known it, been privy to it,
and consequently be able to make a plain, demonstrative, evidential Discovery
and Proof thereof; which I again provoke him to. Had he that Trick when he was
among us? He complains, (in his Book called, The Christian Faith, etc. printed
but in 1692. p. 3.) of Christian Lodowick (such another Apostate as himself)
that Whereas diverse of us (says he) declared sincerely before many People their
sincere Faith, as concerning the Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and what the
holy Scriptures testify of him, yet he did continue to accuse them still, as
denying the true Christ, alleging, They had another sense than the
Scripture-words did bear: Appealing to their Consciences, whether it was not
so: Thus making himself Judge (says G. Keith,) over our secret thoughts, as
having a secret Sense in our thoughts of Scripture words, contrary to the true
Sense of them, though we have not given him, or any other, occasion to judge so
rashly and uncharitably of us; and our Consciences bear us witness, in the
sight of God, that we do sincerely believe and think as we speak: Thus G. Keith
but four years ago, even after he had begun his quarrelling in Pensilvania; yet
the very same thing he then blamed C. Lodowick for doing toward him, he now
does himself toward us: Would one not think he had learnt this Trickling Art
from that Apostate (as he represents him) C. L? He compares us to the Arrians
and Macedonians, some of the worst of Heretics, and in that for which they
were more to be condemned, than for their Heresies, since these might possibly
proceed from Ignorance and Mistake, that must flow from Hypocrisy and Design. I
reject his comparison, and in plain and sober words, deny his Charge, as a most
abominable Falsehood and Slander.

In p. 31. he quarrels with G. Whitehead for saying, S. Eccles's intent in
those words, No more than the Blood of another Saint, was as to Papists, and
you, whose minds are Carnal, who oppose the Light within; and also simply as to
the Essence of the Blood, which you dare not say is still in being. To the
first part of this Sentence he says, This never was my Quakerism. For my belief
all along, was, that Papists, and Baptists, and all, have a benefit by Christ's
Death. And so was G. Whitehead's too. Because his Death being a general
Atonement for all that shall believe in, and receive him, all are thereby put
into a Capacity, by receiving and believing in him, to attain unto Salvation.
But if any, whether Papists, Baptists, or other, being carnally minded (which
is, or brings Death, Romans 8.6.) do in their carnal mind, Oppose the Light
within, and continue so to do, of what particular benefit, to the Salvation of
the Soul, will the Blood of Christ be to them? Therefore G. Keith in this, as
in almost all places, deals unfairly with G. Whitehead, neither taking his
right sense, nor giving his full words: For what G. Whitehead delivered (as S.
E's intent) with respect to such Papists and Baptists whose minds are carnal,
and who Oppose the Light within; that G. Keith extends to Papists and Baptists
Universally, and draws his Conclusion accordingly thus, Now it is come to this,
says he, That the Blood of Christ is no more to Papists and Baptists, than the
Blood of another Saint. As if all Papists and Baptists, qua tales, must of
necessity be carnally minded, and oppose the Light within. In like manner he
deals with him, in the latter part of that Sentence, viz. And also simply as to
the essence of the Blood, which you dare not say is still in being, etc. Which
plainly appears to have been Spoken, ad hominem only, upon the Baptists Notion,
that that Blood which was shed, was not in being. Yet upon this G. Keith
descants, alleging what no Quaker, that I know of, ever denied, viz. That it
was never defiled with Sin, and had a Miraculous Conception; but wholly
conceals those other words of G. Whitehead's, which in his Book immediately
follow, [ But not as to the Spiritual Virtue and Testimony, which is still in
being] Which (said G. Whitehead) S. E. owned to be his Intention. And that
plainly proves, that S. E. owned the Blood shed, was more than the Blood of
another Saint, as to the Spiritual Virtue and Testimony of it.

But says G. Keith, Let us consider these words of S. E. which G. Whitehead
says, might satisfy any Spiritual or unbyassed man, viz. I do very highly
esteem of the Blood of Christ to be more excellent, etc. There G. Keith stops
with an, etc. which he should not have done: For if he had a mind to save the
Transcribing those other good Epithets ( Living, Holy, Precious,) which S. E.
added to the Blood, yet he should not have overppassed those explanatory Words
of S. E's which follow, viz. I mean the Blood which was offered up in the
Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. The words of that Scripture are, How much more shall
the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit, offered himself without
Spot (or fault) to God, purge your Consciences? etc. Hence it is evident, that
by the Blood of Christ, which S. E. said, he so highly esteemed, he meant the
Blood that was of and in that Body, which was offered up upon the Cross: For he
refers expressly to this Scripture, which Speaks directly of that Offering. This
G. Keith unfairly (but like himself) concealed; and then cries out, Here Is S.
E's Fallacy, and G. Whitehead's Fallacy also. But I think he will not be able
to make it out, without the help of one of his former Tricks; nor even with it.
Thus he goes on, Now you know what Blood they mean, and see what Blood G.
Whitehead means. The Blood is Spiritual and Inward, the other is a Type. If
they know what we mean, it is a sign we mean as we speak and write; for they
could not know our meaning, but by our speaking or writing. But such as mean to
know our meaning aright, will do well to take it from our selves, not from an
unjust, and implacable Enemy. That the Blood is Spiritual, and that it is
inward as well as outward, and outward as well as inward, I grant: But that the
outward is a Type, is not the saying nor meaning of the Quakers; but a meaning
invented by G. Keith to put a Trick upon us. He quotes G. Whitehead's Book
(Light and Life, p. 56.) both in his Gross Error, p. 17. and here, thus, It is
confessed, that God by his own Blood Purchased to himself a Church, Acts,
20.28. Now the Blood of God, or that Blood that relates to God, must needs be
Spiritual, he being a Spirit; and the Covenant of God is inward and Spiritual,
and so is the Blood of it. Upon this, says G. Keith, Nar. p. 31. So you see he
does not allow the Blood outwardly shed, to relate to God, or to be the Blood
of the New Covenant, or that God Purchased his Church with that Blood outwardly
shed on the Cross. Why so, I pray? G. Whitehead said nothing against the Blood
outwardly shed on the Cross; but, having to do with a Baptist, who would have
the Blood to be only outward, and not Spiritual, and who (as G. Whitehead cites
him in that 56 p.) confessed he was as Ignorant of any such Blood as may be, G.
Whitehead asserted the Blood of God, by which he purchased to himself a Church
and the Blood of the New Covenant, to be Spiritual (not only outward, as the
Type of it was) And will G. Keith say, that the Blood of Christ which was
outwardly shed, had no Spirituality in it, nor might in any sense, be called
Spiritual, considering the Miraculous conception of the Body (whereof the Blood
was a Principal part) through the overshadowing of the Power of the Highest. G.
Keith might have remembered, that when he was in The way to the City of God
(which now he has turned his Back upon) he writ thus, p. 131. Even according
to that Birth (to wit, his outward Birth) he was the Son of God, no less than
the Son of Man, as having God for his Father, as he had the Virgin Mary for his
Mother. Now the Child, we know, does partake an Image, or Nature, from both
Parents; and thus did Christ, who did partake of the Nature and Image of Man,
from the Seed of Mary, but did partake of a Nature and Image, much more
excellent, than that of Man, in its greatest Glory, from God and his Seed, who
did really sow a most Divine and Heavenly Seed in the Virgin's Womb, which as
it supplied the Males Seed, so it had much more in it, and brought forth a
Birth, which as it had the true and whole Nature of Man, so I say, it had a
perfection above it, and that not only in accidental Qualities (as men will
readily confess) but even in Substance and Essence. But if he had forgotten
this, yet he might have remembered, and ought to have considered, that Christ
having offered up himself through the Eternal Spirit to God, the Blood that was
outwardly shed, was included in that offering, as part thereof; and will he not
admit that Blood, after it was offered up to God through the Eternal Spirit, to
be called Spiritual?

In p. 32. he tells his Auditors, You have had an account of them as to
Justification (and a false account too, say I;) Now, says he, it is worth your
while to see how these [pretended] infallible Men, contradict one another. What
more frothy Flout could the most profane Scoffer at Infallibility have used?
Is not this strange Language from one, that in the same Breath (as it were, see
p. 31.) said, I am a Quaker still? Truly if he were, I should think the worse
of Quakerism (as he calls it) for his sake. The Contradiction he pretends to
find, or rather make, is between W. Penn, and G. Whitehead both, in answer to
Danson. He gives W. Penn's words out of Reason against Railing, p. 82. thus,
Rewardableness is a work without which God will not bestow his Favor, and yet
not the Meritorious Cause, for that there is no Proportion betwixt the work
that is Fini^e and Temporary, and the Reward which is Infinite and Eternal,
etc. G. Whitehead's words he gives out of a little Book called The Voice of
VVisdome, p. 36. thus, The Righteousness which God effects in us, is not
Finite, but Infinite, for Christ is God's Righteousness, and Christ is formed
in us, Gal. 4.19. and so that Righteousness which God works in us by his
Spirit, is of the same kind and nature with that which works it, for the
Saints are made Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. G. Keith should
have observed, first that these words of G. Whitehead's (for he approves and
highly commends VV: Penn in this place: But his Hosannah has commonly a Crucify
at the Tail of it) were a Deduction or Inference from T. Danson's Affirmation,
who had laid down, that the Righteousness whereof Christ is the Subject, and
that whereof he is the Efficient, are of one Species or kind. From which G.
Whitehead makes his Inference thus, Then say I, the Righteousness which God
effects in us, is not Finite, but Infinite: For Christ is God's Righteousness,
and Christ is formed in us, 2. Which takes away the Contradiction wholly, W.
Penn, and G. Whitehead do not speak of one and the same thing. W. Penn speaks
of the works which we perform: G. Whitehead speaks of Christ, God's
Righteousness, formed in us. So the pretended Contradiction being removed, G.
Keith's envious notes thereupon fall with it, which only show his captious
nature and cavilling Spirit. He should have called to mind, that in his Serious
Appeal, p. 24. he told Cot. Mather, That the nature of a Contradiction is
difficult many times to understand, even in natural things, so that it is
reckoned the Subtillest part of Logic or Metaphysics, to understand thoroughly
what are always Contradictions, and what not; And therefore much more hard it
is, to undertand in Spiritual things, that contain many seeming Contradictions.
But this, now I think on it, was to help himself off, when C. Mather charged him
with Contradicting himself.

In p. 33. he says, Now I would hasten to a Conclusion. And though he takes
time to tell an untruth in the very entrance, saying, I have proved to you,
that they have excluded the Blood of Christ, etc. Yet he makes so much haste,
that going on to prove that we say, we are not sanctified by that Blood, he
gives us three pages, but names no Book, out of which he takes them. I shall
read to you, says he, G. Whitehead, p. 49, 50, 51. Here Is one Proof, says he,
if ye think this is not enough, I will bring more. What ground they had to
think that Proof enough, who heard it, I cannot tell. But I think no man by
reading the Narrative can tell what to think of it: For he gives neither the
Book, nor the words; but only the Authors name, and three pages. He brings one
more, and that is out of G. VVhitehead's Book called Light and Life, p. 59. The
Baptists words he gives thus, Neither did I ever read that it was the Blood or
Life of Christ in his People that we are Justified by. See now the Treachery of
this false Man, in setting down the Baptists words. The Baptist's words were,
Neither did I ever read that it was the Blood or Life in Christ, or the Life of
Christ in his People, that we are Justified by. He leaves out the words [ in
Christ] and makes it only the Blood or Life of Christ in his People. Whereas
the Baptist's words import a denial of Justification, not only by the Life of
Christ in his People, but by the Blood or Life in Christ himself. For said the
Baptist, Neither did I ever read that it was the Blood or Life in Christ, or
the Life of Christ in his People, that we are Justified by. G. W's answer he
gives thus; The Spirit of Christ (which is Life) does both Quicken, Sanctify
and Justify, the true Believers, John. 6.63. 1 Cor. 6. And that Blood and Water
that is said to cleanse; is not of another kind, but agrees in one with the
Spirit, all which is known within, and the effects thereof. Upon this G. Keith
concludes thus, So you see he takes it away from the outward Blood, and gives
it to the inward Blood. No such matter. He does not divide the outward Blood
from the inward, with respect to the Virtue and Efficacy of it; Neither indeed,
did he mention outward Blood, or inward Blood either, in this place. But he
said, The Spirit of Christ (which is Life) does both quicken, sanctify and
justify, the true Believers (is not that true?) He said, That Blood and Water
that is said to cleanse, is not of another kind, but agrees in one with the
Spirit (is not that true?) And he said, All which is known within' the
Quickening, the Sanctifying, the Justifying, the Cleansing, and the Effects
thereof, is known within (is not that true also?) Whatever the Efficient be,
the work is wrought within, and both the work, and the effects there of, is
known within.

By this time his Auditors seem to be as weary of G. Keith, as he of the work.
And therefore they bid him go to the next head; but being loath to lose a Proof
(as he calls it) he even thrusts it upon them. He intends this Proof against
VV. Penn, but he names not the Book he takes it out of, as he did not before
upon G. Whitehead, which shows he was in haste indeed. But giving the words,
though not the Book (which he did not in the other Case) I have, from the
Circumstances of the matter, found his Quotation, in that Book of W. Penn's
called Quakerism a New Nickname for Old Christianity, p. 149. It is upon a
Passage which I. Faldo had quarrelled with and perverted in a Book of Is.
Penington's; which G. K. having occasion to speak of, makes as if he were so
chary of Isaac Penington, that he would be loath so much as to mention him; and
says, I charitably think this Passage dropped from him unawares. Then adds, I
wish I could have that ground of Charity to others of them. It seems his
Charity is very narrow, if it can extend to but one, and he not living neither.
But they are in best case, that have no need of his Charity (as the Quakers
have not) for it is as kind as the Crocodile's Tears. But to his Proof, he
begins it thus, J. Faldo thinks that he has made Is. Penington his own. Can
outward Blood wash the Conscience? p. 29. A plain Denial, says J. Faldo. Here
is J. Faldo's Commentary on Is. Penington's words. Is this Intelligible? It Is a
sign by his Confusion he had enough of his work. I must be fain to open the
Passage and the occasion of it, to make sense of his words. Isaac Penington,
amongst many other Questions to Professors (who place all upon the outward) put
this Question, Can outward Blood cleanse the Conscience? Can outward Water
wash the Soul clean? This Io. Faldo (whom G. Keith no longer ago, than in
1692.) branded in Print for a most partial and envious Adversary, known well
enough to be possessed with Prejudice against us, Serious Appeal p. 6. and p.
60.) catch hold of, and made this false Comment upon it, A plain denial of the
Efficacy of the Blood of Christ shed on the Cross, to cleanse the Soul from the
guilt of Sin, by its Satisfaction to the Justice of God. What greater
perversion could have been made! G. Keith probably saw this, and that his
Auditors might not hear it, nor his Reader see it, he huddled through it in
that Confused manner, that rendered it not Intelligible. For he gave no more of
Is. Penington's words, but Can outward Blood wash (for cleanse) the Conscience.
And no more of I. Faldo's, but a plain Denial; without so much as saying what
it was a denial of. He gives W. Penn's Reply some what fuller, but not so fully
as I think fit to give it. For W. Penn (having showed that Is. Penington did
not speak of the outward Blood, with respect to the taking away the guilt of
Sin past, but with respect to Purgation, and Sanctification of the Soul from
the present Acts and Habits of Sin that lodge therein) says, Is he ( I. Faldo)
so Sottish as to make no distinction betwixt being pardoned Sin past, and the
ground of it; and being Renewed and Regenerated in mind and Spirit, and the
ground of that Conversion? (Now follow what G. Keith quotes) Or else is he so
impiously unjust, that because we do deny, that outward Blood can be brought
into the Conscience, to perform that inward work (which they themselves dare
not, nay, do not hold) therefore Is. Penington denies any Efficacy to be in
that outward Offering and Blood toward Justification, as it respects mere
Remission of former Sins and Iniquities? There G. Keith stops: But W. Penn
added, We also say, That Christ's Blood had an Influence into Justification, as
he phraseth it. Thus far W. Penn. And note, that this was spoken plainly and
directly of the outward Blood, or Blood of the outward Body. Now G. Keith
having given the Quotation short, says, So in short, I take it thus: W. Penn
answers, That Is. Penington's words are to be understood with reference to
Sanctification, but not Justification (Yes: Justification in one sense, but not
in every sense.) Says he, Outward Blood cannot be brought into the Conscience
to perform that work (But even the outward Blood had an Influence to
Justification, said W. Penn) But says G. Keith, The way that Blood has been
brought into my Conscience, is by the application of a living Faith in Christ,
whose Blood it was, the Spirit of God working that Faith in me. But has that
Application (he speaks of) of Faith really brought that Blood into his
Conscience, to perform the work of Sanctification there? If not (which to be
sure it could not) Why does he say, The way that Blood has been brought into my
Conscience; as if it had been really and materially brought in there? He says,
That Blood is not a Physical, but a Moral cause of our Cleansing. But did he
never know, (or pretend to know, and hold forth to others) Christ's Blood as a
Physical cause of our Cleansing? He says, Christ Jesus, 1. by his Obedience and
Suffering, procured the Pardon of my Sins, as well as he Sealed it by his
Blood. And, 2. He procured the Spirit to Sanctify me. So then it is the Spirit
within, not the Blood without, to which he himself ascribes the work of
Sanctification. Christ Jesus, by his Obedience and Suffering, procured the
pardon of my Sins, says he, as well as he Sealed it by his Blood. And, 2. He
procured the Spirit to Sanctify me. Is it not plain from hence, that he makes
the Obedience and Sufferings of Christ, the cause of the Pardon of Sin, and the
Blood to be but as the Seal to that Pardon. But he attributes the work of
Sanctification, to neither the one, nor the other; but expressly to the Spirit,
which Christ procured, to Sanctify him? And I wish he had given way to it, that
he might have been Sanctified by it; and then we should not have had such
unsanctified work, (the Abuse, Wrong, and Injustice) from him that we have. He
says, I find none say, there must be a material Application of that Blood, but
a Spiritual and Moral; and, says he, we can give Instances that Moral Causes
are many times more Effectual Causes, than Physical are: As, says he, the Money
wherewith we buy the Medicine that cures the Body, is not the Physical Cause of
Health, but a Moral; and the Money that we buy Bread with, is not the Physical
Cause of our Nourishment and Refreshment, but a Moral. But does he think the
Money wherewith the Medicine and Bread is bought, is a more Effectual Cause of
Health and Nourishment, than the Medicine and Bread that is bought therewith? I
am sure the Medicine and Bread are more proximate and immediate Causes of
Health and Nourishment, than the Money; and if he having Money, could have
neither Medicine nor Bread for his Money, he might perhaps be in as bad a Case,
as they that have no Money. I expect he will (as he uses to do) pay me off with
Ignorance and Folly, for questioning any thing of his Philosophy; But it is no
matter if he do. I learnt when I was a Boy, S^ultitiam Simulare loco Prudentia
Summa est.


That little Skill I have, I know when, where and how to use, and how to hide:
It were well if he knew how to make better use, than he does of his greater
Stock. But Breaking off this short Digression, which I hope will be excused
(for though I cannot dress out Dishes, nor serve them up so elegantly as he;
yet I expect he should allow me, Interferre meis interdum gaudia curis.


He sees I rather choose to change the Verb, than break the Poet's Head, and
thereby hazard the breaking of my own, if I had chnaged the Mood of Interpono;)
I return to the matter again; where I observe, that he makes the outward Blood,
not at all the Efficient Cause (I mean the worker) of Sanctification in the
Heart, but the Spirit, and the Blood no more the Cause of Sanctification, than
Money is the Cause of Health and Nourishment to the Body, to wit, by procuring
the Spirit to Sanctify, as Money procures Medicine and Bread to Cure and
Nourish the Body. And in that sense perhaps, as he says, he agrees with all
true Christians, we may agree with him; provided he will, under the Name of
Blood, take in the whole Offering of Christ, his Obedience and Sufferings both
inwardly and outwardly, and not divide the Sacrifice.

At the close of this page, he tells his Auditors, he has now done with the two
first Heads; and asks them, Shall I go on to prove the other two, or shall we
adjourn to another Day? And truly his Auditors seemed to have had so fully
enough of that Days work, that they would rather endure the Fatigue of one half
Hour more, than be troubled with him another Day; And bid him, if half an Hour
would do, go on. So on he goes.

The Third Head of G. Keith's Charge, (viz. That We deny the Resurrection of
the Body that dies) Considered.
The Third Head (says he, p. 34.) to be proved, is, That the Body that dies,
rises not again. First, says he, from W. Penn 's holding the Resurrection
immediately after Death in his Rejoinder, p. 138. I think, adds he, this will
be enough for W. Penn, if I give no more. It may be so indeed; but I don't
think it will be enough for G. Keith, if he intends to make a Proof against W.
Penn about the Resurrection: For that place in that Book treats of the
Scriptures; but not a Word of the Resurrection. The poor Man in his over-eager
haste, mistook his Books, and quoted Rejoinder instead of Reason against
Railing; in which latter I have found the place he quotes. I defend Truth, and
therefore need not take advantage of Errors of the Press (if this had been the
Printers Error, as it is not, but his own fumbling mistake) though he has most
unworthily done so against G. Whitehead, and that after it has been proved
unto him. Before I recite the Quotation (which I find he cited also before in
his Gross Error, p. 12. and perverted there as here) I cannot but take notice
of the Medium he uses to prove his Charge by, viz. That W. Penn holds the
Resurrection immediately after Death. So that G. Keith to prove one Charge,
makes another, which needs Proof as much as the former. Now let us see how he
attempts it. T. Hicks, says he, argues thus for the Resurrection of the Body;
That if there be no Resurrection of the Body, the Ioys of Heaven should else be
imperfect. Now here (says G. Keith) is W. Penn's Answer to it, I answer, Is the
Joy of the Ancients now in Glory imperfect? Or are they in Heaven but by
halves? If it be so unequitable, that the Body which has suffered, should not
partake of the Joys Celestial, is it not in measure unequal that the Soul
should be rewarded so long before the Body? This Principle brings to the
Mortality of the Soul, (held-by many Baptists) on I am mistaken. But why must
the Felicity of the Soul depend upon that of the Body? Is it not to make the
Soul a kind of Widow, and so in a state of Mourning and disconsolateness to be
without its beloved Body? Which state is but a better sort of Purgatory. Thus
far he gives out of W. Penn, then adds, G. Whitehead argues the same way; but
does not tell where, naming neither Page nor Book. But he gives his words thus,
If the deceased Saints in Heaven, or their Souls, have not all that they expect
to all Eternity, all the Resurrection they look for, then they must be in
Purgatory for the time: But if the latter be not, then not the former. Upon
this G. K says, But this Contradicts many Scriptures, that especially in Act.
26. That Christ should suffer, and should be the first that should rise from
the Dead. Now, says he, according to this Doctrine of W. Penn and G. Whitehead,
Christ's Resurrection was later than that of many Millions. Though he has much
curtailed W. Penn's Answer, and given no direction whereby to find G.
Whitehead's, (neither have I, upon diligent search, found it, and G. Whitehead
deni^^ the words above given as his, to be his) yet from the words of each
which he has given, I find that neither of those Quotations will answer the End
for which he brings them. They both relate to one and the same Objection, That
if there be not a Resurrection of the same Body, the Joys of Heaven should be
imperfect. To show the absurdity of that Objection, they both argued, That if
the Joys of Heaven, to the Souls already in Heaven, depend upon the
Resurrection of the same Bodies in which those Souls lived on Earth, then the
Joys of Heaven, to the Saints already there, should have been imperfect
hitherto, and must continue to be imperfect, until the same Bodies shall be
raised. But this does not at all conclude that they held the Resurrection
immediately after Death, but rather the contrary. For they did not argue, That
the Souls of the deceased Saints have perfect Joy in heaven, because their
Bodies in which they lived on Earth have had a Resurrection already, but
because the Joys of Heaven do not depend upon the Resurrection of those Bodies.
This then is no proof that they held the Resurrection immediately after Death,
nor, consequently, that they contradicted that Scripture, Acts 26. That Christ
should be the first that should rise from the dead; which whether in a strict
Sense he was, has been questioned by some, who have urged the Instance of
Lazarus and some others before him.

But it seems as if he did not intend those Words of G. Whitehead for a Proof;
because after he had passed his Sentence upon that, he says, Now if you will
hear a Proof from G. Whitehead, you may; and cites p. 353. of the Book, called,
the Christian Quaker, etc. Where in Answer to T. Danson's, saying, The
Happiness of the Soul is not perfect without the Body, its dear and beloved
Companion, the Soul having a strong Desire and Inclination to a Reunion to the
Body, as the Schools not without ground determine, vide Calvin. He gives a part
of G. Whitehead's Answer (as also he did in his Gross Error, p. 11.) thus, Both
Calvin, T. Danson, and the Schools, and diverse Anabaptists, are mistaken in
this very Matter, and see not with the Eye of true Faith, either that the
Happiness of the Soul is not perfect without the Body, or that the Soul has a
strong Desire to a Reunion to the Body, while they intend the Terrestrial,
Elementary Bodies: For this implies the Soul to be in a kind of Purgatory or
Disquietness, till the supposed Resumption of the Body. This place (as that of
G. Whitehead, and of W. Penn cited before) speaks not of Resurrection of the
Body, but of the supposed Imperfection of the Souls Happiness without the Body,
and the strong Desire they fancy it has to a Reunion to the Body; which the
immediately following Part of G. Whitehead's Answer (left wholly out by G.
Keith here, and not fully given in his Gross Error, though he confidently says,
Nar. p. 37. I have quoted full Periods at length) plainly shows: For says G.
Whitehead there; And their Assertion and Determination therein, is contrary to
what the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5. For we know, that if our earthly House of
this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an House not made
with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens, ver. 1. For we that are in this Tabernacle,
do groan, being burdened, etc. ver. 4. We are confident, I say, and willing
rather to be absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord, ver. 8. And
said he (the Apostle) I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart,
etc. Phil. 1.23. It is manifest, I say, from hence, that G. Whitehead's Words
(cited by G. Keith) related directly to that Notion of T. Danson and others,
That the Happiness of the Soul is not perfect without the Body, and that the
Soul has a strong Desire to a Reunion to the Body, to which he opposed those
Words of the Apostle before recited. Yet from hence G. Keith tells his Hearers;
You see, I hope, here is Proof enough, that G. Whitehead holds, that the
deceased Saints look for no Resurrection of the Body. But in this he concludes
unfairly: For the Words he gives for Proof, do not prove he held so.

Here G. Keith was put in Mind, it seems, that G. Whitehead, said Elementary
Bodies (which he did and Terrestrial also) to which G. Keith replies, What
other Body could it be? As much as to say, What other Body could the Soul
desire to be reunited to, but a Terrestrial, Elementary Body? For of such
Bodies G. Whitehead spoke, as the Soul was said to have a strong desire of
reunion to, which was the Terrestrial, Elementary Body, which T. Danson said
had been it is dear and beloved Companion. So that, it seems, according to G.
Keith, it must be a Terrestrial, Elementary Body after it is reunited to the
Soul in Heaven. What other Body could it be, says G. Keith? But he is fain to
step down into his Ditch, to fetch up a little of his Ditch-Philosophy to make
it out by. I hope, says he, a little Philosophy will not offend you. The
Objection, says he, they make, is the same against Christ's Body. Pray, says
he, Was not Christ's Body Elementary? Did he not Eat and Drink? And was it not
the same as we Eat and Drink? And if we Eat and Drink of what are Elementary,
then his Body did receive the same Elements, and they were converted into his
Body. First, let me tell him, the Objection made against a Resurrection of
Terrestrial, Elementary Bodies, is not the same against Christ's Body. For
there was a difference between Christ's Body, and the Bodies of other Men. His
was a more excellent Body, with respect to its Generation. G. Keith has said
it, Way to the City of God, p. 134. And thus he was both the Son of God, and
the Son of Man, according to his very Birth in Mary: And therefore even
according to that Birth, he has a Divine Perfection and Virtue, and that
Substantial, above all other Men that ever were, are, or shall be. And in p.
135. 'His body has not only the Perfections of our Body, but also much more,
because of its being generate, not only of a Seed of Mary, but of a Divine
Seed. This made him contend against the Word Humane, as too mean a Title for
the outward and visible Flesh which Christ took of the Virgin, Rector
Corrected, p. 27, etc. But now calls Christ's Body not only Elementary, but
plainly Terrestrial.

He says, G. Whitehead owns in his latter Writings, that Christ's Body that
rose, is the same with his Body that suffered. Here he uses the Word [ Latter]
deceitfully and maliciously, to insinuate, as if G. Whitehead had not owned
this till now of late; whereas he could not but know, that in a Postscript to a
Book, called, The Malice of the Independent Agent rebuked, written in the third
Month, 1678. which is eighteen Years ago, G. Whitehead (for to him G. Keith
ascribes that Postscript) said, Christ did rise in that Body wherein he
suffered, and in the same ascended into the Heavens. I say G. Keith could not
but know this, because in his Book called, The true Copy (Printed but last
Year) p. 21. he quoted a Passage, as G. Whitehead's, out of that very
Postscript. But says he in p. 35. his Pride will not suffer him to own his
form Error, either in that, or in other things. I may rather say of G. Keith,
His Envy will not suffer him to be Just or Honest. For he can no where find in
any of G. Whitehead's Writings, that he did ever disown Christ's Body that
rose, to be the same Body that suffered. But there is not an equal Comparison
betwixt Christ's Body and Man's. His saw no Corruption. But Man's Body is
subject to Corruption and Putrefaction.

In p. 35. He says, And seeing W. Penn thinks it absurd that a Body can be
transformed from an Earthly and Animal Body to an Heavenly Body, as (says he)
he argues, Reason against Railing, p. 134. He makes it not only as gross as
Transubstantiation, but worse. But this (says he) is his gross Ignorance in
true Philosophy, and his false Philosophy destroys his Faith. But what, I
wonder, has destroyed G. Keith 's Honesty, except it be his gross Enmity? For
he has most grossly abused W. Penn in this Passage. Where does W. Penn say, or
hold, it is absurd that a Body can be transformed from an Earthly or Animal
Body to an Heavenly Body? There is no Word in the Place cited, nor any where
that I know of, that either speaks so, or has a tendency that way. But that
which W. Penn reputed absurd was, that a Body should be said to be changed from
an Earthly or Animal Body to an Heavenly Body, and yet after such change
continue to be the same Earthly or Animal Body that it was before. This is that
of which W. Penn said, How is it possible, that it should be the same, and not
the same? And if a thing can yet be the same, and notwithstanding changed, for
shame let us never much so make stir, against the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. And indeed, as easily may G. Keith defend the one as the
other. And if, among those of the Protestant Parties he now Courts, he should
miss of the End of his turning from the Quakers, it is not altogether unlikely,
but that he may try what Earnings he can make among them that hold that
Doctrine. He says, It is not Transubstantiation, if I say, a Saint's Body is
the same at the Resurrection for Substance, as it was when it went into the
Grave, leaving the faces or drossie Part of it behind. I say, that is beside
the Question. But the Question is, Whether a Natural or Carnal Body (that is, a
Body consisting of Flesh, Blood and Bones) can be raised out of the Grave
without Flesh, Blood and Bones, and yet be properly and truly said to be the
same natural or carnal Body, that it was while it consisted of Flesh, Blood and
Bones? For if he would argue from the Substance of a Body, he should first have
defined what the Substance of a Natural or Carnal Body is, that it might have
been agreed; whether the Faces or drossy Part (as he calls it, by which I
understand him to mean the Flesh, Blood and Bones) be the Substance, or any
Part of the Substance, of a Natural or Carnal Body. He seems to hold that it is
not: For he blames W. Penn for holding, that Carniety is essential to a Carnal
Body (that is, that Flesh is essential to a Body of Flesh) and he says
thereupon, see how contrary this is to common Sense and Understanding. But sure
I think every one that has but common Sense and Understanding, may have ground
to Question, Whether he has not lost his. To manifest how contrary it is to
common Sense and Understanding (and withal to give his Auditors to understand,
that he is not only a mickle Philosopher, but a little Piece of an
Hen-Housewife too) he says, There is no Woman that sets an Hen to breed
Chickens, but knows the contrary. You know, says he, the Substance of the Egg
(the White and Yolk) by the force and heat of the Hen sitting on the Egg, is
changed into a Chicken. Is here, s^^s he, any Transubstantiation? First,
observe he grants the White and the Yolk to be the Substance of the Egg. Next,
that this Substance of the Egg, the White and the Yolk, is changed into a
Chicken. Now unless he will affirm, that the Substance of a Chicken, after it
comes to be a Chicken, is the White and Yolk, I see not how he will avoid a
Transubstantiation, that is, a changing of the Substance of the Egg, which was
White and Yolk, into the Substance of a Chicken, which of all the Chicken I
have eaten of, I always took to be Flesh, Blood and Bones. If he thinks
otherwise, and it should ever happen that he and I should be F^llow-Commoners
at a Chicken, let him but let me have what I call the Substance of it, and I
will readily resign all the rest to him, even the White and the Yolk, if he
can find it, and, in requital of his Courtesy, some part (and the most solid)
of that which I call the Substance too, which will not be unsuitable to a
Cynical Philosopher. But whereas he makes himself a little sport with VV.
Penn's Philosophy, he might have considered, that what VV. Penn writ on that
subject was not to entertain the Schools, but to inform common and vulgar
Capacities; and therefore he handled it Scripturally, not Philosophically,
using the Terms he writ in, according to the ordinary Signification, and common
Acceptance of them.

What he says of a Chemical Operation, I take to be but a Chemical VVhimsie in
his Head, or a Chimera, which he pleases, viz. That a gross Body of Herbs, or
other Substance, can by Chemical Operation be made so subtle, volatile, and
spiritual (without any Transubstantiation, or Change of the Substance) that a
Glass can scarce confine, or hold it. I don't think many have that
understanding, that he pretends to have of Chemical Operations. That a subtle,
volatile, spirituous Substance may by Chemical Operation, be extracted from a
gross Substance or Body of Herbs, is easily apprehensible. And that which is so
extracted is usually called the Spirit of that Body out of which it is drawn,
not the Body it self. But that the gross Body it self of Herbs, or other
Substance, can be made so subtle and volatile, as scarce to be contained in a
Glass, requires better Proof, to gain belief, than his bare saying it. Besides,
if the gross Body be made so subtle and volatile, as he says, how is the
Faeces or drossy part left behind, as he says. But that which must make his
Chemical Conceit bear any right Parallel with that Notion of the Resurrection,
which VV. Penn opposed, must be, that this gross Body of Herbs, which he says,
may be made so subtle and volatile, must still remain the same gross Body of
Herbs, that it was before, notwithstanding its almost unconfinable subtility by
Chemical Operation; as they hold the Body that dies and is laid in the Grave,
to be changed in the Resurrection, and yet to be the same Body after the
Resurrection, as it was when it died, and was laid in the Grave. This is that
which VV. Penn compared to the Absurdity of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation;
the Folly of which Doctrine, (not to meddle here with the Impiety of it) lies
in this, that the Patrons of that Opinion affirm the very Substance of the
Bread and Wine, (after the Words of Consecration, as they call them, are
spoken) to be really changed into the very Substance of Christ's Body, and yet
the Accidents of the Bread and Wine enforce the Senses to confess, that the
Substance of the Bread and Wine, remains in them as before.

I perceive he has done, and that quickly, with his Third Head, about the
Resurrection. Which, as he has stated it, he needed not at all have attempted
to prove our denial of. For it is a known thing, that as we have always
asserted a Resurrection of Bodies, so we have always denied the Body which
shall be raised to be the same Body that died, with respect to Grosness and
Carniety; and that, 1. From the Principles of our Opposers about it, who hold
that it is wonderfully changed, and therefore it is a wonder it should be the
very same 2. From the Reason and Nature of the thing, which will not admit a
Natural, Carnal Body to be a suitable Habitation for a Glorified Soul in Heaven
to dwell in, nor to be the same Body, that it was when it was a Natural and
Carnal Body, if it cease to be a Natural and Carnal Body, and be made wholly
Spiritual. 3. From the uncontrollable Testimony of the Holy Apostle, who says,
expressly, That Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdoms of God, 1 Cor.
15.50. And by a Metaphor borrowed from Agriculture, says, That which thou
sowest (which is the Body that dies and is put into the Grave) thou sowest not
that Body that shall be, ver. 37. which is alike, as if he had said in so many
Syllables, The Body that shall arise, is not the same Carnal Body that dies,
and is put into the Grave. No, the Body that is put into the Grave (or is sown)
is a Natural Body: But the Body that is raised is a Spiritual Body. It is sown
a Natural Body, it is raised a spiritual Body, says the Apostle, ver. 44. And
that none might think this spiritual Body was the same with the Natural Body,
he adds, There is a Natural Body, and there is a spiritual Body. He does not
say, the Natural is made a spiritual Body, or the Natural Body and the
Spiritual Body is but one and the same Body. But he sets them in Opposition, as
two distinct Bodies. There is a Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual Body.
The Apostle illustrates this Difference between the Body that dies, (or is
sown) and the Body that is raised, from the two Adams, the first and the last,
saying, The first Man Adam was made a living Soul, the last Adam was made a
quickening Spirit, ver. 45. Is this quickening Spirit the same with that living
Soul? Is the last Adam, and the first Adam, but one and the self same Adam? The
first Man is of the Earth Earthly, the second Man is the Lord from Heaven, ver.
47. Will G. Keith say, This second Man, which is the Lord from Heaven, is the
same with the First Man, which is of the Earth Earthy? As is the Earthy, such
are they also that are Earthy; and as is the Heavenly, such are they also that
are Heavenly, ver. 48. Does not the Apostle here plainly show, that as the
second Man, the Lord from Heaven, is not the same with the first Man of the
Earth Earthy: So the Heavenly Bodies which the Saints shall have, are not the
same with the Earthy Bodies which they have had? And, says he, as we have born
the Image of the Earthy, we shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly, ver. 49.
This shows we shall bear the Image of another Body in Heaven, than that which
we bore on the Earth, consequently not the Image of the same Body. But if by
Heavenly Body were meant the same Body that was Earthy, then we should bear the
Image of the same Body hereafter in Heaven, which we have born here on Earth,
quite contrary to the Apostle's Doctrine; who to clear the matter fully, that
in all this Discourse of his about the Resurrection, he did not mean the same
Body of Flesh and Blood that dies should be raised, concludes thus, ver. 50.
Now this I say, Brethren, that (...) Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.
But the (...) that dies every one knows is a Body of Flesh and Blood,
therefore, that Body cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; but it must be a Body
which is not of Flesh and Blood, and that cannot be the Body of Flesh and Blood
that dies.

This is so fully handled in those Books of W. Penn and G. Whitehead (out of
which G. Keith took his pretended Proofs) as well as in other Books of theirs,
that G. Keith needed not have fetched a Round to prove it, by alleging that
they hold the Resurrection immediately after Death, but that he had a Mind to
fix (if he could) that slander on them, which they no where say, nor do the
Places he has quoted prove it: For they therein only argued against the absurd
and gross Notion of their Opponents, which was, that the Body which is raised,
is the same Carnal Body, that Died and was Buried: which he, if he have a Mind,
may undertake the Proof of. But though we cannot subscribe to that gross and
carnal Notion; yet both the Quakers in general, and they in particular, do own,
and always have owned, a Resurrection, and that of Bodies. So said W. Penn in
the Book G. Keith quoted (or should have quoted, if he had not mistaken, and
quoted another, for it) Reason against Railing, p. 133. We do acknowledge a
Resurrection in order to Eternal Recompense, and that every Seed shall have its
own Body; and we rest contented with what Body it shall please God to give us.
But as we are not such Fools, as curiously to enquire What; So must we for ever
deny the gross Conceits of T. Hicks and his Adherents (of whom G. Keith is now
become one) concerning the Resurrection. And having refuted those gross
Conceits he spa^^ of, he concluded thus, in p. 140. For our parts, (...) we
believe, and of Bodies too, unto (...). What they shall not be, I have briefly
said (...)roved; what they shall be, we leave with God, (...) will give every
one a Body as pleases him; and (...) Fool, belongs to the unnecessary medler.
G Keith himself, but a while ago, undertook W. Penn's Defense in this Point of
the Resurrection, against Cotton M^ther, in his Serious Appeal, p. 9. where he
says, As for his citing W. Penn's Words arguing against that same Numerical
Body its rising at the Resurrection, it is clear that he understands the same
exact Number of the small Particles or Dusts, neither more nor less than what
is commonly buried; and what hurt is there in that? Said G. Keith then. If G.
Keith has a Mind now to maintain and defend the contrary, and will undertake to
prove that it is the same Numerical Body, with all its Numerical Particles,
that rises, which was buried, let him do it Scripturally, not only
Philosophically (and that by false Notions of Philosophy) lest he make People
suspect he intends only a Resurrection of Philosophers, or at most but a
Philosophical Resurrection. I advise him to keep to Scripture-Terms, because he
has so often recommended that to others, and blamed his Opponents formerly for
going from it. And particularly in his Book, called, Truth's Defense, p. 169.
is Positive, That all the Principles and Doctrines of the Christian Faith,
which God requires in common of all Christians, are expressly delivered and
recorded in the Scriptures; and therefore, says he there, for my part, what I
cannot find expressly delivered in Scripture, I see no Reason why I should
receive or believe as any common Article or Principle of the Christian Faith or
Life. The Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Dead, is a common Article of the
Christian Faith, which we find expressly delivered in the Scriptures, and
accordingly we sincerely believe it. But we do not find it expressly delivered
in the Scriptures, that the Body that shall be raised is the very same Body
that died; but we find the quite contrary expressly delivered in Scripture [
Thou sowest not that Body that shall be, 1 Cor. 15.37.] And therefore we see no
Reason (any more than G. Keith formerly did) to receive or believe it as a
common Article or Principle of the Christian Faith, much less that we should be
blamed for not so receiving it; and least of all by him, who has provided so
good a Defense for himself, against being blamed for not receiving as an
Article of the Christian Faith, what he cannot find expressly delivered in the
Scripture.

I could show a great deal of Absurdity and Self-contradiction of G. Keith's in
what he has delivered on this Subject of the Resurrection. But I am unwilling
to spend time, or too much to enlarge the Bulk of these Sheets, which are
already increast beyond my Expectation when I began, by my giving particular
and full Answers to the foregoing Heads. I shall therefore in the Remainder,
contract my Answers as much as well I may, and either pass wholly over the
lighter parts of his Narrative, or touch but lightly on them.

Toward the bottom of p. 35. having done with the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, he takes an occasion to give another Flurt at Infallibility,
though not relating to any of his four Heads or Charges; which makes me think
he did it to gratify the more profane and loose party of his Auditors, as
knowing that such Persons use to scoff at Inspiration and Infallibility, to
whom he was willing by that means to endear himself, and them to him. He takes
his occasion from a Passage in a Book of G. Whitehead's, mentioned before;
called, The Voice of Wisdom, in Answer to T. Danson, where p. 33. to the
Priest's saying, Our want of Infallibility is no valid Plea against our
Ministry; G. Whitehead answered, His falsehood here appears plainly, for they
that want Infallibility, and have not the Spirit of Christ, they are out of the
Truth, and are fallible, and their Ministry is not of the Spirit, seeing they
speak not from the Spirit, but from their own Hearts, which are deceitful,
where they want Infallibility. The Inference G. Keith makes from hence is this,
Now, I hope, says he, I have proved they want Infallibility, and therefore by
their own Doctrine, they are no true Ministers of Christ. But his Consequence
will not hold: For it depends not upon certainty, but hope, and false hope too.
He hopes he has proved they want Infallibility: But his Hope is but the Hope of
an Hypocrite, which will perish, as he also will, unless he repent. If
Infallibility be so ludibrious a thing with him, how comes it to pass that he
has not yet openly renounced what he has formerly written in Defense of Divine
Inspiration, Immediate Revelation, and Infallibility, who perhaps has writ more
on those Subjects, than any Quaker has done?

In p. 36. I observe a Passage dropped from a Friend of ours, that happened to be
present, thus, I do not know but you will find, when you have an Answer to what
G. Keith has offered, that those he Charges and Paraphrases ^n, will agree with
him in Principles. He that spoke this, must be understood to mean, If G. Keith
will agree with himself in Principles, that is, will own the same Principles
now, which he owned, maintained and defended while he was a Quaker, which as G.
Keith had not openly renounced; so neither did that Friend of ours know whether
he would or no. The Stranger therefore, that in p. 37. undertook to Answer in
G. Keith's behalf, did somewhat mistake the Matter, when from those Words [I do
not know but you will find, they whom he Charges will agree with him in
Principles] he inferred [ You say that he differs not from you in Principles.]
Nor was he less out in concluding, that that was to clear him from the Charge
of Apostasy: For It was aptly replied by another, There is an Apostasy from
the Spirit of Christianity, as well as from the Principles. But that Stranger
was strangely out, who in p. 45. said, For a Man to Apostatize, is to
Apostatize from the whole Faith; but for a Man to differ with respect to
particular things, this is not Apostasy. He might have considered, that
Apostasy is either General, or Special. Apostasy General, is that which he
calls an Apostasy from the whole Faith, which I think cannot be properly said
of any but such, as wholly renounce the Christian Religion, in all parts of its
Profession, and turn Jews or Infidels. But if any who have professed the
Protestant Religion, and held Communion with Protestants under any particular
Denomination, should renounce Protestantism, and turn Papist, I presume any
considerate Protestant would account such an one an Apostate; and yet such an
one could not be rightly said to have apostatized from the whole Christian
Faith, inasmuch as the Church of Rome (as Corrupt as she is) does hold diverse
Articles of the Christian Faith, in Common with all Protestants. But since
Apostasy, in the common acceptance of the Word, and from the Etymon thereof,
Signifies a departing, or Falling off, from that Religious Society, or Body of
People, to which a man was before joined, and it is evident G. Keith is fallen
off and departed from the Society of the People called Quakers, to which he was
once joined; he comes properly under the Denomination of an Apostate, and it is
no Injury to him, to call him so.

In p. 37. he repeats the Story which he formerly told, of the Man, that, he
says, told him, he would rather Die, or lose his right Hand, than sign a
Sentence (as he calls it) against him: And that man, he says, has since come to
him, and told him, he did not join in the Judgment given against him. Whether
this latter part be true I know not, nor much regard, knowing what a sort of
unstable man that has been. But of the rest of that matter, so far as it did
concern the Meeting, I have given so particular and full an account, in my
former Book called Truth Defended, p. 64, 65, 66, 67. as I doubt not will give
Satisfaction to any unbyassed Reader, whether I refer such, that I may not
spend time upon so impertinent a matter here, as I perceive some of his
Auditors judged it: For after he had ended his relation of it, one of his
Auditors, whom he calls a Stranger, said, All this is very Impertinent to the
Business in Hand. Yet I find he ran on in a loose way of telling Stories
against the Quakers, both the rest of that page, and p. 38.

Toward the bottom of that page, he tells a Story of three Ministers of London
that in the Year 1678. Rose up (he says) against him, and he opposed their
Errors. Being asked by an Auditor, What Ministers they were? He readily
answered, They were Quakers. But being put upon it, and pressed hard to tell
their Names, he said, I will not do it, it is not convenient; there is one of
them a Citizen of very good repute, and therefore it will be better to conceal
his name. Can there be any thing but Hypocrisy in this pretense? For is not G.
Whitehead a Citizen of very good repute also? And yet so far has G. Keith been
from concealing his name, that he has endeavored to blemish his name as much
as in him lies, and to load him with Infamy and Slander. Besides, being urged
again to tell his name, He answers, I think it not convenient, we must use a
little Policy as well as you. This more fully shows his Deceit, who before
pretended Charity in concealing the Persons names, but now discovers the Ground
thereof was Policy. But to be sure he showed no Policy in that. I might justly
enough reject this story wholly, and tell him, as he did his Countryman John
Alexander (who charged a Misinterpretation of Scripture upon some of the
Quakers, without naming whom) Seeing he has produced no names, of any among us,
understanding that, etc. We are not concerned to answer him, Truth's Defense,
p. 67. And again, in p. 77. to a like Charge made by I. Alexander against some
Quakers without naming them, He says, He ought to have produced their names, or
we are not bound to believe him, that any have said so. May I not with as good
reason, say so to G. Keith in this Case, especially seeing he refused to name
them, though so earnestly pressed to it? As he says, they were three Ministers,
so he charges them with three great Errors. 1. That they said Christ's Body did
never rise out of the Grave. 2. That they denied it was lawful to pray to Jesus
Christ Crucified 3. That they could come to God without the Mediator, the Man
Christ Jesus. These are so Contrary to our known Principles, that I cannot
believe his Charge to be true, as he has given it. He says, he can appeal to W.
Penn, and G. Whitehead. But is it not strange, he should pick out them two
(from amongst forty or fifty, that he says were present) to appeal to, when he
has made them the common Butts, to shoot the Arrows of his Envy at, through the
greatest part of his Narrative? Could he find none to appeal to, out of forty
or fifty, but them? Well, I have enquired of them both, Concerning it. W. Penn
faith, he does not Remember it. G. Whitehead does Remember that some (but not
near so many as G. Keith mentions) had some Discourse with him about that time,
upon something that he had written; but that any of them said, Christ's Body
did never rise out of the Grave; Or, that they could come to God, without the
Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus; Or, that Paul was Dark and Ignorant, (which in
Nar. p. 38, 39. G. Keith Charges on them) he says, He neither heard, nor does
believe. But that some Discourse did pass betwixt him, and them, Concerning
praying to Christ, he does Remember; but believes it was not altogether as G.
Keith has related it. However it was, I observe, that in one part of that
Story (even as G. Keith has given it) he clears W. Penn and G. Whitehead, and
represents them as taking part with him, against those others, who he says
opposed him. For he here says, that (upon their denying that it was lawful to
Pray to Jesus Christ Crucified, and daring him to give an Instance of one
English Quaker that he ever heard Pray to Christ) W. Penn said, I am an English
Man, and a Quaker, and I own I have often Prayed to Jesus Christ, even him that
was Crucified. And that G. Whitehead, to prove the lawfulness thereof, took the
Bible. and Read 1 Cor. 1.2. To all that call upon the Lord Jesus Christ, both
their Lord, and ours. It is evident from hence, that both W. Penn and G.
Whitehead did, in G. Keith's sense and defense, own Chrst, even him that was
Crucified, to be the Object of Faith, and that not only now of late, (as G.
Keith would have it) but so long ago as 1678. which is Eighteen Years past.
This quite overthrows all he has said before, of their denying the Object of
Faith, and may well pass, with all Ingenuous Readers, for a full Confutation of
all his Clamours upon that Head against them. But though he has hereby
acquitted them; yet I see not how he will acquit himself. For this he says, was
in 1678. which was Eighteen Years ago; and yet in 1692. which was but four
Years ago; he told Cotton Mather in Print, That according to the best knowledge
he had of the People called Quakers, and these most generally owned by them, as
Preachers, and Publishers of their Faith, of unquestioned esteem among them,
and worthy of double Honor, (as many such there are) he knew none that were
guilty of any one of such Heresies and Blasphemies as he accuses them, Serious
Appeal p, 7. And to show that he had ground for what he said, he added a little
lower in the same page, And I think I should know, and do know, these called
Quakers, better than C. Mather or any or all his Brethren, having been
Conversant with them in Public Meetings, as well as in private Discourses,
with the most noted and esteemed among them, for about twenty-eight Years past,
and that in many places in the World in Europe, and and for these diverse Years
in America. What must we think of this? That he writ a Falsehood then, or spoke
a Falsehood now? But be that as it will.

The Fourth, and last Head of G. Keith's Charge, (viz. That we deny Christ's
Coming without us, in his Glorified Body, to Judge the Quick and the Dead)
Considered.
In p. 39. he says, I will cite a passage or two out of a Manuscript from
Pensilvania, but instead of that says, See the Book called Light and Life, p.
41. See what is here said by G. Whitehead, That there is not an outward coming
of Christ to Judge the Quick and the Dead. What I prove from G. Whitehead, says
he, is proved from W. Penn, for W. Penn has Authorized his Book. This he has
hinted in several places of his Narrative, referring sometimes to p. 185, 186.
of Reason against Railing, where W. Penn mentioned diverse Books, which he
referred the Adversaries to, in defense of our Principles. I presume he will
find no cause to be sorry for having mentioned any of those Books, unless it be
such as G. Keith was either solely, or partly, the Author of. But if W. Penn's
so mentioning those Books, does so Entitle him to them, as to render him
accountable for whatsover is in them; I would know of G. Keith, why he should
not, for the same reason, he accountable for whatsoever is in those Books,
which G. Whitehead and W. Penn have written in Answer to T. Hicks and I. E^ldo,
since he, with as much Approbation, has mentioned those Answers, in his Serious
Appeal, p. 6. and 60. and yet those are some of the principal Books he picks
his Cavils out of, against G. Whitehead and W. Penn.

Now let us see how G. Keith deals with G. Whitehead in the Quotation he brings
against him. Observe that first, he says, See what is here said by G.
Whitehead, That there is not an outward Coming of Christ, to Judge the Quick
and Dead; therefore look well to his Quotation, and mind to find those words in
it. He begins the Quotation thus, Moreover, Christ said, the Son of Man shall
come in the glory of his Father with his Angels, etc. There G. Keith stops with
an etc. Citing Mat. 1^.27, 28, Luke 9.26, 27. But leaves out the remaining
words in those Scriptures, which in Matthew follow thus, [ And then he shall
Reward every Man according to his Works. Verily I say unto you, There be some
standing here, which shall not taste of Death, till they see the Son of Man
coming in his Kingdom] Why G. Keith left out these words, I may show anon. Now
he goes on with G. Whitehead's words, thus, Now what is that Glory of the
Father, in which his Coming is? Is it Visible to the Carnal Eye? And when was
that coming to be? Is it now to be looked for outwardly? But farther we do
acknowledge the several comings of Christ, according to the Scriptures, both
that in the Flesh, and that in the Spirit, which is Manifest in several
degrees, as there is a growing from Glory to Glory. But three Comings of
Christ, [not only that in the Flesh at Jerusalem, and that in the Spirit; but
also another coming in the Flesh, yet to be expected] we do not Read of, but a
Second Coming without Sin unto Salvation, which in the Apostles Days, was
looked for, (this latter Clause he cited before in his Gross Errror, p. 2.)

Now, Reader, observe, First, That those words G. Keith charges to be here said
by G. Whitehead, viz That there is not an outward Coming of Christ to judge the
Quick and the Dead, are not here: That Is but an Inference of G. Keith's own
making, though he unfairly pretended G. Whitehead said it. Next he left out
those words in the Text* Mat. 16.28. Verily I say unto you, There are some
standing here which shall not taste of Death, until they see the Son of Man
coming in his Kingdom. Upon which words those Questions of G. Whitehead were
grounded, When was that coming to be? Is it now to be looked for outwardly? For
that coming there spoken of by Christ, Mat. 16.27. could not be meant of his
coming at the end of the World, because it was to begin in that very Age, some
then living and present with him, were to see it before they died: There are
some standing here, which shall not taste of Death, until they see the Son of
Man coming in his Kingdom. By his Kingdom, says Beza, is to be understood the
Glory of his Ascension, and what follows thereof, Ephesians. 4.10. or the
Preaching of the Gospel. In the latter part of the Quotation, G. Whitehead had
respect to the Baptists Notion of an Outward Personal Coming of Christ in a
Fleshly Appearance, to reign on Earth a thousand years. And it is with relation
to such a manner of coming in an outward Body of Flesh, to reign Personally on
Earth, for a certain time, as an Outward King, that he there said (after he had
acknowledged the several Comings of Christ according to the Scriptures, both
that in the Flesh, and that in the Spirit.) But three Comings of Christ [not
only that in the Flesh at Jerusalem, and that in the Spirit; but also another
coming in the Flesh, yet to be expected] we do not read of. And indeed, how
should he, if G. Keith says true, Way cast up, p. 131. that That Body which was
crucified on the Cross at Jerusalem, and is now ascended and glorified in
Heaven -- is no more a Body of Flesh, Blood, and Bones, but a pure, ethereal,
or heavenly Body. But that G. Whitehead's words there, related to such a Coming
of Christ in an outward Body of outward Flesh, visible to Carnal Eyes, therein
to reign, as an outward King, after an outward manner, a thousand years on
Earth, (which some Baptists call the Personal Reign of Christ) may be gathered
also from another Book of G. Whitehead's, called Christ Ascended, written near
the same time, in Answer to John Newman, a Baptist, where having in p. 22.
treated of Christ's coming, so as that his Appearance shall be universally seen,
both to the Joy of the Righteous, and universal Conviction and Condemnation of
the wicked, etc. he speaks, p. 23. of the disappointment of them, who are
expecting that Christ's second Coming, or Appearance to Salvation, will be a
Personal Coming, and his Reign a Personal Reign, which word [ Personal] they
add to the Scripture; and do they not herein show their Carnal Expectations,
said he?

G. Keith has another Cavil in this page, (which also he had in p. 3. of his
Gross Error) against G. Whitehead about 1 These. 4.17. which he says, G.
Whitehead denies to be meant of his Personal Coming. G. Whitehead then, it
seems, did not deny it to be meant of Christ's Coming, and of his Coming to
Judgment; but that which he excepted against, was such a Carnal sort of
Personal Coming, as the Baptists expected him to come in, and as is mentioned
before: To show the Baptists the folly of which, he asks them, from those words
of the Apostle, both in the 15th and 17th Verses [ We which are alive, and
remain unto the coming of the Lord] if they did live and remain to a Personal
Coming of Christ in the Clouds, yea, or nay? Which G. Keith sophistically calls
a Sophism, to wrest it to his inward Coming; Whereas G. Whitehead did not turn
it to his inward Coming, nor did he use the word [ inward] in that place at
all. But he showed by the Description John gave of him, when he saw him in the
midst of the Seven Golden Candlesticks, that such an outward Coming as the
Baptists looked for him in, in such a Personal Appearance as should be visible
to the carnal Eye, was not suitable to him. But whereas G. Keith says, (both in
his gross Error, p. 5. and here also) The Apostle's using the word we, there, [
we that remain] is an Enallage Personae, putting [ we] for [ They] like that of
James, Therewith bless we God, and therewith curse we Men, James 3 9. Though he
delivers it positively, and like a Dictator, yet I see not why he must needs be
believed: Why might not the Apostle speak in the first Person, [ we] as
supposing that great and extraordinary Appearance and Coming of Christ (the
certain time of which no Man knew, Mat. 24.36.) was so near at hand, that it
might probably fall out in his Lifetime: For as the Apostles accounted the
Times they lived in, the Last Days, or Last Times, and ordinarily called them
so, ( Heb. 1.2. and 9.26. 1 Pet. 1.20. 1 John 2.18.) so they thought the End of
the World was not far off. What else made Paul, when he had told the
Corinthians, That the things he had related were written for our Admonition,
add, Upon whom the Ends of the Word are come? 1 Cor. 10.11. Why else did Peter
say, The End of all things is at hand? 1 Pet. 4.7.

G. Keith concludes this Page with a most horrible Falsehood and Slander upon G.
Whitehead, saying, He has Allegorized away Christ's Birth, his Death,
Resurrection and Ascension, and Coming to Judgment. This I say is a most
horrible Falsehood and Slander. For though there is none of these that may not
be allegorized, (and perhaps, none among the Quakers has allegorized them so
frequently and so far, as G. Keith himself) yet has not G. Whitehead so
allegorized any of them, as to take away the Literal sense and meaning of them;
but has owned and asserted the Truth and Benefit of them according to the
Letter of the Scriptures.

In p. 40. He makes a Digression to entertain his Company, thus, I hope I have
proved that I am not petulant, and that I have just cause to accuse them of
these Errors. Then adds, I was presented by a Grand Jury at Philadelphia, and
the Presentment would have been prosecuted, if the Government had not been
changed; and I had been accused for endeavoring to alter the Government, which
is Capital by their Law; and they would have found me guilty of Death, had they
not been turned out of the Government, etc. Now though in this he does but
deliver his own Conjectures, what would have been (which how unlikely they are,
may be gathered from what was, seeing when he was fined for some Evil Demeanor,
the Fine was not exacted, though there was time enough to have done it, before
the Government was Changed) yet his telling his Hearers that he had just cause
to accuse the Quakers of Error, and then immediately acquainting them with his
having been Presented at Philadelphia, is a sufficient Indication, that the
ground of his accusing the Quakers, is not Zeal for Religion, but Malice and
Revenge.

In the same page he pretends to give another Proof against G. Whitehead, but
he does indeed but repeat one of the Proofs he gave before upon his first Head,
in p. 16. where I answered it at large. He takes it out of p. 29. of that Book
called The Nature of Christianity, to which himself writ the Additional
Postscript: And he gives it thus: Says G. Whitehead to R. Gordon, Do thou
look for Christ's coming again to appear outwardly in a Bodily Existence? If
thou do, thou may look until thy Eyes drop out, before thou will see such
an Appearance of him. See now the Fraud and Falseness of this Man, who that he
might make this Passage look toward the End for which he brought it, has
corrupted the place, by leaving out those words that he knew would defeat his
purpose: For whereas he gives the words thus, Do thou look for Christ's
coming again, to appear outwardly in a bodily Existence? If thou do, etc. The
words in G. Whitehead's Book, are thus, Do thou look for Christ, as the Son
of Mary, to appear outwardly in a bodily Existence, to save thee, according to
thy words, p. 30? If thou do, etc. It happened that one of the Auditors,
being a Quaker, said, Let the passage be read out. G. Keith to have put it by,
said, If we had not had these Oppositions, we might have saved an hour. Had he
but now had an Auditor ready (as he had in p. 39.) to have said, He has done
enough, it had passed, and he had gone off so: But no body offering to help him
out, he was fain to read the passage right, and so it is set down at the top of
his p. 41. He had put in the words [ coming again] and left out the words [ as
the Son of Mary] and the words [ to save thee] upon which the stress of the
passage lay, that so he might make himself a proof. And yet in p. 41. upon his
offering to read another Passage, out of a Manuscript Paper; he said, I am glad
that my Neighbor has such Charity for me, that he thinks I will not read
wrong: (for it seems the Person he called his Neighbor, not suspecting him
guilty of so great Baseness, had said in another case, p. 24. I think he does
not read false) And to beget the like Charity now, he added, I shall forfeit
the Name of an Honest Man, if I read one word different from the Original. How
differently from the Original he read this passage in p. 40. will appear by
comparing it with the same Passage, as he was fain at last to read it, in p.
41. How far he has forfeited the Name of an Honest Man, (if he then had it to
forfeit) I leave the Reader to judge.

Upon this Quotation, he says, p. 41. Ye see these are plain and express words
against Christ's outward Coming. But in making this Inference, he is doubly to
Blame. For first, Here are no plain or express words against Christ's outward
Coming,; neither does the passage relate to his outward Coming it self, but to
the End of that coming, and to the manner, state and quality, in which he shall
then come. For the End of his coming then is not to Save, as if Salvation were
not to be obtained, or known till then; neither will he come in that low state
of Humiliation and form of a Servant, wherein he appeared as the Son of Mary
(though he was always more than barely the Son of Mary) for he shall come in the
glory of his Father, Mat. 16.27. Or as Luke expresses it, In his own Glory, and
in his Fathers, and of the Holy Angels, Luke 9.26. But secondly, G. Keith is
the more to be blamed, for saying, of those Words of G. Whitehead. Here are
plain and express Words against Christ's outward Coming, seeing he confesses in
p. 40. That in another Book, called The Real Quaker a Real Protestant, G.
Whitehead has declared He did not mean it of Christ's coming to Judgment; but
he meant it thus, Because R. Gordon would needs have it, that Salvation was
delayed till Christ's outward Coming. Who, but a Man of a m^st malicious Mind,
would urge another Man's words against him, contrary to his own declared Sense
and Meaning? G. Keith says, He is apt to think G. Whitehead abuses R. Gordon:
But every indifferent Reader will be apt to conclude, beyond thinking, that G.
Keith has abused G. Whitehead, and that very grossly.

In p. 41. he has a little Flurt at me, which shows he wanted either Matter or
Wit, that he would entertain so great an Assembly with such a Trifle. He tells
it that I had said, I had upward of six Manuscripts. What, says T. Ellwood, (in
his way of Quibbling) six and an half? His words were, I produced above six
Manuscripts. I knowing he loved a loose way of expressing himself, and shunned
plainness of Speech, in my Answer to the Matter for which he said he produced
those Manuscripts, as a Nip for his conceited Folly, asked in a Parenthesis,
What means he by above six? Does he mean six and a half? For if they had been
seven or eight, he might as well have said so, as above six. This he calls my
way of Quibbling; which I think was suitable enough to his way of Scribbling.
Why should such a conceited Philosopher play the Fool, and not be told of it?

He says, I tell him he is guilty of Forgery, in saying the Yearly Meeting
censured any Expressions in his Manuscripts: But because he repeats this over
and over in the following part of his Narrative, I say nothing to it here,
intending to speak to it once for all, when he is got past his Manuscripts,
which he now says are seven or eight (it seems he does not yet know whether;
however it is more than six and an half, and not quite so uncertain as above
six.) Yet I find not that he produced any more than two, and those but private
Letters from one Man, and out of them he read but a piece of each; and how
truly and fairly he read those Pieces, I know not, having no Copy to prove them
thereby; for when they were read at the Yearly Meeting he mentions, we could
not obtain a Copy of them from him; and we have seen but lately how unfair and
unjust he was, in giving a Passage out of G. Whitehead's Book. The Letters he
mentions go under the Name of one John Humphreys, and the substance of that
part he read out of the first Letter, is, 1. A blaming them that divide Christ,
and put asunder what God has joined together, by making such a distinction
between Christ within and Christ without, as divides Christ's Body from his
Spirit. 2. A censuring G. Keith 's Ten Articles of Faith, as relishing too much
of Carnality. And then says, I am grieved to hear some say, They did expect to
be justified by that Blood that was shed at Jerusalem. When G. Keith had read
what he thought would serve his purpose, he gave over, and said, I have not
read the whole Letter, but an entire Paragraph of it. And thereupon says, So
farewell Christ without; You divide Christ, if you mention Christ without. I
think he wrongs the Man in the Inference, for I take his meaning to be, (not
that the bare mentioning Christ without, is a Dividing of Christ but) that so
to distinguish between Christ within and Christ without, as to make two
distinct Christ's of them, (whereas Christ within and Christ without, is but one
Christ) this is to divide Christ; and this I take to be that which Io.
Humphreys did there blame. But I would fain know, why G. Keith did not read the
whole Letter: For (though I would not be overconfident upon my own Memory, of a
thing I never heard read but once, and that more than two years ago, yet) I am
strongly persuaded there were other Passages in that Letter which was read in
the Yearly Meeting, that did explain I. Humphreys his meaning in these. And I
cannot think why G. Keith (who is prolix enough at other times) should pick out
a piece of a Letter only, and conceal the rest, if he had not found something
in the rest, that he thought would take off the edge of his Objection against
that he took. As for those pieces of I. Humphreys Letters, which G. Keith has
exposed in his Narrative, (though I do not hold my self (nor the People called
Quakers) accountable for them, or for every thing that particular Persons may
write in private Letters, yet) I charitably hope (though I know not the Man)
that wherein he has erred, it has rather been in the Expression of his Mind,
than in his real Intent and Meaning. For in that passage of his first Letter,
wherein he says, I am grieved to hear some say they did expect to be justified
by that Blood that was shed at Jerusalem, I take these words to depend upon
that complaint which he had made before, of Dividing Christ, by that kind of
Distinction which some had made, between Christ within and Christ without,
whereby they attributed (at least he thought they did) that to one part only,
as distinct and divided from the other, which ought in a right sense to be
ascribed to both jointly. I am the rather induced to believe this was his
meaning, from that Passage which G. Keith has given out of his second Letter,
(which seems to have been written on this occasion) wherein he says the word [
Only] should have been put in, and that the leaving it out, was the Omission of
his Pen. Now had that word been in, (as it seems he intended it should have
been) the Sentence would have been thus, I am grieved to hear some say, They
did expect to be justified by that Blood Only, tha^ was shed at Jerusalem; And
then I suppose G. Keith would not have quarrelled with it. And though I.
Humphreys, when he saw how his Meaning was wrested in his first Letter, did in
his second Letter, (after he had declared the word [ Only] should have been in,
and that that was his meaning) in contempt of the deceitful and malicious
workings of the Adversaries, seemed indifferent whether they put in the word
[only] or no, saying, as G. Keith cites him, But however, Let Deceit and Malice
have its full force and scope upon it, and that word (only) taken off the
Conclusion of my Paper, etc. Yet it seems he did this, not as intending thereby
to exclude the Blood shed at Jerusalem from having any share or part in our
Justification; but as believing from his before declared Sense, that Christ
(and consequently his Sacrifice) ought not to be divided, but taken jointly;
that it would appear his Words had the force and import of the Word [ only] and
that that was his Meaning, though the Word only was through inadvertency left
out. And therefore he refers to the Words of Christ, John 6.63. Which saying,
says he, of our Savior himself, will clear me of your Aspersion.

So that (even from what G. Keith has thought fit to give of his second
Letter) it appears, that their wresting the Words in his former Letter, and
inferring therefrom that he wholly excluded the Blood shed at Jerusalem from
being concerned in our Justification, he took to be an Aspersion upon him, and
so called it. Now the Words of our Savior, which he referred to in John 6.63.
are these, It is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits nothing. In
which Words it may not be supposed our Savior meant that his Flesh or Body, as
it was in Conjunction with his Spirit and Soul, and contained that Divine Life
which dwelt in it, and was offered up together, a complete Sacrifice to the
Father, did profit nothing, did avail nothing, did contribute nothing to the
Benefit and Advantage of Man: But that the Flesh or Body considered simply of
it self and by it self, without that Divine Life, Soul and Spirit that was in
it, profited nothing. So Wilson, in his Christian Dictionary (Sixth Edition,
Printed at London, 1655.) expounds those Words, The Flesh profits nothing,
that is to say, the Humane Nature of Christ is not profitable to us of it self,
but as the Godhead dwells in it, giving Life to it, and quickening us by it.
And thus, he says, Tindal and the Bible Note expound this Place. In like manner
I understand John Humphreys, both when he said in his first Letter, I am
grieved to hear some say, they did expect to be justified by that Blood that
was shed at Jerusalem; and in his second Letter (from those Words of Christ, it
is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing) So he himself
ascribed the Work of Man's Salvation, and Sanctification, not to the Flesh that
suffered, but to the Spirit that quickened; not to the Blood that was shed at
Jerusalem, but unto the Flesh and Blood that is spiritual, etc.) to intend and
mean, not the outward Flesh and Blood of it self only, without or apart from
the Divine Life, Spirit and Power that appeared in it, and gave Virtue to it,
but both together. Nor Primarily or Principally the outward Flesh and Blood;
but the Divine Life, Spirit and Power that dwelt in that outward Body, and made
it what it was; if he meant otherwise, we cannot stand by him therein.

But whereas G. Keith says of John Humphreys, in Nar. p. 43. That some of his
own Fraternity persuaded him to put in the Word, Only, and that would excuse
the Matter; he puts in the Word Only, and (says G. Keith) he thinks it was
against his Conscience, and so bids put it out again. That some of his own
Fraternity (as G. Keith scoffingly speaks) persuaded him to put in the Word,
Only, does not appear to be true; but that, when he had put it in, he thought
it was against his Conscience, appears to be false: And from thence it appears,
that G. Keith did not think it was against his Conscience to belie him. Where
did I. Humphreys declare that the putting in the Word, Only, was against his
Conscience, and that therefore he bid put it out again? The Words of his Letter
(as G. Keith has given them) show the contrary.

His 43. p. is spent in a confused, rambling Discourse, in which he flits to
and fro, from one thing to another, in a loose way, without sticking to any
thing. But in the Close of it, he mentions a Testimony from W. Penn, to prove
that Bodily Death did not come in by Man's Sin: Which in p. 44. he gives out of
W. Penn's Book (in Answer to Reeve and Muggleton, called, The New Witnesses
proved Old Heretics, p. 55.) thus, If the Flesh of Beasts is capable of dying,
rotting and going to dust, who never sinned, why should not Man have died, and
gone to Dust, though he had never sinned? He should have noted that W. Penn
spoke this upon an extravagant Notion of theirs, That, The Reason why Men's
Bodies in Death, or after Death, do rot, or stink, in the Grave, and come to
Dust, is, because there was Sin in their Bodies whilst they lived; but on the
contrary, if Men had no Sin in their Natures or Bodies, they might live and
die, and naturally rise again, by their own Power, in their own Time. Upon this
he thus observed, Why should Sin only cause the Body to rot, stink and go to
Dust? Does not the Scripure, and Reeve himself (in his Book, p. 44.) give
another Reason, namely, That what came from Dust, is that which must go to
Dust? Then adds (to show their weakness in assigning Sin only for the cause of
the Bodies rotting and going to Dust) Besides, if the Flesh of Beasts is
capable of Dying, Rotting and going to Dust, who never sinned, why should not
Man have dyed, and gone to Dust, though he had never sinned? And in p. 5, 6. he
attacks Reeve again, upon his own Assertion, saying, And it is further evident,
That Sin is not the cause of Men's Bodies crumbling into Dust, from Reeves his
own Words, etc. So that what W. Penn said, on that Subject, might be but
Argumentum ad Hominem, which ought not to be turned upon himself, But if W.
Penn had directly affirmed that Man's Natural Body, as it was formed of the
Dust of the Ground, Genesis 2.7. Should have returned to Dust, again, although he
had not sinned, would that have been a gross and vile Error contrary to the
Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith? Indeed, according to G. Keith's
wild Notions of Adam's and Eve's Bodies (both before the Fall, while they grew
together back to back, before they were split asunder, as he Fables, and after
the Fall too) the Bodies which they had after the Fall, did derive from Sin,
not only their Mortality, but their beginning, and the Cause of their Being
made: For he Dreams that the Bodies in which they lived after the Fall, were
not the same that they had before the Fall; but were those Coats of Skins,
which God is said, Genesis 3.21. to have made for them, which he fancies to be
their outward Bodies of Flesh, Blood and Bones, and that those were made to
cover the nakedness of their former Bodies. Of which, and many more such
Dotages, the Reader (if he have any thing of a sober Brain) may soon read
himself Sick, in his Book, called, Truth Advanced, more especially from p. 16.
to p. 32.

In this 44. p. again He acknowledges G. Whitehead and W. Penn to be Orthodox,
though he has charged them with being Heterodox, and for ought I see makes them
Heterodox and Orthodox in the same things; which is pretty.

Before he got hither, he had pretty well tired his Auditors. He was fain, in
p. 41. to say, I beg of you; I shall be but short: And so drilled them on the
Contents of three Pages further. Now, says he, I beg your Patience for one or
two Quotations more, before I have done. (This was heavy, dull Work.) It is,
says he, out of Tho. Ellwood, to show you that T. Ellwood Charges me with
Forgery, because I said the Yearly Meeting did censure some of these Unsound
Papers. This he has been harping at diverse times before, both in p. 41, 42, and
43. But I deferred my Answer to it, till I came hither. The ground of his Cavil
here at me is this, He (to support his tottering Credit among those few that
seemed at first willing to listen a little to him) had in his Book, called, A
seasonable Information, etc. p. 26. affirmed, That the Paper, called, A true
Account of the Proceedings of the Yearly Meeting in 1694. (which his Agent R.
Hannay published) does own them of the other side (by whom, he meant, the
Friends in America whom he had separated from) to be guilty of unsound and
erroneous Doctrines. I (in my Book, called, A further Discovery, written in
Answer to that of his) said, p. 84. How false and unfair he is in this, the
Words of that Paper shall show, which are these, viz. And although it appears,
that some few Persons have given Offense, either through erroneous Doctrines,
unsound Expressions, or Weakness, Forwardness, want of Wisdom and right
Understanding, yet, etc. Upon this I then made this Observation (which he now
repeats in his Narrative, p. 44.) Here ye see, Friends, that that Paper of the
Yearly Meeting is so far from owning them of the other side, as he calls them
(that is, the Friends in America) to be guilty of unsound and erroneous
Doctrines (which G. Keith here expressly says it does) that it does not
undertake to determine, whether the Offense (said to be given by some few
Persons) was through erroneous Doctrines, and unsound Expressions, or through
Weakness, Forwardness, want of Wisdom and right Understanding. And yet this Man
has the Confidence and Falseness, to say positively, that Paper does own them
guilty of holding unsound and erroneous Doctrines. This is that for which he
says, I charged him with Forgery. And if I did, he well deserved it; for I
proved it so plain upon him, that he has not had the Confidence so much as to
attempt to acquit himself of it: And that, with many more such gross things,
which I fastened on him in that Book, were, I suppose, the reaon, why he has
not hitherto replied to it, though it has been in Print well nigh these two
Years. Now, not being able to shake off the Forgery, he turns Cat in Pan, and
endeavors to make some Advantage against me, for having denied that the Yearly
Meeting had owned those Friends in America to be guilty of erroneous Doctrines,
alleging that thereby I make both the Meeting and my self to approve and
justify them. But that is no fair Consequent. I hope there were some, at
least, in his Auditory at Turners Hall, that were more just that to condemn us
(so much as in their own Thoughts) whom he had Arraigned and so highly Charged
behind our backs, (though he pretended to Convict us from our own Books) but
would, like wise and upright Men, suspend their Judgment, till they should have
heard or read our Defense? And if any that were there, fell short of this
impartial Justice, we value their Judgment no more than it deserves. But if
this is but right and reasonable in this Case; how unright and unreasonable
would it have been in the Yearly Meeting, to have given forth, judicially and
authoritatively, as a Yearly Meeting, a Judgment against any particular Person
or Persons, upon the Accusation of a declared Enemy, without due Proof, and
without hearing the Parties Face to Face, or at all hearing the Defense of the
Accused; nay, when the Persons accused were not only not present, nor in the
Nation, but some thousands (perhaps) of Miles distant, in another Quarter of
the World! This was the Case of that Yearly Meeting, in 1694. G. Keith made a
Clamor then against some in America, for holding (as he said) gross and vile
Errors, as he has since done against some here; And he urged the reading of
some Papers he had brought with him, relating to that Affair. Which though the
Meeting was not obliged, in strict Justice, to admit (the Accused not being
present) yet to stop his present, and to have prevented (if it might have been)
his future Clamor, the Meeting condescended, and he read (or caused to be
read) several Manuscripts. But when they were read (besides that diverse of them
appeared to be rather the hasty Products of Heat and Contention, which he had
raised and kindled there, than the well-weighed Sentiments of a sedate and
deliberate Judgment) of what Authority could they be to the Meeting to ground a
Judicial Sentence upon? Or who would be willing to have Judgment given against
him, upon no Evidence but the bare reading of Letters (supposed to be his own)
without having Liberty to make his own Defense, and to give his own Sense of
any Expression laid to his Charge? This is not new to G. Keith, for in my Book,
called, A further Discovery, in Answer to his, called, A seasonable
Information, I debated this Case fairly with him. In p. 59. With respect to my
self, I told him (which I had also told him before, in another Book called, An
Epistle to Friends, p. 41.) I observe he makes a great Noise and Ou^ery of
gross and vile Errors held by some, and them upheld by others, which he gives
for one Reason or Cause of the Separation. But inasmuch as this is only his
Charge, without due Proof, and the Persons by him Charged with those vile
Errors, are not here present, to make Answer to his Charge, and defend
themselves, or to show the Occasions that led to, and Circumstances that
attended those Discourses, from which he picked the Words he Charges them with,
and to explain their meanings therein, I have not thought it fit, or becoming
me, on no better Ground, to meddle with those Matters, being alike unwilling to
justify them, if in any thing they have done or said amiss, as to condemn them
unheard, upon the report of another, and him their professed Adversary.

In p. 65. (With respect to the Meeting's Words before cited) which he would
have strained to be a Judgment against the Friends in America, whom he had
warred with) I told him, What offense was given, might as well be through
Weakness, Forwardness, want of Wisdom and right Understanding, as through
erroneous Doctrines, or unsound Expressions. Nay, if it were through unsound
Expressions (though they are not to be excused, yet) that does not prove a Man
guilty of holding gross and vile Errors, etc. For a Man that is sound in
Judgment, and Doctrine, m^a chance to drop an unsound Expression, through
weakness, as some perhaps in America, through G. Keith's catching Questions,
may have been drawn to do, whose Weakness for him to expose in Print, in that
aggravating manner as he has done, to the Reproach of the whole Profession, is
very great Wickedness in him, and for which his Condemnation from God slumbers
not. And in p. 66. with respect to his Manuscripts, (which he would have had
pass for sufficient Proofs) I told him thus. He being a Party is not a
competent Judge what is sufficient Proof in this Case. That some Manuscripts
were read in the Yearly Meeting by him, or on his part, I remember; how many
they they were, or whether signed by the Persons own Hands, I know not. But,
supposing (not granting) those Manuscripts to be either Autographs, or
Authentic Copies, I believe he himself would think much, to be concluded or
condemned from Inferences, or Constructions made upon Manuscripts (especially,
if they be private Letters, as I think, some of those he had read, were)
without his being present, and having the Liberty to open and explain his Sense
and Meaning in any Passage, Word or Sentence in them. Thus had I controverted
this Point with him formerly, in that Book of mine, called, A further
Discovery, which he has never replied to; which might have been enough to have
stopped him from telling that Story at Turners-Hall, if he had not wanted
Matter. And this I suppose will be sufficient to satisfy any impartial Reader:
That the Yearly Meeting had no sufficient Ground, from what G. Keith offered to
them, to censure judicially those Persons in America, whom he exclaimed here
against; consequently that he has no just ground to Charge the Meeting (or me
for defending the Meeting against his unjust Charge) with approving and
justifying those things which he calls vile Errors in them.

But he comes off most lamely in pretending that he was charitable to the
Yearly Meeting, in construing the Disjunctive [ or] in their Words, to be
equivalent to the Copulative [ and] as, says he, sometimes it is. Did he ever
know or taken for and, in an Alternative Proposition* or Sentence, as this was,
by any that pretended to understand Words? Let him blush at his Folly, and
repent of his Hypocrisy, in calling that Charity, which was indeed but a
deceitful Shift. And let him learn to be just, before he pretends to be
Charitable.

He thrust upon his Auditors, one Quotation more, out of a Book of mine, which
he almost promised them, should be the last, at least of Printed ones. He tells
them, That I blame him, for comparing the Books of Friends, to the Books of the
Greek and Latin Fathers. which in p. 45. he gives out of p. 99. of my Further
Discovery, thus, In comparing the Books of Friends, to the Books of them called
the Greek and Latin Fathers, he has not done as a Friend and Brother, but as an
Enemy, in supposing Friends Books to have been written by no better Guidance,
nor clearer sight, than theirs, who lived and writ in those Dark times. Upon
this he said, You see how modest they are here? And upon that he makes his
Auditors give a shout, Signifying, says he, their dislike that the Quakers
Books should be preferred so far to the Greek and Latin Fathers, next to the
Days of the Apostles. One might wonder here, at the Cause of his Auditors
shouting: For such of them, as could understand what was meant by Greek and
Latin Fathers, one might expect should be men of greater Wisdom and Gravity,
than to shout in such Assemblies; And for the undiscerning Mob, it was a
Subject so much above their Capacity and Pretenses, that it cannot be supposed
they should shout at that, if they had not been excited thereunto, by some
little antic Gesticulation from him. But to the matter. They shouted, he says,
Signifying their dislike, that the Quakers Books should be preferred so far to
the Greek and Latin Fathers, next to the Days of the Apostles. Why next to the
Days of the Apostles? These were not my words. I did not refer to the times
next to the Days of the Apostles. But my words were, -- Who lived and writ in
those Dark times. Must those Dark times, needs be next to the Days of the
Apostles? See what an Vnfair Stretch this was. Were not most, and the most
noted, of them, in the fourth and fifth Centuries, three or four hundred Years
or more, after the Apostles Days, as Athanasius, Basilius, the two Gregory's (
Naziansen and Nysen,) Cyril, Ambrose, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Hieronimus,
Augustine, Hilarious, and so on to Gregory the great, Pope of Rome. Nay, are not
Oecumenius, Theophilact, and Bernard (none of the worst) reckoned amongst the
Fathers, though the first of them lived above eight hundred Years, the second
above a thousand, and the last above eleven hundred Years after Christ? And why
then must what I spoke of those who lived and writ in those Dark times, be
applied to them that lived next to the Days of the Apostles? Could he find no
other times to be accounted Dark, but the Days next to the Apostles? He has
showed his good Will; and that he is no Changling in this respect (how great
soever in another) but is always for perverting, and taking words in the worst
sense.

That the times were Dark in the 4 th and 5 th Centuries, I suppose he will
grant, when I shall have put him in mind, that much of the Superstition, and
not a little of Corruption in Doctrine, now retained in the Church of Rome,
crept in in those times (of which, were this a suitable place, I could give
plenty of Instances) nor was the third Secle so clear, but that Tertullian (who
lived in the very beginning of it) and Origin (about the middle of it) gave
sufficient Occasion in their writings, for others to see, they were too much in
the Dark. Perkins in his Problem of the Church of Rome, p. 12. tells us, that
Hierom says, Tertullian was not a man of the Church, because he fell a way, to
the Opinion of Montanus. Yea, that he was a chief Heretic. He gives a
Catalogue of the Books, Tertullian wrote against the Orthodox, and says,
Gelasius adjudged all his Books to be A^rcryphal.

Origin, Perkins says, was Errorum plenus, Full of Errors; And that Hierom
called his Writings Venomous. Of Cyprian, he says, p. 13. While he too much
admires Tertullian, he sometimes favors the Montanists. Alstedius in Lex.
Theol, p. 11. Blames Hierom, Augustine Ambrose, Hillary and Origin, altogether,
for their absurd Allegories; Nay he taxes Ambrose and Hillary with soul
Contradictions. And in p. 17. he says, St. Hierom is ridiculous in Allegories
over and over. And Augustine, he says, does sometimes after the same manner.
Jurieu a French Protestant, in his late Book called The Accomplishment of the
Prophecies, Second Edit. Part, 1. and p. 217. says, St. Basil, St. Ambrose, and
the two Gregory's, are the most ancient Authors, in whom we begin to find the
Worship and Invocation of Creatures. And in Part, 2. p. 43, he says, St. Basil
in the East, and St. Ambrose in the West, are the most Ancient Fathers, in whom
we find the Footsteps of the Invocation and Intercession of the Saints. In Part
1. p. 270. he says, The Ancients did Copy one another, almost without any
Judgment, and always without Consideration. And he concludes, Part, 1 p. 112.
If the Authority of the Fathers, be not good in many Places, it is good in none,
it is doubtful every where. I give but these few Touches Concerning those
Fathers (as they are called) who lived (not next to, yet) not many Ages after
the Apostles Days. They who have a mind to know more on this Subject, may find
enough (if not too much) in the learned Dalleus.

But that it may appear, I spoke no^ by rote, in calling those times Dark,
wherein most of those called Fathers before mentioned lived, I think fit to let
the Reader understand, from Perkins's Problem before ci^ed, That Praying for
the Dead (which is a peculiar Doctrine of Popery) is as Old as Tertullians
time, about the latter End of the Second, and beginning of the Third Century,
p. 97. And the Conceit of Purgatory, must to be sure, be some what Older.
Perkins makes the Montanists Authors of it, p. 99. And Tertullian and Origin
the Chief, p. 175. The Honoring of the Relick of the Dead came in a little
after the Year 300. p 81. Praying to Saints, about the Year 380. p. 90. The
Caelibacy, or Single Life of Priests, between the Years 300. and 400. p 190,
191, 192. Monkery* about the Year 260. p. 226. And for Superstitious Ceremo^i^s
used in the Church of Rome, if Genebrard, Fas^iculus Temporum, Polidore, de
invent Rerum, and other Writers may be believed, the greatest part of them were
introduced before the Sixth Century, and not a few in the Third.

In p. 46. he ob^rudes upon his Auditory, the Copy of a Paper, which he
pretends to have Received from some of the Church-Party (as he calls them) by
which I confess at the first sight, I thought he had meant some Episcopal Men,
^till Reading on, I found he described them to be some that go among the
Quakers. Why he Denominates them, some of the Church-Party, (or of a Party for
the Church) I know not, unless to distinguish them from himself, and such as he
was in hopes to get to him, to make a Party against the Church. However, he
says, They were such as favored him; and (if he say true) it appears they
favored him, more than Truth, otherwise they would not have gone out of the
way of Truth, and common Justice, to gratify him. For he says, They gave him a
Meeting (There were, he think^, Nine or Ten of them;) They took notice, he
says, of some of Ellwood's Forgeries and Abuses; And it seems they dr^w up a
Paper against me, as a Censure and Judgment upon my Book, for he says, They
said in their Paper, T. Ellwood had done him wrong. And yet all this (if ever
it was done) was done in the Dark, and in Hugger Mugger (as the saying is)
without ever convening me, or acquainting me with it, before or after; nor did
I ever hear of it, till now. He says, Some of them are Eminent, and that they
are Generally in good Repute among us. If they were so, it would have added
some Repute to his Cause, to have named them; but that, I observe, he would not
be drawn to, by all the Importunity that was used. His Narrative gives Account
that H. G. said, Let us know their names, who they are; which he refusing to
tell, the other said, I dare thee to name their names, or else thou art a Liar,
an Impostor, a Cheat, adding, I dare say it is a Cheat. All this would not
prevail with G. Keith to name a Man of them: And yet he says, Some of them
have, I hope, that Courage, that I believe they would not be offended nor
afraid, if I named them. This makes me the more suspect his Story to be false.
And though I will not say positively, It is a Cheat; yet I dare say, It looks
as like a Cheat, as any thing can well look. And I think an Impartial and
Judicious Auditory would have required their names, and been better satisfied
of the Authority of that Paper, before they would have lent him their Ears to
the Hearing of it. But, as if he had been feeding Iackdaws, all went down (for
ought I find) that he offered, without the least chewing, or Examination.

Now if there be any thing of reality in the Story he has told (of some Persons
whom he will not name, that gave him that Paper, of which he read the Copy in
his Meeting at Turner's-Hall) and that it be not a mere Fiction of his own, to
bring forth that as the work of others, which (for the weakness of it,) he
might well have been ashamed to have brought forth as his own; what ever might
be their intent in doing it, (as perhaps to still and quiet him, by making some
little show of blaming me, which supposing the Story true in Fact, is the most
Charitable Construction I can put upon it.) Yet I plainly see his design in
publishing it is, to slip his Neck cut of the Collar, (as they say) and thereby
excuse himself (if he might) from Answering that Book of mine (called A further
Discovery) out of which the Cavils contained in the Paper he read, were picked
up. For he says, in a Marginal Note to p. 50. (both of that Book, and the
the other called Truth Defended) I think I have effectually answered them here,
as to the main. Now I think it fit to give the Reader an Account, That that
Book of mine, called A further Discovery, etc. and was an Answer to a Book of
G. Keith's called A Seasonable Information, and Caveat, etc. (the Epistle to
which was Published first by it self, about a Month before the Book) in which
he charged me with Fifty False Accusations, Perversions and Forgeries (which he
pretended to have gathered up, out of a Former Treatise of mine, called An
Epistle to Friends) and undertook, in so Many distinct Sections, to prove
against me. All which in my Further Discovery, I Answered, and fully too, and
returned the Charge of False Accusations, Perversions and Forgeries upon him.
This has lain upon him now near two Years, without so much as attempting to
Answer it. Now he would sham me off with an Idle Story ( if not a mere Fable)
of what some few Persons (that must not be named, that they may not be blamed
and shamed) have in a Blind and Indirect manner, signified to him, as their
Judgment Concerning some few (and little material) Passages in that Book of
mine. And this he would have pass for an Answer to that Book. Which that it may
not, but that that Book (as well as the other, called Truth Defended) may still
remain upon him, as unanswered; I will go through the several particulars of it
(which he for want of weight in himself, calls weighty) and show both the
emptiness and weakness of them, and the Folly and Falsehood of his Comments upon
them.

The First Head is, that I blame G. Keith for mistating the Controversy (about
the sufficiency of the Light) and cunningly sliding in the Word [ Within] when
he knew it was not in the Words charged, nor in the Words proved: To this it is
opposed, in that Paper thus, A true Copy of the three Judgments, p. 6. are
those Words: All which are something else than the People called Quakers
understand by the Light, ^o wit, the Light in every Man's Conscience, which G.
Keith alleges, is Proof that G. Keith intended the Light within. To this I
say, 1. What is meant by A true Copy of the three Judgments, I know not. If it
be a Book (as, by quoting, p. 6. it seems to be) I do not remember I have ever
seen it; nor is it much material, to this business; whether I ever do or not.
2. Here Is a Relative without an Antecedent, all which are something else, etc.
All which? all what? All nothing at all: For there is nothing mentioned, or
recited out of that True Copy, to which the Relative Which may be referred. So
that this is a Nonsensi^al Passage. And, to complete the Folly of this weighty
Particular, as he calls it, the Conclusion of it is thus, Which G. Keith
alleges, is Proof that G. Keith intended the Ligh within. Here G. Keith's
pretended Advocates, instead of showing that the Word Within was in the Words
charged, or in the Words proved (which they should have done; if they would
have convicted me of mischarging him, in saying he had cunningly slid in the
Word, Within) come no nearer the Matter than to say, that something or other
(not naming what) G. Keith alleges, is Proof that G. Keith intended the Light
within. They don't adventure so far as to say, that that something (or All
which, whatever it was) is a Proof, but that G. Keith alleges it is a Proof.
And a Proof of what, I Pray? Why, a Proof that G. Keith intended the Light
within. But is not that a fair Proof, at least by Implication, that G. Keith
did not express the Word Within (whatever he intended) and consequently, that I
said true, in saying, He knew it was not in the Words charged, nor in the Words
proved (for how should it, when it was not in the Words spoken, as is here
implicitly acknowledged) but only in his Intention? Was G. Keith so dull, he
could not see, that this was so far from being a Defense for him, that it
wholly makes against him, and for me? To piece out this, there is added in his
Paper, a Passage in one Ben. Chamber's Letter: Another Passage in John
Delaval's Letter. And then is added, John Humphrey's two Letters read, and both
to the same Purpose. It may be so: And yet all to little or no purpose. For
what were all these Letters, I pray? Were they made public in Print? Or only
private Letters lying in G. Keith's Pocket? How then could it be expected I
should know, or take notice, what was in them? But I can assure G. Keith (and
his Advocates too, if he has any) that I went upon surer Ground than the
Letters in his Pocket could be to me: For when I said, He knows the Word Within
was not in the Words charged, nor in the Words proved, I had G. Keith himself
for my Author; and I thought I could not have a better, against himself, than
himself. He, in his Seasonable Information (to which I then answered) speaking
of T. Fitz-water's Charge against him, p. 12. said, His Charge was, That I
denied the sufficiency of the Light. Here Is not the Word Within; and therefore
he knew (if he knew what he writ) that the Word Within was not in the Words
Charged. Then three Lines lower, in the same Page, speaking of what the
Witnesses proved, he says, They proved against me, That I did not believe the
Light was sufficient without something else. Here Is not the Word Within; and
therefore he knew (if he knew what he writ) that the Word Within was not in
the Words proved. This, I think were enough, on this Head, to clear me. But to
manifest more fully, that I had good ground to say as I did, viz. that he knew
the Word Within was not in the Words charged, I add, that in the same Book, p.
17. he says, I stand recorded on the Monthly Meeting Book at Philadelphia, by
the Monthly Meetings Judgment given out against me, and clearing T. Fitz-water
for his accusing me, that I denied the sufficiency of the Light; and the
Evidence (says he) against me was, That I said, I did not believe the Light was
sufficient without something else. Here he has set down the Words charged, and
the Words proved, as they stand recorded (if he may be believed) on the
Monthly Meeting Book at Philadelphia, and yet here is not the Word Within,
either in the Words charged, or in the Words proved. And this both he, and
his pretended Advocates, might have seen in my Further Discovery, p. 62. Yet
further in his Book, called, Reasons and Causes, p. 8. where he gives this
Matter as the first Cause of the Separation, he sets down T. Fitzwater's Charge
against him thus. T -- having openly in the Face of the Meeting accused G.
Keith, for denying the sufficiency of the Light. Here is not the Word Within.
And lower in the same Page, telling what others witnessed for him, he says they
said, They heard him both then and at all occasions, that he delivered his Mind
on that subject, always bear Testimony to the sufficiency of the Light to
Salvation. Here Is not the Word Within. And this I noted formerly, in my
Further Discovery, p. 63. whom would G. Keith have me to believe, if not
himself? Yet G. Keith has the Face, in his Comment upon this Head, Nar. p. 48.
to say, The Question was not concerning the Light indefinitely; but the Light
within: And that I accuse him unjustly.

The Second Head of that Paper is, That, in my Further Discovery, p. 101. are
these Words, And this makes a Verbal Confession; yea, a bare verbal Confession,
sufficient to Yoke them, as he phrases it, together in Church Fellowship. To
this they oppose, Reasons and Causes of the Separation, p. 22. ad finem; Tho.
Ellwood leaves this out, viz. Touching these necessary and Fundamental
Principles of Christian Doctrine, as well as that their Conversation is such as
becomes the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. They add also another Sentence out
of Reasons and Causes, p. 36. But as this last Sentence relates not to those
Words of mine, which were expressly restrained to the Quotation there given out
of Reasons and Causes, p. 22. So they (or he for them, for that it is his Work,
whoever he got to Patronize it, I don't doubt) leave out the former part of my
Words, which explain the latter. The Dispute between him and me there, was not
about Conversation, or how far, he either admitted, or required, that, as a
Term of Communion with him; but it was about a verbal Confession of Faith or
Principles, as a Door of Admittance into Society or Fellowship, or Terms of
Communion therein; See my Epistle, p. 59, 60, and 61. In his Answer to which
(called A Seasonable Information) p. 34. Sect. 37, 38. He mentioned not a Word
of Conversation; but excepted against the Words Door of Admittance, and said,
he made not a verbal Confession, the Terms at all of Church Communion, when the
Profession is but barely verbal; but when the Confession or Profession, flows
from the living Faith of Christ, etc. To this I replying, in my Further
Discovery, p. 101. showed, that he had not guarded his Expression, about a
verbal Confession, so before, in the Place I had quoted of his, which was that
in Reasons and Causes, p. 22. Then reciting the Words again, viz. We are
convinced and persuaded in our Consciences, that God calls us to separate
from such Unbelievers, and not to be yoaked together in Church Fellowship and
Discipline with any that we have not proof of by Confession of the Mouth, that
they are sound in Faith; I thereupon made this twofold Inference, So that he
makes a verbal Confession, a Proof of their being sound in the Faith, and this
makes a Verbal Confession, yea, a bare verbal Confession, sufficient to yoke
them (as he phrases it) together in Church Fellowship. Now the leaving out the
first Part of my Words, is injurious to the Sense of the Latter: For it makes
as if the latter Part ( viz. That he makes abare verbal Confession sufficient
to Yoke them together in Church Fellowship) had been an Assertion of mine;
whereas it is but an Inference from the former, and that former an Inference
from his Words there quoted. For I did not affirm he makes a bare verbal
Confession sufficient to Yoke them, etc. But from his saying, we are convinced,
etc. that God calls us to separate, etc. and not to be yoaked in
Church Fellowship, etc. with any that we have not proof of by Confession of the
Mouth, that they are sound in Faith; I inferred, 1. That he made a verbal
Confession, a proof of their being sound in the Faith: And, 2. That his doing
so (his making a Verbal Confession a Proof of their being sound in the Faith)
makes a verbal Confession, yea, a bare verbal Confession, sufficient to yoke in
Church Fellowship. Now in this I do not apprehend, I did him any wrong at all,
either in the Inferences, or in ending the Quotation where I did, and not
giving the Words now added in the Paper [Touching these necessary and
fundamental Principles (it should have been, Parts) of Christian Doctrine, as
well as that their Conversation is such as becomes the Gospel, etc.] For the
necessary Parts of Christian Doctrine are comprehended in the Words, sound in
Faith; and Conversation was not in the Terms of the Debate, and therefore not
proper to have been there put in* G. Keith's Clamor therefore, in Nar. p. 48.
is groundless, where he says, Take notice how they (the supposed Authors of his
Paper) notify his Forgery, that he leaves out my Words. This may be rather
c^lled his Forgery; For the Paper he read, says nothing of Forgery; but only
mentions what Words I left out, without passing any Censure, or making any
Observation upon it.

The Third Head of that Paper is, That in Page 103. T. Ellwood accuses G.
Keith for giving of false Quotation, or forging Quotation (this is the Scotch
Dialect, by which I guess who framed it) out of R. Barclay's Book. Then it
sa^s, G. Keith's Quotation compared with R. Barclay 's agrees, as quoted,
Reasons and Causes, etc. p. 16. For Substance of Doctrine, p. 24, 25, 26. in
express Words, and adds, p. 106. T. Ellwood admits of Substance. In the Margin
is set, Let the Quotations be read out of R. Barclay's Anar, Now whereas G.
Keith's pretended Advocates, or Compurgators, say here, that G. Keith's
Quotation compared with R. Barclay's ag^ees as quoted, Reasons and Causes, p.
16. for Substance of Doctrine; I deny it, and that upon good ground, having now
again examined the one with the other. And I put both G. Keith and all his
Advocates upon it, to make it appear, if they can. The mentioning the
Quotations G. Keith gave in p. 24, 25, 26. of Reasons and Causes, out of R.
Barclay is nothing to the purpose (if they do agree) because it was not in
those Pages that I charged him with false quoting. But in my Epistle First, I
taxed him with wronging R. Barclay in the Words he gave; in his Causeless
Ground, p. 8. as the express Doctrine and Testimony of R. Barclay in his
Anarchy, p* 48. and I showed it, and plainly proved it by comparing the places
together: And in p. 61, 62. of that Epistle, I showed a like abuse he had put
upon R. Barclay and his Reader, in his Reasons and Causes, p. 16. in giving
that Passage as R. Barclay's Doctrine in Anarchy, p. 32, 33, 48, 49. which was
neither his Words nor his Doctrine: And though he would have shuffled this off,
in his Seasonable Information, p. 34, 35. Yet I would not suffer him so to do;
but in my Further Discovery, p. 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106. drove him out of
all his Holes and Subterfuges about it, and fixed it as a false Quotation on
him; which neither he has cleared himself, nor his Advocates have acqui^ted him
of, nor can. Whereas they say T. Ellwood admits of Substance; they speak not
plainly. If they mean, that in p. 106. (which they mention) I admit G. Keith to
have given the Substance of R. Barclay's Doctrine, in that Quotation, Reasons
and Causes, p. 16. which I taxed him for, I deny it. I only say there, He has
not attempted to prove, that this is the Doctrine, or Substance of the Doctrine
of R. Barclay in that Book, by producing now R. Barclay's own Words to manifest
it. This is not admitting G. Keith's Quotation to be the Substance of R.
Barclay's Doctrine there. But to remove this conceit wholly, I said in the Page
but just before, viz. p. 105. Ye see now, G. Keith not only confesses they are
not his Words, but dares not adventure to say, they are plainly and directly
his Doctrine; but the Substance of his Doctrine. And yet (said I) even that I
deny. I say they are neither R. Barclay's Words, nor Doctrine, nor the
Substance of his Doctrine. What now may we suppose to be meant by those Words
in the Paper, T. Ellwood admits of Substance? Why, if we may Credit G. Keith in
his Commentary upon it, Nar. p. 48. He says, These Men take notice that T.
Ellwood is unfair in taking that Liberty to himself, he will not allow to me:
They (adds he) observe, he admits of Substance of Doctrine in his own
Citations, but will not allow it to me. Whence will he pretend to have this?
The Paper he read, and has Printed, says nothing of it, nothing toward it,
nothing like it. This therefore I charge upon him, as a plain downright
Falsehood and Forgery.

The fourth Head of that Paper is, That in Further Discovery, p. 19. T. Ellwood
accuses G. Keith, that he blames Friends, that they were gone too much from the
Outward to the Inward. But G. Keith, p. 20. (it should be p. 10.) which T.
Ellwood brings for Proof, says, That he blames some Persons, for not rightly
and fully preaching Christ without. So that T. Ellwood's Consequences seems not
fair, but strained. This is weakness, at least. I showed in that page, that the
word [ too much] there, related to their going from the Outward, which I proved
he blamed Friends for, by his own saying Seas. Inform. p. 10. I have blamed
some Persons for not rightly and fully Preaching Christ without. Now if,
according to him, they did not Preach Christ without, righ^ly nor fully, then,
according to him they were gone too much from the Outward: And so my
Consequence was not Strained, but fair.

The fifth Head, says p. 22. T. Ellwood accuses G. Keith, of a Fallacy, in
declaring, he refused not to go forth at the Yearly Meeting: which Fallacy
alleged, was, that G. Keith should refuse to go out some one Day of the Yearly
Meeting. But that not appearing to us, by any Quotation, the supposed Fallacy
appears not. Well, What then! Whether it appeared to them or not, the Fallacy
is nevertheless certain; And though I could not give a Quotation to prove it
(having only his Books to quote out of) Yet I writ it not upon surmise, but
upon Sufficient ^^ound, and G. Keith so well knows it to be true, that he has
not had the boldness to deny it. There is another part of this Head, which
says, And further, Whereas T. Ellwood alleges that he was led into this
mistake by G. Keith's obscure way of writing; for although in p. 14. nor 18. of
the Book, Reasons and Causes, as T. Ellwood unduly Argues, yet in p. 3. Plea
of the Innocent, quoted by himself, p. 19. of his first Book called An Epistle,
etc. We find G. Keith gives account, the Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia, was in
the first week of the 7 th Month, 1691. This looks like G. Keith's work, both
by the Imperfectness of the Sense, and the disposing of the words so, that the
Fallacy I had charged him with, might pass for a Mistake of mine. Whereas the
Fallacy I charged him with, was, His saying he did go out at the Yearly Meeting
(to contradict my saying, he refused to go out at the Yearly Meeting) whereas
(there being several Meetings in that time of the Yearly Meeting, he did go out
at some, or one, of them, but refused to go out at the rest. But the Mistake
that I was led into, by his obscure way of writing, was, that the place of his
Book which I then quoted, to prove he refused to go out of the Yearly Meeting
(which was p. 14. Of Reasons and Causes) spoke not of the Yearly Meeting, but
another, (as I remember, the Quarterly) Meeting (For that he did refuse to go
out at two several Meetings, that Book of his confesses, p. 14. and p. 18) I
complained, that I was led into that Mistake, by his obscure way of writing, in
not setting down the times wherein those Meetings were held, and showed that in
those pages of that Book of his, wherein those Meetings were spoken of, there
is neither Day, Month, nor Year set, wherein either the Quartely or Yearly
Meeting was held. They blame me, for blaming him for his obscurity, and say,
though it was not in p* 14. nor 18. (nor indeed any where) of that Book, yet it
was in p. 3. of another Book; and so it may be in p. 13. of another Book beside
that, for ought I know: But it was not at all, in that Book which I mentioned,
where the Matter was treated of, and where it ought to have been. G. Keith upon
this, Rants at an high rate, Nar. p. 49. and says, You see, he argues like a
rare Logician. He says, I don't name the Year nor Day, nor is it in p. 14. nor
p. 18. But what then? I do it in another page, says he. Ay, so he did indeed:
But that other page, was in another Book. This is rare Logic, says he. And
this is rarer Iuggling, say I; to set down his Matter in one Book, and the time
of it in another Book, that he might hide himself, puzzle his Reader, and
trepan his Opponent. How could he, or his Advocates either, expect that I
should have recourse to his Plea of the Innocent, to find the date of a Meeting
treated of in his Reasons and Causes? Oh, says G. Keith, he has quoted that for
another purpose. True, but as it was for another purpose, so it was in another
Book, written at another time, not in that wherein I complained of his
Omissions; but in the Epistle written three Months before.

The sixth Head is almost such another Cavil, depending upon the uncertain
Dates of some of their Meetings in Pensilvania, wherein their Controversies had
been handled. G. Keith had complained, that the Yearly Meeting there, had not
given a right Judgment against W. Stockdale; I showed that they had. He
thereupon asks, Why did they contradict the Sound Judgment of a Monthly Meeting
at Philadelphia, passing due Censure upon W. S. six Months thereafter? I took
(and yet take) the Monthly Meeting he speaks of, to have been held six Months
after that Yearly Meeting* and thereupon asked him, how the Judgment of the
First could be said to contradict that of the Latter, seeing the Latter was not
in being, when the First was given? To this he says, Nar. p. 49. Pray, May not
a Meeting held six Months after, Contradict a Meeting going before? I am
charged (say he) that I cannot Speak Sense: And why? Because he (T. Ellwood)
feigns that I said, a Meeting six Months before Contradicted a Meeting held six
Months after it; when there is no such thing (says he;) But that a Meeting six
Months after, Contradicts a Meeting six Months before. Thus G. Keith. But how
falsely shall quickly be made appear, and that both by G. Keith himself, and his
Advocates. I ask therefore, Which of the two Meetings, the Yearly or the
Monthly, did Contradict the other? Which of them was it, that was Contradicted
by the other? G. Keith resolves this plainly, in his Seasonable Information p.
11. by saying, Why did they, ( viz. the Yearly Meeting) Contradict the sound
Judgment of a Monthly Meeting at Philadelphia, passing due Censure upon W.
Stockdale six Months thereafter? This is enough to show that, according to G.
Keith, it was the Yearly Meeting that did Contradict, the Monthly that was
Contradicted, and yet both he here acknowledges that that Monthly Meeting, was
six Months after that Yearly Meeting, and his Advocates undertake to
Demonstrate it, by giving the dates of Each, viz. That of the Yearly Meeting,
the 1 st of the seventh Month 1691. That of the adjourned Meeting (which is the
same that he calls the Monthly Meeting) the 27 th of the 12 th Mo. 1691. And
expressly say it was six Months after the Yearly Meeting. Now if it was the
Yearly Meeting that did Contradict, and the Monthly Meeting that was
Contradicted, and that Yearly Meeting was six Months before that Monthly
Meeting, (as from G. Keith's and his Advocates own words before cited, I have
proved that it was) then that which was six Months before, did (according to G.
Keith) contradict that which came six Months after. Which how great Nonsense it
is, G. Keith has already resolved: But he cannot acquit himself of it; nor of a
down right Falsehood, with too great Boldness delivered, to have excused himself
from being too apt, as Learned as he is, to write Nonsense. Of this I expect he
should clear himself, or Confess himself Guilty of both Nonsense, and (which is
worse) Falsehood.

In the seventh Head, p. 48. Having quoted several pages (and recited some
words) out of my Further Discovery, as p. 35, 36, 37, and 42, and 43. Where I
treated about the Separation made by G. Keith in America; they say, Whereas T.
Ellwood should have brought Matter of Fact, to prove G. Keith guilty of the
Separation, instead thereof, he argues, as we think, unfairly by Logical
Nicety. Thought, the Proverb says, is free; and I cannot help it, if they would
think so? But I think (and I have found others think) that I have in that Book
sufficiently fixed the Guilt of the Separation upon G. Keith, and that by fair
Reasoning, drawn from Matter of Fact, throughout twenty pages and more, from p.
36. to p. 59. And I am content to stand to the Readers Judgment in it. But if
the Persons whom G. Keith pretends to have had this Paper from, did draw it up
themselves, I wonder not at their thinking, as they say they do: For in the
Close of the former Head, the Judgment of the Yearly Meeting, is called the
Supposed Judgment of the Yearly Meeting; which word does so exactly resemble G.
Keith's Style, that if any others brought it sorth ^or him, I cannot think but
he begot it in them. Upon this Head, G. Keith makes a large Comment. But it is
little else than a Repetition of the 10 th Section in p. 13, 14. of his
Seasonable Information, already answered in my Further Discovery, p. 42, 43,
44. Only I observe he here makes it a perversion of Philosophy to put the Cause
before the Effect. Which perhaps may be as true, as it would be a Perversion in
Husbandry, to set the Oxen before the Plow, which is their proper place.

The Eighth Head being only about setting the Print^r's Name to Books, I think
too trivial to take notice of here; further than to observe, That it shows G.
Keith, and they that he says favored him, were hard put to it to pick up
Matter out of my Book to Cavil at, when they were fain to stoop for such silly
stuff as this.

The Ninth and Last Head is, That T. Ellwood alleges, p. 91. He did not
understand that the Doctrine of the Faith of Christ, as he died, being
necessary to our Christianity and Salvation, etc. Was by him reputed a Doctrine
in Controversy between G. Keith and others in America; when in several Places
of his Books it plainly appears it was the principal Doctrine in Controversy.
See Reasons and Causes, p. 8, and 21, 22. with many others: They must excuse me
in that. What appears very plain to some, does not always appear so to others.
And I do assure them, that which they say appeared so plain to them, neither
then did, nor yet does, appear plain to me. For I do not believe (whatever he
may pretend) that there was any real Controversy between Friends there, and
him, whether the Faith of Christ, as he died, is necessary to our Christianity
and Salvation. But that the Qu^stion controverted was, Whether that Faith is
absolutely and indispensibly necessary to all Mankind, throughout the Universe,
so that none could be saved without it, though they had not the means,
Opportunity, or Capacity to know or receive it. And that this was indeed, the
state of the Controversy there, I have since Read in the state of the Case, p.
11. written by Samuel Iennings, while here in England.

It was not that I thought there was any thing of worth or moment in this
Paper, that made me bestow this little pains in answering it; nor that the
particular Passages therein (though G. Keith, to set them off, calls them
Weig^ty Particula^rs) have any other weight in them, than what is likely to
fall upon his Head, who brought them forth, whatever it may upon any others
that assisted him therein. But the chief reason which induced me, at this time,
to take any notice of them at all, was, that I might wholly take from him all
pretense of having answered that Book of mine, out of which these Cavils were
taken; so that that Book called A Further Discovery, as well as my last, called
Truth Defended, may still lie with their full weight on him, unanswered in any
part.

In p. 51. The Meeting being over, and Narrative ended, he adds this Note; If
any of my Adversaries object, That diverse of these Proofs, here brought, were
brought formerly in my Book against W. Penn and G. Whitehead, called A Short
List of the Vile and Gross Errors, which T. Ellwood has replied to in his
Book, called Truth De^ended: I Answer (says he) I know not any one of them that
he has sufficiently answered unto, to give the least satisfaction to any sound
Christian; his Answers being merely Evasions and Perversions, as I should have
shown, if he had appeared. Alas, poor man, he might with the more ease have
showed it I not appearing to his Imperious Summons, if he could have showed it
at all. Why should he excuse himself by my not appearing? Neither G. Whitehead
nor W. Penn appeared any more than I (they not owning his Usurped Jurisdiction,
any more than I) and yet that hindered him not from repeating those broken
Charges against them, which I had answered before in Print. If he would needs
be doing, he should have proceeded methodically and fairly, and have first
given his Auditors an account that he had formerly exhibited those Charges in
Print; and that I in Print had answered them. Then he should have read my
Answers, and re^u^ed them, if he could; and when he had done that, it had been
time enough then for him to have renewed and reinforced his Charge. But he had
rather answer my Book by repeating the Charge which my Book was an Answer to;
that he thought would be the easiest way. As for my former Answer, whether it
is sufficient and satisfactory, or no, he must give me leave, or I will take
it, to tell him (notwithstanding he has set himself on the Bench, and called me
and others to the Bar, to hear our selves charged and proved guilty) that he
and I are both too near a kin to the Cause, to be proper and competent Judges
of the sufficiency of my Answer. His Book and mine are both abroad, the World
has them, and the World will judge of them as they see cause, whether we will
or no, and so let them with my good will. But withal let me tell him, that
until he has answered them, they stand, and will stand, as sufficient against
him. And, as such, I still leave them upon his Head, and expect his Answer to
both them and this. And whereas he says there are many new Proofs here
brought, besides the former, it is not unlikely but some there may be (though I
think not many;) for that is the way of Shuffling Writers, to add some New
Scraps to an Old Book, and then set it out with a New Title, for a New Book.
Yet very little, I think, there is, if any thing, in his Narrative, which was
not published before, either in his former List of Vile and Gross Errors (which
I answered before) or in his Book of Gross Error and Hypocrisy detected, now
answered in this. And therefore, I think, I may justly call this Answer to his
Narrative, an Answer to them all; and as such I intend it.

G. Keith's Appendix to his Narrative, and the several Charges contained
therein, considered.
TO his Narrative he tacks an Appendix, containing (he says) some considerable
Proofs out of these Men^ Books relating to the foregoing Heads, The first
Passage be carps at, is in G. Whitehead's Book called The Divinity of Christ,
p. 70. Where in Answer to I. Owen, who had said The Sacrifice de^otes his
(Christ's Humane Nature, whence God i^ said to purchase his Church with his own
Blood, Acts 20.28. For he offered himself through the eternal Spirit, there was
the Matter of the Sacrifice, which was the Humane Nature of Christ's Soul and
Body, etc. G. Whitehead answered, These Passages are but darkly and confusedly
expressed; As also we do not read in Scripture, that the Blood of God, by which
he purchased his church, is ever called the Blood of the Humane Nature: Nor
that the Soul of Christ was the Humane Nature, or was put to death with the
Body (for the wicked could not kill the Soul, -- for his Soul in his own being
was immortal, and the Nature of God is Divine, and therefore that the Blood of
God should be of Humane (or Earthly) Nature, appears intonsistent; And where
does the Scripture call the Blood of God Humane, or Human Nature? etc. It is
plain enough from hence, That G. Whitehead's Exception lay against the word
Human, which he explains by Earthly, to show he took it in that signification
wherein it is derived, ab^Humo, from the Ground or Earth; in which sense it is
not a fit or proper Term to express the Blood of God, or the Soul of Christ,
nay, nor his outward Man by: For his outward Body, which was nailed to the
Cross, was not of a Mere Earthly Extraction; there was more of Divinity even in
that Body than in the Bodies of other men, which rendered it too Heavenly to be
called Humane or Earthly. But though G. Whitehead rejected the word Humane or
Earthly, with respect to Christ's Manhood and Holy Nature, and to the Blood of
God, wherewith he purchased his Church, and could not admit that his Soul was
put to death (though it, with the Body, was made an Offering for Sin, and so it
is, in a figurative manner of speaking, said, that he poured it out to death)
yet he never denied the Manhood of Christ, nor the sufferings thereof, both
inwardly and outwardly, nor the virtue, merit and efficacy of those sufferings;
Nor is there any thing in those words of his which G. Keith has quoted, that
imports he did. But in the progress of his Answer to I. Owen in the next page,
mentioning both the Travel and Sufferings of Christ's Soul under the Burden of
Man's Transgression, and the suffering of his Body, under the violence of the
wicked hands, to death, and the shedding of his Blood, etc. he adds, We desire
all may have as good an esteem of Christ, in his sufferings, as may be.
Therefore G. Keith does very unjustly, and like himself, in insinuating as if
G. Whitehead had denied the Manhood of Christ.

He takes some pains to excuse himself, for having formerly (as he pretended to
excuse others) cited those words of Hilarious, Quid per Naturam Humani corpori^
conceptu ex Spiritu Sancto Caro judicatur, i.e. Why is the Flesh conceived by
the Holy Ghost, judged by the Nature of an Human Body. But, says he, neither
Hilarious nor I judged that the Body, though conceived of the Holy Ghost, was
any part of the substance of the Holy Ghost. No more, say I, do we: Yet being
conceived by the Holy Ghost, through the overshadowing of the Power of the Most
High, that Body was more Pure and Heavenly, than the Bodies of other Men, and
above the Epithet Humane or Earthly. The Book he mentions, in which, he says,
he cited those words of Hilarious, which he calls, The True Christ owned, I do
not remember I have ever seen. But in another Book of his, called The Rector
Corrected, Printed the next year after that, viz. in 1680. he gives the same
sentence out of Hilarious, and tells us. p. 29. Hilarious says, concerning the
Body of Christ, that was born of the Virgin, Jesus Christ was not formed by the
Nature of Humane Conception, and that the Original of his Body, is not of an
Humane Conception. And as there he spoke for Hilarious, so in p. 27. speaking
for himself, he says, even the outward and visible Flesh, which he took of the
Virgin, seeing it was not produced or formed by Humane Generation, but by a
Divine Conception, through the Overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, and did far
excel the Flesh of all other Men that ever were since; inasmuch also, that
after death, it was not subject to Corruption; the name Humane [Mark] is but
too mean a Title, whereby to express it; far less should it be so called now,
when it is glorified, and it is altogether Heavenly and Spiritual. Nor does the
Scripture any where give unto his Body such a name as Humane, said he then. And
who would then have thought, that he would have come to plead for the word
Humane, with respect to Christ's both Flesh and Soul, and condemn us for
Heretics for not using it?

But concerning the Excellency of Christ's Body, hear what he said, in the year
1678. in his Book called The way to the City of God, which now, poor man, he is
quite beside, p. 131. Even according to that Birth he [Christ] was the Son of
God, no les^ than the Son of Man, as having God for his Father, as he had the
Virgin Mary for his Mother. Now the Child, (says he) we know, does partake an
Image or Nature from both Parents; And thus did Christ, who did partake of the
Nature and Image of Man, from the Seed of Mary, but did partake of a Nature and
Image much more excellent, than that of Man, in its greatest Glory, from God
and his Seed, who did really sow a most divine and heavenly Seed in the Virgins
Womb, which as it supplied the Males Seed, so it had much more in it, and
brought forth a Birth, which as it had the true and whole Nature of Man, so, I
say, it had a Perfection above it, and that not only in accidental qualities
(as men will readily confess) but even in substance and Essence. And yet we
must be now anathematized, and that by him, for denying that Body to be Humane
or Earthly.

He says, p. 53, G. Whitehead 's Objection against the word Humane, as
signifying Earthly, has the same force against calling Christ Adam, coming
from the Hebrew word Adamah, that signifies Earth. From hence, first I must
desire the Reader to observe, that G. Keith saw well enough where the ground of
G. Whitehead's Objection lay, viz. (as I have expressed it before) upon the
word Humane, as signifying Earthly. This shows that he is a mere Caviller, and
seeks occasions to quarrel, and defame without cause. Next I must tell him,
That Christ is not called Adam in a strict and proper sense, but in a
figurative, with allusion to the First Man, who was of the Earth, Earthy, (as
being made of the dust of the ground) and therefore was in a proper sense
called Adam. But whereas he says, the Scripture calls the Man Christ the
Second Adam; and that the Man Christ had not only that which was heavenly, but
had even our earthly part, but without sin; I must put him in mind, that in his
Appendix to his Immediate Revelation (for I shall be ever now and then trumping
up some or other of his Old Doctrines in his way, till he will be so honest and
plain, as openly to retract them) he said, p. 226. This same Jesus, or Heavenly
Man, or Second Adam, was before that Body of Flesh which he took upon him, yea
from the very beginning. Look there now; He was, it seems, the Second Adam
before he took on him that Body of Flesh, yea, even from the beginning: But had
he our Earthly part? or any thing that might be called Earthly, or Humane, from
the beginning?

Another of his Cavils against G. Whitehead is about Repentance; that T. Danson
having affi^med that there is a continual need of Faith and Repentance in this
Life; G. Whitehead answers, That there is a continual need of Repentance,
this I deny: for true Repentance, where it is wrought, and the fruits of it
brought forth, this is unto Salvation never to be repented of, and is attended
with a real forsaking of sin and transgression. These words of G. Whitehead's
he says are in the same Answer to T. Danson's Synopsis. But ^e names no page:
and there are about 100 pages, in that part of the Book. It was unfairly done
of him (if it was by design, and not through oversight that the Page was
omitted,) to give me the trouble, and waste of time, to turn over the Book to
seek the place, which at length I have found in page 33, 34. and find the words
cited are an Answer to an Argument T. Danson brought to prove the necessity of
a Continuance in Sin, or the imp^ssibility of being freed from Sin in this
Life. And that G. Keith wrangles upon the Grammatical sense of the word
Repentance, which he gives diversely. Whereas the place he quotes shows G.
Whitehead's meaning was only, That there is no continual need of Repentance,
from a necessity of continual sinning. For he says, where true Repentance is
wrought, and the fruits of it brought forth, it is attended with a real
forsaking of Sin and Transgression, and this is unto Salvation never to be
repented of.

In p. 54. Referring to his having said in the Narrative, That G. Whitehead
has allegorized away the Birth, Death, Resurrection and Coming again of Christ
without us, to Judgment; he offers some instances out of G. Whitehead's Books,
which he calls Plain Proofs; and so they are indeed, but not at all of those
things for which he brings them, but of his own both Envy and Folly.

First, He says, G. Whitehead allegorizes away his Birth, spoken of by Isaiah
9.6. Unto us a Child is born, a Son is given. This, he says, he expounds of
Christ, born within; He-Goats Horn, p. 51. To this I need but give him his own
Answer, which he formerly gave to the Rector of Arrow in his Book called The
Rector Corrected, p. 30. viz. But why may it not speak of both (to wit, his
being born outwardly, and his being born within) the one without prejudice of
the other? Do thou not know that Maxim, Subordinata non Pugnant? Subordinates
are not contrary. And although G. Whitehead in the place cited, from Romans 8.29.
said, Christ was the Firstborn in many Brethren, (...); And thereupon asked,
Was not Isaiah one of these Brethren? who had been as with Child, Isa. 26.17.
(which place G. Keith may see how he rendered in his Immediate Revelation,
Appendix p. 249.) Yet G. Whitehead did not deny Christ's outward Birth; but
mentions his coming in the Flesh, and tells his Opponent he had belyed R. H.
and him, in charging them with counting Christ's Coming in the Flesh to be but
a Figure: for, says he, It was never so affirmed by us.

His Second Instance is, That G. Whitehead allegorizes away Christ's
Resurrection, expressly denying that Christ was bodily seen of Paul, and
perverting that place in 1 Cor. 15.8. to Christ within. For proof of this he
cites only page 51. but names no Book; which made me suppose (and I think
reasonably) he referred to the Book he had quoted last before, which was the
He-Goats Horn. But in that Book and Page, there is nothing of the matter, not
so much as the name Paul, nor any Text out of his Epistle to the Corinthians.
Neither know I where to seek the place. All therefore that I think fit to say
to this Cavil at this time is, That if G. Whitehead had denied that Christ was
bodily seen of Paul, that had not allegorized away Christ's Resurrection. I
wish G. Keith don't allegorize away his own wits.

Thirdly, He says, G. Whitehead allegorizeth away his Coming without us to
Judgment, in these Scriptures, Mat. 16.27, 28. 1 These. 4.15, 16, 17, 18. for
which he cites Light and Life, p. 40, 41. But besides that these very places
are already instanced, and discussed in the Narrative. G. Keith in urging that
Text, Mat. 16.28. for Christ's Coming without us to Judgment, does as flatly
contradict himself, as ever man did. For in his Way Cast up (which he is now
Casting down) p. 143, 144. he said, Christ himself has taught us, that his
Spiritual Coming in his Saints, is as the Son of Man; ( and quotes this very
Text for it) Mat. 16.28. Verily, I say unto you, there are some standing here,
that shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of Man coming in his
Kingdom. Now mark, This (says he) cannot be meant of his last Coming at the Day
of Judgment, else it would infer that some that heard him speak these words,
have not as yet tasted of death, nor shall unto the last day, which is absurd!
Therefore this Coming of the Son of Man must be his Inward and Spiritual Coming
into his Saints. Can one think it any thing but judicial Blindness from God
upon this Man, that makes him thus break his own Head!

Fourthly, He says, Both he and R. H. allegorize away his Burial, for which he
cites, Light and Life, p. 52. and He-Goat's Horn, p. 62. perverting that
Scripture, Isa. 53. He made his Grave with the wicked: He adulterates (says G.
Keith) the True Translation, and turns it, in the wicked, etc. In p 52. of
Light and Life, there is no mention of Christ's Burial; but only he is said to
be a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, and made his Grave with the
Wicked, and with the Rich in his Death: So here the Text is rendered with the
Wicked not in the wicked. The other place, in He-Goats Horn, p. 62. is R.
Hubberthorn's, distinct from G. Whitehead, and it neither mentions Isa. 53. nor
treats of the General Resurrection, or the Resurrection of the Body; but only
answers some Cavilling Queries, put by I. Horn, about the two Seeds, and
therefore is perversely applied by G. Keith to the Resurrection of the Body.

Lastly, He says, G. Whitehead allegorizeth away the Resurrection of the Saints
Bodies by his perversion of Phil. 3.21. to a Change of the Body that the
Apostles and Saints witnessed before death. But he quotes no place, neither
Page nor Book, for this. But he tells us that G. Whitehead in his Real Quaker a
Real Protestant, p. 105. understands that very Place of a Change of the vile,
or low and humble Body, like unto the glorious Body of Christ, as a thing to
come. And by this I understand that G. Keith has sufficiently disproved the
proofless Proof he brought before against G. Whitehead, by bringing this for
him; so that I need say no more to it. That which I would observe to the Reader
is, that G. Keith of all men is most unjust in charging G. Whitehead with
allegorizing, who has indulged himself so far in that way of Writing, that
scarce Origin himself has abounded more in Allegories.

From Allegories he proceeds to give some of G. Whitehead's Contradictions, as
he would have them to be taken; of which he gives two or three Instances, how
idle and improper, will easily be seen. The First he assigns is, That G.
Whitehead in his Light and Life. p. 69. thinks him a very Blind and Ignorant
Man, that reckons Bodies Celestial and Terrestrial to be all one in Matter and
Substance; and yet the same G. Whitehead in Malice of the Independent Agent, p.
17. owns that Christ's Body now in Heaven is the same in substance he had on
Earth: So by his own words (says G. Keith) he has declared himself to be a
Blind and Ignorant Man, and yet Infallible, otherwise by his own word No True
Minister. But hold a little: Did G. Whitehead ever call or own Christ's Body
now in Heaven, or while it was on Earth, to be Terrestrial, or of the Earth? If
he did not, G. Keith is clearly out with his idle pretense of Contradiction.
Has he forgotten what he told Cotton Mather in his Serious Appeal, p. 23. That
Contradictions lie not betwixt two Particulars, nor two Vniversals; but one
Particular, and another Universal: And that a Contradiction is not betwixt two
Positives; but the One Positive, the Other Negative. And that is not enough
neither; for in his Truth's Defense, p. 191. he puts his Opponent I. A. in mind
of a Rule in his School Logic, That Propositions are not contradictory,
although the one be Affirmative, and the other Negative, unless they be in
ordine ad idem, in order to the same, and in regard of the same Circumstances
of Time, Place, Condition, etc. Now let him make out his Contradictions, if he
can, according to these Maxims, who has already blamed G. Whitehead (and that
but just now) for denying Christ's Body to be Terrestrial, or Earthly, and
therefore refusing to call it Humane.

Another Contradiction he pretends to find in G. Whitehead is, that in a late
Printed half Sheet, called, The Christian Faith, he owns Christ to be both God
and Man, etc. and yet, says he, it is proved in the above Narrative, that he
neither owneth him to be God or Man. Here G. Keith brings his own Narrative to
prove that wha that Narrative says is true; Is not that p^etty? Whereas what he
has charged G. Whitehead with in that Narrative, is denied, and rejected as
false; and the Proofs he has pretended to bring out of G. Whitehead's Books,
upon a due Examination, prove to be but G. Keith's Perversions and
Misconstructions of G. VVhitehead's Words, as from the former Part of this
Discourse, will I believe appear. The like Method he takes in the following
Instance of Contradiction, referring to his Narrative for Proof. And in his
Fourth and Last Instance, p. 55. (which is of G. VVhitehead's signing among
others) a Treatise against Oaths, wherein it is said, We look upon it to be no
less than a presumptuous tempting of God, to summon him as a Witness, not only
to our Terrene, but Trivial business; etc. and his now admitting it lawful to
declare the Truth in the presence of God, etc. He seems to put no difference
between summoning God as a VVitness, and speaking the Truth in the Presence of
God, who is VVitness of the Truth spoken; and yet he might have seen, in the
place he cites, what was meant by summoning God as a VVitness, viz. That it is
vain and insolent to think that a Man, when he pleases, can make the great God
of Heaven a Witness, or a Judge, in any Matter, to appear by some signal
Approbation or Judgment, to help or forsake him, as the Truth or Falseness of
his Oath requires, when he says, So help me God. If G. Keith will not see a
difference betwixt speaking with Impre^ation, and without, others do; and that
that difference destroys his pretended Contradiction.

In p. 55. He has an envious Fling at G. Fox, from whom he suggests G.
Whitehead (and many others) did receive unchristian Doctrine, and he mentions a
Paper of G. Fox's, directed to all People in Christendom, etc. Which, he says,
has very unsound and unchristian Doctrine concerning Christ's Flesh. This
Paper I have not seen, nor heard of before, that I remember. How faithfully he
recites out of it, I know not. But this I observe from what he cites, that
whereas he says, by Christ's Flesh G. Fox means not his outward Flesh, the
very first Words, he cites, are, Christ, according to the Flesh crucified: Was
not that his outward Flesh that was Crucified? It Is true, G. Fox says there (as
G. Keith cites him) It was never corrupted. But that does not prove he did not
mean the outward Flesh: For I hope G. Keith will not say; That, that ever
corrupted. But surely, G. Keith might have forborne falling thus foully on G.
Fox, for unsound and unchristian Doctrine, now that he is gone to Rest,
considering how highly he writ of him, while he was living. For in his Rector
corrected, p. 211. he said, not only that the Lord had made G. Fox a worthy
Instrument unto us, and among us, (and he hoped, yet should, unto many more)
but, that he was safe in the hand of him that holds the seven Stars, and the
seven golden Candlesticks in his right Hand; And (said he to the Rector) All
thy malicious Reviling and slanderous Defamation of him, cannot diminish any
thing from that true Honor, wherewith the Lord has honored him, and other
faithful Laborers with him, whom the Lord has raised up in this Day of the
Appearance of his great and mighty Power. Can G. Keith read this without
Blushing, to see how he is repeating the Rector's malicious Reviling, and
slanderous Defamation of G. Fox, and other faithful Laborers with him, that he
might try if he could diminish that true Honor wherewith the Lord has
honored G. Fox, which he told the Rector he could not? I gather from G.
Keith's Words, that this Paper of G. Fox's, which he charges with very unsound
and unchristian Doctrine, is of older Date than his Book in Answer to the
Rector. Is he not ashamed, so openly to contradict himself, as to charge a Man,
that he was guilty of very unsound and unchristian Doctrine, at the same time
that he had proclaimed him such a worthy Instrument of the Lord's making, and
had affirmed he was then safe in the Hand of him, that holds the seven Stars,
and the seven golden Candlesticks in his right Hand?

In p. 56. Having done with G. Whitehead, he falls upon W. Penn again, first,
For some Passages which he calls unsound and scandalous, and then for some
Contradictions, as he would make them.

The First Passage he brings against him is out of his Rejoinder to J. Faldo,
p. 179, 180. about the Excommunication of Robert Norwood by Sidrach Sympson, an
eminent Preacher among the Independents. Where W. Penn ( not to defend Norwood,
but to show Fald^ that he had dealt by the Quakers, somewhat like as Sympson
had done by Norwood) sets down Norwood's Opinion, and Sympsons Charge against
him upon it. Norwood it seems denied the Locality of Heaven and Hell; and
believed the Soul to have been breathed from God, and therefore assigned to it,
something more of Divinity than the usual opinion does. Sympson stretched this,
to be a denial of any Heaven and Hell at all; and a rendering the Soul, God it
self. W. Penn showing how severely Norwood was dealt with only for Opinion,
added (in a Parenthesis) and that not very offensive. This Expression G. Keith
catches hold of, and deals by W. Penn, as Sympson did by Norwood, that is, he
stretches it to the worst Construction he could make, and far beyond what it
could bear. For, whereas by the Word Locality of Heaven and Hell, it is
probable no more was intended than that Heaven and Hell were not certain
particular Places, or parts of the World set out, bounded and limited to any
certain and determinate Dimensions (as the Heathen Poets described their
Elysium to be) G. Keith would represent W. Penn, as thinking it not very
offensive to deny, that Christ's Body that was raised from the Dead, is in any
Heaven, that is, an outward place, or without us. And then stretches out his
Throat, with a loud Appeal to all sincere Christians, that this is really so
offensive, that the denying of that one Truth (of such a Locality I suppose he
does not mean, but of Christ's Body not being in any Heaven without us) is a
plain denial of one of the greatest Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian
Faith, and so makes void the whole, to any that holds such a damnable Opinion;
which I am persuaded Rob. Norwood did not hold, and I am con^ident W. Penn
never dreamt of. For though he said of Norwood's Opinion, it is not very
offensive, as he understood it, and compared with what Sympson represented it:
Yet his calling it not very offensive, shows he held it to be offensive, and
was offended at it. His Cavil upon the other part of Norwood's Opinion, by
which he would reflect upon W. Penn is, that the Soul of Man is a created
Being, and has nothing of Divinity essential to it, p. 57. Norwood's Opinion,
as W. Penn mentioned it, has no such Word as essential in it: He only said, he
believed the Soul to have been breathed from God, thereby assigning to it
something more of Divinity than the usual Opinion does. And G. Keith here
acknowledges, That the Divine Power that made the Soul of Man, is in it, and
operateth in it more manifestly, than in the inferior Creatures. Therefore he
might have spared all this Cavil.

But he has not yet done with Norwood, because he is not yet willing to have
done with VV. Penn, Norwood, in his Answer to Sympson's Excommunication, (who
had charged him with withdrawing himself from the People of God) said, Are none
the People of God, but your selves? This VV. Penn said was Argumentum ad
hominem to I. Faldo, who had represented the Quakers as worse than the Heathens
and Mahometans. G. Keith catches at this too, and reckons (though without his
Host) this is as good an Argument for him against VV. Penn, and the Yearly
Meeting that denied him, because they call themselves the Church of Christ; as
if, says he, they were the only Church of Christ. He once thought them so, no
doubt; and if he does not think them so now, he must think some other Body of
People to be it: For as Christ has a Church, so he has but one Church in the
World. I speak not of particular Gatherings with respect to Place, but of all
that are of one and the same Fellowship in all Places, throughout the whole
World. Neither speak I with respect to particular Persons, but with respect to
a gathered People, (which is both the common, and the true Notion of a Church.)
That we, the People called Quakers, are the Church of Christ, is no Presumption
in us to affirm, nor ought to be offensive to others to hear, since we therein
claim no more to our selves, than every other Body of professed Christians
challenge to themselves; namely, that they and they only (as a gathered People)
are the true Church of Christ. But for this, Protestantism had never been,
neither Name nor Thing. Had the Protestants believed the Church of Rome to be
the true Church of Christ, they would not have withdrawn from her Communion; as
neither would the several sorts of Protestants have successively separated from
one another, had they believed those they separated from, to be the true Church
of Christ. For who (but G. Keith) would be so Mad, to disjoyn himself from that
People, which he believed to be the true Church of Christ? Yet I do not think,
that of the several sorts of Professors of Christianity, who have left those
Religious Societies or Fellowships they were once of, any were so devoid of
Charity, as to think there were no good Persons, none that feared God, none
that sought and breathed after him, and sincerely desired the Knowledge of his
Will, that they might do it, among those People whom they parted from. But that
honesty, and those good desires, in such particular Persons, though it had and
has acceptance with the Lord, and was, and is answered by him with sweet and
comfortable Discoveries of himself unto them; yet it makes not those
Gatherings, or Bodies of People, amongst which such particular Persons are, to
be the Church of Christ. So we (whom the World calls Quakers) whom the Lord God
has raised up in this Age, and gathered by the invisible Arm of his Divine
Power, to be a peculiar People to himself, though we dare not but own, and
declare our selves to be the Church of Christ; yet we have always acknowledged,
and do, that as of old, in every Nation, He that feared God, and wrought
Righteousness, was accepted with him, Acts 10.35. So now, in every Profession
of the Christian Religion, he or she that fears God and works Righteousness,
that hungers and thirsts after the Lord, with desire to know more of his Will,
that they may do it, and who walk faithfully with him, according to what they
already know of him; such are accepted with him, according to the Sincerity he
finds in them, though clouded in their Understandings, through Education or
Tradition. Such as these we do not deny to belong to Christ, and to be dear
unto him, and taken care of by him: Yet that makes not any of those entire
Bodies of People, amongst any of whom these are, to be the true Church of
Christ G. Keith mentions also these Words, as out of a Paper of Solomon Eccles,
The Quakers are in Truth, and none but they. I have not seen that Paper, that I
remember, nor know how fairly he has cited the Words; but before G. Keith out
of a pettish Spleen, forsook the Quakers, he (I suppose) would have said the
same, The Quakers, so called, are in the Truth, no Body of People that we know
of are so inwardly gathered to the Truth, as the People called Quakers are. He
also flings at us a saying of E. Burrough's to the People called Quakers, thus,
The Tabernacle of God is with you, and his dwelling Place is among you, and
only among you is God known, p. 64. of his Works. E. Burrough's Words are, You
who are called Quakers, who are so, not only in Word, nor in show, but in Life
and in Power, whom God has called and chosen to Place his Name in, and to take
up his Habitation among, above all the Families of the Earth; the Tabernacle of
God is with you, etc. This also is very true, if it be truly understood: For
though the Lord is good and gracious to all, and does answer the Breathings and
good Desires of the honest hearted, and does visit them in loving Kindness, and
extend of his Mercies and Goodness unto them, in every Profession, and amongst
every gathered People; yet his Tabernacle and Dwelling Place is with and among
his peculiar People, and he is not so known among any other People, as an
imbodied People, in that full, inward, spiritual, living, sensible,
experimental Manner and Degree, as he is known among us his Poor despised
People called Quakers, whom G. Keith has taken all this Pains to wreak his
Revenge and Malice upon, and to stir up and engage all other People against, if
he could. But the Lord, who sees the Wickedness of his Heart, knows how ^oth to
reward him, and to preserve us, in whom alone we trust.

Out of the same Book of W. Penn, G. Keith picks another Passage, which he
says, is either perfect Nonsense, or Antichristian Doctrine; and because he
cannot tell which, he concludes, or rather indeed both. It is a question
whether perfect Nonsense may be properly called Doctrine either Christian, or
Antichristian. But upon due Consideration, I think, he will find neither
Nonsense, nor Antichristian Doctrine in it. It is in p. 310. of W. Penn's
Rejoinder, to I. Faldo, and it is given as a Reason (among many others) why the
Body of Christ, which was nailed to the Cross, simply considered by it self,
and abstractly from that Divine Life and Power which dwelt in it, should not be
called the Christ, viz. Because, that Flesh of Christ is called a Vail, but he
himself is within the Vail, which is the Holy of Holies, whereinto Christ Jesus
our High Priest has entered, Heb. 10.20, 21. And as he descended into, and
passed through a Suffering State in his Fleshly Appearance, and returned into
that State of Immortality and Eternal Life and Glory, from whence he humbled
himself, which was and is the Holy of Holies (then obscured or hid by his Flesh
or Body, the Vail, while in the World:) So must all know a Death to their
Fleshly Ways and Religions, yea their Knowledge of Christ himself after the
Flesh, or they stick in the Vail, and never enter into the Holy of Holies, nor
come to know him in any spiritual Relation, as their High and Holy Priest that
abides therein. First, Where Is the Nonsense here, the perfect Nonsense, this
great Judge of Sense complains of? Why, if he cannot find it, he will make it,
rather than not Cavil. For says he, His saying Christ has entered into the Holy
of Holies within the Vail, and that Vail is his Flesh, and that Holy of Holies
is himself. What Nonsense is this? says he, Was not Christ always in himself?
But where did W. Penn say, That Holy of Holies is Christ himself? Find me those
Words in the whole Paragraph. Nay does he not plainly say otherwise. Does he
not expressly call that State of Immortality. and Eternal Life and Glory, from
whence Christ humbled himself, and into which he returned, the Holy of Holies?
Read the Words again. And as he descended into, and past through a Suffering
State in his fleshly Appearance, and returned into that State of Immortality,
and Eternal Life and Glory, from whence he humbled himself, which was and is
the Holy of Holies: So, etc. Pray, what is the Antecedent here to the Relative
Which, but the Word State, going before? G. Keith is too well versed in
Grammar, not to know and see this; I would he were but half so well versed in
Honesty: For this is a plain dishonest Perversion, for which he deserves, at
least, the Contempt and Censure of every honest Reader, who by this Instance
may see the ways G. Keith takes to make his Opponent speak Nonsense or
Antichristian Doctrine.

He goes on with the like Honesty in his second Note upon these Words of VV.
Penn thus, His entering in within the Vail of his Flesh, is either perfect
Nonsense, or it has this Sense, That he has put off his Body be had on Earth,
and is s^parated from it. This is a plain Perversion also: For his entering in
within the Va^l is clearly explained, by those Words of his returning into that
State of Immortality, and Eternal Life and Glory (called the Holy of Holies)
which he was in before he humbled himself to take on him that Flesh, which was
called a Vail, because it veiled or hid from Men the Glory of his Godhead that
dwelt in it. Both Vail and Holy of Holies, are Metaphorical Expressions,
borrowed from the Legal Tabernacle: And as there, in the Type, they were used
to set forth a difference of Places, wih respect to Degrees of Holiness: So
here, in the Antitype, they are used to set forth a difference of States, with
respect to Degrees of Glory. The State of Christ's Humiliation; when he
appeared in the form of a Servant, in that Body of Flesh which was called The
Vail, was very glorious: But the State of his Exaltation into that Immortality,
Eternal Life and Glory, which he had with his Father before the World began,
which is called, The Holy of Holies, is a far more glorious State. Yet does not
his entering into this State imply, that he has put off his Body he had on
Earth, and is separated from it: For that Body, being glorified, is in Heavenly
Glory with him. But it is probable he raised this Cavil, as to defame VV. Penn,
so also to introduce a Story, which hereupon he tells, of one R. Young in
Pensilvania, who he says affirmed this. But that he did so, G. Keith gives no
Proof, but his own Word, which is justly, in things of this kind, of no Credit
with me, who have so often found and proved him false.

He makes a Third note upon those words of W. Penn before cited, and that with
as little Honesty as before. For from W. Penn's saying; All must know a Death
to their Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh, G. Keith says, It is plain from
his words, that he has this unsound sense of it, that they must know a Death
to the Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh, as the Flesh signifies the Flesh
of Christ, as he came in the Flesh. But as this Comment is not very perfect
sense (and yet I will not call it perfect Nonsense) so it is plain that he
perverts W. Penn's words to a wrong sense, and therein Abuses him. For W.
Penn's words are. All must know a Death to their Fleshly ways and Religions
(which word, [Fleshly ways and Religions] G. Keith left out, see his Abominable
Falsehood and Treachery) Yea, their knowledge of Christ himself after the Flesh,
etc. Which words, Fleshly ways and Religions, show what sort of Knowledge of
Christ after the Flesh, he meant all must know a Death to, viz. Their Fleshly
Knowledge (as Fleshly is opposed to Spiritual) or that Knowledge which they in
their Carnal Minds have comprehended, or gathered in, and in which too many
rest, without pressing after the Divine and Spiritual Knowledge of the End of
Christ's coming in the Flesh, and the Blessed effects thereof, and manifold
Benefits that accrue thereby, to them that receive him in his Spiritual
Appearance. But how malicious a mind must he have, who from those words would
infer, that W. Penn would have all to Die to the Knowledge of Christ after the
Flesh, so as not to know that he ever came in the Flesh.

In p. 58. G. Keith cites a Passage out of a Book of W. Penn's, called Truth
Exalted, and with all rents a Quotation he gave before in his Narrative, p. 21.
out of a Book called The Christian Quaker, (which the Reader may find answered
before) From both which he infers, that he and G. Whitehead, and many other
Teachers among the Quakers, have no other Notion of Christ, but an Inward
Principle. This is such a known Falsehood, and Apparent Slander, Contradicted by
almost all our Books, and so fully disproved in many places of this Book, that
it neither deserves nor n^eds any other Answer here, than a bare Denial.

To his unjust Charge of unsound Passages, he adds two or three seeming
Contradictions, which he would fasten upon W. Penn. The First is, That in A
Treatise of Oaths (mentioned before) he is earnest against all Oaths under the
Gospel, and yet in his Reason against Railing, p. 180. he uses (says G.
Keith) the greatest Oath that ever was used among the Jews. The Instance he
gives is in these words, directed to T. Hicks. O that these heavy things might
not be laid to thy Charge, for so sure as God lives (there is his Catch) great
will be the wrath that shall follow; Yea, God will visit for these unrighteous
Dealings; And I testify to thee from God's living Spirit, if thou desist not,
and come not to deep Repentance, the Lord will make thee an example of his
Fury, and thy Head shall not go down to the Grave in Peace, etc. This I take to
be a mere Cavil, and a very weak one too. For first, That form of Speech [ as
the Lord liveth] though it was sometim^^ used among the Jews of Old, as an
Oath, yet it was not always so; nor do I think G. Keith will take it to be
intended for an Oath, in all those places where he Reads it in the Bible; as
particularly in 1 Samuel 25, 26. Where Abigail used it to David Concerning his
Enemies. See also Chap. 26.10. and Chap. 29.6. 1 Ki. 17.12. and 18.10. 2 Ki.
22.4.6. and Chap. 4.30. Job. 27.2. with many other places in the Books of
Samuel and the Kings, where it is used sometimes singly [as the Lord lives,]
sometimes with this Addition, [ and as thy Soul lives;] Yea, and sometimes,
this latter Expression [as thy Soul liveth] is used without the former, as in 1 Samuel 1.26. and 17.55. 2 Samuel 11.11, 14, 19. Yet neither with it, nor without
it, was intended for an Oath. Secondly, There is a difference between those two
forms of Speech [ As the Lord liveth] and [ so sure as God liveth] for though
the former was formerly used as an Oath, yet the latter never was so used or
taken; but is only a Persuasive Form of Speech, used to set forth the
unquestionable Certainty of the thing delivered, from the acknowledged
Certainty that God lives. In which sense, and no other, it is evident W. Penn
there used it; to express the Assurance he had of the Truth, and Certainty of
the Testimony he then gave against, and to Tho. Hicks. But none, I think
(besides G. Keith) would be so extravagant as to think, that in these words W.
Penn intended to take his Oath, that the wrath of God, which should follow
those unrighteous dealings of T. Hicks would be great. So to think were great
Folly. How mean a Cavil then is this? And how mere a Caviller has G. Keith
shown himself therein?

The latter part of W. Penn's words before cited, G. Keith says, imply some
Prophecy against T. Hicks, which he suggests was not fulfilled. But he should
have observed that what was there spoken of T. Hicks was Conditional, if he
desisted not, and came no^ to Repentance. That he desisted is certain; that he
did not ^ome to Repentance, I suppose G. Keith will not adventure to say, that
he did come to Repentance, I have heard, which that G. Keith also may do, I
wish.

His second Instance of Contradiction, he gives in p. 59. out of two Books of
W. Penn's, One called Judas and the Jews, p. 13. the other, An Address to
Protestants, p. 152. in the second Edition (p. 151. in the first Edition) the
Passage is concerning the Power of the Church, from those words of Christ, Mat.
18.17. Go, tell the Church. This place in both those Books, W. Penn expounded
of Private Offenses, or Personal Injuries, between Brethren, which has no show
of Contradiction in it. It Is true that in the former, he inferred from those
words of Christ, That Christ gave his Church Power both to try and reject
Spirits. In the other he denies that those words of Christ do Empower the
Church to define and Impose upon all People, under Temporal and Eternal
Punishment, Articles of Faith, etc. What Contradiction is in this? He knows
Propositions are not Contradictory, unless they be ad idem. But is it the same
thing to try and reject Spirits, and to define and impose Articles of Faith
under Temporal and Eternal Punishment? His note upon this, shows his Falsehood,
his Malice and his Weakness. He says, Here you see he (W. Penn) makes the
Church Power very low, as by Church he means the Church of England, or any
other Church beside the Church of the Quakers. But, says he, When he means the
Church of the Quakers, from the same Text, he Magnifies her Power as great as
ever Bellarmine, or any other Jesuit, Magnified the Church of Rome. His Malice
in the Comparison is obvious of it self, and his Weakness in the Cavil. His
Falsness appears by this, That W. Penn in neither of those places named, either
the Church of England, the Quakers Church (as he calls it) or the Church of any
other sort of People: But the Church of Christ indefinitely, leaving the
Application to the Reader. And the moderation that Book pleads for, is a
sufficient Confutation of this Cavil.

He adds a 3 d Instance of Contradiction, as lame as the former. He takes the
first part of it out of the Address to Protestants, p 246. of the second
Edition (p. 242. of the first Edition) where W. Penn said, them that are angry
for God, passionate for Christ, that call names for Religion, and fling S^ones,
and persecute for Faith, may tell us they are Christians, if they will, but no
Body would know them to be such by their Fruits; to be sure they are no
Christians of Christ's making. To this G. Keith opposes some expressions he has
picked up out of two of W. Penn's Books, which he thinks proceeded from Anger
and Passion. But what if they did not, but from a Just and Godly Zeal against
Deceivers and Deceit, as it appears they did? Does he think to prove
Contradictions upon precarious Propositions? Such weak Attempts need no
Refutation.

I am come at length to his Charge against me in particular, which in p. 60. he
brings in under this Title, Some of Tho. Ellwood's vile and gross Errors, truly
collected out of his Book, fasly called, Truth Defended. How truly collected we
shall see anon.

He premises that he shall pass by at present, my many Forg^ries, and
Perversions, and Abuses against him, in that last Book of mine, and my two
Former; to the first, of which he says he has answered in Print. From hence I
hope, he will give me leave to Infer, that he does not pretend to have answered
my two last yet; so that I may live in hopes of hearing from him once again, at
least, if not oftener; And the rather for that he has Collected, he says, out of
my two last Abusive Books (as he calls them) above a hundred manifest
Perversions, Forgeries and Falsities that I have heaped up against him which,
(says he) I have in readiness to show, and which I keep by me for a reserve,
until I find an Occasion to Publish them, either by Print, or otherwise. He Is
a wary Warrior, one may see by this: He will not hazard all at ^^e Battle; but
keeps a reserve to Recruit his Forces, if he should happen to come by the
worst, as it is more than ten to one he will. He mustered up fifty out of my
First Book (called An Epistle) and sent them forth against me, in his
Seasonable Information; Them I beat back upon himself, in my second Book called
A further Discovery (which is the first of those two he has not replied to) so
that he had need reinforce them, if he can, and make good his Old Charge,
before he exhibites a New one. And when that is done with, then let us have the
the other hundred, and by that time perhaps he will have picked some more out of
this.

The Errors he now charges me with, are in number Ten, and all pretended to be
taken out of my last Book, called Truth Defended.

The first he gives thus, The Blood that came out of Christ's side, its
shedding, was not done to complete the Offering, because before that, Christ
said, Consummatum est, it is finished, p. 99. Note, says G. Keith, This is as
much against his Death, for before his Death, he said, It is Finished. Now
Reader, take my words: For these he has given are not mine, but his own; by
which I suppose, he would insinuate, that I hold the Offering or Sacrifice to
have been completed, before Christ's Death? My words were these, This offering
up himself (and giving himself a Ransom for all) included all his sufferings,
both inward and outward, and made it a complete and perfect Sacrifice; in which
his Blood was Comprehended, and concerned, as well as his Flesh, before his
side was Pierced by the Spear. For he had pronounced that great word (
Consummatum est) It is Finished, had bowed his Head, and given up the Ghost,
before his side was Pierced by the Spear. Observe here now, I not only said he
had pronounced that great word, It is Finished, but also expressly, that he had
bowed his Head, and given up the Ghost, before his Side was Pierced. G. Keith
pretending to repeat my words, leaves out that Clause [ he had bowed his Head
and given up the Ghost] and then infers that my making the offering to be
completed, upon his saying It is Finished, before his Side was pierced (which
was no done, and which I say was not done, till after he was Dead) is a making
the offering to be completed before he was Dead. What shall I call this
Dealing of his, a Forgery, Falsity, or Perversion? A manifest Perversion to be
sure it is, and that a gross and vile one. This is the way he takes to prove me
guilty of vile and gross Errors. And at this rate, what Man living, can escape
the lash of his false Tongue! Is this man fit to charge me with Perversions,
Forgeries and Falsities (not by the Dozen, nor yet by the Score, but) by the
Half Hundred, and Hundred!

The second gross Error he charges on me, P. 61. is, That I Justify G.
Whitehead's Doctrine and words, denying that the Material Blood of the Beasts,
were Types of Christ's Material Blood, and yet Fallaciously seem to own it, p.
106. How does this Charge hang together, that I deny it, and yet seem to own
it? If I own it, how am I guilty of a vile and gross Error? If I seem to own
it, so that he could not tell whether I own it or deny it, why would he be so
forward to Charge me with vile and gross Error in denying it, before he was
come to a certainty that I did deny it? Does not this show his Injustice, as
well as his Folly? But besides, both this and the Third ( viz. That I justify
W. Penn's Doctrine, saying, the one Seed cannot be an outward thing; for one
outward thing cannot be the proper sign of another outward thing) are already
discussed in this Answer to his Narrative, where he has repeated these Charges
against W. Penn and G. Whitehead, and I (as before) have endeavored to free
them from his Perversions and Abuses.

The Fourth Error he bestows on me is, That I deny that the Gift of the Divine
Grace or Power within, is the real Purchase of Christ's Obedience unto Death;
arguing, that if so, that would not be the Free Gift of God, p. 121. Here are
two notable Pieces of Art, he has showed in the framing of this Error. First,
He has changed my Words from [ The Gift of the promised Seed] to [ The Gift of
the Divine Grace or Power within:] Which quite alters the Sense of the Place.
For whereas I inferred, from his Words, that the Gift of the promised Seed was
not a free Gift, or did not proceed from the free Love of God to Man (contrary
to John 3.16.) but was the real purchase of Christ's most holy and perfect
Obedience unto Death, when he came (which was the Error and Absurdity I drew
upon him from his own Words) He, to slip from under that, changes the Words, as
I showed before, from the Gift of the promised Seed, to the Gift of the Divine
Grace and Power within, referring to Romans 5.15. Ephesians. 4.7, 8. and Psalm 68.18.
which latter Places mention Christ's giving Gifts unto Men, when he ascended up
on High, after his Death and Resurrection: So turning the Free Gift of God, in
promising the Seed, and giving his only begotten Sun; to the Gift of Divine
Grace and Power within, which Christ the promised Seed gave, when he ascended
up on high, and then charges me with Error, in denying this Gift, given by
Christ, to be the real purchase of his Obedience unto Death; whereas it was the
Gift of Christ himself, as the promised Seed, that I spoke of, which was the
Effect of God's free Love, not the purchase of Christ's Death. The other piece
of his Art is, in turning this upon me, saving, He denies: Whereas I neither
denied, nor affirmed, but showed him the Absurdity and Error of his own Words.

The Fifth Error he assigns me is, That I blame him for saying Christ's Body is
the same in substance it was on Earth, p. 129. I desire the Reader to examine
that Place in my Book, and he will see that I do not blame G. Keith for saying
Christ's Body is the same in substance it was on Earth. But I expose his
Confusion and Folly, in saying, it is the same in substance that it was on
Earth, and yet saying, It is no more a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, but a
pure, ethereal, or Heavenly Body, as if Christ's Body, when on Earth, had not
been a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, but an Ethereal or Airy Body: Or, as if
Flesh, Blood and Bones were not of the substance of an outward, visible,
tangible Body, such as was that which was nailed to the Cross at Jerusalem.

The Sixth Error he allots me is, That I deny that Christ came by Generation of
and from the Properties of Man in Mary, p. 136. In this, as in the rest, he is
extremely unjust. In this place also we treated of Christ, as he was the
promised Seed. And he undertaking to prove (in p. 22. of his Book called The
True Copy, etc.) from Mat. 1.1. That the Seed of Promise came by Generation of
and from the Properties of Man in Mary, I pinched him up close with his own
words in that same Book of his, p. 20. where he had said, It is neither the
Body of Christ, strictly considered, nor the Soul of Christ, strictly
considered, without the Godhead, nor the Godhead strictly considered, without
the Soul and Body of the Manhood of Christ, that is the Seed of the Woman, or
Seed of Abraham, but the Godhead and Manhood jointly considered, and most
gloriously united. Hereupon I showed him, that in urging Mat. 1.1. to prove the
Seed of Promise (as he had defined it) came by Generation of and from the
Properties of Man in Mary, he showed himself to be of a corrupt Judgment, and
contradicted his former Saying. I was so favorable before, as only to say,
Should I not serve him right, if from hence I should conclude against him, that
he holds the Seed of Promise, as consisting of Godhead and Manhood united, to
have come by Generation of and from the Properties of Man in Mary, since he
blamed S. C. for denying it? But I think I have just cause now to set it harder
on him, and charge it home upon him, as a vile and gross Error, That he holds,
that Christ (who he says (in the same place) was the Son of God by an eternal
Generation before the World began) the promised Seed (which, he says, is
neither the Body of Christ, strictly considered, nor the Soul of Christ,
strictly considered, without the Godhead, nor the Godhead strictly considered,
without the Soul and Body of the Manhood of Christ, but the Godhead and Manhood
join^ly considered, and most gloriously united) that Christ, the promised Seed,
or Seed of the Woman thus defined, did come by Generation of and from the
Properties of Man in Mary. And I hope he will think himself, or that others
however will think him obliged, to clear himself of this Error, which is vile
and gross enough, before he take upon him to arraign others.

The Seventh Error he abuses me with is, That I pervert the Apostle's Creed, in
that Clause, Conceived of the Holy Ghost, p. 138. by which I infer, that Christ
came not by Generation of and from the Properties of Man in Mary; and in so
doing, he says, I make the Holy Ghost to be the ma^erial Cause of that
Generation; as if that Holy Thing conceived, were of the substance of the Holy
Ghost; whereas the Holy Ghost was the Efficient Cause thereof, but not the
Material Cause. Perversion is so natural to him, that he can do nothing (at
this sort of work) without it. That he might fasten an Error upon me, he
perverts, yea al^ers the words of that Creed. For the words of that Creed (in
that Clause) are, Conceived by the Holy Ghost, (and so I gave them in my Book)
he has changed the word by to of, and renders it, Conceived of the Holy Ghost.
Whereas the word by imports the Holy Ghost to have been the Efficient Cause,
that by virtue of which Mary conceived: But the word of, imports him to have
been the Material Cause, as if the thing conceived had been taken of the Matter
or substance of the Holy Ghost. To avoid which I, following the express words
of that Creed, said, the common Creed, called, The Apostles, says, Christ was
conceived by the Holy Ghost, though born of the Virgin Mary. Now how shameless
is this Man, to charge me with vile and gross Error in perverting the Apostle's
Creed in that Clause, Conceived of the Holy Ghost: When it plainly appears from
his own Book, that it is he himself that has altered, and thereby perverted,
the words of that Creed; and not I! Besides, he is altogether unjust in raising
this Cavil: for he knows that (in this Place, as well as in the other, upon
which he grounded his last pretended Error, where I defended S. Crisp against
R. Cobbet and him) I expressly spoke of Christ, not only with respect to his
Body, which was born of the Virgin, but as he was the Son of God by an Eternal
Generation, as he was conceived by the Overshadowing of the Power of the
Highest, as he was the Promised Seed, which G. Keith had confessed was not the
Manhood only, but the Godhead and Manhood united: And in these respects it was
that I argued, he was not produced by Coagulation (which was one of Cobbet's
Terms) nor came by Generation of and from the Properties of Man in Mary (which
was another of Cobbet's Terms.) But before I part with G. Keith on this Head,
let us see whether He, who is so forward to brand me with this Error, has not
himself trod too near that, which he charges me with. For in his Book called,
The way to the City of God, p. 131. He says, Even according to that Birth He
(Christ) was the Son of God, no less than the Son of Man, having God for his
Father, as he had the Virgin Mary for his Mother. (But as he was the Son of
God, having God for his Father, was he produce^ by Coagulation. or did he come
by Generation of and from the Properties of Man in Mary?) Now the Child, says
he, we know, does partake an Image or Nature from both Parents; and thus did
Christ, who did partake of the Nature and Image of Man, from the Seed of Mary,
but did partake of a Nature and Image much more excellent, than that of Man, in
its greatest glory, from God and his Seed, who did really sow a most divine and
heavenly Seed (is not that a Substance?) in the Virgins Womb, which as it
supplied the Males Seed, so it had much more in it, and brought forth a Birth,
which as it had the true and whole Nature of Man, so, I say, it had a
Perfection above it, and that not only in accidental Qualities (as men will
readily confess) but even in Substance and Essence.

The Eighth Error he slanders me with, he calls, my false way of reasoning
against the Man Christ's being created; from his reasoning, if not created,
therefore not Man; by retorting, if created, therefore not God, p. 139. This is
as mere a Cavil, as the former; and both the one and the other arose from
hence, that he would make the Manhood only to be Christ, without the Godhead,
or else subject the Godhead to the same Condition of Generation, or Creation,
with the Manhood; either of which is an Error. This made me give him that
retorting Answer, which has so much displeased him. Thus it was in my former
Book. His Third Observation is That S. Crisp's denying that Jesus the Savior
was created, or calling for Scripture to prove it, does sufficiently prove,
that he understands Christ only to be God, and wholly excludes the Manhood of
Christ, from being Christ, or any part of him. Does it so, said I? Then let G.
Keith look to himself. For by retortion, I return upon him, That his holding
that Jesus the Savior was created (which he does by condemning S. C. for
denying it) does sufficiently prove, that he understands Christ to be only Man,
and wholly excludes the Godhead of Christ, from being Christ, or any part of
him; which to hold, is a gross and vile Error. Let him acquit himself as he
can. He cannot acquit himself: therefore he is angry, and wrangles with me for
retorting this on him. He says, I charge him to be deeply drenched into
Socinianism. My words are, I confess, I did not think him so deeply drencht
into Socinianism. He says, This is my Ignorance, -- The Socinian Error is not,
That Christ is a Creature, but that he is a mere Creature, viz. only Man, and
not both God and Man. I was not ignorant of this (nor am, of the folly of his
Arguing,) neither can he be ignorant, that my Answer, by retortion, implied him
to hold, that Christ is not only a Creature, but a mere Creature; only Man,
wholly excluding the Godhead; which is full Socinianism. And until he will
leave Cavilling, and come down in his Stomach, and distinguish (as he ought to
do) betwixt Christ, as he was the Son of God by Eternal Generation, the divine
Word which was in the beginning with God, and which was God; and that which he
took of the Virgin; he shall never be able to free himself from the Imputation
of this Error: For so far as he makes Christ to be created, so far he makes him
a mere Creature.

The Ninth Error he ascribes to me, he calls, my blaming him, to make light (so
he expresses it) of the work of Generation (I take him to mean, Regeneration)
in comparison of Christ's Incarnation; therefore according to him, says he,
Regeneration is greater than Christ's Incarnation. Upon which he cries out, O
great Blasphemy! p. 155. In this he mistook me (whether ignorantly, or
designedly, I know not:) for I did not intend (nor now do) to draw a Comparison
between those two Appearances, or Manifestations of Christ, Outwardly in the
Flesh at Jerusalem, and Inwardly in the Hearts of his People, so as to prefer
the One to the Other (for I have all along told him, I do not like to divide
Christ.) But the drift and scope of my words, which here he carps at, was to
show him that he had done so. As for the Charge it self, of making Regeneration
greater than Christ's Incarnation, he had charged it before (but falsely) on W.
Penn in his Narrative, p. 22. And I have Answered it already in p. 82. of his
Book, to which I refer the Reader for satisfaction concerning it.

His Tenth and Last Error he flings at me is, my saying that the Author of
Regeneration is Christ, chiefly, as he is manifested inwardly in the heart, p.
152. My words (which best show my meaning) were these. And very idle is he, in
saying, Seeing the Work of Regeneration and Sanctification in the Saints, is a
great Mystery, must we not own him who is the Author, and great Cause of it, to
be greater? For who ever questioned that? We all own the Workman to be greater
than the Work; the Author and great Cause of Regeneration and Sanctification,
to be greater than the Regeneration and Sanctification wrought. And this Author
and great Cause of Regeneration and Sanctification, we say is Christ; and that
chiefly as he is manifested inwardly in the Heart: For he works it not in
any, but those in whom he is so inwardly manifested. These words show, that
when I said Christ is the great Cause of Regeneration and Sanctification,
chiefly as he is manifested inwardly in the Heart, it was with respect to him,
as he is the nearest and most immediate Cause thereof, and as he actually works
the work of Regeneration and Sanctification in the Heart, and brings it forth.
And though G. Keith says, This is as absurd, as to say, The Beams of the Sun
that descend on the Earth, are the chief Cause of the Earths Fruitfulness, and
not the Sun it self that is in the Firmament; yet both the Absurdity and Error
will prove his own, in his comparing the Inward Appearance of Christ in the
Heart (whereby the work of Regeneration and Sanctification is wrought) to the
Beams of the Sun that is in the Firmament, by which the Earth is fructified; as
if Christ were no otherwise in the Saints, than the Sun is on the Earth, viz.
by its Beams. Whereas the Travail of the Apostle was, That Christ might be
formed in them he writ to, Gal. 4.19. That he might dwell in their hearts by
faith, Ephesians. 3.17. And G. Keith says expressly, Way cast up, p. 134. The word
Incarnate, or made Flesh, and called by James the Ingrafted Word, we do really
see, for it dwells in us. And p. 124, 125. It is impossible (says G. Keith)
that he could hear us, and be sensible of our Prayers, and especially of our
Thoughts, if he were not immediately present in us, and with us. And in p. 123.
He says, The Man Christ Jesus is really present in, and among us. -- I do not
mean, says he, by his external or outward Person (for that is ascended into
Heaven) but in virtue of his divine Life and Spirit, or Soul extended into us
in his divine Seed and Body, which is his heavenly Flesh and Blood, wherewith
he feeds the Souls of them that believe in him. In p. 107. He brings many
Scriptures, (as Ioh. 6.56. and 17.23. Romans 8.10. Ephesians. 3.17. Col. 1.27. 1 Cor.
13.3, and 5.) to prove Christ's Being and Dwelling in the Saints, and that as
the Word made Flesh, according to John 1.14. And in p. 111. Speaking of
Christ's dwelling in the hearts of the Saints by Faith, he says, He is formed
in them. Gal. 4.19. so that they are his Mother who bring him forth by a
spiritual and divine Birth, Mat. 12.49. Is this to be compared to the Beams of
the Sun that descend on the Earth? Or did it hold forth a more immediate, and
substantial Indwelling of Christ in his People? How unsuitable then is G.
Keith's Comparison (besides the Error it discovers in his Judgment) of the
Beams of the Sun descending on the Earth, and there causing Fruitfulness in it,
to Christ's working Regeneration and Sanctification in his People? As if Christ
in his Spiritual Appearance and Working, were no nearer to his People, than the
Sun in the Firmament is to the Earth.

What remains of his Appendix to his Narrative, at the bottom of p. 61, and 62.
being little, and to as little purpose, I designedly wave, as supposing he may
probably receive an Account of it from another hand. But I shall here fetch in
a Passage in p. 60. which I purposely stepped over there, with intention to bring
it in here. It is this.

In p. 60. He says, Now before I have quite done with W. Penn, let me put him
in mind of his Promise, That he would answer me in the face of the Nation: For
I think I have made good my Word, that I have put him to prove his Charge
against me (that I am an Apostate) in the face of the Nation. What need W. Penn
do that, and he too. Did W. Penn so oblige himself to do it, that he must needs
do it over again, after G. Keith has been so kind to him to save him that
labor, by having done it himself again and again, and that indeed in the face
of the Nation, in every Book he has published since? It is probable W. Penn
might have done it before now, if G. Keith had not taken the work out of his
hand, and showed himself so officious and forward to do it, that he has thereby
rather confirmed the apprehension I formerly had of his Meaning, when in p. 32.
of his Book called The True Copy, he said, I propose this just demand to W.
Penn, that -- he give me an Opportunity -- to make good his Charge against me,
etc. namely, That he wanted but opportunity to do it himself, and thereby free
W. Penn from that small undertaking. I know not how* I may speed for reminding
him of this. For I remember he was very angry with me before, for but gently
touching it (and I think pretty modestly) with a [He seems to have bespoke a
public Meeting, that ^e might have done it himself there.] Yet this soft touch
put him into such a Heat, that I doubt whether he be Cool yet. For no longer
ago than the Third Month last, when he publish^ his intention of Holding his
Court at Turner's Hall, he was in such a Fret about it, that (in the Postscript
to his Advertisement in p. 11. of his Narrative) he calls it, a most impulent
and notorious Perversion, a Cheat and Forgery; Me, a gross and impudent
Forgerer, Wres^er and Perverter; offers to prove me to be not only guilty ^^
Gross Forgeries, and Perversions, and Antichristian Principles (o^ which the
Reader has just now heard a long List, in Ten Heads) and not only so, but
(says he) grossly ignorant (in that which he pretends to have knowledge) of
Humane Learning (and of that I can assure him I never pretended to much; and
though I love Learning well, yet I had rather be as Ignorant as he takes me to
be, than as Arrogant as I take him to be.) Neither is this all, but I am also,
he says, guilty of Pedantick Trifling and Quibling, from mere Errors of the
Press, not so duly corrected, yet obvious to any intelligent Reader. I confess,
I think, both his Book and Himself (under correction be it spoken) have need
enough to be duly corrected; and that I suppose is obvious to any intelligent
Reader. Now if I did happen to mistake his Meaning, in that hobling Expression
of his lame* Demand, of an Opportunity for him (as his words seemed to import)
to make good the Charge against himself, I think he has sufficiently paid me
off, with his Billingsgate Rhetoric, and Scottish Complements. Yet were it not
that I am loath to offend him again so soon, I could tell him, that the
Explanation he gives does not sufficiently clear the sense of that Cloudy
Sentence, neither has he showed that it was the Error of the Press, but added
another, viz. when I will, for where I will. But I have done with that, le^t he
tax me with Quibling. I return to p. 60. of the Narrative, where G. Keith
(having put W. Penn in mind of his Promise to prove him an Apostate, etc. which
G. Keith himself has sufficiently done) says, And let him not put off this
Work, that belongs to himself, to any Deputy, or Busy Intruder, as T. Ellwood,
or I. Penington, who have already sufficiently showed their Folly in Print. But
how if T. E. and I. P. should not think they have sufficiently showed their
Folly in Print? Will he not give them leave to satisfy themselves in that Case
a little further? He might a little consider us by himself, who has
over-sufficiently showed his Folly in Print long since, and yet cannot refra^
Scribbling, though at each time he discovers more Folly than before: And, but
that I am doubtful it would put him into a new Fret before the old one is gone
off, I could show him there is something (even in this last sentence) which, if
it had not come from su^^ a wise man as he, might have been taken for a little
piece of Folly; As where he bids W. Penn not put off this Work (which belongs
to himself) to any Deputy, or busy Intruder. Does he take the ^ords, [ Deputy,
and Intruder] to be Synonimons Terms, I wonder? Is it proper to call him an
Intruder, that is Deputed? Or him a Deputy, that is but an Intruder; and that a
busy one too? If not, what means he by bidding W. Penn not put off this Work
to a busy Intrud^r Does not putting off a Work from ones self to another imply
a D^putation? But enough of this; if not too much, for my store hereaf^er, when
he shall let fly at me again. He also reminds W. Penn. of ^^me word^ (...) his
Christian Quaker. p. 1. which, he says, were, I was not (...) any should answer
for my Faults, if any there were; and innocent, I esteemed my self both
sufficient and obliged to my own Re^ief. To answer for faults, I confess, I
think is most proper for him that commits them. And if W. Penn had Faults to
answer for, (though it were but before Judge Keith) I know not whether, as well
as I love him, I should be contented to take his place, or rather even wish him
to answer for his Faults himself. But it is one thing to answer for Faults;
another, to answer to Faults objected, and show that they are not Faults, but
Cavils. That W. Penn is sufficient, now, as well as he was heretofore, to his
own relief, is not to be questioned. But it does not follow, that he is always,
and always alike, obliged to appear in his own defense; or at all, when he sees
no need of it, the Blow being not so strongly given, but that a weaker Arm may
both bear it off, and beat it back. When an Abler Adversary rises, (which G.
Keith has petitioned the Clergy for) it may be time enough for Abler Defendants
to come forth. In the mean time, since he has accused many (and me among the
rest) in his False Charge; (and that, according to the Maxim, Frustra sit per
pl^ra, quod fieri po^est per pauciora, It is in vain to set many hands to that
work, which few, or one, can do;) Since also it looks like an Effect of his
Pride and Self-conceit, that like that Uncircumcised Champion of old (to whom
he is not more disproportionable in Person, than in haughtiness of Mind, and
Stomach agreeable,) despising me as too low a Match for him, he does, in
effect, call for some choice Man to come out against him, as thinking me, (if
made his Captive) too mean alas! to adorn his Triumph: It is but a just
^etribution to him, for his (perhaps not altogether deserved) contempt of me,
as well as it may serve to abate his Pride and Insolence; that he is fain to
receive an Answer to his (in his own Opinion Unanswer^ble) Narrative, from the
hand of one, whom he has represented so grossly ignorant, as he has done me.

Tho. Ellwood.

Advertisement.
THERE will shortly be made public, a Book entitled Keith against Keith, or
some more: of George Keith 's Contradictions and ^bs^rdities, Collected out of
his own Books (not yet retracted) upon Review. Together with a Reply to G.
Keith's late Book, entitled. The Antichrists and Sadducees Detected among a
sort of (...), etc.

By John Penington.


