Christian Information Concerning these Last times.

Wherein all people may clearly see what Prophesies the holy Prophets
prophesied of should come to pass: which of them is fulfilling, and which is
fulfilled; and how the lowest part of the great Image, that Daniel showed to
the King, is now a breaking to ponder, and by whom; whereby People may see, how
very-near Antichrist, or the great Whore of Babylon, is to her End.

Also some prophetical Passages gathered out of Jacob Behme's Works, who
prophesied and gave them forth, in the year, 1623. Concerning what should come
to pass in these Northern Islands; and as he then declared them, they are now
come to pass; and also what he said concerning the Turk, what he was, what he
should do, and what should at last become of him.

Wrinten in the fifth Month, by F. E.

Here is Wisdom, let him that has Wit, count the Number of the Beast, for its
the number of a Man; and his Number is (all the numeral Letters in the Roman
Alphabet, being rightly placed thus;) MDCLXVI. Revel. 13.18. LONDON, Printed in
the Year, 1664.

Christian INFORMATION concerning these Last Times.
CHrist Jesus, the Light of the World, was (as you may read, Mat. 16.) tempted
with an hypocritical People, who desired that he would show them a sign from
heaven; but he answered and said unto them, When it is evening, ye say, fair
weather, for the sky is red; and in the morning, the day shall be tempestuous,
for the sky is red and lowering: O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of
the sky, and can ye not discern the signs of the times? O ye Rulers of this
Nation of England, and the People thereof, can ye as yet discern any more
concerning the signs of the times, that you now live in, then those Hypocrites
did in the days bypast? can ye not at all discern what the Lord has done,
and what the Lord is bringing to pass in this your day? is not our God working
a Work in your day, and such a Work as you will not believe though it be
declared unto you? Nay, are not you covered with thick darkness, more than any
age or generation of men that ever went before you? Have not you had the
Writings of the holy Prophets, and of Christ and his Apostles, that have
prophesied from the holy Spirit of the Lord; and they have left unto you upon
record, what the Lord would bring to pass in the latter days; and the Book is
sealed unto you yet; so that you will not (or cannot) read what is written
therein? O all you that profess your selves Christians, and say you own that
which is written in the holy Scriptures of Truth, and yet are found at this day
walking and acting clear contrary to that which is written in that which you
own and profess, both Rulers, Priests and People: will not the words that
Christ has left unto you upon record judge you all at the last day, who are
found making void his Commands by your Precepts? is there not one Lawgiver, who
is able to save and destroy, left you upon record? and ought not all men's Laws
to be subordinate unto his Law? O consider these things, for the Lord will
suddenly arise against such a People, that have destroyed (or made void) his
righteous Law. O Nation of England, the Land of my Nativity, which way shall I
take up a Lamentation for thee, and how do I mourn for thee, to see both
Rulers, Priests and People, setting themselves, like so many briers and
brambles, to prevent and stop the Work of the Lord, that he has decreed shall
now be brought to pass in the Earth; and though the Scriptures, that you say
you own, declare of such a Work, as that the Lord will overthrow Babylon; and
the Lamb and his Followers shall have the victory over the Dragon and his
Followers, yet you will not believe, but set your selves, with all your power,
against the Lord, and against his People; abusing, and shamefully entreating
his faithful Prophets, whom he has raised by his own Power, and that in your
own borders first, to declare unto you his everlasting Gospel, that so you
might be turned from darkness unto Light, and from the power of Satan unto God:
And also they have, as righteous Noah did, declared unto you, that the Lord
would suddenly bring a Deluge upon the world of ungodly men, if they did not
suddenly repent, and turn from their wicked ways. And this Message of the King
of Heaven, they have faithfully declared through thy Streets, Cities and
Markets, unto all thy Inhabitants, as well unto thee, O King Charles (whom
their God has set upon thy Throne) as to the Beggar that sits upon the
Dunghill; and in so doing, the Lord's Mercy has been large unto you all, in
that he has faithfully warned you all by his Servants, the thing that must
suddenly be fulfilled upon you: but have you done as the King of Nineveh did,
with his People? or have you at all believed the report of the Lord's Servants?
but have you not done as those did in Zedekiahs day, both Rulers and People?
Have you not done evil in the sight of the Lord, and have not humbled your
selves before him? 2 Chronicles. 36. have not all the chief of the Priests, and also
of the People, trespassed wonderfully according to all the Abominations of the
Heathen, in teaching for Doctrines, men's Precepts? And has not the Lord God of
your Fathers, sent to you by his Messengers (whom you in derision call Quakers)
and they have faithfully declared his Message unto you; And have not you mocked
the Messengers of the Lord; and made a Decree that his Laborers shall no more
labor in this his Vineyard? and you have despised their words, and misused and
imprisoned his Prophets, whom he has sent, until the Lord's Wrath is risen
against you, and there will be no remedy; and will you, who are as Briars and
Thorns, set your selves in battle-aray against the Lord, who is a consuming
Fire to all the workers of Iniquity, and whose day (that is near at hand) burns
like an oven, and all the proud, and all that does wickedly, shall be as
stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts,
and shall leave them neither root nor branch, Mal. 4.1. O foolish people,
consider these things, before it be too late, and cease to do evil, and learn
to do well; seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the Fatherless, and
defend the Widows: but if you do not these things, but (on the contrary,) let
your Decree stand, that will make many thousands widows, and thousands
fatherless; the Lord will never reason with you, but by his sore Judgments he
will overthrow you, and none shall be able to help you, says the Lord God.

For this the Lord has commanded me to declare unto you, and also to his
suffering Lambs, who suffers under your power at this day, that so you may be
warned of the evil of your ways, and his People may be comforted, that their
day of deliverance draws very near, that so they may stand with boldness this
day of great trial, not fearing what man can do unto them; for the Lord has
showed unto me the signs of the time in which we live; and those Visions that
were for an appointed time, showed unto the Prophets of the Lord, Hab. 2.3. do
now at last in this our day, speak, and not lie; and though it tarryed, yet we
have waited for it, and they are surely come, and must stay no longer.

Now this I declare not unto you by only reading of the History without me,
hearing there that such things are to come to pass; but I declare of what the
Lord has wrought of his Work within me: And who ever judges of the times by
no other thing than what he finds in the history without him, or by what he may
attain unto by the stars, or by the face of the heavens, without him, such a
one can never know the signs of the times, but is one with the hypocritical
Generation among whom he lives. And as the unbelieving Jews, who had the
Prophesies of Christ's being born among them, and the place where he should be
born, yet when he was born, according to the writings they had, they would not
believe it was he, but persecuted him, and put him to death: And as William
Lilly in his Book, [Monarchy or no Monarchy] had a clear sight by what he saw,
and read without him, of the Lord's People that should arise in this Nation,
what manner of People they should be, what they should do, how they should
Convert People, which had been a thing but only talked of, and how they should
prosper, and he not at all witnessing the thing, he declared of within him, but
only what he saw by things without him, I say, when those people were brought
forth, according to what he had declared, and in every thing agreeable, in
Life, Conversation, and Doctrine, to what he had given forth; yet this man, as
the unbelieving Jews, would not believe when they were come, that such were the
people he had prophesied of; but his Wife who minded the teaching of the Lord
within her, and giving heed unto that, she could say of a truth, when those
people arose, that they were the People of the Lord that her Husband had before
declared of.

Now all dear Friends and People every where, you may know that there was a
time, after Adam and Eve had transgressed the Righteous Law of God, that the
Lord in his love made a Promise unto them, that the Seed of the Woman should
break the Serpents head. While man lives in sin and transgression, this is not
witnessed. And so according to the Doctrine of the Priests of England, who say
(contrary to the Scripture and Book of Common Prayer) that none shall ever be
perfect, or freed from committing sin while on this side of the grave; and so
denies this promise of the Lord, in that the Seed of the Woman shall ever break
the Serpents head; and so would make God a liar, in not performing what he has
promised; but this promise through the Lords love many at this day can witness:
and who witnesses this, their day of deliverance is come.

After Moses prophesied that the Lord should raise them a Prophet like unto
him, and him they should hear in all things; And this Prophet is come, and the
Lords People hear him, teaching in them, and are made willing to be subject
unto his Laws, and Government. And because they do so, therefore the Kings of
the earth, and the Rulers, they take counsel against the Lord, and against his
People, and would have them do things, contrary to the Law that this great
Prophet, who is come, has left them upon Record, to observe and do; and great
penalties are laid upon them if they will not break his Righteous Law: and if
that person must be cut off that will not hear this Prophet, what will be the
portion of those Rulers, that make Decrees, and Laws, to cause his Righteous
Law to be broken, and persecute those that keep his Law? Consider these things
and repent. Ezekel 37. The Lord showed him in a Vision the True Seed of
Spiritual Israel, which were represented by the dry bones, which lay scattered
in the open fields, and lo he saw them to be very dry; and the Lord said unto
him, Son of Man, Can these bones live? And the Prophet answered, Lord, thou
knows. O my dear Friends, who lay with me in the open field, and who the Lord
sent, his faithful Servants, out of the North Country to prophecy upon us dry
bones, and they did as the Lord commanded them, and said unto us, Hear the Word
of the Lord, Thus says the Lord unto these dry bones, Behold I will cause
breath to enter into you, and ye shall live, and I will lay sinews upon you,
and make flesh grow upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath into you,
that ye may live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. So the Lord's Prophets
prophesied as he had commanded them; and as they prophesied, there was a noise,
and behold there was a shaking, (or trembling) and at that time, those that
were not of the True Seed of Israel, seeing us tremble and quake at the Word of
the Lord, they in scorn in that Day called us Quakers; then as they continued
prophesying upon us, We dry bones came together, bone to his bone; This was the
beginning of the Lord's Peoples Meetings, and therefore we cannot but meet
together, as many as the Lord shall move to make up a body, notwithstanding the
Decrees of men would have us meet but to the Number of Four besides the
Household, and so would have us to be a weak and infirm body, contrary to what
the Lord has joined together to make up the body; but we cannot say to the
eye, we have no need of thee, nor to the hand, we have no need of thee, but
every Member is to be useful and helpful in his place, to the comfort of the
body: and since we have come to witness this prophecy fulfilled in us, in this
our day, our God has not only knit our bones together with sinews, whereby we
are strengthened one by another, and his love is shed abroad in our hearts,
that makes flesh to grow and cover these bones; but also he has put his Spirit
of Life into us, whereby we come to feel and taste and handle of our God, and
that makes us live out of the pleasures, customs, fashions and traditions of
this world; and this Life that our God has put into us, makes us to stand upon
our feet, and we are become an exceeding great Army, having neither Sword nor
Spear, but the Spirit of the Living God.

Now dear Friends, many thousands of you, you know, are come with me hither,
therefore fear not, for we are the people that this prophecy shall very
shortly be fulfilled upon, notwithstanding the Decrees of men to root us out,
for none are of the True Seed of the house of Israel, but those whom the Lord
has or shall make sensible of their dry bones condition, and that witness the
Work of the Lord within them, and be not dismayed, though you hear of Gog and
Magog; (that is all who own not the Truth as it is in Jesus,) rising up and
gathering themselves against you, threatening to banish and to root out this
Army, whom the Lord by his mighty power has at this day raised up, according
to Ezekiel's prophecy; for if thou read the 38. and 39. chapters, thou shall
there see, who among the Nations shall be delivered from Gog and his Army, and
who shall deliver them. Thou may read, that he shall overcome many people,
and but one sort of people shall be delivered from him, and they are such who
live without walled Towers, that are at rest, and that dwell in safety; which
dwell all without walls, and have neither Bars nor Gates, which are not of the
National Churches, which are the People that are gathered out of the Nations;
these are they that the Lord will deliver, that have broken their Spears into
Pruning Hooks, and their Swords into Sithes, that have learned to War no more.
And all you people of what Religion soever, that cannot witness these things in
your own particulars, as being truly called from the dry bones state, and that
have not Salvation for Walls and Bullwarks, which are not yet redeemed from a
Warlike Spirit, and that are not come to witness Christ's Kingdom come, which
is not of this world, who are not yet entered into your Rest, Christ Jesus the
Light, in whom is safety, and no where else, and that are not as yet gathered
out of the Nations, but are yet with them in their Ways, Worships, Fashions
and Customs, you must all fall under Gog and his Army, and as soon as you are
all overcome by him, then will the Lord overthrow Gog with all his Army; and
this is suddenly to come to pass, and the Lord will perform it for his Seeds
sake.

And that this prophecy has not been in former time fulfilled, the Prophet
says in the 38. Chap. and 16. verse, it shall be in the latter days.

And for the comfort of the Suffering Seed of the Lord this day, this I am to
declare unto you, That this is the time that Daniel's Prophecy is now to be
fulfilled, (though it has been long a fulfilling) for we are in that time,
that Daniel saw, Chap. 2.41, 42, 43, 44. And the Lord has by his Power cut us
out of the Mountain without hands, for every hand has been against us, ever
since he cut us forth; And this stone cut out without hands, does grow, and it
must, and will, fill the whole earth, and now it is at work to break in pieces
the latter part of the great Image, whose feet and toes were part Iron, and
part Clay; so the Kingdom is partly strong, and partly broken; and as this part
of the Image is a mixture of Clay and Iron, so has Anti-Christ's Kingdom,
mingled themselves with the Seed of men, some in one form, and some in another
form, so that they cannot join together, but Papists against Episcopal, and
Episcopal against Presbytery, and Presbytery and all others, against those who
are cut out of the Mountain without hands: But in the days of these Kings,
has the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed,
(therefore fear not) and this Kingdom shall not be given unto another people,
but it shall break and destroy all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever;
and it will be as hard a work for the men of this Generation, to remove this
Mountain whom the Lord has cut out without hands, and to carry it away from
this Island beyond the Seas, as to remove the greatest Mountain upon the earth,
and to carry it to the place they have decreed; for if the Decree of the Lord
be, that it must fill the whole earth, where will vain man have a place to put
it; Therefore I say unto the men of this Generation, who make Laws and Decrees,
against the Laws and Decrees of the Lord, as once Balaam said to Balaak and his
Princes, Hearken ye Kings, and give ear ye Princes, God is not as man that he
should lie, neither as the son of man that he should repent; has he said, and
shall he not do it? Has he said that Babylon shall fall and be broken, and
that the Image which Daniel saw, should be broken by the stone cut out of the
Mountain without hands, and that in the latter days, and that those people
shall be delivered from the Sword, that cannot fight with a Carnal Sword, but
are redeemed out of it; and has he said it, and will he not do it? and has he
spoken by his Servants the Prophets, what he will bring to pass in the earth,
and shall he not accomplish it? Has he spoke by Jeremiah his Faithful Prophet,
Jer. 23. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a
Righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
Judgment and Justice, in the earth, in his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely; and this is the Name whereby they shall call him,
The Lord our Righteousness; Therefore behold the days come says the Lord,
that they shall no more say, the Lord lives that brought up the Children of
Israel out of the Land of Egypt, (Mark) that deliverance was Great; but one is
coming near that shall be greater, unto which the lesser must give place; and
in this our day we witness it a fulfilling, and we can in measure say already,
The Lord lives, which brought up and led the Seed of the House of Israel out
of the North Country, (mark that) and from all Countries where they were
scattered, and they shall dwell in their own Land; Therefore lift up your heads
all you who are come hither, for deliverance is near unto you; for now is the
Lord fulfilling of this Prophecy upon his people, and in this Northern Island
has he began his great work, in bringing up his Seed, and leading out of the
North Country, and from all other Countries where they have been scattered;
for now is the Woman spoken of in the Revelation, returning out of the
Wilderness, whom the Dragon cast forth floods after, but the Man-Child was
caught up to God, but the Dragon made great War, and has persecuted her Seed;
but now is the everlasting Gospel Preached, by the Angel that flew in the midst
of Heaven; And the next tidings will be, Babylon is fallen, for she made all
the Nations drink of the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornication, (mark that) she
forced the Nations to drink of her Wine, of the Cup of Fornication; but the
Kings of the Earth were not forced to drink of her Cup, but they drank it
freely from her hand, and were so much in love with her, that they joined with
her, and committed Fornication freely with her; and the Merchants of the earth
waxed rich, of the abundance of her pleasures; but now the days of her
mourning is come, and coming upon her, and the dark night of Apostasy, in which
she has drunk the blood of the Saints, is near come to an end; And the tidings
out of the East, and out of the North, does now sore trouble her, and what the
Lord spoke through that Faithful Servant of his Jacob Behme, in the Year 1623.
is now near to be fulfilled, as may be read in his Book, entitled, A Christian
Information concerning the Last Times, wherein he says, The Oriental Beast
gets an Humane heart and face, viz. that is, The Turk shall turn a true
Christian; but before this comes to pass, while he is a beast, he shall help to
tear down the Tower of Babel with his Claws; for this end has the Lord raised
him, that so the tidings out of the East should trouble Babel: And likewise the
tidings out of the North does at this day mightily trouble the Inhabitants of
Babel to hear that the Lord has raised his Seed in the North Country; and now
they bestir themselves, and they would have them driven out of this North
Country by all means, and if ever they shall return again within seven years,
then they must die without benefit of their Clergy; It seems the Clergy will
neither save their lives, nor have pity of them, nor pray for them. O
hard-hearted Generation of Clergy men, will you not pray for Enemies, nor have
pity on them, but give the Lambs of Christ, if they come amongst you, up to
the slaughter? Are you like unto Christ, who came not to destroy men's lives,
but to save men's lives? Though you have Horns like the Lamb, yet you speak like
the Dragon; and you appear to be Wolves in Sheeps skins, that are thus minded.

But hear further what this German Author said, further he said, In the
darkness of the North arises a Sun, which takes its Light from the sensualish
properties of the Nature of all Beings, from the former expressed Word; and
this is a Wonder, at which all Nations rejoice; This is fulfilled in this
Nation.

Also he says, An Eagle (viz. the Emperor of Germany) has hatched young Lions
in his Nest, and brought them Prey, till they have grown great, hoping that
they would again bring their Prey to him; but they have forgotten that, and
taken the Eagles Nest, and pluck off his Feathers, and in unfaithfulness bit
off his Claws, so that he can fetch no more Prey, though he should starve for
hunger.

Also he says concerning the Turk, That he should very easily come to the
Rhine stream, which now the Turk at this time is near, being a River that runs
through the heart of Germany, where (says he) then the great overthrow of the
Children of Babylon may come to pass, where two great Rods shall appear, the
one by War, the other by Mortality, in which Babel shall be ruined, says the
Spirit of the Lord, in all those who have prophesied before us.

Further he says, A Lilly blossometh to you ye Northern Countries, if you
destroy it not with the Sectarian contention of the Learned, then it will
become a great Tree among you; but if you shall rather contend then to know the
True God, then the Ray passes by, and hiteth only some; and then afterward
you shall be forced to draw water for the thirst of your Souls, among strange
Nations.

And as it was prophesied of by this Prophet of the Lord, so the Lord has
brought it to pass, and the Lilly is blossomed in this Island, and the
Sectarian Contention of the Learned, have done what they can to overthrow this
Lilly: as witness of the public Teachers in these Nations, that have Writ and
Printed against the Lilly; as is to be seen in the Book put forth by George
Fox, and Entitled, The great Mystery of the Whore unfolded, wherein 197. of
the public Teachers are confuted, and their Errors condemned, and their mouths
stopped to their shame for ever, and so the Lilly is become a great Tree in
this Nation; Praises to the Lord for ever.

And for all you who do not witness the Lilly brought forth in you, but are
ready to ask what this Lilly is, the Author tells you in his Book what it is,
and how you may know it.

The Lilly (says he) will not be found in strife or Wars, but in a friendly,
humble, loving Spirit, together with good sound Reason; this will dispel and
drive away the smoke of the Devil, and flourish in its tim^, to the
overthrowing of Babel, and the building up of Zion.

Also in his book he says, That the Turks, after they have tared down the
Tower of Babel as a Beast, with their claws, and given those People and Nations
Blood to drink, that have drunk the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus,
then they shall (says he) come in with great joy and great humility, unto
Abraham, viz. that is to say, unto Christ.

And (he says) They shall not come in, in the form of the Babylonical formal,
litteral Christendom, in their invented and contrived Orders, which are only
verbal, outside Christians, so that a Testimony, and some outward footsteps of
Christ and his Kingdom, have still continued upon the Earth, but they shall be
born in spirit and power, for they are the lost Son, that is wandered away from
the Father, and is become the Swineherd.

But when the Angel shall bid them return, they come in the humility of the
lost Son, returning to the Father, where then the great Joy shall be kept by
Christ and his Angels, that the dead is made alive, and the lost is again
found, and the true golden Jubal year of the marriage of the Lamb arises up
among them.

And albeit Christendom, the Elder Brother (who has continued in the Letter)
does grumble at it, in respect of the different form, that he has made to
himself (for the most part for his belly and honor) yet they are not moved at
it, they are merry with the Father.

And they are the two Sons: to one whereof the Father said, Go and do this; and
he said, Yea, but did it not: and to the other Son (which is the Turk) Do this,
and he said, No, but did it, which does so highly advance (and magnify) the
Turks in the Kingdom of Nature, which the blind Christian World does not
understand: and though Christendom calls them by the name of Infidels and
Unbelievers, yet, says, he they are both alike while the one lives like the
other. And as it is written, Gal. 4.29. He that is born after the flesh,
persecutes him that is born after the spirit. So all Persecutors, may see what
stock they proceed from (the bond woman) who must be cast out, and the time
draws very near; for he, who ever he be, that persecutes his brother, is in
Cains way, and is a Murderer; for when there were but only Cain and Abel born
in the Earth, yet he that was the Persecutor, would have an uniformity in
Religion, and because his Brother would not offer sacrifice as he did, he was
wrath with him, and slew his brother, and the reason was, because the one
Sacrifice was accepted with the Lord, and the Persecutors was not.

And there is no other reason or cause at this day, that men are so mad to
persecute, to banish, kill and imprison their brethren, because they cannot
worship as those do, who teach for Doctrine Men's Precepts: and by their so
doing, they find no acceptance with the Lord; and this makes their countenance
change, and they grow in wrath, and make cruel Laws against their Brethren, who
worship God in Spirit and in Truth, and whose worship is accepted of the Lord;
but as it was with their first father Cain, who was the first persecutor, he
became a fugitive and a vagabond upon the earth, and the Lord set a mark upon
him. So let all Persecutors in this age, take notice of this one thing, That
God has in all Ages and Generations, punished this Sin of Persecution, with
one and the same Judgment, let it be found in whom it will, as Scripture at
large do show, and Histories make mention; and the punishment was this, Their
houses was left unto them desolate. See Mat. 23.37, 38. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that were sent unto thee, how
often would I have gathered thee, but ye would not, viz. Behold (says Christ)
your habitation shall be left unto you desolate. And if Persecutors in this Age
were not blind, they might read, the Judgment of the Lord that have followed
Persecutors in this particular, upon those that are gone before them; for as
man lets Envy into his heart, which is the ground of Murder and Persecution,
it eats out all good in him, and makes his heart desolate of all good Motions
of the Spirit of the Lord, so it is without: Pesecutors by that sin, disposes
themselves at last, and the Lord drives them from their habitation without; for
all Persecutors are all unreasonable men, and ever were: for if I should ask a
King, Parliament or Council, that make Laws to force all other People to
worship in that Manner, Form, Time and Place as they shall prescribe, and if I
be not convinced in my own Conscience, that their way is right, and agreeable
to the true Worship of God, which is in Spirit and in Truth, and if I should
worship in their way, I should sin against God, and against mine own
Conscience, then if I ask that King, Parliament or Council, if they will
undertake at the last day in my behalf (when God shall judge the Secrets of all
hearts by Jesus Christ) and will then keep me from the Eternal Punishment, that
must be fulfilled upon all those that worship God after men's Precepts, and
contrary to that measure of Light he has given me to profit and worship
withal, dare any King, Parliament or Council give me any assurance that they
will do it for me? If they should say they would, yet I could not believe them,
that they were able, or that they can save their own souls; neither can I
believe that there is any respect of persons with God, but Kings as well as
others, must appear naked and bare before the Lord, and every one shall receive
according to the things done in the body, whether good or evil; and also I
read, that Tophet is prepared for the King as well as for the Beggar: Therefore
seeing the King cannot save my soul, is it not an unreasonable thing, that he
should force me to destroy my own Soul? Besides, the King is not that great
Prophet that we are to hear in all things, but should be servant to that great
Prophet: for Daniel and the three Children could not worship according to the
Law of the King, and were justified in their so doing; as we may read, Dan.
3.18.

Now seeing it is so, let all that fear the Lord, endeavor to keep their
Conscience clean and void of offense, both toward God and toward man, what
ever we suffer under the hands of wicked and unreasonable men; for the time is
near, that God will lift up his hand for his People, to deliver them after the
manner of Egypt: And if the Lord should suffer any of us to be banished for his
Truth sake, from the Land of our Nativity, I know the Lord would give us favor
in the sight of the People first, as he has done already, and we should get
much of their love with us, which is their best Jewels; and though it be
midnight now, yet but few Dogs bark at us as they have done formerly; for the
Lord's Truth does begin to be of good report in this Nation, and few are the
number of Persecutors now, as has been formerly: (and as God set a mark upon
Cain for persecuting his Brother, so all men now that are God-like minded, and
all that God has given a spirit of moderation unto, they mark all that are
Persecutors now; and whoever he be that now is a Persecutor, he is as much
marked, as he that is a thief, and steals from his neighbor, the one being led
by the spirit of covetousness, and the other by a murtherous spirit of envy,
and both of the Devil.) And the greatest part of men, are much moderated as to
those called Quakers, whereby I see that Babylon falls apace; for where
moderation is, the Lord is near at hand, and the Devil has now but a short
time, which makes him rage the more; for we live in these days, wherein
Scripture-Prophesies are fulfilled, and the Ancient Visions do now speak, and
we know what times we live in; and our God has given us of his Light, Life,
and Power, and has called us to be of the First Fruits unto the Lamb, and to
be of that Number that must break in pieces the great Image, and now at last to
engage with the Lamb, to fight with the Dragon, and his Followers, which will
be the last battle: for as the Lord has been pleased to raise his Seed,
according as his Servants have foretold, and Scriptures have declared, in this
Northren Island first, and from hence has sent his faithful Servants, in these
late years, to the outmost parts of the Earth, to preach his Everlasting Gospel
to the sons of men, and the Lord's Work has prospered in their hands; so
certainly as he has begun his great work in this Island, so the Lord will
finish it in this Island, and Antichrist shall have his mortal blow in this
Island first, whereby all Nations that hear of it, their hearts shall be struck
with fear, to hear what the mighty God has done for his poor afflicted People
in England. And the Servant of the Lord, J. S. has declared there shall be
such a day of deliverance, as the like was never before it, nor never any shall
be after it; and all Friends are to stand still, for there is our strength to
stand still, and to wait upon our God, out of our thoughts, reasonings, and
consultations, and all keep in the Faith, for by that we shall conquer all our
Enemies, both within and without, Heb. 11.1. for that is our ground of things
hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. And Friends, this I declare,
that I perceive such a Faith that the Lord has begotten in his despised People
called Quakers, in England, that fear not Banishment, no, nor death it self;
and this I find is begotten in thousands that cannot speak much for Truth, but
they have Faith to suffer for Truth if the Lord calls them to it, whereby it is
evident they shall have at last the victory, and shall be saved in the Ark, the
Light: which that was but a figure of, that saved Noah and his family from
drowning in the waters; and as the old world mocked Noah, and would not believe
that the Ark would save him, so has this Age mocked the People of the Lord,
for believing in so low a thing as the Light, they say is. But the Lord has
suffered a Flood to arise in this Nation, that has well-nigh fetched off all
the highest Professions in England; though they have flown from Mountain to
Hill, yet the Flood has arisen, and will arise, to fetch them all off: but all
those that abide in the Ark, the Light, shall flote upon the top of the Waters,
and shall be safe, until the Waters are abated; wherein a New Earth shall
appear, in which shall dwell Righteousness.

So all Friends who believe in the Ark, and dwell in it, keep to the Word of
his Patience, and then your belief will not cause you to make haste, for the
Lord in his good time will perform what is here written, to the renown of you
his suffering Seed for evermore.

Written on the 11. day of the 5th Month, 1664. F. E.

THE END.

