INDIAN Dialogues, FOR Their Instruction in that great Service of Christ, in
calling home their Countrymen to the Knowledge of GOD, And of THEMSELVES, AND
OF JESUS CHRIST.

Mal. 1.11. For from the rising of the Sun, even unto the going down of the
same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense
shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering: for my Name shall be great
among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts.

Printed at Cambridge. 1671.

To the Right Worshipful, THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE United Colonies in N.E.
Gentlemen,
AS I have sometime said unto you, so I now write, That there be none on Earth
that have so great and eminent a Calling from man to take care of the Indians,
that they be instructed in the ways of life by Christ Jesus, as your selves
have. For, besides the Right Honorable Corporation in London, His Majesty our
Sovereign has ordered a Trust to be committed to such as shall be in your
Order, namely, Commissioners of the United Colonies in New England, to take
care of this matter. I find few English Students willing to engage into so dim
a Work as this is. God has in mercy raised up sundry among themselves to a
competent ability to teach their Countrymen. Many have been sent forth by the
Church this Winter to diverse places, and not without good success, through the
grace of Christ: of which I shall (if God will, and that I live) give you an
account at your next Sitting. I find it necessary for me to instruct them (as
in Principles of Art, so) in the way of communicating the good knowledge of
God, which I conceive is most familiarly done by way of Dialogues; an Essay
whereunto I do here present unto you: purposing, if the Lord will, and that I
live, to do more of the like kind hereafter. My earnest Request unto your
selves, is, That in all your respective Colonies you would take care that due
Accommodation of Lands and Waters may be allowed them, whereon Townships and
Churches may be (in after-Ages) able to subsist; and suffer not the English to
strip them of all their Lands, in places fit for the Sustenance of the life of
man. Thus commending you to the Lord, I rest,

Your Worships to serve you in the Service of our Lord Jesus, I. E.

The Preface.
THese Dialogues are partly Historical, of some things that were done and said;
and partly Instructive, to show what might or should have been said, or that
may be (by the Lords assistance) hereafter done and said, upon the like
occasion. It is like to be one work incumbent upon our Indian Churches and
Teachers, for some Ages, to send forth Instruments to call in others from
Paganry to pray unto God: Instructions therefore of that nature are requisite;
and what way more familiar, then by way of Dialogues? For sundry weighty
Reasons I desire and endeavor, that our Learned Indians should learn at least
the English Tongue; our Indian Churches holding Communion with the English
Churches, must perform that Service in the English Tongue. If the Lord give
life, and length of days, I may hereafter put forth these or the like
Dialogues in the Indian Tongue; but what I shall live to do, is known to God.
While I live, I desire to follow this Work, and serve the Lord with all my
might, according to my poor measure of Ability, and wait upon the Lord for his
Blessing, by the concurrent prayers of the faithful.

J. E.

Indian Dialogues.
THe Church did send forth sundry of the Brethren to several parts of the
Country among their Friends and Relations, to instruct, exhort and persuade
them to pray unto God, to turn from their lewd and lazy life to the Living God,
and to come forth from the dark dungeon of their lost and ruined condition,
into the light of the Lord Jesus, whose glory in the Gospel, like the rising
Sun, begins to be displayed among their dead Countrymen; who begin to be
clothed with sinews, flesh and skin upon their dried bones, by the power of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, in the Preaching of the Gospel unto them.

Piumbuhhou was sent to Nashauwog among his Kindred and Friends these
inhabiting: whose entertainment, discourse and success, was, or is desired that
it might be as follows.

Near the Town a Kinsman of his met him; whose discourse was to such purpose as
this.

DIALOG. I.
Kinsman. Piumbuhhou. Speakers. Kinsman. WEll met, and welcome beloved Cousin,
I am glad you are still alive; can you make shift to live in that new way of
living that you have taken up at Natik? I am glad of your coming, because I
shall thereby have an opportunity to be informed truly of your ways, and what
your doings be, about which there be such various reports, some commending,
some condemning, some deriding, some wondering; but so far as I see few desire
to imitate you.


Pium. I am very glad that God has guided my way so well, so that I should
meet you, whom I have longed to see: you are my friend whom I purposed first to
look out, and lo God has ordered us to meet each other, at my first coming to
your Town. Likewise I am glad that you are so desirous to speak with me about
our Religion, and praying to God, for that is the very Errand I come upon, that
I might persuade you to do as we do. I am like a friend that have found honey,
and plenty of food, and I come to call my friends to come partake with me. But
what noise is this that I hear?


Kinsm. I perceive you have quite left off those delights and solemnities that
your Country men use, and which you were in your young time accustomed to,
because you have forgot the meaning of such noises. There is a great Dancing,
and Sacrifice, and Play, and that is the noise that you hear.


Pium. You say right, we have indeed quite left off and cast away those works
of darkness for we have great light shining among us, which discovers the filth
and folly of those things; as when a light is set up in a dark room, in a dark
night, it discovers all the dirty corners of the house, and all the evil
actions, that are wont to be done in the dark, without discovery. We plainly
see the sinfulness of our own former, and of your still continued ways; and I
desire that God would help me to open among you some of the Divine Light which
God has showed us, that it may shame you from such filthy practices and shine
them away for ever as the rising Sun does dissipate and drive away all the
darkness of the night, and makes Wolves, Bears, and all other wild beasts
hide themselves in thickets, and not dare to be seen in the daylight.


Kinsm. Will you go with me unto them, and see what they do? I will give you
this encouragement to persuade you to it, because you shall there see many of
your friends and kindred.


Pium. I cannot serve two Masters: I have undertaken and promised to serve God,
and therefore I cannot now go back again and serve the Devil. I have found that
Jesus Christ is a good Master, and I come to persuade you to come and be his
Servant: Far be it from me that now I am come among you, I should forsake my
Master, and serve the Devil; or that I should so far grieve my Master, as to go
unto those Games which his Soul hates.

And whereas you say that many of my friends are there, the more is my grief. I
desire that I were able to pull you all out of that deep pit and filthy puddle;
which to perform, I should utterly be disabled, if I should go in my self, and
so be d^filed with the same filth, which I persuade them to forsake and cast
away.


Kinsm. Let us go unto my house, that you may take there some refreshment of
food after your weary journey, and there we shall have liberty to discourse
fully of these matters. And while we are in the way, let me ask you of the
estate and welfare of our friends and kindred at Natik; does your praying to
God exempt you from Sicknesses, Poverty, Nakedness? will praying to God fill
you with food, gladness, and garments?


Pium. Our friends at Natik were when I left them in good state of health,
peace and comfort: for which we give God thanks, who is the Father of all
mercies.

Touching your question, Whether praying to God does exempt us from Sicknesses,
Poverty, and fills us with food and garments: I answer, If praying to God did
bring with it outward plenty and worldly prosperity, then all carnal people
would pray to God, not because they love God, or praying to God, but because
they love themselves, and love food, clothing, and worldly pleasures; but the
benefits of praying are spiritual and heavenly, it teaches us to know God, and
the evil of sin; it teaches us to repent of sin, and seek for pardon, and it
teaches us to forsake sin for ever: and if we are loath to part with sin, God
will chastise us with Sicknesses, Poverty, and other worldly crosses, to call
us to repentance, and therefore many times we fare worse in the world, then
wicked men do, that thereby we might be weaned from the world, and brought and
taught to love and long for heaven. And yet I further tell you, that Religion
does teach the right way to be rich and prosperons in this world, and many,
English especially, have learned that way. For Religion teaches us to be
diligent in labor six days, and on the seventh day to rest, and keep it an
holy Sabbath; and God has promised that the diligent hand shall make rich: and
when we walk with God in godliness and obedience, ^e will give us the blessing
of this life, so far as is best for us, he will withhold no good thing from us;
if any thing be withheld from us, or taken away from us, it is because it is
not good for us: Our Father better knows what is good for us, then we our
selves know.


Kinsm. If your praying to God do indeed teach you the true way of being rich,
as you say, how then comes it to pass that you are so poor still? for you have
prayed to God these twenty years and more, and I do not see that you have
increased in riches ver^ much, you are still poor: where be your Riches? where
be you^ flocks and herds of Cattle? where be your Clothes? what great Houses
have you built? where be your fields of Corn, Barns an^ Orchards? Alas, you are
not like the English; and therefore ^ doubt upon this point, it is not as you
say, that praying to Go^ teaches you the right way to be rich.


Pium. This is one of the least, the last, the lowest of those things that our
Religion teaches us. There be two sorts of riches; Earthly riches, of which
only you speak, and Heavenly riches, which Gods Word calls true riches.
These Earthly riches are but temporary, and shall soon perish, but the true
riches are heavenly, and eternal, they last for ever. And we have spent these
twenty Years in seeking chiefly after heavenly riches, for so God commands us
in his Word, Seek first the Kingdom of Heaven, as for these earthly riches
they shall be added to you, so much as you need. And the Word of God commands
us to be content if we have food and clothes; Now we have food and clothes more
then we were wont to have before we prayed to God, and we have contented our
selves therewith, and have bent our minds more to look after heavenly riches,
and in those things we have increased more, then in earthly riches.


Kinsm. I pray tell me what are those heavenly riches of which you speak so
highly, and upon which you do bestow your chief care and pains, and so much
prefer before earthly riches, which we account so much of, and think to be the
best things attainable in this world?


Pium. The true riches which we spend our time to seek after, are, 1. The
knowledge of the great God, who has made this vast World, and governs the
same by his Wisdom and Power, and who has made Man, and governs us by his
holy Laws and Commandments. 2. The knowledge of our selves, to be miserable
sinners, and do daily o^fend and sin against God, provoking his wrath against
us, to pu^^^^ (...) for our transgressions against his holy Laws and
Commandments. 3. The knowledge of Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the world, who
has in unspeakable love took a course to deliver us from the wrath of God* for
whereas we have by our sins deserved Death and Damn^tion Christ became a Man,
and died for us, and thereby has pacified the Justice and Wrath of God, and
opened a way of Salvation for us, obtaining a Pardon for us, and offering grace
unto us, whereby we may be saved, and be brought to eternal glory and
^appines^. 4. The knowledge of the grace of God in Jesus Christ, whereby he
brings us to repent of our sins, to convert and turn from all our evil ways,
and to believe in the Lord Jesus, and to walk with God in the ways of holiness
and righteousness before him. 5. The knowledge of the Means of grace, the
Ordinances of God; whereby we walk with God in ways of Civil Government, in
ways of Justice, and good Order. And in the Ordinances of Worshipping God, in
the sanctifying of the Sabbaths, and walking in the Communion of Saints, by the
Word of God, and Prayer, and Singing of Psalms. 6. In the knowledge of the
estate of all men after death; how the godly men that penitently believe in
Christ, go to Heaven when they die; and the wicked, that refuse to repent and
believe, they go to Hell, and there abide till the Day of Judgment: at which
day or time, when it comes, all men shall rise again, and be judged according
to their deeds in this life; and then shall the godly go with Christ to eternal
Glory, and the wicked shall be cast into Hell Soul and Body, and there be
tormented with the Devils for ever.



Kinsm. These are great and strange things you speak of, I understand them not,
but yet me* thinks there is a majesty and glory in them. I am amazed at what
you say, though I do not understand them distinctly.


Pium. You see then that we are grown rich with Riches that are above your
capacity; and these are the true Riches, and about these things we spend most
of our time. And as for these worldly Riches, we less regard them, as being
poor, low, little, small, contemptible things, in comparison of those heavenly
riches about which we spend our time; and in which we have increased and
gained, by Gods grace in Christ, so much as does make you admire at us, though
we know but little of what is to be known, but you cannot perceive the glory
and excellency thereof.

And indeed it is the wisdom and love of God unto us, that sets us rather
to grow in these riches, which the eyes of worldly men cannot see, then to grow
rich in earthly and worldly riches, which the carnal world can see: because if
we should abound in earthly riches, we should be thronged with multitudes of
carnal persons, who love the world, and love not God, who would be a cumber and
temptation to us. And it is a sign that our ways are good and godly, and above
the world, because so few (in comparison) come unto us, but rather fly from us;
because they love to live in ways and deeds of darkness, and hate the light
and glory that is in our ways. But I pray Cousin whose house is that before
us, where I see so many going in and out, and standing about in every place?


Kinsm. That is my house; and I am glad there be so many of our friends
together, who may have the opportunity of ^earing this good Discourse.


[After their entrance into the house there be four Speakers; Kinsman.
Kinsw^man. All the Company. Piumbuhhou] Kinsman. I h^d ra^h^r that my actions
of love should testify how w^lcome you are, and how glad I am of this your
kind visi^ation, then that I should say it in a multitude of words. But in one
word, You are very welcome to my heart; and I account it among the best of the
j^y^s of this day, that I see your face, and enjoy your Company in my
habitation.


Kinswoman. It is an addition to the joys of this day, to see the f^ce of my
loving Kinsman: and I wish you had come a little earlier, that you might have
taken part with us in the joys of this day, wherein we have had all the
delights that could be desired, in our merry Meeting, and Dancing.

And I pray Cousin how does your Wife, my loving Kinswoman, is she yet living?
and is she not yet weary of your new way of praying to God? And what pleasure
have you in those ways?


Pium. My wife does remember her love to you, she is in good health of body,
and her Soul is in a good condition, she is entered into the light of the
knowledge of God, and of Christ; she is entered into the narrow way of heavenly
joys, and she does greatly desire that you would turn from th^se ways of
darkness in which you so much delight, and come taste and see how good the Lord
is.

And whereas you wish I had come sooner, to have shared with you in your
delights of this day; Alas, they are no delights, but griefs to me, to see that
you do still delight in them. I am like a man that h^ve tasted of sweet Wine
and Honey, which h^ve so altered the taste of my mouth, that I abhor to taste
of your sinful and foolish pleasures, as the mouth does abhor to taste the most
filthy and stinking dung, the most sour grapes, or most bitter gall. Our joys
in the knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ, which we are taught in the Book
of God, and feel in our heart, is sweeter to our soul, then honey is unto the
mouth and taste.


Kinswom. We have all the delights that the flesh and blood of man can devise
and delight in, and we taste and feel the delights of them, and would you make
us believe that you have found out new joys and delights, in comparison of
which all our delights do stink like dung; would you make us believe that we
have neither eyes to see, nor ears to hear, nor mouths to taste? Ha, ha he! I
appeal to the sense and sight and feeling of the Company present, whether this
be so.


A^^. You say very true. Ha, ha, he!


Pium. Hearken to me, my friends, and see if I do not give a clear answer unto
this seeming difficulty. Your dogs take as much delight in these Meetings, and
the same kinds of delight as you do; they delight in each others company; they
provoke each other to lust, and enjoy the pleasures of lust as you do; they eat
and play and sleep as you do* what joys have you more then d^gs have? to
delight the body of f^^^h and blood.

But all mankind have an higher and better part then the body, we have a Soul,
and that Soul shall never die: Our Soul is to converse with G^d, and to
converse in such things as do concern G^d, and Heaven, and an etern^l estate,
either in happiness with God, if we walk with ^im and serve him in this life,
or in misery and torment with the Devil, if we serve him in this life. The
service of God does con^^st in Virtue, and Wisdom, and delights of the Soul,
which will reach to Heaven, and abide for ever.

But the service of the Devil is in com^itting sins of the flesh, which defile
both body and soul, and reach to Hell, and will turn all to fire and flame to
torment your souls and bodies to all eternity.

Now consider, all your pleasures and delights are such as defile you with sin,
and will turn to flame, to burn and torment you; they provoke God to wrath, who
has created the Prison of Hell to torment you, and the more you have took
pleasur^ in sin, the greater are your offenses against God, and the greater
shall be your torments.

But we that pray to G^d repent of our old sins, and by faith in Christ we seek
for, and find a pardon of what is past, and grace and strength to reform for
time to come. So that our joy^s ^re Soul-joyes in godliness, and virtue, and
hope of glory in anoth^r world when we die.

Your joys are bodily, fleshly, such as Dogs have, and will all turn to flames
in Hell to torment you.


Kinsm. If these things be so, we had need cease laughing, and fall to weeping,
and see if we can draw water from our mournful eyes to quench these tormenting
flames. My heart trembles to hear these things: I never heard so much before,
nor have I any thing to say to the contrary, but that these things may be so.
But how shall I know that you s^y true? Our fore fathers were (many of them)
wise men, and we have wise men now living, they all delight in these our
Delights: they have taug^t us nothing about our Soul, and God, and Heaven, and
Hell, and J^y and Torment in the life to come. Are you (...) th^n our fathers*
May not we rather think that English men have invented these Stori^s to amaze
and scare us out of our old Customs, and bring us to stand in awe of them,
that they might wipe us of our Lands, and drive us into Corners, to seek new
ways of living, and new places too? and be beholding to them for that which is
our own, and was ours, before we knew them.


A^l. You say right.


Pium. The Book of God is no invention of Englishmen, it is the holy Law of
God himself, which was given unto man by God, before Englishmen had any
knowledge of God; and all the knowledge which they have, they have it out of
the Book of God: and this Book is given to us as well as to them, and it is as
free for us to search the Scriptures as for them. So that we have our
instruction from an higher hand, then the hand of man: it is the great Lord God
of Heaven and Earth, who teaches us these great things of which we speak. Yet
this is also true, that we have great cause to be thankful to the English, and
to thank God for them, for they had a good Country of their own, but by Ships
sailing into these parts of the World, they heard of us, and of our Country,
and of our nakedness, ignorance of God, and wild condition; God put it into
their hearts to desire to come hither, and teach us the good knowledge of God;
and their King gave them leave so to do, and in our Country to have their
liberty to serve God according to the Word of God. And being come hit^er, we
gave them leave freely to live among us: they have purchased of us a great part
of those Lands which they possess; they love us, they do us right, and no wrong
willingly; if any do us wrong, it is without the consent of their Rulers, and
upon our Complaints our wrongs are righted. They are (many of them, especially
the Ruling part) good men, and desire to do us good. God put it into the heart
of one of their Ministers (as you all know) to teach us the knowledge of God,
by the Word of God, and he has Translated the holy Book of God into our
Language, so that we can perfectly know the mind and counsel of God: and out
of this Book have I learned all that I say unto you, and therefore ^ou need no
more doubt of the truth of it, then you have cause to doubt that the Heaven is
over our head, the Sun shines, the Earth is under our feet, we walk and live
upon it, and breathe in the Air; for as we see with our eyes these things to be
so, so we read with our own eyes these things which I speak of, to be written
in Gods own Book, and we feel the truth thereof in our own hearts.


Kinswom. Cousin, you have wearied your legs this day with a long Journey to
come and visit us, and you weary your tongue with long Discourses. I am willing
to comfort and refresh you with a ^hort Supper.


All. Ha, ha, he: though short, if sweet, that has good savor to a man that is
we^ry. Ha, ha, he.


Kinswom. You make long and learned Discourses to us which we do not well
understand, I think our best answer is to stop your mout^, and fill your belly
with a good Supper, and when your belly is full you will be content to take
rest your self, and give us leave to be at rest from these g^stering, and
heart-trembling discourses. We are well as we are, and desire not to be
troubled with these new wise sayings.


All. You say true. Ha, ha, he.


Pium. It is good to be merry and wise. I am an hungry and ^eary, and willing
to eat. God has appointed food to be a means of sustaining, relieving and
repairing our spent strength: This being a work above the power of the food we
eat, or of our selves that eat it, and only in the power of God himself to
bless it, for such great uses; therefore God has taught us, and it is our
custom, among all that are godly, to pray to God for a blessing before we eat:
and therefore I entreat you ^o have so much patience and compliance, as to give
me the quiet liberty to pray to God before we eat.


Kinsm. I pray do, and we shall with quietness and silence attend to such a
service unto God.


Pium. Let us lift up our eyes and ^earts to God in heaven, and ^ay, Almighty,
glorious, merciful and heavenly Father, thou dwell in the high Heavens, and
fillest both Heaven and Earth with thy presence; thou take care of, and
governest us here on earth: we are poor worms under thy feet, thou feedest
every living Creature, and ^akest our food to be like a staff to sustain our
faint and weary bo^ies; thou renewest our strength every day: and though we are
sinners in thy sight, yet thou art merciful to us, and with long patience do
call us to repentance. We confess all our sins before thee, and pr^y thee for
Jesus Christ his sake, who died for sinners, to have mercy on us, and freely to
pardon and forgive us all our sins. Bless us at this time, and this food which
is set before us, let it be blessed to us, make us wise to receive it at thy
hand, and to use the strength we get by it to the glory of thy Name, through
Jesus Christ. And bless all our Souls, ^eed them by thy Word and Truth, and
guide our Tongues to speak wise words, that may minister grace to the hearers;
and help us all to rejoice in the Lord through Jesus Christ. Amen. Now let us
eat and rejoice together, for God fills our bodies with food, and our souls
with gladness.


Kinsm. When the body is full of meat, and the head full of wit, and the mouth
full of words, there will be wise discourse.


Pium. Add but one thing more, If the heart be full of grace, then the
discourse will be both wise and godly.


Kinswom. You talk much of a belly full, I wish we have victuals enough to fill
them.


All. Ha, ha, he. They be not half full yet. Ha, ha, he.


Kinsm. What News do the Ships bring from beyond Sea?


Pium. They say wicked men are bold, and that good men who pray to God are
hated, vexed, troubled, persecuted, and not suffered to pray to God according
to the Laws of Gods Word, but by the Laws of men.


All. It is an ill time for you to come to persuade us to pray God, when
praying to God is so opposed, hated and hindered; y^^ may be m^re like to
prevail with us, when praying to God is credit, honor, and good esteem.


Pium Such as will turn to God only at such times when pra^^ing is in credit,
leave themselves under a doubt, whether it be (...) the love of God and his
ways, that they pray, or for love of the^^ selves and their own credit.

But when men will take up praying to God in evil times, wh^ they must expect
h^rd measure from the world for it, this is a (...) that they love God, and
love praying to God, better then th^^ love themselves, and that they deny
themselves for Christ his (...) Therefore I have taken the fi^test time to try
you, and to sift yo^ to catch none but the good Corn, and to let go and lose
all t^^ dust and chaff.


Kinsm. Some s^eak of very many English people killed wi^^ Thunder, and many
burnt in their houses: is it so indeed?


Pium. It is so ind^ed, and in many parts of the Country, Boston, and in many
other places. Very lately, there were in o^^ Winter eight or nine persons burnt
to death in one house, five another, one in another. Sicknesses are often sent
of God amo^^ them, which kill many: Their Corn is Blasted, and they are
p^^ni^^ed by God many ways, by Sea and Land, in these late years.


Kinswom. These are but cold and weak Arguments to perswa^^ us to take up the
English fashion, and to serve their God, when (...) tell us how sharply he
deals with his Servants.


All. You say right: we are better as we are.


Pium. We know there be many sins among the English, whi^^ provoke God to be
angry with them, and to punish them, to t^^ end he might bring them to
repentance. When we exhor^ you^ pray, and to serve the God of the English, we
call you (...) the virtues and good ways of the English, wherein yo^ shall
acceptable to the Lord: We do not call you to imitate their (...) whereby they
and you shall provoke the anger and displeasure the Lord. An^ what though God
does chastise his people for the sins? it is his wisdom, faithfulness and love
so to do: a Ch^^^ will not run away from his wise and loving Father, because he
(...) him for his faults, but will love him the better, fear him t^^ more, and
learn thereby to be a good Child. The wise Engl^^^ love God the more, for his
wise Chastisement of them for the sins. And why may not I use it as an Argument
to persuade y^^ to choose him to be your God, who will love and encourage you
all virtue, and love and punish you for all sins, that he might br^^^ you to
repentance and amendment of life. Gods Rods have mo^^ encouragement to a wise
heart, then discouragement in them.


Kinswom. Cousin, had you not a great Thunder and Lightni^^ to day as you came,
and were you not afraid? We had it so with us, and I was very much afraid, and
especially since I have heard of so many English stricken and killed by it, and
cannot refrain my self from fear.


Pium. I perceived the Thunder to be more this way, then it was in the place
where I was at that time traveling. Touching the fear of Thunder, the Word of
God says it is terrible, and the bruit Beasts tremble at it: it is sometime
called The Voice of God, by reason of the terribleness of it; and the reason of
its terror to man is, because we are great sinners, and have deserved Gods
wr^th, and it should move our hearts to repentance for our sins, and take heed
of provoking the anger of that God, who is able to utter so terrible a voice,
and can dash down destroying fire upon us worms, who are no ways able to
defend our selves.


Kinsm. Would you not lie down now you have eaten, and take so^e rest after
your long journey?


Pium. Nay, we must first return to God, and give Thanks to him for our food,
and health and strength by the same.


Kinsm. I pray tell me why you are so careful to pray unto God before and after
meat?


Pium. Let us first give Thanks, and then we will discourse that point. Attend
all. We do give humble thanks unto thy holy Name, O Lord our God, for our life,
health, food, raiment; and for this present food whereby we are refreshed. We
thank thee, O Lord, for the love we find among our friends, and for our
freedom in good discourse for the good of our Souls: We do pray for a blessing
upon both, what our food may strengthen our Bodies, and our discourse may do
good to our Souls. Help me so to declare thy Word and thy Works, that I may win
their Souls to love thee, and to forsake their sins, and turn unto the Lord by
true Repentance. These, and all other mercies we pray for, in the Name, and for
the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.


All. Tabat, tabat, tabat.


Pium. Now my Kinsmen and Friends let us discourse a little about the Question
propounded, Why we pray unto God before and after Meat? Our Lord Jesus Christ
did so before meat, as it is written of him in many examples; and we are not to
doubt but he did the same after meat, because the Lord has commanded the same
so expressly, saying, When thou have eaten and art full, then beware lest thou
forget the Lord.

And to show you what great reason we have thus to do, consider that God does
some of his chief works in this world, in the matter of our eating, which no
creature can do: for take you a Tray of meat, and ask, Who can turn this into
blood, and flesh, and si^ew^, and bones, and skin? and who can give every part
of our body its due proportion, that one part shall not overgrow the other, but
every part alike? Who but God can do this? And who but God can make our bodies
to grow to such an appointe^ stature, and then to grow no more? And who but God
can pr^^serve our health, and turn away sicknesses? Now these marvello^^ things
God does for us every day, and every time we eat, an^ therefore is it not very
good reason that we should pray and giv^ thanks to God at such time as he does
such great and obligi^^ things for us?

Again, God provideth all our food for us; he provideth Cor^* not we our
selves, we do but a little toward it, the great work ^ Gods: all that we do is
to put our Corn into the ground, and k^^^ the ground clean about it, but God
makes it to grow, he gives (...) a root, a blade, a stalk, and ears, whereby
one Corn shall becom^ three or four or five hundred. Who but God can do this?
there^fore Corn is of his providing.

Again, who provideth water, and waters the Corn? is it no^ God? for when
Springs and Rivers are dried up, what can me^ do, but cry to God? and the^ God
will bring Clouds, like great Bottles full of water, and drop them down upon
the withered an^ parched Earth, and thereby make the Corn and Grass, and all
frui^ to grow. Who but God can do this?

Again, God provides Flesh for us to feed upon, for he maket^ the grass and
herbs to grow, and when the beasts do feed thereon he does turn those Leaves
into blood, flesh, sinews and bones; an^ this he gives us for food, and
turns it into blood, flesh, sine^^ and bones in us. All these wonderful works
God does, in t^^ matter of feeding us; and therefore is it not good reason w^
should then pray to him?


Kinsm. I never heard so much before, nor thought of these things; but now you
declare and teach them, my heart says, tha^ all is true which you say, and I
now see great reason for this practice of you that pray to God, to pray and
give thanks both before and after meat: and I see not but that there is good
and just re^^son so to do, every time we drink, and take in any sustenance, a^
l^ast to lift up our hearts to God, who has so eminent an hand i^ doing us
good thereby, or hurt if he will.


Pium. Your acceptance and approbation of what I say, and (...) what we do in
this point, is a great argument that God does bo^ your heart to pray unto God;
for you acknowledge it to be o^^ duty so to do, and the neglect of it would be
against the light o^ your own Reason: so that this Conviction has cast a chain
upon your soul, to bind you to pray unto God. What say you m^ friends?


All. We cannot say any thing against what you say, but wh^^ we shall do, we
cannot yet tell: we must first consider of it, for we are ignorant and foolish,
we cannot do as you do.


Pium. Bend your hearts to it, and God will teach you by hi^ Word: for we were
at first as ignorant as you are, but God helped us to hear the Word, and do
what we could, and you see what God has brought the matter unto. We now walk
in the light, and now we call you to come into the light: therefore I say,
Awake you that sleep, stand up from the dead, and Christ will give you light.


Kinsm. We shall tire you with these discourses after your long and weary
journey; it is time for you to go to rest.


Pium. This discourse is better to me then meat, drink and sleep, if I may do
good to your Souls, and turn you unto God.

But before we go to r^st and sleep we must pray unto God, for it is God that
gives rest and sleep unto his Servants.


Kinsm. Do all you praying Indians thus do when you are weary and tired with
labor, or travel, or hunting, etc. do you pray before you go to rest? what is
the reason of your so doing?


Pium. We always do so: and if any should at any time through sloth and
sleepiness fail so to do, we judge our selves for our sin, and repent, and
confess our sin unto God, and beg pardon and mercy for Christ his sake.

And there is great reason thus to pray unto God before we go to rest; for
besides what I said that God gives us rest, and therefore it is fit humbly to
ask it of him; There be many other Reasons why we should thus do: for 1. We
must give God thanks for all the mercies we have received all the day, which
are more then the moments of the time that we live. 2. We must pray for Gods
protection of us when we are asleep, we lie like so many dead men, and how
easily might mischief befall us, either by Fire, or by an Enemy, if God did not
defend and keep us; but when God is our keeper we may rest quietly, in safety
without fear, under the covert of his hand: and by faith in Gods protection we
sleep quietly without fear, whereas you that do not pray, nor believe, nor
commit your selves to God, you do always sleep in fear and terror. 3.
Moreover, our sleep and rest is a great reparation of our strength and spirits,
and preservation of our health. While we sleep our food is boiled up within
us, and digested into all parts of our body, and new spirits are extracted out
of our food, and sent up both to our head, heart, and all parts of our body, so
that we are fresh and strong in the morning after a good nights rest. Now all
this is the special work of God, beyond the power and skill of man to perform
for us, and therefore it is great reason to pray for this blessing when we go
to rest.



Kinsm. What you say is plain, clear and true in every bodies experience,
though I did never hear nor consider so much of it before: if therefore you
will pray we will attend you.


Pium. Let us all appear before God reverently and with godly fear; let none
lie along or sit, which are postures of unreverence, but either stand like
servants, or kneel like sons and daughters before the Lord; and so let us pray.
O merciful Lord God, etc.


Kinsm. I perceive that you pray for all our Countrymen, who do not yet pray
unto God; it is your love so to do. But what is the effect of your prayers?
there are not many, that I hear of, tha^ pray unto God; and you that do pray
unto God, what do you get by it? wherein are you be^tered by your praying to
God?


Pium. These are two great Points which you have propounded. I am willing to
speak to both. First, for the numbers that pray to God: At first this a^^er of
praying to God was a little thing, like a Cloud in the West of the bigness of
a man's hand, but now the Cloud is great and wide, and spreads over all the
Country. Nop and Nantuket, and P^umenuk Islands, Mahshepog, and many parts of
the main Land, to the utmost bounds of this Country Eastward. And VVestward,
not only all the Massachusetts pray, but also a great part of Nipmuk; yea and
the fields are ripe unto the harvest in many places more, whom I will not name
until they have given up themselves to the Lord, to forsake their vanities, and
to pray unto God. The Church of Christ at Natik have sent forth many into many
parts of the Country, to call them in unto Jesus Christ. I am sent unto you,
and I have good hope that God will bow your hearts to pray unto God. So that
the praying Indians are many, and like to be more every year: And our hope is
the greater, because the Lord has r^ised up sundry of our young men (who were
children when we first prayed unto God) unto good knowledge in the ^criptures,
and are able to teach others the good knowledge of God, and are sit to be sent
forth unto all parts of the Country, to ^each them to pray unto God.


Kinswom. Husband, what do you mean to withhold our Friend from ^e^t so long,
so l^te? Alas Cousin, you had need be at rest; I pray tire not your self with
these long discourses.


Pium. I tha^k you for your care of me. There is but one thing more that I am
to speak to, viz, the second part of your question, What we have gained and got
by praying to God? Of which Point we discoursed before we came into the house,
and therefore I shall but touch it now.


1. We are come into the light, and it is an heavenly light, which le^deth us
to God, and to the eternal enjoyment of happiness by Jesus Christ. 2. We have
attained to some measure of the true Riches, by faith in Jesus Christ, and love
to God and his people. 3. We are content with that portion of food and raiment
which God gives us. 4. We enjoy the Lords Sabbath days for our Souls good,
and communion with God. 5. We have Government, and all Gods Ordinances in
peace. 6. We can lie down in peace, and sleep quietly without fear.
In all which, and many more respects, our condition does far exceed what we
were and had before we prayed to God, or what you have or enjoy unto this day.
And now let us lie down in Gods bosom, and take our rest.

Next Morning. Kinsman. Kinswoman. Piumbuhhou. Kinsm. ARe you well this
morning? have you slept well this night? does not your weary journey l^e in
your bones? is not the skin of your feet that was worn thin with rocks and
rough ways, still tender?


Pium. By the mercy of God through Jesus Christ, I am every way well refreshed.
The comfort of my Soul does make my bodily infirmities inconsiderable. And that
which adds much to the comfort of my Soul, is the good attention which you
and some other of our friends gave unto our disconrse and prayers the last
night, which gives me hope that you are not far from the Kingdom of God.


Kinsm. I confess my thoughts have troubled me this night, I have a great
strife in my heart, I think your way is right, I cannot gainsay any thing of
which you discoursed: but on the other side, if I should forsake our former
ways, all my friends would rise up against me like a stream too strong for me
to stand against, and I am not able to defend my self against them; I do not
know what to do.


Pium. God is above man. When I began to pray to God, I had the same
temptation, but I quickly found how vain and weak it was; God will defend all
his servants against all gainsayers: the light and power of Gods word and ways
will soon shame all sinners into silence.

But I will tell you a further help in this case: We shall endeavor to
convince and persuade all your friends to turn unto God also, and then that
Temptation will quite sink. Let us therefore get your Friends and Neighbors
together, and labor to persuade them all first to hea^ the word of God
preached among you, and my hope is that God will persuade so many of them, as
that the rest will be ashamed to oppose; for darkness and sin are weak, Truth
and Light are powerful.


Kinswom. My thoughts have also troubled me this night, but if you shall take
that course, then I shall gladly join with my Husband in this Change. I will
therefore get you some Victuals to eat, and then go about that business.


Pium. We are not ready for eating yet, we must first go to prayer, and give
God thanks for his mercies the night past, and this morning, and we will pray
unto God for his blessings all this day, and pray that he would bless our
endeavors to persuade them, for the hearts of all men are in Gods hand, and he
can overcome them and persuade them.


Kinsm. I like well what you say. I pray therefore do so, we will attend and
join with you.


Pium. Let us humbly bow our knees and hearts before the Allseeing God, and in
the Name of Jesus Christ pray unto him. But there come some company, let them
first come in, it may be they will join with us in our prayers.


Kinsm. A good morning to you my friends, you come in a good season. Our friend
is come from far to visit us, he is now going to prayer, I pray you to join
with us, and attend unto what ^e prays.


All. We shall willingly keep silence and attend.


Pium. Prays --


Kinsm. This good friend of ours is come to visit us, and does persuade us to
pray unto God, and you hear how heartily he prays unto God for us: what think
you of it?


All. We cannot tell, we do not yet understand the matter, how then should we
answer to it?


Kinsm. Your answer is right and discreet; let us therefore discourse about
this matter. Wise men will look before they leap.


All. We are but a few, and weak men, let us send for the Sachem, and the rest
of the old and wise men, and especially for the Pauwau, and then let us
discourse of such matters: they better know what to say in these matters then
we do.


Kinswom. I like the motion. And I pray you in the mean time eat soch food as I
have pr^pared for you, that when they come together, you may be ready without
interruption, to attend unto what you are purposed to do.


Pium. Always before we eat we must pray, the last night I gave you some
reasons for it by the word of God; and seeing here be more of our friends come
in, who heard not our discourse last night, I will again rehearse the same or
the like Reasons for this Religious practice. He discourses of them --


Kinswom. Your meat is ready: if therefore you will please to pray, according
as you wisely discourse, I hope we shall all attend.


All. We shall attend.


Pium. Pr^yeth for a blessing --


Kinswom. Cousin, I am glad to see you eat so heartily, you are very welcome to
it. And I see that praying to God does not fill your bellies, you need food to
eat for all that.


All. Ha, ha, he. Praying to God would starve them if they should ^ot eat. Ha,
ha, he. Praying Indians are as weary and hungry as other men, for ought we ever
saw by them. Ha, ha, he.


Pium. It is tru^ that you say, and therefore we pray unto God to give us food,
and to bless it to us when we eat it.

This discourse brings to my mind a word which Christ spoke, Man lives not
by bread only, but by every word of God Man ha^^ ^wo parts, A Soul, and a
Body, and both are to be fed. The body ^s fed by food, the Soul is fed by the
Word of God and Prayer. You that pray not to God, you feed you^ bodies only,
but you ^tarve your Souls: we that pray to God f^ed our Souls as well as ^ur
bodies. And this is one reason why we persuade you to pr^y ^o God, because we
would not have you to starve your Souls. The Soul is the most excellent part of
man, and shall never die; the ^ody shall die. If you have so much wisdom as to
fe^d your ^odies we pray you be yet more wise, and f^^d your Souls also.


Kinsm. Every thing that lives does live by feeding, as Birds, Beasts, Fishes,
and so do men.


Pium. You say true; and the Souls of men are living Souls, and therefore
should be fed with the food which God has appointed ^or them, and that is the
word of God and prayer.


Kinsm. If our Souls be living Souls, what do they feed upon? we having neither
the word of God ^or praye^?


Pium. Your Souls feed upon nothing but lust, and lying, and ^ealing, and
killing, and Sabbath breaking, and Pauwauing; and ^ll these are sins which
poison, starve, and kill your Souls and ^xpose them to Gods wrath that they may
be tormented among De^ils and wicked men in Hell fire for ever: and therefore
it is in love to your Souls that we persuade you to pray unto God. But ^ow that
we have eaten and are sufficed wi^h food, let us give ^hanks to God for it, and
pray that it may be blessed to us. [ He ^iveth Thanks]


Kinsm. Yonder come a great company of our friends, order the ^ouse against
they come.


Kinsman. Sachem. Pauwau. Piumbuhhou. All. ^insm. WElcome Sontim; welcome my
Friends and Kinsmen all: here is a Kinsman and friend of ours come ^^om Natik
to visit us, he prays for us, and expresses love ^o ^^r Souls, which you
take no thought or care ab^u^^ He tell^^^ of Light and Wisdom which they learn
out of the Word o^ God, which we are strangers unto. He tells us of Hell fire
^ Torments, to be the reward of our sins which we walk in. (...) tells us of
Repentance for our sins, and of Faith to believe Christ for a pardon, and of
Salvation in heaven with eternal g^^^ ry. He tells us of the danger of living
as we do. He tells of a better way of living then yet we know. Many such
things have discoursed, which are beyond my understanding. I am (...) pleased
with his love, but I know not what to say to his Pers^^^ sions: for which cause
I have entreated your company, that may confer together about matters of so
great importance, (...) that we may be mutual helps to each other for our best
good.


Sont. If any man bring us a precious Jewel, which will mak^ rich and happy,
every body will make that man welcome; an^ this friend of ours do that, who
more welcome? but if by re^^^ ving his Jewel, we must part with a better Jewel
for it, then ^ men should do well to consider, before they accept his offer.
T^^ things you speak of are great things, but if we accept of the consider what
we must part with and forgo for ever; viz. All^ pleasures and sports, and
delights and joys in this world.


All. You say true. Ha, ha, he.


Pium. If foolish Youths play in the dirt, and eat dung, and (...) ing fish and
flesh, and rotten Corn for company's sake, their ^ chem makes this Law, If you
come forth from that filthy (...) and company, and feed upon this wholesome and
good food (...) provided, and keep company with the wise, then you shall b^
(...) noured and well used all your life time: But if you so love your company,
as that you choose rather to feed on trash, and ^e^^ to perish among them, then
perish you shall, and thank you^ for your foolish choice. This was our case at
^^rst, and is you^ this day. You walk in darkness, defile your selves with a
(...) Conversation, you feed your Souls with trash and poison, and choose to do
so for your company's sake. Behold, God calls to come out from among them, and
touch no unclean thing; to verse among the wise, and offers you pardon, life
and salv^^ in heaven, in glory, among all the Elect, Saints and Angels. (...)
you are at your choice, will you forsake those bad course^ companions, and live
in glory? or will you choose your old courses and companions, and perish for
ever?


Sont. All our forefathers, (so far as ever we have heard) walked and lived as
we do, and are we wiser then our fathers^


Pium. No, we are foolish, weak and sinful, and love to be but God is wiser
then our fathers, and he has opened to (...) way of wisdom and life, and
calls us to enter, and walk ^ in; therefore be wise, and submit your selves
to the ^ Christ.


Sont. But why do you say that we feed upon trash, st^^ meat and poison?
wherein does our food differ from yours, and wherein do you in that respect
excel us?


Pium. In bodily food we differ not from you; but it is Soul food I speak of.
We feed our Souls with the Word of God and Prayer; you feed and satiate your
Souls with lust, lying, stealing, Sabbath-breaking, and such like sins: and I
appeal to your own Conscience, whether these are not trash and filthiness; and
what fruit can you expect from such actions, but punishment and wrath?


Pauwau. Let me add a few words to give check to your highflown confidence in
your new Way, and new Laws, and to your deep censoriousness of our old Ways,
the pleasancy and delight whereof, every one, both man, woman and child can
judge of; and we cannot but dislike to have such pleasant Delights taken from
us. Tear our hair from our heads, our skin from our flesh, our flesh from our
bones, you shall as soon persuade us to suffer you to do so by us, as to
persuade us to part with our old delights and courses. You tell us of the
English-man's God, and of his Laws: We have Gods also, and more then they; and
we have Laws also by which our forefathers did walk, and why should not we do
as they have done? To change our Gods, and Laws, and Customs, are great things,
and not easily to be obtained and accomplished. Let us alone, that we may be
quiet in the ways which we like and love, as we let you alone in your Changes
and new Ways.


All. You say right: why trouble they us in our pleasures and delights? Let us
alone in our enjoyments.


Pium. You have spoken many things, which do minister matter to me of much
discourse, both concerning God, and our selves, and concerning you, and the
offer of Gods mercy to you at this time. You say you have many Gods, but they
are no Gods. There is but one God, the great Creator of this great World. Did
your Gods make this World? the Heavens, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the
Clouds, the Seas, and the whole Earth? No, no; God made this whole world. Can
any of your gods give Rain, or rule the Clouds? it is the Devil that blinds
your eyes, and covers you with darkness. We teach you to know the true God,
who can kill us, or keep us alive at his pleasure. Your gods shall all perish
with you, for they are no gods.

As for your pleasures and delights, they are all sins against God, which
provoke his wrath to plague you for ever. We now call you to repent of your
evil ways, and to reform your lives to serve the true and living God, to seek
for pardon of your sins, and mercy to appease his wrath which is kindled
against you. I do now offer you mercy through Jesus Christ; do not harden your
hearts against the Lord: be therefore persuaded now to forsake your sins and
turn unto the Lord, come unto the light out of your darkness, awake from your
dead sleep, stand up, and Christ will give you life. We speak by exp^rience,
we were dead and blind as you are, we loved pleasures as you do; but by the
grace of Christ we have found lig^t and life, and we now call you to partake
with us in our m^rcies.


Pauwau. We have not only pleasures, but also Prayers and S^crifices; we beat
and a^^^ict our selves to pacify our gods, and when ^e be ^ick w^ use such
ways to recover our health, and to obtain all such things as we want, and
desire to obtain from our gods.


Pium. Your Prayers and Pauwauings are wor^hipping of the Devil, and no^ of
God, and they are among the greatest of your sins. Your ^urthers, lusts,
stealing, lying, etc. they are great sins, your Pauwauings are w^rse sins,
because by them you worship the Devil instead of God. When you Pauwau's use
Physic by Roots, and such other t^ings which God ^ath made for that purpose,
that is no sin, you do well to use P^ysick for your recovery from sickness; but
your pr^ying to, and worshipping the Devil, that is your great si^, which now
God calls you to forsake. Use only such Remedies as God has appointed, and
pray only to God; this we call you to do, and this is the way of true wisdom.


Kinsm. I feel my heart broken and divided, I know not what to do. To part with
our former lusts and pleasures is an hard point, and I feel my heart very loath
and backward to it, many objections against it: yet I cannot but confess, that
I do not in my inward heart approve of them. I know they are vile and filthy,
and I desire to forsake them, they are like burning coals in my bosom, I will
shake them out if I can. I am ashamed of my old ways, and loath I am to keep
that which I am ashamed to be seen in. The wiser men be, the more they abstain
from such lusts, and we account such to be foolish, vile and wicked, that are
unbridled and unpersw^deable. I would not be my self of the number of them that
are vicious and vile ^bove restraint. What I persuade others to leave, I would
not do the same my self. We do account it commendable in such as do bridle and
refrain themselves from those vices; and what I judge to be commendable in
others, would be therein exemplar and a pattern unto such as be young and
foolish, and run mad after such beastly courses. In that point I would easily
be persuaded, or at least I desire so to be: But the greatest difficulty that I
yet find, is this; I am loath to divide my self from my Friends and Kindred. If
I should cha^g^ my course and not they, then I must leave and forsake their
company, which I am very loath to do. I love my Sachem, and all the rest of you
my good Friends; if I should change my life and way, I greatly desire that we
might agree to do it together.


Sont. I like well that we should agree upon some amendment of some bad courses
that are too often among us: and I love your love, that would have us agree
together, and do what we do, in these great matters, by common consent; but to
do that, is a matter of much discourse, and deep consideration. This Meeting
was sudden, we have other matters at present to attend: we have been together
long enough for this time, we must leave the whole matter to some other time.


Pium. Two day^s hence is the Sabbath Day: God has commanded all men to
Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy. I request all of you to come together
that day, and then I will further teach you (by the assistance of the Lord)
touching this matter. And to persuade you to make this beginning to keep the
Sabbath, besides the Commandment of the Lord, we have the Reasons annexed by
God himself unto it. God himself Rested that day, to set us an heavenly
pattern; and God has also blessed that day, and m^de it holy, and has
promised that when we shall ^eet together in his Name, then he will come among
us, and bring a blessing with him. And when the Disciples of Christ were met to
worship God upon that day, before the day was done, he came among them and
blessed them. So if you come together on the Sabbathday, my hope and trust is,
that we shall find some special token of the presence of Christ Jesus among us.


Kinsm. I do very well like of this motion, and shall willingly attend; and if
you think good, let my house be the place: or if you our beloved Sachem think
good, we will all come together at your house.


Sont. I like it well, let it be so, come to my house, and you shall be welcome.


All. Content, we like it well: so let it be.


Pium. Let the time of Meeting be as early as you well can, about Nine of the
Clock.


All. So let it be.


The Sabbath Meeting. Sontim. Piumbuhhou. Kinsman. All. Sont. IT is well done
my Friends and Neighbors, that you have remembered our agreement, and are come
together about this great business. And now my kind Friend, what you have
further to say unto us, we are here ready to hear you.


Pium. Six days God has given us, wherein to do all our own business and
works. Every seventh day God has commanded us to give unto him, to rest from
our own works, and to do his work, to pray unto him, to hear his Word, to talk
and speak of heavenly matters, for the good of our Souls. We are all here this
day before the Lord: And first of all he has commanded us to pr^^ together;
therefore let us all either stand up like servants, or kneel down like sons and
daughters, and pray unto the Lord. Then he prays -- The next work we use to
do, is to Catechize, that is, to teach by asking of Questions, and they that
are taught make Answer according as they have been taught: but that work you
are not yet fitted and prepared for, therefore we lay it by. The next work
which we do is to Read some Chapter of the Word of God. Then he calls one
that came with him, who Realeth. When that is ^ini^hed, then he says, Now we
use to sing a Psalm, which is one part of Gods Word and Worship: but for that
work you are not yet prepared, therefore w^ lay that by also.


And now I will teach you out of the Word of God. The Text is Matthew. 7.13, 14.
Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way,
that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. Because
strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few
there be that find it.

In these words are two parts. 1. Here be two sorts of ways wherein men walk.
2. Here be two sorts of men that walk in these two ways. The first way is
described by four things.

1. There is a strait, little, narrow gate to enter in at. 2. It is a narrow
way, very rough, ^ard and difficult to walk in. 3. Here is the end of this way
whether it leads, viz. to heaven, happiness, glory, and eternal life. 4. Here
be the Numbers that get into, and walk in this way t^ get to heaven, Very few.
The second way is described by four things.
1. The gate of entrance is broad and wide. 2. The way it self is pleasant,
easy, full of delights of the flesh, and of worldly pleasures. 3. Here is the
end of this way, it leads to Hell, to torments, and to eternal damnation. 4.
Here be the Numbers that walk in this way, Very many; most men in the world
will choose to walk in this way, and at last go to Hell torments.
2. The first sort of persons are good men and women, who 1. With much
difficulty get into this way. 2. They patiently endure all difficulties in it.
3. They go to heaven and glory at last. 4. The number of them, they are but a
few.


The second sort of persons are wicked people: and these 1. Easily get into
this way. 2. They take pleasure in it, and will not be persuaded to leave it,
and get into the hard way. 3. The end of them all is, they go to hell torments.
4. The number of them, A great many; most men are found in this way


All these particulars he opens, and insisteth upon, and concludes with an
Exhortation: 1. To come out of this broad easy way, by considering the end of
it, whither it leads. 2. To get into the hard way of praying to God, and
patiently continue in it, considering the end it leads unto, even Heaven and
Glory.


Sont. What Book is that you read in? and why do you call it The Word of God?


Pium. This is the Book of Gods Law, which he has taught holy men his Prophets
and Apostles to write, and give unto us, to call us out of the broad way of sin
and death, and to call us into the narrow way of Repentance, Faith in Christ
Jesus, and eternal life.


Sont. It may be the Englishmen made it, and tell you that they are the words
of God.


Pium. This Book was written long before the Englishmen prayed to God, and
Englishmen have learned all their wisdom out of this Book, and now they have
Translated it for us, and if we attend unto it, it will teach us wisdom, as it
has taught them.


Kinsm. You speak much of Jesus Christ, and his pardoning our sins, and saving
our Souls; who is this Jesus Christ?


Pium. God is One in Three; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Jesus Christ is
God the Son, who became a Man; and when we deserved to die for our sins, he
came and died for us: and God has promised that all that believe in Christ
shall be pardoned of all their sins, and be glorified in heaven.

Touching this Point I will teach in the Afternoon.


The Afternnon Exercise. Pium. GOD requires we should give him a whole day,
therefore it is not enough to worship God half a day. We are again come
together to worship God, and we shall do the same this Afternoon, as we did in
the Forenoon. Let us pray.

After Prayer, he takes this Text; Mat. 1.21, 22, 23.

This Text teaches three things touching Jesus Christ,


1. His wonderful Birth; A Virgin conceived. Of which, see Luke 1.26, to 39. 2.
Two Names; Jesus, Emmanuel. 3. What Christ did for us, and does, signified by
his Name Jesus; He takes away our sins. And this he does two ways: 1. He
takes away our sins out of Gods sight, by dying in our stead, and so meriting
a pardon for all our sins. 2. He takes away our sins out of our own hearts, by
working Repentance in us, and Faith in his Name, giving us his Spirit, and
sanctifying of us by his Grace, and leading us in all holiness of life and
conversation.

The third part of this Text is, how Jesus Christ is enabled to do these great
things for us. This signified by his second Name, God with us.

Christ was God and Man in one Person; and that makes his death of infinite
value with God, to obtain a pardon for all our sins.

And this makes him of infinite power to overcome our hearts, and turn them
unto God.

These things are deep wisdom; therefore pray unto God, and he will give you
wisdom to understand them, Iam. 1.5.

Kinsm. I am amazed to hear these deep things: I am now more discouraged about
praying to God. Alas, we cannot Pray, nor Read, how shall we keep a Sabbath?
and whall s^all we do?


Pium. I will speak unto the Church at Natik, and we will send a wise man to
teach you, to keep Sabbaths among you; and all that I shall persuade you unto,
is to come together on the Sabbaths, as you have done this day, and hear the
Word of God, and then God will teach you.


Kinsm. Oh that it might be so, I should gladly attend unto the Word.


Sont. I say the same.


All. We like it well.


Kinsm. I pray let it not be delayed.


Pium. Lo, here is a manifest token of Gods presence according to his promise:
for who but God could bow all your hearts to hear the Word of God, especially
considering how averse you were at first. Now let us pray, and praise, and give
thanks to the God of Heaven, for his mercy endures for ever.


DIALOG. II. About calling home poor INDIANS.
Waban was sent forth upon the Service of Christ unto sundry places; where
passed such like discourses and acts. Waban Penoowot. Waban. HO, well met
friend: how far travel you this way?


Pen. I am going to Napmuk, a Town where Nishohkou is Sachem: with him I have
some business, which occasioneth my going thither.


Wab. Ha! you and I are both alike in sundry things, I wish we might be both
alike in one thing more. The things wherein we are alike, are these; We are
b^th tall men, We are m^t in the same way, We are going to the same place, Our
business is unto the same person, the Sachem of the place.


Pen. Ha, ha, he. I acknowledge wh^t you say: but I pray what is that wherein
you desire we might agree? for I do not understand that you have yet named
that, and I the more desire to know that, because you do seem to put more
weight upon that, then upon all the rest which you have named.


Wab. You judge ri^ht touching my opinion of that thing which I have not
mentioned, but I doubt that you will not be of my mind if I should speak it,
and for that reason I did conceal it. Wise men will cover and hide their
Jewels, and not expose them to every bodies sight, for they know some will
lightly esteem them, because they know not their worth: but if they fall in
company with such as know the worth of their Jewel, they will be content to let
them see it, and take a full view of it.


Pen. Your discourse does the more inflame my desire to know what this matter
is that is so precious in your eyes and so doubtful to find esteem with me. I
confess I am foolish, but I hope you shall find me one that would be wise, and
love the company of the wise, and willing to learn of others that wisdom which
I want; and therefore though I desire not to know other men's secrets, yet if
this other matter you intimate be such as I may know, my desire is raised high
to know it.


Wab. Your words are good and wise, and give me hopes that what I have further
to say unto you, will find acceptance with you according to my desire. I will
therefore open to you the truth of the matter. I am a praying Indian, I have
left our old Indian Customs, Laws, Fashions, Lusts, Pauwauings, and whatever
else is contrary to the right knowledge of the true God, and of Jesus Christ
our Redeemer. It repents me of all my fore-past life, the lusts, vanities,
pleasures, and carnal delights that were formerly very sweet and delightful to
me, are now bitter as gall unto me, I hate and loath them. All the works of
darkness in which I was wont to take pleasure, I do now forsake and abandon. I
am come into the light, I now see things as they are indeed, and nor as they
seemed to be in the dark. I now know the Word of God, which shows me the way
of eternal Life. I now know God who made all the world, against whom mankind
are turned rebels and sinners. I know the Law of God which I have broken, and
by my sins I have deserved eternal damnation in the world that is to come. I
now know Jesus Christ, who has died for us, to procure a pardon for us, and to
open a door and way to eternal life and salvation for us. Into this way I have
entered, herein I walk, and I have promised to God, that I will live and walk in
this way all the days of my life.

And not only so, but my desire is to persuade all others into the same way
which I have entered, because I do certainly and experimentally know that my
former ways were darkness, sin, and led unto hell and damnation; and this way
whereinto I am now entered, is a way of light, life, holiness, peace, and
eternal salvation: therefore do I earnestly persuade all that I meet with to be
wise, and turn from the ways of darkness, and come into this way of light and
glory. And this is the thing which I did mean, when I said, that there is
another thing wherein I wish that we may be alike. I do therefore exhort and
entreat you that you would do as I have done, forsake your old ways of sin, of
which you have cause to be ashamed, and turn unto God, call on God, be numbered
among the praying Indians.


Pen. Oh I am surprised, I am amazed, you have ravished my Soul, you have
brought a light into my Soul. I wonder at m^ self: where have I been? what have
I done? I am like one raise^ out of a dark pit; you have brought me forth into
the Sunshine* I begin to see about me: if I look back, and down into the pi^
where I have been all my days, I wonder at my self what a dea^ dark thing I
have been; when I look upon you, I see you like a^ Angel of light. I have heard
of this business of praying to God some have spoken ill of it, some have spoken
favour^bly I could not tell what it was, but now by your discourse I begin to
se^ what an excellent thing it is: it changes men, and advances the^ into a
condition above other men. You have dealt with me like a^ the Fishers do by the
fish, you laid a Bait for me to make me de^sire it, and bite at it, but I saw
not your hook, until you ha^ caught my Soul; and now I am caught, I see it
was not for m^ hurt, but for my great good. The light which I do already see is
beautiful and desirable thing, and therefore I pray you go on, a^^ tell me
more of this new way.


Wab. The two first things you are to consider of now you a^^ come into the
light, and your heart willing to attend unto the great work of praying to God,
are these: 1. To know God. 2. Our selves.



Of God, know his Greatness, Goodness, VVisdome, and Powe^^ He has made all
things in this great world; all things above ^^ are his works, he made the
Heavens, the Sun, Moon, Stars, Cloud^ etc. and all things below, the Seas, the
Earth, and all things th^^ are in them: he made Man, and gave him dominion over
all ^^ works in this world, and a Law of Life, under the penalty* damnation:
and all this God did in six days; so great is God above man. The Law which he
gave to man is holy, just and good: but man by the temptation of evil Angels,
who by their sin became to be Devils, I say man broke the Law which God gave
him, and sinned against God, turned Rebel against God, and served the Devil:
and in this rebellion all the children of men go on to this day.

Gods Law is in Ten Commandments, wherein he requires of man to know and
worship God, fear his Name, and keep his Sabbaths; and other Laws forbid Lust,
Murder, Stealing, and all other evils. Moreover, God has annexed unto his Law
a great Promise, Do and live, with a just Punishment, Sin and die eternally;
namely, that all the breakers of this Law, and sinners against him, shall be
punished in hell fire with eternal torments. And this is the condition of all
mankind, and it is our estate, that by our sins against God we have deserved
to die, and then to be cast away down into hell fire, to be tormented among the
Devils, who tempted us to sin, and whom we have served in our life time: now
together with them we must be tormented for ever.

Pen. Oh you have now killed me again: By the first light you showed me, I
thought you had made me alive, and I joyed in the light, but I understood it
not. Now your light is become a sword, it has pierced through my heart, by it
I now see I am a dead man. Alas, I have been a sinner all my days, I am guilty
of more sins then I have lived days, many sins in a day have I committed:
Night and day have I offended God, and broke his Law. I have served the Devil
and not God, I have done nothing that God commands, I have only served the
Devil, and committed sin; therefore I have deserved to be damned in hell, and
to be tormented among the Devils for ever, whom in this life I have served with
so much delight; And now poor miserable I, what shall I do? These Trees under
whose shade we sit, why fall they not upon me and crush this rebellious worm in
pieces, and send me away to the place of eternal torment? These Rocks and hills
about us, why fall they not upon me and break me into dust and powder, and send
me away unto perdition? will God regard these complaints of mine? what are
these tears of mine? can they quench hell fire? nay, will they not rather be
oil unto those flames? I am in misery, help I can find none; the greatness of
Gods Majesty and power, against whom I a finite poor worm have sinned, does
most amaze me. I pray help me further to understand the great majesty of God.


Wab. For this purpose this young man with us shall read unto you some part of
the Word of God. Read the 40 Chapter of Isaiah, begin at the 12 verse, and
read unto the 27. Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? and
meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in
measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? etc.
Ag^in, re^de some Chap^ers of Job, Chap. 37, 38, 39, 40. When these Chapters
were read, Waban proceeded and said, Moreover, such is the Omniscience and
Omnipresence of God, that we cannot ^^de from his sight any sin, or thought,
nor yet can we hide our selves, or escape out of his hand. For this purpose
read Psalm. 139. ver. 2, ^o 14. Thou know my down-sitting and up rising:
thou understandest ^y tho^ghts afar off, etc. ^lso God is Unch^ngeable: for
that read Mal 3.6. For I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob
are not consumed. And without shedding blood there is no remi^sion, Heb. 9 22.


Pen. Still I am more and more confounded: who is able to deliver a wretched
rebellious worm out of his Almighty hand? where shall I hide my self from his
eye? Oh that the Rocks and Mount^ins would fall upon me, and hide me from the
stroke of his wrathful hand! And yet I see that my wi^h is vain, there is no
escaping from his wra^^ful vengeance. O^ wretched I, what shall I do! had I a
world to give, I would freely give it, to be sav^d out of those flames, which
are ready prepared for me, and I have so justly deserved. And yet I see that I
have no such thing to give in ransom for my Soul; or had I such a thing to
give, would it be accepted? God has no need of my gifts or s^crifices. Oh what
shall I do? my miserable Soul must die.


Wab. I am in the same condition with you, and so are we all: but I have rest
and quiet in my Soul, because I have found a ransom, with which God is well
pleased, his wrath is pacified, and I am delivered; I have escaped the danger
of those deserved flames.


Pen. Your speeches are some stay to my distressed Soul, it breeds some h^pe
in me to hear that there is a ransom to be found, and that y^u have found i^;
^ay there be hope that I also may find the some?


Wab. Yea, there is hope in Israel touching this matter; it is as free for you
as me.


Pen. Oh that you would show me this Remedy. You have showed me my mis^ry and
danger, effectually; may it please the Lord to make you as successful to show
me the Remedy. But my Soul is still drowned in doubt and fear: Oh how I long to
hear where this Remedy is to be found. I would go to the worlds end to find
it, I would take any pains to obtain it; but m^ trembling heart says you and I
both may be deceived, for what Creature in all ^he world is able to deliver a
Soul from the hand of this Omnipotent and All-seeing God, whose Justice and Law
are Unchangeable, and not^ing save blood and death can satisfy it.


Wab. True, no Creature is able to deliver us, vain is the help of Man or Angel
in this case. As you said before, your mournings, crie^ and tears cannot do it,
none but God himself can do it; and your heart will say and yield that God
himself can do it: Isa. 55.9. As heaven is above earth, so are Gods thoughts
above ours.


Pen. Yea, that I can freely yield unto, that God himself can do it; what
cannot he do? but will the offend^d just and holy God p^cifie himself for my
offenses, and pardon so great a sinner as I? God is just and holy, and how can
it stand with his holy Justice to pardon a vile sinner, without satisfaction to
his holy Justice? will the holy God cease to be just? will ^e abrogate and
disanul his holy Law, which I have so often, so deeply, so rebelliously broken?
I have some hope, because you say it is so, but I see not yet how it can be,
for God is Unchangeable.


Wab. It is true that you say, God will never deny his own Justice, nor
abrogate his holy Law for our sakes: But our God is a merciful God, and
infinite in wisdom, and by his infinite wisdom he has found out a way to
satisfy the Justice of his own Law, and to deliver poor sinners from the
condemnation of the Law.


Pen. But how can that be? Can man, or any Creature for him, satisfy the
Justice of the Law of God? Oh I am in the dark about this matter, you speak of
impossibilities.


Wab. Nothing that is holy just and good is impossible with God; and therefore
to show you God has done this, know, that God has done it himself, and
whatever God has done is holy just and good.


Pen. But I pray tell me how this can be: Oh how I long to hear of this way of
deliverance of a poor sinner out of the hands of Gods holy Justice and
unchangeable Law.


Wab. I will (as well as I c^n) declare it unto you. God is One in Three;
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: which we must believe and admire, though we cannot
demonstrate. I shall at this time say no further of that point, only thus
much; God one in Essence, in his infinite Wisdom and Understanding, conceives
the Image of himself as the only adequate object of his infinite wisdom. God
conceiving is the Father: God conceived is the Son; this intellectual act of
conceiving, is called Begetting: God conceiving, and God conceived, by an
infinite act of volition, lov^^h himself; and this Love is the holy Ghost,
proceeding from the Father and the Son. God as he is Father has made all
^^ings, and given man a Law. God in the dispensation of the Covenant of Works
has agreed within himself that the Son of God should assume unto himself an
humane Nature, which is subject unto the Law of God. This glorious Person is
God and Man in one Person, named Jesus Christ. This glorious Person Jesus
Christ, is a Person of more worth then all Mankind beside. This glorious
Person Jesus Christ came into this world, and offered to God by Covenant his
own life in our stead, and died for us to satisfy divine Justice for the sin
of man: with this Sacrifice God has said he is ^atisfied for the sin of man.
Thus Jesus Christ has honored Gods Law, by s^tisfying of divine Justice, and
now Jesus Christ has power to pardon whom he will.


Pen. These are strange and deep things which you say: in this way I do see
that a person is found that is able to pay a ransom to God, and satisfy his
Justice. But still I am in the dark about my self, how shall I be inter^sted in
this Redemption wrought by Jesus Christ? If you have obtained it, I have some
hope that so may I. I pray tell me how I may be m^de partaker of this great
Redemption, from the condemnation of sin pronounced against me by the Law of
God.


Wab. According to my poor ability, as well as I can I will tell you, and I
will tell you ^ow I have obtained it, and in the same way you also may obtain
it.


Pen. O how this hope, by your experience, begins to raise my heart. I pray
go on and declare it to me.


Wab. God has made a new Covenant of grace which he has opened in the Gospel,
and Jesus Christ has published it to all the world: and the sum of it is this;
That whosoever shall penitently turn from sin toward God, and believe in Jesus
Christ, he shall have a pardon of all his sins, and be partaker of eternal
life, through the grace and mercy of God in Jesus Christ. John 3.16. God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever ^elieveth
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.


Pen. This puts me into another great difficulty: can I penitently turn from
sin, and believe in Jesus Christ? Alas, I know not how to go about such a work,
much less do I know how to accomplish the same; therefore I still am under
great straights, and know not what to do.


Wab. You say true, it is a work past your ability to do: But Jesus Christ has
undert^ken two great works in the salvation of sinners. The first is to pacify
Gods Justice, and satisfy the Law, and to reconcile God toward us; and that he
has done and finished effectually, when he was here on earth. 2. Christ has
undertaken to conquer the world of all Gods Elect (for it is only the Elect of
God whom Christ has undertaken for) and the Father and the Son have sent forth
God the holy Ghost to effect this work: for none but God himself is able to
convert ^ Soul, and create faith in the heart of man. We cannot do it of our
selves, neither you nor I can do it, but by the assistance of the Spirit of
God, by the Word of God.


Pen. Still the difficulty lies before me, I am at a loss, and know not what
to do. I fully believe I am not able to do it my self.


Wab. I will help you as well as I can; and the Lord help you by his Word and
Spirit. Your heart is now (in some measure) already turned away from sin; that
part of the work is wrought in your heart, which I will demonstrate to you
thus: I ask you, will you hereafter live and walk in the ways of sin as you
have formerly done?


Pen. Oh no, no: I hope God will keep me and help me; I will never live again
as I have f^^merly done, I will bind my self from it. I abhor to do so, I will
forsake them for ever: Lord help me so to do


Wab. Well; therefore you are now converted from your sins: and who wrought
this great Change in you? it was not your self did it, nor was it I that did
it; I only opened unto you the word of God, but the Spirit of God, by the
conviction of the Law, and by the word of God, has wrought this work in you.


Pen. I cannot gainsay you, I yield to what you say, and wonder at it.


Wab. In the some manner the Spirit of God by the word is able to cre^te Faith
in you to believe in Jesus Christ. This work the Lord uses to work in us by
the Promises of the Gospel. Now I will propound unto you at present but one
Promise, Mat. 11.28, 29. Come unto me all ye that la^our, and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. Now I ask you, Are
you weary and heavy laden with your sins?


Pen. Oh yes, God knows I am so; I never f^lt the like distress in my Soul
since I was born, sin is the bitterest thing in the world to my Soul.


Wab. Then hearken to this call of Christ, for he calls you in particular to
come to him, and this coming is believing: are you willing to come to Christ,
and ask a pardon of him, and beg his mercy?


Pen. Yea, with all my heart. Lord help me.


Wab. Then see the next words, what he promises, I will give you rest.


Pen. Oh Lord let it be so, according to thy Word and Promise, thy will be done.


Wab. Well, wait here, and see if God does not quiet your Soul, and give you
rest. Mean while I will further ask you in the next words, Are you willing to
take upon you Christ his yoke, and this yoke consists of two parts: 1. The
yoke of Commandments, to do whatever he commands. And 2. his yoke of
Sufferings in this world for his Name sake: for now that you are converted, the
carnal world will hate you, mock you, injure you, speak all evil against you,
and it may be if they can they will kill you, as they did Christ; but are you
willing ^o su^^er all for Jesus Christ his sake, who has died for you? And
further, are you willing to learn meekness of Jesus Christ? For they are the
next words; and I do assure you, that you will have great need of patience,
when you have done all the duties he commands, to suffer patiently what God
himself shall inflict upon you by sicknesses, crosses and temptations, or what
wicked men shall inflict upon you.


Pen. These things which you speak are against the flesh and f^a^e that I used
to be in; and I do find that they are not so fully killed, but that they have
a little stirring in them when you propound these cases to me.

But the experience I have now found of the love of God, and of Jesus Christ to
my Soul, does lay such an engagement upon my heart, that I will, by his grace
and assistance, be for him only, serve him only, do all that ever he shall
command me, suffer whatever he shall impose upon me; I will no more be for my
self, but for him, who has done all this for me. Oh what shall I render unto
the Lord for all his benefits to my poor Soul!


Wab. We are surprised by the night, we must rest under these Trees this night.
I do account this day well spent, though we have made but little progress
toward the place of our intendment: but I have been about the work I came
abroad upon, though not the persons I intended. Thus God does overruled the
ways of men; he foreseeth and orders that which we had no thoughts upon: and
therefore in that we have spent this day in such Conference and Discourse,
wherein we have seen so much of the presence of Christ with us; let us now
spend this night in prayers and praises unto the Lord, who has found us before
we sought for him. You were going about another business, you little thought of
finding Jesus Christ by the way, and finding mercy to your Soul, a pardon of
your sins, and to become a praying Indian.


Pen. Your discourse does heighten my admiration. I acknowledge God has
thought of me when I thought not of him; he had a care of my Soul when I had no
care of my self; God has plucked me out of darkness, and brought me into a
most wonderful light, that I should be forced to see the wonderful things of
Gods Law, and of my eternal condemnation by it, my helpless and hopeless
condition that I was in.

And then, that the Lord should open unto me a possibility of escape, that a
ransom and remedy might be found by the infinite wisdom and mercy of God; and
that Jesus Christ had not only accomplished that great work, but offered the
fruit and benefit of it to me, and called me to rest in him, and to betrust my
Soul with him, for pardon of all my sins, and for eternal life in Jesus Christ.
These things are matter of my admiration, and shall be to all eternity. My life
remaining shall be spent in admiring, and in obeying and suffering, as you have
now taught me; I shall account nothing ^oo dear for Christ, who has not
accounted his own most precious life too dear for me. Whereas I am now
instructed, that he being God and Man in one person, his life was of more value
then all the lives of all mankind; and that he did not forbear to offer that
precious life for me; I must, I will, by his grace assisting, admire at this
mercy for ever: and therefore the motion that you made of spending this night
in prayer and praises unto his holy Name, it is a most acceptable motion to my
heart. My experience suggesteth unto me matter abundantly to pray and praise
his Name, but my ignorance is such as that I cannot tell how to utter my mind
in words of knowledge suitable unto so great mercies as I have now experienced.


Wab. Your discourse does lead me out to inform you in a great point of the
grace and kingdom of Jesus Christ, and that is the gift and grace of Prayer,
which the Spirit of Jesus Christ teaches every new born Soul to perform: for
so the Scripture says, Romans 8.15. He has given the Spirit of his Son, whereby
we cry, and crying is an earnest manner of praying; and the matter of our cry
is to s^y Abba, Father, that is, to call God our Father, and to ask him a
Childs portion in the Name of Jesus Christ, as he has promised, that whatever
we ask in the Name of Jesus Christ, it shall be surely granted, either the same
thing or a better; for we are foolish children, and know not what is best for
our selves, but our Father does: and therefore when we make our prayers and
request to God, we must leave the matter to his love and wisdom, to give us
what, and when, and how he will.

And because we are ignorant what to pray for, therefore the Spirit of God who
dwells in our heart, he is called the Spirit of Grace and of Supplication;
and Romans 8.26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we
know not what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings, which cannot be uttered. And he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he
makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God. Where we see
that our weakness is supplied by the assistance of the Spirit, and he helps
us to pray for such things as please God; and in such a manner as pleases God.
And this is the condition of every true converted believer, that he can pray,
and desires to pray, and is ever lifting up his heart to G^d in prayer: and
therefore I like it well that my motion of spending this night in prayer, is so
acceptable to you, a good sign it is that the Spirit of Jesus Christ has taken
possession of your Soul.


Pen. This little sight and experience I have, has so filled my heart with a
sense of my own vileness, that I see matter of endless confession; and I see so
much nothingness in my self, that I see endless matter of petition and
supplication; and I see my self so infinitely obliged to God for the riches of
his free grace to me a rebellious worm, that I see infinite matter of praise,
thanksgiving and admiration: My heart also longs after others, that th^^ may
be as I am. I pray tell me, what is my duty in that respe^^ to pray for others?
my Relations, my Friends, my Neighbou^^ and for all?


Wab. Christ has taught us, When thou art converted, then streng^^^en thy
brother, Luke 22.32, therefore you must pray for all t^^ Church of God; you
must especially pray for them that are wea^ and tempted, and afflicted; and you
must pray for them that a^^ not yet converted, and for all Gods people, and for
all Gods cau^^ in all the world, and for the fulfilling of all Gods Promises.
The^^ is a world of matter to pray for: and for Kings and Rulers in ^ special
manner.


Pen. I feel my heart to answer your words like an echo; m^ heart answers, All
these things I desire to pray for. But alas, ^ am ignorant of fit words in
prayer, and therefore I do request o^ you, first do you pray, and set me a
pattern. Waban prayeth^


Pen. Many whole nights have I spent waking, sometime in hun^^ing, sometime
worse, in dancing and other sinful revels; but ^ never spent a night so well in
my life before: it is the first nigh^ of my new life; I have begun to live
well, oh how full of fea^, and care and desire my heart is, that I may go on
according to thi^ good beginning. I hope the sweet savor of this good
beginning to live well, shall abide with me, and I desire your help and counsel
how I may so perform it.


Wab. Our state in this world is not perfect, corruption is killed but in part;
there be old roots remaining, which upon occasion offered will still be
stirring, acting, appearing, as a tree that is cut down, the old roots will be
growing, which must be kept dow^ with a speedy cutting off. A field that is
well weeded, will quickly produce new weeds again, out of that natural
propensity of the earth to bring forth weeds; but a watchful and diligent
husbandman will be often weeding over his Corn fields: and so will ou^ hearts
be sending forth new weeds of sin, but we must be daily diligent to watch and
weed them out; our hearts have a natural propensity to sin, and therefore must
be kept with all diligence. An^ therefore that is the first counsel that I give
you, out of the experience of my own naughty heart.


Pen. Your words do put a fear into my heart, I know that old customs of sin
are very hardly left, and I have been so long accustomed to sin, that I am
afraid of my self.


Wab. Fear is a good watchman; Happy is the man that feare^^ always: and let
this put you on to a second Counsel that I giv^ you, Be much and often in
prayer, and that not only among other in Family Worship, and Publick-worship,
but also, and most frequently in secret prayer, for so Christ has commanded,
Mat. 6^^ and Christ himself has set us an example, who spent whole nights in
prayer.


Pen. The night spent in prayer has let me find a sweet taste in it, though I
do already find that it is a weariness to my flesh. I thank you for this
Counsel, I desire I may remember and do it. What further Counsel will you give
me?


Wab. You must be much conversant in the Word of God, and though you cannot yet
read the Word, yet you must get the help of others, and learn the word of God
by heart; and you must meditate upon the same night and day, for so David did,
Psalm. 1.2. And the meditation on the Word will sanctify the heart, and kill
corruption, and will mightily help you to subdue it.


Pen. I doubt it will be difficult for me to learn to read, I am dull of
capacity.


Wab. A strong desire, diligence and constancy, will obtain any thing: and you
must pray God to teach you, and to open your heart to learn: Iam. 1.5. If any
of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and
up^raideth not, and it shall be given him. And for a further help to you, my
fourth Counsel is, That you diligently learn the Catechize, and by learning to
read that, you will learn to read and understand the whole Bible.


Pen. I see my self very ignorant, and therefore I am very desirous to learn
Catechism, because I have heard and do perceive that is the foundation of all
knowledge in Religion, being wisely gathered out of the Scripture.


Wab. You say right about Catechism; we do therefore teach it our Children,
that the principles of good knowledge may be sown and rooted in them from a
Child: and for that reason also do we send them to School, to learn to read
the Word of God, that they may be acquainted with the Word from a Child.


Pen. Oh what a loss is this to me, that I am to begin to learn Catechize and
the Word of God now I am a man, which I might have been acquainted with from a
Child, had I been brought up among the praying Indians. How happy are your
Children that are thus brought up. I suppose you are very diligent in this
matter in Training up of your Children.


Wab. We have great cause to judge our selves for too much negligence in this
point. A fifth Counsel I give you is, That you be constant and diligent in the
exercise of the Worship of God in your Family, in these points: 1. You must
Morning and Evening pray in your Family, and teach them in Catechism, and
reading of the Scriptures. 2. Always before and after Meat you must pray and
give thanks to God.


Pen. Oh what an holy life do the praying Indians live. Lord ^each me and help
me thus to do. What further Counsel do you ^ive me?


Wab. A sixth Counsel I give you is, That you do carefully re^ember the
Sabbath Day to keep it holy, and to come to the public Assembly both Forenoon
and Afternoon, constantly and timely, and there diligently to attend the
worship of God.


Pen Oh how my heart approves of this Cou^^el. Have you any further Counsel to
give me?


Wab. One thing more; Let all your Conversation be a good example to others,
and labor on all occasions to do good to others.


Pen. I requ^st this of you, that as we travel this day in our journey, you
would teach me the Principles of Catechism.


Wab. I do well like of your motion, its a good subject of discourse as we are
in our way.

Thus are they employed till they come at their journeys end.


Waban. Nish^hkou. Penoo^ot. Waban. MY aged Uncle, I am glad that it has
pleased God once more to give me an opportunity to see you alive in this world.
It is not unknown unto you, that I and many others have undertaken a new way of
life, which is known to many by the name of Praying to God. The way that I
formerly, and you still live in, is a way o^ worshipping the Devil, it is a way
of darkness and sin: and though it is a way pleasant and easy to the flesh,
yet it leads to destruction and eternal torments. Man is made for another
life after this life is ended; and though our body dies and turns to dust,
yet the Soul is immortal, it dies not, but at the death of the body it
departs to a place of eternal being, either in glory, or in misery. If we
pray to God with a right ^eart, peniten^ly turn from sin to God, and believe in
Jesus Christ, then we shall have a pardon granted us, and eternal happiness
with Jesus Christ, But if we do not turn to God, but worship and serve the
Devil, and walk in the ways of sin, then at death our Soul must be dragged to
hell, and there tormented for ever among the Devils, whom we have obeyed and
served in this life. These* things, and many more, we do perfectly know, and
believe to be true by the Word of God, which is the Sun-light of the Soul, even
as the Sun is the great light of the outward world.

God has put it into my heart to desire that your Soul might be ble^^ed for
ever; and the Church has sent me, and I come in the Name of Jesus Christ to
tell you these things, and beseech you to turn from these vain and evil ways,
and to believe in Jesus Christ, that your sins may be pardoned, and that your
Soul may be saved in eternal glory.


Nish. Your love and desire of my good, I have no reason but, to accept with
kindness; but me thinks one thing in your discourse is doubtful. We see with
our eyes, and know certainly that the body dies, and turns to rottenness and
dust, and why may not the Soul d^ so likewise? we see not what becomes of it,
and to make such a stir, and change our course upon uncertainties, I have no
liking to it, my Age inclines me rather to be quiet, and not meddle with such
un^een intricacies, fitter for younger heads to mind.


Wab. Our bodies are the product of the seed of man, and that is made out of
the food we eat, and our food grows out of the earth, so that our bodies are
made of refined earth; and therefore at death turn to earth again, out of which
it was made, and so God speaks, Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall
return. But the Soul is not so; it is a Spirit, of a purer nature then earthly
things, and it is immediately created by God, and therefore dies not. Besides,
we are assured by many infallible proofs out of the Word of God, and by
evidence of good Reason, that the Soul is immortal, which point we are taught
in our Catechism. And not only so, but God has taught us, that at the end of
the world the body shall be raised again out of the dust, and the Soul and body
joined together again, and then the person shall be judged by Jesus Christ,
according to their deeds done in the flesh: those that live and die in their
sins, shall be turned into hell, to be tormented by and with the Devils; but
they that turn to God, and believe in Jesus Christ, shall be judged to go with
Christ to heaven, and be ever with him in eternal glory.

Therefore this consideration does more sharpen my request and entreaties of
you, how shall I endure to see this body of yours, which I so respect and love,
and that Soul of yours also, to go away unto eternal torments. And I pray you
consider what a wound and torment i^ will then be, to remember, I was exhorted
and entreated to turn to God and live; mercy in Christ was offered me, but I
refused it: and therefore deservedly do you lose what you refused, and
deservedly you suffer that torment you did choose, rather then to trouble your
self with this business of praying to God, and believing in Jesus Christ.


Nish. These are great and deep things that I understand not: you young men
have your blood warm, and your wits fresh and ripe, you can read and
understand these things. I am old and cold and dry, and half dead already, I
have not strength enough left to be whetted up to such a new edge; let me alone
to die in quiet, why should I take upon me such a disquiet to my mind, and
disturbance to my self, and to my people? I have two Sons young and active men,
I am very willing that they should take up this new way, persuade them to it if
you will, but as for me, I am too old for such an undertaking.


Wab. You do well to permit your sons to enter into a way of wisdom, and pray
unto God; but I would propose two requests unto you: 1. To do well for your
(...) as well as for your Sons, for your soul is as prece^o^s as (...) And 2.
the most effe^tu^l means to pe^swad^ your S^^s unto this way of wisdom, is for
you to s^t them an (...); i^ you should choose this way, then it is like that
they would follow your ex^mpl^, but if you refuse it your self, ^here i^ the
les^ ^ope ^^at they will c^oose it: for it is a way hard to the f^e^^, and
requires much subduing of lusts, which will rather be done in your d^crepi^
Age, then by them in their flourishing youth.


Nish. I a^ weary, and need some food, and it is like so do you after your
travel, and here is Meat set before us, therefore I pray ea^, and you are
welcome.


Wab. I pray you let us eat like praying Indians. God has taught us, that
always when we eat we should pray and give thanks to God.


Nish. I pray do so, it pleases me well, though I cannot do so my self, for I
am ignorant of the ways of praying to God.


Waban prays for a blessing, and then they eat: and after meat does the same
again. Pen. Aged Sachem, now that you and we are refreshed and strengthened ^y
this food, I will declare unto you strange News, to which I entreat your
attendance a little while, and all the people here present. I am like a man
that was looking for a shell, and found a Pearl of inestimable value, whereby
he became very rich and renowned. I had a small occasion to come and visit you,
gra^^ Sachem, and by the way I met with this good man, a messenger o^ God; by
whose discourse my blind eyes are opened, my dead heart is made alive, my lame
legs are enabled to walk in the way to heaven, where I shall enjoy an eternal
Ki^^dome. Many miracles ^ave been wrought upon me by the power of Gods Word
spoken to me by this man: and that I may stir up your heart, and the hearts of
the people here present to give diligent heed to what he says, I will d^cl^re
unto you what passed between us. I was a^ you are, I lived as you live, I did
as you do, and as the rest of ou^ Countrymen and Neighbors do; I followed the
sports, pleasures, vanities, and courses that other men, and you, to this day
walk in^ But I was not aware how blind, and dead, and vile, and wicked I was
in the sight of God; nor was I aw^re that I was running o^ in a pleasant
delightful way, which led m^ down to hell and eternal damnation.

But when I met this man, he discoursed with me about these things; he opened
unto me, by the Word of God, the great Majesty of God, his Holiness, Justice,
and Goodness; how God h^^ made thi^ great world, and all things in it, both
things above, an^ things below; how ^e made man an eminent Creature, gave him
dominion over all the creatures here below; and gave him an holy, ju^^ and good
Law, in Ten Commandments, under the order of a Covenant of Works, and if he
kept and obeyed this Law, he should live in glory and happiness for ever, but
if he did break this Law, and sin against God, that great Majesty of heaven,
then he should be answerably and justly pun^^hed with eternal torments in hell
fire, with the Devil and his Angels for evermore: and this L^w was for himself
and all his posterity, in whose stead he sto^d as a public person.

Now he informed me, that Ada^ the first man sinned by the temptation of evil
Angels, which rebelled against God, and tu^ned Devils: by their temptation Adam
^inned, and turned rebel against God, and served, believed and obey^d the
Devil, and therefore by the Law of God he was judged and condemned, and all his
posterity. All this I found to be true in ^y own experience, for I went on in
the same rebellion, breaking the holy Law of God every day both in thought,
word and deed, obeying the Devil and his temptations, serving the lusts of my
flesh, and fil^hy mi^de: I walked in the broad, easy, pleasant way that
leads to destruction; so that I have deserved to be damned a thousand
thousand times: and the greatness of the Majesty of God against whom I sinned,
did breed terror in my soul; my just condemnation by the Law of God, was
evident to me as the light; Gods pure and ^nchangeable Justice, which sentenced
me by the Law unto hell, I saw I could not possibly answer, seeing I am a poor
finite worm, and what have I to satisfy infinite offended Justice? and
therefore my soul mourned and lamented, and sunk into despair; for Gods Justice
is unchangeable, and his Law must be satisfied, which I am never able to do,
and therefore I must be eternally damn^d under that just sentence. I d^rst not
pray God to pardon my transgression, by any absolute sovereign act of mercy,
for then he should have offended his own Justice, which is unchangeable, and
abolished his own Law, whose perfection is such that it must be fulfilled and
satisfied; and to satisfy Gods just Law, was not in the power of any finite
creature, Man or Angel: and therefore I despaired, no ransom could be found in
all the world for me a poor sinner. Oh the bitterness that my soul felt, in the
horror of my damned estate! No tongue can utter what my soul felt. I had a
taste of hell torments in my soul; my meditation of Gods Omniscience, whereby
he knew all my sins, not only open, but secret ones, brought innumerable sins
to my remembrance, one of which was enough to damn me, but I had mountains of
guilt heaped upon my distressed soul; the impossibility for me to satisfy
divine Justice, and the impossibility of pardon without satisfaction, because
God cannot be unjust, and his Law is unchangeable: Such meditations cast me
into the horrible pit of darkness and desperation. The redemption of the soul
is precious, it cease for ever, Psalm. 498.

Then God opened the mouth of this dear Servant of his, who told me that the
infinite mercy and wisdom of God had found out a ransom, a way to satisfy
Justice, and fulfill the Law, and to save poor condemned sinners, and that he
himself had found mercy in that way. This bred some hope in my soul, and stayed
me from sinking quite down, when I heard of a possibility: but still I was in
distressing doubt and fear that it was but some delusion, because I could not
see a possibility for Man or Angel, or any Creature, to satisfy and give a
ransom to infinite Justice.

Then he declared to me, that it is true that no Creature could give a ransom
to satisfy Justice, but God himself was able to satisfy the infinite Justice
of God. To that I yielded, that God himself might satisfy his Justice, but
still I was in the dark, I could not see this could possibly be. Then he opened
me, that adored Doctrine of God his being One and Three; how God was one in
Essence, three in Persons, God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost;
how the Father does by an eternal in^ellectual act conceive the Image of
Himself, as being the only adequate Object he understands himself; and this is
called the Bege^ting of the Son, by an intellectual conception of his own
Image: and these two Subsistencies, do by an eternal act of Volition love each
other; and this Love is the third Person in Trinity, proceeding from both the
Father and the Son.

Now the eternal Majesty of God agreed within himself, that God the Son, the
second Person in Trinity, should assume humane Nature to himself, and become a
man, subject to the Law. This glorious Person is the greatest subject that ever
the Law had, and this glorious Person is able perfectly to fulfill the Law, and
perfectly to pay a ra^some satisfactory to infinite Justice, who has done it.
This depth of divine Wisdom my soul admired, and shall do to eternity.

But still I was at a loss how I should be interested in the ransom that this
glorious Person has paid. Then did this Messenger of God declare unto me, that
this glorious Person Jesus Christ had undertaken both parts of this work: First
to atone, and reconcile God to man, by paying the ransom required, and by
perfect fulfilling the Law: Secondly, to subdue the soul and will of man to
turn, and submit to be reconciled to God. But this work of converting ^ soul to
God is such, that as no man can convert himself, so no other Creature is able
to do it, only God himself can do it; and for that end, both the Father and
Son have sent forth the holy Ghost, the eternal Spirit, to work upon the hearts
of men, and to create the work of Faith in them by the Word, and then to take
possession of, and dwell in believing souls, to mortify their lusts, to
sanctify their hearts and lives, and to lead them in the way of grace unto
glory.

And he further declared to me, that this blessed Spirit of G^d, by the Word of
God, had already begun this great work in my soul: for a new light is set up in
my soul, a work beyond the reach of man; and that light has convinced me of
sin, and of my my damned estate by sin; it had made a separa^ion and divorce
betwixt sin and my soul; it had cut me off the old stock, and l^id my soul down
at the foot of Christ, capable with all humble thankfulness to accept
salvation, not by any merit of mine, but by free grace of Christ unto a vile
and unworthy sinner. This I could not deny, but I did find such conviction,
and such a submission to Christ: and this he declared to be the first step and
beginning of the work of sound Conversion.

I crave your patience for a few words more. Then he proceeded to show me that
the work was finished by the Promise, which also the Spirit of God does bring
home unto the soul, and makes up the match betwixt Christ and the soul. And to
that purpose he brought Mat 11.28, 29. by which Text he showed me, as in a
glass, 1. The distress my soul was in. 2. The call of Christ to such distressed
soul. 3. The promise of Rest to such as come to him. 4. The obligation to learn
meekness, both to do and suffer the will of Christ. And here my soul rests.



Ah friends, we poor Indians are great sinners, but Christ is great salvation
for the greatest sinners. What ^inite creature can outsin infinite satisfaction?

Nish. I see you are strongly changed and transported: but my feeble Age
needs rest, and so may you also by this time.


Wab. Aged Uncle, to morrow is the Sabbath Day: if you like of it, order all
your people to come together in the morning, and by the Lords assistance I will
further teach you by the Word of God.


Nish. I like it well. Send out to all parts of the Town, that all meet to
morrow morning.


The Sabbath. Many being met, Waban. THe Lord has appointed that in our
public Worship first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all men: For Kings, and for all that are in authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable li^e in all godliness and honesty. For
this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior: Who will have all
men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.^, 2, 3,
4. According to this appointment, let us pray. Which finished,

He took that Text, Matthew. 20.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. In these words we may
observe these things: 1. The Vineyard where men labor, is the Church, and this
wa^ of praying to God; and shows that it is a laborious and a good work, and
will cause us to bring forth good fruits, grapes and wine, which is pleasing to
God and man. But beware of bringing forth sour grapes; especially suffer no
briars and thorns, but cu^ them down, and root them up, and cast them out. 2.
The Lord of this Vineyard is Jesus Christ, who calls all me^ to come into
this his Vineyard, and do these works. And th^^ day I do in the Name of the
Lord Jesus call you all to pray to God, come and work in this Vineyard. Hearken
to this Call, and be no longer idle, follow your sins no longer, you have lived
in (...) long enough, stay no longer, but come in when you are called. Happy
are you, if you obey and come; woe be to you, if you refuse. 3. Here be the
several seasons of men's coming in, or the sever^^ Ages of men that do come in.
1. Some come in while it is morning, that is, while they b^ young: therefore I
call you Boys, Youths and Girls, come yo^ unto the Lords Vineyard, and give
unto God the first fruits o^ your days. 2. The Lord went forth at the third
hour, and called in youn^ men and young women into his Vineyard: Hearken
therefore yo^ young men and young women to the Call of God, and come in. 3. The
Lord went forth at the ninth hour, that is, he called i^ men and women full
grown, to ripeness of parts, and strength; you are called this day to come into
the Lords Vineyard; be yo^ persuaded to come in, and serve the Devil no longer:
now tu^^ unto the Lord. 4. The Lord went forth the eleventh hour, that is, a
little bfor^ night; and this does mean you old men, and old women, com^ you
into the Lords Viney^rd: you see the Lord will accept you (...) you come. Do
not think you are too old to serve the Lord; (...) your days be near finished,
you had the more need come in quic^^ ly, lest you die in your sins, and perish
for ever.




When he had finished, an Objection was made by one; We d^^ not come in to pray
to God, for we hear you are very severe if any (...) found in sin, of lust or
the like, you Whip them and punish them, (...) makes us afraid to pray to God.

^nsw. Wab. God has appointed punishments of sin to be Ph^ sick for their
souls; and though Physic be bitter and sharp, y^^ its very wholesome, good and
needful. If you were invited (...) dwell at such a Town where there is a
Physician, would you sa^ No, I will not dwell there, because if I be sick I
must take Physic^^ sure you would therefore go dwell at that place. So it is in
th^^ case; you should therefore desire to pray to God, because they use Physic
to heal the sickness of your souls.

Afternoon. They being met, Waban having first prayed, then takes this Text,
Psalm. 2.8, 9, 10, 11.

In these words see these three things: 1. Christ Jesus takes possession of
the heathen, and utmost ends of the earth: and this is one description of our
Country. And now Jesus Christ calls us to come to him. Some of us have
submitted unto Christ, and he has mercifully accepted us, and so he will
accept you, if you will come in unto him. 2. See what Christ will do to them
that will not come in; He will break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in
pieces like a potters vessel. Thus Christ will deal with our sins, if we submit
to him. But if we will not submit to him, he will thus deal with our persons,
and destroy them that refuse to serve him, Luke 19.27. 3. Here is the effect of
Gods severity against sinners; Be wise therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed, ye
Judges of the Earth: serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Do
not say, Because Christ is severe against our sins, therefore we will not come
unto him, but fly from him: do not so, for then he will destroy you; but come
trembling to him, and say, Lord take away our sins by sharpness, that our souls
may be saved for ever.


DIALOG. III.
Anthony and William Ahauton were sent to Paganoohket, where Philip is Sachem.
When they first came to the Town, they went to the Sachems house.

Anthony. William. Philip Keitassoot. All the Company. Anthony. SAchem, we
salute you in the Lord, and we declare unto you, that we are sent by the
Church, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to call you, and beseech you to
turn from your vain conversation unto God, to pray unto God, and to believe in
Jesus Christ for the pardon of your si^s, and for the salvation of your soul.
We do unto you, according to the holy Example which we find, John 1.40, to 47.
where Andrew called Peter, and Christ himself called Philip, and Philip called
Nathaniel. So we are come this day unto you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, to
call you to come unto the Lord, and serve him. This Argument we persuade you
by, because we hear that many of your people do de^^re to p^ay to God, only
they depend upon you. We pray you to consider, that your love to your people
should oblige you to do them all the good you can. In this point, it lies in
your hand to do the greatest good in the world unto them, to do good to their
souls as well as to their bodies, and to do them good to eternity, as well as
in this present world. All this good you will do to your people, if you will
accept of this offer of mercy; you will not only your self turn from sin unto
God, to serve the true and living God, but all your people will turn to God
with you, so that you may say unto the Lord, Oh Lord Jesus, behold here am I,
and all the people which thou have given me: we all come into thy service, and
promise to pray unto God so long as we live. Oh how welcome will you be unto
the Lord? And oh how happy and joyful will ^ll your people be, when they and
their Sachem are all owned by God, to be in the number of his Children and
Servants. It will be a joy to all the English Magistrates, and Ministers, and
Churches, and good people of the Land, to hear that Philip and all his people
are turned to God, and become praying Indians. We read in Luke 15.7. that
there is joy in heaven over one poor sinner that repents, and turns unto
God; what great joy will it then be in heaven, when so great a number as you
and your people be, are ^urned unto the Lord, and b^come praying Indians!


Keit. Often have I heard of this great matter of praying unto God, and
hitherto I have refused. Mr. Eliot junior, while he was alive, attempted it,
but I did not hearken unto his persuasion. Old Mr. Eliot himself did come unto
me, he was in this Town, and did persuade me; but we were then in our Sports,
wherein I have much delighted, and in that temptation, I confess, I did neglect
and despise the offer, and lost that opportunity. Since that time God has
afflicted and chastised me, and my heart does begin to break, and I have some
serious thoughts of accepting the offer, and turning to God, to become a
praying Indian, I my self, and all my people. But I have some great Objections,
which I cannot tell how to get over, which are still like great Rocks in my
way, over which I cannot climb; and if I should, I fear I shall fall down the
precipice on the further side, and be spoiled and undone: by venturing to
climb, I shall catch a deadly fall to me and my posterity

The first Objection that I have is this, Because you praying Indians do reject
your Sachems, and refuse to pay them Tribute; inso^uch that if any of my people
turn to pray unto God, I do reckon that I have lost him, he will not longer own
me for his Sachem, nor pay me any Tribute. And hence it will come to pass, that
if I should pray to God, and all my people with me, I must become a^ ^ common
man among them, and so lose all my Power and Authority over them, This is such
a temptation as neither I, nor any of the great Sachems can tell how to get
over: were this tempta^ion removed, the way would be more easy and open for me
to turn praying Indian. I begin to have same good likance of the way, bu^ I am
loath to buy it at so dear a rate.


Will Though I am younger then my Brother with whom I am sent, yet I know my
self to be in a clearer capacity to answer to this case, then my Brother is,
because Cutsh^^oquin, the first great Sachem that prayed to God, and after him
Chikk^tab^k, and after him Msqu^mmog, were Sachems in the Town where I live,
and they were my Sachems, and I well know how the praying Indians did carry the
matter toward them.

And first, I say, if any of the praying Indians should be disobedient (in
lawful things) and refuse to pay Tribute unto their Sachems, it is not their
Religion and praying to God that teache^ them so to do, but their Corruptions;
it is a sickness that needs Physic to cure it, and not allowance and
countenance to defend it: I am sure the Word of God commands all to be
subject to the higher powers, and to pay them Tribute, Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5 6
7. And Christ Jesus has commanded to give unto Caesar the things that belong to
Caesar, and to God the things that belong to God. And thus we have been taught.
All the time that Cutshamoqui^ lived, our Town did always honor, obey, and
pay Tribute unto him; and so far as I know, so did all the praying Indians
which belonged to his Jurisdiction After his decease we chose Iosi^^, or
Chikkatabuk, but not until he had promised before the Governor and Magistrates
of the Massachusetts at Boston, To pray unto God, and to defend and govern us in
praying to God all the days of his life. And though he fell back from his
promise, yet our Town always owned him. And when he began to recover himself a
little before his death, the people were ready to adhere unto him, and
acknowledge him. In his life time we accepted his Brother, at his request ^ and
Msquammog his leaving us, is his own act and not ours. And therefore, beloved
Sachem, let not your heart fear that praying to God will alienate your people
from you; nay, be assured it will more firmly oblige their hearts unto you.
Thi^ I know by experience, for the more beneficent you are unto them, the more
obligation you lay upon them. And what greater beneficence can you do unto
them, then to further them in Religion, whereby they may be converted,
pardoned, sanctified and saved.


Ant All that my Brother has said I second, and can bear witness unto it;
only I will add one thing more, of which I know more then he does, because it
was acted in the Town where I live. There was some subtle endeavor to have
mingled the praying and non-praying Indians, and to have reduced the praying
Indians under the power of non praying Indians, contrary to public and evident
Conditions. Against this, did some of the wiser sort (who saw the Trap) firmly*
stand; giving this Reason: The Fox came to the Lambs door, and would fain come
in, but the Lambs refused. Then the Fox desired to let him put in but one Claw;
the Lambs refused, saying, If he get in but one Claw* he will not rest till he
have wrigled in his whole body. Stop waters while they be small and supera^le.
And this I say unto you, beloved Sachem, you shall find none truer to you then
praying Indians: but know withal, that G^d teaches them by his Word to be
wise, and they will not easily be abused.


Keit. If that be true which you say, all is not true that is talked against
the praying Indians; and indeed I do see that they are the worser sort of men
that do speak so ill of them, the wiser sort are not so minded. I have nothing
within the compass of my knowledge, to gainsay that which you have spoken; and
I know not but that a course may be taken to oblige both sides, as you took a
course to oblige your Sachem. I am ready to think that the Governor and
Magistrates of the Massachusetts would as well oblige you to him, as him to you.


Ant. Yea, yea, so it was, and most equal that it should be so.


Keit. I have another Objection stronger then this; and that is, If I pray to
God, then all my men that are willi^g to pray to God will (as you say) stick to
me, and be true to me; but all such as love not, and care not to pray to God,
especially such as hate praying to G^d, all th^se will forsake me, yea will go
and adjoyn themselves unto other Sachems that pray not to God: and so it will
come to pass, that if I be a praying Sachem* I shall be a poor and weak one,
and easily be trod upon by others, who are like to be more potent and numerous;
and by this means my Tribute will be small, and my people few, and I shall be ^
great loser by praying to God. In the way I now am, I am full and potent, but
if I change my way and pray to God* I shall be empty and weak.


Ant. I confess that this is a strong temptation, and requires much
Self-denial and Faith to conflict with it. I pray consider what Counsel Jesus
Christ gives in this case, Matthew. 16.24. Let a man deny himself, take up his
cross, and follow me. I confess that this is harsh Doctrine ^o flesh and blood;
but I will tell you a Cordial against it, Matthew. 19.29* Every one that has
forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or
Children, or Lands for ^y Names sake, shall receive an hundred fold^ and shall
inherit everlasting life. Trust God in this Promise, and see if he do not
perform it. And be assured, it is better to trust God in a way of well doing,
then to trust to wicked and vile men in a way of sin. If God will punish you,
all your men, especially the worst of them, cannot save you; but if all your
men should forsake you, and yet you choose Christ, and be true to him, then
Christ will certainly take care of you. And further, this is but a fear that
humane Reason makes; try the Lord, it may be he will make all your men to
stick the closer to you. You think the better sort will stick to you, it is but
the loss of the worser sort, at the worst, and if you trust in the Lord, he can
overruled the hearts of the worst of men, and they shall no^ forsake you.
Besides you may put it to the trial, put it to the public Vote; if you should
do so, I do think that they will all promise to stick unto you if you pray to
God: and then this Objection is cut off in the beginning of the work. Consider
also what Christ ha^h said, Mat. 11.29, 30. he commands such as come to him, to
take up my yoke, and learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly of heart, and ye
shall find rest to your souls: For my yoke is easy, and my burden light. You
fear that ^his will be burdensome, heavy, and to your loss; try the Lord if he
do not make this Objection easy and light unto you: and see if it do not prove
that you are more afraid then hurt. Christ will not suffer any body to lose by
him, at last. Nay, you shall be a certain and a great gainer by it, both in
this world, and in the world to come.


Will. As my Brother has said, I acknowledge this to be (in appearance at
least) a strong temptation. This was the temptation of Josias, that drew him to
his Apostasy, he forsook his praying people, and adhered unto those who did not
pray to God: but this was because his own he^rt did not love praying to God,
and did better like of the wicked ways of the non praying Indians. But what
got he at l^st by adhering to the worst sort of his Subjects? When he was in
distress they all forsook him, which his praying Subjects would not have done,
if he would have adhered unto them. Likewise this very thing which you propose,
was a temptation to Cutshamoquin; His praying to God did make such of his
people as loved not that way, to waver in their sub^ection to him, and it did
begin to make him waver in the matter of praying to God: but God did mercifully
preserve him, and kept him steadfast to his dying day. But this he did, he went
sometimes among them, he used them kindly, he treated them with gentle
persuasion, without compulsion; by such ways he so carried the matter, that
they forsook him not. And I do not doubt but that the matter may be so ordered
and carried, that you may be secured from that danger, which seems to lie in
your Objection. But indeed the true Reason why sundry of Cutshamoquin his men
left him* whereby he fell under poverty, was this, He sold unto the English all
our Lands which lay by the Seaside and Salt water, save only one Field; and
then it was, that they went to such other places as they liked better. And this
one Field also, Josias sold away; and the Inland place, where we now live, Mr.
Eliot procured for us, after we prayed to God.

But let the worst of your fears come to pass, suppose all your Subjects that
hate praying to God should leave you, what s^^ll you lose by it? you are rid of
such as by their sins vitiate others, and multiply transgression, and provoke
the wrath of God against you and yours. But consider what you shall gain by
praying to God: Do not trouble your self by p^ring upon what you shall lose,
which at most is but a very small matter. Turn your eye to the other side, and
look what you shall gain; you lose a f^w wicked men which hate praying to God;
but if you pray ^o God, all the praying Indians will rejoice at it, and be your
friends, and they are no^ a few, now, by the grace and blessing of Jesus
Christ; all the Massachusetts Indians will be your friends; all the praying
Indians ^n the Nipmuk Country will be your friends; all the praying Indians of
Nop will be your friends; all the praying Indians or Nantuket will be your
friends; all the praying Indians o^ Mahshepog, and all Eastward from them as
far as Cape Cod; all the^e will be your friends: and what comparison is betwixt
these, and those you lose?

Again, suppose you lose a few Subjects that hate praying to God, but ye^ you
shall gain a more intim^te love of the Governor, and Magistrates, and good
people of Plymouth, who were ever good friends to your Father Onsamequin, and
to you hitherto; but if you pray to God, you shall find a difference, they
will more honor, respect and love you, then ever they did; they will embrace
you as a Brother in Christ Jesus. Yea further, the Governor and Magistrates of
the Massachusetts will own you, and be fatherly and friendly to you. The
Commissioners of the United Colonies will own you. Yea more, the King of
England, and the great Peers who are Heads of the Corporation there, who yearly
send over Means to encourage and promote our praying to God, they will take
notice of you: and what are a few of your Subjects that hate praying to God, in
comparison of all these? Yea moreover, and above all these Considerations, that
which is said, Luke ^5.7. I tell you, there shall be joy in heaven over one
poor sinner that repents; So that God in heaven, Jesus Christ, the holy
Ghost, and the holy Angels in heaven, will joy at your turning to God. Cea^e
therefore these vain fears of losing a few sinful people, who possibly may
forsake you, if you pray unto God.


Keit. I am drowned and overwhelmed with the weight of your Reasonings: I know
not what to answer you at the present; yet I fear, that when I am out of the
sunshine of your wise discourses, I shall again be plunged into the pit of
doubting, by my manifold fears that do incompass me.


Ant. Go on therefore and produce all your doubts, let us see what weight is in
them. Sands are heavy when many are laid together, but bring them out one by
one, and they will be found light, and of no value. Our desire is to deal fully
with you, and hear all that you have to say: Cobwebs may seem thick and strong
until they be handled, but when they be touched and opened, they will be found
alt^gether weak.


Keit. I perceive that in your praying to God, and in your Churches, all are
brought to an equality; Sachems and people they are all f^llow-brethren in your
Churches; Poor and Rich are ^qually privileged; the Vo^e of the lowes^ of the
people, has as much weight as the Vote of the Sachem. Now I doubt that this
way will lift up the heart of the poor to too much boldness, and debase the
Rulers too low: this bringing all to an equality, will bring all to a confusion.


Ant. This also I confess is a great and weighty Point, and must be looked upon
with much prudence and caution. The weight of a Vote lies not so much in the
man, as in the matter wherein he Vo^eth. A poor wise man may give a better
Reason then a rich man, or a Ruler, and then it is the Reason that prevails,
not the man. We must all be ruled by the Word of God, both Sachem^ and people.
The Word of God in the mouth of a poor man, must be regarded for the Words
sake, and not for the man's sake, be he rich or poor. The management of Church
Liberties is a narrow edge, and may easily be miscarried, and prove hurtful;
which difficulty must be helped by good conduct: the well-ordering of a Church
is a point of great wisdom and care; but we must not therefore fly off from a
Rule, because it is difficult, but it must be acted with the more fear, care
and prayer.

There is such a Rule in the Gospel-way of the Churches, as Equality of Vote
among Believers in the matters of Jesus Christ: And herein is a great point of
Self denial in Sachems and chief men, to be equal to his Brethren in the things
that appertain to Christ, who is no respecter of persons: So it is said, Col.
3.11. Where there i^ neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scyth^an ^ond nor free, but Christ is all, and in all. And as Faith
^a^es all Believers equal in Christ, so does the Order of the Gospel: all that
are in Gospel Order, are equally concerned in the ^ffairs of Jesus Christ. And
this should not be a trouble, but a comfort and joy to every one; and therefore
it is said, Iam. 1.9, 10. Let the brother of low degree rejoice, in that he is
exalted; but the ri^h in that he is made low: for by both these Christ is
exal^ed, and in that we must rejoice.


Will. All that my Brother has said is weighty: I will add ^ word further to
the edge of your Objection. Church Order does not abolish Civil Order, but
establish it; Religion teaches and commands reverence and obedience to Civil
Rulers: and when ^ religious Ruler does deny himself for Christ his sake, to be
equa^ with his Brethren in Church Order, it obliges all godly hear^^ the more
to honor him in his Civil O^der. 1 Timothy 6.2. the Lord says, And they that
have believing Masters, let t^em not despise the^ because they are brethren,
but the rather do t^e^ ^ervice, because the^ are ^ai^h^ul and beloved,
partakers of the ^enefit. These things ^eac^ and exhort. Do not fear any loss
of honor, by submi^^ing ^o G^sp^^ Community in Church Order; but know, that it
is the rig^^est way to true honor. The hearts of all will honor those Rulers
that are humble and holy.

And when you shall do this for the honor of Christ, then Christ will take
care to honor such Rulers; for God has promised, 1 Samuel 2.30. T^em that
honor me, I will honor. Believe the word of G^d, for you shall find it true.


Keit. What second thoughts may come into my mind I cannot tell, but at
present I find nothing in my mind to oppose against what you say. But yet
there is another t^ing that I am much afraid of, and that is your
Church-Admonitions and Excommunications: I hear that your Sachems are under
that yoke I am a sinful man as well as others, but if I must be admonished by
the Church, who are my Subjects, I know not how I shall like that. ^ doub^ it
will be a bitter Pill, too hard for me to get down and swall^w.


Ant. Still your Objections are great and weighty. Sin is the sickness of the
soul, even as diseases are the sickness of the body. Admonitions in the Lord,
by the holy Scriptures are the P^ysic^ of the Soul* even as outward Medicines
are Physic to the body. Now if your body be sick, you will not refuse Physic
because i^ is bitter or sharp, and difficult to bear. No, but you will bear i^
patiently, because you know it is wholesome, and a means to cure your sickness.
The same I say about the sickness of your soul, that Medicine which God has
appointed to purge away your sin^ you must patiently submit unto, because it is
wholesome and good for your soul. Yea, and you must be so much the more careful
and willing to submit thereunto, by how much the danger o^ so^l-sicknesses are
deeper and greater then bodily sicknesses be. A bodily sickness, at the worst,
does but kill the body, but soul-sicknesses, if not cured, do damn both body
and soul in hell, with the D^vil and his Angels for ever. It is a desperate
danger to l^^ soul sicknesses go uncured. It is pleasant and d^lightful to the
flesh to sin without control, but remember what the end of it will be. S^lo on
that wise King says, Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice, O (...) man, in thy youth, and let
thy heart cheer thee in thy youth, and wa^^ in the ways of thy heart, and in
the sight of thy eyes; but know th^^ that for all ^he^e things God will bring
thee into judge^ent. This is ^ tre^bling word Felix a great Ruler trembled when
he heard th^^ word, Acts 24.25. It is therefore against all wisdom to refu^^
to be subject to soul-physick. It is a great mercy when God gives a skilf^^
(...) to cure our bodies, but it is a greater mercy to have a skilful P^ysician
to he^l and cure our souls. This there^^^e is so fa^ from being a
discouragement from praying to God as that it is rather an encouragement. Make
haste ^o come into that way which provideth well f^r your souls health, because
eternal salvation depends upon it.


Will. I am willing to add a word or two by way of lenitive. Though the matter
be harsh and bitter, yet the manner of applying must be with all reverence,
gentleness, meekness, tenderness, and love, so as to ^void all exasperation or
provocation. So the Lord has commanded, Galat. 6.1. If a man^e overtaken in a
fault ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekne^s,
considering thy self* lest thou also be tempted.

And for your fu^ther encouragement, we find in the Scripture that great Kings
and rulers have meekly submitted to this soulphysick. David was sharply
reproved by the Prophet, and he meekly submitted to it, 2 Samuel 12. and so it was
with Eli, 1 Samuel 2.27. Let it not therefore be unacceptable unto you, to imitate
so great, so good Examples. If Sachems might sin, and no body might admonish
them, because they be rulers, and the Ministers and people are the subjects, it
were the most miserable condition in the world to be a Sachem or a ruler, they
run to hell without control, and no body may say unto him, Why do you so? It
is said, Isa. 30.33. Tophet is ordained of old, yea for the King i^ is
prepared. If God have ordained hell for Sachems, then sure he has ordained
means to keep them out of it, as well as for other men; for God desires not
the death of a sinner, but rather that ^e should repent and live. If therefore
you desire to escape hell, and to go to heaven, submit your soul to such means
as God has appointed to bring you to repentance and salvation. When you put
the Objection, you s^id you are a sinful man as well as others: therefore your
own heart will tell you that you have need of such helps as God has appointed
to bring you to repentance, else you cannot be saved.


Keit. I feel your words sink into my heart and stick there, you speak arrows;
I feel that you wound me, but I do not think that you hurt me; nor do you mean
me any hurt but good. I desire to ponder and consider of these things. I have
more matters to object, but I will forbear at this time: and besides, it is
time for you to eat, and to take rest, and therefore I will proceed no further
at this time.


Ant. We thankfully accept your patience thus long, and your good accept^nce of
what we say: God has been present with us, and we perceive that the Spirit of
God is at work in your heart, this puts us in hopes of a good issue.

We have one request unto you, beloved Sachem, That while we abide in your
house, we may have liberty to carry our-selves like praying Indians; namely,
that when we eat, we may pr^y and give t^anks to God, before and after meat;
also before we lie down at night, and when we rise up in the morning, we may
pray and give thanks to God; and that discourses may be grave, and for
edification; that there may be no Games or Sports, or such other things, which
we have abandoned.


Keit. I do like well what you say, all things shall be as you desire; it will
be a g^od opportunity for us to see what manner of Convers^^ion you praying
Indians use. I will pr^pose it unto so many ^f my people as be here present,
how they like of t^is last motion you make, of allowing you free liberty of all
such Exercises as you praying Indians practice. What say you, my friends, to
this l^st mo^^on of theirs?


All. We like it very well, and shall willingly give attendance un^^ their
prayers. And besides, it is not long to their Sabbath, we desire they would
stay the Sabbath, and teach publicly, and let us see their S^bbath
Convers^tion also. It may be we shall see so much beauty and desireableness in
their ways, that it may much heighten and raise our affections to embrace and
submit our selves unto this way of praying to God.


Keit. You go too fast, your answer goes beyond my proposal, or their request:
we spoke only of private Conversation. I said nothing of the Sabbath, nor of
their public Teaching, this is a greater matter. But go to, seeing you have
made the motion, I will not refuse it. What say you my friends? you hear what
these people desire, will you tarry the Sabbath among us, and teach publicly
amongst my people? for if you accept the motion, we shall take a course to give
notice thereof to all parts of the Town.


Ant. We are sent by the Church in the Name of Jesus Christ, to call you up
unto the way which leads to heaven. One part of this heavenly way, is to Keep
holy the Sabbath day, by exercising our selves in the Word of G^d and prayer. I
perceive the forwardness of your people hereunto, and your own wary
condescendence unto their desires, which amounts unto more then a calling
unto us to attend the motion: it adds encouragement and hope of good
acceptance with man, and a divine blessing from heaven.


Philip Keitassoot. Anthony. William. Sachem. Keit. I Have so ordered my
occasions, that they will give way to my attendance to the matter you come
about, therefore this Afternoon I have set apart, that we may have further
Conference about them.

The former points we discoursed, I am willing they should still lie soaking in
my heart and mind. I am not ready to make Replies, or to draw forth any
further speech about them. I choose rather to draw forth some of my other
Doubts and Objections; unto which, if your Answers be as considerable and
weighty, as they were to my former doubts, I shall then s^e cause to lay them
up also a soaking, and pondering in my heart. Know this, that in the rowlings
of my thoughts, the disquiet turnings and tumblings of my mind, do oft-times
molest me with variety of passions. I am sometimes in grief and anguish of
mind, especially when I over look my life past, and remember the many sins and
follies that I have stained my life and honor withal, I think with my self,
What a fool have I been, that for the love of a lust, which Dogs and brute
Creatures delight in, that I, a Man, a Sachem, should be so besotted, as to
stain my honor, wound my Soul, offend God, and expose my self to eternal
damnation, and all this for a short delight that is gone with a blast, and
leaves nothing behind but shame and sorrow; and these are durable and
indelible, a sad effect of sensual pleasures. Ah what a fool have I been? when
I should have employed my self in higher and greater matters for the honor of
God, and the good of my people* I have wasted my precious time and strength to
satiate my pleasures, which have left such a sting and torment in my soul,
which all my Estate and Honor cannot ease me of, but they are like to torment
me for ever. I am never without wicked company to draw me out unto such
iniquities, but none of them can ease the torment of my mind and conscience,
though some apply themselves so to do, I do find their remedies are false and
uneffectual.

But I have quite lost my self, I did not intend to open and pour out my mind
and thoughts about these matters; but full vessels are ready to run over. I
will come to that which I did intend.


Ant. Beloved Sachem, as the overflowings of your grief have interrupted your
intended discourse, so let me take so much boldness to lengthen this your
interruption, with a word of God* that may, by his blessing, be (at least) the
beginning of a Cordial to your heart, and a Cure to your stain and wound. Sin
is a shame to any Nation or person, but repentance is an honor. Your griefs
have the right savor of repentance. It is said, 1 Cor. 3.18. Let a man become
a fool, that he ^ay be wise: you chide your self for your ^ol^y; you do well ^o
to do, it is an act of wisdom so to do, go on in this frame of heart, and be
constant, and you shall find rest. Christ calls troubled souls to come unto
him, Mat. 11.28. and he promis^^h to give them rest, and he is able to perform
his promise. In his hand I leave this matter, and your tossed soul with inward
griefs, that in him you may find rest.


Will. My Brother ha^h presented you with a Cordial for your heart^g^ief, I
will present you with some Balm to heal your soul wounds. It is said* Ier.
8.22. Is there no Balm in G^lead? is there no Physician there? Why ^hen is not
the health of the daughter of my people recovered? Behold, in Gods Word we
find a Balm for wound^d souls, and that is the death and blood of Jesus
Christ, believed by faith: for Christ has died for our sins, and rose again
from the dead for our justification; he offers a pardon for all your sins,
and he will heal your soul, and quiet your heart from all those turmoiling
troubles and griefs. Believe therefore in Jesus Christ, and he will pardon and
save you.


Keit. I thank you for these comfortable words, I feel them in my heart, and I
desire to lay them up among other things which I ponder in my heart.

And now I will proceed to open such other doubts which lie in my mind, as
impediments which hinder me, and delay me from accepting of this way of praying
to God. I perceive in all your discourses, that you have a Book which you call
The Word of God, and you read it to me. I perceive also that in your
worshipping of God morning and night, you read in that Book: I pray tell me
what Book that is* what is written in it? and how do you know that it is the
Word of God? Many say that some wise Englishmen have d^vised and framed it,
and tell us that it is Gods Word, when as it is no other then the words of wise
men.

Hoh! we shall be interrupted in our discourse, for here comes in S^chem that
hates praying to God, and has been a means of delaying my entrance into this
way: but if he come up unto us, we will go on and let him be partaker of our
discourse, if he like of it, and be willing so to do.

E^^h, my friend, I pray come and sit down here, and hearken to our discourse.
Here be some of the Massachuset praying Indians, who are soliciting me to pray
unto God; and we are now discoursing about a Book which they have, which they
say is the Word of God: and I am now enquiring of them what is contained in
that Book, and how it may be made appear that it is the Word of God^ If you
think good to join with us in this discourse, it will be acceptable unto us to
have your company, and to hear what you have to say about it.


Sachem. I am willing to be present and hear your discourse, but as for this
new way of praying to God, I like it not. We and our Forefathers have through
all generations lived in our Religion, which I desire not to change; Are we
wiser then our Forefathers? And I like not to suffer our people to read that
Book which they call the Word of God. If it be Gods Word, it is too deep for
ignorant people to meddle withal; and it will ^ill them with new light and
notions, which withdraws them from our obedience, and leads them to make
trouble and disturbance unto us, in those old ways in which we and our
Forefathers have walked: and my Counsel is to suppress the reading of that Book.


Ant. With due respect unto you, Sachem, I shall thus answer unto what you s^y.
If a great Sachem in a far Country should send unto you a writing, wherein he
gives you wise Counsel, would you not read it? would you not hear what he
says? and would you not suffer your people to learn wisdom, but continue in
their ignorance and blindness? Sure you would show so much respect to a man, a
Sachem, that should do so kindly to you. Now so it is, that the great God who
made these high heavens, and the great Lights that be therein; who made this
Earth, and all this great World, and all things in it; who is King of kings,
and Lord of lords: I say this Great God, pitying to see the ignorance that all
men are darkened withal, he has sent us his Word, which will make wise the
ignorant, and will you not suffer your people to learn that wisdom? do you
love darkness better then light?

Besides, all Mankind live in the ways of sin, which lead them to hell
torments, where they shall be punished with eternal fire: but God pitying this
miserable condition of man, has sent us this Word of his, which shows us
the way to escape hell torments, and leads us into the way that leads us to
eternal life, happiness and glory. And will not you suffer your people to learn
this good way, when God offers it unto us? Consider how your people will
curse you, when they feel these torments, because you would not suffer them to
learn the true way to heaven and happiness. And what though we are not wiser
then our Forefathers, yet God can teach us such wisdom as our Forefathers did
not know. I think, that we are bound to think that our fathers were so wise,
that if Gods Word ^ad been brought and offered to them, they would have
received it, and would have learned by it to be wiser then they were, and why
therefore should not we be so wise, as to do that which our wise fathers would
have done, if this light had shined unto them, as it now does unto us. Let not
the deepness of that wisdom in Gods Word, hinder us that are ignorant from
searching into it, for by reading of Gods word the ignorant may be made wise,
Psalm. 197. it makes wise the simple: and Prove. 1.^. The Word gives wisdom to
the simple, and to the young man knowledge and discretion. David learned to be
wise by reading the word of God, Wiser then his Enemies, wiser then his
Teachers, wiser then the Ancients, Psalm. 119.98, 99, 100. and so may we. It is
a vain word to say, They are ignorant, and therefore they may not read the
Word; the contrary to this is true, Because they are ignorant, therefore let
them search and read the word of God, because that will make them wise. But
you give the reason that lies in the bottom of your heart, when you say, By
reading of the word they will learn new light, which will molest and trouble
them that love and walk in their old lusts, and deeds of darkness, and
therefore you will keep them from the light. But I pray consider at what a dear
rate you purchase your quiet in your old ways of sin and darkness, which lead
you to hell, when you will compel all your people to live in sin and darkness,
for fear lest when they find the light of Gods Word, they should molest and
trouble you in your lusts and sins.


Will. I will add a few words to what my Brother has spoken. I have heard
that in the other part of the World there be a certain people who are called
Papists, whose Ministers and Teachers live in all manner of wickedness and
lewdness, and permit and teach the people so to do: and these wicked Ministers
will not suffer the people to read the Word of God, and pretend the same
reason as you do, Because they be ignorant. But the true reason is the same
which you plainly speak out, lest by the knowledge of the Word, they should
have light to see into their vileness, and molest them in their lusts and sins.
And they are so cruel, that if they find any one that reads the word of God,
they will kill him. They choose rather to lead all their people with them to
hell, then to suffer them to see the light whereby they may be saved, lest when
they see the light, they should discover their filthiness, and trouble them in
their way to hell. But God does account these men Murderers, and has
threatened to bring upon them fearful destruction, to revenge the blood of Gods
people whom they have murdered. Therefore I pray you to consider, that the
like vengeance from God will fall upon you, if you will not suffer your people
to search into, and learn the word of God.


Keit. What you have said has fully settled and satisfied my heart in this
point. I will never hinder my people from the knowledge of the word of God, and
I wonder at those vile Ministers that do so wickedly abuse the people; and I
wonder at the Sachems, that they will suffer such vile Ministers to abuse their
people in that manner, why do they not suppress them? and why do they not
Command their people to Print the Bible, and let it be free for any man that
will buy them, and read them? I wonder at these things; Can you satisfy me in
the reason hereof?


Will. I can say but little to it; only thus much I have heard. Some Sachems
are as bad as the Ministers, and of the same mind with their Ministers, they
are li^e minded as this Sachem is; other Sachems that are wiser and better
minded, yet they cannot help it, because their Ministers are so rich, and by
that means have so many people depending on them, that their Sachems dare not
meddle with them; and their Ministers take a cunning course to keep themselves
and successors rich, for they will not suffer one another to marry, whereby
they should have lawful Children to inherit their riches, but when they die the
next Minister has all, or most of the riches that he had. And to the end they
may keep one another from marrying, they suffer one another to keep Whores, so
that they have Bastards good store, but no lawful Children. And by this means
they maintain themselves in very great wealth, so that the Sachems dare not
meddle with them.


Keit. Does no body see these base doings of these Ministers?


Will. Oh yes, many; but if any body speak a word against them, they will kill
him presently, so that partly by their wealth, and partly by their cruelty,
keep every body in fear of them.


Keit. Oh strange! how many of these wicked Ministers be there, that they are
so potent?


Will. Oh, a great many. The Ministers of I know not how many Countries combine
together, and be of one mind to uphold one another; and they choose one Chief,
and call him a Pope, and say that he has power to pardon men's sins, and will
sell Pardons for Money, and by that means they get a great deal of wealth, for
people are such fools as to think that he can pardon them, when as the Popes be
as vile sinners as any body, and keep VV^ores, and get Bastards. Other of these
Ministers they call Cardinals; others Lord Archbishop; others, Lord Bishop;
other, Lord Abbot; other, Lord Prior, and I cannot tell how many more: and many
of these as rich as Sachems, and leave their wealth to their successors,
because they have no lawful Children, only keep Whores, and get Bastards. And
they will allow their Sachems, or any body else, to keep Whores, and get
Bastards, and the Pope will pardon them for money. And this that I tell you, is
but a little of the filthiness that is among these wicked Ministers. Now if
people should but look into the word of God, they would presently find that no
body can pardon sins but God; and they would presently find, that God has
appointed no such Ministers as these, they are all of them the Devils
Ministers, and not God's: and if Sachems and people knew this, they would buy
no more Pardons of them, and the Sachems would suppress them, and take away
their great riches, or employ them to better uses. And for this reason they
will not suffer any but themselves to read the Scripture, they will kill them
if they do; and they have Lords Inquisitors, as they call them, to watch and
search if any body have a Bible, or any other good Book, that opens and
discovers their Villainy, he shall be killed: And these Lords Inquisitors are as
rich as Sachems. And thus they keep all men in subjection to them, and in fear
of them, and Sachems are afraid of them, and they do what they list.


Keit. Here be Ministers with all my heart! are these the men that manage their
Religion? These are worse then our Pauwaus. If any Pauwau in my dominions
should be half thus vile, I would scour him. I see that in some places of the
world there be worse men then we Indians be. I do not think there is such
vileness to be found among any of the Indians in all this Country, what may be
further off I know not. And if all this vileness be maintained by ignorance of
the word of God, it seems to me, that it is a principal thing in Religion to
know and be acquainted with the word of God; and therefore I desire that now we
may go on with our intended discourse. And whereas I proposed two questions, me
thinks that much may be gathered out of this discourse we have had, tending to
show what matter is contained in the word of God. But it is like you will speak
more fully to it. I shall therefore bend my mind to give attendance unto what
you shall further say.


Ant. This Question is one great Principle in Religion; and I cannot take a
surer and better course to answer it, then by declaring the Answer that is
given in our Catechism unto the Question, and by opening some of the Texts of
Scripture, which are there brought for the proof and manifestation thereof.

The Question is, What is the Word of God? The Answer is, It is the Will of God
written in the Bible, whereby he rightly guides man, in every thing in this
world, and whereby he brings us to eternal salvation. These are but few
words, but full of weight, and proved by diverse Scriptures.


Keit. What do you mean by Scriptures?


Ant. The word and will of God written in a Book, whereby we may not only hear
it with our ears, when it is spoken by others, but we may see it with our eyes,
and read the writing our selves. And this is a great benefit to us, to have
Gods word and will written; for a word spoken is soon gone, and nothing
retains it but our Memory, and that impression which it made upon our mind
and heart; but when this word is written in a Book, there it will abide, though
we have forgotten it, and we may read it over a thousand times, and help our
weak memories, so that it shall never be forgotten; yea, and such as cannot
have an opportunity of hearing the word, yet they may always have an
opportunity of reading the word, because it is written in the Bible, which they
have by them in their houses, and may read in it night and day. We do
therefore call the word of God Scripture, because it is written in a book.


Keit. I am satisfied in what you say: I pray go on to open those Texts of
Scripture which the Catechism gives for proofs.


Ant. The first Text I mention is Hos. 8.12. I have written to him the great
things of my Law, but they were counted as a strange thing. Here God gives to
man a Law, and he writes this Law; and every thing in this Law is a great
matter: though some things are greater then other, yet every thing that God
has written is a great matter. But God does blame men for counting them as
strange things; we should be well acquainted with them.

Dan. 10.21. when an Angel spoke to Daniel, he told him, that he would declare
to him that which is noted in the Scriptures of truth. And we that teach others
must carefully so do, we must teach nothing but that which is noted in, and
grounded upon the Scriptures of truth. And we need to teach nothing else, for
all things needful for salvation are contained in the Scriptures, as appears 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. A^^ Scripture is given by interpretation from God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good works. The man of God here, means, or may be applied to any honest man
that is willing to walk by the Rule of the word, be he a Sachem, or a Teacher,
or a Father, etc. Every man may find in the Scriptures a perfect rule to guide
him in every thought, word or deed. So that the word of God is a perfect Law to
guide every man, in every thing, all the days of his life. And the word of God
is not only a rule to guide us in this life, but it also brings us to heaven;
Acts 20.32. I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able
to build you up, and give you ^n inheritance among them that are sanctified:
and James 1.21. Receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save
your souls. Many such testimonies I might add, to show the fullness of
perfection of the word of God: but I forbear at present.


Will. I will add a few words touching the perfection of the Scriptures. Deuteronomy.
12.32. Whatsoever I command you, observe to do it; thou shall not add thereto,
nor diminish from it. Here be two ways of wronging the Scriptures; 1. By
adding to it; 2. By taking from it. Now these Popish Teachers and Ministers of
whom I did discourse before, they do most wickedly wrong the Scriptures,
especially by adding to them. They say that their Offices are commanded in the
Scripture, and that the Pope is Christ his Vicar, and that he has power to
pardon sin, and abundance more such rotten stuff they add unto the Scripture.

Now this is another reason why they will not suffer people to read the
Scriptures, because then every body would find out their false dealing; and
therefore if any body find them out, they will presently kill them. The great
wrong they do unto the Scriptures of truth, is one of their great sins; they
add their own wicked inventions, unto the pure and perfect word of God.


Keit. Your discourse does breed in my heart an admiration a^ that excellent
Book; and I find in my heart a longing desire to be acquainted with that Book,
and with those excellent matter^ that are contained in it. But although my
heart does begin ^^ reverence that Book for the sake of the matter contained in
it, yet I desire that you would proceed to give me your grounds why yo^ believe
that it is Gods word, because I shall then reverence the Word, not only for
the matters sake, but also for the Author^ sake. Good words spoken by a good
man, do obtain respect ^ much more may the words that God speaks, command all
reverence.

This Point also being a great Principle in Religion, I will ta^^ the same
course in it, as I did in the former. I will show yo^ what Answer we are taught
in our Catechism, and I will touc^ some of the proofs.


1. The first Reason to prove the Scriptures to be the Word o^ God, is, Because
they teach us the first Creation of the World, and all things in it, which no
man nor Angel does know or ca^ teach, only God; and this is proved in the
first Chapter of Genesis, w^ere we read the wonderful work of God in the
Creation of the World, where man was last made. 2. The second Reason is from
the holiness and perfection of the word of God. No man or A^gel could give so
holy, pure and perfect a Law, as G^ds Law is, Psalm. 19.8, 9, 10, 11. also Psalm.
12.6. The words of the Lord are pure words; as silver tried in a furnace of
earth, purified seven ti^es. 3. The third Reason is, Because the word of the
Lord is confirmed by such Miracles, as only God himself is able to perform.
Moses the first writer of Scripture, did many great Miracles, in Egypt, in the
Red Sea, and in the Wilderness; so did many other Prophets: but especially
Jesus Christ did many wonderful Miracles, and so did the Apostles, by which our
Faith is confirmed, that their writings are the word of God. 4. Because the
Scriptures does reveal unto us Jesus Christ, and salvation by Christ, according
to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. This no man or Angel could ever have found out,
only God, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
and has committed to us the word of Reconciliation John 5.39. Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think to find eternal life: and they ar^ they that
testify of me. Therefore they are the word of God. 5. Because the word of God
does convert the soul from sin and Satan, unto God. It sanctifies the soul,
and does lead me^^ souls in the ways of life, unto salvation; it is the sword
of the Spirit to conquer the Devil* Iam. 1.18. Of his own will begat ^e us with
the word of truth. Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them through the tr^th: thy word is
truth. Ephesians. 6.17. Take the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
Such grounds as these we are taught in our Catec^ism.
Keit. Who can oppose or gainsay the mountainous weight of these Arguments? I
am more then satisfied, I am ashamed of my ignorance, and I abhor my self that
ever I doubted of this point; and I desire wholly to give up my self to the
knowledge of, and obedience to the word of God, and to abandon and forsake
these sins which the word of God reproves and condemns.


Will. I will add one Consideration further, to manifest that the Scriptures
are the word of God; and that is, By the great Antiquity of these writings,
which have been extant so many thousand years, and have passed through so many
enemies hands, who ^ave used all art and force to abolish them, or corrupt
them, and yet they could never d^ it. Moses wrote the first Five Books of
Scripture above a thousand and four hundred years before Christ came, and it is
above a thousand and six hundred years since Christ came, and since the G^sp^l,
the last part of the Scripture, was written. Put these two Numbers together,
and they make three thousand years. So long the Church have had the Scriptures:
and all this while the Devil and wicked men have endeavored either to abolish
them, or corrupt them, but they could never do it; we have every word of God
perfect and pure unto this day, which cannot be said of any other writing in
all the world. And this wonderful divine protection of this Book, does greatly
manifest, that doubtless it is Gods own word, over which he has bestowed such
eminent care.


Keit. But how do you know all this? How do you know what was done so many
thousand years ago?


Will. The Scriptures themselves have kept a perfect Record of Times from the
beginning of the World unto the coming of Christ, and out of that Chronology
we may perfectly know how long Moses was before Christ; and there be other sure
ways to know how many years it is since Christ came. And thus may we know
certainly how long the Scriptures have been written.


Keit. If this be so, the Reason is strong, the Antiquity of the Book requires
reverence; and Gods constant care of it, shows he has a divine influence in
it.

But we are now called off from any further proceeding in our discourse at this
time. Before we part, I have one motion and request to propose unto you; To
morrow is your Sabbath, and I have a desire that you two would teach us that
day, and let us see the manner how you worship God; it may please God to make
more of his light to shine among us. You remember what passed about this
motion; I do now with more desire confirm shat motion.


Ant. We also are still of the same mind and purpose, and are the more
confir^ed in our hearts, because we see that G^d is on the coming hand, to
incline your heart unto the Lord.


After the Sabbath. Philip Keitassoot. Anthony. William. Keit. I Have now lived
one Sabbath: many a Sabbath have I been dead, and followed works of darkness
and sin, when I should ^ave been following the Lord in such ways of Worship,
as yesterd^y was spent in. I am wounded at my heart to remember what I have
done upon the Sabbath Day, I ^ave served the D^vil, and lust and sins of all
sorts, even upon the Sabbath-dayes* The sins that I have committed do render me
vile in the sight of God, and the time wherein I have committed many of them,
does render me more vile in the eyes of the Lord my Judge. You said yesterday,
that Christ Jesus is the Lord of the Sabbath, and requires all men to spend
that day in his service; and when Christ Jesus shall judge the world, he will
examine all men how they spent every Sabbath. Oh wretched man that I am, what
answer shall I make, though I am a Sachem here on earth, I s^all be but a
subject in the day of Judgment. I now sit upon the Bench to judge others, then
I must stand at the Bar to be judged my self. Oh what mountains of sin have I
heaped up in my wicked life! I had forgot my sins, and I thought God had forgot
them too; and I had thought my Conscience had forgot them also, but now I see
it is not so. God has numbered all my ways, my thoughts, my words and works,
and I feel now that my Conscience remembers them also, though it has been
asleep in the times of my ignorance and profaneness. Oh I am a wretch: I should
have been an example to my people, an example of virtue, of wisdom and of
praying to God, but I have done quite contrary to my duty: I have been an
example of lust, of profaneness, yea of all sin; and in particular of this
great sin of profaning the Sabbath: my heart is wounded with the sense of this
^in especially, and that forces my troubled Conscience to gall and afflict my
soul with the remembrance of all my sins. But why say I all? I now find my
sins are numberless: my own personal sins are many, great and vile, my heart
does loath my self to remember them, they make me an abhorring to God. But
moreover and besides my own personal sins, other men's sins I am guilty of; Oh
how many have sinned upon my account, many ways? I am a Sachem over my people,
to rule them in virtue, and to do them good: but I have done contrary to my
charge, I have led them out into all sin, and thereby I have done them ^he
greatest hurt and mischief. I have been a means of their damnation, Oh how many
are gone, and going to hell upon my account? how shall I escape damnation, who
have led so many in^o that eternal pit? Oh I am pained at my heart, what shall
I do? Oh what shall I do?


Ant No creature can help you; none but God in Jesus Christ, he can help you.
Consider that Text, Micah 6.6, 7, 8. Wherewith sha^^ I come before the Lord,
and bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him with bur^^
offerings with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of
rams, or with ten th^usands of rivers of oil? shall I give ^y first born for my
transgression, the fruit of my bo^y for the sin of ^y soul? He has s^ewed
thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
ju^tly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Nothing that you
can do, or bring to God, can pacify that divine wrath that is kindl^d against
you; but ver 8. he shows you the way. Also consider that Text, John 14.6. I
am the Way, and the Truth, and ^he Life: No man comes unto the Father, but by
me. You have been a great sinner, now you lament it, you would obtain a pardon,
and be reconciled to God: This word of God shows you the way, and th^^ is to
humble your self before Christ Jesus, believe in him, and give up your self to
be his servant, your self to worship the Lord, and to bring on all your people
to do the same. I remember two places in Daniel where Sachems were in trouble
of mind, as you now are, and Daniel gave them counsel from the Lord: the first
place is Dan. 4.27. Wherefore, O Sachem, let my counsel be accepta^le to thee,
and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thy iniquities by she^ing mercy to
the poor, if it may ^e a lengthning of thy tranquillity. And my heart is
persuaded (with submission to the Lord) that if you now turn unto God, and
promote praying to God among all your people, you shall see better days t^en
ever you have yet seen. There is another sad story in the fifth Chapter of
Daniel, where the wicked Sachem did act profanely against the G^d of heaven,
and then appeared fingers which wrote Mean, Mean, Tekel Vpharsin: but let the
interpretation of that be unto your enemies, and not to you, beloved Sachem. I
say unto you in that word of the Lord, Acts 16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shall be saved, and thy house.


Wi^^. Hope of relief, is a means to ease grief, and to raise the distressed
heart to apply it self unto means of Remedy. In the second of Chron. 33. we
read of a Sachem that was a greater sinner then you have been, yet upon his
repent^nce and change of life, he obtained mercy. His Name was Manasseh, his
sins were such, as that it is an abhorring to read them: then God brought him
into affliction, and it is said, ver. 12, 13. And when he was in affliction* he
^esought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his
fathers, an^ prayed unto him, and he was intreate^ of hi^, an^ hear^ his
supplication, and brought him again unto Ier^^ale^ into his kingd^me. Then
Manasseh know that the Lord he was God. So I say unto you, Beloved ^achem,
humble your self before the Lord set up praying to God among all your people,
walk in ways of wisdom and religion, and you shall find that God will be
merciful to you, and your latter days shall be blessed, and be a blessing.


Keit. Words that come swimming in love, with full sails of wisdom, have great
power to calm heart storms of grief and trouble. I now find it true: my soul
is wounded for my sin in profaning the Sabbath Day, now I desire to look deeper
into the matter. I desire you would open unto me the Sabbath, that I may know
my former sins, and future duty.


Ant. The doctrine of the Sabbath is a great Point in Religion. It is one of
the Ten Moral, Univers^l Commandments of God, which are required of all
Mankind; and the fourth Command, a chief Hinge of all the rest. By a religious
keeping of the Sabbath, we act our obedience to all the Commands. By profaning
the Sabbath, we turn all Religion and good Order out of doors, and set open a
door unto all sin and wickedness, so weighty a matter is the good keeping of
the Sabbath Day. For the opening of the Sabbath, I know not a better way, then
to open (briefly) the fourth Command; which I shall do, by laying it out into
six parts.


1. Here is the Preface, in this word, Remember the Sabbath Day, to show the
great weight and worth of the Sabbath, o^ our proneness to ^light it; and to
stablish a perpetual and careful preparation to the Sabbath, Neh. 13.19. And it
came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the
Sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut, and charged that they
should not be opened till after the Sabbath: and some of my servants set I at
the gates, that there should no burden be brought in on the Sabbath day. 2.
Here is the Affirmative part of the Command, wherein we are commanded to keep
the whole Sabbath holy, both in thought, word and deed, Isa. 58.13. If thou
turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day,
and call the Sabbath ^ delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall
honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor
speaking thine own words. 3. Here is an exact distribution of all time betwixt
God and man, wherein God has appointed six parts or days to man, and the
seventh part is dedicated to God: and hence it follows that the Sabbath was
capable of being changed, from the l^st of seven, to the first of seven; and so
the Lord has changed it, 1 Cor. 16.2^^ Acts 20.7. Rev. 1.10. And when this
Change was first made, the Church kept two Sabbaths together, as the Passover
and the Lords Supper were together. 4. Here is the Negative part of this
Command, wherein we are forbidden all our own works, in that word or deed, Thou
shall do no manner o^ work. 5 Here be the persons that be bound to keep the
Sabbath, All, high and low, rich and poor, male and female, in all societies
and rel^tions, and strangers, Thou, thy son, thy ^aughter, thy manservant, thy
maidservant, thy cattle, and thy stranger. 6. Here be three R^a^ons to urge us
to a reverent and careful keeping of the Sabbath: 1. Taken from Gods most holy
and wise Example, who six days Created, but on the s^venth d^y rested in his
heavenly joys. 2. The second Reason is, Because God has put a blessing on the
head of the Sabbath, and on all that keep it holy: He blessed the seventh day.
3. The third Reason is, Because the Lord made it holy, he dedicated it to holy
use, and t^erefore may not be violated without sacrilege. Mal. 3.8. Will ye
rob God? Thus have I opened this Command.

Will. I will only add two Texts of Scripture; Ier 17.19, to the end: Thus
says the Lord unto me, Go and stand in the gate of the children of the people
whereby the Kings of Judah come in, and by the which they go out and in all the
gates of Jerusalem and say unto them, Hear ye the word of the Lord, ye kings of
Judah, an^ all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem that enter in by
^hese gates: T^us says the Lord, Tak^ heed to your selves, and bear no burden
on the Sabbath day* etc. The other ^ext is Exodus 31, 13, 14, 15, 16 17. Speak
thou also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my Sabbaths ye shall
keep: for it is a sign ^etween me and you throughout your generat^ons, that ye
may know that I am the Lord that does ^anctifie you, etc.


Keit. I am now in a great strait, my heart is bent within me to keep the
Sabbaths; but alas, neither I nor any of my people know how to do it, unless we
have some body to teach us.


Ant. It is true that you say, and I return you this answer, When we return,
and make report of the grace of God poured out upon you, and of your acceptance
of the word of God, and resolution to keep the Sabbath, and your desire of a
Teacher; We know that the Church will presently take care to send a Teacher
unto you. Or further we will propose, If you and your people shall choose any
one whom your souls desire, and send your request unto the Church, that he
might be sent unto you, We doubt not but the Church will readily grant your
desire.


A penitent Soul in great distress comes unto John Speen, one of the Teachers
of the Church at Natik; where we shall find the Penitent pouring out his
griefs, and John ministering Counsel and Comfort. Penit. OH my friend, I am glad
I have met you in so opportune a time and place. My heart is broken with
griefs, I am ready to ^ink into the ground because of my distressed mind. I
desire to pour out my melted heart into your loving bosom; it may be you may
give me Counsel what I shall do in my distress, and advise me if there be any
way or means to comfort this distressed so^l of mine.


John. Alas, your sorrowful countenance does indeed discover, that your mind
is oppressed with grief, and in such cases men are miserable comforters; God
only knows how to speak a word of Comfort to the heart, he made the heart of
man, he knows all the sorrows and griefs thereof; and usually God does
afflict the heart with grief, out of great love, that he might call the
distressed soul to come to him, and to make its griefs known to him, and he is
very gracious and pitiful to such afflicted souls: for Christ has said, Mat.
11.28. Come unto me ye that labor and are heavy laden* and I will give you
rest. My first Counsel therefore is, that you would pray unto God, and believe
in Jesus Christ, and he will surely give you rest. B^t as for man, especially
such a poor creature as I am, I cannot help you, nor is there any help for you
in the hand of man.


Penit. But the words of a true-hearted loving friend may minister some
comfort, and I do already feel that your words have relief in them, in that you
tell me Jes^s Christ is so tenderhearted toward those that are of an
afflicted spirit.


John. True it is, that God has said, The Priests l^ps shall preserve
knowledge, and thou shall enquire the Law at his mouth; I am very weak, but I
am willing to help your afflicted soul to go to Jesus Christ, who will not fail
to comfort you. Seeing therefore it is your desire, let me hear your griefs and
troubles, it may please God to put a word into my mouth, whereby the good
Spirit of God may speak comfort to your sorrowful heart.


Penit. My outward condition is full of affliction, and those frowns in the
brow of Providence do make me fear, that the wrath of God is set against me,
and will wear away my life with grief, and then cast me away into hell among
the damned, where I shall perish for ever.


John. This is a wholesome fear, and you shall find it will end well. My
Counsel is, mingle hope with your fear, viz. that God does outwardly afflict
you, that he might drive your distressed soul into the bosom of Jesus Christ,
who will graciously pardon all your sins, and save your soul from those eternal
flames, which you so much dread. It is Gods usual way of grace, to put his
Lambs into distress, that he might cause them to fly for refuge into ^is
bosom; and I hope that it is his meaning so to deal with you, because I see
that his afflicting hand does so kindly melt your heart, and causes you to
seek refuge to save you from those everlasting burnings. These distresses will
make the salvation of Christ precious unto you. Consider that Text, Eccles 7 3,
4. Sorrow is better th^n laughter; for by the sorrow of the countenance the
heart is made better. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning. But
what are those outward distresses which do so a^^^ict you?


Penit. I know not where to begin or end. The world has always promised me
fair, but it has ever failed me; my mornings have had some brightness, but my
rising day is always clouded, and full of darkness, and I know not but my Sun
will set in thick darkness and despair. You know my Father was a Sachem of the
Blood, and I was brought up under such high Capacities and Expecta^^^tions; I
have been Chosen and Advanced, as you know, to the ^egree of a Sachem, but so
filled with Crosses and Distresses, that I ^ever enjoy my self, nor one quiet
day, my griefs are multiplied ^^ke the waves of the Sea, they break in upon me,
and are ready to overwhelm me.


John. You say the world has ever failed you, and so it always deals with
Gods children: but I will show you who will never ^^il you; Psalm. 73.26. My
flesh and my heart fails, but God is the ^^rength of my heart, and my portion
for ever. Let your soul ponder (...) feed upon this Promise. See also Heb.
13.5. He has said, I ^ill never leave thee nor forsake thee. Mark that word,
Never leave ^hee nor forsake thee; the word will hold both in this life, and to
^ternity.

You further say, that your bright mornings prove black and ^loudy days. It
has been so with other of Gods Children. Read ^he 88 Psalm, and you shall
find the Prophet just in your case in ^any verses of that Psalm: I will
mention some of the words, ^er. 6, 7, 8, 9. Thou have laid me in the lowest
pit, in darkness, in the ^^eps. Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have
afflicted me with ^ll thy waves. Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from
me; ^hou have made me an abomination unto them. I am s^ut up, and I ^^nnot come
forth; mine eye mourns by reason of affliction. Lord, ^ have called daily
upon thee; I have stretched out mine hand unto ^^ee, etc. And ver. 15. I am
afflicted and ready to die from my youth (...); while I suffer thy terrors, I
am distracted, etc. Behold a dear ^^ilde of God in as bitter distresses as you
are, yet the first sentence of this Psalm is a word of Faith, he s^ith, O Lord
God of my s^^vation. I^ is some comfort to a distressed soul, to have good
company with them; you have the best comp^ny in the world, for yo^ have the
company of Jesus Christ. See Isa. 53 3. He is ^esp^sed a^^ rejected of men, a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with gr^efs; (...) we hid as it were our ^aces
from him: he was de^p^^ed, and we este^^ed him not. When you ^re alone by your
s^l^, re^de all this C^^pter, you shall find that Christ was in grea^er
distre^ses then yo^ are, which he suffered patie^^ly, to procure for us pardon
and salvation, and by his ^u^fering he ^ad ex^erience of su^ferings, that ^^
might pity us in our g^ie^s; and ^h^r^for^ it is said, Heb. 4.15. For we have
not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the feelings of our
infirmities, but wa^ in all points tempted, l^ke as we are, (...) without sin.
Our aff^ictions, al^s, expose ^s oftentime^ to ^in, b^^ in that case also Chr
is it is very pitiful and gracious, he remembre^^ that we are but du^^, Psalm.
103.14.

You add, You fear that your Sun will set in darkness and de^spair. I answer
to you, Consider t^a^ future things belong to God Do not afflict your self with
future things; Sufficient for the d^y^ the evil thereof, Mat. 6.34. Let ^he
morrow care for it ^elf. B^^ suppose y^u should have no comfort t^ll you die,
it is the case ^^ many of Gods children to die in a dark cloud; and Christ
himse^^ sanctified that case, Mat 27.46, 50. He cried with a loud voice. E^^
Eli, lamasabachthani. Ver 5^. Jesus when he had cried again with loud voice,
yiel^ed up the ghost. Wh^t if some of Gods children should in this point be
conformed to Jesus Christ? do not add ^^ your sorrows, fears of a sad
condition which Christ has sancti^fied.

Touching your Parentage, and present state, I know how it i^ very well. In
this case I advise you to consider, that if yo^^ worldly Cup had been fill^d
with such sweetness as flesh and bloo^ desire, it might have been much worse
for your soul. A so^^ drowned in earthly pleasure is rarely saved: but a soul
drowned i^ worldly sorrows and griefs (if instructed in the knowledge of J^^sus
Christ) shall never be lost, because the sorrows and crosses ^^ the world will
keep him from surfeiting upon the Creature, an^ drive him to s^tiate himself in
Christ by the promises of the G^^spel. Thus have I answered to the chief points
in your Co^^plaint.


Penit. Oh the power of the word of God, aptly applied unto t^^ case of a
distressed soul! The sweet experience that I have no^ found in those ^criptures
which you have produced, and applie^ to my case, shall make me, hereafter, to
search and read the Scri^ptures more then I have done. I do, like Hagar,
complain for ^^^ter, when it is just by me, if I would search. I hope I shall
rea^ the Scriptures more then ever I have done.


John. You have prevented me, or rather the Spirit of God has put into your
heart by power and grace, that which I intended to have presented to you by way
of Advice and Counsel, namely, To be frequent and abundant in reading the
Scriptures, for you see that all Soul-cordials are laid up there, fetch them
out therefore from that divine Treasury, and make use of them for your comfort.
I know the Devil will oppose you in this matter, and keep you from conversing
in the Scriptures, because they are the sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. whereby
we resist his temptations, as Christ himself has set us an example, Mat. 4.4,
7, 10. when the Devil assaulted him with a temptation, he drew forth the sword
of the Spirit, a Text of Scripture, and opposed the temptation thereby, and
that presently conquered the Tempter. Do you the same, you cannot imitate a
better pattern then our Lord Jesus Christ; and it is his Command also that we
should so do, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures: and David made them his
meditation day and ^ight, Psalm. 1.2. and he had the like experience that you
now have found, and came to the like resolution, Psalm. 119.93. I will never
forget thy precepts, for with them thou have quickened me.


Penit. I feel much tranquillity in my mind, in this way of seeking
Soul-comfort in the Scriptures. Oh I have found out a way of refuge, comfort
and rest in a stormy time, I hope the Lord will give me grace and wisdom to
make more use thereof then ever I have done in my life.

But still my soul is in great doubts and fears about my eternal condition: if
I spend this life in griefs and sorrows, and when I finish here, I go away to
eternal misery, Oh what a lamentable case is that! and my fear is, that this
will be my condition: my griefs indeed are many, but they are worldly sorrow, I
cannot say that I am converted. I desire to know what it is to be converted.


John. All Mankind are once born, by natural birth they come into this world;
but all Gods children are born again, John 3.3. Except a man be born again, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven: and this is a spiritual birth, ver 5.
Except a man be born of water, and of the Spirit, etc. Baptism is an outward
sign of it, but the inward grace is a work of the Spirit, and the Spirit
works by the Word of God, James 1.18, 21. Of his own will begat he us by the
word of truth; and ver. 21. Wherefore lay apart all fil^hiness and superfluity
of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to
save your souls. By faith in the Promise the soul is united to Christ, and he
that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. When an afflicted soul
does venture it self and its All, upon the faithful word of Promise, and says
to God, as Job said, Job 13.15. Though he kill me, yet I will trust in him;
this is the newborn soul, and this believing soul shall be surely saved at
last, whatever sorrows and afflictions it goes through in this life.

And wh ereas you say that your sorrows and griefs are but worldly sorrow: I
answer, That the question is not what kind of sorrow it is, so much, as what
the effects of it is; for no matter what the sorrow is, if it drive the soul to
Christ; our salvation is by Christ, and not by sorrow: the use of sorrow is to
imbitter sin, and the world, and to drive the soul to Christ for relief and
rest; if worldly sorrow, or rather sorrow about worldly things do this, it has
its end, and proves to be a godly sorrow. Sorrows are not to merit any thing
from God, but to force the afflicted soul to fly to him for refuge. We shall
find examples in Scripture, where sorrows about worldly things have
effectually driven the soul to fly to God for refuge. Psalm. 88.18. Lover and
friend have thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness. This was
an outward affliction, and yet in the first verse of that Psalm, it drives him
to fly and cry to the God of his salvation; and this is an act of faith. So
Psalm. 35.15. But mine adversaries they rejoiced, they g^thered themselves
together, yea the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew
it not; they did tear me, and ceased not. With hypocritical mockers in feasts,
they gnashed upon me with their eeeth; that is, some broke jests upon him at
their Taverns and Tiplings, and others scorned him, etc. all these were outward
afflictions, but they drove David to fly and cry to God, ver. 17. Lord, how
long will thou look on? rescue my soul, etc. and this is an act of faith. So it
was with Job in his affliction, Job 30.8, 9, 10. the basest of the people made
songs and jests upon him; but mark what end God made with Job. So James speaks,
Iam. 5.12. Therefore whatever your griefs be, turn them into prayers, and cry
to God for relief, and then your grief has a sanctified end, and you will at
last learn to say after David, in that high strained string of Faith and
Experience, It is good for me that I was afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes, Psalm. 119.71. And ver. 67, of that Psalm, Before I was afflicted I
went astray, but now I have kept thy word. And therefore what though your
afflictions be outward afflictions, seeing God is pleased mercifully to bless
them unto your spiritual and eternal good.

But I further observe, that sundry of your expressions do hold forth a
spiritual sorrow for your sin, and a fear of Gods wrath, and an earnest desire
to flee from, and escape wrath to come. I pray therefore express your self what
sorrows and griefs you have of that kind; for although such sorrows do not
deserve any thing at Gods hand, yet they are of a more spiritual nature, and
spring from a deep reverence and fear of God, and do more immediately and
effectually drive the soul for refuge to Jesus Christ, who only delivers the
soul from the guilt and condemnation of sin. Utter some drops of those
soul-wounding terrors, which afflict you in the sense of your sin guiltiness.


Penit. Still my soul admireth to see the great use is to be made of the word
of God, which does engage my soul more and more, to a more frequent use of the
Scriptures. Lord Jesus help me to perform it.

My forementioned griefs about my outward condition, are but the Porch of
those troubles that Iodge in my distressed soul. When I look down into the
dungeon of my heart, and the dunghill of my life, I am filled with an
abhorrence of my self, and wonderment at Gods patience, to suffer such a wretch
as I am to live. I know much of the sins of others, but I know more by my self,
then I know by any body else, considering circumstantial aggravations. I can
truly say with Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. sinners, of whom ^ am chief. If my Companions
have misled me, or my leaders have ca^sed me to err, it may aggravate their
sin, but be no excuse or apology for mine; I have done as evil as I could, and
had not God hampered me with outward affliction and trouble, it is not to be
said by man how vile I should have been. It is sometimes a quieting argument to
my heart, to be patient under ^y outward crosses, because they be Mustard on
the Worlds Nipples, to keep me from surfeiting upon the Creature. If I look
into the glass of Gods Law, and behold the face of my life, and of my soul, as
they are there represented, I am afraid of my self, I abhor my self, I am
confounded. Gods Sabbaths I have profaned; Gods Word I have neglected; Gods
Grace I have despised and resisted; I have broken the whole Law of God, every
Command have I violated: for there be some acts of sin that I never did
actually commit, yet the habit of sin is in me, and in inclination and desire I
am guilty of it: and for a foundation of this mountainous heap of guilt, I am
guilty of Adams fall, the first, the worst, the root of all the sins of the
sons of men. My sinful habit and disposition by nature, does viciously incline
me to sin, against my desires, purposes, promises, and resolutions. When I
strive and labor, and cry and pray against my sins, yet upon the opportunity
and occasion offered, my sin will return; I am weak, that is strong; I am
subdued, and that prevails. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me?

When I consider the infinite Justice of God offended, the infinite Wrath of
God provoked, the eternal Law of God violated, and the eternal torments
provided and prepared in hell for sinners, and the insuperableness of my sin,
by any means I can use, it will prevail over me, it will keep me in bondage, it
will inslave me, and I fear it finally will damn me. In these considerations my
soul is sunk and drowned. If therefore there be any Balm for my sore, any
succor for my distressed soul, show me the way how I shall escape these
everlasting burnings, that are the just recompense of my transgressions.


John. The first endeavor of the heart of man, is to pacify Gods wrath with
something of our own; and first by mincing, excusing and apologizing, as they
did, Ier. 2.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? thou
teach ways and arts to sin cunningly; and hence the blood of innocent souls
is openly found in thy skirts: yet thou say, I am innocent, and his anger
shall be turned away. But then divine Justice takes the cause in hand; Why
gaddest thou about to seek so many shifts? I will never leave thee till I have
made thee ashamed of them all, for none of them shall prosper to turn away
divine wrath, ^r to procure thee a pardon. But I find not your soul mincing or
your ^in, nor making excuses for your self.

The next course the heart of man will take, is to purchase a pardon, by giving
to God some great sacrifice, or by doing some great penance; as it is expressed
in Micah 6.6, 7, 8. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self
before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves
of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten
thousands of r^vers of oil? shall I give my first born for my transgression,
the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? He has showed thee, O man, what
is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk hum^ly with thy God? The inquiry is wherewith a sinner shall
pacify God; he proffers great matters, more then he can perform: he bids low
at first, only burnt-offerings and calves; but when that will not be accepted
he rises higher, ^hewing what he would do if he had wherewith, he bids
thousands of rams, ten thousand rivers of oil; if that will not do, he offers
the fruit of his body for the Sin of his soul, whether macerations of the body,
or any other fruit: but alas, all will not do. And then ver. 8. he shows what
is the only thing that will satisfy, only Jesus Christ, belived on by faith,
held forth in those works of sanctification and holy life, for so the Scripture
testifies, 2 Cor 5.19. God was in Christ Jesus reconciling the world unto
himself. And Acts 4.12. There is no other Name under heaven by which we can be
saved. Acts 16.3^. Bel^eve in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thy
house.

I do not mention such Texts of Scripture as call to repentance, because the
end of repentance being ^o dispose the heart to believing; it seems to me, by
your many gracious and penitent confe^^ions, that the Spirit of G^d has
wrought in you a penitent heart already, and your soul lies in the very next
capacity of believing in our Lord Jesus Christ by the Promise. Yea further I
say, that your gracious acceptance of the Word of God, love unto it, and
submission ^o its light and conduct, these a^ts of grace in you are so
powerful, sweet and savoury, that I know not but that the work of faith is
already wrought in your poor, mourning, trembling, but blessed soul; and
therefore be no more so disconsolate, hope in the Lord, and do as it is said,
Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy
heart: wait, I say, upon the Lord.


Penit. I do perceive that you take that to be a great work of grace and faith
in my heart, so gladly to receive the Word of God, and submissively to give up
my self to the conduct thereof. I cannot deny, but confess, that my heart is
really so as I have expressed, and every thing that has passed in this
Conference has had something in it, to strengthen that frame of heart it me:
and now lastly and especially, that you do bring forth that work which is
wrought in me to be an evidence of faith, this does so much the more incline
and oblige my heart to a great love and reverence to the Scriptures, and a
resolution, through the grace, help and assistance of Jesus Christ, to spend
the rest of my life in a more diligent and abundant attendance on the hearing,
reading, meditating on, and obeying of the Word of God. If this be an act of
faith, I desire to live that part of the life of faith all the days of my
life. Lord help me to perform this promise unto God.


John. I will show you the reason why I lay so much weight upon that f^^r of
heart, to embrace the Word, to love it, to obey it, etc. first, I find that it
is the character of those famous primitive Converts, Acts 2.41, 42. Then they
that gladly received his word were ^aptized, and the same day there were added
unto them about three ^housand souls: and they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship. Their obedience to, and walking in the Word,
is a ^hief effect and Sign of the true and thorough work of grace in them: in
that point their Conversion shined, and it seems to me, that your Conversion
does in this point shine.

Again, Iam. 1.21. it is said, Lay aside all filthiness and superfluity ^^
naughtiness, and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is ^ble to
save your souls. Here be three things in this Text: the first ^^ the
preparative work, to cast away all filthiness, and out boil^ngs of naughtiness.
This work God has wrought in your di^^ressed heart, which appears in your
penitent confessions. The ^econd work is to receive the word with meekness, and
so, that it ^ay appear to be an ingrafted word, connaturalized in your heart;
^^d this is the work which I observe to be wrought in your heart, which is the
work of faith, whereby you are united to Christ by ^^e word so received, and
submitted unto: The entrance of thy lord gives life, Psalm. 119.130. Then the
third thing; this Word ^^ received and ingrafted, whereby you are united to
Christ, this ^ill save your soul; you are a ve^^el of grace, and shall be a
vessel ^^ glory, fear it not, God that cannot lie has spoken it.

Again, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Laying aside all malice, and all gu^le, and hy^^crifies,
and envies, and evil speakings; As newborn ba^es desire the (...) milk of the
word, that ye may grow thereby. Here see 1. A (...) born babe, that is, a soul
converted, a new creature formed in the heart by faith laying hold on Christ,
and from him receiving the Spirit, to dwell in him, and to form this new
creature in hi^ heart. Now what acts of life does this babe perform? they ar^
two: 1. By mortification and repentance he purges out all hi^ sins; and this
act of life you effectually do by your penitent co^fessions. The second act of
life is, he desires the sincere milk o^ the word that he may grow thereby. The
new creature is fed b^ the same means by which it was begotten: the word of God
is t^^ seed of God to beget the new creature, 1 John 3.9. and then t^^ word of
God is milk to feed and nourish the new creature. No^ this is the thing that I
observe in you, that as a new ^orn babe yo^ desire the milk of the word: and
note this word, Sincere milk; ^ living babe of Christ cannot abide humane
mixtures added to t^^ word of God; he loves the pure word, he cannot relish
mix^tures.


Penit. My dearest friend, God has made you an instrument ^^ his hand to lay
before me unspeakable consolation; and I cann^^ deny but I feel it in my heart,
I am another man then what I wa^ I looked on my self the most miserable of men,
I now am hap^^ being united to Christ. O blessed change! I am in admiration
(...) this, I admire the grace of Christ to a dead, lost, damned sinn^^ I am
come into a new world, I have other desires then I had, (...) other purposes; I
see things in another frame then I was wont see them. I must live a new life,
and steer a new course.

But in this point my soul desires to begin, I am not mine own* am the servant
of Jesus Christ, he died for me, and by his grace de^^^e to live unto him. And
now I find my self greatly to (...) Counsel how to order my self in my future
course; what sha^^ do for the Lord, who has done so much for me? My dear
frie^^ your Counsel has been greatly owned and blessed by the Lord my new
birth, I desire to have great respect to your Counsel for ordering of my ways
in my new life.

You do partly know that my people, and some chief ones amo^^ them, have had
but a final measure of respect for me, but I have gr^^^ reason to overlook it,
and bury it, because in his infinite (...) Christ has turned it about for my
better good; my heart tell^ me that I must seek the good of my people, how to
manage (...) work wisely, is my difficulty, wherein I need your Counsel. ^
would to God that all my people were as I am, and tasted and (...) what I have
found; but that is not yet so. I desire to bring t^^ to be the Lords people,
how I shall accomplish that, is my gr^^^ ^ifficul^y. You know I have been
frequently among you pr^^ Indians, and in my heart have adhered to you, and it
may be (...) have found the less acceptance for it; but I leave that God* must
do and perform the trust, charge and duty that my Lord (...) has committed to
me. My question therefore is, How (...) comport with the present affairs, and
state of things? how shall I bring the matter about, to bring about my people
to pray to God?


John. It joys my heart to hear these gracious breathings of Gods Spirit in
you. I taste in your discourse evident tokens of a living child of God. I see
that my judgment about the spiritual state of your soul, was not a product of
precipitate charity, but an effect of the spirit of right discerning. I will
encourage you in your godly purposes, with a modest application of some of the
Angels words to Gideon, Judge. 6.12, 14. Go on, thou mighty man of valor, and
go in this thy strength, and thou shall save thy people. The Lord will be with
thee. But for the manner of your proceeding in this matter, my thoughts incline
me to propose this way: Be open to own the grace of God bestowed on you, to
confess your former known crooked and dark ways, and the change which God by
his grace has wrought in you. At present, let your first motion be to stay a
while at Natik, adjoyn your self to the Church, who when they hear your
Confession, will joyfully receive you. In due season, request of the Church to
send some able, pious, and fitting Teachers with you, among your people.
Prudent Counsel may be taken how to prepare and predispose your people for such
a motion. I do not doubt but the Governor and Magistrates of the Massachusetts,
will be easily entreated to interpose in so good a work, which may tend to the
bringing in so many people to the service of Jesus Christ.


Penit. I do well approve and accept of your Counsel, it savoureth of
discretion and wisdom, in all things God has guided your lips to drop like
the honeycomb into my heart. And now I have one request further unto you, That
while we are together in this solitary opportunity, we may spend some time in
conversing with God in Prayer, turn all those things that have passed into
Prayers, and the future matters also; let us spread them before the Lord, and
beg his guidance and blessing.


John. I do greatly accept this motion; and it is another sign of the truth of
the work of Gods grace in your heart, because this is the property of the new
creature, a newborn babe, that he will cry Abba Father. Here we leave them at
Prayer.


FINIS.

