A MODEST VINDICATION OF TITUS OATS THE Salamanca-Doctor FROM PERJURY: OR AN
ESSAY TO Demonstrate Him only Forsworn in several Instances.

BY ADAM ELLIOT, Master of Arts, and a Priest of the Church of England.

Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue. What
reward shall be given, or done unto thee, thou false tongue, even mighty and
sharp arrows, with hot burning Coals. Psalm. 120. Hic putat esse Deos and
pejerat: aspice quanta
Voce neget, quae sit ficti constantia vultus;
Tam facile and pronum est superos contemnere testes:
Aut nullo credit mundum rectore moveri,
At que ideo intrepidus quaecunque Altaria tangit.
Juv. Sat. 13. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Joseph
Hindmarsh at the Black-Bull in Cornhill. 1682.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE most Notorious Salamanca-Doctor, Titus Oats, after having signalized his
prodigious Parts, by the Destruction of several eminent Persons, and hazarding
the lives of God knows how many more; after having miraculously saved his
Majesty's Person from Poison, screwed Gu^ and Consecrated Dagger, and freed
three Nations from imminent ruin; after having defeated the designs of Rome,
and the plots of the greatest Politicians in the world, though they had been
hatching these 100 years past; and all this by mere Bukeblawing, and to the
astonishment of the whole Christian world, by the breath of his mouth; was at
last put upon it, to try an expeririment or two to fix Property, which by Wise
heads (that is by Needy or Covetous persons, who wanted Bishops or Crown Lands)
was thought to be in equal danger with our Religion. For if, for example, he
could swear a friend to the cause into the right of forty or fifty thousand
Pounds, (which the Law it seems was so scrupulous in, as not to understand;)
then true Protestants might have a compendious and infallible way to secure
their Property against the encroachments of whatsoever Arbitrary, that is,
Legal power. In order to effect this wonderful project, he was pleased
unhappily both for himself and me, (at the instigation of what Lord or Devil
the Lord knows,) to bestow a cast of his office, on a friend who shall be
nameless, and to stoop an oath or two at his service, against so mean a person
as my self: not only engaging his Verbum Sacerdotis in several Companies, yea*
even where men ought to be very furious, before the King; but also Swearing,
invocating the sacred Majesty of God, who will one day call him to account for
it, to witness to the truth, when he asserted, that I was a Mahumetin, and had
been thereupon Circumoised; and that also I was a Popish Priest, having
received Orders from the Sea of Rome: by the former charge making me unworthy
of credit or reputation, incapable of the advantages of converse amongst
Christians; and by the later, the milder indeed of the two, aiming only at my
life, which as being a Popish Priest* is forfeited to the Law. I must indeed
confess of all kinds of Deaths I have the least fondness to be hanged, and I
hate mortally that the butcherly Executioner should be rummaging amongst my
Entrails* neither can I apprehend any pleasure in being drawn up Halborn hill
upon a Hurdle: therefore it was, that I had no mind to appear either a
Renegado, or a Popish Priest; and I thought my self obliged both by the Laws of
God and Man to preserve my life as long as I could, and to vindicate my
reputation from infamy, and assert my just and honest title to the comforts of
humane society: and that I have no ways deserved to be proscribed the
Communication of Christians.

To this purpose I made my application to the Law for satisfaction, and had the
Doctor arrested in an Action of the Case for Defamation. The Cause was tried
before the Right Honorable Sir Francis North, L. C. J. of his Majesty's Court
of Common Pleas, June the 30th last past; where the issue went upon my side,
and the Jury brought the Doctor in guilty, allowing me 20 l. Damages: which
small sum, though by many it was looked upon as very inconsiderable and
disproportionate to the damages wherewith the Doctor had affected both my
Reputation and my Purse; yet by another party, it was looked upon with a sore
eye, to see their Goliath (who had for some time past, hectored and swore for
the cause) foiled, if not knocked down by so mean a person as my self. They
admired my insolence in offering to defend my life, when the Doctor was pleased
to swear it from me; they inveighed against me, as a narrow selfish soul, far
from a public spirit, who would not rather be hanged, than the Doctor's
veracity should be liable to any suspicion; a man who had laid himself out, and
ventured all for the good of the Nation; yea, who is the Savior of the Nation,
said prudent Sh. Pilk. Notwithstanding all which, I cannot but be of this
faith, that it is more convenient for me, that the Doctor should swing than I;
as for his all that he has ventured, I never heard of any thing he had to
venture, unless his all, i. e. his Soul; which to my knowledge is deeply
engaged. And as for his being styled the Savior of the Nation, it is Scandalum
Magnatum in the highest degree; the Title is most arrogant, and intimates a
Blasphemous relation to the Savior of the world; a most odious Comparison
'twixt the Merits of our Savior Jesus Christ, and those of Titus Oats; for
which there cannot be the least reason or foundation of Analogy; unless that as
it was judged necessary (notwithstanding Oats preached to the contrary) that
our Savior should be crucified, that the world might be saved; so it should be
thought convenient, that Oats might be hanged, that so our Nation perish not.
Then indeed he might sustain some Relation, even the same that the Blasphemous
Thief had to our Savior when he was on the Cross, and in some sense he might
be called the Savior of our Nation; but otherwise the Title is intolerable,
and he must first be hanged before by any propriety of speech, it can agree to
him.

There are a Party of men I say, who finding what an intractable, morose,
uncomplaisant humor I am of, and that by refusing to be accounted a Popish
Priest or a Circumcised Mahumetan; the Doctor has fallen under a shrewd
suspicion of Perjury, and may in time put in his claim to the Pillory, though
with the forfeit of his Ears. Therefore it is, that they have used all base
unworthy arts to blacken my reputation; and seeing it was manifestly proved in
Court, that the Doctor had frequently uttered those scandalous words, which
tended to my Defamation, they give out now, that I was the first Author of them
my self; and what the Doctor said or swore concerning me, was only what he
heard me say of my self; thus endeavoring to affix as notorious a mark of
Folly to my name, as before he would of Villainy. Therefore to answer the
importunity of my friends, and to disabuse any, who may be deluded by the
malicious calumnies of my nettled Adversaries, I have adventured to put Pen to
Paper, to give a full and clear account of the proceedings 'twixt the Dr. and
my self; which will consist in these following particulars.

I shall first give a short Narrative of my Travails, Captivity and Escape from
Slavery in Barbary; which though it may seem foreign and impertinent to my
design, yet, because it is the subject of the Doctor's Oaths, I cannot clearly
without it, represent the quality of them; and besides, being a recital of some
rare accidents, and almost miraculous instances of the providence of God in my
deliverance from a Moorish Captivity, I presume it will make some compensation
for the impertinence which it seemingly carries to the design of these Sheets.

In the next place, I shall faithfully set down, what the Doctor has deposed
against me upon Oath, under his own hand, at Doctors Commons, and what was
proved in Court at our Trial by unexceptionable Witnesses, that he had said
several times against me, to the same purpose with what he swore before.

And in the third place, I shall give an account of what was sworn in his
behalf to mitigate Damages: Upon all which, I shall only make such Anirnad
versions as are pertinent and proper, and draw such Inferences as the matter
will rationally allow. And then I refer my self to the whole Nation as Judges,
whether or no the Doctor has not only falsely and maliciously defamed me, but
likewise sworn that to be true, which in it self is false, and to his own
knowledge also.

Yet notwithstanding all this, I cannot see how it will follow that the Doctor
is guilty of Perjury; for though in the Court of Heaven, and before God,
Perjury and false swearing be synonymous, yet none are esteemed guilty of
Perjury, by the Laws of this Land, but who have been convicted of swearing
falsely in a Court of Record. But the Court of Delegates, where Oates's
Depositions against me were exhibited, being no such Court; therefore according
to the Law-Phrase, what ever I think in my conscience (and I am sure he is
Porsworn) yet I cannot say that the Doctor is Perjured, and consequently that
the Pillory has never been adequate to the Doctor's high merits. A Wooden Ruff
does not well become the Savior of the Nation, with modesty be it spoke as I
said before, I think a Halter would much better befit him; and really before I
should see the Salamanca Doctor treated as they say poor N. T. was, I had much
rather see him hanged.

This modest Vindication of the Doctor, my grateful sense of his merciful kind
temper to me has commanded from me; for if the Doctor had pleased to have
thought of me when he and Dr. Tongue were thinking together, he might easily
have bestowed a small Commission upon his old Acquaintance; some little
Cross-bearers place amongst the Spanish Pilgrims, or else if he had only made
me a Courier 'twixt tall fair Don John and the four Ruffians; any such like
employment, (and the Doctor has bestowed abundance, and has much more in store)
would have consigned me to Jack Ketches disposal long ago; for it is very hard
to prove a Negative. But now that he has only made me a Musselman, cujus
character est indelebilis, he has given me a fair opportunity of proving him a
forsworn Liar; for which singular kindness I cannot sufficiently profess my
obligations: And this is one reason why I have undertook this modest
Vindication. Which labor of mine, though it may seem to carry an oblique
design only of gratifying my fond humor to the Doctor, yet to considering
persons also I presume I shall be thought to have hereby contributed my Mite to
the public, in exposing the wickedness of a Wretch whose talent lies only in
Swearing: for though I have undertook his Vindication, yet I intend it shall be
with all Modesty, and such as shall not interfere with the Truth.

The Doctor has employed his Swearing faculty only to my particular detriment,
the meanest of the Church of England; he has forsworn himself to prejudice me;
but yet every member thereof is concerned, since this public Enemy has given
broad signs of his inclinations to them all, as namely, when he said there were
not above three Protestant Bishops in the Church of England, and that all the
Clergy were tantivying to Rome: as also in his Sermon at Woodstock, he
delivered for true doctrine that the Presbyterians were the only supporters of
the Protestant interest; and there is no question, but that when there shall
come a House of Commons to pay him the 40000 l. promised (as he says) by the
last House who sat at Westminster, he has 40000 Oaths at their service. But
now, by exposing him as Forsworn, the edge of his Swearing will for the future
be rebated; for if it be the dictate of prudence, never to trust those who have
but once been found to impose upon us, then certainly it is unaccountable folly
and madness, to accept the testimony of one who has manifestly Forsworn
himself, and in a manner proclaimed to all the world, that he has no dread of
that God, who will revenge himself upon those who take his name in vain. For my
own part, though forty Plots were laid against me, I had rather venture them
all, than rely upon a Salamanca Doctor's Oath: and if any thing staggers my
faith in the belief of the 40000 Black bills, and other remarkable passages in
the Popish Plot, next to the contradictions which occur; it is because a
Villain of so plainly debaucht and profligate a conscience has concerned
himself in the discovery. Which I have endeavored to make appear manifestly to
others, as well as my self, from the following Sheets.

A NARRATIVE OF My TRAVAILS, CAPTIVITY and ESCAPE FROM SALLE, In the Kingdom of
FEZ.
IN the year 1664, I was admitted into Cajus College in the University of
Cambridge, where I continued until 1668; when Commencing Batchelour of Arts, I
obtained Letters testimonial from our College, and then left the University.
During my stay there, I remember Titus Oats was entered into our College; by
the same token that the Plague and he both visited the University in the same
year. He was very remarkable for a Canting Fanatical way conveyed to him with
his Anabaptistical Education, and in our Academical exercises, when others
declaimed Oats always preached; some of which Lectures, they were so very
strange, that I do yet remember them. I moreover remember, that he staid not
above a year in our College, but removed to S. John's; what the occasion was, I
cannot call to mind: and then he was so inconsiderable both as to his person
and parts, that I appeal to all who knew me, whether Elliot and Oats could be
such intimate acquaintance as Oats would make the world believe.

After I had commenced Batchelour* in 1668, I left the University; in the
beginning of 1669 I had the opportunity of traveling with some Gentlemen of my
acquaintance, with whom, after a transient view of Flanders and other of the
Spanish Provinces, which had been the seat of war for some years preceding, I
had the opportunity to see St. Omers also, where Oats was once a Schoolboy,
and no Jesuit. I remember during my stay there, which was three days, S.
Ignatius or Xaverius or some other Jesuit* Saints day happened, and I with the
Gentlemen with me, were civilly invited to Dinner to the English College;
where, to give the Devil his due, we met with nothing but Learning and Civility
to their Countrymen and Strangers. From St. Omers we directed our Course into
France, directly for Paris; whence, after I had gratified my juvenile curiosity
with the rarities and remarkable places there, and several others in France,
about the latter end of 1669, I was carried into Italy, and about November we
came to Rome; where I saw that Great Beast of a Whore, as Oats called him, a
Reverend old Gentleman Rospigliosi who then was Pope. He happened to die a
little after my coming thither, which was the occasion of my fortune to stay
there, sede vacant, during the Election of another Pope. I never saw the
Scotch College during my stay there, nor any Scotch Father, nor any that
belonged to the College that I know of: I was frequently indeed in the Roman
College, and I had the happiness of hearing Padre Gotinio, the then
Mathematick Professor, discourse very satisfactorily upon several curious
subjects.

I staid in Rome no longer than the Election of Altieri Rospigliosi Successor
to the former, which was in March 1670: after which an occasion happening of
parting with my Company, I parted also from Rome; and intending home again for
England, I came to Leghorn, where finding an opportunity of the Bristol one of
his Majesty's Friggots, I had a convenient passage to Alicant in Spain, and
from thence to Malaga, where I embarked aboard Sir John Herman, then
Rere-Admiral under Sir Thomas Allen in the Streights, who gave me passage to
Cales. About the beginning of May, I had a curiosity to see Sevil; from whence
having the convenience of some Company, I took my course directly for Lisbon in
Portugal; there was then residing Dr. Cradock Minister to the English Merchants
there, whom I had seen at Cambridge; to whose civility, and some English
Gentlemen's, particularly Mr. Bulteel's, I was exceedingly obliged.

There was at that time no Vessel designed for England in the River of Lisbon,
excepting a little Ketch called the John of London, laden with Oranges and
Lemons, and I was very desirous to return home, so that I was obliged to take
my passage in that small Vessel; some who seconded my desires, alleging that I
should be more secure in her than in a bigger, because she by reason of her
smallness would keep near the Coast and so out of danger of the Turks; and
besides Sir Edward Sprag was said then to lie upon the Portugal Coast with a
Squadron of English Frigots, so that these Seas would be scoured clear of the
Barbary-Rovers. Upon which Arguments, I was induced to embark aboard that
little Vessel, where I lost my Freedom.

It was about the middle of June 1670, we parted from Lisbon* River, designed
for London; about three days after, we met Sir Edward Sprag with his Squadron,
who encouraged us with the News that no Pirates were in those Seas, he having
lain there about a month. Upon which we struck out to Sea, the wind being
Northerly and cross to us all the while; so that by the 22d of June we had got
no farther than Cape Finisterre: on which day, whilst the Master and I were at
breakfast, a Boy who sat at the Helm, cried out, a Sail, which was the only one
we had descried (excepting Sir Edward Spragg) since we left Lisbon: by our
Glasses we perceived she had a mind to speak with us, for she had got out all
her Sails, and bore down upon us directly before the wind, which methought was
no sign of a Merchant man; therefore I desired the Master to bear toward the
Shore, who refused to be persuaded, alleging, that this was the usual passage
for Hollanders, French and English, and that it was most probable, that this
Ship which was in view, must be a friend, for that year we were at peace with
all Europeans. About ten a-clock up comes the Ship with French colors, as soon
as she came near us, so that we could not escape, she pulled down her French
and put up her Salle-Colours, and withal gave us a Gun, which obliged us to
strike. Immediately appeared upon the Pirates Deck about 200 Moors, who
commanded us to put out our Boat and come aboard them, which we all (excepting
one) presently obeyed. For our welcome, and to show us what entertainment we
were after to expect, the Master of the Vessel and my self were stripped and
tied to the Mast in order to be whipped, that so they might extort a confession
where the Money lay hid if we had any; we satisfied them as well we could, that
they were Masters of all that we knew of in our Vessel: and so we were released
from the Mast, and put in Irons below deck with our Fellow Prisoners. There it
was that I began to reflect upon my condition, for before (the change was so
sudden and the strange uncouth accidents so surprising) I had scarce leisure to
consider: it is hard to express my resentments then; all my fellow prisoners
were lamenting with pitiful cries and tears their miserable estate, which only
afforded matter of triumph and insolence to our cruel and merciless Masters;
who when they heard us complain of our condition, would visit us with some
blows, insulting most intolerably over us, lifting up our dejected heads and
spitting upon our Faces, not vouchsafing us any other Name than Dogs. I must
confess this inhumane usage was very hard to digest at first, but a little
time, and the discipline of our skilful Tutors easily reconciled us to it; for
we found that murmuring did but enhance our affliction, and enrage our crosses.
Our Vessel was within two or three hours after she was taken, sent to Salle,
with twenty Moors aboard her, who carried with them all our Provision of Beef
and Biscuit, leaving a little Pork only which we soon devoured: after which, we
had nothing left to maintain us in life, save a small quantity of dried Olives
and Biscuit, which eveday was allowed us: this sort of Dieting did indeed bring
down our high Stomachs, and made us very tractable.

We lay in this miserable condition about forty days, oppressed as with many
inconveniences, so especially I remember with the stench and nastiness of our
lodging: sometimes in the day we were permitted to come above deck, to suck in
a little fresh air, and to wash our selves, but this small comfort was soon
forgot by returning to our irons. There was scarce a day almost, according to
my remembrance, in which we did not either give chase or else were chased; for
the Salle-man was a good Sailor, and whenever she saw a Sail, she immediately
made after her, if she found her too strong to grapple with, then she tackt and
stood away. At length about a month after I was taken, one morning when there
was little wind stirring, we were called up upon the Deck, I thought it had
been to refresh our selves, but we found it was with labor and toil, for there
being a great calm all that day, we were obliged to tug hard at the Oar till
ten at night; at which time we came up with a French Merchant laden with Oil,
whom we had been in pursuit of all that day; as soon as we came near her, we
poor Christians were remanded to our kennel, and moreover had a Sentinel set
over us to observe us. A little after three and twenty Frenchmen had the
unhappiness to make us a visit, and take up their Lodgings in the same
quarters. It was but a miserable comfort methought to have such companions in
misery, and truly the sight of so many dejected souls, particularly a Merchant
(who lost 2500 Crowns of Cash besides his concerns in the Cargo) affected me
then with a more sensible grief than my own sufferings; he was a man of too
tender a constitution to endure the same miseries with the rest; we were all
lodged equally, and had the same sort of accommodation, that French Gentleman
and the meanest of the Seamen were treated alike: which subjected him to such a
grief that was too powerful for him, so that at length it broke his heart, for
he died the next day after we landed.

Our Barbarous Masters were well pleased with this rich Prize, and resolved to
go home with her for Salle, so they directed their course thither. We fortuned
one day to meet with hard weather which increased to a storm that night. The
Moors we perceived were in great trouble and amazement, so that a conceit
entered my head, that if we should all of us with resolution fall upon the Moors
who had the management of the Ship above Deck, we might easily make her change
Masters, a project which if it had been prosecuted, did not seem impracticable,
for there were not above thirty Moors who understood any thing of Navigation or
a Seaman; these were above deck, and employed; the rest of the Moors were
surpised with so great a consternation that the Captain commanded them all to
go below deck; so that if we had resolutely attacqu'd the Captain with his few
Companions, and clapped down the Hatches upon the rest, we might have succeeded;
but this poor-spirited-French man and two more, apprehending the Difficulties
of the enterprise as insuperable, declared their resolution to discover all, if
we proceeded; notwithstanding the rest of us seemed unanimous, as thinking that
we should never find a better occasion to venture our Lives to regain our
Liberty.

A few days after by break of day, we found our selves near two great Ships who
put out Dutch Colors; this put the Moors into a great fright lest they should
fall into their hands, wherefore they made all the sail they could, and
labored hard to get clear of them, but to little purpose, for the other two
Ships gained manifestly upon the Salle-man though it proved not to our comfort;
for when they came up to her, and every minute she expected to be boarded, all
of a sudden we Christians (who were then lying below in irons heartily praying
for our Deliverance) heard a shout of joy above deck; for the Ships who were in
chase of us discovered themselves to be Algerines, the Admiral called the
Springing Tiger, as I think, and another. Then there was great rejoicing
amongst them, coming aboard each other freely, and mutual treats past, and we
Christians also were permitted to go and visit our fellow Slaves and
Contrymen; who acquainted us with the News that some English Frigots were
lying then before Salle, which gave us some hopes if true, and made the Moors
very wary. That evening we parted from the Algerines, and bore directly for
Salle. At length we came in sight of the Castle, but could discern no Ships
before it, we therefore made directly for the River, when presently there
starts up a Vessel that made all the Sail she could at us, and obliged us to
tack about and strike down along the Barbary-Coast; she put us so hard to it,
that we were forced to forsake the French Prize, and leave her to be picked up
by our Pursuer, which was an English Ship called the Holmes-Frigot of two and
twenty Guns, whom afterward I saw at my return at Cales. Whilst she was
employed in taking the Prize, the Salle-man in the Interim made away, and night
approaching, in the dark made her escape.

The next morning, all we Christians were commanded a-shoar, because the Moors
had run themselves into a Creek some twenty Leagues South off Salle, where they
lay concealed from the sight of the Frigot, though we had her plainly in view
all the next day, with the French prize at her Stern, with languishing eyes and
sad hearts, seeing our Deliverance, but not being able to approach it. There
they landed us poor* Christians in number two and thirty, English and French,
who were to travel to Salle under the guard of a couple of Moors only, whom we
might easily have rid our selves from, if we had judged it safe or convenient:
but Salle was the only place whither we could retreat unto, and these were our
Guides thither through as desolate and forlorn a country, as barren and dry a
land, as ever my eyes beheld. We were above two days in traveling these twenty
Leagues, where we had not the prospect of any Town, Village or House all the
way, nor could we see any footsteps of Husbandry or Civility; the best water we
met with, was very brackish; our provision, which our Masters allowed us, when
we parted from the Ship, was all devoured the first day. Our condition indeed,
during that journey was the most deplorable that ever I was in; for our short
Commons and hard Lodging aboard the Ship, had much weakened our bodies, we were
very hungry and had no meat, exceeding thirsty and for a whole day no water,
the Sun was very hot and no shelter, the Heavens looked like Brass and the Earth
like iron, all which circumstances will easily convince any that we must of
necessity long to get clear of that cursed Country, which threatened us with
inevitable destruction, and there was no other place of refuge but Salle; so
that our condition of life must appear very pitiful, seeing we longed for the
place of our Captivity, and panted after our Afflictions. When night approacht,
our Guides made us take up our Lodging where there were a few Shrubs, which we
set on fire to secure us from the Lions, and other Beasts of Prey, as
Wild-Boars, etc. of which we saw several in our way.

At length upon the third day we came within sight of Salle, about half a
league from which, we met with a garden full of delicate fruits, which if the
Moors had not freely bestowed upon us, we had made bold to have took without
leave, such was our necessity: there we were permitted to refresh our selves
for two hours, before we made our public entry into the City, which was indeed
extraordinary; for we were accompanied by several hundreds of idle rascally
people and roguish Boys, who came out of the Town to meet us and wellcomed us
with horrid barbarous Shouts somewhat like the Irish hubbub. We in the mean
time were forct like a drove of Sheep, through the several streets, the people
crouding to gaze upon us and curse us, for that Civility is a piece of Religion
with them. With this solemnity were we conducted through the Town unto the
River, which we were to cross to another Salle standing in the North-side;
there were we all shut up in the Deputy-Governours Courtyard, where like a
pack of tired Hounds, we fell all fast asleep upon the Ground.

At evening we were conveyed to our Lodgings, where we were to repose our
selves that night, a place proportionable to the rest of the entertainment; it
was a large Cellar under the Street archt and supported with two rows of
Pillars; the light it was furnished with, came through three holes in the
Street strongly grated; through one of which, by a Ladder of Ropes we descended
into this Room, called the Kings Masmora, capacious enough to hold 300 persons,
(for very near that number of Christians of several Nations were shut up there
at nights) besides a whole Leystall of filth, in which, (whosoever's lot it is
to be there) he must wade up to the ancles. There I watched all night, for sleep
I could not; and though the next day I was to be sold publicly in a Market,
yet the peeping in of the light was joyful, because I was to leave that
intolerably noisome Prison.

By Sunrising next morning we were all of us, who came last to Salle driven to
a Marketplace, where the Moors sitting Taylor-wise upon Stalls round about, we
were severally run up and down by persons, who proclaimed our Qualities or
Trades; and what best might recommend us to the Buyer. I had a great Black who
was appointed to sell me; this Fellow holding me by the hand, coursed me up and
down, from one person to another, who called upon me at pleasure to examine me
what trade I was of, and to see what labor my hands were accustomed to. All
the Seamen were soon bought up, it was midday ere I could meet with a
purchaser; the reason was, a boy of the Vessel wherein I was taken, in hopes of
favorable treatment from the Captain who took us, pretended to discover my
quality to him, assuring him that I was a Relation of the now Duke of Norfolk,
who was then Ambassador from his Majesty at Taffiletta, and was come (...)
Tangier. Upon this information, the Captain put a great value upon me, and that
was the reason why none would meddle with me; until about noon Hamed Lucas (who
is Secretary of this present Embassy from the Emperor of Fez to his Majesty)
agreed with the Captain, and paid down 600 pieces of Eight for me.

I was pretty well pleased with my fortune to fall into the hands of such a
person, who besides that he was of a great repute there, seemed to carry in his
deportment an air and mien that was extraordinary; and therefore I hoped for
some more favorable treatment from him than from another: but other Christians
who had heard of this Patron of mine, pityed my ignorance, as knowing that he
was a cunning Jewish Merchant, and that he bought me with a design to extort
from me a great Ransom, though by the harshest and cruellest usage imaginable;
which I found to be too true a character of him him before night: for after he
was come to his own house, whither he commanded me to follow him, he presently
makes me ac^quainted with a piece of his mind and temper; telling me, that he
had paid a considerable sum of Money for me, which he did upon the prospect of
a Ransom for my Liberty, proportionable to his expectation and my quality,
which he was well assured was such, that it would answer whatsoever hopes he
entertained; and he would have me know that I had to do with a man with a
Beard, and who was too cunning to be imposed upon, and therefore advised me to
forego that piece of policy which the Christians frequently make use of in
concealing their qualities, and disguising their conditions; since it would be
in vain to prevaricate before him, who was very well informed of my state, and
as well acquainted with my fortunes in England as I my self; and wished me
rather to propose such a Ransom as was suitable to his expectations, from so
considerable a Captive, for payment of which he would allow me sufficient time:
and if I gave any demonstrations of sincerity in dealing with him, I should be
exempted from all slavish employments; but if I refused a compliance with these
his Proposals, I should experience the greatest severity that any Slave in
Barbary could from his Patron.

Seeing he professed himself a man with a Beard, and one that hated to be
imposed upon, I endeavored all I could to disabuse him, and possess him with a
clear notion of the naked truth, professing with all sincerity, that I was so
sensible of the miseries of Captivity, that if a Kingdom were at my disposal, I
would frankly quit all pretensions to it, in exchange for the happiness of the
Freedom and Liberty I enjoyed in my own Country: but that such has been the
pleasure of God to me in the dispensing the goods of this world, that he has
allowed me no more than what he saw me then possessour of; so that I found my
self under so much worse circumstances than other Christian Captives by how
much I sustained greater expectations, and was least able to answer them; but
that which was the greatest aggravation of my misfortune was, that I should
very much contribute to the calling in question his prudence and judgment,
because all the Town will admire when they shall see the event, that the wise
Hamet-Lucas was imposed upon in giving 600 pieces of Eight for a poor Slave,
who was not worth a Maravidi.

At which last words, he was so transported with passion, that he showered down
a whole torrent of Blows upon me, and lighting unluckily upon a stick, he broke
my head in several places, and never ceast till he had made me all in a
gore-blood; I was not able to stir, and the cruel Villain permitted me to lie a
little while: afterward he comes again afresh, and drags me out of his House
into the Streets, and then falls upon me anew, beating me all along the
Streets, to the great grief of my Fellow-Captives, who were of the same mind
with my self, that I should hardly outlive that night. He brought me at length
to a Black-Moor who was working in Lime, commanding me with all cruel imperious
insolence imaginable, to serve that Black, by giving him up Lime with my hands,
which I did, till such time as my Patron departed; and then I signified to the
Black that I was very sick, and by signs prayed him to let me leave off that
work which had almost chok'd me; which by his pitiful gesture I perceive he
allowed. So I lay down upon the ground and fell asleep; my Patron presently
returned, and took such a course to awake me, that he had very near laid me
asleep for ever; for he gave me a blow in the small of my back, which created
such a pungent pain, as quite cashiered all patience and all respects of
self-preservation; so that I vented my passion in the most rash inconsiderate
expressions, the most provoking, opprobrious and menacing terms, that my anger
and my little Spanish could accommodate me with, daring him to dispatch me, for
my life then seemed a grievous burden to me.

The Covetous Moor fearing lest I should make my words good, and by putting
hand to my self, rob him not only of his hopes, but also of his 600 Dollars,
departs from me with a threatening gesture, which I showed very little sense of;
for I immediately composed my self to sleep again, being so weary that I could
have rested contentedly upon Briars and Thorns. Some-while after the Cruel Dog
returned, and awakening me gently, smiled upon me, asking me if I would drink
Water; I answered I was like to die for want of it, having drunk none that day:
so he directed me to a house near by, where a woman was, who gave me some in an
Earthen Pot, which after I had drank off, she broke the Pitcher. I returned to
my Patron, who made me follow him home, and after a plentiful supper which he
allowed me, he gave me a Hammock, and ordered one to show me the way to the
Masmora, where I remained all night.

The next day he had provided a Jew (who had been in Europe and spoke good
Latin) to treat with me, as if my defect in the Castilian language wherein he
was exquisite, had occasioned the unsuccessfulness of his Negotiating with me.
This Jew I found to be a good understanding man, who was quickly made sensible
of the truth of my condition, and withal a man endu'd with more humanity than
generally the people of that Religion are, which he evidenced by his good
advice to me to this purpose; telling me, That my Patron was a man of violent
passions, and that, though he himself was pretty well satisfied of my utter
inability to answer what my Patron demanded, yet if my Patron should be so
persuaded, and find himself bilkt in all his great expectations, he would
certainly convert his hopes into an extravagant rage, and then put me to some
cruel death; therefore he advised me, as not to sooth his vain hopes, so
neither quite to banish all: As thus, says he, you shall give me leave in your
name to acquaint your Patron, that you have Relations and Friends who are
powerful and rich, though you are miserable; and you have reason to believe,
that rather than you should spend all your days under the pressures of a heavy
and cruel Captivity, they would make a purse of 1000 Crowns to ransom you.
This Proposal, says he, though it may not satisfy his expectation, yet it will
banish all despair, and so you may live till God who has been pleased to
afflict you by bringing you hither, may be pleased in due time to redeem you
hence.

This advice of this charitable Jew, I so far complied with, that I not only
gave him liberty to free my Patron from the despair of any Ransom at all, but I
resolved to improve it, by promoting his hopes to the highest degree
imaginable. To this purpose, finding after that the Jew had acquainted him with
the issue of his discourse with me, and of my coming up to 1000 Crowns, yet
notwithstanding his rigor did not abate, but every day he put me to harsher and
severer tasks; I one day let fall some discourse which encouraged the conceit
he had entertained of my relation to his Excellency the then Lord Henry Howard.
This indeed by all my Fellow-Slaves was looked upon as a strange piece of policy
in that place to blab out my great Relations, where all other Christians by all
art and care imaginable study to represent their condition mean, and to conceal
their Relations and Fortunes so much the more as they are considerable; and
therefore one of them told me, that he never expected to see me one of the
Privy Council; I answered him, that neither did I, so long as I was a Captive
there: he said, he wished me in my own Country in a place there called Bedlam
which was fittest for me, and he believed my Cousin (for so his Slave-ship was
pleased to style him) the Lord Howard would be of the same opinion; I answered
him, that I did not question to be delivered from this insupportable Bondage by
my Cousin's means; which afterward came to pass after this manner.

The Christians usually about Sunsetting were sent to a fountain of excellent
water without the Town, to bring home in great earthen Jarrs some of that
water; I also was sent by my Patron: Amongst other discourse which the
Christians use to have there, I listened to a Seaman discoursing of Mamora a
Spanish Garrison, some twenty miles distant from Salle, at the mouth of a River,
and that he sailing along the coast, had observed it very rocky for about eight
miles, but the rest was a fine Sand that reached as far as Mamora; he said
moreover that he believed a good footman might run a race for his Freedom in
three hours, if he had the convenience of a favorable night, and could escape a
number of Tents which were pitched all along the Country 'twixt Salle and
Mamora, who are very industrious to pick up Slaves attempting an escape,
because the Law of that Land incourages them with half the Slaves ransom.

Upon this Discourse it entered strongly into my head, that I should be the
person who should win this prize; but at present it was impossible by reason of
my lodging in the Masmora, as also by reason of my lassitude at night, being
quite spent with the toil and labor of the day; but if I could induce my
Patron by any arts to be a little kind to me and abate his severity, I thought
I might fall into some capacity of performing what I designed. Seeing then that
the hard usage beyond other Slaves which I endured proceeded, from my obstinacy
(as my Patron said) of not confessing my self to be a Conde, and particularly a
near Relation of my Lord Howards, (as my Patron was informed) and whose
alliance he more coveted than any others in behalf of his Slave; I resolved to
try my fortune a little under the mask of a person of great Quality; and this
was the reason, why I was pleased at that time to own an alliance to the great
Family of Norfolk, which sham though, occasioned my Deliverance; so that I
found it by experience true, what is vulgarly said, that it is good to be
related to a great estate or family, though at never so great a distance; for I
am sure all the relation that I knew I had to the Duke of Norfolk then, was,
that he was at Tangier when I was at Salle, and so near were we then related
indeed, and no more. However I wrote a Letter to his Excellency, which my
Patron had translated into Spanish, and such satisfaction did he receive from
it, that he allowed me a month in expectation of an answer; during which time I
should be treated with all mildness and civility, only I was to look after his
Barb and his House when he was abroad; which employments I esteemed a happiness
hardly to be expected in that Country. My Letter was delivered by my Patron to
an Irishman by name Long, newly ransomed, who intended for Cales with the
first opportunity; him did my Patron oblige by promise, to deliver my Letter to
his Excellency with all expedition.

The news of my Quality presently spread abroad, so that I had several visits,
and particularly from a French Friar, a very ingenious Learned man, who
acquainted me that the next Sunday was S. Bartholomew's day, and that he
intended then (having procured permission from his Patron) to preach at the
French Consul's house, and so invited me to be his Auditor. I told him I should
be proud of the happiness, if my Patron would give leave; he engaged to use his
endeavors with his Patron to procure a License from mine, which was obtained:
So to the French Consul's I went, where after having heard a seasonable
Discourse to Slaves about patience under our afflictions made by the Friar, the
French Consul gave me a Glass of Wine or two, after which I returned home. My
Patron seemed concerned at my long absence, to whom I replied that the French
Consul had treated me with Wine which was extraordinary good, and which if he
understood the virtue of, he would renounce Mahumetism to drink of it: He
counterfeited a displeasure at my Railery, but I perceived he was really well
satisfied, as who had no antipathy in his temper to the juice of the Grape;
which I had seen him before sometimes drink with a great greediness.

About the dusk of the Evening, he and the Jew I formerly mentioned, being
together at our house, ordered me to go to the French Consuls, and desire him
to send to my Patron a quantity of Wine, which I did; but first I begged of my
Patron that I might have share of it, he told me he intended I should; then
says I to the Jew, I must request another favor of you, that you would
intercede with my Patron that I may not go to the Masmora this night, for the
miseries of that place will damp all the pleasures and satisfaction of the day
preceding. My Patron was so complaisant, that he condescended to both our
desires. Away then went I to the French Consul immediately, to whom having
imparted my Message, he ordered some servants to carry a considerable parcel of
Flasks of Red wine, (Syracusa I think they termed it,) to my Patron's house.
The Gentleman in the mean while arresting me civilly to drink a glass with him
before I went to the Masmora as was expected, which I did; withal acquainting
him, that I designed also to have a share of the wine sent to my Patron, but my
principal aim was, that the should have his dose, and thereby I should escape
that night; I told him how my Patron had accommodated me with a sufficient
opportunity, by excusing my going to the Masmora that night, which if I
neglected, I deserved to be hanged next morning. The courteous Gentleman seemed
amazed at my resolutions upon such a desperate attempt, and endeavored to
dissuade me from an enterprise which carried with it insuperable difficulties,
and which to his knowledge some had attempted in vain; and had only purchased
to themselves thereby heavy stripes and multiplied their miseries, whereas
never any one in my circumstances had accomplished it; however seeing me
obstinately fixed either to escape or dye that night, he gave me his friendly
advice how to manage both my self and my Patron in drinking; and so telling me
that he would pray heartily for my success, and that he would not commit
himself to sleep, till he heard of the issue, with all humility and
thankfulness I kissed his hands, and departed to my Patrons house.

At my return, I found him and the Jew and four other Moors set at Supper,
which was brought them by some Slaves according to their appointment, so that
this seemed a designed club; which consideration created in me sundry anxious
surmises, left there being so many in company, my designs might happen to the
^r^se'd by some one or other of them; and thence it was, that all the while
they were at Supper, I was very thoughtful and engaged in deep intense
meditation, how to obviate all emergent difficulties, which this unexpected
Company might lay in my way; yea so pensive was I, that I could not advert
their commands, which occasioned my Patron to enquire the reason of my
extraordinary Melancholy, seeing my fair hopes of a sudden Redemption, and his
kind and civil usage to me, together with the cheerful and jovial temper of his
Friends, who came to be merry with him, seemed to administer matter of quite
different resentments: At this I roused my self out of my thinking posture with
some kind of confusion, and humbly begged his pardon for my unsuitable humor,
which I told him, proceeded from the consideration of my Cousin the English
Ambassadors resentment of my weakness, in discovering my self so soon; and
though I questioned not the speedy payment of my Ransom and my Discharge, yet
I could not, but with exceeding trouble, reflect upon the reason of his
displeasure, and the ill consequences which must ensue if he should be angry
with me, for whose favor and kindness I had the highest veneration and respect.

At this my Patron bid me cheer up, and be merry with them, for says he, I my
self will write to his Excellency the English Ambassador, and will excuse you;
I will acquaint him with the true way and means how I came to be informed of
your Quality, and alliance to his Excellency. I pretended to be extraordinary
much affected with this kindness of my Patron, which I signified by passing a
Moorish Complement upon him to this effect; That this favor would out balance
all the miseries of my Captivity, and that if his Excellency my Cousin knew how
happy I were in a Patron, he would come himself to redeem me with his own
Person, and would throw himself at your Feet, ambitious of the honor of being
your Slave. This Rhodomontado was so surprising and taking, that he told me,
that if he had not been sufficiently informed of my Quality before, this
instance of my excellent education had manifestly discovered me; upon which, I
was forced to give over complementing, lest he should enhance my Quality, and
perchance beat me into the Royal Family for a lie of my own making, as I had
been before, into the Family of Howard for a lie of our Ship-boys. However I
earnestly begged him to write to the English Ambassador with all expedition,
for if he removed my fears of his displeasure, I would be the merryest man
alive; and then I resolved to cashier all thoughtfulness, both because I would
give no occasion of jealousy, as also lest too much thinking upon the
difficulties (which indeed were very great) might damp my resolution or slacken
my endeavors, which I intended to employ to the utmost, that I might that
night make my escape; leaving the method and means to the management of
Providence.

After these complements were over, I sat down with the Company, and composed
my self to be as merry and agreeable as possibly I could; I sung several
English Songs to them, particularly I remember Calm was the Evening, etc. in
the Mock-Astrologer, which was new when I left England; they were wonderfully
affected with it, and were very desirous to have me translate ha ha ha, etc.
into Spanish, which made me laugh more heartily than I sung; they also sung a
la Morisco to requite me. I must confess I never knew any who seemed much
diverted with the sweetness of my voice, neither was I ever so vain to expect
it; but really when I heard their barbarous Tones and Damnable dissonant
Jangling, I cannot deny a piece of weakness which then possessed me, which was a
pleasure to hear mine own sweet Self chant it. The glass in the mean while did
not stand still, which I principally adverted, for upon the management of that,
depended the fortune of that night: therefore though I used all art to shift it
from my self, yet I used the same that my Patron might never balk it; which at
last evidenced it self plainly, for he was got very drunk, and truly I thought
that then it was not safe nor convenient to my purposes for his Slave to appear
sober: therefore I counterfeited the humors of a man overtaken with drink with
all the artifice imaginable, so that I afforded exceeding divertisement to the
soberer part of the Company; yet withal the Glass was never neglected to be
sent about, which was plied with such industry, that before midnight all the
Company had got as much as they could well carry away, and my Patron abundance
more; for my own part I pretended to be so much concerned, that I fell down,
and there I lay till such time as the Company pleased to depart, when they
roused me up to lock the doors, which seemingly with much ado I effected; and
then I returned to my Patron with the keys.

Him I found in a condition, such as a highly provoked revengful Adversary
could hardly wish for a more opportune; there was no company in the house
excepting my Patron, his Barb and my self; the Doors and Avenues were all
secured; the Streets were clear, and the Neighborhood hushed up in the silence
of Midnighte; the Moor could hardly either speak or stand; all which inviting
circumstances seemed to court a more resolved patience than my own to a
compliance with this lucky opportunity of Revenge upon an inhumane Monster, who
professed it his interest to deprive me of all the blessings of this world, and
to make death to me more eligible than life. While I was upon these thoughts,
the Brute raises himself up a little, and mutters somewhat to me of a
not-to-be-mentioned Carnality, not only unworthy of Christian ears, but the
bare mention whereof offers violence to the dictates of Nature, and which my
charity would never suffer me to believe that it could enter into any man's
mind, unless I had heard of the Citizens of Sodom, and a Doctor of Salamanca:
which abominable proposal did so invigorate my resolution, that immediately I
had made him a Sacrifice to my most cruel resentments of the barbarous usage I
received from him, if by a happy chance the Wine had not got the ascendent over
all his senses, and laid him in a profound sleep. I laid however hold of his
Scimitar, and drew it, and put on the Belt, so that if he had awaked, I might
have found my self under a necessity not to flinch back, but to proceed with
all vigor, for my own life's sake to take away his. But when I reflected upon
the many difficulties I was to encounter and overcome before I could escape,
and the great probabilities of my being retaken, and withal the cruelties of a
Death that I should suffer, if Hamet Lucas should be found killed by his own
Slave; upon these considerations, I banished all thoughts of vengeance, and in
complement to my own self-preservation, I gave the Moor my Patron his life, as
thinking it much more rational as well as generous and Roman-like to save a
Citizens life, though my own, than to destroy an Enemy's.

Seeing then that my Patron was engaged in a deep sleep, from which in all
probability he could not awake in four or five hours, I immediately sheathed
the Sword, and taking out of his Bags a small parcel of Spanish Pistols, (which
methought, might not be unserviceable to me in another part of the world)
together with two Shirts of his, (for indeed I had none of my own) and a pair
of Shoes, I put out the Candles, and with all expedition I slipped out of a
window into the Street, where again I unsheathed, being resolved to attacque
whomsoever I should rencounter in the Streets, and not to part with that
Liberty, which, though in a small measure, I was then newly made possessour of,
unless with my life. I went through several Streets, and by a favorable
providence, I escapt all rencounter or discovery: I came at last to the
Riverside near the Castle, where presently I threw my self in, but after
having been a little there, finding my self incommoded in swimming, by reason
of the Sword and other things, I swum back to shore, where I stripped my self,
and laid all upon my back kept together by my Breeches buttoned about my neck:
so I committed my self again to the water; but the Tide carrying me upon one of
the Ships, I was obliged to struggle with all my strength to get clear of it,
which maugre all my endeavors, I could not do so effectually, but that I came
within hearing of their talk aboard. I conjectured then that the reason of my
slow proceedings might be the weight of the burden I carried, and besides my
arms were a little weary, and I had a great mind to throw my self on my back
and ease my self; whereupon I unbutton'd and let all my Clothes, Riches and
Armor go together, and swimming on my back, I at length came to the other side
of the River, a little weary, and altogether naked and defenseless.

Now the dangers began to crowd upon me, and I had so near a prospect of them,
that I wished I had never undertook the work, and was entering into
consideration of returning to my former estate; but when I reflected on the
loss of my Patrons Scimitar and the Gold, my desperate estate gave me both
hopes and courage; I had more than past Rubicon I thought then, for there was
no returning: so up I got, and having almost rounded North-Salle and left it
behind me, with a good speed I made away, having no other direction, saving the
noise of the breaking of the Sea upon the Shore within half a League on my left
hand; it was moreover dark, and there was no path or road that I could hit
upon, so that many times I stumbled, and fell over Stones, which cut and
bruised my naked body. With these sort of divertisements I entertained my self
until daybreak; when seeing at some distance before me a Mist arise, and being
ignorant of the occasion, and fearing lest it might be the effect of some
Travelers, I turned to the left, over a great Bank, on the other side of
which, I happily fell in upon a Sand upon which the Sea broke, which continued
about eleven or twelve miles in length; there I had good running for a while,
till such time as I saw three Moors upon the Sand before me; but having nothing
to say to them, nor any mind to their company, I turned therefore to my right
hand over the forementioned bank, where I fell in upon a path, which I measured
with all the haste I could, until I had in view a couple of Tents roared up in
the path way: these I thought it a very unseasonable complement to visit so
soon in the morning, and therefore endeavored to decline them, by turning up
the bank upon the left hand; upon the ridge of which I was obliged to travail
above a mile in great trouble, wading through thick Fuzze and Goss, which
pricked me with exceeding vexation and smart; the Moors on either hand of me,
constraining me to keep this middle course, unless I would expose my self to a
manifest hazard of being retaken. It pleased God that I had left the tent a
pretty way behind me, I turned therefore down into the path aforesaid, where I
exercised my feet to the best purpose that ever I think I did in my life, for
about three miles, and then I came within sight of Mamora the Spanish Garrison.

I was then about two miles distance, and being obliged to part with the path
which I had hitherto followed, and then turned away from Mamora, I found great
difficulty to run with that haste which my occasions required, for the ground
was full of stumps, and other asperities very afflictive to my naked and
wounded feet, which rendered that little last stage much more tedious than all
the rest of my journey; besides lassitude grew upon me so fast, that I almost
fainted, so that I most impatiently longed to reach the only place of my
safety, fearing lest I should founder in the entrance into the Port, after
having escaped the great difficulties of a dangerous voyage. There was a hill
upon my right hand, which I had a fancy to ascend, thence to make my descent to
the Garrison at pleasure; the Moors kept a kind of a Garrison there to hinder the
Spaniards from sallying out to forage the Country; this I was ignorant of,
otherwise I had not directed my course thither, however this error was very
instrumental to my preservation, for the Moors who saw me though I did not
them, observing me direct my course toward them, imagined I must be a friend,
whereas if I had made directly for Mamora, they had certainly intercepted me.
When I came to the foot of the hill, being then out of sight of those who were
on the top, I found the ground so full of small Snail-shels, which cut my feet
extremely, that I thought it more convenient to go along by the foot of the
hill, which was much easyer: I was got at last so near the Garrison, that I
could call to the Soldiers, who were very numerous upon the works; I called
out to them that I was a Christian, and begged them to relieve me by admitting
me to come in; they waved their hats to me, and withal I saw a company sent
from the Garrison, enter a square-Fort which was some little distance from it.
The Spaniards continued waving their hats, which I mistook for a sign to stay
there where I was, and make no further advance till such-time as they had sent
out to enquire what I was; I therefore sat me down there, at length off comes a
great Gun from Mamora, whose Bullet grazed upon the side of the hill above me,
which I looking after, saw the Moors who had mistrusted my long stay, coming
down upon me, and then I made all the haste that fear could inspire me with,
the Spaniards in the mean time firing at the Moors to stop their eager pursuit;
at last with my utmost endeavors reached the little Fort, at the bottom of
whose wall I fell down quite spent, so that my spirit failed me.

The Soldiers carried me in a Cloak up to the Garrison, where the Governor,
after having caused a glass of Wine to be poured into my mouth to revive me,
questioned me what I was and whence I came (for indeed I was so covered all
over my body with blood, sweat and dust, that it was hard to distinguish me
from a Moor by my color) I satisfied him that I was an Englishman, whom God
had been so merciful to, as last night to bestow an opportunity of escaping
from a heavy Slavery in Salle, and direct me to this blessed place of refuge,
for whose preservation and prosperity, all poor Christians at Salle offer up
their prayers, and I particularly held my self obliged to do, so long as I
lived. The Courteous charitable Gentleman (whose name I am sorry I have forgot)
congratulated my Deliverance, and told me I was heartily welcome to that place,
and because he saw my condition required not much discourse at that instant, he
recommended me to the care of the Physician, who very charitably procured me a
few Clothes, and applied to me such things as I had need of: and then committed
me to rest until about noon, at which time the Governor sent for me to come to
him upon one of the Rampires, to show me some Horsemen hunting among some
Bushes, and he conceited that I was the game they were in quest of; I accorded
with his opinion, and to confirm him in it, I assured him that such a horse
which I pointed out to him, did belong to Hamet Lucas who was my Patron. The
Moors were then within reach of the Guns, the Governor therefore commanded to
let fly amongst them, and I upon my request, to honor the departure of my
Patron whom I thought never to have seen more, had the favor to fire two at
him, which though they did no execution that we could perceive, yet we observed
the place was too hot for them, so that they made haste to be gone.

It is hard to be expressed, what a great satisfaction it was to me, to see my
cruel Enemy (whom but 24 hours before I dreaded as Indians do the Devil) flee
from me, and endeavor an escape out of my reach, with as much eagerness, as
the night before I did out of his. Though I then smarted a little under the
sense of my weary and wounded body, yet the thoughts of my Liberty entertained
me with such pleasant divertisements, as are not to be conceived by any but
those who are in the circumstances that I was in, and who can value their
present Liberty, (which together with health makes life it self comfortable,
and without which it is but an uneasy burden) by a competition with a hard and
grievous Bondage under the professed, yea, superstitiously bigotish Enemies of
my God, my Religion, and my own person. Yet when I reflected upon the weakness
of the Garrison, (which that afternoon I had an opportunity to survey) which was
no bigger in circumference than the Tower of London; the feeble resistance that
400 disheartened half-starv'd sickly Spaniards could make against an
innumerable swarm of Moors, (who lay about and in a manner besieged them)
should they attaque them, I must confess my fears did a little qualify my joy,
and I could not foreforbear wishing that my Patron and I were at a greater
distance. All the night I could hardly rest, for the Moors twice alarmed us,
and the Bells about the walls were sounding every moment, to keep the Soldiers
a wake and to their duty; for should they be remiss for half an hour only, it
had been easy methought to surprise the place, being defended only with a dry
Ditch, and pitiful low Walls.

The next morning early, the wind presented fair, five Barca-longa's, which had
brought provision from Cadis, were returning home, in one of which I gladly
embarkt, bidding adieu to Mamora my refuge and place of Deliverance, which
since about two years ago (as I heard with sorrow from Hamet Lucas himself)
was taken by the Moors after above a 100 years possession of the Spaniards; he
declaring, that he was the first man who entered it. We sailed along the
Barbary-Coast all the day, nothing occurring remarkable, save that in the
afternoon, the Spanish Seamen acquainted me that we were pursued. It was very
strange and surprising when I beheld astern of us, an innumerable quantity of
Fish, making after us at full gallop as it were, leaping above the water; they
quickly overtook us, and so pursued their journey, without any concern at our
hallooing, as they past very near us, on both sides our boat: they were not so
long as ordinary Cod, but they appeared much broader; what the meaning of the
frolic should be, I cannot tell, but the Spaniards seemed more affected with
my amazement, than with that strange appearance, so that I suppose this was an
ordinary divertment, that that kind of Fish affords upon that Coast.

Upon Wednesday morning, we were got as far as A-la-rach another Garrison
belonging to the Spaniards at the Mouth of a River, at which time we heard much
shooting out at Sea, so that we thought it convenient to put into Larache. This
is a strong place, the Walls enclosing a considerable piece of ground, where
grow abundance of excellent Grapes and rare Fruits. The Town is fortified by
two strong Castles, well-stor'd with great Ordnance; into one of which we were
permitted to ascend, to view a rare sight at Sea, a very unequal Combat as to
number, yet briskly maintained by one Dutch man of War against six Algerines,
whereof the Admiral and Vice Admiral were two, and the least was of two and
thirty Guns. The fight continued till noon, when two great Dutchmen, and Van
Ghent in the Looking-glass, and another coming up, the Turks thought best to
make sail and stand away; and then luckily ahead of them, as they were
weathering Cape Spartil, appeared six English men of War, Captain Beech was
Commander of one. The Algerines being hemmed in, resolved rather to venture
through the English, and so make their way into the Streights, than to turn
back upon Van-Ghent, whose great Guns struck a great terror into them: so up
they went to the English. But Captain Beech with the first broadside disabling
their Admiral, they all together tacked and run ashore in the Bay of Arzilla,
where they were all set on fire, abundance of Christians being relieved, and
abundance of Turks being killed. The Governor of Larache commanded our Barca
to go out and bring an account of the action, which we did, and returned again
at night with the news, that the Algerines who were destroyed were, the
Springing Tiger, the Standing Tiger, the Date Tree, the Shepherdess, I have
forgot the names of the rest.

Next day being Thursday, we set forward for Cadis, and upon Friday night we
arrived in the Bay. The next morning I applied my self to Mr. Westcomb (since
Knighted) then Consul, who treated me not so much according to the exigency of
my condition, as his own Generosity, inviting me to his own Table daily, during
my stay at Cadis which was about a sortnight. There I saw some of these very
Moors Slaves themselves, who made me so; there being fifteen taken, aboard the
French prize I formerly mentioned, by the Holmes-Friggot, and carried to Cadis
and there sold: this accident furnished me with a pleasant opportunity of
thinking how the case was altered. About the middle of September, at Sir Martin
Westcomb's desire, I obtained passage aboard a Dutch man of War designed for S.
Uves, from whence I traveled by Land to Lisbon, the place where I embarkt some
fourteen or fifteen weeks before, in that Vessel wherein I was taken. I went to
pay my respects to Dr. Cradock and Mr. Bulteel, who saw me when I was at Lisbon
before, and could hardly be induced to believe that I had been a Slave since,
unless they had been assured by Mr. Parry, then Agent at Lisbon, to whom I
brought a Letter from the Consul at Cadis, recommending me to his favor in
procuring me a safe passage for England, and who certify'd him sufficiently of
my escape from Salle to Mamora, seeing I had brought Letters from the Governor
of Mamora to the Duke of Veraguas, then Governor of Cadis, which Mr. Westcomb
himself delivered up to the Duke.

After my stay in Lisbon about a fortnight, Mr. Parry the Agent aforesaid,
prevailed with the Dutch Consul, to grant me passage for England in a Dutch Man
of War (there being no English Ships of any force then in the River, and I was
very unwilling, any more to hazard my self in small Vessels.) It was the very
same Ship which I saw at Alarache, engaged with the six Algerines. In the
beginning of November I was brought to the Texel, (having had no convenience to
be removed into any Ship in the Channel, by reason of a great Storm that
hurried us over to the Holland Coast:) from Amsterdam I came to the Hague,
where hearing, that Sir John Chicheley then Envoy from his Majesty to the
Governor of the Spanish Netherlands was returning instantly for England, I
made haste to Brussels, and obtained passage for England amongst his retinue,
so that I returned to England in November 1670, and never have been out of his
Majesty's Dominions since.

After my return I immediately went for Oxford, where I fell into the favor of
George Wheeler Esquire then Gentleman-Commoner of Lincoln-Colledge, who was
pleased to think my indigent condition a fit object of his charity; with whom
and his Father Colonel Charles Wheeler I lived in quality of Tutor to his
Children from Christmas 1670, until May 1672. During which time I received
Deacon's Orders, from the Bishop of Ely's hands, and at Christmas following I
was ordained Priest by the Bishop of London. In 1673, William then Lord Gray of
Wark admitted me to be his Chaplain, with whom I lived until his Death 1674,
after which being invited by some promises to Dublin in Ireland, I removed
thither, and lived constantly in the City of Dublin, in the execution of my
Ministerial Function, until 1679, when I was called into England, upon what
occasion will be the subject of my following Discourse.

This is a true account of my Captivity and Escape, which I appeal to many
thousands whether or not it agrees exactly, with what I have related these
twelve years past; Haec meminisse juvat. I cannot indeed disown a piece of
vanity I have had, in frequently reflecting upon this remarkable accident of my
life, and such complacency I have had therein, that I have always freely
complied with any handsome invitation to relate it; for there is a great
pleasure in remembering the great Dangers I have past (Dangers to evade which,
the Salamanca-Doctor would I believe have pawned all his True-Protestant
expectations, yea and his Swearing Faculty too, which now considering the
temptations he is under, I am afraid he will be damned before he will part with
it.) I have indeed heard many discredit the whole Relation, as Romantic, but I
never heard any tax me of an Otism, i. e. inconsistency with my self, as if I
told one Story by Candlelight, and a quite different one again in the day. But
now that, Haggi Hamet Lucas, (who was my Patron in the place of my Captivity)
has by a strange providence come over to this Country, and before several
persons of Quality and Reputation, attested the truth of all these things by me
related, which were within the sphere of his knowledge; I suppose there will be
but little scruple remaining, to unprejudiced persons in the belief of the
above-written Narrative. Supposing it then true, what is there in it, to render
me Criminal? Because I am lame must I be beaten with my own Crutches? Because I
have been unfortunate, is it for that I must be miserable? Because I have made
an escape from a sad Captivity in Barbary, do I therefore deserve to be hanged
here in England? He must be a Devil at making of Plots, as well as discovering
them, who can make such inferences as these pass, who because by Gods
assistance to my own endeavors I have saved my Country the trouble and price
of my Redemption, will therefore bring me in guilty of Treason against her; and
this calls to my mind the Salamanca-Doctor.

An Account of TITUS OATS HIS DEPOSITIONS Against ME.
IT is very hard to conceive, that any thing made after the Image of God, and
endu'd with a reasonable soul, (howsoever degenerate and corrupt) should affect
evil only for the love of evil, and covet mischief for its own sake; this is so
great a reproach, and casts such a dishonorable reflection upon humane nature,
that no man can suppose such a Devil incarnate: and therefore even Titus Oats
himself (though we should comply with the Papists and believe all his
Depositions to have been only the result of his own wicked and mischievous
invention) had always the hopes of Grandeur and the importunate solicitations
of cunning politic heads, together with a gratification to his Revenge, or
some natural inclination, to plead as an acquittance from the imputation of so
Diabolical a temper. And really the Jesuits and Benedictines were very
uncharitable to him, when he poor Rogue seemed abandoned by God and Man, and
was forced to betake himself to the Devil and the Jesuits to get bread, and
not having the fear of God before his eyes, had no other design to maintain
himself in life, but by conspiring the Kings death: for them first to turn him
away ignominiously from S. Omers as an indocible Blockhead, that could never be
brought to turn three Lines of English into tolerable Latin; and then to disown
him here in London, notwithstanding he had a Patent (Risum teneatis!) from the
Pope, to be admitted to their private Cabals; and in the next place to oblige
him without Shoes and Stockings, to go a-begging to the Benedictines in the
Savoy for, the Scraps of a dinner; and then for Corker and the rest to bid the
Maid shut the Door upon him, this is enough to make a man so hungry as he was,
to be very angry, and to swear too: so that considering the Doctor's temper,
the satisfaction of his revenge might be alleged as some kind of excuse to
qualify the malignity of his Oaths against these people. And now probably the
Readers curiosity is excited to the enquiry upon what occasion, motive or
provocation, the wicked Doctor (supposing the falsity of his Depositions) was
induced to swear so maliciously against me: for satisfaction thereto, he must
know that Charles Lord North and Gray, was the sole and only occasion of
Oates's swearing against me; it was to oblige this Noble Lord (for whose
interest it was thought necessary to have me disesteem'd, and put out of
capacity and credit) the cursed Doctor pawned his Soul, which will appear
plainly to have been his design not only from the express words of his own
Depositions, but also from the said Lord's acknowledgment upon his Oath, in
Court at our Trial. But how this noble Lord became so concerned to appear my
Enemy, the Reader will understand from what follows.

William late Lord Gray of Werk, by his last Will and Testament, left to his
Daughter Katharine now Lady North two hundred Guinneys as a Legacy, and his Son
Ralph afterward Lord Gray, he appointed sole Executor of his Will; by Deed
having settled his Estate upon his Grandson Ford the present Lord Gray of Werk.
This was a very great disappointment to the Lord Gray of Rollestone, now Lord
North, who had entertained great expectations, not only of being Executor to
his Father in Law, but also of having a considerable part of the Estate settled
upon him; though upon what foundation he built such mighty hopes unless his own
fancy, seems very unaccountable. For the Lord William Gray had bestowed a
plentiful Portion with his Daughter; and he always caressed his Son and
Grand-sons with a paternal affection, as the props and supports of his Name and
Family: and why then he should alientate his Estate, and bestow it upon another
Name, is very unsuitable to that wisdom and prudent conduct by which the said
Lord was always observed to have managed his affairs. Howsoever the Lord North
left no means unattempted, no Stone unrolled, to find out a Dish of Deeds, as
his Lordship learnedly phras'd it, but all in vain: at length two Sons of
Belial, William Warren (who had been for a long time Steward in the Lord Gray
of Werk's Family, and then for his infidelity cashiered) and Isaac his Son
(much about the same time and upon the like account, discarded the service of
the Lady Dowager Gray) being both turned out of Beneficial employments, and not
having any other ways of subsistence, they lay hold of this humor of my Lord
North, resolving to encourage him in it, and to improve it to two different
purposes; namely, to procure themselves a livelihood thereby, and besides to
revenge themselves upon the Lord Gray and the Lady Dowager his Mother. To this
purpose, they inform the Lord North that he is much injured by the Lady Dowager
Gray, Executrix to her Husband Lord Ralph Gray, pretended Executor only to his
Father the Lord William Gray, because that the Lady North was appointed sole
Executrix, by the last Will of the said William Lord Gray, and that the Lord
Ralph had burnt that Schedule wherein she was nominated, and forged another,
wherein he nominated himself, and substituted it in the place of the other;
this they both attest upon their Oaths, upon which the Lord North commences a
suit against the Lady Dowager Gray. The Cause after several removes from Court
to Court, at last centered before the Delegates. To be short, after a tedious
examination of Witnesses produced on both sides, the Delegates having
diligently weighed the arguments, came to a final determination, and
unanimously pronounced in favor of the Lady Gray, judging that Rascal Isaac
Warren (who confessed himself to be a Villain, in betraying his Lord William
Lord Gray, and in being accessory to the forging his last Will and Testament,
before he could be in a capacity to witness for Thomas Lord North) to be much
more a Villain after, and that his Testimony involved a manifest contradiction,
and consequently that he was forsworn. It was, during the trial of this Cause
in that Court, that I was sent for from Dublin in Ireland; about September
1679, I was produced as a Witness by the Lady Gray.

After I had delivered what I knew as to that Cause, I prepared for my return
back to Dublin; and accordingly I had took a place in the Chester-Coach for the
Monday following. But the day before, as I was preaching at S. Gyles's Church
in the Fields, in the Afternoon, news came to the Lady Gray, that there was a
Warrant out to apprehend me as a Jesuit; upon which, I was conveyed home, and
commanded to keep my self close, till such time as her Ladyship had made
enquiry what the matter was.

At length I understood from her Ladyship, that the Lord North and Titus Oats
had that morning met at Whitehall, and after some conference, they came where
his Majesty was, and told him for news, that they had discovered where one of
the most dangerous Jesuits in England was; one that was lately come over from
Ireland, sent as a Spy; one who hid himself under a Parsons Gown, and preached
in our Churches sometimes; at other times he would put on a Cloak and hold
forth in a Conventicle, and anon, one might hear him saying Mass in
Sommerset-Chappel. His Majesty was astonished at the impudence of such a
fellow, who at such a time of the day, durst appear to affront the severity of
the Laws which were then most rigorously put in Execution, and was pleased to
demand his Name, and inquired of Oats if he knew him. Oats told his Majesty,
that his name was Elliot, and that he knew him very well, for one of the most
mischievous wicked men in the world, and that he believed he had more malice in
him, than all the Jesuits had who were hanged; nay more says he, he is a
Circumcised Jesuit. God bless us, says his Majesty, What sort of Jesuit is
that? A Jesuit who is no Christian but a Turk, replied the Salamanca Devil. And
thus they went on, the Lord and the Doctor striving to outvy each other in
burthening my poor name with all the Infamy imaginable, and that before his
Sacred Majesty; as if I were unworthy of his protection, or the benefit of the
Laws. At length, his Majesty weary of such an odious description, was pleased
to retire, bidding them get a Warrant to apprehend me; which they immediately
did from Sir William Waller.

Her Ladyship moreover made me acquainted, that there was an Advertisement in
the Gazette for the next day concerning me, and therefore that it would not be
my best course to set forward for Chester, for that I was represented under so
vile a Character, that the Mobile would certainly tear me in pieces. However
her Ladyship bid me cheer up and not to despond, for I should find friends
enough to stand by me and defend my innocence, so that never a Lord nor
Devil-of-a-Doctor of them all should prejudice me: her Ladyship therefore that
night sent and prevented the Advertisement in the Gazette, and bid me prepare
my self to appear before Sir William the next morning.

About nine of the Clock the day following, I saw a Constable with some
Red-Coats coming to my Lady Grey's House, and fearing lest they should affront
Her Ladyship if I should be out of the way, I went and met them at the Gate; I
demanded whom they would speak with? The Constable told me, that he had a
Warrant to search for, and apprehend a Priest in that house; I assured him,
there was no Priest belonged to that Family except my self: he inquired whether
I was one, I answered that I was, but of the Church of England, and that my
name was Elliot; and moreover I told him, I thought I was the person he was in
quest of. He replied that he was of the same opinion, and withal commanded me
along with him; I enquired whither I must go; he told me to Sir William Waller,
whose Warrant he showed me. The Honorable Ralph Gray Esquire came to the
Constable, and desired him to command the Red-Coats to keep off, because the
People seeing them attend a Coach, would be apt to affront us, and withal
proffered me the honor of his Company: which I with all thankful
acknowledgments most willingly accepted. And indeed I had reason, for if it had
not been for his presence, and the influence of the Right Honorable the Lady
his Mother, I had been certainly sent to Newgate, and whither then God knows,
for Oats says, he never begins a business but he goes thorough-stitch with it:
he might have sworn that he saw a Letter under my hand, which encouraged Grove
and Pickering to proceed to murder the King, as easily as he swore that he saw
one under my hand, wherein I acknowledged that I had received Priests Orders
and sung High Mass at Rome; I will swear he saw one as much as the other.

But to proceed, we took Coach and went directly to Sir William Wallers house
in Westminster: whilst we were going thither, the Constable inquired whether
ever I had been amongst the Turks, I told him I had; the Constable then shook
his head, telling Mr. Gray that it would go hard with me, for that there was
strong evidence against me that I was both a Jesuit, and a Turkish-Priest; Mr.
Gray could not forbear laughing, whilst I was heartily vexed to see my self
thus abused. When we came to Sir Williams, after a little squabling, and some
coarse complements I was obliged to pass upon his Worship, Mr. Gray and he
withdrew, and after having the Case clearly stated to him, Sir William returned
to me, and begged my pardon, for he understood I was a Minister of the Church
of England, and had the relation of Chaplain to a very Honorable Family, which
he was sure, would not entertain within their doors any one represented under
the character that I was; and so he professed himself sorry that upon a
misinformation he gave me this trouble, desiring Mr. Gray to go to Oates's
Lodgings in Whitehall with me, and ordering the Constable to attend, he said he
would presently follow us, and endeavor my dismission, which he did.

Oats in the mean time, being informed that Persons of great Quality would
appear in my vindication, if any danger threatened me, and that the Lord North's
design of Revenge was too too apparent in the business, alters his mind, and
hastening down to Sir Williams at that time when we were coming to Whitehall, he
met his Coach following us; and going into Sir William's Coach, the first thing
he said (as a Gentleman then present informed me) was, Sir William, you must
not meddle with Mr. Elliot for I have nothing to say against him: Nor I
neither, answered Sir William, for he is a Minister of the Church of England,
and has his Orders about him. A little after our coming to Oates's Chamber,
where were abundance of people, the Doctor came in, to whom addressing my self,
I asked him if he knew me; he told me, that he remembered me very well at
Cambridge, about twelve years ago, and that since he never saw me; he heard, he
said, and was informed, that I had said Mass in Sommerset-Chappel, but he
believed it was a mistake: pray, Mr. Oats, said I, what is the meaning of the
report you have raised, as if I were circumcised; Truly, says the Doctor, when
I was at Rome, the Fathers of the Scotch College inquired whether I knew you;
knew whom, says I? They asked, says he, whether I knew one Adam Elliot, who had
been of their College; I told them I knew youvery well, and that I heard you
had been taken Captive by the Turks; It may be, reply the Fathers, they have
Circumcised him. This is all, says he, that I know of the business. This was a
piece of such intolerable impudence, that I could hardly refrain giving him the
Lie; for he not only contradicted what he had told His Majesty the day before
(as persons of the greatest Quality can attest) but he contrived a Story, whose
every Syllable was false: for I never was in the Scotch College at Rome, I
never saw it to my knowledge, neither did I ever see a Scotch Father, neither
was I ever reputed a Scotch-man whilst I was abroad; and moreover my Name was
never known to be Elliot: so that knowing these things to be false, I had
reason to question whether ever he had been at Rome, which I do still. However,
I thought it was not convenient to put him out of humor by my contradiction at
that time, but I let him go on without interruption, to tell Lies as long as he
pleased; at last seeing him at a pause, I asked him if he had any thing to
allege why the Constable might not be discharged farther attendance; his
Doctorship was pleased to speak the word that he might go about his business,
and so I was set at liberty.

This Lenity of the Doctor in causing me to be apprehended, and immediately
discharged, was not the effect of his Repentance or good Nature, but of his
Cowardice and Fear, as the Reader will presently conclude. As soon as with
convenience I could, I made haste for Ireland; yet not with that speed, but
that a Packet or two had got over before me, and carried the news of my
apprehension, and of Oates's Depositions against me: the News was so general,
that there was no doubt of the matter of fact; and Oates's testimony was in so
great credit then, that it was judged a crime equal to Blasphemy or Treason to
call it in question: so that even my friends and intimate acquaintance were at
a loss what to think of me; the Dissenters and Enemies of our Cathedrals (of
which I was a Member) did insult and triumph upon this sham-occasion. At length
in the very heat of these prepossessions, I landed at Dublin, upon a
Sunday-mornning, and immediately repaired to the Church, where I officiated
according to the duty of my place; most people were astonished to see me,
because I was reported generally to be in Newgate in London. But the Phanaticks
were almost distracted, to see their false intelligence confuted by so lively
an argument as my appearance; and my not being a Popish Priest, or a
Circumeis'd Turk, they thought would baffle the Doctor's Infallibility, damn
the Plot, and confound them all. O! what a great scandal it was to them, to see
me walk the Streets, but much more to hear me discourse freely, as, God help
me! I could not forbear sometimes, when Titus Oats came in the way of my
fancy. These were affronts that were intolerable, and therefore they watched
my conversation, and always to ensnare me. At last, I unhappily fell into the
company of a turbulent factious Fellow, a City-Captain, who endeavored to
raise his credit by catching of Popish Priests, and he had got a little fame by
that way: but now, if he could but entrap me, he thought he should gain
immortal honor. Amongst other discourse, he desired of me to be satisfied of
the occasion of these reports spread concerning me when I was in England; I
endeavored to satisfy him all I could, but all would not do, for says he, I am
sure Dr. Oats cannot Lie, and I am pretty well assured, that he said you were
a Popish Priest and a Turk besides. This insolent expression provokt me to some
passionate resentment; so that I told him, that Oats was a great Lying Rogue,
and he was another: this is not to be endured by any True Protestant, says the
Captain, speak your pleasure of me, says he, but do not blaspheme the venerable
Doctor; the Doctor, continued I, if he deposed with no more truth against the
Jesuits than he did against me, they died Martyrs: At this, the Captain rises
and runs away to Sir Robert Booth, a True-Protestant L. C. J. of the Kings
Bench, and makes affidavit, that I said that Titus Oats was a Rogue, and the
five Jesuits Martyrs. To be short, I was sent for by a Tipstaff, bound over to
answer at the King's Bench the near approaching term, when I was indicted for
these very words, found guilty, and fined 200 l. and imprisonment until I paid
it. At the same time, comes over from England a pretended character of Adam
Elliot, directed to a Gentleman of Quality in Dublin, who was desired to
disperse Copies of it; it was subscribed North and Gray, and was a base,
malicious Libel, stufft with lies and impudence; it is Scandalum Magnatum any
person professing Honor and Honesty, as the Author of it. He asserts upon his
honor, that I was expelled the University of Cambridge, that I was a Jesuit,
that I was a Renegado and a Mahumetan, that I was a Felon, that I was a
Murderer, that I was guilty of Forgery, and particularly that I combined with
Ralph Lord Gray of Werk, and with him forged the last Will of his Father
William Lord Gray, to the prejudice of the Lord North of above 30000 l. This
infamous character, howsoever most abominably, and from the beginning to the
end false, yet coming under the specious recommendation of a Person of Honor,
did much prejudice me, especially with the concurrence of my other misfortunes,
so that I was rendered very odious and vile, insomuch that my confinement was
my best security; for if I had walked the Streets I had been in danger of being
stoned.

At length, after this violent ferment of the Peoples hatred by a little time,
as is usual, had begun to abate, the Privy Council upon my Petition, were
pleased to consider my condition, as thinking that I had met with very hard
measure for speaking a few words, (which were by the severest construction, the
result only of passion and inadvertency) and being pretty well satisfied of my
good inclinations to the Church of England and Ireland as by Law established,
as also to the Government, and my aversion to Popery; and withal considering
how I labored under the calumnies and slanders of a scandalous Libel,
apparently false, and designed out of malice to ruin my reputation, and that I
had no way to do my self right, so long as I was under confinement, they were
pleased to order my releasement upon Bail until the next Term, and then I
satisfied the Law, and was discharged.

After my departure from London for Ireland, the Lord North perceiving how much
a propo it would be to invalidate my testimony, viz. that excellent invention
of Circumcision, (for though a Papists Oath may be taken, yet no man sure will
believe one who has renounced the Christian Faith) he renews his solicitations
to the Doctor, to swear against me in the Court of Delegates: the Doctor who
used not to swear lightly and in vain, i. e. for nothing, seemed shy at first;
but having heard that I called him a Rogue and the Jesuits Martyrs, he complied
with the desire of his good Friend, the Lord North, who at that time; the
Reader must take notice, was a Petitioning Lord, that is, one of those Lords,
who subscribed and presented a Petition to his Majesty for the sitting of the
Parliament, and therefore was by all obliging offices to be caressed and
retained. (The Reader is likewise desired to take notice, that at the Lord
Stafford's Trial, Oats swore, that a certain Lord sent him a 100 l. but he
neither tells us who, nor for what, so that whether this remark be to the
purpose or not, I cannot as yet tell.)

Oates's Depositions against me upon Oath are as follows.

4to Maii, 1680.
Super Allegatione articulata ex part Domini North and Gray, and ejus Uxoris,
quarto Martii 1679, juxta etc. data and 18o ejusdem mensis admissa.
Titus Oats Sacrae Theologiae Professor and Vicarius Vicariae de Bibbin in
Com. Cantii aetatis suae 32o, aut eo circiter, natus apud Okeham in Com.
Rutlandiae, Testis productus, juratus and examinatus, deponit prout sequitur,
viz.
AD. 11 and 12, Articulos dictae Allegationis deponit, That he knew Mr. Elliot
now a Minister, whose name he thinks Adam, in the year 1667, in the College of
Cajus in Cambridge, and as near as he can remember, he was then Pupil to Mr.
Simon Bagg or Mr. John Ellis, one of which (as the said Elliot confessed) he
the said Elliot did beat; at which time, and during the time of this Deponents
knowledge of him in the said College (which was for about the space of a
year,) he the said Elliot was a poor Scholar, maintained by some of the
Doctors of the University, (as he confessed to the Deponent;) but for his rude,
riotous, whoreing and debauched living, they withdrew his maintenance as he
complained to this Deponent. And the said Adam Elliot has confessed that he
went a Deer-stealing; and the said Elliot robbed a Study in Cajus College, and
would have sold this Deponent some of the Books he took from thence. He further
says, that after the said Elliot was gone from the said University, and in the
year 1670 or thereabouts, the said Elliot did write to the Rector of St. Omers,
and gave him an account that he had received Orders, and was a Priest, and had
sung high Mass at the English College at Rome; which Letter this Deponent saw
in the year 1677, juxta etc. and afterward the said Elliot was carried a Slave
into Barbary, and there, as it was reported generally and credibly, was
Circumcised, and as he confessed, did give poison to his Master or Patron.
After which, returning to Rome, he made his Recantation, which this Deponent
has seen under his own hand, as this Deponent believes, having been well
acquainted with his Character. He further says, that in the year 1673, the
said Elliot living in Kent did lead a very dissolute debauched life, and was
much given to Drinking, Whoreing, Lying, and Swearing that to be true which was
not so: And he says, that he has seen a Letter subscribed as from the Bishop
of Mead in Ireland; the purport of which was, that Elliot was indicted in
Dublin before the Lord Chief Justice Booth, for saying that this Deponent was a
perjured Rogue, and that the Jesuits that were hanged for high Treason died
Martyrs, and that there was no such thing as a Popish Plot, or to that effect;
upon which the said Elliot was convicted and fined 200 lb. and was to be
imprisoned till the said Fine was paid, or to that purpose: And this Deponent
does verily believe that the said Elliot was and is so vile and infamous a
Person, of such a lewd, wicked and debauched life and conversation, that no
faith or credit is or ought to be given to his sayings and Depositions in this
Cause: Et aliter nescit deponere, super reliquis non examinatur ex directione
partis producentis.

Idem ad Interrogatoria ex adversa part ministrata. Ad primum and secundum
respondet, that about Christmas last, as near as he remembers the time, the
Lord North and Gray met this Respondent in Whitehall, and asked this
Respondent, whether he knew one Elliot that was a Priest or to that purpose;
and at first this Respondent could not recollect whether he did or not, but
upon further discourse and enquiry, finding that he had been of Cajus College
in Cambridge, this Respondent did remember him, and told his Lordship that he
knew the said Elliot to be a very Rogue, and a lewd debauched liver, and that
he had been Circumcised, and had received Orders from the Sea of Rome, or to
that purpose. Et aliter nescit respondere, saving that just after the former
discourse between this Respondent and his said Lordship which he has
predeposed, his Lordship asked this Respondent whether he thought it not fit
that the said Elliot should be taken up or apprehended, and asked this
Respondent how it might best be done; and (as near as he can remember) this
Respondent advised him to get a Warrant from Sir William Waller for him; and
saving the said Lord North then asked this Respondent, whether he could justify
the said Elliot was a Romish Priest; to which this Respondent replied, that he
believed he could, or to that purpose.

Ad tertium Respondet, that the next day after the Sunday whereon the said lord
North and this Respondent had the discourse predeposed of, the said Elliot was
taken and brought before Sir William Waller. Et aliter nescit respondere.

Ad quartum respondet, that he did seo the said Elliot before Sir William
Waller, but did not hear him examined.

Ad quintum interrogatorium Respondet, that being advised and told by the Lord
Chancellor, that since the said Elliot had taken Orders in the Church of
England, that his so doing had swallowed up all other Orders, and therefore
there could be no proceedings against him for being a Romish Priest, or to that
effect, as he remembers; this Respondent did tell the said Sir William Waller
that he had nothing to allege or say against the said Elliot. Et aliter
nescit respondere.

Ad sextum nescit, saving the Interrogatory, Sir William Waller did at this
Respondents instance clear or dismiss the said Elliot.

Ad septimum respondet, that the time when the Lord North and Crey had
discourse with this Respondent about the said Elliot, as he has predeposed, he
told this Deponent, that the said Elliot had belied him and his Lady, and had
injured him; and as he thinks told this Respondent, that the said Elliot had
been a Witness against him concerning a Will, in a suit depending at Doctors
Commons between his Lordship and the Lady Dowager Gray. Aliter non meminit.

Ad octavum respondet, that he is well acquainted with the Character of Sir
William Waller, and believes the Schedule or Certificate now shown unto him, is
totally wrote and subscribed by the proper handwriting of Sir William Waller.

Ad nonum, refert se ad praedeposita quae dicit esse vera.
Ad decimum dat causas sciend. ut supra.
These are the Depositions of Titus Oats against me, which did not flow from a
precipitate rashness, or inconsiderate passion, but were the advised result of
six months deliberation, subscribed by his own hand, and grounded upon the same
motives of Credibility with his discovery of the Popish Plot; even his Oath and
most solemn Invocation of the dreadful God, to avenge himself upon him, who
bears false witness against his Neighbor. The charge against me in these his
Depositions is intollerably grievous, even abstracting from the sacredness of
my Function, and considering me barely, as I am a member of a Christian and
Protestant community: and truly the conclusion of his Depositions in these
words, that I am so vile and infamous a person, of such a wicked, lewd and
debauched life and conversation, that no faith is, or ought to be given to my
sayings and Depositions in that Cause; as it plainly shows the design of
Oates's appearing against me, viz. to oblige the Lord North, and to invalidate
my testimony in behalf of the Lady Dowager Gray; so it is a very rational
consequence which the Doctor is seldom guilty of: for indeed if I am truly and
justly charged by him, I confess my self not only unworthy of credit in that
cause, but in all others; but if he has sworn falsely against me, then I hope
the conclusion will be equally applicable to himself, and that the Doctor ought
not to be believed, either in his Depositions against me, or any other person.
Now I do in the presence of the almighty and all-seing God declare, that what
Titus Oats has sworn against me, is mere calumny, and malicious wilful
detraction and slander, and absolutely false; and that whosoever might excite
or encourage the Villain to this base and unworthy undertaking, yet certainly
the Enemy of Mankind must have been mainly concerned in the wicked contrivance,
and the Doctor by his shameless impudent lying and false swearing, has plainly
evidenced himself to be the Son of a Devil, by manifest characters and features
lineally extracted from the Father of Lies and accuser of the Brethren.

But here I expect some Readers may probably cut me short, and tell me, that by
asserting Doctor Oats to be forsworn, I insinuate as if the Popish Plot were
but a feignment, and a mere whim of the Doctor's invention; at least I reflect
most severely upon his Discoveries, for if he can be found but once to have
sworn falsely, the credit of his Depositions immediately sinks, and every man
for the future, will think himself obliged to disbelieve his Narrative.

To this I answer, that his Maje^^ and Council have declared that there is a
Popish Plot, and therefore I have reason to believe one; for the King is as an
Angel of God, and has means of Intelligence that far transcend my little
sphere, or any Subjects; so that in despite of these objections Oats has laid
in the way, I do really believe the existence of a Popish Plot; but withal I
do declare, I do not believe one syllable thereof from beginning to ending,
upon account of the Doctors Depositions: and if it be criminal to deny it, or
call it in question, the truth and being of which is ascertained by his
Majesty's Declaration in Council, and by the Votes of the House of Lords and
Commons in Parliament, then certainly there is abundant matter of Information
against one Titus Oats a Salamanea-Doctor, who for these three years past, has
industriously endeavored to discredit it, and by contradicting Oaths, and
forswearing himself in several instances, has ruined his own reputation, and
labored as much as in him lay, to persuade the Nation that his Narrative is a
Lie, and the Plot a sham; for which if he be not returned into the
Crown-Office, and answer for his misdemeanour at the Kings-Bench-Bar, (as it
shall be none of my fault if he do not,) yet I hope there will come a
Parliament; and really I believe it will be a pleasant sight, to see Doctor
Oats brought up by Topham, to answer at the Commons Bar, the contempt of God
knows how many Votes.

When the first discovery of the Popish Plot had alarmed these Nations with a
general consternation and horror, as reasonably it must, I confess I bore a
part; for being in a Country, viz. in Ireland, where the Papists were very
numerous, and where forty years interval had scarce worn out the footsteps and
bloody marks of their barbarous and inhumane Cruelty, and execrable Rebellion;
methought the Protestauts there had all the reason in the world to be sensible
of their Danger, and to stand upon their guard, seeing such a dreadful Plot was
sworn to be upon the very brink of breaking out here in England. But when after
all, Oates's Narrative, and his Evidences against the Jesuits, and others who
suffered, produced nothing but bare downright confident Swearing, (a certain
and infallible argument of nothing so much as his own traitorous disposition
formerly) I must confess my fears began to vanish, and strong surmises to come
in their place, lest the Doctors Ears might be in greater jeopardy than our
Throats. To speak the truth, the 40000 Black-Bills, and the Army of Spanish
Pilgrims, and Military Commissions from General D'Oliva, appeared always to me
so monstrously ridiculous, that they offer an intolerable affront to the
understanding of any man, who has but a very indifferent account of the affairs
of Europe. I desire the Reader to reconcile if he can, Oates's Depositions in
Coleman's Trial, page 29th, where upon Oath he delivers to us, yea, and repeats
it for sureness sake, That he never saw Langhorn after he had showed him the
Commissions; which there he tells us, was two days after the April Consult; and
yet in Langhorn's Trial page 18th, he swears, he saw him twice or thrice after,
in July and August: this last he thought himself obliged to swear, that he
might charge Langhorn with a new Treason contrived at a Benedictine Consult,
which the Doctor made to be in these months at the Sav^* These two evidences
upon Oath are plainly contradictory, I am sure, they can never both be
reconciled to truth. It never abated my honor and dutiful respects to His
Royal Highness, that Oats swore first for him, and afterward against him; and
notwithstanding his Doctorship's swearing through a double Door, yet I have ten
times more reason to believe the Doctor to be a Son of a --, than His R. H. to
be a Son of the Church of Rome. I have heard much talk, and a great deal of
Swearing there has been, about the Commissions, and a world of Letters brimfull
of Treason, sent by the Post too, whose Date the Doctor remembers precisely;
and yet wisemen, if they do not think he Lies, they cannot but admire that he
should have never a scrip nor scroul to show; they wonder he should forget to
bring at least a Copy along with him: I would have been more generous my self
than Sir John Gage was to him, I would give twenty Shillings for the sight of
that Commission, for which Sir John gave but ten.

At Stafford's Trial, page he swore he never was really a Papist, but a
Counterfeit; then in the first place, I desire the Reader to consider what
Religion he could be of, during his residence amongst the Papists; which of the
Whiggish Tribes could he be obliged to for Communion, or whether the Protestant
Religion of the Church of England would own such a wicked Dissembler with God
and Man, who took all sorts of Tests of Oaths and Sacraments, yea, and
committed abominable Idolatry, in despite of his conscience; who equivocated
beyond Garnet, and out-ly'd the Devil. In the next place, supposing, but not
granting him to have been then a Protestant; pray Reader, ask him the next time
you see him, why he did not carry the Resolves of the April-Consult concerning
the assasinating his Majesty, to one of the Secretaries of State, or to some
Magistrate? He swears that he carried these Resolves from one Club to another,
subscribed by the several hands of the Persons, who were at the Clubs; could
there a fitter opportunity offer it self to discover the Plot, than at a time
when he might have seized all the Conspirators cooped up together? when he
might so manifestly have convinced them, by their names and manual
subscriptions to the highest and express most Treason imaginable? Nay moreover,
when a small delay threatened His Majesty's sacred Person with an imminent, if
not certain destruction. By his swearing himself to have been at that time no
Papist, I appeal to any man, whether he does not in effect make Oath, that
there was no such traitorous Consult: for it seems not probable, that there
should be such a horrid palpable Conspiracy, and such an excellent convenience
for Discovery, and yet a Protestant should conceal it. But above all, I can
hardly find in my heart to forgive him, (notwithstanding His Majesty's pardon)
the not preventing the Destruction of His Majesty's sacred Person, by Sir
George Wakeman's Poison, or some other way, by the four Ruffians at Windsor. In
almost all the Trials, he sticks to this, viz. that he saw 80 lb. told down to
be carried to them, and he saw a Guinney given for expedition; and yet this
bloody Villain never made, nor attempted any discovery, when it might have been
seasonable: every minute he expected to hear the blow was given, and yet, which
is monstrous, he never offered the least prevention. Certainly Ravilliac and
Jaques Clement were better Christians than this Rogue; he Lies, if he says he
was then a Protestant, or else he Lies in devising this Plot, let him take his
Choice.

At the first discovery of the Plot, he was pleased to allow His Grace the Duke
of Ormond, a Guard of four such Ruffians as attend his Doctorship, and he made
his Grace at that time so considerable in the Protestant cause, that he
appointed him Fogarthy for a Physician: but this was in the dawning of the
Discovery: the Doctor is observed to make very considerable mistakes by
Candlelight, and so probably he might then mistake his Grace for a certain
Noble Peer; for afterward, when the Plot was arrived to the Noon of its
discovery, that People could see clearly who it was convenient to swear for, or
against: His Grace was brought in as a favourer of that Religion, which before
the Doctor swore would have murdered him; and God knows how many more were
brought in upon the like account. All the Clergy of the Church of England, were
then seen tantivying it to Rome, and the Dissenters and Conventicles were the
only strong Holds and Bulwarks of the Protestant Religion; whereas at the
beginning, the Doctor swears in his Narrative, the Papists endeavored by all
means to encourage these seditious Separatists, and that the Meeting Houses
were the lurking holes of the Jesuits, where under the umbrage of the
Toleration allowed them, they absconded themselves from the view of the Law.
Nay, if the Doctor's friend Stephen College had been permitted to finish his
Discovery of the Plot and his Raree show, I do not doubt, but his Majesty had
been drawn into the Plot against his own Life. The Learned Doctor may have read
or heard at least, that Charles Stuart has been before now, charged with
Treason against the Sovereign; they had got pretty near the King, when they
made bold with the Queen, and however the Doctor has not been positive as yet
to this point, yet he knows there is a time for all things. All which
arguments, with abundance more too large to be here inserted, drawn from the
intrinsic matter of the Doctor's Depositions, were sufficient to restrain my
assent to the Doctor's Oaths, how confident soever; especially when I
considered that he was a person no ways eminent for probity or honesty,
qualifications essentially requisite to all who aim at credit by Swearing: but
this villainous Doctor is notorious for all flagitious crimes and impieties
imaginable. Sir Dennis Ashbourn witnessed, that he had one property of the
Devil, viz. that he was a Liar from the beginning; he has served an
apprentiship to the trade of Leesing from his Cradle, and Hastings his some
time abode in Sussex, and Bobbing in Kent, will verify the old saying, Quo
semel est imbuta, etc. He has been observed, wherever he has fortuned to make
his residence, to sow dissension amongst Neighbors, even where he pretended to
be a Minister of peace, a perpetual Makebate; upon which account and several
others, Sir George Moor turned him out of his Family at Bobbing,: and how he
behaved himself at Hastings, the Records of that place are a demonstration, and
are so generally known, that I shall not trouble the Reader with a recital;
only I have heard it wished by an Inhabitant there, for an experiment, that he
would bestow a visit upon his Quondam Parishioners, he verily believed, he said
that all his Ruffianlike Mirmidon would hardly defend him from the resentments
of the good House-wifes there, who remember what a scarcity of Poultry was in
that Town, when he was their Minister. Nay, on my conscience, I never heard any
Person who pretended to know him, who did not describe him by an evil
character: But these are Peccadilloes, in respect of his monstrous lusts, which
would make a Satyr blush, upon which account, he is notoriously infamous both
by Sea and by Land. I have heard those who were aboard with him report, that he
has committed such crimes a-ship-board, as have obliged the Captain, a
Gentleman of very fair conditions, to wave all Civility usually bestowed upon
his Quality, and to order him to be drubb'd, and tied neck and heels, and
afterward to be set ashore. And there are those living now, who will witness
that Knox and Lane were not the first or only Persons that could charge him
with a Sodomitical attempt. As for his Religion, no man can tell what Creed he
professes. The Reader may have heard of a blasphemous Villain, who pronounced
St. Athanasius a Creed-making Coxcomb: I am morally certain, the Salamanca
Doctor has not as yet made public satisfaction to the Church of England for
his scandalous apostasy, and that he has made no public abjuration of the
errors of the Church of Rome, which sometimes he professed; and I am sure that
for a while he associated with the Socinians, and was even by them disliked,
being scandalized with his contemptuous and blasphemous talk of the blessed
Trinity, and he is very well known both by his Non-fensical harangue at the
Weavers Feast (upon these words, Heb. 1. 2. By whom also he made the worlds) as
also by his prating in public company, to be obstinate in the Socinian
persuasions, though God knows, he is very little capable to understand their
arguments: nay, I have heard it credibly reported, that this profane Wretch,
made it his business to go about fidler-wise, amongst places of public resort,
and ridicule preaching, by a Presbyterian Cant, and as the Fiddlers used to
press into companies, and say, Gentlemen, will ye please to have a Lesson of
Music, this Mountebank used to say, Gentlemen, will ye have a Sermon; and when
the reckoning came to be paid, there was usually twelve pence left for the
Fiddlers, and six pence for the Doctor. This they say was one way he had of
Living, after he was turned from St. Omers, before he laid hold of the Plot.
And now I appeal to any unprejudiced Reader, whether credit ought to be given
to his Depositions; or whether the Life, fortune, or reputation of a man, ought
to be of so inconsiderable a value, as to depend upon the breath a Miscreant,
destitute of Religion and Morality, an utter Stranger both to faith and good
manners.

But yet supposing the truth of these allegations should not appear so clearly
to prejudiced minds; yea, suppose they all should be false, yet I am so fully
persuaded of his malicious villainy, and false swearing against me, that should
the whole world oppose me, I am resolved to be Athanasius against the whole
world: the glory of God, the interest of Truth, and the vindication of my own
reputation, oblige me to expose this Enemy of mankind and all that is good, and
to proclaim to all the world, that Titus Oats is one of the wickedest and most
malicious Villains in it, who shows no dread of a God, nor makes conscience of
an Oath. And this I shall demonstrate and offer a clear proof of, to all
unbiassed understanding persons, who desire to be satisfied of the truth, in
the examination of his Depositions against me: which though this cunning
swearing-master, has couched with all artifice, that the truth might not be
discovered, swearing things by such circumstances, which as they admit of no
manner of probation but his own Oath, so he thought his falsehood would never be
detected, by reason of the difficulty of bringing arguments to prove Negatives;
yet the Devil who is indebted shame and confusion to all his Proselytes, has
taken occasion to pay a little in hand at present to his own child Titus, by
leaving him in some places of these his Depositions, unguarded of that fence he
had provided him with in most of his other Lies; so that now he lies shamefully
naked, a foresworn wretch, exposed plainly to the view of all who do not
wilfully shut their eyes against the light of the truth.

To show the Reader what truth he is to expect from Oates's Depositions, he
begins with a notorious untruth, and prefaceth his false Oaths with a suitable
Lie; he styles himself, Titus Oats, Sacra Theologiae Professor, which rendered
into true English is, Titus Oats a damned Liar, for Titus Oats Doctor in
Divinity is a contradiction to truth. He has imposed upon the nation, asserting
upon the word of a Priest, that he commenced Doctor at Salamanca, whereas he
has made it highly probable that he never was there; and besides, by declaring
that he never received Clerical Orders from the Church of Rome, he has given
all understanding men a better proof than his Oath, that he could never be a
Doctor, no person being qualified for that degree in that University, who is
not a Romish Priest. It is very unlikely that he should obtain the highest
honor of Academical preferment in a foreign University, who never deserved
the Grace of the lowest degree in the University of Cambridge, amongst his own
Countrymen. The Doctors of Salamanca are much famed for their acuteness and
exact knowledge in Scholastic Divinity, which this blockhead understands as
much as he does Greek or the Chinese Languages, which his Mother never taught
him, and therefore he is a stranger to. I have heard of Angelicus Doctor, and
Seraphicus Doctor, but I never heard of Doctor Diabolicus, until Titus Oats
and the hellish Popish Plot appeared together; a Damnable Doctor created at the
Amsterdam-Coffee-house, or B -- l's Club in the Devils name, and so let him
pass.

Having by this prefatory address of a palpable Lie, bespoke the Readers belief
to what follows, he begins and swears four abominable rappers in a breath: he
swears I beat my Tutor, that I robbed a study of Books, and offered to sell the
Books to him; that during his knowledge of me, (which, by his own acknowledgment
was only for the space of a year) I was maintained by some Doctors of the
University, and yet during that time, I was not maintained by them, for they
withdrew the maintenance, by reason of my whoring, drinking, etc. and lastly he
swears that I went a Deer-stealing. These are four scandalous crimes, by which
he begins and assaults my Reputation; but because he knew the charge lay
obnoxious to be disproved, and the falsity thereof might easily be made appear
by the testimony of the whole College: therefore he has recourse to the usual
shelter of his lies, viz. I confessed these things to him. And now he thinks he
has entrenched himself secure against the most powerful attacks of the plainest
truth. It was to this refuge, that this impudent forger of falsehoods betook
himself, when at my Lord Castlemain's Trial, he was charged by that noble
Person with a manifest Lie, in asserting that he was divorced: he brought
himself off with a retreat to the old sconce, I am sure, says he, My Lord told
me he was divorced. But I hope the Reader will be so just, as to qualify this
sort of argument, which if admitted without consideration, is as apt to destroy
the innocent as condemn the guilty: the quality both of the Oath and the
Swearer ought to be examined, otherwise* the most innocent person is exposed to
the malice of every confident Villain. Now the Doctor has sworn against me
crimes committed in Cajus College in Cambridge, which the College never so
much as heard me suspected of; and moreover some persons of known integrity and
veracity who were well acquainted with me, and during all the time of my
residence in Cambridge, knew me intimately, have thought themselves obliged to
do me justice, and have upon Oath in the Court of Delegates declared that they
had all reason to believe me abused by malicious slander, seeing, if there had
been any ground for such aspersions, they must of necessity have been made
acquainted with it, as who were my fellow-Collegiates, and had the opportunity
of a converse four times as long as Oats can pretend to. My Tutor did likewise
declare and offered to make Oath, that he never knew me in the least guilty of
any such undutiful carriage, as to beat him or any fellow in the College; he
moreover did attest, and offered to procure the Testimony of the whole
College, that I never was charged nor suspected of Robbing a study, and
(whereas this impudent falsewitness did aver to a person of Honor, that I
robbed my Tutor's study) that he himself never had his study robbed either by
me or any other. As for Oates's other charge, that during his knowledge of me,
I was maintained by some Doctors, and that for my whoreing, drinking, and
riotous living, they withdrew the maintenance. The whole College can attest,
that I resided in the College till after I was Batchelour of Arts, and I desy
the Doctor, to produce one Cambridge Dun who could charge me with the least
Debt when I left the University; and how then I should be addicted to such
expensive vices, (especially, seeing the Doctor has been pleased to allow me
but a very small competency to maintain them) is matter of enquiry. But his
last charge is the most wild and extravagant of all, viz. Deer-stealing; I
solemnly profess I never saw a Deer, during my being a member of Cajus
College, I never saw any Park, neither knew I where there was any, neither did
I know or hear of any who were addicted to that sport in the University: and
for the truth of what I assert here, I refer my self to the arbitration of that
Society of which I had the honor to be a Member, and to all persons in the
University acquainted with me or my conversation, who can be supposed to be the
only competent Judges or Witnesses in this affair.

And now how shall I ferret him out of his last hole, namely his plea, that I
confessed my self guilty of these crimes to him? there is no way of
demonstrating the falsity of this; but however I have as great probabilities
thereof to offer, as the matter will allow, and I hope the Reader will not
expect more. As 1st. it is highly improbable that Titus Oats should contract a
greater acquaintance with me in one year, than any of the College could do in
four. 2ly. That I should defame my self, or unbosome my self to him, who was of
the meanest repute in the College, who was inferior to me both in years and in
standing in the University, and who besides was as to his quality, only a poor
Sizer, the Son of a Weaver; and as to his parts, the most ignorant illiterate
Dunce, incapable of improvement, from whose converse there was not the least
prospect of advantage. And then in the third place, notwithstanding his precise
memory, which has registered more Letters than ever Langhorn writ,
notwithstanding he can remember the particular hand-writings of a thousand men,
only by seeing them put Pen to Paper; yea, notwithstanding he swears he is very
well acquainted with my character fifteen years ago, (which is more then I am
my self) and that we were such intimate Comerades; that I trusted him with all
my secrets: yet he unhappily cannot call to mind who was my Tutor, yea, he
cannot tell whether I was his Fellow-Pupil, for Mr. John Ellis was his Tutor,
which is a pretty fair indication that his memory is not so excellent as his
Lying: for if it was defective, where he had such convenient helps, it affords
reason to suspect it too bad to remember where he could have but mean and
imperfect assistances.

I have been thus prolix in vindicating the reputation of my younger years from
this Calumniator's aspersions, not that I arrogate any supererogating
observation of the Statutes of our College (for I am sufficiently sensible of
the loss of these opportunities which I might have improved to very happy
advantages, under the excellent discipline of that learned Society, which I
ought never to mention, but with all resentments of Gratitude and Honor) but
that I might show unto the world, how consistent with his principles this
forsworn Villain has been in every particular against me, charging me only with
those things which are false, and of which the severest Censor of manners in
Cajus College must pronounce me innocent; and that Titus Oats must have been
a perfect Stranger both to my converse and humor. The Bloodthirsty Murderer
makes his next attempt to take away my life, he swears he saw a Letter
subscribed by my hand in the year 1670, directed to the Rector of S. Omers,
wherein I gave him an account, that I had received Priests Orders, and had sung
high Mass in the English College at Rome; this Letter he swears he saw in the
year 1677. If the Valiant Captain were alive now, to second the Learned Doctor,
and swear that he saw Langhorn register this Letter, there needs no more to
hang me. Good God! how unsearchable are thy judgments, and thy ways past
finding out! who thus permittest the blood-thirsty and deceitful man to go on
still in his wickedness, and to prosper in his Villainies; in respect of which,
Cain the Murderer was innocent, and a Saint! If the Schoolmen and Doctors of
Salamanca have given a true notion of the Sin against the holy Ghost, then I do
affirm that there is no hopes of pardon for that damned Reprobate, a
sham-brother of theirs, Doctor Titus Oats, who sins wilfully in despite of his
conscience, and swears and lies against his knowledge, outbraving Hellfire, and
daring the vengeance of God: for I desire the Reader to take notice, that I
invoke this vengeance of the Almighty to seize me immediately, if ever I
received any Orders from the Sea or Church of Rome, or if, ever I received any
Ecclesiastical Ordination, except of Deacon; An. 1671, from the hands of Bishop
Laney of Ely, and of Priest, An. 1672, from Bishop Henchman of London,
according to the rites of the Church of England now by Law established.
Moreover, if ever I wrote any such Letter as Oats swears I did, to the Rector
of St. Omers or any other person, or if ever Oats saw any such Letter writ by
me. And that I may satisfy the Reader as far as I can, in the proof of a
Negative, I declare my name was never known to be Elliot beyond Sea, as
hundreds can attest; and besides to show that that Rogue's wickedness is more
my concern than the danger of my life, I will put it to the venture, and gage
my life against his (if the law will permit,) that he knows not my handwriting
from any other which he never saw. If I had received Orders from the Sea of
Rome, I needed not to be Reordained, our Church holding the Romish Ordination
to be valid.

But because his chief aim in his Depositions, was to invalidate my Testimony,
he is not content to have made me a Priest, but he boldly calls God to witness
that I am a Renegado and a Mahumetan; swearing, I, that I was carried a Slave
into Barbary: 2ly, that there, as it was generally and credibly reported, I was
circumcised: 3ly, that I confessed I gave poison to my Patron: 4ly, that after
that, I returned to Rome: 5ly, that I made a Recantation there: 6ly, that he
saw this Recantation under my own hand, being well acquainted with my
character. In every of which particulars, I do affirm, and engage my self to
prove Titus Oats to have sworn falsely, and I challenge all his friends to
undertake his defense from the imputation of having sworn in some of these
instances, maliciously and contrary to his knowledge, and in some others (to
put the best construction,) rashly, and in all falsely.

As to the first, Oats never saw me in Barbary, therefore he swore beyond the
sphere of his knowledge, and howsoever it be materially true, yet it is
formally false in him, who swears at random, and calls God to witness his
certainty of the truth in a matter which he cannot know whether it be true or
false; yea, which he has more reason to believe to be false than true,
according to his own Oath, as afterward it follows in the Depositions, that
after I came to England, and when I lived in Kent, An. 1673, I was much given
to swearing that to be true, which was not so: then thus I argue ad hominem,
all the intelligence that Oats had of my having been in Barbary, and a Slave
there, proceeded from my own information to several persons, before it came to
his hands, and therefore seeing I was the sole author of the Narrative of my
Captivity, Oats had more reason to believe it false than otherwise. And
besides, the account of my escape appeared so Romantic, that a great many
persons who heard it, thought themselves obliged upon good prudential
considerations to suspend their judgments, and to doubt whether ever I was in
Barbary or not; so that Oats by swearing positively that I was carried a Slave
into Barbary, has sworn to the truth of that which he could not be certain of,
and which he had much more reason to believe to be false.

2. As to the second particular, that there (viz. in Barbary) it was generally
and credibly reported that I was circumcised; this Oath is also rash, and
therefore false, and is liable to be proved so, by the same means as the
former, because Oats never was at Salle, the place of my Captivity, and
consequently could not certainly know what was generally and credibly reported
there. Moreover, whereas he swears it was generally and credibly reported, it
seems very probable that (if he swears true, and does not contradict his
conscience) he could produce some of those persons, whom he knows to be
credible; but I challenge him, and all mankind to produce one person who ever
attested or reported that I was circumcised until about three years ago, Titus
Oats brought this Lie and a great many others into the world. Seeing then he
cannot produce one of those many witnesses whose credit he much relies upon,
its probable he swears maliciously as well as falsely, but however it is
certain he swears at least rashly to a thing which he did not know, and
therefore falsely.

3. He swears I confessed I gave Poison to my Patron; this I deny, and Oats is
forsworn in saying so, for I could not confess to Oats, because I never saw
him since I was at Cambridge, which was before I rtavail'd; And if he only
heard so from others therefore Oats has sworn rashly to the truth of a matter
which is false, and of whose truth he had no means of being certain.

4. He swears, that after I had been in Barbary I returned to Rome: this is
false, and the Doctor in this is also forsworn, for I have never been in Italy,
nor within two hundred Leagues of any part of Italy, since I was in Barbary,
and the truth of this and the moral impossibility of the contrary will be
attested by persons of worth and unexceptionable credit and veracity: for in
the year 1670, Doctor Zachary Cradock now Provost of Eaten, who was then
Minister to the English Merchants at Lisbon, and Mr. Bulteel a worthy Merchant
who then resided at Lisbon, with others, do remember me, and saw me at Lisbon,
in the month of June, before I embarkt in that Vessel in which I was taken; and
they can attest, that I returned back to Lisbon in September after I had made
an escape. Sir Martin Westcomb Consul of Cadiz is able to attest, that in the
beginning of September 1670, I arrived at Cadis from Mamora, the place whither
I escapt from Salle in a Spanish Barca-longa, and that I brought a Letter from
the Governor of Mamora to the Duke of Vergauas Governor of Cadis, and that
after a fortnights stay there, he procured me passage in a Dutch man of war for
Lisbon: from Lisbon I returned home in another Dutch man of war, in which I
embarkt about the middle of October, and was carried to the Texel, and so to
Amsterdam, in November about the beginning. I refer my self to the testimony of
Dr. Marshal Master of Lincoln College in Oxford, then Minister to the English
at Dort, who was pleased to assist my necessitous condition, and Sir John
Chichely then Envoy to the Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, who remembers
me, and his servants with whom Sir John was pleased to grant me passage from
Brussels to Ostend; whence having been stopped there a fortnight by bad weather,
I returned home, and landed at London about the latter end of November 1670.
There are several persons of Quality and worth who remember me, and upon Oath
can attest my residence ever since November 1670, so that it is morally
impossible that ever I should have been at Rome since I was in Barbary: and
besides the business in which he engages me at Rome, which he swears in the
next place, requires a time for its performance, which it is impossible for any
considering Reader to allow.

5. He swears I made a Recantation at Rome; this he swears positively, and I
swear he lies abominably: and this the Intelligent Reader may be easily
convinced of, by this short demonstration. Every one who renounces the
Christian and embraces the Mahumetan faith, is immediately circumcised, that
being the essential form of iniitation into that Religion, and an infallible
character of all its Proselytes: if therefore I am not circumcised, then it is
impossible that I could have been a Professor of Mahomets Law, and
consequently, it is as impossible that I should have recanted it at Rome. But I
am not circumcised, neither as a Proselyte nor otherwise, which this Rogue's
unparalleled impudence and villainy has obliged me to prove by a demonstration
not altogether so consistent, I confess, with the gravity of my Profession, yet
such as I have no great reason to be ashamed of, since providence has made it
instrumental for discovery of the truth, and preservation of my own life, and
rescuing my fame from the imputation of a far greater moral turpitude, than any
natural I thank God I am guilty of. Titus Oats is therefore palpably forsworn,
and to the shame and confusion of himself and all who dare stand up for him, I
can demonstrate it. But further yet, there are collateral arguments to convince
the Reader of the falsehood of this his Oath; If I recanted my Apostasy from the
Christian Religion, how came I to escape the Inquisition at Rome, which is a
harder escape than from Salle? and this the Doctor would be sure of, if he were
there. There are none, whether the Doctor know it or no, who turn from the
Romish Religion, to the Protestant, or as they term it Heretical, who are
received into the bosom of the Church of Rome upon a bare Recantation, they
are besides to endure a purgatory in the Inquisition; much more, if they revolt
and apostatize totally from Christianity, and most especially if they were
Priests, as the Doctor swore I was. The Doctor therefore by being silent as to
this particular, how I got clear of the Inquisition, which must have been very
remarkable, has given one main argument, that I never deserved it, and
therefore that I never recanted, and therefore that he is a malicious lying
Rogue.

6. He swears he saw this Recantation subscribed with my own hand, and that he
is well acquainted with my character; every syllable whereof is false, and he
maliciously contradicts the truth* swearing contrary to his conscience, for he
must certainly know, that he never saw that which never was. And besides, if I
had made such a Recantation, it would have been very notorious, and the News of
the Prints at that time: and for a further conviction, I desire the Reader once
more to take notice, that hundreds can attest that my name was never known to
be Elliot beyond Sea, and Oats is ignorant by what name I went; and how then
he should know my hand, or what I was is next to an impossibility.

In these six foregoing particulars, the Doctor is manifestly forsworn, and has
shown only the pregnancy of a wicked invention, without any judgment, by
improving an innocent if not commendable passage of my life, to a crime that is
Capital, and making me to deserve imprisonment and Death amongst Christians,
because I made a laudable attempt to escape from a Moorish Bondage and
Captivity. It is lamentable, that amongst Christians in England, I should meet
with a faith worse than Punick, and that Haggi Hamet Lucas a barbarous Moor
should outvye a Doctor of Salamanca in Christianity. But blessed be my good
God, who has delivered me from the paw of the Lion and the Bear, and I trust
will likewise deliver me from this Uncircumcised Philistine; he whose eminent
providence has appeared, in my deliverance from the Monsters of Africa, from
the house of Bondage and slavery to cruel Masters, will likewise vindicate my
Innocence from the false swearing of this Monster of men, who by wicked
blasphemies defies the Armies of the Living God.

He proceeds on in his wicked lying and false sweating, as if it were religion
with him never to speak truth, swearing positively that An 1673, when I lived
in Kent, I was given to all debaucheries, viz. Whoreing, Drinking, and
particularly to Swearing that to be true which was not so; in which
Depositions, he is like himself constantly false, for he cannot so much as
pretend that ever he saw me in Kent, and consequently the Reader cannot but be
satissied that he swears rashly and falsely. As for the matter of his
Depositions, which indeed he knows nothing of, I refer my self to a worthy
Gentleman, Colonel Charles Wheeler and his Family, with whom I lived a year
and a half, and to Sir Thomas Scot and his Lady, with whom and in the
Neighborhood, I lived the rest of the time during my residence in Kent,
whether ever they heard me so much as suspected of these crimes: I know these
worthy persons are such friends to justice, as that they will not scruple to
give his Doctorship the Lie. At our Trial, he subpena'd some people out of
Kent, who were so far from seconding this Villain, that they deposed much to my
advantage; and I am certain, that he cannot produce any who can justly charge
me with these vices, or that ever I wronged or defrauded any person, or by
false swearing invaded any man's right or good name, crimes peculiar to this
public Enemy, and who like the Devil, endeavors to have all others esteemed
at least, if not to be, like himself.

The last Subject of his Depositions against me, is a Narration of what befell
me in Ireland, and in this, as in all the rest, it is highly probable that he
lies and swears falsely: he swears he saw a Letter from the Bishop of Mead,
which said that I was endited, and fined 200 lb. for saying that Oats was a
perjured Rogue, and the Jesuits who suffered justly dyed Martyrs, and that
there was no Popish Plot: for the only words of my enditement were, Titus Oats
was a Rogue, and the five Jesuits Martyrs, and not one syllable more was
alleged against me; so that considering that Reverend Prelate, who was a
person of great integrity and justice, I have much more reason to believe that
Titus Oats would conclude as he begun, a calumniating, lying, forsworn wretch,
than that any thing should be alleged, that entrenches upon the veracity and
clear reputation of that pious Bishop.

I have now done with the Doctor's Depositions, in examination of which, I have
I hope with all plainness confuted the calumnies of Oates's Friends, who gave
out that the Doctor swore only that he was informed of those things he deposed
against me; whereas it is clear to any man,. (except an Ignoramus, who shuts
his eyes and will not see) that what he has delivered under his own hand and
oath is in the most material parts positive, and to his own knowledge; and I
hope I have also, with perspicuity enough, exposed him forsworn in most of his
Depositions, whom in my conscience I believe and know to be so, in all and
every particular. And now at the foot of the account, I cannot but prosess my
hearty regret, that such a monstrous Serpent, and venomous Viper, whose mouth
is as an open Sepulcher, and under whose lips is the poison of Asps, should be
brought forth and fostered in this our otherwise happy Island, who with bloody
Oaths, and execrable blasphemies rends the bowels of his mother, and labors as
much as in him lies her Destruction. It is matter of real grief to me, that he
should find entertainment in this Nation, who has exposed it to the scorn and
derision of them who are round about us. The stealing away of the Grand Lowys
in the French Farce, was but an imperfect representation of the silly senseless
credulity, with which this swearing, lying Rascal has stained the English
reputation; he has sixth a blot upon this generation not to be washed off, by all
the blood in his veins. He has dishonored the Christian Religion, and
particularly he has affected the Protestant with ignominy and shame; he has
blasphemed God and injured man, a detestable enemy to both.

The Reader I suppose considering how I have been damnified and exasperated by
the malice of this wicked Fellow, will not think it strange, if I endeavored
to do my self right, and applied my self for satisfaction to the Law; which for
a while I respited, in consideration that Oats at that time was the King's
Evidence, and had his residence in his Majesty's Palace, (which under the Rose
has frequently called to my mind one of the Plagues of Egypt, which brought
forth Frogs even in the King's Chambers, and Lice in all their quarters.) But
afterward, when I perceived that he forsook his Majesty and became Witness for
the Traitor College, and that afterward he was turned out of that Royal
Entertainment, for his ungrateful demerits, and that thence, he betook himself
to the seditious and disloyal part of the City, associating chiefly with those
who are suspected of High Treason, and Capital Misdemeanors, and that he was
by them encouraged for some swearing job no question, when time should serve; I
thought it them seasonable to expose him, to which my resolution, a strange
accident did seem providentially to concur. After the arival of the Morocco
Ambassador, I had the curiosity with others to go to see these people, amongst
whom once I had been Captive; the Secretary Hamet Lucas, upon the first view,
immediately knew me, and seized me, crying out, That I was his Christian, and
that he had bought me with his Money, and that I had made an escape from him at
Salle; which unexpected encounter, together with his confirmation of my
formerly reputed Romantic Escape, and that he was not poisoned, nor knocked in
the head by me, as Oats by malicious swearing insinuated, seemed an occasion
which providence offered into my hands to vindicate my own reputation, and to
prosecute this false Swearer; which I did by arresting him.

THE TRIAL BETWIXT TITUS OATS And ME.
IDeclar'd against him, for saying that I was a Popish Priest, and had been
circumcised as a Mahumetan; to which the Doctor pleaded not guilty, upon which
we joined issue, having June the 30th, appointed for a day of Trial. The words
were plainly proved by the Honorable Ralph Gray Esquire, and Mr. William
Durham a Clergyman, before whom he had spoke them; after which, my Council
were proceeding to aggravate the charge by proof, that he had not only said
these words in several companies, and more especially before his Majesty, (as
Captain George Collingwood, was there in Court ready to attest, though not
called upon, that he heard Titus Oats depose in his Majesty's presence, that I
was a Jesuit, and was sent over from Ireland, under the masque of a Clergyman
of the Church of England, to be a spy:) as also that he had maliciously swore
to the truth of those calumnies and slandering expressions against me; but the
Council of the Defendant, conceded that the words were proved sufficiently,
begged leave to offer something in mitigation of Damages: viz. some proof that
Titus, if he did speak such words as were proved, yet he spoke them only
jocularly, as who had no malicious design. No not he, good man was of so tender
a conscience, that he would not discompose the Hair of a man's head, for a
thousand worlds, (as is clear in the case of the Lord Stafford, and the
Jesuits who suffered; (the pious Doctor, God wot, had no malice against them,
he only had them hanged up jocularly, or so, (for truly hanging is but an
ordinary jest with him.) And in order hereunto, the first who appeared to
qualify the Doctor's words, and honor the cause was the Noble Peer Charles
Lord North and Gray. It was by many looked upon with admiration, that his
Lordship would appear in defense of an already baffled cause, and for the
encouragement and patronage of a profligate Villain, abandoned by his Majesty
and all his Loyal Subjects. But these people were it seems but strangers to the
Great soul of this Noble Lord, who maintained a resolution and courage equal
always with difficulties which were insuperable, and a wit so transcendent
which nothing could match but his profound wisdom and discretion, and besides
an eloquence so powerful as to be able to rend the rocks, and make the most
obdurate heart to split. These people moreover did not consider what a sense of
gratitude this person of honor did entertain, who seeing how liberal the
Doctor had been of his Oaths in his Lordships behalf, resolved to be even with
him, and pay him in his own coin: his Lordship therefore, after having been
sworn in mitigation of damages, in behalf of the Doctor, and against poor Me,
addresses himself to the Lord Chief Justice, and the Jury to this effect. My
Lord, I knew this same Elliot when Chaplain to the Lord William Gray, and my
Lord, he then told me, that he was circumcised; I vow to God this is true, I
would not tell an untruth for all the world: and my Lord, to show you
circumstances to believe this to be so, he was at that time making Diamonds out
of calcined Flints. My Lord, he told me, he was a Slave at Mamora, where the
Blackmores inhabit, I have been there my Lord, and know it very well. (Here his
Lordship was interrupted by his Council, acquainting his Lordship with a
mistake, for that Elliot was a Slave at Salle and not at Mamora, that being the
Christian Garrison whither he escapt; but His Lordship being moved a little
with their saucy interruption proceeds) I say Elliot told me he was a Slave at
Mamora, he might tell you, who understood no better, that he was a Slave at
Salle, but he knew that I had been in that Country, and that I know very well
a man cannot escape from Salle, but from Mamora he may easily, and therefore he
told me the truth, that he was a Slave at Mamora, and to show you that this is
true, he told me he knocked his Master in the head, and left him for dead, and
the reason why he did it, was becaase his Master had a very handsome woman to
his wife, and Elliot told me, he had a very great mind to have a bout with her;
this upon my honor is true, nay, as I hope to be saved, he told me, shrugging
his shoulders. He told me besides, my Lord, that he was a Slave at Rome, no, I
beg your pardon, my Lord, I would not tell an untruth not for all the world, I
think he was mistaken there; he told me he taught Mathematics in the Scotch
College, and I believe then that he was a Priest. He swore against me, ay, he
swore against me at Doctors-Commons, and truly my Lord, I got Oats to swear
against him: that good man was loath to appear, I was forced my Lord to
Whatdeecallum him, what dee call it, pish, what dee call it, pish, you you know
well enough what they call it (at length some called out subpaena, and then the
Lord went on) ay, ay, I was forct to subpaena that modest good man to swear the
truth. I Will tell you my Lord by what good fortune I met the honest Doctor, you
know my Lord, there is a gallery in Whitehall, you have been there my Lord, and
so have I, and several I believe in this Company; it was not the Stone-Gallery,
no, no, I know that Gallery well enough, that is below stairs, no, no, it was a
Gallery above stairs, and yet it was not that Gallery over the Stone Gallery,
but another Gallery; and yet now I think on it, it was not in the Gallery, (for
I would not tell a Lie, an give me never so much) it was in a Chamber at the
end of the Gallery, not such a Chamber which your Lordship knows very well, but
another Chamber; there it was that I met Oats, no I beg your pardon my Lord, I
would not tell a Lie for the world, I did not meet the Doctor there, but I Will
tell you who I met there, I met my Lord Chancellor there; this is the plain
truth as I hope to be saved; says I to him, pray my Lord Chancellor who can
you advise me to, that is good at catching a Priest; says my Lord presently to
me again, there is Doctor Oats hard by, you cannot light upon a better; with
that I took leave of his Lordship, and addressed my self to the Doctor, I asked
him if he knew one Elliot a Priest, who had been at Cambridge, he presently
told me that he knew him to be a Popish Priest, and that he had been
circumcised, and for the truth of this, the King and my Lord Chancellor will
be my Witness; God damme (laying his hand on his Breast) this is all truth.
This eloquent speech in Oates's behalf, by the Lord North and Gray I have made
bold to trouble the Reader's patience with, lest the Doctor should tax me with
injustice in omitting any thing that was material in his defense, as this
florid harangue was the most considerable. I remember I have sometime heard
this Noble Peer say, that the curious Painter in drawing His Lordship's
Picture, had observed a Je ne scay quoy in his face, I am sure there are a
great many Je ne scay quoy's in his speech, embellishments which can hardly be
better expressed in English, than by a word borrowed from His Lordship,
Whatdeecallums. There is one observation which I cannot omit, viz. that in the
heat of his Rhetoric, His Lordship overslipt his design, which was to prove
Oats intended no malice against me by his detraction, and so to mitigate the
damages, but instead thereof, His Lordship offered His Majesty and my Lord
Chancellor for witnesses, that Oats loaded me with calumnies even before the
King; so that with whatsoever resentment His Lordship may be thought to have
uttered these pathetick elaborate periods, yet he really was a Witness on my
side, and confirmed Mr. Grey's restimony, destroying the Doctor's Plea.

The next who seconded the Lord in behalf of the Doctor, was one Isaac Warren,
the Lord North's chief evidence against the Lady Gray; he told the Court, that
I had confessed to him privately that I was a Papist, and that I did not
believe any of the Protestant Doctrine, which I delivered in some Sermons I
preached before the Lord William Gray, his Lord and mine. In answer to this
(because he proceeds in the method of his Swearing-Master Oats) I say, that I
appeal to all that Noble Family, to which I retained, who I am sure will
unanimously give him the Lie: the Lord William Gray is known to have been a
person so averse to all that favored Popery, that if he had suspected me
guilty of any tendency that way (as this Fellow ought to have discovered me,
and there is no question, if he had known, he would) His Lordship would never
have afforded me entertainment under his Roof, which I enjoyed during his Life.
The Reader will be astonished, when he shall know, that this impudent fellow
came to the Lady Dowager Grey's House, and offered to Mr. Durham the said
Lady's Chaplain, to be a Witness in my behalf against Oats, and did suggest
several things very dishonorable to the Lord North, which the said Gentleman
told him, he was sure I would reject, as who knew him to be a very rascal, and
to be forsworn in the Lord North's cause, and therefore would not prejudice my
self by such a notorious false witness: his Testimony is a scandal to truth,
and as unworthy of acceptance on my side, so not deserving any more confutation
on Oates's.

The third who appeared was Marshal, a remarkable man the Cause, at Peter's
Coffee-house in Covent Garden; I remember I saw this Blade once at Leghorn, by
the same token, that I saved him from being beaten or worse, which courtesy he
has now requited, by testifying that he suspected me to have been then a Popish
Priest, because he finds my name was not then Elliot, which now I own. He
moreover testified that I told him in England, that I had cut off my Patrons
head in Barbary; which is false; for Mr. Edward Courtney, who was then in
company, when this Story was supposed to be told, desires me to acquaint the
world in his name, that he heard me then relate the manner of my escape, as he
had done formerly, and that I then told them that I left my Patron asleep, and
that he pursued me the next morning: so that this zealous Buzzard, though he
spoke nothing to the purpose, (as who crossed the design of the Doctors Plea,
and who endeavored to render that probable which was impossible and a Lie, and
which the impudent Doctor himself pretended to the grace to deny,) yet to show
his good will, he pawns his soul, and put his ears to a hard venture to serve
the Doctor.

The next in place, was one Codoghan, or some such ugly name, an Irish
Evidence; this was very surprising, that the Doctor who had given them all to
the Devil a great while ago, should now make use of such a Witness: he would
make application to the Devil himself upon an urgent occasion. This Fellow
swore that when I was at Dublin, I sustained a bad Reputation; which I grant;
and may thank the Doctor for it; yet notwithstanding, I have Certificates of my
fair and honest deportment in that place, from the Dean and Chapter of
Christs-Church, and those who were concerned to be acquainted with my
conversation, more to my advantage, than Oats or this Irish fellow, or all
their Relations can produce, for theirs.

After him comes a holy Sister, a True-blew-Protestant-Hosiers wife, one Mrs.
Kedley forsooth, who lives at the sign of the Swan at the corner of
Fryday-street in Cheapside; this zealous woman thinking it hard that the Doctor
who had sworn so much for the Nations good, should be exposed to danger for
want of an Oath or two, prostitutes her little modesty at his service; swearing
that travailing from Chester to London in the Chester-Coach, she heard me tell
a Story of an Escape from Slavery, and that I said I killed my Master; She
swore moreover, that I said I was circumcised; and withal, she had the
impudence to blush, though she wanted the grace to repent. To convince the
Court of the improbability of this Woman's Depositions, I produced a Gentleman
Mr. Shorter, who travailed in Company, with that Woman and me all the way, who
testified that he heard me tell the Story of my, escape during our journey,
five or six times, and that it appeared so strange to him, that he imprinted it
in his memory, and has since told it above a hundred times he believed: he
swore that he never heard me say I killed my Master or Patron, but that I might
have killed him if I would, and that I said my Patron pursued me the next
morning: he moreover declared, that he never heard the word Circumcision, or
any thing relating thereunto, mentioned by me, and that it seems highly
improbable, that I should declare to that woman that I should be circumcised,
seeing I professed my self a Clergy man in Orders, when first I entered the
Coach; and that I was girded with a Canonical Girdle, and all the way demeaned
my self as a person under that character.

Lastly, to bring up the Rear of this goodly Company, comes Brother Sam. Oats,
the Son of the Doctor's Mother; he would fain have disproved Mr. Grey's
Testimony, and at the same time the Lord North's; but it was observed here, as
also at Colledge's Trial, that this fellow had not been taught his Lesson well
enough. To be short, he is a mere blockhead, and will never make an Evidence
worth a farthing, notwithstanding all the examples and Copies the Doctor has
swore before him.

I had forgot two Witnesses more, Clergymen, whom the Doctor had subpaena'd
out of Kent, but seeing they testified against him, and to my advantage, I will
not reckon them in the number.

This is an impartial account of what the Doctor alleged in mitigation of
damages, which howsoever true it should be, yet I suppose it cannot influence
the Readers judgment so, as not to believe the Doctor to be forsworn in his
Depositions against me; for though I should be so foolish and silly as to give
my self the Lie, and upon no design raise an ill report of my self, and say
that I am a Popish Priest or a Turk, and that I recanted Mahumetism at Rome.
Notwithstanding it should be true that I thus falsely abused my own reputation,
and slandered my self, yet Titus Oats is not a whit less guilty of being
forsworn, in saying he knows these false things to be true; though he and his
Council endeavored to mitigate his Fine, yet they pretended not a word in
alleviation of his crime and guilt in swearing falsely, and lying most
maliciously. To conclude, they tacitly admit what I have plainly proved, viz.
that Titus Oats is a great enemy to the truth, a malicious Calumniator of his
Brethren, and a forsworn Villain: and now I prosess in all sincerity, that I do
not serve any Popish or sinister ends, in exposing this Enemy both of the
Romish and English Church; I aim only at. what every man claims, the Liberty of
the Subject, my Birthright, a vindication of my Name and credit from the
oppressive calumnies of a Ruffian, and to serve the interest of truth, and the
glory of that God, who has expressly forbid evil to be done, that good may come
of it; or that the Testimony of a false witness, and notoriously forsworn
wretch should be accepted, though we were sure thereby to rid the Church of
England of its greatest plagues, the Jesuits and Phanaticks both together.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. l. 19. dele where. Ib. l. 32. for Rospigliosi Successor to the former,
read Rospigliosi's Successor. p. 7. l. 9. for at read to. p. 21. l. 13. for and
read of. p. 22. l. 14. for Thomas read Charles. p. 25. l. 23. for allways read
all ways. Ib. l. ult. read to charge my Person. p. 38. l. 36. for Vergauas read
Veraguas. p. 43. l. 18. read conceding.


