THE DOCTRINE OF Passive Obedience: Asserted in a SERMON Preached on January
30. 1684.

By James Ellesby, M. A. Vicar of Chiswick in Middlesex.

For Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but to the Evil: Will thou then
not be afraid of the Powers? Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise
of the same. Romans 13.3. LONDON, Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon
without Temple Bar. 1685.

TO THE READER.
THIS Discourse was sent to the Press the Monday after it was preached, Feb. 2.
and part of it printed before the much lamented Death of his late Majesty, of
most Dear and Happy Memory; the Intent whereof was not to flatter Princes into
an Abuse of their Power, or make them more Absolute than the Law has done (a
Calumny, which some are apt to fasten on the Doctrine of Passive Obedience;)
but to teach Subjects their Duty to Governors upon all Occasions, and instruct
them in the Principles of Subjection, according to the Laws of the Land, and
Rules of the Gospel; wherein I have had regard to those Persons, who make show
of a more than ordinary Zeal for Religion, yet are apparently defective in the
two great Duties of Charity and Loyalty, to make them those Complete Christians
they would be taken for.

This Sermon, with another of the like nature, was at first preached some Years
ago; now what passed for good Doctrine against one sort of men then, I hope
will not be thought otherwise now; for Truth does never alter nor vary with the
Times, whatever the Professors of it may do. I hope in God, seeing our Present
Sovereign has been pleased to declare (to the infinite satisfaction of the
whole Kingdom) his Royal Intention to Govern and continue things as they are
now Settled and by Law Established, we shall have no reason to cherish any
Fears and Jealousies, but rather to bless God for inclining his Royal Heart so
Graciously toward this poor Church and State. Therefore, instead of carrying on
their old Discontents and Factions against the Government, People ought to Own
and Submit to the good Providence of God, who has preserved his Majesty that
now is from so many imminent Dangers, and brought him to the Throne in Peace
and Safety, notwithstanding all the Attempts and Oppositions that have been
made to the contrary. Let us then perform the Duty of good Subjects, in
yielding that Obedience and Subjection which we owe to our Lawful Prince, and
of good Christians, in praying for a Blessing upon his Royal Person and
Government, that he may Reign long and happily over us, and we may lead Quiet
and Peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty under him.

Feb. 9. 1684. Amen.
PROVERBS 30.31. -- And a King, against whom there is no Rising up.
THESE Proverbial Sayings of the Wise man, carry their own Sense and Context
along with them, and are collected together without any great Order or
Dependence upon one another.

In the beginning of this Chapter we have Agur's humble and modest Wish for a
contented mediocrity, preferrable to both Extremes of Poverty and Riches: The
remaining part is spent in the observation of some remarkable Qualities,
peculiar to several sorts of Creatures.

The last here mentioned takes notice of four things, which are Comely and
Majestic in their Going, a Lion which is strongest among Beasts, and turns not
away for any; a Greyhound, a He-Goat, and a King, against whom there is no
rising up.

I shall not spend time in giving you an account of the various Readings and
Opinions of Interpreters upon these Words; but preferring our own Version as
the most generally received, I shall only observe that the first and last of
these, the Lion and the King, have their particular Characters annexed to them;
a Lion which is King among Beasts, is so strong, as he neither Fears nor Turns
away from any thing; and a King, he is so Sacred among Men, as no Man ought to
Rise up, or Turn against him: The former is generally feared for his great
Strength and undaunted Courage; and the latter, no less to be Reverenced for
his Sacred Character and Supreme Authority

By a King here we are to understand a Sovereign Prince, one invested with the
Supreme Power of a Nation, and not such Titular and Precarious Princes, as were
the Kings among the Lacedaemonians, or those under those Romans; Qui non
proprio, sed precario jure imperabant, in the Words of Grotius; who had little
of Royalty belonging to them, beside the Name and Ceremony, at most, were but
Kings upon Courtesy, and reigned at the Pleasure of the Senate and People. But
by King here is meant, such a one as Solomon himself was, the supposed Author
of these Words, under the name of Agur; one who is acknowledged Sovereign in
his Kingdom, who holds his Crown Independent on any but God, as having no
Equal, much less Superior upon Earth: And such a one as this the Laws do
acknowledge our King to be, when they call his Crown an Imperial Crown,
resembling that of the Roman Emperors, which was Absolute and Independent;
when they Entitle him upon all Occasions, Our Sovereign Lord the King, when
they account his Person Sacred and Inviolable, which cannot be but in respect
of his Authority, which must therefore be Divine in its Original, and
Inseparable from his Person; when they affirm he is Legibus Solutus, free from
the Coercive Power of the Law; and enjoin us to pray for him as Supreme in all
Causes, and over all Persons, throughout his Majesty's Realms and Dominions.

Against such a King as this, there is no Rising up, that is, there ought to be
none: No Force or Violence, no Opposition or Resistance can lawfully be made
against a Sovereign Prince, who receives his Power immediately from God, and
therefore to him alone can be accountable for it.

From the Words thus opened, you may easily ghess at the Subject Matter, and
Intent of my ensuing Discourse, which will be to prove, and if possibly,
convince you of the great Sin and Danger of Resisting a Supreme Lawful
Authority, wherever it is lodged, either in one or more, and upon what Account
it becomes utterly unlawful so to do.

. Now that Resistance of this nature is a Sin, I am thoroughly satisfied, and
the Reasons why I believe so, are such as follow.

. 1. Because it is an Affront and Violation offered to a Divine Ordinance, and
that Government is a Divine Ordinance I might prove at large, from the
Testimony of all Nations concerning it; from the joint Confession of the whole
Christian Church, Primitive and Reformed, and in particular by that of our own,
together with the Laws of the Land, which do acknowledge and suppose as much.
But however, there is less need of insisting upon these, because the Apostle
St. Paul does expressly affirm it, and this he does by a Spirit of greater
Infallibility than that of Rome, or any other Sect or Party of Men, who have
taught the contrary. Romans 13.1, 2. There is no power but of God, the powers
that be are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resists the powers,
resists the Ordinance of God.

Now that Resistance is an Affront thereunto, I think none will deny, for it is
to overthrow what God himself has Established, to pluck up what he has
Planted, and to make void, as much as in us lies, the Providence of God in the
Government of the World.

It was Gamaliel's Argument to the Council, that they should not evil entreat
the Apostles, Acts 5.39.
lest happily they should be found to fight against God. The like caution may be
given in this Case, that no Man ought to offer the least resistance to Civil
Authority, nor so much as lift up a hand or singer against those whom God has
set over them, lest happily they be sound at length to sight against God, in the
Person of his Vicegerent. For our Savior's way of Reasoning, which he uses in
another Instance, for vindicating the Mission and Authority of his Apostles,
holds good here; He that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me,
Luke 10.16.
despises him that sent me. In like manner, he that offers resistance to the
Power or Person of the Sovereign, does in that very Act, resist the Ordinance
of God, and he that resists a Divine Ordinance, may be said to resist God
himself, who is the Sole Author and Institutor thereof; and what a Man may
expect after such an Affront, I need not tell him, Romans 13.2.
for the Apostle does, They that Resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.

. 2. Resistance is the breach of a Divine Command, and in that respect the
Abettors thereof cannot be Guiltless: Is not Obedience and Subjection to Civil
Authority made our Duty, and pressed upon us frequently in Holy Writ, as well in
the Old Testament as the New; The particular Places to this purpose are so well
known that I need not repeat them at large; that of the Text is sufficient at
present.

Now it is granted on all hands, that a Divine Command reaches the Conscience:
God therefore having given us an express command for Subjection, has thereby
made it our Duty, and having given us an express Prohibition against Resistance
has made that a Sin, and consequently matter of Conscience to every Christian:
For Conscience must evermore have a Divine Command for its Direction and Guide,
for its Rule and Warrant to Act by, otherwise it is not Conscience, but
something else that deserves a worse Name. Now consider, a thing becomes never
the more Lawful or Unlawful in it self, because it is grown a Custom and
Fashion with some Men to plead Conscience for or against it; except you will
grant that Conscience is Infallible in all Men alike, or that a Man cannot do
amiss, or go wrong, that pretends to follow the Dictates of his Conscience; for
then, when two Persons Act directly contrary to one another, both may be said
to be in the right, if they do but follow, their Consciences, the one in doing,
the other in Forbearing what they are commanded.

Conscience then being so variable, is no Rule at all, much less an infallible
Rule, but stands in need of one that is so; for want of which, it has been
greatly mistaken; therefore that only becomes necessary to be done, which God
has commanded, and that only Sinful and Unlawful which he has forbidden.

Now let us bring this home to the Case in hand. By this Rule, all Seditious
Practices, and violent Attempts against the Government, being forbidden by God,
are as much Sins as any Act of Profaneness and Impiety whatsoever; and are never
the more Warrantable, because some Men have pleaded Conscience in Defense
thereof, and disguised their Faction under the Veil of Religion. Well therefore
may we apply that of the Apostle, Acts 4.19.5.24.
which has been so often urged against this very Duty; Whether is better to be
Obeyed, God or Man, judge ye. So in this matter, Whether ought to be most
obeyed? God, who commands Subjection, and forbids Resistance; or such
Turbulent, and Disaffected Persons, who plead Conscience against every thing
they dislike, and pretend Religion to the neglect of this Duty, in opposition
to a positive Precept and Divine Command?

The Text tells us, against a King there is no Rising up: that is, as I have
already told you, there ought to be none. Had the People but the tenth part as
much for Resistance, as here is against it, no Government would be quiet, nor
Kings suffered to sit long upon their Thrones; when yet they are in so much
danger, from the Patrons of Faction and Sedition, notwithstanding all the
Provision which God himself has made for their Security.

This will further appear, if we consider the Inconsistency of it to our
Christian Profession. Wherefore,

3. Resistance, or Opposition to Civil Government, is contrary to the Doctrine
of Christ; Examples of the Apostles, and the whole Genius and Design of the
Gospel.

The Doctrine of Christ is well known, and has been sufficiently vindicated
upon this Occasion. It recommends to its Professors all those admirable Virtues
and Graces, which are inconsistent with a fierce and violent temper of Mind: It
Enjoins us to pray for our Enemies, and bless our Persecutors: tho we suffer
wrongfully, to bear it patiently; to do Good for Evil, instead of returning it:
to take up the Cross rather than the Sword; for which Peter was so sharply
rebuked by his Master and Ours. Now there can be no Resistance but something of
Revenge must prompt to it, and be mingled with it.

Now if by the Laws of our Religion we are forbid Revenge, or the returning of
Wrong toward our Equals and Inferiors, much more toward our Superiors. For
if Love and Charity is due to the one, Faith and Loyalty being superadded
thereto, is due to the Other. And if to suffer, tho wrongfully, be a Duty; be
sure wrongful Resistance is no less a Crime. Now all Resistance is of this
kind, for want of a Lawful Authority to bear it out.

. Then for the Example of Christ; this was nothing else but a Praxis upon his
own Doctrine; instructing them therein, as well by his meek and gentle
Behavior, as by his admirable Counsel and Advice. Though his Cause was the
most Just and Righteous, and himself the most innocent Person in the World; tho
his Enemies were the most Cruel, and his Sufferings the most Severe, attended
with all the Circumstances of Ignominy and Reproach; yet the great Savior of
the World, and Exemplar of us Christians, was so far from offering at
Resistance, or any thing like it, that he did not utter so much as a threatening
Word, nor make show of the least Murmuring or Discontent; Isaiah 53.7.
But as a sheep before the Shearers is dumb, so he opened not his Mouth; says
the Evangelical Prophet. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
Righteously; Peter 2.23.
says the Apostle.

Now the more we resemble our meek and humble Savior in our Comportment under
Sufferings and Injuries, the greater assurance we have of being his Disciples
indeed; this will entitle us to the Adoption of Sons, and make us Heirs with
him of the promised Reward.

. Add to the Example of Christ, that of his Apostles, who were in all respects
admirable Followers of the Blessed Jesus; instead of revenging their
Sufferings, or resisting the Powers under which they suffered, they on the
quite contrary rejoye'd in Affliction, and gloried in Tribulation; they
accounted it an Honor to tread in the steps of their great Master, and to be
so evil entreated by the World for His sake.

Now it is not only the Cause, but the Manner of Suffering, or our Behavior
under it, that makes our Sufferings like those of Christ's; for let our
Sufferings be upon what account they will, whether Civil or Religious, it is our
Patient and Submissive Demeanor under them, that makes them Christian
Sufferings, and to resemble those of our Blessed Redeemer; nay, the Manner of
Suffering is every whit as much to be regarded as the Occasion; for a Man may
suffer in a good Cause after a bad manner, and thereby lose the Reward of his
Sufferings for want of Faith and Patience to support and carry him through:
Again, He that suffers in an ill Cause, may become so Sensible of his Fault,
and Penitent withal, as to find Pity from Man and Pardon from God; whereas the
best Cause can never justify the impatient murmurings and discontent of its
froward Martyrs or peevish Confessors.

. To this purpose, let us consider a while the Example of the Primitive
Christians, how they behaved themselves under all their Persecutions, and we
shall find them Followers of the Apostles, as they were of Christ, and thereby
proved themselves no less his Scholars and Disciples than they. We find them
made up of Patience and Submission, Meekness and Long-suffering; they underwent
the greatest Rage, sharpest Torments, and severest Persecutions that could be,
yet with an Apostolical temper, and Christ-like frame and disposition of Mind,
amid'st all the Cruelties threatened on the one hand, and inflicted on the
other, we find nothing could provoke them to a Disturbance; we read of nothing
they did in way of Revenge or Despite to their Governors; and notwithstanding
the late disingenious Representation of the Christians in Julian's Time, yet
from the best Account we have given us of that, and the Preceding Ages, we are
assured, that the Patience of the Christians was equal to the Rage of their
Adversaries, and their Constancy and Resolution in bearing Injuries, was
greater than that of their Enemies in the inflicting of them.

Nay, their Sufferings were rather cause of Joy and Triumph, than of Quarrel
and Revenge: Magis damnati quam absoluti gaudemus, Tertul. ad Scapul.
said the most Ancient of all the Latin Fathers: We are more cheerful at the
news of our Condemnation than of our Acquittal or Absolution: Now their
willingness to suffer, and forwardness to submit, is an Argument they were much
better Christians than the generality of those, who think themselves in the
uppermost Form in Christ's School, and yet have not taken out this Lesson.

What kind of Weapons those were which the Primitive Christians opposed to all
the Abuses and Outrages of their Adversaries, is very well known: They made use
of no Offensive Arms against the very worst of Princes, nor any other Defense
than that of Prayers and Tears, Apologies and Supplications; aliter nec debeo
nec possum resistere, says the Warlike Bishop of Milan. According to the
Principles of their Religion, they could not make any other Defense, they were
not permitted any other Resistance.

And therefore one great Topic they insisted on in their Apologies for
themselves and their Religion was this, That it was the greatest friend to
Government in the World; it no ways countenanced Sedition, nor encouraged to
Rebellion; but on the contrary, kept Subjects within the strictest bounds of
Obedience, made them Loyal to the Prince, and Faithful to the Government, and
bound it as a Duty upon their Consciences so to be: It taught them to respect
their Governors as God's Ministers and Vicegerents upon Earth; to acknowledge
with our Savior, that they received their Power from above, and to behave
themselves under it accordingly.

Furthermore, that you may see how shy they were of Resistance, and at what a
distance they kept from this Sin, they were wont to put up Public Prayers (and
I dare say they never said them backward in Private) for the Life of the
Emperor, Safety of his Person, and Success of his Arms, tho in so doing they
did but pray for their greatest Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers, and a
continuance of all those Calamities which they daily suffered and groaned under.

Objection. This in a great measure Some will acknowledge to be true, but not
upon the Principles of Conscience and Religion: it is true, say they, the
Primitive Christians did not resist, but it was because they durst not; Deerant
vires, says Bellarmine; they wanted Strength and Numbers to oppose and go
through with it, if they had begun, and therefore it was Prudence in them to
sit still and be quiet, and make the best they could of an ill Bargain, as
having no hopes to better it by Resistance.

Answer. This Objection or Pretense carries a great deal of Untruth along with
it, and no less Ill Will and Disaffection toward Governors; but in reality is
no better than a Jesuitical Fiction, made use of by that Order of men (who make
Lies their refuge, when they find the plain Truth is not for their turn) to
support their wicked Doctrine of taking up Arms against the Prince at the
command of their Church. For if any credit may be given to Primitive Antiquity
and the General History of those Times, the Christians then had both Arms and
Armies; They wanted not Force to Defend themselves, and Oppose their
Governors, if they had had a mind to it; For the chiefest part of the Empire
was then turned Christian, who made up partom poene majorem, the greatest
Number almost in every Town and City, says Tertullian, whose account is very
well known, and daily cited upon this Occasion.

Moreover, if they had been inclined to Resistance, or thought it Lawful, might
not the Desperatoness of their Case have supplied the defect of their Numbers,
which sometimes carries men a great way, and inspires them with Courage and
Resolution beyond that of their Enemies; considering withal, their Condition
could not well be worse than it was, had they failed in their Attempt, and
fallen short of Success; for let what would happen, they could but Die, and it
was more Honorable (for Soldiers especially) to dye in the Field, than at a
Stake or Gibbet, and more satisfaction to sell their Lives as dear as they
could, than to have them torn away from them by all imaginable Torture and
insulting Cruelty.

But, God be praised, none of these Considerations moved them: They were acted
by other-guess Maxims and Principles, than the disaffected of this present
Age: We hear of no Attempts, or Offers of Resistance, amidst the greatest heats
of Persecution; and it is a mighty Credit to Christianity, and Satisfaction to
all good Christians, that no such thing is recorded of them: This argues the
Goodness both of their Cause and Religion, which upon that Account, deservedly
recommends it self to the especial Care and Protection of Princes; as being the
best Fence and Security to their Persons and Government.

. 4. Resistance against Lawful Authority is a Sin that does most commonly meet
with its Shame and Punishment even in this Life, and has evermore been Abhorred
by all Good Men, notwithstanding the Success, which for a time it may meet
withal.

No Crime is judged more Wicked and Unnatural, more Mischievous and Prejudicial
to Humane Society than this; and no greater Punishment assigned to any, than to
this of Treason and Rebellion, which is the plain English of all Violent
Resistance, when opposed to Lawful Authority; it being of most dangerous
Consequence to all States, and no Government long Safe, where this may be
permitted, or thought Lawful; and therefore the Laws of all Nations under
Heaven have strictly provided against this Sin, and branded it with the
greatest Reproach and Infamy in the World. It forfeits not only the Life and
Estate of the Party guilty thereof, but Taints his Blood, Ignobles his
Posterity, and is too often the Ruin and Dishonor of many otherwise Splendid
and Illustrious Families; especially where the Prince is pleased to take the
Forfeiture, according to the utmost Rigor and Extremity of the Law. Est enim
tam grave Crimen, ut vix permittatur Haeredibus, quod vivant, says Bracton;
it is so Vile and Infamous a piece of Guilt, that the Law does hardly allow Life
to his Children and Posterity.

Had I time, I might observe unto you, out of all sorts of History, and the
Records of all Nations extant, the Sore and Grievous Punishments, which have
overtaken those that have been given to Change, and drawn into Open Rebellion,
or secret Conspiracy against their Lawful Prince and Governors; which is a
manifest token, how much God and Man abhors this Sin, and how dangerous it is
to those that are Guilty thereof.

The Time would fail me to speak of the just Judgment of God, pursuing Korah,
Dathan and Abiram, who rose up against Moses; Absalom, Achitophel, and Sheba,
who rebelled against David: befalling Bigthan and Teresh, which conspired
against Ahasuerus; Theudas and Judas of Galilee, who made an Insurrection under
the Romans: overtaking the Murderers of Saul and Ishbosheth his Son, and the
Conspirators against the several Kings of Judah and Israel: All which are
recorded in Holy Writ to be like Lot's Wife, when turned into a Pillar of Salt,
as so many standing Monuments, to caution us against this horrid Guilt: where
unto I might add out of profane Story, the Murderers of Darius, Alexander, J.
Caesar, and an infinite more who have been all brought to a Shameful and
Untimely End by this very Sin, and Branded to Posterity for their detestable
Treasons and Conspiracies against their Princes and Sovereigns.

. The whole Nation of the Jews, who were very Peaceable and Quiet under both
their former Captivities and upon that Account always fared the better for it,
God himself inclining the Hearts of their Conquerours toward them, and
sometimes appearing in an Extraordinary manner for their Safety and
Deliverance, yet were at last utterly Ruined by this very Sin; for by Rebelling
against the Romans, they became a dreadful Instance of God's Wrath and
Severity; first under Titus, and afterward under Adrian, by whom, for their
frequent Mutinies and Insurrections, they were banished their Country, forbid
their City, and every foot of Land taken from them, which they could never
recover from that time to this.

What shall I or can I say more; the great Conscience which David made of
Resisting Saul, Injuring his Person, or Attempting ought against his
Government, notwithstanding he was Chosen of God and Anointed by Samuel to the
Succession; as likewise his punishing the wicked Amalekite with Death for
laying hands upon him, tho in his Distress, and at his Request, to prevent his
Fall into the Enemies hands; All these Instances give us to understand (if we
will Understand any thing) how Hateful and Abominable this Sin is both to God
and Man; and how much we should dread all Beginnings and Approches thereunto.

. I pray, what have the Authors of the late Rebellion, and in particular of
this Days horrible Parricide, what have they got thereby, but besides the
Forfeiture of their Lives and Estates, a Stain upon their Memories, a Reproach
to their Religion, and Cause of perpetual Jealousy and Suspicion from the
Government?

The like may be affirmed of all those who have been any ways Instrumental in
carrying on the two late Horrid Conspiracies against the Life of our Present
King, (whom I pray God long preserve) what have they got hereby, but as the
Prophet says, Jer. 23.40.
an Everlasting Reproach and a perpetual Blot, which shall not be forgotten.

He therefore that takes the Sword into his hand to lift it up against his
Brother, much more against the Father of his Country, does in that very Act
rescue it out of Gods hand, and so may justly dread the Fatal Consequence of
such a Presumption, foretold by our Savior, when he said, Matthew. 26.52.
They that take the Sword shall Perish with it; which most Men have found true
to their own Cost, either first or last, sooner or later: Wherefore you ought
to be Subject (as the Apostle says) for Wrath sake, that is, for fear of the
just Judgment of God overtaking you in this Life, either immediately from his
own hand, or that of the Magistrate: But this is not all, there is something
Worse than this yet behind; wherefore,

. 5. God has threatened to punish this Sin with Damnation, Romans 13.2. so the
Text runs according to our Version: The word indeed signifies Judgment; but
however, according to the Analogy of Scripture, it may refer to the Punishment
of the Other Life as well as of This, because Resistance is (as you have heard)
the breach of a Divine Command, the Transgression of the Law of God, which the
Apostle tells us is Sin; Romans 6.23.
now the Wages of Sin is Death, that is, of all Sin, and This among the rest:
and then what a woeful Case must they be in, who Live and Dye in this Sin
unrepented of, or whom the just Judgment of God does overtake before they are
brought to an Humble Sense and Acknowledgement thereof.

Now who would venture upon this Sin, which carries Shame in the Front, and
Damnation in the Rear? Who would hazard his Soul, tho it were for the Conquest
of the whole World, much less for a small clod and parcel thereof.

Strangel that Christians, who know they have Souls to save, or lose for ever;
and therefore should be the most scrupulous of any thing that might hazard and
endanger them, that yet they should be able to allow themselves in so great a
Guilt; and study all they can for Pretenses to excuse and mitigate this Sin,
rather than take Warning and Repent thereof; notwithstanding so vast a
Punishment is threatened thereto.

To conclude this Particular, Whatever we may dream of the Original of the
Magistrates Power, yet our Religion for certain teaches us to acknowledge it to
be Divine, and to proceed from God: It makes Subjection, notwithstanding all
Evasions and Pretenses to the contrary, to become our Duty, and that as well
for Conscience, as Wrath sake; and does moreover caution us against Resistance,
as a great and Damning Sin, Destructive to the Souls, as well as Bodies of Men;
and being so, what is there in this World that is worth the hazarding our Souls
for; what kind of Christians must they be, that can swallow down a Sin of this
Nature so glib, and digest it so lightly; and what kind of Subjects are they
that shall go about to wrest the Laws, as some have done the Scriptures, in
Favor of this Sin; a Sin so abominable in the sight of God, 1. Sam. 15.23.
that as Samuel told Saul, Rebellion was as the Sin of Witchcraft: and that is
the Reason, says a Modern Writer, that the Devil was so forward to tempt the
Jews to it of old, and the Christians of late; Wherefore my Soul come not thou
into their Secrets, and unto their Assemblies be not thou united. Genesis 49.6.

. I come now to consider the chiefest Objections that are usually made use of
against this Doctrine, which I shall endeavor to Answer in the Resolution of
these three great Inquiries.

1. Whether Subjection is due to Bad Governors as well as Good.

2. Whether it continues our Duty, when Religion is in apparent Hazard and
Danger. And,

3. When the Laws of the Land, or which is all one, when the Civil Rights and
Liberties of the Subject are invaded.

To all which I answer, Yes; Submission is our Duty under all these
Circumstances.

. 1. As to the first Inquiry; Let our Governors be never so Bad, Actual
Obedience is due to all their Lawful Commands, and Submission to those that are
Otherwise; but in no case Resistance to either. For what the Apostle advises
Servants toward their Masters, holds equally true on the behalf of Subjects
toward their Governors, where the Obligation is much stronger, namely, 1 Pet.
2.18.
To be subject with all Fear, not only to the Good and Gentle, but also to the
Froward: which Grotius, and St. Augustine before him, refers to Princes and
Subjects, as well as to Masters and Servants: For as the Authority of the
Master, so the Power of the Prince, of the Evil and Froward, as well as of the
Good and Gentle, is from God; tho the Person may be Wicked and Ungodly, yet his
Authority is Sacred and Divine, and in that respect commands our Reverence, as
being the Ordinance of God. For Dominion is not founded in Grace, neither do
the Temporal Rights of Princes depend upon Religion, whether True or False; the
Power of the Magistrate is never the more from God, because he is a Good man,
and never the less from God, because he is a Bad man; but the Authority of the
Good and Bad is alike in Both, and derived from one and the same Original,
notwithstanding the Abuse thereof when in Ill hands: To this purpose that of
St. Augustine is very well known; Aug. l. de natura Boni adv. Manich. c. 32.
Etiam Nocentium Potestas non est nisi a Deo; The Power even of Hurtful Princes
or Tyrants is from God: and in the fifth Book of his City of God, He instanceth
in the Best and Worst of the Roman Emperors, Qui Augusto, Ipse and Neroni,
etc. Qui Constantino Christiano, Ipse Apostatae Juliano, etc. He that gave the
Sovereign Power to Augustus, gave it likewise to Nero; and He that conferred it
upon Constantine, a Christian, bestowed it in like manner upon Julian an
Apostate; and this, says he, Si occultis causis nunquid injustis? tho by
hidden Causes, and for secret Reasons to us unknown, yet such as are never
Unjust.

The Abuse therefore of a Lawful Power in the Prince, is no excuse for an
unlawful Act in the Subject, as Resistance is; for if the Prince receives his
Power from God, to him only must he be Accountable for it; but the Subjects
case is different, for if he fails in his Duty, he is Accountable both to God
and his Governors. Authority then however managed, ought not to be opposed,
seeing God has allowed no such thing, nor given Subjects any such Permission;
but they ought to obey as far as lawfully they may, and where they cannot do
that, then to sit still and be Quiet, Submit to the good Pleasure of God, and
prepare for Suffering, when He in his Providence shall call them to it, as then
he does when they cannot avoid it without Sin.

For pray consider, If we must presently fly to Arms, or break forth into open
Force and Resistance upon the Miscarriage of Government, or because perchance
we are obnoxious thereto, and may think our selves in some Danger to suffer
under it; pray, what then will become of the Faith and Patience of the Saints,
so much celebrated in Scripture, and spoken of in Former Times? Where would be
that Christian Forbearance, Long-suffering, and Self denial, which our Religion
enjoins in Times of Suffering and Persecution from Bad Princes and Governors.

The great Evangelical Duties of Meekness, Patience, and Submission to the Will
of God, which are pressed so frequently upon Christians by the Holy Ghost, Are
they of Force only under Good Princes, and not under Bad? Under Good Princes
there is commonly little or no need of them; and if they are not of Force under
Bad, there is never like to be any Occasion for them at all; and then the
Directions given us in Scripture concerning them, become altogether Vain, and
to no purpose in the World; which must needs reflect upon the Divine Wisdom, in
enjoining us Duties of such a Nature, as have no time Time or Opportunity for
the Practice of them: but none, I hope, will dare to charge God thus foolishly.

In a Word, Christians, if you are resolved to obey and submit only to the Good
and Gentle, and not to the Evil and Froward; if you are resolved to be
Peaceable and Complying, so long as things are like to go well on your side,
and no longer; I may well demand of you in the Words of our Savior to the
Pharisees, What do you more than others? Do not the very Heathens and Publicans
the same? Are not the worst of Men as good Subjects as this comes to? And do
you think the Religion of Christ does teach you to be no better than they: Your
Righteousness even in this Respect must exceed that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, if ever you hope to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

. 2. In Answer to the second Objection, it is not the Cause of God, nor
Preservation of Religion, that can justify Resistance of a Lawful Authority;
for Religion it self, as you have heard, does forbid it. Now for Men to assert
Religion by Actions Unlawful, and such as Religion it self does condemn, is
very Absurd and Preposterous. This is in effect to make void Religion, while
they stand up in the Defense thereof, and to transgress the Laws of
Christianity, at the same time that they contend so fiercely for them.

To defend Religion by Rebellious Force, is to violate Religion for Religions
Sake; and to defeat the great End and Design of the Gospel, out of a Zeal to
the Name, rather than the Thing,

Give me leave therefore to be a little warm with those People, who use to be
much hotter upon this Occasion; You that think your selves obliged to scuffle
with your Prince, out of Zeal to your Religion, Pray, What Religion is it, that
you would contend for? Is it for a Religion that Encourages Sedition,
Countenanceth Rebellion, teaches Resistance, and Puts you upon Violent Courses
on its behalf? If this be the Religion you would Tugg for, it is firting that
both you and your Religion too should be suppressed and kept under: For such
Religion as this, is nothing but Rebellion in Disguise; and such Faith, nothing
but Faction under a Vail. This is such a Religion that no Government in the
World will endure, go where you will; no nor your selves neither, if you were
uppermost; and does it become Christians to plead Conscience for such a
Religion as would put them upon the most Infamous and Dishonorable Practices,
and render them Odious and Suspected to all Governments under Heaven.

But on the other Hand, Is it the Religion of Christ, the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and Pure Christianity, that you would struggle for? Why this very
Gospel and Religion teaches you quite otherwise; it is an Humble, Quiet, and
Peaceable Religion; of the greatest Meekness, Forbearance, and Self-denial; a
Religion that is made up of nothing but Love and Charity, Peace and Unity,
Forgiveness and Long-suffering; a Religion that abhors Violence, damns
Resistance, and strictly prohibits the use of Force and Violence on its behalf,
as contrary to its own Genius, together with that of its Author: Now to pretend
any of these for the Sake of such a Religion as this, is the greatest
Contradiction imaginable.

We must not do Evil, that Good may come of it, is a known Aphorism in
Christianity: We must not willingly do an Ill thing tho it be for God himself;
The Ark (for instance) must fall, or we must venture it at least, rather then
support it by a Wrong Hand, or too Rude an Arm: We ought not with Peter to draw
the Sword against a Lawful Authority, tho it be in defense of the Savior of
the World; but quietly permit him to be taken and slain, tho wrongfully, and by
wicked Hands; rather then attempt his Rescue in an Unwarrantable manner.
Agreeable hereunto, we ought not to undertake either the Safety, or Reformation
of Religion in such a way as God himself does disapprove of: Such men, instead
of hoping to be Accepted for their Zeal, may be sent away with a Quis
requisivit? or who has required these things at your hands? Wherefore those
Pretenses of Religion are never to be Trusted, which tend to any Ill Design
against the Government, or are Inconsistent with any part of our Christian
Duty, whereof this of Subjection is none of the least.

3. Neither will the Invasion of the Laws, or which is all one, of our Civil
Rights and Privileges, justify Resistance against the Sovereign.

But now, because People are apt to be Alarmed, and Object in this case: That
if we must not stand up in the Defense of our Laws and Liberties, when they
chance to be invaded, this is the ready way to invite Injuries and Oppressions
from the Prince, to enslave a Freeborn People, and open the Door for Arbitrary
Sway and Government to come in upon us, without any hope of Redress in such a
Grievous Case: To this I shall reply in the following particulars.

1. We may endeavor the Security and Preservation of our Liberties and Estates
by all Lawful means, in a Legal way, and after a Modest, Humble, and Peaceable
manor, such as the Laws of the Land do allow of, and is consistent with that
Duty and Respect, which by the Law of God we owe our Prince.

2. Let our Circumstances be never so hard and Grievous, yet to go about to
Remedy them by Public Resistance and Opposition, is the worst way we can
possibly take. For this is a Course which is both Unlawful and Unsafe.

It Is first Unlawful, and that according to the Laws both of God and Man.

1. It Is Unallowable by the Laws of God, or according to the Principles of
Religion, as I have already proved at large from the Doctrine and Example of
Christ, and the Practice of the Apostles and Primitive Christianity. For
hereby, we are taught to Suffer as the Servants of Christ, rather than resist
as Freemen of the Nation: And tho want of Prudence and Policy may be objected
in the case, yet they are never to be pleaded to the prejudice of our
Consciences in the Breach of any known Religious Duty.

It Is true, to sit still and Suffer rather than Rise up and Resist, is Durus
Sermo, a hard Lesson; but yet is such a Lesson that God has set us, and must
be learnt, as making up a considerable part of our Religion: It may be thought
Foolish and Unreasonable at first sight, and in the Opinion of most men, but
will appear quite otherwise upon second Thoughts, when considered according to
the measures of the Gospel.

However, let it appear as Imprudent and Impolitick as it will to men of
corrupt Minds, yet the Policy of this World ought to give way to the Simplicity
of the Gospel; and if God has once made it our Duty, it is not all the
Objections drawn from Interest and Reasons of State that can make it otherwise,
except the Argument holds good, that we were Englishmen before we were
Christians, and so ought to prefer the Rights and Privileges of the One,
before the great Commands and Duties of the Other.

But then at this way of arguing we may Supersede the whole Law of God, and
Evade the chiefest part of our Christian Duty, when once it stands in the way
of our Interest and Ambition. For are we not Men as well as Christians, and
have we not Honor, Credit, and Reputation to be tender of, as well as
Privileges? Why then may we not plead the One against Conscience and Duty as
well as the Other? What more Mean and Cowardly, may the Proud man say, than to
to turn one Cheek when we are smitten on the other, to forbear Revenge upon an
Injury offered, or put up an Affront with Patience, and requite it with
Kindness; This to a man of more Honor than Conscience sounds Low and Mean,
appears Base and Ignoble, and yet no Duty can be more Christian than This. Now
if it is not warrantable to oppose any of these Worldly Considerations to the
greater Obligation of Conscience in matter of forgiving Enemies, and passing by
Injuries; no more ought we to object against the Duty in Hand, upon any
Politic Motive or Consideration whatever.

Does our Religion oblige us to bear and endure so much from one another, and
nothing at all from our Rulers; to lay aside Malice and Revenge, Hatred and Ill
Will toward our Equals and Inferiors, and not to do the like toward our
Superiors, and those whom God in his Providence has advanced so much above
us. This Non-resistance therefore being enjoined by Christ, becomes as much our
Duty toward our Governors, as the Other of Forgiveness is our Duty to each
other.

. From the Doctrine, let me desire you to turn your Eyes once more upon the
Example of Christ, and mark his Behavior a little more narrowly: As he was no
Hector to return an Affront immediately, or as soon as it was offered; so
neither did he set up for a Champion or Patriot of his Country against his Duty
to the Roman Emperor; he never espoused the Cause of the Jewish Religion to
promote a Faction, or carry on a Party against the Government: He would not
Assert the Liberties and Privileges of his Countrymen (tho they enjoyed them
by a Divine Grant) in prejudice to Caesar's Authority, or to the Interrupting
of the Public Peace; so great a Friend he was to the Quiet of the World, and
so little Encouragement did he give to the Disturbers of it.

The Romans had many good Laws to be governed by, and great Privileges
belonging to them; insomuch as it was not lawful to bind a Roman, Act. 22.25.
or beat him with Rods like an ordinary Malefactor, as in the Case of St. Paul:
Yet the Primitive Christians (many of whom were Romans, and born to those
Privileges which others purchased) never laid claim to any of them to the
Prejudice of their Duty toward the higher Powers; but chose to suffer and part
with all, even to Life it self, (which alone is sufficient to weigh down all
the Rest) rather than save either the one or the other by Resistance.

If then the great Concern of Life ought not to exempt us from Subjection, then
surely no other Conveniences or Advantages relating thereunto can possibly do
it: For are we not commanded to part with Lands and Livings, Friends and
Relations, rather than Deny Christ, or any part of his Religion, as this of
Subjection to Governors is, and a considerable part too.

And how Extravagant soever such a piece of Self-denial may be looked upon in
or by the World; yet this should not Move a Christian, who has a Soul to be
concerned for, of more worth than the whole World, and all the Honors and
Advantages thereof put together: This for certain will secure our Condition
with respect to a Future State, whatever may happen or fall out in This; whenas
all our Losses and Sufferings in this World shall be abundantly made up with a
rich Recompense of Reward, and a far more Exceeding and Eternal weight of
Glory; wherefore, Christians, comfort one another with these Hopes. But,
secondly.

. 2. To put the matter out of all doubt, Resistance is Unlawful according to
the Laws of the Land; For the Wisdom of our Princes, and Loyalty of our
Parliaments have sufficiently provided against Taking up of Arms against the
King or his Ministers: and to This the whole Nation have Sworn, and given their
Assent once already by their Representatives, and every man does it over again
in his own Person, as often as they are admitted to any Public Employment either
in Church or State.

Our Laws are accounted in all respects as Loyal as our Religion, and I make no
question, but the Professors of that Honorable Science are better able to
vindicate them herein, than I can possibly do: Yet thus much is evident to all
that have but the least insight into the Constitution of our Government, that
no Nation under Heaven has been more Sollicitous for their Sovereigns Honor
and Safety, none more tender of their Princes Reputation and Government than
Our Own; and therefore no Country has better Laws, and no Laws make better
Provision, either for the Prince or People than these of the English Nation.
Our Constitution is the Happiest and Safest both for the One and the other, if
we had but Eyes open to see it, and Hearts thankful enough to Acknowledge it as
we ought.

No War can be justifiable, but what is begun and carried on by a Lawful Power,
and the People of England will always want that in their taking up Arms against
their Prince; for the Law has made all Resistance of this Nature Illegal, by
acknowledging the Power of the Sword to be solely in the King; so that no man
has Power, or any Pretense of Power now to take up Arms, but by the Royal
Authority, which be sure the King will never Commission against himself; or if
he should, the Grant is void in its own Nature, as being inconsistent with the
Essentials of Sovereign Power, which cannot be Sovereign unless it be
Irresistible too; and such is that Power which our Kings are invested withal,
and which the People do Recognize every time they take the Oath of Allegiance
and Supremacy, and declare their Abhorrence of that Traitorous Position, Of
taking up Arms against the King, etc. Or any that are Commissioned by him.

. 3. The Methods of Resistance and Open Force, (let the Enemies of Passive
Obedience say what they will) are the most Unsafe and Impolitick Course we can
take for the Preservation of Liberty and Property; which will appear if we
consider,

. 1. War, Civil War especially, is one of the most Formidable Violations of
Public Laws and Liberty; for under pretense of taking up Arms for the Rights
and Privileges of the Subject, they do hereby but Invade those of other men,
and Hazard their own. Now the open Breach of the Laws is no good Method for
attaining their End; the exposing our Liberties to the chance of War is the
worst course we can take to Preserve them, and the Invading other men's
Properties, but an ill way of Securing our own: For this makes every man guilty
of that Crime which he is jealous of in his Prince, namely, the becoming
Illegal, Unjust, and Oppressive, Regardless of the Commonweal and Public Good;
This makes Subjects more Arbitrary, than the most Absolute Monarch, and Popular
Fury of much worse consequence than any unbounded Tyranny whatsoever; insomuch
as the Remedy proves always worse than the Disease, and Ends many times in the
open Shame and just Punishment of the first Authors and Abettors thereof: And
tho the Prince may chance to fall in the Crowd, yet this is still so much the
worse for the Subject, who seldom gets any thing thereby; for Rebellion and
Disobedience under a good Prince is oft-times punished with the Succession of a
Bad one. This has been our Case once already, when we got many Ill Masters in
the room of one Good one. Let us take heed therefore of those Commotions for
which of late we have smarted so severely; let us have a care we do not by our
Mutiny and Sedition disturb the Government, and thereby Sin our selve into a
worse Condition than that we pretend to Fear at present.

2. Resistance is a Method that God seldom blesses, and rarely Thrives with any
Number of Men, that shall be so wicked as to make use of it.

The Safety of a Nation, and the Security of Government consists more in Gods
Providence and the Peoples Quietness and Submission thereto, than in their
Greatest Force and Strongest Opposition; for when they have done all they can,
Ten to One but things return again into their Old Channel. Notwithstanding all
we can do, God will govern the World; The Lord will reign as King upon Earth,
let the People be never so Unruly. After all our Stirs and Commotions things
shall go, not as we, but as God will have them; This Consideration alone has
bore up the Spirits of the Best and Wisest Men in all Ages, after they had for
many years Wearied and Puzzled themselves with the Intricacy of Humane Affairs.

Pray consider, what do People commonly get by Rebellion, and such like Violent
Attempts, except it be to Rebel themselves into Bondage and Slavery, or Sin a
Nation into those very Dangers and Mischiefs which they are apt to be so
Jealous and Apprehensive of.

What has France got by all her Civil Wars and Broils, (whereof that Nation
had good store formerly) that Tyranical Yoke which she would have shook off
thereby, does but sit the Closer upon her Neck, and Grates more heavily than
ever; And the Religion which they so eagerly contended for, is now in great
Danger to be utterly lost and extinguished; except a greater Power than that of
Man, be pleased to interpose miraculously on its behalf.

And to come nearer home; Pray tell me, What have we of this Nation got by our
late Unnatural Wars, notwithstanding the Peoples Success against the
Government? What did we then purchase by all the Blood and Treasure that we
spent for so many years, but only Servitude and Arbitrary Government, which was
the very thing we pretended to Fear from our Lawful Prince. What did we get by
Deposing and Murdering of one Good King, but the Usurpation of Many in his
room? What by dissolving the Ancient Frame of Government, but the erecting of
several Tyrannies in his stead. What got we by Banishing our Princes and
Nobles, and Forcing them into a Strange Land, but to send them for Shelter and
Refuge to the Enemies of our Nation and Religion? And shall we still be at the
same lay? Shall we be still playing with the Flames, which have scorched us so
terribly already? This is to be worse than Children, if after having been once
burnt, we do not for ever after Dread the Fire. God forbid then, that any among
us should in the least Favor, much less Attempt over again the same Violent
Courses which have been the Occasion of so great Unhappiness to these Nations.

After we had once shook the Government, and subverted the Ancient Frame and
happy Constitution thereof, how long was it before the Nation could Settle it
self again? We changed and shifted so often, till we were in fear of Disbanding
all Government, and every man forced to stand upon his Guard as in time of War,
and to take care of his own Defense, as they began at last to do in this City:
So much cause they saw of Fear, and so little of Hope, or any thing certain to
Trust unto; and this was our Condition for several years together. For
Rebellion, like an Inauspicious Comet, or Vnluckey Configuration of the
Heavens, does not produce all its ill Effects at once, but continues its
Malignant Influence a long time after, as it did then, nay, I may say, as it
does still; for unto our late Uncivil Commotions we may impute a great Part of
our Present Fears and Jealousies, Unsettlement and Distraction.

Now to draw toward a Conclusion: Seeing these things are so, what remains for
us to do in our Present Circumstances, but to leave the Government of the World
to the Maker of it, and the Management of Public Affairs to those, whom the
good Providence of God has set over us. It belongs to our Governors to Rule
and Reform the State, and to God to Overruled and Amend what may possibly be
amiss in them. We are not obliged to do God more Service than he has allowed
us to do, or will thank us for, when we have done: We may Exceed and Over-act
our Parts in one Extreme, as well as be too Remiss and Defective in the other;
hereby we leave no room for Suffering, if we may Oppose, nor make use of our
Faith and Patience, while we are unwilling to have them exercised and undergo
the Trial.

To be peaceable in peaceable Times, to be Loyal when there is no great Number
of Examples to the contrary, to be Still and Quiet when the Genius and
Complexion of the whole Nation is so, this is not Thank-worthy, it is no less
our present Interest, than Duty so to be; the most Factious can be content to
be Quiet, and Boast of their Loyalty in such a Juncture as this: But to give
proof of a Quiet Temper and Disposition, to adhere to Principles of Peace and
Loyalty when the whole Nation is pressed with contrary Extremes, and distracted
with Opposite Factions on either hand, this is an Argument of a Good Man, Good
Christian, and Good Subject indeed; of one that is fixed to his Principles, and
bears a Good Conscience in all things, tho he may be ill thought of for his
Pains, and badly treated by either Extreme.

It Is therefore the Glory of our Church (for which notwithstanding the
Reproaches of many have fallen upon her) it is her Glory, I say, however, as it
always was of our Religion, that neither of them did ever encourage Disturbance
or Commotion in the State, or gave the least countenance to Force and
Opposition against Government: Why then she should be Censured so severely for
adhering to those very Principles which were the Credit of Religion, and the
Ornament of its first Professors and Reformers, I do not understand. For
People to brand us for Papists, or suspect us of Confederacy with the Common
Enemy, for asserting a Doctrine that is purely Christian, and directly Opposite
to that of Rome, is to reflect upon our Laws and Religion, which acknowledge as
much as this comes to: At this rate what may not People talk, who think their
Tongues are their own, and they may use them as they please; they may as well
say the Ancient Fathers of the Church were a company of Heathens, for
persuading the Christians of their time to submit themselves to the Tyranny of
Pagan Princes and Persecutours without Resistance; as to say, that we are
Well-willers to Rome, or Ill-willers to our Country, for doing the same Thing,
and going upon the same Principles as they did; nay, they may as well say that
Christ himself had a Design upon all Governments under Heaven, because he has
enjoined Submission to the Higher Powers, and made Resistance Unlawful under
the worst of Princes.

But if the Principles of our Church, and of those men who charge her so
heavily, were but thoroughly weighed and compared together, we should quickly
see which of the two bids fairest for such a Character, and does most deserve
to lie under such a Suspicion. However, let men Judge and Censure as they
please, as their Interests may sway, or Affections incline them, yet, since the
Author of our Religion has made Resistance a Sin, and Subjection a Duty upon
all occasions, the Ministers of Christ (if they would be found Faithful) ought
to connive at this Sin no more than at any other; nor yet suffer the Guilt
thereof to lie upon their Peoples Souls, without warning them of the great Evil
and Danger of it, and putting them in mind of their Duty toward their
Governors, as often as need shall require.

In a Word, As we ought to Teach, so it is your part to Learn your Duty toward
God and the King, toward Church and State, as now established. Be not therefore
frighted out of your Duty by the Apprehension of Romish Persecution on the one
hand, nor by the Reproach of Censorious Faction on the other; Think not slight
of Passive Obedience, as some lately have done, tho with little Credit either
to themselves or their Cause, nor yet run into the opposite Guilt of any
Temptation in the World; Do not shrink from the Principles of True Christian
Subjection, nor of old English Allegiance: but learn of an Apostle, to Fear God
and Honor the King; or take the Counsel of one of the Greatest of Kings, and
Wisest of Men; wherewith I shall shut up this Discourse. Prove. 24.21. My Son,
Fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change; for their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the Ruin of them
Both.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books printed for and sold by William Crook Bookseller, at the
Sign of the Green Dragon without Tem-Bar, nigh the Passage into the Temple by
Devereux-Court, 1685.
DIVINITY.
1. BRevis Demonstratio, being the Truth of the Christian Religion, proved by
Reason, 12o price bound 10 d. 2. The Primitive Institution, showing the
Antiquity and Usefulness of Catechizing, together with its suitableness to heal
the Distempers of the Church. By L. Addison. D. D. and Dean of Litchfield.
Price 1 s. 6 d. 3. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a Sober Religious Man,
sound drowned in a Pit. In 8o. price bound 1 s. 4. Mr. Howel's
Visitation-Sermon before the Bishop of Chichester, 4o. price 6 d. 5. Dr.
Hascard's two Sermons, the one on the Fifth of November, the other before the
Lord Mayor of London, both in 4o. 6. Mr. Manningham's two Sermons, one before
the Lord Mayor, the other at St. Mary's in Oxford. In quarto. 7. A Sermon
preached at the Savoy Church in French, and since printed in French and
English, twelves, price bound 8 d. 8. A Modest Plea for the Clergy, wherein is
considered the Reasons why the Clergy are so contemned and neglected. By L. A.
D. D. and Dean of Litchfield. Price 1 s. 6. d. 9. Hugo Grotius his Catechism,
Greek, Latin, and English, with a Praxis of all the Greek Words therein
contained. In octavo. price bound 2 s. 10. The Spirit of Prophecy, proving that
Christ and his Apostles were Prophets: written by the directions of, and
recommended to the Press, by the late Peter Gunning, then Lord Bishop of Ely.
In octavo. price 3 s. 11. The King-killing Doctrine of the Jesuits, in a
sincere Discourse to the French King; written by a Roman Catholic. In quarto.
price 1 s. 12. Justifying Faith; or the Faith by which the Just do live,
together with the excellency of the Common Prayer Book. In octavo. price bound
1 s. 13. Mercy Tryumphant, or the Kingdom of Christ enlarged beyond the narrow
bounds which have been wont to be set to it. By Ed. Lane. M. A. and Rector of
Sparshals. 14. Du. Moulin's Reflections reverberated, being a full answer to
the damning Doctrine of Dr. Lewis de Moulin: also, a Confutation of Edmond
Hickeringill against the Ecclesiastical Courts. By E. Lane, etc. In quarto. 1
s. 6. d. 15. A Discourse about Conscience, relating to the present Differences
among us, in opposition to both extremes of Popery and Fanaticism. In quarto.
price 6 d. 16. A Thanksgiving-Sermon for the Discovery of the late Fanatic
Plot. September. 9. 1683. By John Harison, D. D. Rector of Pulborrow. quarto. 17.
An Introduction to the Sacrament. or, a short, plain, and safe way to the
Communion Table, being an Instruction for the worthy receiving the Lords
Supper; Collected for, and familiarly addressed to every particular
Communicant. By L. Addison, D. D. Dean of Litchfield. 18. The Protestant
Religion the safe way to Salvation: or, an Answer to a Book entitled, Mercy
and Truth, or Charity maintained, by Catholics which pretend to prove the
contrary; together with the Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy; as also nine
Sermons on special occasions. By William Chillingworth, M. A. of Oxford, the
fifth Edition; to which is now added Mr. Chillingworth's Reasons against
Popery, to persuade Mr. L. to return to the Church of England. In fol. price 14
s.
HISTORY.
1. AN Institution of general History, or the History of the World; being a
complete Body thereof, in two Volumes, by W. Howel, late Chancellor of
Lincoln. In folio. 2. Historical Collections; being an account of the
Proceedings of the four last Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, by H. Townsend,
Esquire; in folio. 3. Clelia, the whole Work, in five parts; written in French, now
put into English, in folio. 4. Scarron's Comical Romance; being an Historical
account of a company of Stage Players, full of variety of Novels, rare
Adventures, amorous Intrigues, etc. being both witty and pleasant. In folio. 5.
The Life of Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury, written by himself in Latin, since
translated into English. In folio, price 6 d. 6. Megalopsichy; being a
particular and exact Account of the last seventeen years of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, both Military and Civil; the first written by Sir W. Monson, one of the
said Queens Admirals; the second written by H. Townsend, Esquire; a Member of her
last Parliament. Wherein is a true and faithful Relation of all the expeditious
attempts, designs, successes, and errors, both of the English and Spanish, in
the Wars, from the year 1585, to the said Queens Death; with a full account of
the eminent Speeches and Debates, etc. in the said time: To which is added, Dr.
Parry's Trial in the year 1584, all written at the time of the Actions, by
Persons that were eminently acting therein. folio, price bound 10 s. 7. A
Voyage into the Levant, being a Relation of a Journey lately performed from
England to Grand Cairo, by Sir Henry Blunt, twelves. price 1 s. 8. A
description of Candia, with an exact account of the last Siege and Surrender of
it to the Turks. In octavo. price 1 s. 9. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena,
containing the Original, Antiquity, etc. of that Dukedom. In quarto. price 6 d.
10. The present state of London, containing the Antiquity, Fame, Walls, Rivers,
Gates, Churches, Bridge, with the Customs and Infranchisements. By J. Bridal,
Esquire; price 1 s. 11. The Wonders of the Peak in Darby-shire, commonly called the
Devils Arse of Peak. By Tho. Hobbs, octavo. price 1 s. 12. The Life and Death
of Mahomet, being the first estate of Mahometism, showing all the designs that
that Impostor Mahomet had to carry on and settle the Turkish Religion; written
by L. Addison, D. D. price 1 s. 6 d. 13. The Connection; being Collections of
some principal matters in the Reign of King James, being the time that nothing
of this nature is printed, being betwixt the end of Megalopsichy, or the last
seventeen years of Queen Elizabeth, and the beginning of Mr. Rushworth, Heath,
Nalson, Whitlock, and others, price 1 s. 6 d. 14. The Moors baffled; being a
Discourse of the Government of Tangier, under the Earl of Tiviot; showing the
subtilty and policies of both parties: written by Dr. Addison, who lived there
many years, quarto. price 6 d. 15. All the Works of Homer, both Iliads and
Odysses, translated out of Greek into English, by Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury,
price 2 s. 6. d. 16. Considerations on the Loyalty, Religion, Manners, and
Reputation of Thomas Hobbs, octavo. price bound 1 s. 17. The Memoirs and rare
Adventures of Henrietta Sylvia Moliere, a great Lady in France, now living,
written by her self, in six parts in French, and now translated into English,
price 4 s. 18. Tho. Hobbs Angli Malmbs. Vita, being an account of Mr. Hobbs, of
the Books he wrote, of the times when, and the Occasion thereof; of the Books
and Authors against him, of his Conversation, Acquaintance, etc. part wrote by
himself, the rest by Dr. B. in octavo. printed 1681. 19. Behemoth, being the
History of the Civil Wars of England, and the Councels and Artifices by which
they were carried on, from 1640, to 1660. Printed now from his own perfect
Copy, in which is many pages more than was in the former Counterfeit Edition;
none of which Editions before this, had less than a thousand faults in them,
whole Lines lest out in a hundred places, which did extremely pervert the sense
of the Author Tho. Hobbs. 20. The Tracts of Mr. Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, in two
Volumes in 8o. gathering nine of his Treatises together, which are also to be
had single, viz. 1. His Life in Latin. 2. His Considerations on his Loyalty,
Religion, etc. 3. His Art of Rhetoric, in English. 4. His Dialogue about the
Common Law of England. 5. His ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy. 6. His Civil
Wars of England, the perfect Edition. 7. His Historical Narration of Heresy. 8.
His Answer to Bishop Brambal in defense of his Leviathan. 9. His seven
Problems, with an Apology for his writings to the King, price bound 12 s. 21. A
New Survey of the present State of the World, newly written in French, and now
translated into English, in octavo. 22. Compendium Geographicum: or, a more
exact, plain, and easy Introduction into all Geography than yet extant, after
the latest Discoveries and new Alteration; very useful, especially for young
Noblemen and Gentlemen; the like not printed in English. By P. Chamberlayne of
the Inner Temple, Gent. the second Edition with Additions, twelves price bound
1 s. 23. Bucaniers of America: or, a true Account of the most remarkable
Assaults committed of late years upon the Coasts of the West Indies, by the
Bucamers of Jamaica and Tortuga, both English and French, etc. Written in
Dutch, Spanish, etc. And now put into English; the second Edition, with the
Addition of Captain Cooks, and another Relation to it, in quarto. Now is newly
printed the second Volume of the Bucaniers of America. In quarto. price 6 s.
24. The present State of the Jews, wherein is contained an exact Account of
their Customs, Secular and Religious; to which is annexed a summary Discourse
of the Misna, Talmud, and Gemara. By L. Addison D. D. Dean of Litchfield, and
Archdeacon of Coventry, twelves. price bound 1 s. 6 d. 25. French Intrigues:
or, the History of their Delusory Promises since the Pyrenaean Treaty: printed
in French at Cologne, and now made. English price 1 s.

