The Christian Hearer's First Lesson. A SERMON PREACHED AT St. Mary's Church IN
NOTTINGHAM, On Thursday October. the 4th. 1694.

The First Day of a LECTURE preached there Weekly, by the MINISTERS of that
Town and County.

Published to satisfy the Desire of some of the Auditors.

By CLEM. ELIS, Rector of Kirkby in Nottinghamshire.

IMPRIMATUR.

November. 10. 1694.

Ra. Barker.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1694.

TO THE Christian Readers.
THIS plain Sermon, preached at the Request of my Reverend Brethren of the
Clergy, and here published in compliance with the Desire of Them, and (as they
assure me) of some others who heard it; I do first most humbly offer to
Almighty God in Prayer for his Blessing, that it may become in some measure
useful to his Church; and next to you the Christian Readers, to make the best
use of it you can.

If any one of you receive Profit by it, pay, as you are here directed, all
your Thanks to Him alone who gives the Increase: I only beg that you would
assist the Sinful Author with your devout Prayers for the increase of Grace,
lest that by any means when he has preached to others, he himself should be a
Cast-a-way.

THE Christian Hearer's First Lesson.
1 COR. iii. 7. Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters; but God that gives the increase.


SAINT Paul (as we read in the XVIIIth. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles)
had, by the good Blessing of God upon his Labors, been very successful in
preaching the Gospel of Christ at Corinth, so reasoning, and persuading, that
notwithstanding all the opposition and blaspheming of the Jews, Crispus, the
chief Ruler of the Synagogue, believed on the LORD with all his house: and many
of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized. Ver. 8.

After his departure thence, came Apollos, an eloquent man, and mighty in the
Scriptures, who being fervent in the Spirit, spoke and taught diligently the
things of the LORD at Ephesus: and being come into Corinth, helped them much
which had believed through Grace; mightily convincing the Jews. (ver. 27, 28.)
And this is it that St. Paul here says, v. 6. I have planted, Apollos watered,
but God gave the increase. An Increase indeed very considerable, as it appears
by the Apostle's Thanksgiving to God for it. I thank my God (says he, Chapter 1.
v. 4.) always on your behalf, for the Grace of God which is given you by Jesus
Christ; that in every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance, and in
all knowledge; even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you. So that ye
come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in
the Second Epistle, c. 8. v. 7. he testifies of them, That they abounded in
faith, in utterance, and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in their love to
him, and their other Teachers.

Here then, by the planting of Paul, and the watering of Apollos, and the
Success which God gave to them both in their Ministry, an eminent Church grew
up in a short time, and flourished at Corinth, of persons sanctified in Christ
Jesus, and called to be Saints. But alas, how imperfect are all the most
perfect things that are under Heaven? This so lately planted, so plentifully
watered, so highly commended Church, (as the purest and best constituted Church
on Earth will always have) had its spots and blemishes; and those not a few,
but many; and some of them of the foulest sort too, and such as did not only
stain her beauty, but endangered her very Life. The Resurrection of the Dead
was denied by some among them; Fornication and Incest, such as the Gentiles
would blush to hear of, was committed by others; the holy Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper was profaned by the Irreverent and Uncharitable, by the Drunkard
and the Glutton; Stumbling Blocks were laid in the way of the weak Brethren,
and their tender Consciences wounded by an unnecessary and uncharitable use of
Christian Liberty: Little conscience was made of scandalizing their holy
Religion, by going to Law before Infidels; nay, by wronging and defrauding one
another: Discipline lay neglected, and there was none of that mourning, which
should have been for all these Abominations committed among them. Here then
were Corruptions many and great, both in Faith and Manners, and such as, though
they would not warrant any Member in a separation from this Church, were more
than enough to fire the holy Zeal of all the Members of it, and to engage them
all in the most vigorous endeavors for a speedy Reformation in it.

What then is to be done in such a case as this? Why, truly all that can be
done, providing still for the safety and preservation of the whole, and as much
as may be, of every part. All that can be to heal, and cleanse, and edify, but
nothing to destroy. Let every Member of the Body, according to its station and
office therein, contribute what possibly it can to the preservation of its
Life, and restoring of its Health, but let no Member be cut off, so long as the
Body may be preserved without such mutilation, and there is hope remaining that
the corrupt Member may be cured by gentler means: much less let any Member tear
it self off, so long as by continuing in the Body it may have life and
nourishment. Dividing is a very untoward way of healing, and I think should
never be used, but when the case is otherwise desperate. Indeed the Body may
sometimes be saved by the loss of a corrupt Member; but it will be very hard,
if possible, to keep a Member from dying, that separates it self from a living
Body, though diseased.

St. Paul takes a great deal of pains to correct and reform the many Errors and
Disorders among these Christians of Corinth; but whatever he does, or orders to
be done, for a Reformation, he seems to have his Eye continually fixed upon the
Peace and Unity of the Church; considering well, how unhopeful a thing such a
Reformation is in a House that is divided in it self: And therefore he goes to
work like a skilful Reformer. He would have the old leaven purged out, but so,
that they might still continue one, though a new lump, c. 5. v. 7. He would have
the House repaired without pulling it down, or taking it in pieces Stone from
Stone: So that the Foundation, which he as a wise Master Builder had laid,
continue, he thinks it better to leave the Wood, Hay, and Stubble, which others
had built upon it, to the trial of the Fire, when God shall send it, than to
take the building asunder, c. 3. v. 10, etc. He would have the Body kept sound;
yet so, if possible, that it may also remain entire; that so it may still grow
up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ: from whom the whole
body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth,
according to the effectual working in every part, makes increase of the body,
unto the edifying of itself in love, Ephesians. iv. 15. Therefore in the first place,
he most earnestly exhorts the Corinthians to Unity, and warns them to beware of
Divisions, c. 1. v. 10. Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions
among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in
the same judgment. And that this earnest Exhortation may appear the more
reasonable, he proceeds to demonstrate unto them the unreasonableness of that,
which at least was one, and it may be a principal cause of the Divisions which
were among them: which in St. Jude's Phrase, v. 16. is, their having Men's
persons in admiration because of advantage: and in St. Paul's, chapter 4. v. 6.
their being puffed up for one against another. One will be of Paul, another of
Apollos, a third of Cephas, and a fourth is too wise or too good in his own
conceit to be taught of Man, and will therefore confine Christ to his own
Party, that he may be taught of God only. St. Paul with all plainness informs
their Understandings in the Truth, that Faith may take good rooting. And for
this, it may be, his speech seemed contemptible, 2 Cor. 10.20. What (might some
say) can this dry preaching signify? Give us an awakening Preacher. Apollos
with a flood of Eloquence watered what St. Paul had planted. And what is all
this (might others say) but a vainglorious ostentation of Art? Let us have
plain Reason or Scripture, without all this flourishing of words. O how hard a
task have the Ministers of Christ in a Corinth, in a populous and wealthy Town!
where much People is, there is always much variety of Temper. and Humor; and
where is much Ease, and Leisure, and Plenty of all things, there will be also
much Pride, and Wantonness, and Curiosity. And what Paul or Apollos is
sufficient to deal with all these? Every one's Humor or Fancy is his Idol, and
if God himself will not minister to it, he is offended. Every one would limit
God in his own Work, to such Instruments as he finds himself most affected
with, not considering what he is here told, That though Paul himself plant, and
Apollos water, yet neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters, but God that gives the increase.

Well then, if we believe St. Paul, The whole virtue and efficacy of Man's
Ministry in the Church of Christ, for the conversion and salvation of Sinners,
is from the blessing of God. Neither Paul's planting, nor Apollos's watering,
nor all the unwearied endeavors of the most accomplished Preachers, can make
us good Christians, and bring us to Heaven, without the Special Grace of God.

This is it that I would at present earnestly commend to your most serious
thoughts: It is indeed a very plain truth, and stands not in need of an
elaborate proof; but the as plain and necessary consequents of it are not, I
fear, sufficiently pondered by us; and therefore I have thought it not
unseasonable at this time to mind you of them. I intend therefore, by God's
help, I. For the preventing of all Mistakes, briefly to illustrate the Doctrine
contained in these words. II. For the help of such as may need it, to point at
some of the Uses we should make of it.


I. For the preventing of all Mistakes, I shall briefly illustrate the Doctrine
contained in these words. And this, I hope, may be sufficiently done in the
showing you these four things, viz. 1. What every Minister of the Gospel may,
and ought to do. 2. What one Minister may be able to do, more than another. 3.
That all which the Best can do, is in it self of no efficacy. 4. That the
efficacy of all is of God only.


But before I enter upon this, it will be fit to tell you what I suppose, and
take for granted of the Persons here spoken of; which is this.

(1.) That they have a sufficient Call to the Office of the Sacred Ministry,
and Authority to exercise the same, and are no bold Intruders, who run before
they be sent. (2.) That they be furnished with a competent stock of Divine
Knowledge, and understand the things they are to teach and minister unto
others, and are not blind Leaders of the Blind. (3.) Lastly, That they have, at
least, such a Faculty of expression and elocution, as that they may be
understood by those whom they are to instruct; and that they and their Hearers
are not Barbarians to each other. These things supposed, because I know not how
he should be accounted a Minister of the Gospel that wants them; I am now to
show.
1. What every Minister of the Gospel may and ought to do. And it is very
plain, that such an one as is qualified as abovesaid, may both plant and water,
and do the whole Work of God, so far as he has thought fit to instruct Man
with it, and to work himself by the Ministry of Man. All Ministers of Christ
may and ought catechize and instruct the ignorant, and exhort the knowing;
strengthen the weak, and establish the wavering; comfort the afflicted,
encourage the timorous, and lift up the dejected; awake the sleepy, spur on the
lazy, and warn the confident; rebuke the wicked, correct the erroneous, and
direct the doubtful, terrify the presumptuous, and reprove the scorner. They
may and ought to feed the Flock of God, and to give to every one his Portion in
due season, giving Milk to Babes, and strong Meat to them who are able to bear
it. They may preach the Word plainly and constantly, administer the Sacraments
duly and reverently, pray for all Men both publicly and privately, fervently
and devoutly. In short, they may exercise the whole Ministry of Reconciliation,
which Christ has committed unto them; behave themselves as Examples to the
Flock whereof they are made Overseers; showing themselves Patterns of Good
Works, and making others see in their holy conversation the narrow way to
Heaven. These things, I say, all who are fit to be called Ministers of the holy
Gospel of Christ, may and ought to do. And these are indeed great things, and
they who do them are not to be set at naught and despised, but to be esteemed
very highly in love for their Work's sake; and so, no doubt of it, they will
be, if, as it there follows, (1 Thessalonians. 5.13) we can once again be so happy as
to be at peace among our selves. They are God's Ministers, by whom men may
believe, v. 5. His Servants, sent forth to invite us to Heaven and Eternal
Blessedness; his Attorneys (if I may so speak) to seal unto us in his Name the
Mercies of the new Covenant. They can tell us words whereby we and our Houses
may be saved. Act. 11.14. By taking heed unto themselves, and to their
Doctrine, they may both save themselves and them that hear them, 1 Timothy 4.16.
They are laborers together with God. v. 9. Stewards of the Mysteries of God,
Chapter 4. ver. 1. Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. Whilst therefore they are
faithful to their Great Master, they ought to have the Honor due unto their
Character. We have thus in short seen what all Ministers ought to do.

2. Let us now see, What one Minister may be able to do more than another. And
that one may be able to do a great deal more than another, I think no man can
doubt, when he considers, that God has not given to all the same number of
Talents to improve withal: And one may do five times as much with five Talents,
as he can do with one. There never was (that I know of) such an equality in
Ministers, as excluded all difference in degrees of excellency or usefulness.
Whilst immediate inspiration lasted, and the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit
were in a manner common, every one who had them, had them not all; nor had all
they who had the same Gifts, those same Gifts which they had, in the same
measure; the Spirit divided to every one severally, as he would; to one this,
and to another that, yet to every one to profit withal, 1 Cor. xii. 7, 11. All
the Apostles had not St. Peter's boldness of Spirit, presence of Mind,
quickness of Apprehension, forwardness of Speech, Zeal, or Courage: All were
not, like James and John, Boanerges, Sons of Thunder: All had not Paul's
Learning, nor his admirable Patience, and indefatigable Industry; nor can all
be supposed to have had Apollos's Eloquence. One Minister of Christ may have a
more faithful Memory, and another a clearer Judgment, and a third a more
fruitful Invention, and a fourth a better Elocution. One may have more Reading,
and another more Experience, a third more Zeal, and a fourth more Prudence. One
may be more knowing, and another more dexterous in teaching what he knows. One
may discourse more copiously and plainly, and another may argue more closely
and nervously, and another persuade more warmly and affectionately. One may
insinuate more sweetly, and another may rebuke more cuttingly, and a third may
instruct more convincingly. One may be more dexterous at planting, another at
watering, a third at weeding, and a fourth at fencing; and another may exceed
all in pruning off the luxuriant Branches, and cherishing the tender Plants.
Now, all these, and the like, wherein one may be able to do more than another,
are very good things, and in some competent measure necessary in every Minister
of Christ. And yet it is no less absurd, to expect the same abilities, and
degrees of such Ministerial Accomplishments and Perfections in all Ministers,
than it would be to imagine, that all Artists, or Men of any one Profession,
should be of equal Skill, Prudence, Industry, and Activity. Taking it therefore
for granted, That one may do more than another, and all the Builders in God's
House must not be thought equal to that wise Master Builder St. Paul; let us
now see what we may expect from the very best of them. To this I say,

3. That all which the Best can do is in it self of no efficacy. Neither is
Paul himself, nor Apollos, any thing; that is, of any use at all to us, without
the special Blessing of God, whose very weak Instruments, and no more but so,
all, even the best qualified Ministers of the Gospel are. Let us do all that
ever we can to do you good, we cannot by any Art or Skill, Power or Pains that
we have or can use, make any one of those whole that are sick, strong that are
weak, and much less can we make alive them that are dead in Trespasses and
Sins. We cannot in the least measure benefit any one of those, toward whom we
exercise our Ministry.

It is true indeed, we find St. Paul (Chap. iv. 15.) speaking thus of himself
to the Corinthians, In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel: And
thence he rationally enough infers, That though they had since that Ten
thousand other Instructers, yet should not their kindness for any of them, how
well soever they had deserved it, abate any thing of the love and honor which
were still nevertheless due to him, as the first Instrument of their
conversion. They might respect their other Teachers as good and tender Nurses,
but ought still to give him the honor due unto a Father, and be followers of
him. Yet after all, St. Paul acknowledges himself herein to be no more but an
Instrument in another's hand. He beg at them, but in Christ Jesus, and that by
the Gospel, whereby was sown in them by God himself that incorruptible Seed of
which alone Men are reborn Christians, 1 Pet. 1.23. He tells the Galatians also
(Chap. iv. 19.) That he traveled in birth again till Christ was formed in
them: This is indeed a high expression of his truly Parental Affection for
them, of the great pains he took with them, of the troubles he cheerfully
underwent for their sake, and of his earnest solicitude, and ardent desire of
their proficiency under his Ministry, and his great grief of Heart to see them
so soon turned away from the Doctrine he had taught them, and unto which he now
labors again to reduce them. But the forming of Christ in Men is the work of
no less than that Divine Power that once formed for him an Humane Body in a
Virgin-womb.

What is it that the ablest Ministers can do to make Men good Christians? Alas,
all comes to no more but this: They can declare and lay open the Doctrine of
the Gospel to Men fully, plainly, and sincerely. They can exhort, persuade, and
desire Men frequently, earnestly and heartily to believe and practice it, and
show them very good Reasons why they should do so. They can direct them to the
best helps, and warn them to take heed of all Letts and Impeditaments, and show
them the danger of Temptations. They can admonish them when they are out of the
way, and labor by all means to reduce them into it again, comfort them in it,
and encourage them to persevere therein unto the end; and, in a word,
administer unto them all the things which Christ has put into their hands to
administer, as they can have opportunity of administering, and can find persons
capable of receiving the same. Finally, They can incessantly pray to God for a
Blessing upon all they do: And so indeed they have great need to do; for when
all that they can do is done by them, they have but done what the Husbandman
can do toward a good Harvest; they have ploughed and sown, but know not what
the Crop will prove. They do but hold a glorious Light before a blind Eye, and
sing a melodious Song to a deaf Ear, and give very good Advice to Fools and
Madmen. To make Men see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, to bring
them to themselves, and make them understand with their Hearts, that they may
be illuminated, converted, and healed, is not the work of Man; our Necks are
too stiff to bend, our Wills too sturdy to yield, vicious Habits and Customs
too deeply rooted to be plucked up, fashionable Sins too impudent to be put out
of countenance, our Lusts too rebellious and imperious to be subdued and tamed
by Men's reasonings and persuasions. The strong man armed, that has got the
possession, will be too strong for all men, and will keep the possession he
has gotten in spite of all that can be done, till the Man who is God too,
come upon him and disarm him. The strong bolds of Satan within us will not be
cast down by the little Batteries of Men's Tongues. And though we that are
Ministers must never hold our Peace, but lift up our Voices like Trumpets;
though we must not cease to cry aloud; though we spare not, but shout till
these earthen Vessels of ours crack and fall in pieces, the walls of this
cursed Jericho will not be so blown down. None but He, whose Voice shakes the
Heavens and the Earth, can rend the stony Hearts of Sinners. Which is the last
thing to be now shown, viz.

4. That the efficacy of all is of God only. Whoever planteth, or waters, God
gives the increase. All are as good as nothing, and labor in vain without
him. It Is true indeed, it has pleased God to make use of the Ministry of Men
in the building of his Church, and to make them workers together with and under
Himself; and their great business it is, to beseech us not to receive this
Grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. vi. 1. He has put his Words into their mouth, and
his Seed into their hands; they are made his Seeds-men, and go forth to sow by
his command: but still the Seed it self, and all the prolifick virtue of it,
the skill and activity of the Sowers, the goodness of the Ground, the Warmth
and the Rain, the Growth and Harvest, are all of him. Who must soften the
Highway's-side? Who must add depth of Earth to the Stony Ground? Who must root
up the Thorns and the Briars? Who must fright away the devouring Birds? It is
God alone, the Father of Spirits, that can create a right Spirit within us,
restrain our Thoughts from wandering abroad, and the Devil's Temptations from
entering in and prevailing. It is he only that can empty our Hearts of Cares,
and the love of Riches, and the Pleasures of this Life, which choke the good
Seed. He it is that can make the Heart good and honest, and prepare and enable
it with due attention and affection to receive, and with serious meditation to
cherish the Seed sown, and with constancy of resolution to bring any Fruit to
perfection. Though Ministers are sent to invite us to Christ, yet has Christ
himself told us, Joh. vi. 44. saying, Mo man can come to me except the Eather
draw him. It is God (as St. Paul says, 2 Cor. ii. 14.) that makes manifest
the savor of his knowledge in every place. He that by the foolishness of
preaching saves them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. He opened Lydia's heart to
attend to the things which were spoken of Paul, Acts xvi. 14. St. Paul says,
He labored more abundantly, than they all; yet he adds, Not I, but the Grace
of God that was with me, 1 Cor. xv. 10.

Indeed, our Blessed Savior had sent forth his Apostles to a very unhopeful
work, sending the Lambs to convert the Wolves, a few poor contemptible Men to
make Disciples all Nations, had he not promised himself to be with them, Matthew.
xxviii. And the greatest encouragement that St. Paul had to abide preaching the
Gospel in such a Town as Corinth, lay in those words of Christ, Act. xviii. 8.
I am with thee, and I have much people in this City, and therefore fear not. He
had prepared the Hearts of the People as the Books to be written in, and then
he made use of St. Paul's Tongue as the Pen of a ready Writer; and this Writer
was God himself. I (says he, Heb. viii. 10.) will put my laws in their mind,
and write them in their hearts. Therefore (says the Apostle to these
Corinthians, 2 Cor. iii. 3.) Ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of
Christ, ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the spirit of the
living God. Who shines in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; 2 Cor. iv. 6. Indeed, to give light
to our dark minds, and to keep the God of this World from blinding them, is the
work of him alone who at first brought light out of darkness. He alone can make
us new Creatures, that is, Christians, who breathed into our Dust the Breath of
Life, and made us Men. With what Treasures then soever it has pleased God to
instruct any of us, that we may dispense them unto you; yet still both you and
we must know, that we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. iv. 7.

I have held you, I fear, too long in the illustration of so plain a Truth;
Deus incrementum dedit, non per illos sed per seipsum. Excedit hoc humanam
humilitatem; excedit angelicam sublimitatem; nec omnino pertinet, nisi ad
agricolam Trinitatem.
I shall therefore conclude this part of my Discourse with those words of St.
Augustine upon St. John's Gospel, God gave the Increase, not by them, but by
himself. This is a work which is above not only the meanness of Man, but the
height of Angels: nor does it at all belong to any other but to him who is the
Husbandman, that is, the ever blessed TRINITY.

The Doctrine thus cleared,

II. For the help of such as may need it, I will point at some of the Uses we
should make of it. And truly, methinks they lie very obvious, both to Preachers
and Hearers.

We are this day, by the good Providence of God, entering upon an A Lecture
preached weekly there.
Exercise, wherein our whole design and business is to minister, as God shall
enable us, to the good of your Souls. Far be it from us to beguile you with
enticing words, with fair speeches to deceive the simple, or with feigned words
to make merchandise of you. Expect not to have your Heads filled with airy
Notions, or your Curiosity fed with fine Speculations; and fear as little to
have your Minds perplexed with doubtful Disputations; least of all let any
Jealousy possess you, that you shall be entertained with splenetick and
virulent Invectives against Men and Parties: these things become not us, nor
will they profit you: We seek not yours for our selves, but you for God; and I
doubt not but I may say it in the Name of all my Brethren, who are engaged on
this Service of your Faith, That we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord, and our selves your Servants for Jesus sake: That we have no ambition to
exercise a dominion over any Man's Faith, but earnestly desire (may GOD of his
Goodness make us so happy) to be helpers of your Joy. It Is God's Honor, and
your Happiness, and both these in the reviving of a sincere and unaffected
Christian Piety, now languishing even to death among us, that we solely aim at.

But alas, what are we, that we should attempt such things as these? We are
nothing, we can do nothing of our selves toward so weighty a Work; all our
Sufficiency must be of God. The sense of this directed me to the choice of this
Subject, as most proper to humble us, and instruct you. To humble us, I say, in
consideration of our utter insufficiency for the important work which lies
upon us; and to instruct you how, notwithstanding all our weakness, you may be
sure to reap some profit by the weakest of us all. And truly, I the rather hope
for God's Blessing upon our Endeavors, when I consider with what unanimity and
cheerfulness of Mind my Reverend Brethren have consented to this Service. It
will now much confirm this Hope, if you shall be pleased ( Worshipful and
Beloved) not only to countenance us with your presence and attention, but to
assist us with your devout Prayers.

1. And therefore, next to the humbling of our selves in the presence of God,
as nothing without him, unable to serve either Him or you without his Special
Assistance, and because of our manifold Sins most unworthy of that also; the
first Use which I very heartily desire you to make of what has been said, is
to help us with your daily fervent Prayers at the Throne of Grace, for the
pardoning of our Sins, and the sanctifying of our Souls, and the supplying of
all our Defects: That in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we may have our conversation in the World, and
more abundantly to youwards at this time, not handling the Word of God
deceitfully, but by manifestation of the Truth, commending our selves to every
man's Conscience in the fight of God: That God would open unto us a door of
utterance, that we may open our Mouth boldly, that the Word of God may have its
free course, and be glorified with you. Therefore Men profit so little by the
Ministry, because they so seldom or so coldly address themselves in Prayer to
God, for his Blessing upon it. Whilst we bestow so much more time in Hearing
than we do in Praying, as being the far easier Task of the two, it may be
feared we expect more from Men than we do from GOD; and though we may carry the
Sermon home, we leave God's Blessing behind us. Therefore,

2. Because we are nothing, and all the Increase is of God, let us take heed
how we depend so much on the Ministry of Men, who are nothing, as to attend too
little in their Ministry upon God who does all. Whilst you are pleased to
afford us your Ear, be sure that you give God your Heart. Neither regard ye
what we say any farther than we speak as the Oracles of God. Imitate the
Thessalonians in this, who when they received the Word of God, which they heard
of St. Paul, and others, received it not as the Word of Men, but (as it is in
truth) the Word of God, which effectually works in them that believe, 1 Thessalonians. ii. 13. Come with a desire and resolution to hear God himself speak to
you (by what Mouth soever he shall speak) and, be sure of it, the Word will be
mighty, and prevail.

It is a very lamentable thing, to see in what Extremes we are apt to lose both
God and our selves; First, Because neither Paul nor Apollos are any thing
without God, or in comparison of God; therefore some very rashly conclude, that
they are nothing at all to them, and that the Ministry of such Men is of no use
in the Church, but all are to be taught of God only. And it is true, that our
chief Teacher is God himself; but if we will be taught of him, we must submit
our selves to be taught by him as it pleases him to teach us, and not as we
have a mind to be taught. What though the very best Instrument be able to do
nothing by its self, out of the Workman's hand? Yet even an indifferent one may
do much, when managed by the hand of a skilful Workman. I shall only desire one
thing to be granted me by him that resolves to be taught of God alone, without
the Ministry of Men ordained to teach; and I think it a very reasonable
request, that before he thus put it to the venture whether he shall be taught
or no, he be first very sure, that God will, as well as that he can, so teach
him; or, that he has not ordained the Ministry of Men in his Church, or that
he will, merely to humor him, change his ordinary method, and cancel his own
ordinance. It is certainly God alone that gives the Increase in the Field, as
well as in the Church; and yet Men are not so unreasonable or confident, as to
expect and rely upon a good Harvest from God without the Labor of the
Husbandman. Why then should they expect the Fruit of the Spirit without the
Labor of the Ministry, till God give them some better assurance of it than yet
he has done? We must not indeed stint God's Power as though he could not work
without this or that Instrument; and yet neither must we slight his
Institution, and neglect his ordinary method. He that would pluck God's
Instruments, how mean soever they seem, out of his hand, and not give him the
Glory of magnifying his Strength in the Weakness of Men; though he do not thereby
disable God from working, yet does he enough to provoke him not to work.

Others there be, who in another Extreme seem to make God himself almost
nothing, and the Minister all. Such are they who place the greatest part of
their Religion in hearing many Sermons; and when they have heard enough, are
apt to persuade themselves, that they have served God well enough. They are
wont to be very attentive, with a great deal of Affection, and it may be a
great deal too much Admiration, to the Preacher; and to talk much of him, and
of his excellent Sermon; and yet all the while are as regardless of God, and
address as little to him for his Blessing, as though they had heard nothing at
all of him, nor had any thing to do with him. It is very well, if God be not
too often thus put off with a vain show of Worship, and if the Preacher have
not all, but only what in the coveted reputation of Hearers and Professors we
catch at for our selves, of the Honor which is due unto Him. The delight which
many of us take seems to be too much in the mere planting or sowing, and if
that be done, according to our own opinion, artificially, we are mightily
pleased; and if not, more offended, and we count all the time lost (as in sad
truth it is) which we have spent in hearing. The Harvest and Increase is the
thing that of all others we least think of; as though we heard only for hearing's
sake. So our Ears be but constantly exercised, a barren Heart, which brings
forth no Fruit of Righteousness to God, or to our Neighbor, in our Life and
Conversation, never troubles us. We are apt to fancy, howsoever we live, that
we love God very well, because we love to hear of him; and if this love cool a
little, so long as we can ever and anon warm it again by hearing we keep our
selves, as we imagine, spiritually alive unto God.

To these two sorts of People a third may be added, who seem to attribute so
much to the choice of the Instrument or Preacher; as if they thought that God
himself is like to some Workmen, who cannot do their Work to any purpose,
unless they have the very best Tools to work withal. Indeed, the Religion of a
great many seems to lie in nothing else but the itch of the Ear; which is a
Disease, and not a virtue; and no good Symptom of a sound Heart. The Apostle
said long ago, That a time would come when Men would not endure sound doctrine,
but after their own lusts would heap to themselves teachers, having itching
ears, 2 Timothy iv. 3. Now, we may be sure, that where Men's Lusts and Affections
choose their Teachers, though the Ear may be clawed, the Heart will remain
unsearched. Sound Doctrine will sit too hard upon the sore place, and make it
uneasy. There are some soft Doctrines, which mightily please whilst they
profit nothing. These prick not at the Heart, and so long the Itch may daily
increase, the more that the Sore within putrifies. And though the Christian
decay, yet as the Itch increases, the fancy of being a good Christian
increases with it; and the Disease within becomes mortal e're it be felt, and
the deluded Soul, in a ravishing Dream of going to Heaven, sinks pleasantly
into Hell.

3. Let us, from what has been said, learn how we are to behave our selves in
relation to the Ordinances of God administered by Men. And first more generally,
Let us see that we rightly discern and distinguish between the Work of GOD, and
the Ministry of Man in every Ordinance; neither expecting from Men what God
alone can do, nor expecting that God will do that alone, which he ordinarily
does by the Ministry of Men. Remember what St. Paul has told us, That though Men
are Ministers by whom we believe, yet is it even as the Lord has given to
every man, ( v. 5.) that he can either work in any measure, or hope to speed by
his working. And though Ministers are Laborers together with God, in tilling and
building, yet still we are God's husbandry, we are his building, ver. 9. Except
therefore that the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it.
Nay, if we trust too much to the Builders, then is their preaching vain, and
our faith is also vain, seeing it stands, as the Apostle says it ought not, in
the wisdom of men, not in the power of God.

More particularly, remember that the Men who minister to you in holy things,
are still Men, and will as long as they live have more or less the Infirmities
of Men. You must therefore be so just, as to allow for the common Infirmities
of Human Nature, and so charitable too as to overlook some personal Failings.
If the Workman build on the right Foundation, and by his true Rule; if he do
his Work truly, faithfully, and substantially; this ought to satisfy: and though
possibly there may be wanting something of that. stateliness, art, and
politeness, which a more masterly and finer hand might have added to it, yet
even thus, by the Blessing of God, it will go up apace till it reach Heaven.

If we have already profited any thing by the Ministers we have had, we have
already also learned thus much of them, That as they are Ministers of Christ,
they are not to be despised; and as they are no more but Ministers, they may be
too much magnified. That as God can work by the very meanest of them, and we
ought not to doubt but he will do so for them that love him; so, provoked to
displeasure by our Sins, he may refuse to work by the most eminent and holy.
For us therefore to side with, or to be puffed up for one against another, is a
very unreasonable thing; and we do but show thereby, that we are yet too much
carnal, and walk rather as Men than as Christians. If he that glories in
Apollos had indeed profited by Apollos's preaching, as he ought to have done,
he would be very well pleased with Paul. And if he that glories in Paul had
improved in sincere Christianity by Paul's Ministry, he would be well enough
pleased with Apollos. He has not profited by either as he might have done, who
is not very thankful to God, who has provided so well for his Soul by the
ministry of either; or does not wait with Faith and Patience for a Blessing,
whichsoever of the two it is that he at present enjoys.

I know, that it is pleaded by some, That they cannot profit, or are not
edified so much by some as by others; and possibly there may be some truth in
this Plea of theirs, and yet, it may be, the fault does not always lie where
they would have it laid, but where they have no mind at all to find it.
However, what is here pleaded deserves to be considered.

And first, suppose we (what in this whole Discourse is taken for granted) that
the Word of God, the wholesome Food of our Souls, is duly and fully, though it
may be in a very familiar, and the most homely manner administered unto us. If
so, then I must needs say, that I see no room at all for this Plea; for it is
no less than the Word of God that we receive, and that is the Food whereby our
Souls may live eternally, by whom soever, and after what manner soever it be
conveyed unto us. The same living Water, coming from the same Spring, has the
same virtue, through what Conduit soever it may pass unto us. The sound we hear
is the Man's, and that may be less grateful; but still the Word is God's, and
should be always welcome. Were it the Word of Men we are to be instructed in,
we might well entertain it, according to the credit and reputation the Men have
got with us, and so receive it proportionably with more or less Faith and
Affection. But being the Word of God, as no instrument of conveyance, can add
any thing to its worth and value, so neither ought any one to lessen its
welcome. What, shall we vile Worms take that piece of state upon us, that we
will not receive a Message of Peace and Reconciliation from the great and
glorious King of kings, unless he will do us the honor to send it by one of
his chief Servants? Indeed he has already, as unworthy as we are, done us a
far greater honor than that, even to send it by his only Son, whom he has
made heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds. God was in Christ,
reconciling the world to himself, and Christ has committed to us the word of
reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. We are Ambassadors for Christ, and in his stead, and
though one may deliver the Mind of his Lord in better language, or with a more
graceful behavior than another, yet all speaking the same thing, in the same
great name, and to the same end, ought to be honorably treated for their
Master's sake.

There is, without all dispute, a great deal of difference in the Abilities of
Preachers, as there is also in the Tempers, Capacities, and Gusts of Hearers,
and in the suitableness of the one to the other. And I will not say, that one
may not profit more by some than he can by others. But what then? Can he profit
by the best and ablest without the Special Blessing of God? And may he not with
his Blessing profit by the weakest? And ought he therefore to hate the one and
love the other, to forsake the one and cleave to the other, or to be puffed up
for the one against the other? Let it be considered,

First, That the Scales, it may be, hang a great deal evener than we (for want
of a single Eye) yet think they do. As many good and pious People are edified,
for ought we know, by him whom we forsake, as are by him we follow. As this
Preacher suits best with the Capacity, Humor and Palate of some, so does that
also with those of others. And then where is the Advantage which the one has
above the other? Or, what has one Party here to glory in that another has
not? Certainly it well becomes both to join together in the Praises of GOD, who
as he has given Men diverse Capacities and Palates, has also by as great a
variety of Gifts left none of them unprovided for. If this Air, or this Dish of
Meat, agree best with my Constitution, does it therefore become me to decry all
others as unwholesome, though they may agree as well with other men's
Constitutions as these do with mine?

Secondly, That which is here pleaded is indeed a Disease and not a Virtue, a
thing to be resisted and striven against, and, if possible, to be mastered, and
by no means to be indulged in our selves. It is a shame for us to be always
Children, and it is no advantage or commendation to any one to have a squeamish
Stomach. Would we endeavor after a more healthful Constitution, and to be of a
more masculine Temper; would we learn to be Men indeed, both in Understanding
and Humor, wholesome Food would at once both please and nourish us: and so
long as we can have our Food in due season, and in full proportion, we would be
less curious and nice, and no more pettishly refuse our Meat, because it is not
so prepared as in every thing to hit exactly our Palates. Though therefore the
Minister that excels another in any thing should not want from us his due
Praise and Respect, yet neither need we under another want any thing that is
necessary to our Spiritual Health. And were we as sensible as we ought to be of
our great Unworthiness of the least of these Helps which God affords us, we
would soon grow more thankful for what we have, and not through a squeamish
humor lose the benefit of it.

But next I ask this Question, and I beseech you take some pains in examining
your selves, that ye may be able to answer it aright. Is there indeed,
generally speaking, any truth in this Plea? I dare not say there is none; but I
hope I may, without offense to any one, commend unto you all this (as it seems
to me) very necessary Caution. Be not over-hastily confident, either that you
cannot be edified, where as yet you are not; or that you are indeed edified,
where you think you are. Some persons I have known, who through an unreasonable
prejudice have been even sick at the sight of some Meat, whereof they could
never be persuaded to taste, and yet after they have but once or twice been
prevailed with to eat of it, have fed upon it with much both delight and
benefit. Possibly then you may not be edified, not because you cannot, but only
because you think so, and will not try. And though you think you are edified,
you may but think so; for it may well be doubted that you are not edified by
the Word of God, if you find it has not the same good effect upon you
delivered by one as by another. Take heed, lest what you call Edification be
only the heightening of your Fancy for a Man, the enflaming of your Zeal for or
against a Party, or the exciting of some Passion or other by certain modes of
speech or gesture. I say this to no other end, but to put you upon an impartial
examination of your own Hearts; for I conceive, that pure Religion and Devotion
are grounded upon and cherished by the Word of God only; and therefore I see
not but where that is plainly preached, and yet does not move so much as when
dressed according to Men's Fancies, those Men are not in love with the natural
beauty of Religion, and God's Image thereon, but with the artificial beauty
that Men bestow upon it.

If the fault of your not profiting be really in the Minister, you are so far
excusable, and no body can blame you if you go abroad to seek your Meat, when
otherwise you must be famished at home. But if he preach God's Word soundly and
intelligibly, how is the fault in him? Some of you will say, it may be, that he
is not a powerful Preacher; but do you indeed know what it is that you say? Why
is not the same Word of God as powerful delivered by one as by another? Does it
not sufficiently inform your Understandings? That cannot be, for we suppose it
soundly and intelligibly preached. Does it not equally move your Affections?
That Is it you mean by powerful preaching, or nothing that I know of. And if so,
why does it not? Here is the Word of God to do it, what then is wanting? Is it
a neat and curious composure, a smooth style and fine cadence of Sentences, a
pleasing noise and gingling of Words, a nimble Tongue and glib Elocution, a
passionate and hot way of expression, the affected accenting or tuning of the
Voice, the setting of the Countenance to the matter in hand, and humouring it
either with smiles, frowns, or tears, a mimical action of the Body? Or what is
it? Whatever it is, it is well if it be not something of Man only. I say not;
but most of these things are, in due place and season, decent and commendable:
yet are they but such things as would work the same thing in the Theater as in
the Church, from the Stage as from the Pulpit. Now certainly there must be a
great fault, where the Art of Man can affect us, and the Word of God cannot.

To prevent this Self-deceit, I know nothing more proper than the often
thinking on the Text I am now preaching on. Whomsoever therefore you hear,
remember how very a Nothing he is in himself, and make your humblest and
closest, and warmest applications to God himself.

If you think you have not met with a Minister altogether suitable to the Needs
of your Souls, yet blame not him that labors for you according to the measure
of his talent. Reflect rather very seriously upon your selves, and see if you
cannot find Sins enough to provoke God to with hold from you the Blessing you
desire. The way to obtain a better, is to praise God for his Mercy in affording
you any, and to acknowledge his Justice in sending you a worse, even for your
Sin of not improving more under the worst of all. When you are truly humbled,
and by Humility prepared to make a good use of whomsoever God at the present
affords you, He will either bless the present more to your advantage, or send
you a better in his stead.

How mean soever you may think the person whom you at present hear, remember
for your comfort, that God's power is always the same it ever was, and his
Goodness no less to all that love him in sincerity. Come then purely in love to
God, and he will never send you home without his Blessing. Your only business
in these religious assemblies, is to apply the whole attention of your Souls to
God in the several parts of his Worship; and till you do so, you come for
something else than to honor him. And how can you expect his Blessing when you
are not employed in his service?

To close all. Come hither to treasure up the Word of God in your Hearts, that
you may not sin against him, and let it dwell in you richly in all wisdom, that
you may grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ daily.
Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envys,
and all evil speakings, as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word,
that ye may grow thereby. And let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel
of Christ. Stand fast with one spirit, in one mind, striving together for the
faith of the Gospel: and do all things without murmurings and disputings, that
ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, in the midst
of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom may ye always shine as lights in
the world, holding forth the word of life, that we may rejoice in the day of
Christ, that we have not run in vain, neither labored in vain. God grant you
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye
being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and hight: and to know the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge, that ye may be filled with all the fullness of
God.

Now, unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works in us, unto Him be glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without end. Amen.

FINIS.

