Imprimatur.

Guil. Lancaster, R.P.D. Hen. Ep. Land. a Sacris Domest.
October. 27. 1692.
THE GREAT DANGER AND UNCERTAINTY OF A Deathbed Repentance, As it was
Delivered in a Funeral Sermon Preached lately in the Parish Church of CHISWICK,
in Middlesex.

Humble thy self before thou be Sick; and in the time of Sins, show Repentance,
Eccles. 18.21. When a Wicked Man Dies, his Expectation shall perish; and the
Hope of Unjust Men perishes, Prove. 11.7. Published chiefly for the sake of the
ordinary sort of Inhabitants of that Parish.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple-Barr, 1693.

To the Inhabitants of the PARISH of CHISWICK in the County of MIDDLESEX.
SVCH formerly has been, and in some measure still is, that great Weakness and
Indisposition of Body, under which I have labored, that I have not been able
to go through with my Duty with that Vigor and Constancy, as a better measure
of Health would have enabled me to have done: In particular, my Weakness has
disabled me from making those frequent Visits to my Neighbors, by going from
house to house, (as I thought my self obliged) to Instruct the Ignorant, Warn
the Unruly, Reruke the Obstinate and Profane, and to stir up all sorts of
People to the Practice of their Duty, and Amendment of their Lives, where there
should be most need or occasion for in: Neither, it may be, would the
Iniquities of the times, or the Humor of the Age, be able to bear it, had such
a thing been undertaken by me; because I find Good Counsel and Advice are very
Unwelcome to the Generality of Mankind; and they who stand in most need of
Admonition and Reproof, are commonly the greatest Despisers of it. For such
Fools as make a Mock of Sin, Prove. 14.9, 16. and 1.7, 22, 30. and 15.12.
usually make a scorn of Reproof too, and thereby give but small Hopes of their
ever being Reclaimed, or Growing better, which therefore cannot but render
their Condition so much the more Desperate. For the Wise Man has assured us,
Prove. 15.10. He that hates Reproof shall Die. And, Eccles. 21.6. He that
hates to be Reproved is in the way of Sinners, that is, in the High way to
Ruin and Destruction, as all Wicked Men are, who stop their Ears against
Instruction and Reproof.

And though I have not been backward in Public to warn all such among you of
their Great Guilt and Danger on that account; yet there are many of you, who
seldom or never see the inside of a Church; or if they do, little Regard what
is Taught and Learned them there, thinking what is delivered to All in general,
does not concern themselves in particular.

To Supply this Defect on my part, and to Remedy what I can, this great
Carelessness and Neglect on Yours, I have been prevailed withal to publish the
ensuing Discourse, which was lately Preached on a particular Occasion.

I have proposed the Example of the Deceased, as a Sea-mark to Caution you
against those dangerous Rocks and Shelves, which he run himself upon; the ill
Effects whereof he Complained of and Lamented with his latest Breath. And this
I have done in as favorable a manner as I could, or was Consistent with the
nature of my Design, which was to Instruct and Warn the Living, without bearing
hard on the Memory of the Dead, who is now passed from Man's Judgment Seat to
that of God's: Therefore I have not mentioned any thing of the Name or
Circumstances of the Deceased Party, whereby he might be known to those that
knew him not before; and have confined my self to his behavior in his
Sickness, and what he was pleased to take notice of publicly to other People,
rather than to my self.

The Duty I here persuade you to is One of the most Necessary and Important in
all Religion; and indeed Comprehensive of all others: For True Repentance
consists not in a confessing our selves to be Sinners in general; or in being
Troubled for our Sins, and Begging Pardon for them when we can Sin no longer.
This is no other than gross Delusion and Hypocrisy: It Is one of the Snares of
the Devil, which he lays for the Ruin of Souls; but Repentance consists in a
Hating and Forsaking of all Sin, in the Watching of your Hearts, and Bridling
of your Tongues, in the Restraining of your Passions, and Mortifying the
Affections and Lusts of the Flesh, and in Arming your selves against all those
Sins and Temptations, which you are Prone to Offend in, and have formerly been
overcome by.

This is the True Notion of Evangelical Saving Repentance, to which the
Promises of the Gospel are made, and upon which alone we can give you any
Comfortable Hopes of Pardon and Forgiveness at the hands of God, either Now, or
when you come to Die.

I pray God set these great Truths home upon your Hearts and Consciences; that
in this your Day you may see the things that belong to your Peace before they
are hid from your Eyes. So prays He that unfeignedly Wishes the Eternal
Happiness and Salvation of you all, and who is desirous to Contribute, (as his
Duty obliges him) what ever lies in his Power toward it.

J. Ellesby.
October. 28th, 1692.
THE Great Danger and Uncertainty Of a Deathbed Repentance. As it was
Delivered in a Funeral Sermon Preached lately in the Parish Church of CHISWICK.
Hebr. III. 7, 8. Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says, To day if you will hear
his Voice, Harden not your Hearts, as in the Provocation, in the Day of
Temptation, in the Wilderness.
THE things which accompany Salvation and relate to the Happiness of a Future
State, are of that infinite Moment and Concern to every Man living, and the
Time allotted by God for the Discharge and Performance of them, so short and
uncertain, that we ought to let slip no Opportunity for to admonish and put you
in Mind thereof. We cannot too earnestly press and persuade you thereunto on
the one Hand; neither on the other, can you be too diligent and serious in a
matter of that vast Importance, whereon endless Bliss or Woe, eternal Happiness
or Misery, do most assuredly depend.

This is that which we ought to make the main Business of our Lives, as soon as
ever we arrive to years of Knowledge and Understanding, and are able to discern
the difference between Good and Evil; for, set aside the prospect of Happiness
in another State, whereof we are but Candidates and Probationers in this, and
the present Life would not be very desirable for its own sake; neither should
we have any great Reason to be fond of it; for the many Troubles and Calamities
we daily meet withal in the World, would embitter Life to that Degree, as to
make us Disrelish all the Comforts and Enjoyments thereof. The Hopes therefore
of a future Recompense of Reward, of a more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory, is the greatest Anchour to support the Spirits of good Men, and able to
bear up their Minds, amidst all the Storms of an Afflicted and Calamitous
Estate.

But alas! Unless our Hopes of Happiness are firmly settled and well grounded,
they will most certainly deceive and disappoint us in the end; for it is only
Repentance for Sin past, and a Life of Holiness and new Obedience for time to
come, that can give us good Hope through Grace, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. And make us
Partakers of that Glory which hereafter shall be Revealed, 1. Pet. 5.1.

They are such only, who truly Believe, Repent, and obey the Gospel, and spend
some considerable part of their Lives in so doing, that can have any solid
Hopes or Comfortable expectations of their future Safety and well being;
whereas the confident Hopes of bad Men and presuming Sinners, which Job calls
the hope of the Hypocrite shall perish, and like a Spiders Web deceive those
that shall trust to it, Job 8.13.

But now to come more closely to the matter in Hand: If we would have our
Repentance to be Repentance unto Life, or such as will entitle us to the Pardon
of our Sins, and acceptance with God, we must take the Holy Ghost's advice in
the Text, not to harden our Hearts, nor stop our Ears against his Calls and
Invitations to this Duty, but we must set about it presently, to day while it
is called to day, v. 13. because to morrow it is possible may be too late. We
must resolve to Repent immediately and without delay, before we have provoked
God too far, or tempted him to give us up, as he has done many others, to a
hardened and impenitent Estate; for it is possible a Man may outlive the Seasons
of Grace, and Sin away the acceptable Time and Day of Salvation; he may sink
and plunge himself so far into that depth of Guilt and Wickedness, by adding
one Sin and provocation to another, as it will be scarce possible to recover
himself out of the Snare of the Devil, or to free himself from the gall of
Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity, be sure not without a great deal of Trouble
and Difficulty, nor till after a long time spent in deep Sorrow and Contrition,
and in the painful acts of Mortification and Self-Denial.

The time past can never be recalled, and time to come is very uncertain, the
present time is only ours, and what we can be most sure of; and therefore we
should be careful not to let it slip from us without improving it to the great
ends and Purposes of Religion, to the reconciling our Selves to God, perfecting
the work of Repentance, and giving all Diligence to make our calling and
Election sure.

To which purpose I shall apply this Advice which the Holy Ghost gives us in
the Text, To day if you will hear his Voice harden not your Hearts, etc.

The words contain,

First, An Exhortation to Belief, as appears by the Context, expressed here by
Hearing or Harkning to the Voice of God.

Secondly, A disswasion from Impenitency or Hardening our Hearts through
Unbelief, both which are in the third place, reinforced by the Authority of the
Holy Ghost, whose Exhortation this is, Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says, To
day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts.

From which words I shall discourse unto you on the Three following Particulars.

First, That Unbelief is one great Cause of Impenitency or Hardness of Heart.

Secondly, That Impenitency or Hardness of Heart is a Sin very provoking of
God, and admits of great Aggravations under the Gospel.

Thirdly, I shall endeavor to dissuade from this Sin, and reinforce the
Exhortation of the Holy Ghost, by laying before you the great and absolute
necessity of Repentance, and improving the present Time in order thereunto.

First, Unbelief is one great Cause of Impenitency, and Hardness of Heart.
Infidelity has been judged the root of all Sin, especially in Christians, for
did they really and heartily believe the great and important Truth of that
Religion they make profession of, wherein the motives and arguments to a good
Life are so very strong and powerful, and the threats and disswasives from Sin
and Vice are so convincing and amazing, it is scarce possible they should allow
themselves in those Vile and Sinful courses which are so rise among Christians,
or give such small hopes of their Repentance, as many do.

Did they believe in good earnest, there was a God, a God of that infinite
Power and Purity, hating of all Sin, and threatening to punish it in the most
severe and terrible manner, they would not dare to affront him, and fly in his
Face with their horrid Oaths and Curses, Blasphemies and Imprecations, as
frequently they do; they would not live without God in the World, nor cast off
all Fear and Reverence to his Holy Name and Righteous Laws. Did they believe in
Christ, as the Son of God and Savior of the World, they would not, with the
Jews murder and crucify him afresh by their often repeated Sins and Impieties,
nor do despite to the Spirit of Grace, by quenching his holy Motions, or
resisting the checks of their own Conscience. Did they believe a future
Judgment and Life to come, they would stand in greater awe thereof, and be
afraid to provoke him, that will be their Judge, and call them to a strict
account, for all the Actions of their Lives past, for all the neglects of his
Grace, contempt of his Mercy, and Defiance of his Judgment; they would not then
increase their Accounts, nor swell them up into such a frightful Mass of Guilt,
as will make them one day stand amazed at the Sight thereof. Did they believe
there was a Heaven for the reward of good Men, and a Hell for the Punishment of
the Bad, they durst not make so light of either; but become more Careful and
Sollicitous to secure the Happiness of the one, and avoid the unspeakable
Torments and Miseries of the other.

But all Men have not Faith, says our Savior, no, nor all Christians neither;
they do not heartily believe what they profess, for while they profess to know
God, in their Works they deny him, being abominable, disobedient, and unto
every good work Reprobate. Tit. 1.16.

The effect commonly points out the Cause, and the Action usually discovers the
Principle from whence it flows: and if so, we may justly suspect the greatest
part of the Christian World, to be void of that Faith they make Profession of,
and to believe as little of their Religion as they practice of it. Their Lives
and Actions bespeak many of them to be rather Atheists than Christians, and
downright Infidels than true Believers, for true Faith, or the through Belief
of the Doctrine of Christ, would influence their Lives in another guise manner,
than what is commonly observed in the World; it would make them live better, be
more shy of Sin, and cautious of offending; if therefore Men would examine
their Hearts and Souls, or search into the Root and bottom of their Actions,
they would find a great deal of Infidelity or Unbelief to lurk there, and that
Christ among all his Nominal Professors and Disciples has but a small number
of those that believe in him aright; or according to the Revelation which God
has given us of his Son, as long therefore as they have an evil Heart of
Unbelief it will make them to depart from the living God, Heb. 3.12.

Secondly, This Impenitency and Hardness, which is occasioned by Unbelief, is
very provoking to God, and admits of very great Aggravations under the Gospel,
because thereby Men shut their Eyes against the clearest and most manifest
Light, and harden their Hearts against the most importunate Calls and
Invitation to Repentance. The former times of Ignorance God winked at, says
the Apostle Acts 17.30. that is, God was willing to pass by and overlook in
agreat Measure, the Ignorance and Impenitence of the Heathen World in respect
of what he does now under the Gospel, by which he commands all men every where
to repent; so that Repentance is become a more express Command, and strictly
enjoined Duty, now than formerly; and therefore Impenitency is a Sin much more
inexcusable and provoking in Christians than it was in Heathens, considering
what Means and Motives the Gospel affords to Repentance, What helps and
assistances it does offer toward their Conversion and Amendment, which the
World was never made acquainted with before.

God who at sundry times and in diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets; has in these last days spoken to us by his Son, etc.
Heb. 1.1, 2. Him has he sent as a Physician to call and invite you to
Repentance, and through him forgiveness is preached and promised to all that in
good ^arnest repent of their Sins, and endeavor to amend and live better for
time to come. Acts 5.31. Him has God exhalted with his right Hand to be a
Prince and a Savior, for to give Repentance to Israel, and Forgiveness of Sins.

Nay, the drawing us to Repentance, in order to our Forgiveness is the main
Purpose and Design of the Gospel, and of all its Precepts and Commands, Threats
and Promises. Now for any Man who believes the Gospel, and understands the end
and Design thereof, to stop his Ears against so many gracious Calls and
Invitations, to harden his Heart against so much Love and Goodness, to remain
stupid and insensible under so many powerful Motives and Inducements as the
Gospel affords him in order to his Repentance must needs be a high Aggravation
of his Guilt, and mighty Provocation to God. It provoked him so far against the
Israelites, that he swore in his Wrath, they should never enter into his Rest,
Heb. 3.11.

Impenitency therefore has been always looked upon as a very great and
dangerous Sin, insomuch as some have thought it to be the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, of which our Savior says, it shall never be forgiven, either in this
World, or in the World to come, Matthew. 12.32. But however it is acknowledged by
all to be equally fatal and dangerous to the Souls of Men, for no Sin shall be
pardoned unless it be thoroughly repented of, and the longer any Man continues
in a sinful State, the less hopes he gives of his Repentance every day than
other, and consequently the further off from the hopes of Pardon.

To be sometimes overtaken with a Fault, or surpised against our Wills by a
Temptation, is the Frailty and Infirmity of humane Nature, and may draw forth
pity in God as well as Man, but wilfully to run or fall into a Sin, and when we
are once fallen, to lie and wallow in it, as Swine do in the Mire; when we have
done amiss not to be sorry for it, but to laugh at good Counsel and Advice, or
fly in the Face of those that shall admonish and reprove us for our Faults,
this is that which aggravates a Crime, and adds mightily to the Guilt of it,
whereby Sin becomes as the Apostle does express it, exceeding or out of Measure
Sinful. This is that which provokes the Almighty and stirs up his Anger and
Displeasure against his Creatures; this makes him to whet his Sword, and bend
his Bow, and prepare in readiness the Instruments of Death. Had Judas repented
thoroughly and in good earnest, we have reason to think his Condition had been
less desperate; for the same most precious Blood of the Crucified Jesus, was
able to atone for his Guilt that betrayed him, as well as for theirs, that
murdered and put him to Death; but we read of the Repentance of the one, and
not of the other, or if he repented, it was without hopes of Pardon and purpose
of Amendment, which therefore ended in Death.

Christ dyed for all, but only the Impenitent, for no Sin in it self is too
great for Pardon, if repented off and forsaken in time; but it is impenitency
which puts Venom into every Sin, and makes the Sting so deadly and Mortal, and
binds us over to everlasting Punishment, for except ye repent, ye shall all
Perish, says our Savior. Luke 13.3. and again, Repent and be converted, that
your Sins may be blotted out, says St. Peter. Acts 3.19.

Implying that they that do not Repent, shall certainly Perish, and no hopes to
have our Sins Pardoned and blotted out, unless we actually turn from them and
forsake them in time. In a word. Repentance is all along in the Gospel, made
the chief condition of Forgiveness, without which no Sin can be Remitted, no
hopes of Salvation given to the Sinner, whether living or dying.

Thirdly, Let me in the next place dissuade you from this great Sin of
Impenitency and Hardness of Heart, and thereby reinforce the exhortation of the
Holy Ghost in the Text; by showing you the great and absolute necessity of a
Timely Repentance, or of redeeming the present time to that purpose, and my
request is, that every one that reads this, would apply it home to his own Soul
and Conscience, and make a particular Application thereof for his own Use and
Benefit, in as serious a manner, as if God himself should address to him by
Name, as he did to Job, out of the Whirlwind, Job 38.1. or as Christ did to
Saul upon his Journey to Damascus, Acts, 9.4. For the exhortation is the Holy
Ghost's, and therefore to be looked upon as the Advice of God rather than Man.

First, Now my Advice in Conjunction with that of the Holy Ghost's in the Text
is this; That you would no longer stop your Ears nor harden your Hearts against
the Calls of God, or Voice of his Ministers, when they exhort you to repent and
turn from the evil of your ways, and to amend the wickedness of your Lives; but
that you would find some time to bethink your Selves of your Spiritual Estate
in order to that which is Eternal, and to secure the interest of your immortal
Souls, by making a timely provision for them; which can be done no other way
than by setting about the great and necessary work of Repentance and good
Living, which through Faith in the Merits of your Blessed Redeemer, is the only
thing that can secure the endless Happiness of another World, when you leave
this.

And be sure you endeavor it forthwith and out of Hand, even to Day, while it
is called to Day; do it in the time of your Health and Strength, while the most
Merciful God does afford you Time and Space to repent and amend your Lives in,
which you cannot hope to do, when Death begins to Approach, Strength to Fail,
and Life it self is ready to expire.

It Is my Duty to take all Occasions to remind you thereof, both in Season and
out of Season, and therefore I was willing to lay hold of this, to stir you up
to a serious and due regard of the great interest of your Souls, before it be
too late, and it is your Duty to receive the Truth in the Love thereof, and
follow that Counsel and Advice which is intended for your Good, and will put
you into a safe and happy Condition, both here and hereafter.

And let me add one thing farther, That Persons of all Ages and Degrees are
concerned in this Admonition, and it is their Interest to attend and become
obedient thereunto.

Young People ought as the Wise Man exhorts them, to remember their Creator in
the days of their Touth, Eccles. 12.1. and endeavor to be good betimes,
because their Life is as uncertain as that of others; for more die young than
live to be old, and being once arrived to years of Knowledge and Understanding,
they have an account to give to God as well as older People, and consequently
are capable of being Happy or Miserable for Ever.

Elder People ought to set about the amending and reforming of their Lives in
time of their Health and Strength, while they may most conveniently do it, as
being endu'd with Ripeness of Judgment and Understanding, and in some Measure
past the Follies and Vanities of Youth; it is time therefore for them to grow
serious and act like Men and Women in matters of Religiou's as well as Worldly
concerns.

Ancient People more especially ought to do this, before Sickness or Death does
sieze them, as having neglected it too long already, and therefore have less
time to do it in, than formerly they had. It concerns them then to be careful
to lay hold of the present Opportunity while it is yet before them; for if you
that are ancient and traveling apace to your Grave, will not grow serious and
make provision for Eternity, when, O when! will you do it; you are already
arrived at the 11th. hour of the day, have a care of deferring it to the 12th
and last, when the dark night of Death is ready to overtake you, whenas no Man
can work.

Once more: To this Duty of a timely and undelay'd Repentance, the Rich Man and
Man of Honor is obliged as well as the Poor and mean Man for as their Talents
are more; so^ their Accounts will be greater than that of their Inferiors; and
what through the snares of the World and Temptations of Riches, they are in a
great deal more danger to Perish and miscarry; whereupon the Salvation of Rich
and Great Men seems by that of our Savior to be abundance more hard and
difficult, than that of other Men, Matthew. 19.23. Verily I say unto you, a rich
Man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

The number of the Saved in general is like to be but few and small, Matthew.
7.14. and c. 22.14. but be sure that of Rich Men will be the least and fewest
of all others, because not many mighty, not many noble are called, 1. Cor.
1.26. and therefore it concerns them chiefly to watch and pray against those
many great Temptations, which a Rich and Prosperous Estate is wont to expose
and lay them open to, and to work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling,
because of the difficulty thereof, and to take time enough before hand, for
that purpose.

Secondly, Repentance delayed and put off from the present time to the Future,
is matter of great Hazard and Uncertainty, and it is mighty odds, if ever such a
one does repent at all.

A dying Bed proves commonly too late, and very improper for this great and
necessary Duty. Times of Sickness and Weakness are usually taken up with other
guise concerns, and attended with many inconvenient Circumstances, which render
Repentance very difficult at such a time, and at the best but doubtful and
uncertain.

Now the difficulties of such a Repentance may arise, either, First, From the
Violence or Malignity of the Disease, which possibly may be of that nature as
to sieze the Head, stupifie the Brain, and take away the use of the Senses and
Understanding, without which no Man is or can be capable of the least act of
Repentance, nor of doing any thing toward it; and in such a Case to repent is
plainly impossible. But, 2. the Difficulties of this Duty arise most commonly
from the nature of ill Habits and bad Customs, which are not easily broken, or
left off on a Sudden, nor yet new ones immediately planted and introduced in
the room thereof; for all Habits are produced by Acts, and therefore must be
weakened by degrees, and worn out by their Contraries, for which Reason it is
necessary that we accustom our selves to frequent Acts of Virtue, to wear out
the Habits of Vice; but then this requires constant Use and Practice, and some
considerable length of Time for that Purpose, both which are commonly wanting,
to those that are Sick and Weak, and more especially when they are Dying.

But to make the best of their Case, suppose they should be willing to set
about the Duty of repenting before they Die, and may be judged able to do
something toward it, something like it at such a time; yet no Man living can
judge of the Truth and Sincerity of such a Repentance, much less give the Sick
Person any great Hopes of Comfort thereupon. I am sure we have no warrant from
God so to do, there is no promise made to such late and dying Penitents. And to
give them any hopes of Pardon without a Promise to ground such hopes upon, is
not to comfort but flatter the Souls of Men, and deceive them to their utter
Ruin and Disappointment in the end.

For to give wicked Men at their Deaths any Hopes of Heaven, is to give the
Childrens Bread to Dogs, and prostitute the precious promises of the Gospel to
the encouragement of Sin and Vice, which is wholly contrary to the design
thereof.

Moreover we have a great deal more Reason to suspect than hope well of such
Men's Repentance, because we often find a great deal of Deceitfulness and
Hypocrisy in the most solemn profession of Grief and Sorrow, in the most
serious and repeated Promises of Amendment, that have been made by sick
Persons, when under the apprehensions of Death, and the Terrors of an awakned
Conscience; for it is usual for such Penitents upon their Recovery, to forget
all that ever they Promised to Almighty God, and to grow rather worse than
better. We meet with too many instances daily for to confirm us in the belief
of this Truth, and I am sorry to think that there should be any among you of
this Parish to make up the Number; some of whom I have visited in their
Sickness, been witness to their Vows and Promises solemnly made to God of new
and better Obedience, who yet have started aside like a broken Bow, and behaved
themselves falsely in God's Covenant, Psalm 78.37, 57.

Such I do earnestly desire, and in the name of God seriously charge to
remember from whence they are fallen, to call to mind the many Vows and
Promises made to God in the time of their Trouble and Distress, and to make
Conscience of the Performance thereof, as considering that the bitterness of
Death is not yet past, and they know not how soon God may reduce them to the
like or worse Circumstances, lay his Hand more heavy upon them, and fill their
Souls with far greater Horror and Amazement in the remembrance of their Vile
Hypocrisy, and abominable Dissimulation: And how then can they hope, God
should hear their Cries and accept their Vows, who have been already so false
and treacherous to their Word and Promise; the last Estate of such Men and
Women, it is to be feared, will be worse than their First, Luke 11.26.

Thirdly, Consider further, you that are apt to put off the thoughts of Death,
and of Repentance with it, if you cannot endure the serious thoughts of dying
now, how will you be able to bear up under the near Approaches and feeling
Apprehensions thereof, when Death shall overtake and sieze you in good earnest,
and there shall be no hopes to escape or avoid it, what, Oh! what will you then
do?

The Apprehensions of Death to a sick Man are very Awful and Terrible, but much
more so to one that finds himself unprovided for it, to one that is unfit to
give up his accounts to God, or appear with Comfort before his Great and
Dreadful Tribunal.

If the great and necessary duties of Repentance and Amendment, Mortification
and Self denial be judged so hard and troublesome to you now, do you think the
Trouble and Difficulties thereof will wear off and grow less by your delays, or
shall you be better able to master or overcome them, when you shall want both
Time and Strength to go through with them.

He that thinks seriously of Death and a future Judgment to ensue thereupon,
methinks cannot be so much forsaken of his own Sense and Reason, as not to
judge it necessary to make the best and most timely preparation for them that
he can, and to use all the helps and assistances of Religion for that end and
purpose.

For God's Sake, Sirs, consider of these things in time, and bethink your
Selves in good earnest before the Evil days come, and the Years draw nigh,
wherein you shall say, I have no pleasure in them. Eccles. 12.1. and let the
Advice of the Holy Ghost in the Text prevail with you, though mine cannot. To
day, if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts.

Remember your immortal Souls are in danger every hour, every Moment that you
live in any known wilful Sin, and refuse to repent of it: Life is short, frail,
and uncertain, Eternity is at Hand and hastens upon you apace; Heaven and Hell
are at the end of your Lives, and stand ready to receive you according as you
have fitted and prepared your Selves either for the one or for the other; those
Spirits which you carry in your Bosoms must live for ever; for ever, I say, in
perpetual Bliss or endless Woe, and we have all but a little time before us to
secure our Eternal State in, therefore be sure to find time to endeavor and
set about it; whatever you neglect, do not neglect the things that belong to
your Everlasting Peace; let not the Cares, the Business, and the Troubles of
the World, much less the vain and foolish Pleasures and Pastimes thereof
misimploy your time, and take you off from this one thing needful and most
necessary.

You that are Poor and Mean in the World ought to do this; you ought to find
some time to make Provision for your Souls as well as for your Bodies, and to
labor as diligently for the Bread of Life, as for the Meat that Perishes; for
according to the Apostle, Meat is for the Belly, and the Belly for Meat, but
God will destroy both it and them; whereas the Bread of Life which comes down
from Heaven is able to nourish your Souls unto Eternal Life, so as never to
hunger or thirst more. Alas! What signifies it for you to drudge and toil, and
take pains to maintain your Bodies, and in the end to lose your Souls, for want
of setting apart some time, and bestowing some care upon them.

But especially you that are above the wants and necessities of the World, and
have so much time and leisure lying on your Hands, that you complain thereof,
and know not well how to get rid of it, or pass it away, except it be by
Drinking or Gaming, by going to Plays, and running into bad Company to divert
your selves; such as you, be sure, will be Inexcusable before God, if instead
of laying hold of the present Opportunity, to make ready your Accounts against
the Judgment of the great Day, you shall swell and increase them, by a Life of
Sloth and Vanity, Luxury and Profaneness.

To such as you therefore, I address my self, not as the Rich and Great ones of
the World, for as such commonly you are apt to Despise our Counsel and think
your selves above Reproof; but as Frail, Dying, Mortal Men, who must shortly
Die as well as others, have your Dust mingled with that of the meanest, and all
your Pride and Greatness, Niceness and Delicacy converted into Stench and
Rottenness, and the Dishonours of the Grave; and moreover as having many more
Talents to be accountable for, than your Poor and Indigent Neighbors.

Is not the Day of your Death as certain as that of your Birth or present Life;
and though you are loath to think of Dying, and willing to put off the Evil Day
far from you as a melancholy prospect, and Unwelcome entertainment; as a
Subject that is apt to damp your Mirth, and unsuitable to your brisk and gay
humors: Yet consider the putting off the thoughts of Death will not prevent
its Approach, or make it less Terrible when it comes; nay, quite otherwise, it
will make the surprise thereof more dreadful and amazing, and render you so
much the more unfit to grapple, and encounter with the King of Terrors,
Ecclesiasticus, 41.1. O Death how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man
that lives at rest in his possessions, unto the man that has nothing to vex
him, and that has prosperity in all things; yea, unto him that is yet able to
receive meat. The more unwilling you have been to think of, and prepare for
Death now, the more astonishing will the approach of it be then, and fill you
with dreadful Agonies and Convulsions of Soul beyond what I am able to express,
or it is possible for you to conceive at present.

Sometimes the Despondencies and Misgivings of heart, which have siez'd Good
men at their Death, have been very great and apt to fill them with Fears and
Apprehensions: O how Frightful and Intolerable then must those Horrors and
Confusions be, which the Consciences of wicked men usually feel at the approach
of Death: Conscience, I say, when thoroughly rowz'd and awakened in the sense of
their former Guilt and approaching Punishment: the Anguish thereof in some Men
and Women has been so great that they have thought themselves in Hell already,
and that their condition could not well be worse in the very Place of Torments.

Therefore, Sirs, think often, think seriously of these things before hand;
call to mind your latter End and prepare for it in good earnest before it
comes, and that may be one way to prevent the bitterness of Death, and take
away the Sting of it.

For without a timely Repentance, and Preparation for it, it is not a saying,
God be merciful to me a Sinner, Luke 13.25. or Lord, Lord, open unto us, Matthew.
7.21. that will gain us admittance into the Kingdom of Heaven: It Is not a
little outward Grief, or forced Sorrow that can supply the want of Repentance,
or be accepted by God in the stead thereof: No, no, To Repent is to be so
heartily Troubled and Sorry for your Sins, as to grow out of Love with them,
and to Resolve immediately to Leave and Forsake them; to Repent is to Amend and
Reform whatever you see amiss in your selves; it is to become Wiser and Better
for the future, and to lead your Lives according to the Directions of the
Gospel, and Precepts of your most Holy Religion: And he that does not endeavor
to do this in good earnest, knows not what true Repentance means; he is a
stranger to the Grace of God, and is not yet arrived to the condition of Life,
or terms of Salvation, and consequently not in a capacity of being saved.

Now we cannot but think, (and therefore ought to let you know as much) that it
will be too late to do this, when you are Sick and Dying; you will want time
and opportunity for it, when life is drawing to an end, and Death with all his
Terrors and Affrightments is hastening toward you. O then, what would you give
for a little of that Health and Strength which you have formerly misspent in Sin
and Folly, in gratifying the lusts of the Flesh, in complying with the Pride
and Vanity of the World, and running your selves into the Snares and
Temptations of the Devil; what would you not do to gain a little more of that
time and leisure to go through with your Repentance and Preparations for
Eternity, which you have wretchedly abused and thrown away upon your Excesses
and Debaucheries, upon your Lusts and Pleasures, in a Vain, Sinful, and
Unprofitable manner; what Fruit will you then have of those things, whereof you
will be ashamed? For the end of those things is Death. Romans 6.21.

6. Then you will see, that the least hour of your misspent time will be worth
more than a whole Age of Folly and Vanity; you will wish then (whatever you may
think of it now) that the greater Portions of your life had been spent in the
Closet at your Private Prayers, or at Church in the Public Worship and Service
of God, or in seeking and finding out opportunities of doing Good, rather than
in Dressing and going Fine, in Gaming and Playing, in Idle and Impertinent
Visists, in Censorious and unprofitable Conversation, which engrosses so much
of the time of our People of Quality, both Men and Women, many of whom are
mightily guilty this way, and are observed to spend their time the vainest of
all others: Nay, some among them that are pleased to take up a show and
Profession of Religion, give us too much reason to fear, it is rather for Custom
and Fashion sake, than out of Conscience, because so very few are known to
become any whit the better or more serious upon that account: And for my part,
I do not see how it is possible to reconcile the strictness of Religion and a
Holy Life (to which the greatest stand obliged as well as the meanest) with
those undue Liberties, which our People of Quality do commonly take in many
things, and particularly in the instances before mentioned.

O my God! What account will they be able to give another day; when all those
Helps and Advantages both of Time and Leisure, Riches and Honor, Interest and
Authority, wherewith they might do a great deal of good to themselves and
others, and become Exemplary to their Inferiors, shall yet be abused and
misimploy'd in the worst manner that can be, and to become matter of public
Scandal and Offense.

Is this to answer the end of their coming into the World, or the way to
prepare themselves for a happy Exit or departure out of it? Is this to live
like Christians, or to spend their time like those that must be accountable to
God for it?

But Death, when it comes will open their Eyes, though they shut them now, and
convince them of their error and mistake, though we cannot: But then it may be
too late and out of their power to retreive or amend it. Remember you can never
be too fit to die, nor too careful and sollicitous in preparing your selves for
it; because it is a thing that can be done but once, and Eternity depends upon
the Well-doing of it.

He then that shall deferr his Preparations for Eternity, till he comes to be
sick unto Death, and ready to go out of the World, hoping that may be time
enough for it, will find himself very unfit for so great a Work, and mightily
deceived and disappointed of his Hope. For Experience tells us, whatever is
done in have, is commonly done by halves and hurried up in a slight and
imperfect manner; many things are wont to be forgotten and over looked at such a
time; and therefore the Errors and Mistakes, the Omissions and Oversights of a
Repentance hudled up in have when we come to die, must needs be many and great;
the least whereof may prove Fatal and undo us for ever.

It Is Wisdom therefore to set about it now, while time and opportunity are
before you; while God offers you his Grace, and stretches forth the Arms of his
Mercy to welcome and embrace you, as the Father did the Prodigal Son upon his
Repentance and Return.

Do it to day, while it is called to day, for you know not what a day may bring
forth, Prove. 27.1. or what danger you may run to all Eternity by the least
delay: A day, an hour, nay a few Moments may pass you out of this life into the
Regions of the shadow of Death, and land you upon the Confines of the other
World, and make your condition Desperate, and for ever Hopeless.

Sect. To this Duty of the Text be ye further persuaded from this Spectacle of
Mortality now before you, viz. That of a strong and lusty Young Man cut off in
the midst of his days, who, before he was seized with his Distemper, was as
likely to live as any of you all.

Sect. As to the Life and Conversation of the Deceased, it is too well known
already, and therefore I shall not meddle with it; but with respect to what was
most remarkable in his Sickness, I think my self obliged to take notice of, and
advise these two things,

First, That you would Repent of and avoid those sins, which in his sickness he
publicly owned himself guilty of, and professed to be sorry for; and what they
were, I suppose is well known to many here, specially to such as were his usual
Companions and Associates.

And therefore to such as you, I shall more particularly apply my self in this
Discourse, for whose Sakes it was chiefly designed at first.

Many great Sins and wilful neglects with respect to God and Religion, he
openly lamented and bewailed, during his long and tedious Sickness, which yet
several others among you are taken Notice to be guilty of, as well as he, and
therefore you have as much reason to repent of them, as he had, and if you do
it not now, you may do it hereafter with less hopes and to less purpose.

Remember those Sins that troubled him, when Sick and Dying ought to trouble
you that are now alive and in Health; those neglects of Religion and omissions
of Duty, which sat so heavy upon his Soul, may fit heavy on yours, and will do
so too, when once God comes to set those things home upon your Spirits, and to
awaken your Consciences by Sickness, Death, or any other remarkable Affliction.

How light soever you may make of Sin now, the weight of it will be intolerable
then, and without timely Repentance and amendment sink you down to the
bottomless Pit of Destruction.

The Remembrance of a wicked and ill spent Life, will fill you with Horror and
Amazement, when God shall come to write bitter things against you, and make you
to possess your former Iniquities.

The Spirit of a Man may hear his Infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who can
bear? Prove. It Is possible we may be enabled upon several accounts, to bear up
under the one, whereas nothing will be able to support us under the other; but
Alas! When the Spirit shall be wounded with Guilt, and the Body at the same
time weak and languishing with Pains and Sickness, how will it be possible then
to bear up under both? When God at such a time shall frown and look Angry,
threaten and hide his Face, who then can abide, who will be able to speak
Peace; this can be no other than the Gate of Hell, and the beginning of its
Torments.

Let the deceased be a Warning and Example to you, God was pleased to punish
him by a long and lingering Sickness, by a faint, restless, and uneasy
Distemper; none of us can tell what he suffered and endured all that while, but
then at the same time his Soul was filled with Grief and Trouble, with Sorrow
and Remorse in the Remembrance of his Sins past, (and better so than otherwise,
better be troubled for Sin, than go out of the World stupid and hardened without
any Sense thereof) and after all cut off in the midst of his days, by a severe,
yet righteous Dispensation of the Divine Providence, and how far God has
accepted his Sighs and Tears, we do not know, for secret things belong to God,
therefore to God we must leave him; our Business is not to judge preremptorily
concerning the Dead, but to warn and caution the Living.

Remember therefore there is none of you all, how brisk and gay soever you may
be in your Humors, how Confident and secure at present in your Sins, how
stubborn and hardened against Reproof, but Sickness and Death will be able to
tame and humble you, to pull down the Pride and Confidence of your Spirits. and
fill you with Anguish and Bitterness of Soul in the thoughts of what you have
deserved, and therefore may justly expect and Fear.

Secondly, Do not delay your Repentance to Sickness or Death, as he did,
because that is as you have heard, the most unseasonable and inconvenient time
to set about it. The deceased found it so, and did in effect acknowledge as
much, when he wished he might live his Life over again, that he might spend and
employ it better.

Now what God has denied him, he has in a great measure granted you; all of
you at present are well in Health, and alive before God this Day, but how long
you may continue so, none can tell. You know not how soon God may lay his Hand
upon you by Death or Sickness, and cut off the Thread of your Lives
unexpectedly to what you now hope for; and if your Repentance is not begun
before that time, I fear you will be very unfit to set about it then.

Alas, if Repentance is necessary when we are Sick or Dying, then it is
necessary now, it is necessary every Hour and Moment of our Lives, because we
are Dying daily, and we know not how soon the Fatal stroke may be given, we are
daily hastening to the Grave, and we know not how soon our Feet may stumble on
the dark Mountains, and if it is necessary to repent before we dye, then it is
the wisest course we can take to set about it in time, while God does continue
to us Life and Health, which is the fittest Opportunity for its performance,
and if once lost or suffered to slip from us, may never return more, we may
never meet with the like again, and then it will be in vain to recall misspent
time, or wish we might live our Lives over again, for time past can never be
recalled, the loss of it will be irrecoverable; all that we can do then is to
bewail that which we can never repair, and to lament our Folly when 'twill be
too late to grow wiser by it.

If you will not learn and take warning by the Example of the Deceased, you
know not how soon God may make you a warning and Example to others, reduce you
into as bad or worse Circumstances than he was in, and be forced to acknowledge
the Justice of God in all that befall you, as he did.

You have often seen and heard, how the Judgments of God have overtaken, both
afar of and nearer hand, many bold and daring Offenders, sinners every whit as
Confident and Presuming as any of you now present, and made them Examples of
his just Anger and Displeasure against sin; and why then should you think to
escape more than they? Though you are not Punished yet, does it therefore follow
you never shall? Is not the same Great and Holy God able to punish you, as he
has done them and many others; and has he not threatened to do it too? Why
than should you think your selves more safe and secure from danger then they
were, as long as you take so little care to prevent and avoid it?

Go too, therefore, ye hardened and impenitent Wretches, ye mockers and deriders
of all that is good and serious, ye that are apt to tempt and encourage one
another in an evil way; take heed you do not provoke God to make you the next
instance of his fierce Anger and Indignation; take heed you do not draw down
the Wrath and Vengeance of Heaven upon your heads, and that sooner than now you
think for. For truth it self has told us, that great Plagues remain for the
ungodly, Psalm. 32.10. That to God the Lord belong the issues of Death; but God
will wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a one as goes
on still in his Wickedness. Psalm. 68.20, 21. When they shall say Peace and
Safety, then sudden Destruction shall come upon them, as Travail upon a Woman
with Child, and they shall not escape, 1. These. 5.3. But he that being often
reproved does harden his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed and that without
Remedy, Prove. 29.1.

After all this, can ye imagine, that the Patience of God, which hitherto has
been so forbearing and long-suffering, will always wait in vain, and suffer his
goodness to be continually affronted and despised by the vilest of his
Creatures? No reason to think that Obstinacy and Impenitency shall always go
unpunisht; for you have but your time, and others have had theirs before you,
who now reap the fruit of their Folly, and find to their Grief and Sorrow, what
an evil and bitter thing it is, for to sin against God.

Or suppose punishment should be delayed and no remarkable Judgment should
overtake you in this life; but you die in as stupid and secure a manner, as now
you live: Yet the less you are punished here, the more reason you have to fear
that God does but reserve you for greater punishment and vengeance hereafter.
For the Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptation; but to reserve
the wicked to the day of Judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord has made
all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of Evil, Prove. 16.4.
And again, the wicked is reserved to the day of Destruction; they shall be
brought forth to the day of Wrath. Job, 21.30.

Therefore, Sirs, think often of these things, and weigh them well in your
Minds, for as Moses told the Israelites, it is for your Life, for the Life of
your precious and immortal Souls, which are in danger to be lost, and the loss
so great as can never be recompensed by a whole Life of Sin and Pleasure, much
less by those Pleasures, that last but for a moment, and die away in the
Enjoyment of them. I shall conclude all with those Remarkable words of the Son
of Sirach, to this purpose.

Follow not thine own Mind, and thy Strength to walk in the ways of thy Heart.
Say not, who shall control me for my Works? for the Lord will surely revenge
thy Pride. Say not his Mercy is great, he will be pacified for the multitude of
my Sins, for Mercy and Wrath come from him, and his indignation rests upon
Sinners. Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to
day; for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy Security
thou shall be destroyed, and Perish in the day of Vengeance, Eccles. 5.2, 3, 6,
7. Consider this all ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver, Psalm 50.22.
FINIS.

