IMPRIMATUR,

R A. BARKER.
August 24. 1691.
THE NECESSITY OF Serious Consideration, AND SPEEDY REPENTANCE, As the only WAY
to be SAFE BOTH LIVING and DYING.

By CLEMENT ELIS, M. A. Rector of Kirkby in Nottinghamshire.

Psalm 119.59, 60. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies.

I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by William Rogers at the Sun over against
St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, and Thomas Elis in Mansfield. 1691.

TO MY CHILDREN.
My dear Children,
THO this Plain Discourse of The Necessity of SERIOUS CONSIDERATION and SPEEDY
REPENTANCE, seem to me very needful to many, and is therefore published, that
all who need it, and please to make use of it, may have by them a friendly
Rememebrancer to put them in mind to take all due care of themselves: Yet
because of the special Love and Care I ought to have for you, as I am your
Father, I do in a more special manner commend it to you, as the very best
Advice I am able to give you; and seeing my life cannot now be much longer, it
may be the last.

If I have expected from you the Duty of Obedient Children, it has been always
more for your sakes than mine own; that you might be sharers in that special
Promise which St. Paul tells you belongs to them that Honor their Father and
Mother, Ephesians. 6.2, 3. And I shall always reckon, that you very fully pay all
that Honor which you owe to me, so long as I see you make it your chief
business to fear God, and keep his Commandments, which is your whole Duty,
Eccl. 2.13. Honor always your Father which is in Heaven; and be sure you can
do no greater Honor than that to your Parents upon Earth. And as you may
justly expect from me the Love and Care of a Father; so you ought to think,
that I never better express either of them toward you, than when, as the same
St. Paul has commanded me, I endeavor to bring you up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, v. 4. For whatever else God shall enable me to do for
you, in this I take care at once both of your Souls and Bodies; Godliness
having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

I dare not be confident, that I have not much failed you in this Duty of a
Father, whilst you were all at home with me, and under my eye. Neither can I
now hope to have you again much with me whilst I live, or indeed that I shall
live much longer to take any care at all of you. The only way therefore that is
now left me, either to make you amends for such neglects of you, as I may have
been at any time guilty of; or to testify my earnest desire, that you may be
always happy in the Service, and under the Blessing of Almighty God, the
FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST, to whom you were in your Baptism dedicated; is
first, daily so long as I live to pray for his Grace to guide and govern you in
the ways of Truth and Holiness to Eternal Life; and then to put into your hands
the substance of all those pious Instructions which I could ever be able to
give you, were we to live here together to the World's end.

This, if I mistake not, I have already in some good measure done in three
small Books, viz. CHRISTIANITY in SHORT; the SCRIPTURE-CATECHISM, and the
COMMUNICANT'S GUIDE. If you be perfect in these, you will understand reasonably
well both what you are to believe, do, desire, and hope for; and will be able
to reap more benefit by the reading of other more excellent Books, and chiefly
that Book of books, the BOOK of GOD, which I do charge you with all the
Authority of a Father, to read so long as you live, when not unavoidably
hindered (some part of it daily); and that with the greatest seriousness and
attention of mind, with the devoutest Reverence to the Great GOD, whose Word it
is, and with most earnest Prayers to Him, to enlighten your understandings by
it, and to conform your Wills wholly unto it.

Consider well all that you read or hear, and speedily put in practice all that
is your Duty to do, and cast off every Sin without delay; As this Discourse
will, I hope, convince you, it is altogether necessary for you to do. Having
therein said so much to you and others jointly, I shall not need to say much
more now to you alone. Only let me advise you to bear this always in
remembrance, That if you will be saved, it must be by obeying the Gospel of
JESUS CHRIST, our only Savior, which you cannot do, but by denying your
selves, by doing his will and not your own; following his Rules, and not the
Customs and Fashions of the Persons, great or small, amongst whom you live. Our
Wills are corrupt and perverse, and the Multitude is always in the broad way to
Destruction. You have need of much Christian courage to save your selves from
this untoward Generation. O, as you love God and your selves, be neither
ashamed nor afraid to live as the few do, which are in the narrow way to Life.
Stoutly resolve to be as indifferent for the World, as you see many zealous for
it; and as zealous for God and Heaven, as you see others regardless of them.
Pray fervently for strength to do as you resolve; and then I doubt not, but you
will be a comfort to me whilst I live, and an Honor to me when I am dead; and
when you are dead too, we shall all live together again in the Eternal Joys of
Heaven, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord. Amen.

THE NECESSITY OF Serious Consideration.
The INTRODUCTION.
THAT Exhortation which St. Peter has given unto Christians, 2 Pet. 1.10. To
give diligence to make their calling and election sure, must needs appear at
the very first hearing of it, so very reasonable, and so much for our Advantage
every way, that one would think it should be most readily embraced, and
immediately put in practice by every one that loves himself. Can any one, who
has any love for himself (as who has not in some sense or other?) rest
himself content and well satisfied, so long as he apprehends himself to be in
an unsafe and dangerous Condition, and knows a way how to come out of it? Is it
not natural to all Men in such a Case to bestir themselves, and to seek out
diligently all the means of safety, and never to cease from so doing, till they
think themselves as sure as Men can be, that all the danger is over; and that
they need no longer to fear, either to lose the good they love, or to suffer
the Evil they abhor? Yes, it is natural enough to us all, to use as much, and
oftentimes a great deal more diligence, than it is either needful or fit for us
to use, that we may secure the safety of our Bodies, and even of the least
valuable parts of our Estates in this World; which yet it is not in our power
to do, tho we do all that ever we can to that purpose. But alas! we are so far
from using any such diligence in endeavoring to make sure to our selves our
Eternal Happiness, (tho we may be always as sure, that we shall have power to
do this, as we are that we sincerely endeavor it) that we hardly once
consider, that we are in any danger of losing it.

Surely it will be granted by all, That a blessed Life for ever in Heaven,
after this very short and very troublesome Life on Earth shall be at an end, is
a very desirable thing; and such as one cannot but desire, when he has well
considered, That there it may be had, but here it cannot. And though there may be
some, who do not yet believe, that such a life of eternal Blessedness is to be
had in Heaven after Death; yet I dare say, that even these, seeing they know
they must shortly die, could heartily wish it might be so. I cannot easily be
persuaded to think, that any one can hate Life for any thing else but the
troubles and the miseries which he finds it cannot be without: And therefore I
believe, that no Man would willingly die, and be no more for ever, supposing it
possible that he may live again for ever without any such troubles or miseries.
Now every one knows, that he must die, and that it cannot be long ere he must
live no more here; and therefore no Man can choose but wish, that, if it be
possible, he may live again: Especially if he may be sure, both to live a happy
life, and to die no more.

And blessed for ever be our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who has given us assurance,
that there is such a Life prepared for all that are his faithful followers! He
has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to light through
the Gospel, 2 Timothy I. 10. And being Himself the way, the truth, and the life,
Joh. XIV. 6. has pointed out unto us the narrow way which leads unto life,
Mat. VII 14. And this is no other but the way of God's Commandments, Rev. XXII.
14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the
tree of life. Whosoever therefore desires an eternal blessed Life after Death,
and has a mind to make it sure unto himself, must make haste to get into this
way, and be very careful to keep it so long as he lives. He must get into this
way, because there is no other way to Life; and he must make haste to get into
it, because Death follows him every day at his Heels* and he knows not how soon
it will be upon him; and if he get not into the way of Life before it overtakes
him, he must die and be miserable for ever. And he must be sure to keep it all
the days of his present Life, because whenever he goes out of it, he is in the
way to eternal Death.

The time of this present Life (how short soever it may be) is to be looked
upon as the only time of making an eternal Life sure unto us. If we let this
time pass over us before we are prepared for that Eternity, it is like to prove
unto us an Eternity of Sorrows. Now are we traveling toward God our Happiness,
and those heavenly Mansions, which the Eternal Son of God, and our only Savior
is gone before to prepare for us; and where we hope to be for ever with the
Lord. Whilst we live, we are but in the way, and not at home in our Country:
Here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come, Heb. XIII. 14. And
the same blessed JESUS, who has opened the Gate of Life unto us by his own
Death and Resurrection, and is our only sure Guide unto it, has acquainted us
with two ways, and no more, that we can walk in whilst here we live; the broad
way to Destruction, wherein go the Multitude; and the narrow way to Life,
wherein but few walk: If then we step out of the one way, we must needs be in
the other; for there is no middle Path to be found, wherein we may walk, and
neither go to Life nor Destraction. The broad way is that of Men's Lusts,
wherein there is Latitude enough; and the narrow way is the way of God's
Commandments; and a Man must be very strict and upright in his walking therein,
and must not swerve either to the Right Hand or to the Left, if he have a mind
to be safe.

It seems (I must needs say) one of the strangest things in the World to me,
that we all should be so exceedingly concerned, as at every turn we show our
selves to be, about our living safely and comfortably in this present World; so
that we cannot hear the least ill news, but it puts us quite out of humor; and
we are all in fears what will become of us: And yet so very few amongst us seem
to have any concernment at all upon them, what shall become of them when they
die! I confess, if Men could be any way assured, that there is nothing at all
to be expected after Death, I should the less wonder, that their whole concern
should be for this Life; because I know nothing else that they should be
concerned for. But seeing it is an impossible thing, that any one should be
assured of that; and seeing we have all the assurance that Men can have of the
contrary, to wit, That an endless state of either Happiness or Misery shall
follow our short life here; what an unaccountable madness seems this to be,
which has so generally possessed us, to be so concerned, how we shall fare for
a few Days here, and altogether as regardless (for so the most of us seem to
be) how it shall go with us for evermore! Whence can this proceed, but from
inconsideration, or want of thinking on things as Men should do? If we did
really think in earnest, what we are, whence we came, what we have here to do,
how soon we may and must go hence; whither we are to go, and what shall finally
become of us; we must needs become a little more serious and provident both,
than now we are; and how little assurance soever we had of what is to come, we
would be concerned a little, so to behave our selves in this World, as we might
go out of it with this Comfort at least, That if we can be sure of no good
after Death, yet we should not need to fear any evil. Any one that is wise, if
he have no hopes to he Happy, would yet take a course to be Safe. And yet (God
knows!) the generality of People are far short of this Wisdom. All we seem to
mind, is some little thing that we take pleasure in for the present; and all
our care is, not to lose that, whatever it be, so long as we live. But we so
little think of what either shall be, or may be after Death; yea, and (what is
stranger, considering we know it so well) we so little think, that we are every
moment stepping toward the Grave, and that the next step we take, for ought we
know, may be into it; that Death surpriseth most of us, when ever it comes; and
how slowly soever, through God's wonderful forbearance, it come; yet it steals
upon us unaware, and takes us unprepared, and so proves (what we are
well-taught to pray against) a sudden Death to most of us; and if there be any
thing worse than another after Death (as certainly there is both a better and a
worse than any thing can be in this World) we are sure of it. To make us a
little more sensible of this great folly, and to show us what course we are to
take, if we have any mind to do our selves good, or have no mind to make our
selves miserable for ever, is the design of this Discourse. And I shall divide
it into Two Parts. In the former of which I shall show the Necessity of a
Serious Consideration, and give some few Directions for it. In the later shall
be shown the Danger of Delaying our Repentance, and an Exhortation given to
make haste to live well, that we may be always ready to die well; and so make
sure of Life Eternal.

PART I. OF CONSIDERATION.
HE that would make sure of eternal Life, and escape everlasting Torments, must
take care to do it in this World, before he be called out of it by Death: For
the time of this present Life is the only time which God has given us to
prepare our selves for Eternity; and as we behave our selves now, so must we
expect to fare for ever. And the best course that we can be directed to take,
that we may be sure of Eternal Blessedness, is the same which David tells us he
took, Psalm CXIX. 59, 60. in these words: I thought on my ways, and turned my
feet unto thy testimonies: I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy
commandments. Where we are to observe both what he did, and what he did not.

1. That which he did was this: First, He thought on his ways. He entered into
a Serious Consideration of his own course of Life, that he might understand
thereby, what his present State and Condition was; and whether such a Life was
agreeable to the Law of God or no; and consequently, whether it would bring him
to Happiness or Misery. And, Secondly, Having considered this well, He turned
his feet unto God's Testimonies; and he made haste to keep his Commandments.
Whatsoever he found amiss in himself, he immediately corrected it by a speedy
Repentance, regulating his whole Conversation henceforward by the right Rule
thereof* the Commandments of God.

2. That which he did not, was this: He delayed not to keep God's Commandments.
Or, as some render it, he was not troubled, or disturbed in mind about it; or
he had no dispute within himself, Whether he should, or he should not; or
whether he should do it just now, or stay till some other time; but without any
delay, or driving it off from day to day, or so much as one moment longer, he
presently set himself to the keeping of God's Commandments. He did not, as
Felix did, Acts XXIV. 25. who when he had heard St. Paul reasoning of
Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, was so far concerned, as that
he fell a trembling; but yet put off the farther consideration of what he had
then heard, to a more convenient time: Go thy way, says he, for this time;
when I have a more convenient season, I will call for thee. A season which, as
far as we know, he never found. David was wiser for himself than so: He had not
only considered his ways, but also the uncertainty of his life. He knew that he
had not time at his command, he could not make it stay his leisure; therefore
he took it whilst it was there; considering withal, that the time present is
always the most convenient season for doing that, which if it be not done
before he die, he must perish everlastingly.

We have these two things then in this good Example to imitate. 1. His
Consideration. 2. His Reformation. The later of these is the sure way to God
and Blessedness; but we are never like to come into it, but by the former. And
therefore I shall commend this, in the first place, to all that have a desire
to be safe. Concerning Consideration, I shall show, 1. What it is. 2. What are
the Evils of Inconsideration. 3. What chiefly causes the neglect of it. 4.
What are the things we should consider.

SECT. I. What Consideration is.
DEsigning this Discourse principally for the less-understanding sort of
People, I find it necessary, in the first place, to tell them, what is meant by
Consideration. And, I suppose, such Persons will best understand me, when I
say, That to consider a thing, is very seriously to think of it. I say, it is
to think of it very seriously, as much as the thing deserves to be thought of.
To understand this more perfectly, let us enquire into two things.

1. What kind of things they are which deserves our serious thinking on. 2.
What kind of thinking it is that deserves the name of Consideration.
1. What kind of things they are which deserve our serious thinking on. It is
not every thing that deserves to have a Man's serious Thoughts, or which can be
thought worthy of his Care, and fit for him to busy his Head much about. But
the things which a Man should seriously think upon, are such things, as we are
wont to call considerable things; matters of some weight, and of some
concernment to him one way or other; and especially such as are of greatest
concernment. They should be such as it may do one some good to think on; and
the serious thinking of which, may make him the Wiser, the Better, or the
Happier. There are some things of so little worth or concernment to us, that
they are not worth much thinking on; and there are some things so
unintelligible to us, that it is to no purpose to think much of them; and there
are some things that are so wholly above our power of ordering, that it can no
way avail us to be much concerned in our Thoughts about them. But there are,
besides these, things, whereof if we do not think much, we must needs be Fools,
or Wicked, or Miserable; and these ought to be much and seriously thought on.
Yet such is the vanity of our Minds, that we are aptest to trouble our Heads
most about those things, the much thinking whereof brings us nothing but
trouble and vexation. How happy were it for us, if we could never think of many
of those things, which our Thoughts do usually run most upon! And in thinking
whereof we waste the far greater part of our Life, either to little, or to a
bad purpose! It would be our great ease, and advantage too, to think no more on
these things, than only to consider that they deserve not, and therefore should
not have our serious Thoughts.

As any thing is of more or less use and concernment to us; as it may more or
less conduce to make us Wise, or Good, or Happy; as the thoughts of it may more
or less help us to live as we ought to do, in our duty to God or Man in this
life, or to come to Eternal Life when we go out of this; so is it more or less
to be seriously thought on. And in like manner, whatever things may make us
worse or more miserable, and may be hindrances and obstructors either of our
duty or happiness, are accordingly to the hurt more or less which they may do
us, to be more or less made the Objects of our serious Thoughts: So that
whatever things they be, that may not be either useful or hurtful to us, and
the more or less so, as we either do, or do not think upon them, are to be
looked on as things not at all considerable; and therefore no more to be
thought on, than must needs be, when they come into our Heads whether we will
or no; and then are they to be thought on with all indifferency imaginable.

The things then that are of concernment to us, and for that considerable, are
all such as we may be better or worse for, such as God may be honored or
dishonored by; such as may help or hinder us to be good, and to do good in
this World; or may prepare or unfit us for everlasting Blessedness. Hence the
concerns of the Soul are more to be thought on than the concerns of the Body;
Public concerns more than Private, relating to this World only; Spiritual and
Heavenly things more than things Carnal and Earthly; Eternal concerns more than
Temporary; and God, who is infinitely above all, and whose both Honor and
Favor is of nearer concernment to us than all things, is to be thought on more
than all things. Such are the things which most deserve our serious thinking on.

2. Let us now see, what kind of thinking it is, that can deserve the name of
Consideration. Or, how are these considerable things to be thought upon so, as
that we may be truly said to consider them. It is certain, that every sort of
thinking is not to be accounted considering. We have all of us a thousand
rambling thoughts of many things, which we take so little into consideration,
that we can give very little account how we came to think of them; and often
can hardly remember that we did so at all. Whilst we are awake always, and
sometimes when we are asleep, our Heads are full of thoughts, which are very
busy, or rather playing, even whether we will or no, about a multitude of
little things, which we never thought worth one hours consideration. As in a
Market-crowd a Man may see a hundred Faces, and give every one he meets with a
slight Good Morrow, or a How-d' you; and he has some thoughts (such as they
are) of every one, and yet takes no farther notice of them, these being Persons
he is not then concerned with. His business which brought him thither, is the
only thing he thinks of then in good earnest: So most of the things we think
of, we do but remember at most, or occasionally and accidentally they come into
our minds; but as they come, so they go: Like to a thing that passes by us in
haste, we see it as it passes, and think but very little of it; but as we lose
the sight of it, so do we the thoughts of it too; and are no more concerned
about it, than as if we had never seen it, or as if there had never been such a
thing. The thinking of a thing which may be called Consideration, is a
designed, concerned, leisurely, serious and thorough thinking of it.

1. It is a designed thinking, with a full purpose of mind to inform our selves
better about it; a summoning up of our thoughts, and a diligent setting them on
work. It is not a thought that a Man hits on by chance, and which stays with
him a while, though he never intended it; but that which is sought, chosen, and
invited. As it is said, Plal. II. 2. The kings of the earth set themselves, and
the rulers take ^ounsel together. So a Man must set himself to consider, to
advise with, and take counsel of his own Reason. This is an usual thing with
most Men in any great Difficulty or Danger which they apprehend, to set
themselves to think and contrive what course is fittest for them to take.
Neither will any wise Man neglect this. And why should not we set our selves to
consider and contrive for our safety, who meet with daily so many difficulties
in our way to Heaven, and are in so great danger to come short of it?

2. It is a concerned thinking, as about that, the near and great concernment
whereof to our selves we are very sensible of. We often think of things without
any reflection on our selves, as upon matters that no way touch us. But we are
not apt to be very serious about them, unless we apprehend our selves some way
or other concerned in them. When David had determined evil against Nabal,
Abigail's Servants desired her to consider well of it, 1 Samuel XXV. 17. Now
therefore know and consider, what thou will do; for evil is determined against
our master, and against all his household. She was to think of it as a matter
that concerned the Safety and Welfare of her self and Family. And thus the
Psalmist speaking in God's Name to the wicked, Psalm. L. 22. Now consider this,
ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. If
we will pass our time in Peace and Comfort, we must not forget, but think much
and very concernedly of God; considering well what it lies us upon to live
conformably to his Will, that we may never fall under his displeasure.

3. It is a leisurely thinking, a taking time to view and observe a thing
exactly, together with all its circumstances, its conveniences or
inconveniences, and all the evils or goods which attend it. Sudden Thoughts
little deserve the name of Consideration. It is a laying things in order in our
thoughts, with a design to conclude from them what may be, or ought to be done
or expected by us. Consider of it* take advice, and speak your minds, say the
Israelites one to another in the Levites case, Judge. XIX. 30. And so said Elihu
to Job, Hearken unto this, O Job, stand still, and consider the wondrous works
of God, Job. XXXVII. 14. There is implied in it, First, A preparing the Mind
for it, by awakening it, and stirring it up from the bed of security, and an
unthinking temper; such as the mind of habitual Sinners is even always in, in
relation to Spiritual things, and of Eternal concernment. Rise up Balak, and
hear, said Balaam to him, Number. XXIII. 18. Put the Mind into an attentive and
considering posture. And then, Secondly, A laying aside all other business
which may disturb our thoughts, or interrupt them; shunning all distracting or
diverting Objects, silencing all troublesome Affections and unruly Passions;
Give the Mind leave to do its own work; It must not be let to run at random
upon other things, it must not be disturbed by any Passion, nor confounded with
any throng of Business, but there must be Calm within, and a Quietness round
about it: Commune with your own hearts upon your bed, and be still, says
David, Psalm IV. 4. We must resolve to be deaf to the World, and our own Lusts,
if we will consider to purpose the things that belong unto Eternity.

4. It is a serious and earnest thinking; we must not be in jest, or
indifferent in a matter of such weight and importance, that requires our
greatest intention, care and diligence, no less than Eternal Life or Death
depending on the result of our Thoughts and Self-consultations. Trivial matters
may be slightly thought on, but matters of moment call for serious Debates. And
hence Consideration is usually expressed by such words as import a seriousness.
God, it is certain, because of his Divine Perfections, needs not to consider of
any thing; yet when he is spoken of in Holy Scripture, as observing the
behavior of Men, in order to Reward or Punishment, as though he were considering
of them, he is said to Weigh, Ponder, Examine, or Try, etc. The Lord weighs
the spirits, Prove. XVI. 2. He pondereth the hearts, Prove. XXI. 2. The ways of
man are before the eyes of ihe Lord, and he pondereth all his goings, Prove. V.
21. Does not he see my ways, and count all my steps? Job XXXI. 4. And the wise
King, speaking of the Arts of the strange Woman to entice a Man, says, They
are to divert him from considering; lest he should ponder the path of life,
Prove. V. 6. It Is said of the Blessed Virgin Mary, that she kept all these
things, and pondered them in her heart, Luke II. 19. (...), she preserved and
kept them safe together in her Memory; (...), conferring and disputing within
her self about them. And of the Scribes and Pharisees we read, Mark II. 6. that
they were (...), reasoning in their Hearts; discoursing within themselves, as
though two Persons had been in their Breasts discoursing Dialogue-wise the one
with the other. It was an excellent Precept which Pythagoras gave to his
Scholars, Sleep not till thou have run over in thy mind all thy works of the
day past, and ask thy self, Whither have I gone? What have I done? What have I
left undone? Consideration is a Man's posing himself, examining his Heart,
advising with his own Reason very seriously. It is a bethinking ones self, 1
Kings VIII. 47. A laying a thing to heart, Isaiah LVII. 1. An applying ones
heart to a mateer, Hag. I. 5.

5. It is a thorough thinking, leaving nothing unthought on, neither ceasing to
think on, till one come to the end of thinking; that is, to a right
understanding of the matter, and a steadfast resolution about it: It is such a
reasoning and discoursing, as bring one to his Conclusion and final
Determination. Otherwise all is to no purpose, and a Man has nothing but his
labor for his pains, and had as good never have begun, as never come to an
end. Resolution is the end of Consideration, and Practice of Resolution. And
herein lies all practical Wisdom or Prudence, Not rashly, inconsiderately and
blindly, and at all Adventures to rush on, whatever it is we have a mind to do;
or which way soever our natural Inclinations and Affections would carry us; but
to consult with our Reason, and be well advised in all things, deliberating and
debating the matter well with our selves, and with calm and serious Thoughts,
rationally concluding what is best to be done, and how it may be done to good
purpose. A thinking on some few things relating to a business, is not enough,
but all considerable Circumstances are to be thoroughly pondered. Nothing is to
be left out of our Consideration, which may alter the case in hand, or has any
weight in it, which may turn the Scales either the one way, or the other. The
nature of the thing what it is, necessary or unnecessary, profitable or
hurtful, weighty or light, lawful or unlawful, expedient or inexpedient: the
ends and uses of it, the arguments persuading to it, or dissuading from it; the
rules and measures whereby all is to be regulated, the agreement with, or
swerving from such rules; the benefits, advantages and gains on the one side,
and the dangers, disadvantages and losses on the other; the necessary
preparations, helps, instruments and encouragements; together with the
difficulties, hindrances and discouragements that we may meet with; and the
ways and means of removing or overcoming them; and whatever else may have any
influence upon the matter to be considered. Thus whatever the things be which
fall under Consideration, whether they be past, present, or to come,
Consideration is such a designed, concerned, leisurely, calm, serious and
thorough thinking on them, and an inward reasoning, or a mental discoursing
about them, and about all things pertaining to them, as may help us to order
all things prudently, and to the best advantage; so as we may reap as much
good, and sustain as little hurt by every thing as may be. That whatever we do,
or whatever befalls us, may as little hinder, and as much promote our happiness
as it is in our power to make it; and that if we cannot keep our selves from
all evil or hurt, yet at least we may not do any thing to make our selves
miserable

By what has been here said, we may understand, what that Inconsideration is,
which God complains of, and is indeed the sin of a great many. It is a
careless and unthinking temper of Mind; and they who are of this temper,
venture boldly, rashly, and unadvisedly upon any thing, as it falls in their
way; never inquiring how pleasing or displeasing it may be to God, or what it
may bring upon themselves in the end. They review not what is past, to find out
wherein they have erred or offended, and what stands in need of mending, or
blotting out, and undoing again by Repentance. They think not wisely on what
they go about at present, to observe its fitness or unfitness to be attempted,
or to do it by a right rule, and to a right end, and to take care that they
neither do any hurt, nor lose their labor. They think not providently on the
future, what either must or may come, so as to prepare and provide as they
ought for it, but are without either fear or forecast. And what the evil of
this is, I am next to show.

SECT. II. The Evils of Inconsideration.
IT is so visible to all the World, that Inconsideration is a very ill thing,
that in the most common concerns and affairs of this Life, there is hardly any
one that seems not very sensible of it. There are few Tradesmen, or Husbandmen,
or Artificers, how mean a Trade soever they drive in the World, but they are
aware of it: And all seem satisfied, that nothing can ordinarily succeed well
under our hands, and that there can be small hopes of thriving by what we
undertake, if we do not wisely consider of it. If an unconsidering Man speed
well, it is only by chance; and it is not above once or twice, it may be, in a
hundred times; and few Men are willing to venture any thing they prize, upon
the success of such blind and giddy doings. Men therefore, in all matters of
moment, set themselves seriously to think, what they have to do, and to what
end they do it; how it is to be done, and what helps they stand in need of, and
how to have them; what letts and rubs there are in their way, and how they may
be removed; what they may hope for, as the fruit of their care, skill, and
industry; and what they may fear, as the consequent of their negligence,
ignorance, idleness, or any miscarriage. If any one do not consider these
things, Men count him a Fool; and every one is ready to read his Fortune for
him, and say, He is not like to thrive. Which of you (says Christ, Luke XIV.
28, 31.) intending to build a tower, sits not down first, and counts the
cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? Or what king going to make war
against another king, sits not down first, and considers whether he be
able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty
thousand? What Husbandman goes to plow, and sits not down first, and
considers whether his Ground be in good heart, and like to bear any burden;
whether the Season be proper for his work, and all his Instruments in good
order; whether his Oxen be tractable, and in good plight; and his Servants well
versed in the work they go about; whether his Seed be sound, and himself of
sufficient Ability to manage all to good advantage. So wise are the Men of this
World in their Generation for their worldly ends, that they think not fit to
venture all at random without due consideration. And shall we be so foolish as
to imagine, that the great business we are to do, to secure unto our selves a
blessed Eternity, should either deserve or require less consideration, than the
things which relate to our short continuance in this World only? Let the
miscarriage we are guilty of in our worldly concerns be what it will, the evils
which we incur by it will shortly have an end; and we shall no more remember
them: But if we miscarry in the business we are now to do for Eternity, it is
that which draws after it evils both endless and intolerable. And this is
enough of it self to rouse us up to the consideration of these things. An
affright will often bring a Man to serious Thoughts, when nothing else will;
And can there be any thing more terrible, than a prospect of Eternal Torments?
But this is not all the evil of Inconsideration, though it be that which is most
apt to awaken the Inconsiderate. I do no more but mention it now, in hope that
the fear of being everlastingly miserable, which will certainly be the end of
unconsidering People, bringing us to some degree of seriousness, we may be
capable of discerning other great evils in it, such as are these following:

1. Not to consider the things on which our Eternal State depends, is not to
behave our selves like Men, but to act quite contrary to our Nature. Reason is
a thing Essential to Man, and only Man, of all inferior Creatures, is able to
make this use of it; I mean, to consider things. To this end is it given us,
and if we make not this use of it, we had as good have been without it. Trees
and Plants grow, and bear Fruit; but they cannot consider how they do so, nor
what they do. Beasts and other Animals live and move, eat and drink, and do
such things as are agreeable to their Nature: But they consider not, they do
not deliberate within themselves about their Actions, or their Ends; but are
carried on by their Senses, and a natural Appetite, without pondering of
Circumstances, and debating in their Breasts what is most fit or unfit to be
done, or what is like to follow upon the doing or omitting of any thing. Only
Man, of all earthly Creatures, has Reason and Understanding, and thereby is
fitted for deliberating, consulting, and discoursing things over within
himself, and for contriving, forecasting, and ordering all he does to good ends
and purposes. And if he does not make this use of his Understanding and Reason,
he acts contrary to the Nature which God has given him. Yea, and in effect, he
seems to impute Vanity and Impertinency to the All-wise God; as though he had
given him so noble a Faculty, as Reason is, in vain, and for no use at all; For
what else is the use of Reason, but Consideration? If a Man may act like a
Beast, without Consideration, why should not God have made him like a Beast
too, without Reason? If any say, We have the important Affairs of this Life to
consider, and this is to use our Reason well: I readily grant it; but deny
withal, that this is either all the use, or the chief use for which our Reason
was given us. Had God made us for this World only, and if there were nothing
for us to enjoy, or to suffer, but in this short Life; the use of our Reason
might well be confined to things of this present World and Life. But seeing God
has designed us to be Immortal, and has made our Life on Earth to be but a
time of Probation, and Preparation for Eternity; to use our Reason either only,
or chiefly about the Affairs of this World, is as unnatural an abuse as we can
make of it. Can there be any thing more against Reason, than to think it was
given us to consider least, the things that are most considerable? And can
there be a more unreasonable thing, than to consider more how we may make a
shift to spend a few Days here upon Earth, than how we may be sure of living an
Eternal Life of Happiness with God in Heaven? Nay, to what purpose shall we
consider what to do in this World, and how to make the best Advantage of it for
the very short time that we are to continue in it; if in the mean time, we
consider not, what shall become of us when we go out of it, nor how to improve
our being in this World, so as to save our selves from being Eternally
miserable in the World to come, when ever we depart hence, which may be, for
ought we know, the very next moment? If self-preservation be that which all Men
naturally desire and aim at, it must be most of all things against Nature, to
consider least the things whereby we may be Eternally preserved from the
Torments of Hellfire, and in a State of Everlasting Joy and Blessedness.
Certainly, if God have given us Reason for any thing, it must be chiefly, and
above all things, for this; To consider how we may best Serve and Honor Him,
and promote our own Eternal Happiness. If we do not make this use of our
Reason; it will be hard to say, what advantage we have by our Reason above the
most Unreasonable Creatures: For Beasts have less Trouble without Reason in
this Life, than men have with it. And had men the same end that beasts have,
and there were nothing at all to be considered, but what concerns this Life;
possibly it had been better for the World, if all men had had as little Reason
as they; for all the good it seems to do, is to make men more Sensible of their
own Miseries, and more able to make others Miserable. Without this use of
Reason, what difference can there be betwixt us and Madmen? The greatest
difference between a man that is Sober, and one that is Mad, seems to be this;
That the one has the right use of Reason, and the other has lost it: The one
Acts Considerately, and the other Rashly without consideration. And certainly
he is the maddest of all Madmen, whatever he considers as to this Life, that
runs laughing into Hellfire, never considering what he shall endure there.
Such an Unnatural thing is it for men to lead an Inconsiderate Life.

2. Without Serious Consideration, all the means of Happiness, which God has
been Graciously Pleased most Plentifully to afford us in CHRIST JESUS, are lost
upon us, and we can have no benefit by them. None of the means of Grace and
Salvation, which are given us of God, work on the hearts of men, as Plasters
and Salves do upon their bodies, whether they think of them or no. But all
these things work morally by our consideration, and mental application of them.
The Word of God affects not the Heart, nor works any change in the man, by
being heard alone, but by being considered. Read the Scripture a thousand times
over, whatever we may know or remember more, yet shall we not be made better by
it without considering it. The Sacraments, how often soever received, Seal no
good at all unto us, if they be not considered* The things that were spoken of
Paul, had had no more Operation upon Lydia's heart, than they had upon many of
the hard-hearted Jews, if the Lord had not opened her heart to attend unto
them, and consider them. The good seed falling into the good and honest heart,
is therein Cherished by consideration, and so it brings forth Fruit. Therefore
said St. Paul well, Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding
in all things, 2 Timothy 2.7. Whatsoever methods God uses to bring us to
Happiness in Himself, he brings us first to Our selves, with the Prodigal Son
in the Parable, Luke 15.17. He awakens us some way or other to a Serious
Consideration, or all will be lost upon us. His Word and Sacraments, his
Judgments and Mercies, nor any thing else, has any effect upon our Souls,
unless it be to the greater hardening of our Hearts, without setting our
thoughts on work about them. And this is the Reason why notwithstanding the
abundance of Means we enjoy, so few are Sanctified and Saved.

3. The want of Consideration makes all that ever we do, even our most
Religious Exercises, all our most Charitable Deeds, and whatever is by God's
Command, or in its own Nature otherwise good and profitable to men, altogether
unprofitable to us, and Unacceptable to God. God always expects from us a
reasonable Service, and a Spiritual Worship, such as is suitable both to His
Nature and our own; which we can never give unto him, without much Serious
Consideration. All things, even to our very Eating and Drinking, or whatsoever
else we do, must be done to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. All our Thoughts,
Words and Actions, must be regulated, as well as we can, by the Rule of his
Commandments: and this is certainly a thing impossible to be done, without a
very serious exercising of our mind about every thing. Therefore did God reject
as an Abomination and a Weariness to him, all the Sacrifices and Religious
Worship of the Jews; and whatever they did to Honor him by; because they did
all in a formal and customary way, not considering the ends and significations
of them; nor the qualifications requisite in the Worshippers to render them
Acceptable, Isa. I. And our Blessed JESUS has assured us, that all our
Fastings, and Alms, and Prayers, shall lose the reward Promised, as often as
they are done without due consideration of the right end and manner, Matt. VI.
1, etc. Now what a wretched condition is that man in, all whose Addresses to
Heaven, and all whose good deeds on Earth can do him no good? And such is the
case of every unconsidering person.

4. Through Inconsideration it is, that all Temptations, even such as had we
our Wits about us, we would be ashamed to be foiled by, prove too strong for
us, and have power enough to draw us from our Duty into Sin. A weak Child may
kill a Man that is fast asleep. A very little thing in a man's way, will give
him a fall, that minds not where he steps: And he whose reason is asleep, or
busy about impertinencies, is easily surprised by any little Temptation. It Is
no hard matter to beguile one that is careless and secure, and never thinks
himself in any danger of being deceived. It would not be so easy, as most of us
find it to our cost, for many of those Temptations whereby we are daily
overcome, to prevail against us, had we our Eyes always open to see what they
are, and what reason we have to withstand them. Would we seriously think with
our selves, how little it is that the Temptation promises, and how much less
it performs; how little we shall gain, and how much we shall lose by
yielding; we would even scorn to be so soft, as to be wrought on by most of
those things, whereby we are now without much ado drawn into the vilest Sins.
Why does the Young man so easily yield to the flatteries and enticements of the
Impudent Whore, Prove. VII. but that he goes on without consideration? He goes
after her straightway, as an ox goes to the slaughter, and as a fool to the
correction of the Stocks. V. 22. As a bird hastes to the snare, and knows
not that it is for his life. V. 23. Whosoever is simple (says the foolish woman)
let him turn in hither: and as for him that wants understanding, she says to
him, Stolen waters are sweet, etc. But he knows not, that the dead are there;
and that her guests are in the depths of hell, Prove. IX. 16, 17, 18.

That Inconsideration gives the greatest strength they have to most
Temptations, is very plain from those Excuses men are wont to make for
themselves when they have Sinned. What is it which they commonly plead for
themselves but this, That they did not think it to be a Sin; That they hoped
there had been no great evil in what they did; If they had thought there was so
much evil in it, they would not have done it? Now if they speak truly, it is
plain that they had not been tempted but through Inconsideration. And indeed it
is hardly imaginable, how the number of wicked People should be half so great
as it is, were it not for this, that they consider too little what they do. We
cannot think that in a Christian Church people should live many years, and yet
never hear of the things which are daily taught therein; and yet these are
enough, one would think, to make them fearful to live Wickedly, and to arm them
sufficiently against all Temptations, were they duly considered. When we hear
how strictly a most Just, Good, Almighty, and Omniscient God has forbidden all
Wickedness upon pain of Eternal Damnation; and how the same Great God has
Commanded Holiness, and encouraged us to it with the Gracious Promises of
Pardon for all past Sins, and Acceptance of Weak, if Sincere, endeavors and
performances of Duty through JESUS CHRIST, and for his sake of the reward of
Eternal Life: How were it possible for us, for the sake of a little short and
often filthy Pleasure; for the shadow of Honor, or for a little dirty and
uncertain Wealth, and all but for a very few Days, to venture upon Sin, did we
ever consider things Seriously? No, we see it, that when men are at any time
awakened into serious consideration by some sharp Affliction, by an
apprehension of some great and imminent Danger or Sickness; they can despise
all these Temptations, and resist them; and if when the Danger, Fear, or Pain
is over, they are again enticed by the like Baits, it is only because through
their ease, their consideration is fallen asleep again. So plain is it, that
the greatest advantage that any Temptation can have over us, is that which we
give it, by not considering things as we ought to do.

5. Nothing more certainly ruins us eternally, than Inconsideration, and that
both because it keeps us in Ignorance, and hinders us from that Exercise of
Grace, which by Faith in CHRIST JESUS should bring us to Heaven.

Inconsideration holds us ignorant both of God and our selves; and so never
well understanding, because never thoroughly considering what we hear and read,
what we see and feel, the Goodness and other Attributes of God; our obligations
to him, and dependence on him on the one side, nor our own needs, our weakness
and miserable condition, when our selves alone, on the other side; we rush on
blindly and boldly, and the more blindly always the more boldly too, fearing
nothing, because we see nothing; and seeing nothing, because we will not open
our eyes to see and consider what lies plain and visible before us. A prudent
man foreseeth the evil and hides himself, but the simple pass on and are
punished, Prove. XXII. 3. A wise man fears and departs from evil, but the
fool rages and is confident, Prove. XIV. 16. They consider not that they do
evil, Eccl. V. 1. The harp, and the viol, and wine, are in their feasts; but
they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his
hands, Isa. V. 12. They consider not in their hearts, that I remember all their
Wickedness, Hos. VII. 2. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his master's
crib; but Israel does not know, my people does not consider, Isa. I. 3.

Again, Inconsideration hinders all those Exercises of Grace, whereby through
Faith in CHRIST, we might escape Death, and be prepared for Life Eternal.

Who can Repent of the Sins which he has not duly Considered, with all their
aggravations? He that examineth not himself often, he that never reviews his
Conversation, nor inquires into the temper of his own Heart, is like to prove a
sorry penitent. He that considers not the Law of God, knows not wherein he
has Transgressed; and he that considers not his own Life, cannot lay his Sin
to Heart. He that thinks not much both of the vileness and danger of his Sin,
will hardly bring his heart to be sorry for it, or to hate it. Whilst we are
secure and careless how we spend our days, what can be expected, but that we
lie still in our Filth, and hold on confidently Dishonouring God to our own
Destruction? I hearkened and heard (says God) but they spoke not aright; no man
repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one turned to
his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle, Isa. VIII. 6.

Who can have any Comfort in his life past, that considers not how he has
spent it, whether Sinfully and Vainly, or Virtuously and Piously? Who can cheer
up his Soul in God, and rejoice in the Lord? Who can arm himself against the
Terrors of Death, and in hope expect the great Judgment to come; who never yet
cast up his account, nor considered what he has been doing all his days, nor
how far he is run in arrear with God? How shall an unconsidering man ever be
able to say with St. Paul, Acts XXIII. 1. I have lived in all good conscience
before God unto this day? Or as he again, 2 Cor. I. 12. Our rejoicing is this,
the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have
had our conversation in the world?

Who can be thankful to God for all the Mercies he has received, and all the
wonders of his Goodness vouchsafed to him in all the parts of his life, that
has not considered them well? Who can improve the Blessings of God to God's
Honor, and the good of himself and others, that seldom thinks of them? What
obligations to God can we be sensible of in all the great things which he has
wrought for us, whilst we mind them not?

How can we live and act any otherwise but loosely and irregularly, running
headlong into all wickedness, and upon any danger; so long as we consider not
what a God we have over us, and what Rules he has given us, and how much we
are concerned to observe them? For want of considering it is, that we do all
things at random, without any regard to the Ends or Consequents of our Actions.
Our Love, our Fear, our Desire, our Hope, our Trust, our Obedience, are all
misplaced; we keep to no Rules, nor tie our selves up to any Laws; we omit our
Duties to God, our Neighbors and our own Souls: we commit things abominable
and hurtful; dishonorable to God, and destructive to our selves; most
unbeseeming both our Nature and our Profession; against our own comfort and
happiness; we consume our Time in Idleness, Folly, and Vanity, because we
Consider not for what we live, nor whose we are, nor what we are to account
for: And by all this we lose our Hope, and Confidence, and Assurance, and all
that might stand us in any stead, in the Hour of Death, and Day of Judgment. O
that we were wise, that we understood this, that we would consider our latter
end! Deuteronomy. 32.29.

SECT. III. The Causes of INCONSIDERATION.
HAving seen some of the Evils of Inconsideration; we will, if we be wise,
labor to be cured in time of so dangerous a distemper; but this will not be
done, unless the Causes of it be removed. Let us therefore next inquire into
these, and endeavor to put them away. Amongst others, we are especially to
take notice of these which here I shall point out.

1. The first is Ignorance: For I doubt not but many would consider more than
they do, if they knew either What to consider, or How to consider, or what it
lies them upon to consider. But alas! we may to as good purpose bid a blind
man see, or a deaf man hear, as exhort an ignorant man to consider any thing at
present, but his Ignorance. Consideration is the exercise of Knowledge, and the
improving of it to practice; but no man can exercise what he has not: A
brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this, Psalm. 92.6.
Therefore the way of a fool is right in his own eyes, Prove. 12.15. because he
knows no better. Ignorance therefore must be removed in the first place, that
a man may be able to consider: And yet, tho this in many may be the cause of
Inconsideration, these many are but few in comparison of those who have eyes
and see not; who know, and yet consider as little as if they knew nothing. We
must therefore seek out other Causes of this Evil.

2. And the next I shall name, is Presumption; which I take to be as common a
Cause of Inconsideration, as any other whatsoever. Men generally presume too
much upon their Skill and Knowledge, and are too confident to see their need of
Consideration. And there is a manifold Presumption which causes a neglect of
due Consideration.

A man, as but now was said, may presume too much of his own Knowledge, and
Wisdom, and Dexterity, as one that is so ready and expert in the right
management of his Affairs, that he can do all things off-hand, without any
puzzling thoughts about it: Now there is more hope of a fool, than of one that
is thus wise in his own conceit, Prove. XXVI. 12. The greatest Miscarriages in
the world are owing to a conceited and confident Ignorance, and a Presumption
of a man's own Wit and Understanding, thinking himself too wise and knowing, to
take Advice of others; and scorning to seem so dull, as to need much consulting
with his own Reason.

A man may presume too much upon the Easiness of the Work he has to do, and
take the way to Heaven to be so open, and plain, and safe, that he needs not be
at the trouble of much enquiry and circumspection in his walking. He may
imagine God requires no such accuracy and strictness in framing our whole
Conversation by his Laws, as the more scrupulous sort of men do think. There
needs not, says he, so much ado about the business of Salvation, that a man
must be always busying his mind about it. We have a round of Duties to run, and
when we have done that, all is done: As tho God did consider as little as we are
apt to do; He has said to God in his heart, Thou will not require it, Psalm. X.
13.

One may presume, That all is well with him already, and that he has already
made his Calling and Election sure: He has already got, as he thinks, into the
right and sure way, and has no more to trouble his head about, but only to go
on the same way still, without any further thinking of it: There is a way that
seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death, Prove. XIV.
12.

Some may possibly presume, That they do consider things well enough; even when
they never have any such thought of them, as can deserve to be called
Consideration. Now and then, it may be, they think a little of the things that
ought to be considered; and it would be strange if they did not, when they are
so often put in mind of them; but alas! that thorough weighing and pondering of
things in their minds, which before was shown to be Consideration, they are
mere strangers to, and never once went about it. And in this vain confidence,
of having done what they never in earnest endeavored to do, they pass their
time without considering, till considering can do them no good.

Others presume, That they have day enough before them, and they will consider
of it sometime before night. They will, and they will, but they will not yet;
because they presume it will be time enough to do it anon; and it is always too
soon, till it be quite too late. And thus through a foolish presumption of one
thing or other, many of us are kept from considering, till there be nothing
left us to consider, but this one sad thing, That we have lost our opportunity;
it is now too late, and Consideration is become a great part of that Torment,
which it should have prevented.

3. Another Cause of Inconsideration, is our long neglect of considering, and
an unthinking Habit of Mind. Hence Consideration, when we are called to it, is
an uncouth thing to us; and we have been so long strangers to it, that we know
not how to come acquainted with it, nor how to entertain it. We have used our
selves to another course a great deal more easy, and have got a custom of
doing things inconsiderately. We do as we have been bidden to do by others, or
as we see others do, or as our own Inclinations and Affections lead us to do;
but we have not been used to think for our selves, what is rational or our
duty; what is lawful, or what is fit, and becomes or behooves us to do. We go
down with the stream of custom or inclination, and we slide smoothly and
pleasantly away; but we have not been wont to consider to what purpose we do
so, or into what Gulfs we may be carried, or how we shall get out again. When
we have been, it may be, the greatest part of our age accustomed to act all
things like children, to suffer our thoughts to run loosely, wildly, and
rovingly without check, we know not which way to get them together again, or to
fix them in seriousness upon any thing, nor how to get into any method of
Thinking; hence it is very uneasy to us to consider, and we are soon weary of
it.

4. Another Cause therefore of our continuing inconsiderate, is our Sloth and
Laziness. We cannot endure the pains of confining our Thoughts to the things
which should be considered; and the less can we away with it, because this
would, as we conceive, abridge us of much, not ease only, but liberty and
pleasure too, which we have been wonted to, in thinking on every thing that we
have most mind to, or on any thing that falls in our way. To tie up our
thoughts to rules, to restrain them within a certain compass, to direct them to
a certain mark, is a task of too much trouble to most of us: Especially
Spiritual and Eternal things afford the Sensual man no delight at all, they are
very melancholy subjects, and he is soon weary of them. It requires much pains
and attention of mind, to drive away those wanton and frolic thoughts, which
our Lusts and Vanities commend unto us, and are always sending in to disturb
us. And who of a thousand, especially if young and lively, has patience to
endure this?

5. There is also another Cause, and that not uncommon, of Inconsideration,
which is, An Unwillingness to see our own sins in their own colors. Every
considering person must needs quickly discover his own Filthiness, Shame, and
Guilt; and not these only, but the great danger he is in because of his sins:
And we had most of us rather be blind, than see such a melancholy and
frightful sight. Alas! Such a sight would mightily disturb us, and break off
our sweet slumbers, spoil our pleasant dreams, and make us a terror to our
selves. Our Consciences would be thus awakened, and fly angrily in our faces,
and be continually reproaching us with our folly and wickedness. This most of
us are apt to look upon as a very uncomfortable, and even an intolerable
condition; and therefore madly choose to venture all, and to go on quietly, with
sleeping Consciences that cannot check us, tho we drop unawares into Hell by
doing so; than by Consideration to awaken them, and endure their rebukes, tho
we can no otherwise be safe, and arrive at Eternal Blessedness.

6. The last Cause of Inconsideration I shall mention, is our busying our
selves too much other ways, so that we grudge our selves time and leisure to
consider. Our thoughts are almost constantly otherwise engaged, and cannot
break loose from such things as have got the mastery and command of our
affections. With Martha they are troubled about many things, and hardly ever at
leisure for the one thing necessary. What one of a hundred of us, makes
Religion his business? We account the matters of the world our business, that
calls for Seriousness; and Religion a thing only now and then to be thought on
a little by the by; and when we have nothing else to do, or rather are forced
to it. Or it is, if a business at all, only like that of dressing our selves on
some certain days, a little finer than ordinary; a Festival or Holidays work,
little better than a Play. Now what we make our main business is always the
thing that we most consider, be it never so trivial and needless: To dress our
meat daintily, to fit fashionable Clothes on our Bodies, to beautify our
Houses at home, and visit our idle Neighbors abroad; this we can make our
business, consider, and contrive, and often break our sleep to think how all
may be done most modishly, and with the best grace for our credit: But the
business of Religion, as tho it were a matter to be done, as they say, with a
wet finger, it is enough to think of it when the Bell rings, or it may be, when
we are indisposed for company, and have a mind to be alone, and can think of
nothing else to divert our selves with. And this thoughfulness about all things
else, even tho of least concernment, is one main cause why so few consider the
things that belong to their Everlasting Peace.

If then we will root out the Causes of this Evil Disease, we must take care in
time, to furnish our selves with a competent stock of Divine Knowledge; we must
pass the time of our sojourning here in fear, and beware of Presumption. and an
ill-grounded Confidence; we must apply our selves to learn the Art of
considering, and accustom our selves to Seriousness and serious Company; we
must shake off Sloth and Laziness, and watch against all Sin, which makes us
afraid to know our selves; and lastly, We must not plunge our selves too deep
into worldly business; and we must lay aside all needless curiosity, and
affectation of modish vanity. In short, We must labor to understand, that the
business of serving God, and saving our Souls, is a thing of nearer concernment
to us, than all other businesses whatever: and resolve to make it so; and then
be sure it will be considered accordingly, and our most serious thoughts will
be employed about it.

SECT. IV. What things we are to Consider.
WHEN we are sensible of the Evils of Inconsideration, and understand the
Causes of it; no more can be needful to teach us either why, or how we are to
avoid it. And certainly we can need no motive to practice any thing, which we
know it is so necessary for us to practice, that if we do it not, we must be
eternally miserable. Supposing therefore, that enough has been said to
convince us, that Consideration is altogether necessary; Lest any one should be
at a loss how to find out fit matter for it; I shall now point out to him some
few of those things, which ought principally to be considered; and for want of
considering whereof, our lives are generally so unanswerable to our Profession,
and so displeasing to Almighty God.

Now whatsoever things it has pleased God, in much goodness and mercy to
reveal, and make known unto us, in relation either to his own Honor, or to our
Salvation, we must needs acknowledge to deserve our very serious consideration.
For to this end has God revealed them to us, that they may be considered by
us, and by consideration have that influence upon us, which they ought to have.
That knowing God, we may glorify him as God; and knowing our selves, we may
behave our selves like men; that is, like the rational Creatures of God, to
whom he has given Reason and Understanding to know our dependence on him, and
our duty to him.

Wherefore has God been pleased to reveal unto us the History of the Creation
of the World, and of his admirable Providence over it in all the Ages of it,
but that we might know and consider the work of his Hand, and the method of his
Government; that we might see his Infinite Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness; his
Truth and Purity, his Justice and his Mercy: whom we are to praise for our
being and subsistence; to whom we are to pray for needful supplies of all our
wants; whom we are to serve and obey, and in whom we are to trust and put our
confidence; and to whose will and ordering we ought to submit, and resign our
selves?

Wherefore has God been pleased to reveal unto us so many Divine Truths in his
Word, concerning his own Nature, and his gracious Designs for us, the Eternal
State of Happiness provided for us, and the Methods he is pleased to use to
bring men into it through the Redemption and Mediation of JESUS CHRIST, and by
the Illumination and Sanctification of the HOLY GHOST; but that we might
understand and believe these things; and considering them wisely, bring our
selves to an humble and thankful compliance with all his gracious Designs for
our blessedness, wherein he delights to be glorified?

Wherefore has God given us so many holy Precepts and Rules of living; but
that we should learn them, and consider them, and rule our whole Conversation
by them?

Wherefore has he made so many Gracious Promises to the Faithful and Obedient,
and Threatened such terrible things to unbelievers and wicked persons? Wherefore
has he executed such severe Judgments on the stubborn and rebellious; and
shown such Mercy, and given such Deliverances to the humble and penitent? Is
not all this done, to the end that we should diligently observe and consider
all these things; and by his Promises and Mercies encourage our selves in his
Worship and Service; and by his Menaces and Judgments, learn to stand in awe of
him, and tremble to offend him?

Indeed there is nothing in God's Word or in his Works, but calls for our
Serious Consideration; and we can never do our Duty, or come to the Blessedness
we desire, without a due considering of them. But that which I would here do,
is to show and point out some special matters of Consideration, which it
chiefly concerns us, even daily, to bear in mind, and to exercise our thoughts
upon: Such as these.

1. That we are not our own, neither is any thing at all absolutely ours: But
we are his who made us, and placed us here; and all things in the World, who
ever possesses and enjoys them, are always His. It is God that made us, and
not we our selves; therefore, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture,
Psalm. C. 3. Yea, will some say, who knows not this? Indeed we all either do, or
may know it; but alas! Who Considers it? I fear hardly one of a hundred. The
careless and dissolute Lives of a great many, tells us very plainly, That
whatever they know of this, they Consider it not. If we send our Servants into
the Field to labor for us, and to do our work; and they do nothing there but
play and idle away their time, and after they are told of it again and again,
they take no farther notice of it, but follow their old wont: Will we say, that
they consider whose Servants they are, and what they have to do? If we trust
them with our Money, and direct them how to lay it out for our use; and they
game and drink it away, and give us no better account of it, but that they have
spent it on their own Lusts and Vanities: Will we say, they consider whose
Stewards they are, and what their Duty is? Do such Servants consider, that they
are not their own, and that the Money they have is not their own? How then does
that man Consider that he is not his own, but God's, who Serves not God but
himself, and who wastes what he has on his own Sins, instead of improving it
to God's Glory? If we will be kept within any bounds of Duty, or in the way to
Life, this must be much in our thoughts.

The Reason why men take to themselves so much liberty, as most of us do, is,
because we too little consider, that we are God's Creatures and Servants. For
want of Considering this, we live and do as we list, follow our own wills, and
take our own pleasure, as much as we dare for the Laws of man. Indeed we
generally behave our selves, as if God had nothing to do with us or ours, and
as if we had none to please but our selves, and men that have more Power than
we. But if we would be Safe and Happy, we must take another course, and
frequently think thus every one within himself. Who made me but God? Who placed
me here on the Earth but God? Who gave me what I have but God? Whose am I, but
the same God's that made me? Whose work have I here to do, but his who sent me
hither? By whose Order am I to dispose of what I have, but by his who gave it
me? Whose Servant am I, but his who feeds me, and who alone can Reward or
Punish me? And who feeds me, or can reward or punish me, but he who is Lord of
all things? Whom have I to Please, but him whose work I am to do? Whose work
have I to do, but his whose I am, and who can and will call me to account? Whom
am I to Praise and Glorify, but him, from whom I and all things came, by whom
I and all things are preserved? What am I to do with my self and what I have,
but that for which I was made, and for which all that I have was given me?
Whose Orders am I to follow in spending my time, my estate, my strength of mind
or body, but his who has committed all these things to my trust? Who will call
me to a reckoning for all I have, and all I do, but he who gave me all, and
has given me Rules whereby to dispose of all? Whose will am I to do? Mine own,
or his whose I am, and who alone can make me happy? Who can make me Happy, but
he who made me and all things? How then should I hope to be Happy, and not
Miserable, but by Pleasing and Honoring him in doing his Will, and Obeying him
in all things? O what a Reformation would such a consideration as this work in
the lives of men! And unless we thus exercise our thoughts, we shall never
learn to live like men.

2. Consider, that as we are God's, and all we have is his, and his work it is
which we are to do: So we are always, and work always under his Alseeing Eye;
and are to consider, what that Great God is whom we Serve, and in whose
presence we always are. The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the
evil and the good, Prove. XV. 3. All things are naked, and opened unto the eyes
of him with whom we have to do, Heb. IV. 13. The ways of man are before the
eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings, Prove. V. 21. O consider this
all you that forget God, because you see him not! He always sees you, and
cannot forget you. If any thing will make a Servant diligent in his business,
and careful not to do amiss, this will, That his Master is always with him; and
he who will certainly either Reward or Punish him according to his deeds, has
his eye constantly upon him, and nothing can be hid from him. This therefore we
should much Consider, that wherever we are, and whatever we are about, God is
always with us, and sees us. Let every one say to himself, I am now in the
presence of the Great God, whose I am; he is now here with me, and has his Eye
upon me, though I see him not; observing my whole behavior, and taking notice
of all my Thoughts, Words, and Actions; from whomsoever I can hid^ them, I can
never hide any of them from him. I had need therefore to take heed what I do,
that all may please him, that every thing may be right in his Eyes, and such as
he approves of. For he is a most Holy God, of purer eyes than to behold evil,
and cannot look on iniquity, Hab. I. 13. The way of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. XV. 9. He is an Almighty and most Powerful God,
and is able to cast both soul and body into hell, Matt. X. 28. He, even he is
to be feared, and who may stand in his sight, when he is angry! Psalm. LXXVI. 7.
He is a most Just God, and the Righteous Judge of all the World. He will not at
all acquit the wicked, Nah. I. 3. Seeing this most Holy, Powerful and Just God
is the Judge of all, and will render to all according to their works; and
seeing the same God who is to judge us, is always a present eyewitness of
every thing that we are to be judged for; certainly nothing can more deserve
our Consideration than this; and no other consideration can more overawe us
into a due carefulness to do always such things as we are sure are acceptable
to him.

3. A third thing that we are much to Consider is this, That nothing in the
World but a sincere Holiness of heart and life, can please this most Holy and
Alseeing God. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. XII. 14. Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Mat. V. 8. O how little is this
Considered by the generality of men! How few have this in their thoughts, That
to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and to perfect
holiness in the fear of the Lord, is the very work that the Promises of God
should put us upon? Yet so it is, 2 Cor. VII. 1. and no otherwise can we ever
hope to be made partakers of the Blessings promised. O that we would think well
of this, and seriously consider, if this be the business that we are
continually a doing! If it be not, alas, what is it that we live for? what are
we all our life long a laboring for? What, is it the business of our lives, to
make our selves Everlastingly Miserable? Are we hard at work, as most of us are
one way or other, to no better purpose, than to vex and provoke our Holy and
Righteous God, and to heap up Wrath unto our selves, against the day of Wrath?
O what pains do we take to undo our selves, when we know that nothing but we
our selves can undo us! Whatever we are a doing, if this be not our chief work,
to perfect Holiness, the one thing necessary is still left undone; and we have
yet done nothing to please God, and so had as good been doing nothing at all;
seeing we are toiling all our days, without any reason to hope that we shall be
Happy, and reap any thing but bitterness from all our labor, when our days are
ended. For every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as he
is pure, 1 John III. 3. O consider it in good earnest, for it is a matter of
moment! Shall we be so mad as to live to no other end, but to have time enough
to make our selves intollerably wretched? How! shall we tire and wear out our
selves, merely to destroy our selves? Shall we toil like Oxen in the dirt of
this World, merely to defile our selves, and make our selves odious in the
sight of our heavenly Father? Shall we trifle away all our time in sin, and
folly, and vanity, to this good End, That we may be the surer of an eternity of
Torments and Sorrow? Alas, the World passes away, and the Lusts thereof, to
which we enslave our selves; and we draw near to Hell, and the flames which are
unquenchable. Could we consider this, we would soon discern what manner of
persons we ought to be, in all holy conversation and godliness, 2 Pet. III. 11.

4. Consider often what a price God Almighty has set upon us; how wonderfully
he has manifested his love toward us; and what great astonishing things he
has already done to make us happy in himself. The Angels of God, those
glorious and holy Spirits, desire to look into these things (1 Pet. I. 12.)
with admiration and delight: beholding therein the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians.
III. 10. What more obliging course can we imagine God could have taken to bring
Sinners in love with Him, and their own Happiness? How could he testify his
love and care of us more convincingly than he has done? How many notable ways
does he daily exercise his loving kindness toward us? Is nothing of this worth
our serious Consideration? No not this, that when by the breach of the First
Covenant we were fallen under the Curse; instead of executing the judgment upon
us which had been threatened, he was graciously pleased to make a new one with
us, and a much easier too? Nor this, That when we had done enough to destroy
our selves, rather than let us perish, the most wonderful thing that ever was,
must be contrived by Infinite Wisdom to procure us a Savior? Had we deserved
to die? God's own eternal, only begotten, and beloved Son, the immortal God,
and eternal Life, must be brought into a capacity of dying, to redeem us. Were
we become weak? Omnipotence it self must be clothed with the weakness of our
Nature, and in that bear our sins and sorrows. The Creator of all things must
be made man of a woman; The King of the whole world must be made under the Law,
to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
Sons, Gal. IV. 4, 5. Are we ignorant, and wicked? The Holy Spirit of God must
be sent to be our Teacher and Guide, our Sanctifier and our Comforter. Have we,
after all, need still of bodily succors and sustenance, of wordly delights and
refreshments in our way to blessedness? Good God! what plenty and variety of
all these does he daily afford us! It Is plain, God would restrain us from
nothing, but from doing our selves a mischief. How often have we broken his New
Covenant of Grace, and sinned against the greatest of Mercies? And yet God
spares us, and grants us time to repent in, and earnestly invites us to be
happy; and loads us with all encouraging Blessings, both spiritual and
temporal, every day. O consider all this, how wonderfully, how many ways, how
often and long God has showed himself gracious unto us in JESUS CHRIST! and
despise not the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering,
not considering, that the goodness of God leads us to repentance, Romans II. 4.

5. Another thing which we should daily be thinking on so long as we live, is
our Latter End; how soon it may come, and what it is like to be. O that they
were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter
end, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 29. An End will come; and it seems strange, that we should
all know it, and few of us consider it to any purpose. We see every day in one
or other, what is the end of all our Pleasures, and Honors, and Riches, and
every thing that we here delight in. All these are at an end when death comes;
and it is coming, and at hand, none of us knows how near. We are sure it cannot
be very far off; and every day we are sure it is nearer than it was the day
before; and the longer we live, the nearer it is still. And though all the
things we are now so fond of, end in death, yet death will not make an end of
us; for after death is the Judgment, when we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10.
Neither is there an end of us then, but according to the Sentence which shall
then pass upon us, Some shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into life eternal, Matthew. 25.46. Now did we seriously consider this,
that our End is like to have no end, but is an endless state of Blessedness or
Misery, surely we would come a little sooner to our selves, and learn the wit
to ask our selves some Questions, such as these. What is it that I am a doing
in this World? What am I spending my time and labor in? Am I sure what my End
will be? Have I made my self ready for a blessed Eternity? I have been
laboring for the things of this World, as if I could never have enough of
them* and yet I must shortly dye, and all I have labored so hard for, will be
gone, and I shall carry nothing away with me. I am continually caring for this
Body, and making a very Idol of it; my business from morning to night is to
feed it, and to adorn it. And am I not a very fool for this? Must not this
idolized Body of mine by and by rot in the Earth? And am I taking all this
pains to entertain the Worms? Who can dwell with Everlasting Burnings? And what
care have I taken that I may not? How stand my Accounts against the day of
Judgment? Do I nothing now but what I shall be able to answer for then? Or have
I blotted out by repentance all that will not pass then for good? O let what
will become of this World, which is but for a moment; and of this Body, which
will quickly be all rottenness and putrefaction; my great care, if I be not
quite mad, must be, by a holy and virtuous life on Earth, to be fitted for an
eternal glorious Life in Heaven. My days consume apace, and when my Lamp of
Life will be extinguished, I know not. This day is here, but to morrow's
uncertain: It Is therefore high time for me to live well, that I may live for
ever.

6. Consider, as Holy David did, Ps. CXIX. 50. and as we are often called upon
to do, our own ways. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways, Hag. I.
5, 7. A man's ways are his thoughts, desires, designs, delights, hopes,
confidences, loves, fears, or hatreds; all his words and actions, callings,
professions, customs; and in short, his whole conversation privately with
himself, or abroad in the World. This it concerns us much to think upon; not as
too many do, with delight and pleasure in the very thoughts of their Sins,
endeavoring thus when the act is over, to taste over the pleasure again in
their thoughts of it, and to continue the gust and relish of it as long as they
can: neither must we consider and contrive in our thoughts new ways of sinning;
how we may get into them, how we may walk on most securely and most pleasantly
in them, or how we may compass our worldly, carnal and devilish ends by them:
this kind of thinking on our own ways, is (God knows) too common; and many are
so perfect in this art of considering their own ways, that they can hardly do
any thing else. But this we are to consider, That we walk by the Rule that God
has given us; that we carefully mind what we do, and how, and to what end we
do it; and taking a review of our ways past, examine whether they be such as
God approves of. We should be as vigilant over our selves, and have as close an
eye to all our doings, as a most wary Master or Mistress are wont to have over
their Servants, whose either skill or faithfulness they most suspect. Every
night it would well become us to call our selves to an account for all our
doings, and let nothing escape us, if it be possible, without trial. Thus might
we discern what our present spiritual state and condition is, and whither the
ways we now walk in, will bring us in the end. Would we indeed well consider
all our own ways, and observe well whether they be the ways of God, or the ways
of the Devil and our own Lusts, and whither they tend, to life or death; it
were to be hoped we should see the World in time reformed, and the ways of
Piety and Holiness come in request again. But alas! whilst men consider so
little what they do, and live so carelessly and negligently, as tho their doings
in this life had no relation at all to their future state; or as if they had no
God to give an account to of what they do; it is no wonder that so many run
headlong to destruction in the ways which they have chosen, and persist in,
without any consideration, what they are, or whither they lead.

SECT. V. The CONCLUSION.
HAving pointed out some few things very considerable, for the help of those
who have not been accustomed to this most necessary duty of Consideration; I
shall now conclude this Part with an earnest Exhortation to it.

Let us all, as we love God and our own Souls, awaken our selves to this Work.
Nothing can be of greater concernment to us, than the things we ought to
consider; and therefore we must be every way inexcusable if we do not very
seriously consider them* Can it seem all one to us, whether we have a God over
us, or none? Is it all one whether we be under his Government, or our own
Masters; under his power, or at our own command? Are we no way concerned in
God's Infinite Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Justice, Faithfulness, Holiness, his
Providence, or his Laws? Are his Works and Word, his Blessings and his Curse,
his Favor and Displeasure, his Mercies and his Judgments, all one to us? Can
we be wholly unconcerned whether he see us, or see us not; whether he regard,
or neglect us? Can we think it all a case, whether we behave our selves toward
him as Subjects, or as Rebels; whether he reward, or punish us? Is it no
matter, whether we live like Men, or Beasts; whether we use our Reason, or not;
whether we do what we were made for, or act contrary to our Nature, and the
ends of our Creation? Is it the same thing, whether we be holy or unholy;
lovely or abominable in the pure Eyes of God? Can we be indifferent, whether
God take any care for our Salvation, or none? whether we have a Savior, or no
Savior; be reconciled to God, or at enmity with him? Is it all one to us what
our End shall be, whether we shall be acquitted, or condemned in the day of
Judgment? Whether it shall be then said to us, Come ye blessed, or depart ye
cursed? whether we shall for ever rejoice in Heaven, or burn in Hell? Makes it
no matter, whether the time of this life be wisely improved, or vainly wasted?
whether we be fitted in time for mercy, or stay till it be too late? If none of
all these things be of any concernment to us, then are they not worth our
thinking on; neither are we our selves worthy of our own Thoughts; and it is no
matter what becomes of us, whether we shall be saved, or damned. Nay, it is
plain, we think not our Souls worth the saving. But if there be any weight in
these matters, and if it be not all one to us, whether we be in Glory, or in
Torment; then are these things well worth our serious considering; and it
cannot be all one to us, whether we think much of them* or no. Our meat will
not keep us from famishing, or alive, if we do not eat and digest it. No means
of Salvation will keep us from perishing, if they be not considered. God's Word
and Sacraments, his Judgments and Mercies, his Promises and Threatenings; all
the Merits of Christ, and all the gracious Invitations of the Gospel, and all
the helps of the Ministry, are quite lost unto us, without Serious
Consideration; and we go to Hell when Heaven is set open to us, for want of
considering whither we are going.

How can we possibly excuse our selves for this gross neglect? It is no hard
matter for one to think of himself, and his own Concerns. It is natural and
unavoidable to us to think of something; and is it not reasonable then to think
on something to some purpose? When we cannot hinder our thoughts from being
busy, is it not fit we should set them on work for our good? Can we excuse our
selves for not thinking most on the best things, which will do us most good?
Can our own Consciences acquit us, for not thinking how we may escape Eternal
Misery? Can any one pity us, or shall not we curse our selves, if we perish
only for want of considering how we may be saved? Are the things which belong
unto our Peace hid from us, so that we can have no thoughts of them? Has not
God laid them plain and open before us, so as he that runs may read them? Have
we not yet well learned them? And can we excuse our selves for such a Sin and
Folly? Have we no Teachers to instruct us? Have we no capacity of learning?
Have we no Eyes to see with, no light to see by? Are we forgetful? And have we
not daily remembrancers of what we are so apt of our selves to forget? Alas!
all comes to this at last; We are idle and negligent, we are sturdy and
obstinate; we are wicked and perverse; we take no delight in God; we care not
for spiritual things. O how shall we then escape for neglecting so great
Salvation?

Have we no Reason to consider? Are we not in the greatest danger by not
considering? May we not be surprised by Death, before we have learned to live;
by Judgment, before our Accounts be ready; by Hellfire, before we so much as
feared it? May we not be tempted out of the way to life, ere we are aware of
it, by a thousand temptations for want of considering? May we not fall asleep,
and sleep on securely, till all be in flames about us, and there shall be no
escaping, nothing but terror and amazement? Good God! that nothing should make
us sensible of this danger who are otherwise so apt to be afraid, even where no
fear is! What, will we not be safe at so easy a rate as a little timely
thinking of our danger!

What can sweeten and smooth unto us all the sour, rough, and melancholy
passages of this life, and make them in any measure tolerable to us, but
Consideration? What is it that can strengthen us either to prevent, or remove,
or bear the cross, and all afflicting Accidents; the Losses and
Disappointments, the Sicknesses and Pains, the Griefs and Vexations of this
Life, but Serious Consideration? Such may any Man's Condition be in this World,
that nothing in the World, but the consideration of his own Integrity, of God's
Love, and the Joys of Heaven, can give him the least comfort or ease of mind.
His whole refreshment is this, That he is in the right, though it be a rugged
way; that he shall shortly be at his Journeys end, and out of this uneasy way,
at home in his Father's House, where he shall rest in blessedness for ever.
Nothing but this Consideration can keep up his spirits, or prevent his fainting
in the way. And shall we not, to make our life easy to us, and our burden
light, be at the pains of a few timely serious Thoughts?

Whether we will consider or no, God does always consider us, and all our ways,
and doings, and that in order to an Eternal Reward or Punishment. If God would
not regard what we do, we needed the less to consider what we do. Were it all
one to God, how we live, and he made no difference between the Sheep and Goats,
we should need the less to consider unto which Flock we belong. But we know
it is otherwise, He numbers our steps, and watches over our sins; our
transgression is sealed up in a bag, he sows up our iniquity, Job XIV. 16, 17.
Though we consider it not in our hearts, he remembers all our wickedness; our
doings beset us about, they are before his face; Hos. VII. 2.

The Devil and his Angels consider us, and watch all opportunities, which our
inconsideration makes them in abundance, to take us at unawares, and as it were
fast asleep. When the Husbandman sleeps, then is the proper season for the
Enemy to sow his Tares. When we are at rest in our minds, secure, and consider
little; then is it Satan's opportunity to sow the Seed of Wickedness in our
Hearts. We must be on our watch against this devouring Lion, if we would not be
devoured by him: and our only Security is Serious Consideration.

O how much Misery would a seasonable considering of things prevent! Misery,
which will make us at length sadly consider, when it will be too late. Now
Consideration will do us much good, 'then 'twill do us hurt. When 'twill do us
good, we will not consider; when 'twill do us hurt, we cannot choose but
consider. O Folly of all Follies! What a madness is this, not to do to our
comfort now, what if we do not now, we must do hereafter to our sorrow? What
would the Damned in Hell now give, that either they had considered when they
would not, or could not now consider when they must? Now Consideration would
prevent Hell Torments, then it will in a great part make them. Had the Rich
Glutton considered what he must endure in Hell, he would not have delighted in
the way to Hell; thither he came because he considered not, that thither he was
going; and that being there, no Consideration could bring him back again. Yea,
how many severe Judgments might we escape in this life, did we well consider?
These things have thou done (says God) and I kept silence, thou thoughtest
that I was altogether such an one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set
them in order before thine eyes. Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver, Psalm. L. 20, 21. What a folly
is it to sleep on, 'till God be forced by his Rod to awake us! But what a
madness, not to awake when his To is upon us, but to sleep on still, till we
awake in Everlasting Burnings!

PART II. THE SIN and DANGER Of Delaying REPENTANCE.
I Hope there has been enough said in the former Part of this Discourse, to
convince us of the necessity of Serious Consideration; and if Consideration be
so very necessary, it is to this end, that we may live well here, and happily
hereafter. It appears, by what has been said, that none but serious, thinking,
and considering Persons, can live well; and it is certain, that none, but they
who live well, have any reason to hope, that they can die well, or that they
can be happy after death. Therefore was it needful in the first place, we
should be put in mind of this important Duty, which is so generally neglected,
and the neglect whereof draws so great an Evil after it, as that of living only
to dishonor God, and to destroy our selves eternally. But now it is also as
evident from all that has been said, that the deepest and most Serious
Consideration, even of the best and most considerable things, is but a great
deal of trouble to no purpose; and indeed a very idle thing, if it bring us not
to a steadfast resolution, and a strenuous endeavor to behave our selves,
throughout the whole course of this life, so as may best please God, and most
conduce to our own Eternal Happiness. Resolving is the end of Considering, and
Doing is the perfecting of Resolution. Without constant practice, it is neither
considering nor purposing that will bring us to blessedness. To think much,
merely for thinking's sake, is just to as much purpose, as to think of nothing
at all; a man may possibly become more knowing by it, but he is not one jot the
better. If then we will improve our Consideration to our advantage, we must
take the same course, which, as we have seen before, David took; who no sooner
had considered, but forthwith he turned his feet unto God's Testimonies; yea,
he made haste, and delayed not to keep God's Commandments. This must be the
fruit of our Consideration, if we consider to any purpose. As the Prodigal Son
in the Parable, Luke XV. no sooner came to himself, and considered things well;
but straightway he resolved to return to his Father; and having resolved, away
he went without delay* so are we to do, if we would be safe and happy;
considering well, repent immediately of all our Sins, and without stop enter
upon a new course of life. And this is the business of this Second Part, to
show the necessity of a speedy Repentance, and the absurdity of Delaying it. It
is a work that requires all the haste that we can make, and admits of no delay
at all. First, We cannot repent too soon. Secondly, We may defer Repentance
till it be too late. These are the two things I shall now make very plain.

SECT. I. No man can Repent too soon.
REpentance, is a turning from our own Sinful ways, into the ways of God's
Commandments; out of the way of Death, into the way of Life; it is a leaving
off to be bad, and a growing good: it is a change of the whole man for the
better, both of the inward temper of his heart, and of the outward course of
his Life and Conversation. And can it now be needful to prove, that this cannot
be done too soon? Can one too early get out of danger and be safe? Can one too
soon begin to grow Happy? Need I use arguments to convince us, that one cannot
make too much haste to be a good man? And yet so strangely bewitched and
blinded are Sinners, such an almost inncredible power has Satan got over men,
to blind their eyes, and darken their minds, that they dote on nothing so much
as on their own foulness and deformity; and nothing is harder to convince them
of, than that it is better for them to be clean than filthy, well than sick,
good than bad, wise than fools, happy than miserable. Who would think, that a
Reasonable Creature should be so Senseless? And yet almost all the work, and I
am sure, the hardest part of that which the Ministers of Christ have to do, is
to make men sensible of this, That a man cannot too soon be good; the thing
which I am now to show; and show it I can, but to make men see and believe it,
is the work of God alone; and we must Humbly and Earnestly in Fervent Prayer
beseech Him to do it; I mean to make us effectually Sensible of these three
things.

1. That we cannot too soon do, what is at all aims our Duty to do. 2. That we
cannot too soon do, what alone can set us in safety. 3. That we cannot too soon
do that, without which our life is very uncomfortable.
1. We cannot too soon do that, which is at all times our Duty to do; and there
is no part of our life, how early soever it be, that it is not our duty to
Repent in it, and keep the Commandments of God. What we cannot do sooner than
it is our Duty to do it, cannot be done too soon; and what it is our Duty
always to be doing, cannot be begun too soon. We are always Sinners, therefore
we cannot Repent too soon; because it cannot be sooner than we have Sins to be
Repented of. Were Repentance no more, than what too many I fear take it to be,
a being sorry that we have sinned; it could not be too soon; for so soon as we
have Sinned, we have cause to be sorry that we have Sinned; and we have all
Sinned even from our Infancy: And so soon as we have Offended God, it is our
Duty to be sorry that we have Offended Him. Were it no more, but a hatred of
Sin, a confessing of it, or resolving against it, yea, or any sort of actual
forsaking it, and begging God's Pardon for it: nothing of all this could be
done too soon; because it is our Duty to do all this so soon as we have Sinned;
and we have always had Sins to be hated, confessed, resolved against, pardoned
and forsaken. And yet, were this all that is meant by Repentance, though we
could not but confess it very reasonable, that all this should be done so soon
as we are sensible that we are Sinners; yet I fear we should not think it
altogether necessary; but would rather flatter our selves, that it would be
enough to do it in our last Sickness, or some few days or hours before we die;
because all this, if we have but so much time, and so much sense and
understanding left us as to think of it, may then be done; and I doubt not, but
it is done by a great many, who yet do not Repent unto life, as will be shown
anon. But seeing Repentance is all this, and a great deal more than all this;
even a through change of life, not for death, but for a more Holy life, and
that, not in Heaven, but on Earth; seeing it is a leaving of Sin, not to do
nothing, but to do our Duty; a turning from our own wicked ways unto God's
Testimonies, and the keeping of his Commandments; it is a Duty, that we are
always to be doing so long as we live, and can only be done whilst we live; and
is in great danger not to be done at all if it be not soon begun; and cannot be
done too soon, because the doing of it soon, even so soon as we can, is a part
of the Duty. To make this plainer, let us First briefly consider what the Duty
of Repentance is, as in the Holy Scripture it is described unto us; and
Secondly, what time the same Scripture directs us to, for the doing of it; and
by both we shall easily perceive, that we cannot repent too soon; because no
sooner than it is our Duty.

First, Observe how the Duty of Repentance is described unto us in the Holy
Scripture. Ezekiel. XVIII. 21. It is a turning from all our sins which we have
committed, and a keeping of all God's Statutes, and doing that which is lawful
and right. And v. 31. A casting away from us all our transgressions, whereby we
have transgressed; and making us a new heart, and a new spirit. It is an
amending of our ways and our doings, Jer. VII. 3. A returning every man from
his evil way, and making our ways and our doings good, Jer. XVIII. 11. It
implies a godly sorrow for Sin, yet that godly sorrow is not Repentance; but
works repentance to salvation not to be repented of, 2 Cor. VII. 10. It
implies a hatred of every false way, Psalm. CXIX. 104. A being ashamed, and
confounded for our own ways; a loathing our selves in our own sight, for our
iniquities, and for our abominations, Ezekiel. XXXVI. 31, 32. A confessing and
forsaking our sins, Prove. XXVIII. 13. And yet all this is not the whole Duty of
Repentance. But as we must cease to do evil, so must we learn to do well also,
Isa. I. 16, 17. We must both eschew evil, and do good, 1 Pet. III 11. Neither
is this to be thought a work, on which it may be enough to bestow some small
part of our life, when it grows near to an end; for Repentance is thus
expressed, Tit. II. 12. A denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Can we think the Apostle
meant no more by these words, but that we should do this for some few years or
days of our old age before we die? Certainly no man can be so foolish as to
think so; but rather, that even so long as we live in this present World, and
whilst we are a looking for that blessed hope mentioned V. 13. that is, so long
as we live, we should do this, as Zacharias clearly expresses it, Luke I. 75.
That we should serve God in holiness and righteousness before him all the days
of our life. And by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality, Romans II. 7. I am confident, that no body can now
imagine, that such a Repentance as in these places of Holy Scripture is
commended to us, can be the work of a dying man, or that it is not work enough
for one's whole life, how long so ever. However it is plain, that it is our Duty
in all the several ages of life, and at all times whilst we live, and therefore
no point of our time can be too soon to begin it in; but every moment that we
wilfully neglect it, we add to our Sins by leading so long an unholy life,
contrary to the Command of God. But this will more fully be proved afterward.

Secondly, Observe what time the same Scripture directs us to for the setting
upon this Duty. And we shall hardly find, that it commends to us any other time
but the present; there is no to morrow, that I know of, allowed us to depend
upon; not the least countenance or encouragement to procrastination or driving
off to another time. Therefore now, says the Lord, turn ye even unto me, Joel
II. 12. Now it is high time to awake out of sleep, Romans XIII. 11. Behold now is
the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. VI. 2. To day if
ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Heb. III. 7. Remember now thy
Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccl. XII. 1. No part, no day of our Age too
soon. We are always called upon to repent, presently, to day, just now; and not
told we may stay till to morrow, or bid to do it sometime hereafter. Whenever
therefore we are called to repent, and that is as soon soever as we are made to
understand that we are sinners, and that Repentance is our duty; then is it our
duty to set about it; and to put it off longer, is a violation of our duty, and
a new sin; and therefore it is certain, we can never begin to repent too soon.

2. We cannot too soon do that, without the doing whereof we can never be in a
safe condition; no man thinks he can make too much haste to be safe: And
nothing can be plainer than this, That we are never in a safe condition, till
we be sincere Penitents; therefore we cannot repent too soon, unless we can be
safe too soon. Can any one think he has too soon got out of the Lion's mouth,
out of the snares of the Devil, and from the Borders of Hell? Can any one think
it too soon to be within view of Heaven and Eternal Joys? Then indeed he may
think it too soon to repent of his sins, and walk in the ways of God's
Commandments. Did we but really believe, and well consider, That we are always
in danger of Eternal Destruction; and every moment ready to fall into the
bottomless Pit of Fire and Brimstone, out of which there is no Redemption, so
long as we go on in any of the ways of sin; tho we had no sense of our
Obligations and Duty to God, and tho we had no Love to him, which should
constrain us to do any thing for his sake; and lest we should be wanting in our
Duty to him; yet one would think the apprehension of the danger we are in of
perishing, should make us afraid to go on, and fear should constrain us, for
our own sakes, to change our course of life, lest we should be wanting to our
selves and our own safety. Our Blessed JESUS, who came to save us from Death
and Destruction, came to call us to Repentance, that we may be saved; that
being the only door that God, for his sake, has opened unto us to Salvation.
He himself it was that said, Except ye repent, ye shall all perish, Luke XIII.
3. And when St. John the Baptist saw the Pharisees and Sadduces coming to his
Baptism, which was the Baptism of Repentance, he thus saluted them, O
generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring
forth therefore fruits meet for repentance, Matthew. III. 7, 8. Showing them,
That there is no other way of escaping the Wrath of God, which always burns
against sin and wickedness, but such a Repentance as brings forth the Fruits of
Righteousness. Till we unfeignedly Repent of our sins, we are in a state of
sin; and so long are we the children of wrath, Ephesians. II. 3. The wrath of God is
revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who
hold the truth in unrighteousness, Romans I. 18. Whilst we know what is our Duty
to God, and yet do it not, there are many stripes ready for us; and God has
declared both by many Threatenings, and by many Examples of his just
Indignation, that his Wrath is kindled against us. God spared not the old
world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing
the flood upon the world of the ungodly. And turning the Cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample
unto those that after should live ungodly, 2 Pet. II. 5, 6. They suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire, Jude 7. What safety can the impenitent Sinner
promise himself, or whither will he fly, and take Sanctuary from the Fiery
Indignation of provoked Justice and Omnipotence? Whilst we presumptuously
continue in our sins, we heap up wrath against the day of wrath, Romans II. Our
Sins cry aloud to the Almighty, for his Vengeance upon us. His Judgments hang
over our heads, like the naked Sword over the head of the Tyrant, by a single
hair of Mercy; and if our sins once break that, we are suddenly cut off from
the land of the living. God will wound the hairy scalp of such a one as goes
on still in his trespasses, Psalm. LXVIII. 21. For God is angry with the wicked
every day. If he turn not, he will whet his sword; he has bent his bow, and
made it ready. He has prepared for him the instrument of death, Psalm. VII. 11,
12, 13. God has made all things ready for the execution of his Wrath
whenever it pleases him; and no sinner knows how soon God will smite him
down to Hell. If he stay yet a while longer, it is to give us time to repent;
and if we repent not ere long, he is the mean while but whetting his Sword, and
bending his Bow to its full bent, that whenever he pleases to take his own
time for it, his Sword may pierce deep, and his Arrow fly home, and wound
mortally. Indeed he has declared himself to be very gracious, and slow to
wrath; and our own daily experience assures us that he is so; and this wicked
use we are too apt to make of it, That by his long-suffering and forbearance we
embolden our selves to sin the longer, and to delay our Repentance, in hope of
longer forbearance still. Yea, Because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them
to do evil, Eccles. VIII. 11. A strange and most unreasonable presumption this,
as tho a man could be the safer, the longer he abused God's Patience, and
turned his Grace into wantonness, and even dared him to do his worst. Oh that
we would consider how unadvisedly we act for our selves! how ill we consult for
our own safety! and what Fools we are to think we can be safe, whilst we are
provoking God by our Sins, and by this Sin especially, of presuming he will yet
forbear us longer, because he has forborne much longer already than we
deserved. Not considering the goodness of God in his forbearance and
long-suffering, which should lead us to repentance; after our hardness and
impenitent hearts, we treasure up unto our selves wrath against the day of
wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, Romans II. 5. How
foolishly secure soever we may be in our sinful courses, yet certain it is, we
are never safe. Jonas may sleep, and fear nothing, but the Winds and Seas are
not quiet for all that while; and he is in no less danger because he thinks not
of it. Whilst we sin, God's Anger is pursuing us, and we know not how soon it
will overtake us. Seeing therefore we are never safe till we repent, we cannot
repent too soon, unless it can be too soon to be safe.

3. We cannot too soon do that, without which our life can never be comfortable
to us. Comfort is the very life of life; and a life without Comfort, is worse
than death. And truly a life of sin is a life without any true Comfort at all;
and false Comfort is not worth the having, unless it can be worth ones while to
go laughing into the Fire of Hell, which never shall be quenched: We cannot
therefore too soon repent, except we can think it too soon to lead a
comfortable life: And that the impenitent sinner can have no true Comfort, is
plain enough from what was last considered, That he can have no safety; for
certainly an unsafe condition is also a very uncomfortable condition; and I
know not what can comfort him that sees himself every moment in greatest danger
of perishing everlastingly. What? Can there be any place for Comfort in that
man's breast, that knows himself to be at Enmity with God, and God to be
incensed against him? Can he find Comfort, who walks wherever he goes, under a
full-charg'd Cloud of Vengeance, ready whenever God gives the word, to break
upon his head? Can there be any Comfort in a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries? And yet
this is all he has any reason to look for, who sins wilfully, after he has
received the knowledge of the truth, and holds on without Repentance, Heb X.
26* 27. Indeed we see it too often, That the most abominable Sinners can so
harden themselves in Sin, that they grow insensible of their danger: And not
only so, but they can find much Pleasure, too (such as it is) in serving their
lusts; nay, and whilst they do so, can flatter themselves with a foolish
conceit that all is well enough with them. And just so may a man in a swoon, or
in any stupifying Disease, be insensible that he is in danger of death; and a
man in his sleep, may not perceive that the House over his head is on fire:
Yea, he may have many pleasant Dreams in the midst of his danger; and a Madman
may take pleasure in his madness, and yet he is as mad as he, that thinks such a
Pleasure to be a Comfort. Such a comfort may an impenitent Sinner have in his
wicked life, whilst his sins keep him too busy to think of his danger. But
whenever he shall begin to think seriously, (which such a one is very unwilling
to do, and which unwillingness of his is a manifest sign that he can find
nothing Comfortable in his present state, else would he be more willing to
think of it) he will find his pleasure quickly vanish. Let him apprehend
himself in present danger of dying, and let him think whither Death is about to
convey him, and what he can plead if he shall be called to the great Judgment;
and then even his uncertainty of what shall become of him, or what he shall
find in another World, will soon detect the vanity of all his present Comforts.
But now on the other side, how sweet and pleasant are the thoughts of that
happy person, who has repented unfeignedly of his Sins, and walks before God
in the ways of his Commandments with a perfect heart! He lives in a constant
friendship with the Father of mercies, and God of all consolation; with the
Blessed JESUS in whom he is reconciled unto the Father: and who has said unto
his Disciples; Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you, John XV.
14. Hence was Abraham called the friend of God, Jam. II. 23. Now says Christ,
I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid, Luke XII. 4. This is the penitent
man's comfort, he is at peace with God, and there is no condemnation to them
that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans VIII. 1. Yea, he has
this comfortable Promise, v. 28. All things work together for his good. Were
there no more in it but this, That the Penitent is freed from the fear of
Eternal Punishment, and that his Sins are forgiven; that he is free from the
stings and smartings of a guilty Conscience, which is now purified and healed;
certainly this alone is so great a comfort, that no man of any sense can think
he can get too soon into such a condition. Is it not an exceeding comfortable
thing to a man, that he can go about his honest business, or lawful
refreshments; and quietly, after all, betake himself to his rest, without the
angry rebukes of his own Conscience, and without any dreadful apprehensions of
God's being displeased with him? Is it not very comfortable to be confident of
God's love and favor, of his fatherly blessing, and of his special care and
providence? Is it not very comfortable to be able in the Psalmist's words,
Psalm. IV. 8. to say after all the hard labors and troubles of the day past, I
will both lay me down in peace, and sleep; for thou, Lord, only make me dwell
in safety. Let it thunder and lighten, let the winds blow, and the waves beat,
let all the World be in tumult and confusion, the Penitent is got into his safe
Harbor, his strong Tower, his inviolable Sanctuary. Let men's Tongues be
whetted like Swords, let the Devil and his suborned Tools bring thousands of
Calumnies and false Accusations; his own Conscience still acquits him, and his
rejoicing is this, the testimony of his conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity he has had his conversation in the world, 2 Cor. I. 12. Let
dangers and Enemies encompass him round about on all sides, his God is his
Protector; and who, says he, can hurt me, if I be a follower of that whch is
good? 1 Pet. III. 13. Nothing can separate me from the love of God which is in
CHRIST JESUS my Lord, Romans VIII. 39. Finally; So long as he lives, he can
rejoice in hope of the glory of God; yea, and glory in tribulation also, Romans
V. 2, 3. And when he comes to dye, he can without any disturbance take leave of
this World, and triumph over Death; saying, O death! where is thy sting? O
grave! where is thy victory? Blessed be God who has given us the victory
through JESUS CHRIST our Lord, 1 Cor. XV. 55, 57. I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for
me a crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy IV. 7, 8. Is it now possible that any one
can make too much haste to get into this comfortable Condition? No man that
considers aright his Duty, his Safety, or his Comfort, can think it at any
time too soon to repent.

SECT. II. The Sin of DELAY.
THough it can never be too soon for a Sinner to repent of his sinful course of
life; yet I dare not say that it can never be too late; a man therefore cannot
make too much haste, because he knows not whether any other time after this,
will not be too late; and because the longer he delays it, the more cause he
has still to fear that it will be so. Indeed every delaying of this Duty is
sinful; and therefore look how long it is delayed, so much always in one sense
it is too late; because it was not so soon as it ought to have been, or not
soon enough to prevent a Sin. It has been already proved, that it cannot be
done sooner than it is our duty to do it; because it is our duty at all times,
and we ought always to be doing it: and therefore, if it be delayed at all, we
do it later than in duty we were bound to do; and that is too late in respect to
God's Command. It has also been proved, that it cannot be done sooner than it
is our interest and near concern to do it; because we can never be safe, nor
enjoy any true comfort till it be done; and therefore again, if it be delayed
at all, it comes later than we stood in need of it, and that is too late in
respect to our own welfare. God, all the time we delay it, wants his right, the
honor due unto him; and we all the while lose much good, our safety and
comfort; and so in both respects it is too late, if it be at all delayed. But
now, it may be be too late too (I will not say in a worse, but to us) in a
sadder sense; that is, we may drive it off so long, that it will be too late to
repent at all, and till there be neither time nor power left us to repent; and
what will become of us then? How long any one may delay his Repentance before
it be too late in this sense, no man living can tell him: And therefore whosoever
is wise, will not delay his Repentance at all. Of this I shall say more
afterward: at present, I shall endeavor to make us all a little more sensible
of the sinfulness of delaying, and driving off our Repentance, and the keeping
of God's Commandments, from day to day; how contrary it is to all Scripture and
Reason.

And truly this delay is so contrary to both these, that it seems very
wonderful, how any one should not be ashamed, as well as afraid to use it.
There can be nothing in the World more absurd, than for a man at once to
profess he believes the Gospel, and owns the duty of Repentance as necessary;
and to delay this duty: for this delay seems no less than a bold attempt to
cancel and blot out the whole Gospel at one dash, and to change the order and
method which God has prescribed for the bringing of Sinners to Salvation, for
a new one of our own contriving. It seems, I say, the making of a new Gospel
for our selves, and a new way to Blessedness, which God never approved of, nor
allowed. And is not this as absurd, as to set our selves in our Savior's
stead, and a taking upon us to make for our selves a new and easier way to
Heaven?

That I may not seem to say this without good reason, let it seriously be
considered; That Repentance is not only a duty, but the special privilege of
the Gospel. The good news which the Angels brought from Heaven was, That God
had sent us the Savior, whom he had in the beginning promised to Sinners; and
the good News that our Savior brought us, was, That God would for his sake
accept of the Sinner's Repentance, and Faith in him. And this was blessed
Tidings indeed to a sinful World; told ('it is true) before in the Old Testament,
and shadowed forth in the Law; but now most fully declared, and gloriously
confirmed by JESUS CHRIST in the New Testament.

The Law of Innocence, and Covenant of Works made with Adam, allowed of no such
thing as Repentance. All it said was this, Do this, and live; do it not, and
dye. In the day thou eatest thereos, thou shall surely dye, Genesis II. 17. The
first breaking of the Law, was death. There could be no safe delaying to keep
it, because every delay of keeping it, was a breaking of it; for it was a not
doing of the Commandment, and that was death* And it must be kept from first to
last; for every ceasing to do what was commanded, was a not doing of what was
commanded; and to this death was threatened. No repentance therefore could have
place under this Covenant. It was the New Covenant of Grace that made way for
Repentance; and this is the Gospel Grace, that Sinners who have broken God's
Law, and for that are by the Sentence of the Law doomed to die, shall yet, if
they repent, find mercy with God through JESUS CHRIST. This is the Gospel,
which the Apostle says was preached before to Abraham, Gal. III. 8. and
therefore was before the Law of Moses, so long, that it was first preached by
God in that gracious Promise of the seed of the woman, Genesis III. 15. If
Repentance had not been allowed of from the first man's sinning, even all along
to the coming of our Savior into the World, as well as after his coming; then
had all men, during that long tract of time, for about four thousand years,
perished in their sins. But to prevent this, it pleased God, that so soon as
the Law was broken, the Gospel should be preached; that men might believe, and
repent, and be saved. In a most astonishing condescension to the weakness of
Sinners, he mitigated the rigor of the Law, and was pleased to accept
henceforward of a sincere obedience to it, instead of a perfect fulfilling of
it. Heartily a man must endeavor to do the whole will of God; and whatever
failings he finds in himself, he must as heartily repent of them, and believe
that God for CHRIST his sake, will not only forgive him his repented failings,
but also reward his sincere Obedience with Eternal Life. This is the Grace of
the Gospel; but this admits of no delay of our sincere obedience, or of our
repentance: but makes it our duty every day sincerely to obey, and unfeignedly
to repent; and he that does not so, daily sins against the Gospel of Grace;
and he that hops for Salvation whilst he thus daily sins against the
Gospel of Grace, must needs frame to himself in his imagination some other
Gospel than that which Christ has preached, as the foundation of his Hope. The
Gospel of Christ gives no man leave to continue one moment in sin and
impenitence. It shows an easier way to Heaven than the Law did; and assures us
of pardon and salvation upon our repentance, which the Law did not: but it has
not left Sin to be any part of our way to Heaven; nor assured any one that
delayeth to repent, that he shall ever come thither.

Our Blessed Savior came not to call Sinners immediately to Heaven, or to
assure them of Blessedness, whether they lead a life of repentance or no; but
he came to call sinners to repentance, Matt. IX. 13. and so to put them into
the new way to life, which was opened unto them through him. His Forerunner,
John the Baptist, he sent before to prepare his way, by his Preaching and
Baptism. The substance of whose Preaching was this, The kingdom of God is at
hand; repent ye, and believe the Gospel, Mar. I. 15. He preached the Baptism of
Repentance, for the remission of sins, v. 4. And the first preaching of our
Holy JESUS was to the same purpose. He began to preach, and to say, Repent, for
the Kingdom of heaven is at hand, Matthew. IV. 17. And sending out the Twelve to
preach, we find the Business they were sent about, was the very same, Mar. VI.
12. They went out and preached, that men should repent. For this was God's
will, That Repentance and remission of sins should be preached in Christ's name
among all Nations, Luke XXIV. 47. When St. Peter's Auditors were moved with his
Discourse on the day of Pentecost* and began to be inquisitive what course to
take for themselves; he thus directs them, Acts II. 38. Repent and be baptized
every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins. Now
what does all this signify, but that as many Sinners, as hearing this
comfortable Gospel, believe it, and are thereupon willing to leave their former
sinful course of life, and to bind themselves in a new Covenant by Baptism, to
live a holy life in all sincerity and uprightness of heart, always as they find
themselves failing, repenting of their faults, and endeavoring to do better,
shall, through the Merits of Christ, in whom they have believed, be pardoned
and saved? That therefore which the Gospel calls, and admits us to, is a state
of Repentance, whereinto we enter by Baptism. Adult persons, already come to
the use of Reason, must repent; that is, bid adieu to their old wicked way of
life, and resolve upon a new and holy one, before they be baptized. And
Christian Infants by Baptism covenant to lead a life of repentance when they
come to understanding. And none are to delay this wilfully, but always as they
are able to understand the state whereunto they are called, and wherein they
are engaged, to make good their part of the new Covenant; which is to live in
sincere obedience to Christ, and always to repent of their failings, as they
are able to discover them. Thus he that believes, and is baptized, shall be
saved, Mar. XVI. 16. How! Shall he be saved, though he live as long as he will
in his Sins after he is baptized! No; but if he die after Baptism before any
actual sin, and in a purpose not to commit any such, he shall be saved; and if
he do commit sin afterward, and speedily repent of it, not wilfully continuing
therein, he shall be saved: But if he wilfully continue in his Sins, which in
Baptism he renounced, it is nowhere told him that he shall be saved. Baptism
saves us (says the Apostle, 1 Pet. I. 3, 21.) But then he says too, It Is not
the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience
toward God. If our Consciences, being examined, can answer us truly, that we
covenanted sincerely, and keep covenant faithfully, Baptism saves us. But what
was it we promised? To repent, and begin to live an holy life at such or such
an Age; or when we grow old, and are going to dye; or after we have had our
fill of sinning, some time or other when we shall think it most convenient? Was
it not this we promised, To keep God's holy will and commandments all the days
of our life? Was it not this Charge that Christ gave his Apostles, when he gave
them Authority and Command to baptize; Teach them to observe all things that I
have commanded you? Matthew. XXVIII. 20. What, for some few days of their life,
or for the whole remaining part of it? St. Paul shall answer this Question,
Romans VI. 2. Shall we (says he) that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?
What means he by saying, We are dead to sin? Is it not, that we are by our
Baptism engaged to live in Sin no longer? Know ye not (says he again) that so
many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? v.
3. And what will follow thence? This is that which he tells us, v. 4. Therefore
we are buried with him by baptism into death; that as Christ was raised from
the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life. And then he adds, v. 6. Our old man is crucified with him, that the body
of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. Henceforth
we are not to let sin reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the
lusts thereof. Neither to yield our members as instruments of unrighteousness
unto sin; but to yield our selves unto God, as those that are alive from the
dead, and our members as instruments of righteousness unto God, v. 12, 13.
Henceforth then, that is, from the time that we are called to repentance by the
Gospel, and are baptized into Christ, we are to lead a life (as St. Paul says,
Ephesians. IV. 1.) worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called: and that is a life
of sincere Obedience, and unfeigned Repentance. To sin at all, is a
transgression of the Law, and that is mortal in it self; but that the Gospel
comes in to our succor, and gives us the privilege of Repentance; If then we
delay our Repentance, so graciously indulged unto us, we sin against the mercy
of the Gospel, as well as against the righteousness of the Law; we reject our
Pardon, most lovingly tendered unto us, by our unwillingness to comply with the
Terms on which it is offered us: and if we be sick unto death, and will not in
time apply the only remedy provided for us in our otherwise desperate case,
what can we expect but to dye? and what pity can we deserve if we die?

And yet too many are apt enough to encourage themselves, to hold out still
longer against all Calls and Invitations to a speedy Repentance, upon the most
deceitful grounds imaginable: Because they read in the Prophet, Ezekiel. XVIII.
27. When the wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has
committed, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul
alive. And because many have lived a long time very wickedly, and yet have been
converted at length, and accepted of God upon their conversion and repentance;
they are apt to think it no such ill thing, as they are told it is, to delay
their Repentance awhile longer; and therefore venture on it, in hopes they may
be accepted hereafter, as well as others have been.

Now for men to flatter themselves thus upon so very slender grounds, is so
very foolish a thing, that one who considers not how much the love men have to
Sin, is become too hard for their reason to answer, how weakly soever it plead
for it self; would exceedingly wonder how any reasonable creature should be
guilty of it. It is indeed very true (and God's Holy Name be for ever Blessed
for it) that God will accept of the true Repentance of great Sinners, who have
lain long in their Sins without Repentance; and this is a good reason why one
that has continued long in Sin, should not despair; but if he yet Repent, he
may hope to be Saved: But is it therefore as good a reason why he should delay
his Repentance, in hopes to Repent hereafter? I have not yet said, that no man
who has been long an Impenitent Sinner, can never Repent, or shall not be
pardoned if he Repent; though I am in doubt, whether or no a Sinner that
Repents not till he come to die, can have a pardon upon so late a Repentance.
But that which I have said is this, That all delay of Repentance is exceedingly
sinful; and therefore nothing ought to be pleaded for it; no man should dare to
encourage himself in it. It is a Sin against the Gospel of Christ, which is the
only foundation Sinners have to raise their hope of Salvation upon? It Is, I
think, beyond all dispute, that though the Gospel of Christ assure Salvation to
the Penitent, yet it has not assured Repentance to him who delayeth it. It
calls Sinners to Repentance without exception, whether they have been so a
longer or a shorter time, and promises acceptance; but does it allow them to
take what time they please for it, after they are called? Does it tell them,
that they may safely stay as long as they have a mind to Sin, and yet Repent at
last? Neither Ezekiel, nor any other Prophet, no nor Apostle, has left us one
syllable in the Holy Scripture to encourage Delay; though they have left much
to encourage him that has long delayed to Repent. To do the former were to
encourage men to Sin. To do the later, is to encourage them to give over
Sinning, though it be late. The former were to allow men to Sin that Grace may
abound, which the Apostle abhors, Romans VI. 1. The later, is but to dehort men
from continuing in Sin through despair of Mercy. In short, though an old Sinner
may Repent, yet was it his Sin to stay till he was old; and he has that Sin,
as well as others, to Repent of; and no Scripture encourages him to grow Older
in Sin before he Repent, or to take what day he pleases for it before his
Death, or to hope he shall ever Repent at all if he do it not now. We are
called immediately to put off the old man, and to put on the new, Ephesians. IV. 24.
I need say no more, but that he who delays his Repentance, imagining that to
Repent afterward will be enough, must needs account an Holy life a needless
thing; as though that were not the principal thing that God requires, but it
would satisfy him if a man died well, how ill soever he had lived; when on the
contrary, God has often Commanded us to live well; and indeed all his Commands
are to that purpose; but has never commanded us to die well; and reason good,
for there is no other way to die well, but to live well; and as little danger
that he who lives well, should not die well. Alas! To what purpose was a great
part of the Scripture written, containing so many rules of Holy living, if one
may delay to live holily as long as he will? Had it not been enough to have
told us thus: You that are Sinners must be sure one time or other to Repent
that you have been so. Though it be your duty to live an holy life, yet you
need not make all the haste you can to do it; only you must take heed of this,
That you die not before you have Repented that you have lived wickedly. A man
that understands any thing of God, or of the Gospel of Christ, would tremble to
hear such a sense as this put upon it; and yet no better does he use it, that
delays his Repentance in hopes of Repenting time enough hereafter. And yet
after all, would the Gospel bear such a sense as this, it would not excuse the
delaying Sinner's either Sin or Folly: For were he sure, that a late Repentance
would be accepted; yet he cannot be sure, that he shall live long enough to
Repent, if he delay it never so little; and it is a foolish thing to venture all
upon an uncertainty: And though he could be sure of this, yet would it still
show the greatest basenss of Spirit, and the meanest sense of God, and of all
those Obligations of Duty and Gratitude which he has laid upon us, that a man
can have; both which I shall endeavor to make very plain in these following
Periods.

SECT. III. The Baseness of Delay.
TO Delay our Repentance and our keeping of God's Commandments, is an exceeding
base, unworthy, and shameful thing; and such as I am confident, when any one
thoroughly considers, he cannot without blushing, and great indignation at
himself think he should be guilty of it. I know we are all witty enough to
invent excuses for our folly; and to find covers for our Nakedness, and
something or other we have always at hand to hide our filthiness and vileness.
But we are not the less fools for being so wise as to deceive our selves; and
when we once have the wit to consider what we do, we shall be ashamed of it.
When we have said all we can for our selves, our Consciences (if ever they
awake) will tell us, that we have no regard either to the dignity of our own
Nature, as we are men, nor to the good of others, as we are Neighbors and
Brethren, nor to the Honor of God, as we are his rational creatures, whilst we
delay our repentance; but that all our delight is to live like beasts, and all
that we value is earthly and vile, and all our care is how to feed our Swinish
lusts, and to humor corruption; and can a man perceive this to be his own
temper, and not be ashamed of himself? Yea, can any one choose but see, that
what he does must needs be altogether as odious and abominable to God, as it is
base and reproachful to himself?

In the first place; How shall a man be able to pardon himself for dealing so
basely with his own Soul, as for a great part of his life, not to allow it the
benefit of its Reason; but to enslave it to the Tyranny of the Flesh? How shall
he be reconciled to himself for dishonouring his own nature, and esteeming of
it so vilely, as tho it had no pre-eminence above that of the meanest Animals?
All the while that we delay our Repentance, we choose for our selves a condition
below the worst condition that any of them can be in, a state of Sin, and
Enmity with God; wherein not the vilest of them ever are or can be. How
sensible are we in the mean time, of the Dignity of our Nature, as we are Men?
How can we choose but blush to continue any time, so very unlike to that which
God at first made Man to be? We cannot choose but know what filthy leprous
creatures sin has made us: And why are we in no more haste to be cleansed and
made whole? Why are we no more ambitious to retrieve the Honor and Glory which
by sin we have lost? When God himself, to show the value of our Humane Nature,
was pleased to send his own Eternal Son to take it upon himself; and he who was
ever God, was not ashamed to be found in fashion as a man, what a baseness is
it in us, to defile that same Nature in the drudgeries of sin, which God
thought not unworthy of a Personal Union with the Divine Nature in his only
begotten Son? What Is the reason we should delay to have Christ formed in us, to
be made Partakers of a Divine Nature in Holiness? Does not God in JESUS Christ
most graciously invite us to this high honor? Has he not opened unto us a
fountain for sin and for uncleanness, wherein the foulest sinner may wash
freely, and become as white as snow? What a vile degeneracy is this that we are
sunk into, That we should fall so deeply in love with our own dishonor, as to
be loath to part with it? We love our Sickness more than our Health; our
Filthiness, more than Purity; our Weakness, more than Strength; our Deformity,
more than Beauty; our Chains of Slavery to the Devil, more than the Liberty of
the Children of God. We had rather obey our Passions than our Reason, and live
like Beasts than like Men; be Earthly than Heavenly, Carnal than Spiritual,
like Devils than like Angels, yea, than like God. What else can be the reason
why we should delay one minute to keep God's Commandments? Do not they all
visibly tend to our Health, and our Honor, and our Happiness? Is it not the
design of them all to make us Wise and Good, and every way perfect in our
Nature, and like unto God in Holiness; the Brethren of Christ, and Children of
God, and Heirs to the glorious Inheritance of the Saints in Light? Why then
make we no more haste to keep them, and to enter into this most Honorable and
Blessed Condition? Can it be for any other reason, but that we love to be as we
are; and take more pleasure in our wretched Slavery, and loathsome Corruption,
than in all that Blessedness and Glory which God so freely offers to restore us
to? And truly if we be thus madly in love with our own Shame and Wretchedness,
it must needs be very just with God to leave us in them, and never once more to
make us those tenders of Mercy, which we cannot yet find in our hearts to thank
him for, or to count worth our acceptance. Suppose a very poor beggar were very
kindly invited by some extraordinary charitable Person of a great Estate, to
throw away his nasty Rags, and to accept of a Rich Suit instead of them; and to
leave off his wandering Trade, and come and live in his Family; with a farther
Promise and Assurance, That he should be Heir to a goodly Inheritance; and the
Beggar should give him no other answer but this; I thank you, Sir, with all my
heart, and I will do as you would have me; but I will take my own time for it:
I love these Rags exceedingly, and I cannot part with them yet; and I am so
accustomed to wander, that I cannot yet endure to be confined, tho it were to a
Palace: But some time or other I will accept of your kindness; when these Rags
will hang about me no longer, and when I am so old or lame, that I can wander
no more, I will come to your house, and expect to have your good Apparel and
Estate. Or suppose some leprous creature should meet with a charitable
Physician, who should very kindly desire him to accept of his help, promising
perfectly to cure him; and this filthy wretch should reply, Sir, I very
heartily and thankfully accept of your kindness, and am resolved to make use of
it whenever I think fit; but I have a great mind to be leprous a while longer;
it is so pleasing a thing to scratch this foul skin of mine, that I cannot
endure to think of being well just now; but whenever I shall grow weary of this
filthy disease, at least, when I am almost kill^d with it, and afraid to dye, I
will call for you, and you shall heal me. I think there is no body that would
say such persons deserved to have such kindnesses offered them any more; but
that they were right served, if they were left to perish by their own base
folly. How then shall we think our Blessed JESUS, who has tendered us greater
kindnesses than these, in our far greater necessities, will resent our Baseness
in Delaying to accept of his Love, whilst we have as little to plead for our
Delay, as these Wretches had? Indeed we need not guess at this; for himself
has told us, in the Parable of the Feast, Luke XIV. It Is God himself that is
represented there by the certain man that made a great supper, and bade many;
it is he, I say, that graciously condescends to bid sinners to a Feast of fat
things; but alas! one has a piece of ground to go see, and another has his
Oxen to prove, and another has a new-married Wife to cherish; and for these
reasons they cannot come when they are bidden: Well, they may stay away then
for ever; for so says God, v. 24. None of those men that were bidden, shall
taste of my supper. If we will be so base as to delight in filthiness, why
should not God with Indignation say, Let them be filthy still?

Secondly, Whosoever delayeth his Repentance, behaveth himself as basely in
reference to others, as to himself; and shows very plainly, That he cares not
what becomes of the whole World, so he might be left freely to enjoy his sins,
without any disturbance. Can any man that professes Religion, be ignorant,
That it is the breaking of God's Commandments, that brings upon the world of
mankind, all the evils it at any time labors under? All the Troubles and
Disturbances which men have one from another, and all the terrible Judgments of
God, which light upon whole Kingdoms, Towns, and Families, are owing to men's
continuance in their sins, and delaying their Repentance. He Is not only too
great a stranger to the Word of God, but a man of very little experience or
observation, that understands not this. And truly he that understands it, and
delayeth his Repentance, declares himself thereby too base to make a Member of
Humane Society; and the world may well be both ashamed and afraid to afford him
entertainment any longer. The very Rabble could hardly be too much enraged, or
vent its fury too freely, on so unnatural a wretch, as chooses rather to
continue one of them, for whom, and by whom, a Nation is in continual danger of
being destroyed, than to be one of those few Righteous Persons, for whose sake
God often spares a very wicked Generation. Would we not account that man one
of the worst-natur'd men in the world, and fit to be trampled down to dirt by
all that met him, who should be so malignantly bent against the welfare of
mankind, and bear such a spite against all men, that rather than the world
should want some noisome Vermin, and poisonous Creatures to molest and hurt it,
would be content himself to be turned into a venomous Toad or Viper? And yet,
when we well consider things, how much worse than either of these, and how much
more mischievous in all kinds, is that man, who delayeth his Repentance; and by
his wilful continuance in sin, not only disordereth the world, and makes it a
very uneasy and dangerous place to live in, but provokes God daily to pour
down Fire from Heaven on the Neighborhood wherein he is suffered to live and
do wickedly? What Punishment could be too great for that man, who being sick of
the Plague, and assured of his Cure, if he would stay within doors, and be
ordered by his Physician, will not hearken to any Advice, in order to his
Health, unless he may be allowed first to run abroad to and fro, infecting all
the Country, as far as his strength will carry him? And how much worse than
this, does he who will not accept of the cure of his sins, till he have had
time enough to fulfill all his lusts, and to corrupt all his Neighbors, and
make all about him, as much as in him lies, fit objects of God's just Wrath
and Indignation? This is all the respect that the delaying Sinner has to the
good of mankind; that rather than want the vile Pleasures of Sin, as long as he
is able to serve his Lusts, he is resolved never to regard what Evils any
number of men fall under, and endure. And what greater baseness of mind and
temper can there be in any one, than this?

Yes, Lastly, The delaying Sinner is come to a degree of baseness far exceeding
all that has yet been said of him. For by his delaying to keep God's
Commandments, he declares, that he has as little sense of God's Honor, and of
his own manifold Obligations to God, as of his own primitive Dignity, or of the
World's Happiness. To delay our Repentance, after that God has been graciously
pleased, in the greatest wonder of mercy, by his only beloved Son to call us to
it; and by him to open unto us a new Door to Salvation, after that Sin had
walled up the old one against us; what less can this be, than, as they are said
to do in the Parable, Matthew. XXII. 5. to set light by the Gospel of Peace? What
is it, but to slight all God's gracious tenders of Peace and Reconciliation, as
things we think as yet needless, and not at all to be valued? To puff at the
goodness, and loving Invitations of God, and to turn scornfully away from his
Call, whilst he beseeches us to return unto him, and be saved: one of us
preferring his Farm, another his Merchandise before the Kingdom of God? We
cannot but be sensible how great a baseness it is to deal, as delaying Sinners
do, with Almighty God, when we shall have well considered the condition wherein
his Mercy overtakes us. We cannot but confess, that as his Creatures, we are
naturally obliged to be entirely obedient to his Will in all things: and that
as Sinners, who have disobeyed his will, he may justly punish us as he
pleases. And we know, that for Sin we all lie under the curse of Death, and
it is justice in God to execute the Sentence of Death upon us at any time, when
he thinks it fit. But instead of doing so, he is pleased in much goodness to
offer us a Pardon, and that upon such terms, as had all been left to our own
choice, we our selves could not reasonably have desired easier; though one
would think no terms of Salvation should seem hard to those who were under a
condemnation to Eternal Torments. All that our good God requires of us, is but
to repent of our sins, and to come in at the hearing of his gracious
Proclamation, and to submit our selves to the Government of that Blessed
Savior, who in his love has provided for us; and to conclude our selves safe,
whilst we continue under his Conduct. And this is it that the delaying Sinner
thinks it not yet time to accept of. Now if any of us be of this mind, pray let
us well consider, what it is that we do. Our offended God is willing not only
to pardon us, and rid us of the fear and danger of Eternal Misery; but also to
reward us with Eternal Blessedness, on condition that we will come in at his
Call, and take the easy Yoke, and light Burden of JESUS CHRIST upon us: but
we will not yet. Is not this then as much as to say thus unto God -- Good God
be content, and have patience awhile longer, there is no such haste. Thou may
be sure we have no mind to perish, and therefore need'st not to question it;
but one time or other, before we die, we will come and accept of thy kindness.
Be not then so hasty with us, but let us alone awhile to mind our own business
that we have set our selves to do; and think it time enough if we hearken to
thy Call, when we shall be a little more at leisure. The World calls us, and
our Lusts call us, and we cannot do all things at once; these must be served in
the first place; and when we have done what we can for them, we will serve
thee. Let us now consider, what we would think of those men, whom we should
overhear uttering such words as these to God with their mouth. And then
consider again, whether this must not be the secret Language of every one's
heart that wilfully delayeth to repent, and keep God's Commandments. I know
there may be many Causes of men's putting off, and neglecting their duty to God.
Some of us are either so ignorant, or so regardless of God, and of all things
that shall be after this life, that they never think to any purpose, or
seriously, and concernedly, of any such thing: and we must needs confess this
to be a most horrid indignity offered to God, as well as a most stupid
senselesness of our own good or evil. Some may have foolishly persuaded
themselves, either that Repentance is a far slighter thing, than really it is;
or that there is no such indispensable necessity of it as is pretended: and how
can we excuse such as these for the affront they put upon God, in not believing
his Word; or in taking so little pains to understand it? But whatever Causes
may be assigned why some men repent not, this is certain, That whosoever is
convinced that Repentance is a duty, without which he cannot be saved, nor God
honored by him, and yet delayeth it; delayeth it for this reason, that he is
in love with some sin or other, which he is not yet willing to part with; the
love whereof is greater in him, than his love of God, and bears it down.
Otherwise his love to God would constrain him to make as much haste to serve
and honor him, as his love to sin now does to disobey and dishonor him. How
long has God already waited to be gracious? How much patience has he had
already to see himself dishonored by us? How many calls and warnings has he
already given us to repent? What then do we in putting off our Repentance yet
longer, but in effect bid him stay a little longer yet; as though we thought
him bound to wait our leisure, and observe our time, and not our selves to
observe his? Yea, what is this, but, as St. Paul says, Romans II. 4. To despise
the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing
(or not considering) that the goodness of God leads us to repentance? God
calls upon us in good earnest, in great compassion, in much patience and
long-suffering; and all this purely for our own Eternal Welfare. All day long
(says he) have I stretched out my hand unto a disobedient and gainsaying
people, Romans X. 21. Isa. LXV. 2. And what says the delaying Sinner to all
this, when he is told of it? I hear you (says he) but let him stay awhile
longer, no haste yet, I have something else to do first. Why? What is it that
should hinder us from making what haste we can to be happy, in harkening to so
good and gracious a God and Father? Why not now, as well as hereafter? I am yet
too young, says the young Sinner; it is yet but the time of blossoming with me;
let me flourish awhile in the days of my vanity; to think too much of God, and
the other World, of Death and Judgment, would make my Flower fade too soon, and
blast all my youthful delights; to be religious so soon, is to be old before my
time; would you have me turn my Spring into Autumn? I will bear Fruit to God,
when Fruit-time comes. I am too busy yet (says the man of full-growth) my
strength is but just come, and fits me for man-like Exercises, and the business
of the World: These are the things it now becomes men of my strength and vigor
to be wholly employed in. I must not yet unfit my self for the management of
worldly Affairs, by entertaining the melancholy Thoughts of preparing my self
to go out of the World. What Trade can a man drive on thrivingly in this World,
if he make his Conscience too soon tender and delicate? My head is yet too full
of Cares (says the old Sinner) and I must not neglect the present opportunity
of making all sure to Posterity, seeing I have one foot already in the Grave.
So soon as I have set all straight for this World, which I now make haste to
do, I will think of the next. O how wise and provident are we all for this
World, and for our Lusts! Let us seriously consider now, what is the plain
English of all this: Are we not afraid, lest God should understand it? And yet
understand it he does, much better than we. God is greater than our hearts, and
knows all things, 1 John III. 20. He knows very well, that the meaning of
all we can say for our delaying to keep his Commandments is this, with what
fine words soever we would cover it. We will give the First Fruits, and every
choice part of our time, our health, our strength, our wealth, our parts, and
all we have, to Sin and Satan; and the vile and refuse, and what we cannot tell
how otherwise to dispose of, we will give to God, who gave us all things.
Whatsoever good thing he has bestowed upon us, we will spend as much of it as
we can upon his Enemies; and then throw him back their leavings. We are
resolved to have our own will, and to do our own pleasure whilst we are able;
and when we know not how to take our pleasure in any thing, we will do what we
can to please God. We will do, and submit to his Will, when we can no longer do
what we would our selves. It Is enough to bestow that upon God, which is good
for nothing else, or whereof we can make no other use. We may come, ere we die,
to be deprived of all the delightful things which this World affords; we may
come to be old, and past all youthful pleasures, and worldly business too; we
may come to be sick, and cannot relish any longer what before we loved; and
then will it be time enough to serve God. We resolve to part with all our sins
at last for God's sake, but we cannot endure to do it so soon; that is, in
truth we cannot endure to part with them at all; and will never do it for his
sake, nor at all, as long as we can keep them. We perfectly hate God's Service,
and are resolved to keep out of it as long as we can, or dare: in plain terms,
we will never serve him, if we can help it; and when we talk of resolving to
serve him hereafter, we can mean no more but this; We are resolved to keep out
of his service as long as ever we can, and to venture as far as ever we dare in
the way to death. Now when we consider, what God is in himself; and what he
has always been, and would be to us; I think it may be safely concluded, that
there cannot be imagined any higher degree of baseness, whereof it is possible
for man to be guilty, than this amounts to. And therefore nothing can be more
odious and provoking to Almighty God, than this foul Sin of delaying our
Repentance.

SECT. IV. The First Danger of Delaying.
I Am sensible how hard a thing it is to make one who loves his sin, to see the
baseness of it. If he be young, it is hard to bring him to that degree of
seriousness, as is needful to such a thorough consideration, as must make him
understand it: and if he be old, long custom has hardened him in it, and taken
away the sense of baseness. But he that is grown too impudent to be ashamed,
may possibly be made afraid; and an apprehension of danger may move him that
has lost the sense of Baseness. Let us therefore now consider the great danger
we are in by delaying our Repentance, and the keeping of God's Commandments;
and we shall find it to be no less, than that of perishing everlastingly. We
must repent before we die, or at death we sink into Eternal Misery; and
therefore it is certain, that seeing none of us knows how soon he must die,
every delay of our Repentance, which must be before we die, or never, is
extremely dangerous. We say, we are resolved to repent; and it behooves us to do
more than resolve upon it; for without doing it, how fully soever we resolve to
do it, we must perish for ever. When therefore will we repent, that we may be
out of danger? Not yet, but sometime hereafter. Well, but now consider it in
earnest; Is there not a great deal of danger in driving it off till hereafter?
Run we not a great hazard in doing so? All we can hope for, and all that we can
fear, our attaining to the one, our escaping the other, depends upon our actual
Repentance; and will we yet venture all upon hereafter? Suppose That Hereafter
never come, but we die before; then farewell to all possibility of Repentance
and Salvation too. Suppose we live till Hereafter, but be then as unwilling to
repent as we are now; then shall we be no better, but much worse than we are
now* and in more danger of dying in our impenitence, and of Perishing. Suppose
we shall hereafter have some kind of willingness to repent, but shall not be
able to repent so, as that God will accept of our Repentance* then is there no
remedy, but we are undone for ever. Here then lies the danger of delaying till
hereafter. We know not whether we shall have an hereafter or no to repent in;
we know not, if we have an hereafter, whether we shall repent in it or no: We
know not, if we shall in some sort repent hereafter, whether our Repentance
then will be accepted, and do us any good, or none. How dangerous then must it
be to put it off till hereafter!

What assurance can any of us have, that we shall have an hereafter to repent
in? How know we, that we shall not die before? God has not assured us of any
such thing, and Man cannot; on what then do we build our hopes of living to any
time hereafter? We are well assured, That it is appointed for all men once to
die, and after that, the judgment, Heb. IX. 27. We are well assured, that
except we repent, we shall all perish, and die the second death, and go into
everlasting punishment. But who has assured us, that we shall have any time at
all, after this that now is, to repent in? And if we be not assured of this,
what can it be to put off that which must be done before we die, to another
day, which we have no assurance at all that we shall live to see, but a rash
hazarding of our Souls to all Eternity? What is our life? St. James has told
us, and we all know it; It is even a vapor, that appears for a little time,
and then vanishes away, Jam. IV. 14. And thence that Apostle very rationally
dissuades men from the great folly of confidently resolving, any otherwise than
conditionally, to do any thing hereafter; Whereas ye know not what shall be on
the morrow: How foolish a thing is it to say, to morrow we will do this or
that? Ye ought to say, if the Lord will, we shall live, and do this or that, V.
15. When we say, we will repent to morrow; do we know whether we shall be alive
or dead to morrow? If we do not, what can we mean by saying so, but this; That
if we live, we will repent to morrow? And are we content then to be damned if
we die to night? If not, why are we so mad as to put it to the venture? Boast
not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth,
says the wise man, Prove. XXVII. 1. Alas! a day, an hour, the least moment of
time may lay the strongest and most confident of us all upon our backs in the
dust; and why are we confident we shall repent to morrow, when we know so
little what changes one single minute may produce? Is it possible that any of
us, whilst we see so many every day dropping down into the grave round about
us, should need a Monitor to mind him, that this life is a very ticklish thing
to trust to? What though we be young, and lusty, and healthful? Were not some
of them so too, who died the other day; and thought they not themselves as
likely to live as any of us can be? All their confidence is swallowed up of
Death in a moment; and I am sure we are all of us so many days the nearer to
Death, as we have outlived them. How many hundreds yearly die in the heat and
wantonness of their youthful blood? How many in the very fullness of strength
and vigor? How many in the very throng of their worldly business, and whilst
they are as busy as the Be in gathering for old age? How many in the midst of
their mirth and jollity, yea, in the very acts of Sin, in their drunkenness and
gluttony, their fornication and adultery, their theft and robbery, their anger
and revenge? How many in the height of their security and confidence, sleeping
in their beds, riding merrily on the rode, going busily about their common
affairs? It Is no news to hear of sudden and unexpected Deaths of many sorts;
and less strange can it be to any one to see those young people cut off by
Death, who thought it too soon to become good and serious; and were unwilling
to mar their juvenile pleasures with many thoughts of Piety and Religion. Let
us but think, how many are already Dead, who delayed their Repentance with as
much confidence as we can do, to Repent hereafter, till they had no time left
them to Repent in: And how fruitlesly they now lament their folly in doing so.
Think but what they would now be content to give, that they might have their
life to begin again on Earth; and whether they would, were that granted them,
venture again to delay their Repentance, and hazard another sudden fall into
those intolerable torments, which now they feel! O let us not stay, till
thinking of this will do us no good; let us not go on till we fall into their
condition, and experience the Torments of vain and fruitless wishes. Let us not
indulge our infidelity as to these things, till some come from the dead to make
us believe; lest we be made, before we fear it, to see and feel, what we make
no more haste to escape. We say still, we will Repent and become new men to
morrow: But alas, we know not yet whether we shall live till then; nay, we know
not but that our bodies may be in the Grave, and our Souls in Hell to morrow;
and for this very reason, because we Repent not to day. Who then that is wise
will venture one moment longer on such an uncertainty?

But suppose we may live, and have the time we at present presume so
groundlesly upon; we may not be one jot the better for it when we have it. We
are to consider yet farther, how many things may happen to us at that time or
before, which may as much disable us to Repent, as Death it self. We may live,
and yet be as good as dead unto all manner of Religious Duty and Exercise: We
may be, we know not how soon, in such a condition, as we may not be able either
to reflect on what is past, or understand what is present, or consider what is
to come. We cannot be ignorant, how many Diseases suddenly surprise men, which,
though they do not immediately deprive them of life, yet destroy their memory,
and understanding, and reason; or so weaken them, that they can be of little
use for the exercise of Repentance. May we not be suddenly taken with an
Apoplexy or a Lethargy, with a Phrenzy, or Melancholy, or Dotage? May we not
become mad or foolish, and so distracted and crazed in our heads, that we
cannot at all consider either what we do, or what we should do? Yea, suppose
none of these things befall us, yet are there other diseases and pains,
whereunto we are subject, and which we may labor under a very considerable
time before they kill us; by which yet we may be brought into such a condition,
as we shall find it very hard to perform any Religious Duty as we ought. We may
lie under such continual, and even intolerable pains of body; under such daily
languishings, and faintings, and decays of Strength and Spirits, that we shall
have very little freedom or strength of mind left us to Consider, and do all
that is needful to Repentance, which till then has been delayed. Why do not we
think our selves concerned to prevent all these evils? Are we not sensible that
such things often befall men, who as little feared them as we do? And may they
not, for ought we know, befall us as well as any others? If we are surprised by
any of these after we are become sincere Penitents, they do us but little hurt;
they are God's Visitations indeed; and for what, He (it may be) only knows; but
the worst that comes to us by them, is only this, That we are long a dying, and
in such a manner as it pleases God. But if we have not sincerely Repented
before these evils seize us, it is greatly to be feared, we shall never be able
to Repent; and God only knows, what will become of us. Let us then be so wise,
as to make good use of our strength and health, our senses and understanding,
whilst we have them. Why make we not all sure now whilst we can, seeing we know
not how soon it will be, that we cannot? Now we are young, we are too jovial
and airy; and we put all off to those years, which we suppose will of course
bring with them more Seriousness, and when we think it will better become us to
look gravely and Religiously. When those years, which we are wont to call the
years of Discretion, are come; we find that a great deal of other business
comes with them; and now we are men and women, we are engaged in the World; and
if we have got loose from the Vanities of Youth, which do not seldom hold us
fast even till we die, we are become entangled in things that are but a little
better; and we put off all yet till old age come and make us more leisure. Old
age is all this while stealing insensibly upon us, and we perceive it not for
the throng we are in, till we find our selves on a sudden grown too heavy and
dull, and our faculties too much decayed, and too feeble for much business. And
then instead of serious reflections on the state of our Souls, we are rather
apt to reflect with too much concern on our present bodily weakness, as we are
become unable to do any longer as we have done, and yet have as great a mind to
do as ever. And hence also instead of being Penitent for our Sins, we are apt
to grow Passionate, Peevish, and Impatient; and our Repentance is still put off
to our last Sickness. After all these delays, it may be we have no Sickness at
all, Death gives us no warning at all of its approach, but knocks us down with
a sudden blow; or else it sends such a Messenger for us, as will not allow us
to know or consider, whither we are going, by reason of either the stupefaction
or Torment which it lays us under. What remains then, but that we take the
Preacher's advice, Ecc. XII. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall
say, I have no pleasure in them.

But besides the uncertainty of the term of our life, as to us; and many
disappointments, which not unusually befall us in it; we ought farther to
consider, that it is very Just in God to cut our lives the shorter, for our
delaying to keep his Commandments. Neither can we take a more likely course to
provoke God to take us away in the midst of our days, or to render them by his
Judgments intolerable to us, than this bad use which we make of them. When by
delaying our Duty to God we make it appear, that we grudge him any considerable
part of our time; and that we are resolved to dishonor him with as much of it,
and to bestow upon his Service as little of it as we can; what readier way can
we take to provoke him, either to cut our thread of life very short, or to make
it very knotty to us? Can we our selves when we think well of it, judge it fit,
that he, to whose goodness we owe our life, and being, and in whose hands our
times are, Psalm. XXXI. 15. In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and
the breath of all mankind, Job XII. 10. should allow us just as much time as we
desire, to dishonor and affront him in? I confess, I know not what greater
Presumption we can be guilty of, than to resolve to rebel against God as long
as we can think it safe to do so, and to expect he should give us from day to
day more time to do so in. O let us take heed, lest he take away our breath,
and we return to our dust ere we have begun to serve him; for then be sure all
these vain thoughts shall perish. Psalm. CVI. 4. The youngest of us is not sure
to live one day longer; and we who grow old are very sure, that we cannot have
many days more, if any, to live in this World: nor what kind of days, be they
many or few, they will prove to us. Let us then no longer delay our Repentance,
because we are so little sure that we shall have any hereafter to repent in.

SECT. V. The Second Danger of DELAY.
AS it is a dangerous thing to drive off our Repentance, in hopes that we may
have time enough hereafter to repent in: So is it altogether as dangerous upon
another account, Because we know not, if we have an hereafter, whether we shall
repent in it, or no. I have already mentioned some things, which may disable us
to repent hereafter; but besides this, it may well be feared, that we may be
also as unwilling, and every way as much indisposed to repent hereafter, as we
are now. Is there not as much reason now to move us to keep the Commandments of
God, as ever there will be hereafter? Is he not the same God now, that he will
be then, one and the same, unchangeable for ever? Are not our Obligations, and
our Dependances on him the same? And is not the danger of dying impenitent, the
same now, that it will be then? What reason then can we have to hope, that if
the consideration of these things will not move us now to Repentance, it should
prevail more with us hereafter? How difficult, or how easy soever the Duty may
now seem to us; or whatever it is that now affrights us from it, or encourages
us to delay it: we have little cause to think that it will become more easy by
delay; that we shall meet with fewer difficulties the longer we drive it off,
or fewer temptations to defer it still longer. Nay, it is very certain, that the
longer we delay, the difficulty daily more and more increases, and very
probably, so will our unwillingness too; for it is not very likely, that we
shall be more willing to set our selves about a harder work hereafter, seeing
we dare not venture on it now that it is much more easy. Would to God all
impenitent Sinners could be brought to consider this; That all the good they do
themselves by delaying their Repentance, is to make it every day harder for
them to do a thing, which they must do, or else they perish. That we may be
convinced of this folly, let us observe but these few things. 1. That the
Causes of Delay will hereafter be the same, and as forcible upon us, as now. 2.
That the Work will hereafter be greater. 3. Our Strength for it, is like to be
less. 4. Our Time to do it in, will be shorter. 5. Our Assistances are like to
be fewer. And, 6. Our Impediments and Discouragements are like to be more. And
when all this has been well thought on, we cannot but see, that though all
that time, which we very groundlesly presume upon, should be granted us; yet
cannot we be sure that we shall, nay, we are more sure of the two, that we
shall not make so good use of it, as we may do of the time which is present.

1. Look what Causes we think we have at present to delay our Repentance till
another time; the same, or more, and more powerful to work upon us, are we like
to have hereafter; and it is like to be as hard, or harder then not to be
tempted to delay, than now it is. Is it now a careless, negligent and
unconsidering temper of mind that is the cause of our delay? And is it not
likely, the longer we delay, that this same supine and regardless temper will
be the more fixed and confirmed? What is it that we think will alter it? The
Temper we are of is such, as admits of none, or very slight thoughts of any
such future alteration of it; these thoughts consist not with such a careless
and inconsiderate temper, as we suppose to be the cause of our delay. However,
such a change of it hereafter is not to be depended on. What makes men more
careless and secure in their sinful Courses, than long impunity and
forbearance? He that was a little afraid to venture on sin at first, lest he
should be punished for it, and lest the Wrath of God should light suddenly upon
him in some severe judgment; and he that was at first somewhat ashamed to sin,
and unable to conquer his natural Modesty, or to endure the reproaches of his
natural Conscience: after he has with some struggling broke through these bars
of fear and shame, the further he ventures forward, the farther he leaves them
both behind him. When the sin is become customary, and yet he finds that he
suffers nothing by it; he is the more emboldened to continue in it. The
longer he escapes what at first he was afraid of, the less apt is he to fear
it; and the more hope he has to escape it still. The prosperity of fools
destroys them, Prove. I. 32. How, but by making them the more careless and
resolute to go on in the ways wherein they thrive, as we find it by daily
experience in all sorts of Sinners? Because sentence against an evil work is
not speedily executed; therefore the hearts of the sons of men is fully set in
them to do evil, Eccl. VIII. 11.

Is the cause of our delay a secret root of Atheism or Infidelity, a disbelief
of God, and of his Word? The longer we go on in any sin, the more likely are we
to be hardened in our unbelief. For whilst we hold on offending God, and
disobeying his Word; and yet find, that notwithstanding all his terrible
threatenings, he does not seem to take any notice of us, but lets us alone,
and stretches not out his hand to execute vengeance upon us; we are apt to
take as little notice of God, as we foolishly imagine he takes of us; and
because we continue to do these evil things, and God keeps silence, we conclude
the more confidently, either with the Fool, Psalm. XIV. 1. That there is no God:
or with another as foolish as he, Psalm. L. 21. That he is altogether such an
one as our selves. The prosperous Sinner is apt to say in his heart, God has
forgotten; he hides his face, he will never see it. He contemns God; he
says in his heart, thou will not require it, Psalm. X. 11, 13. The Lord shall
not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it, Psalm. XCIV. 7. To such a
brutishness does our continuance in sin ordinarily bring us!

Is it an unwarrantable presumption of the greatness of God's Mercy, or of his
unwearied Forbearance, that is the cause of our delay? And is it not then too
natural to men of this presumption, to presume still the more confidently, the
longer God forbeareth them? Certainly he that delayeth at first, presuming on
that patience, whereof he has yet had comparatively but little experience;
will be the more apt to delay still longer, after he has long experienced the
patience, and long-suffering of God.

Is it the love of our sins wherewith we are bewitched, so that we are not able
to part with them, and therefore delay our Repentance? And what reason have we,
if we now love them so well, to think, that we shall not love them as well
hereafter, as now we do? What can we imagine should bring us out of love with
sin more then, than now? We may not be able to commit some sins hereafter,
which now we commit; but I see not, why we may not have the same love for them
hereafter, which we have now. Nay, I see, that usually it is so; and that few
sins are less loved for becoming habitual. The more we practice them, the more
we love them; and the longer we have tasted the sensual sweetness of them, the
less can we endure to be without them. And if our Inclinations and Tempers so
alter with our Age, that some juvenile sins do not relish with us as they were
wont; yet we do but change them for others; and we are as averse from goodness,
and as much inclined to evil as ever. The Sins which suit with all ages of man,
we commit with as much greediness as ever, and as things which by custom are
become natural; and we sin even as we eat and drink; being as unable (as it
seems to us) to live without the one, as without the other. And though, it may
be, some sorts of Sins grow stale, and we find hereafter no temptation to them;
yet is there one thing, which, the longer we delay our Repentance, grows still
the more strong; and that is an inordinate self-love; and the less we have been
used to deny our selves in the things we love, the harder still shall we find
it to do so. We have been used to humor our selves, and to feed corrupt Nature
in all things which it craves; and then it is all a case, how the Appetite
changes as to this or that sin; seeing what it desires, it must have; and we
have lost all power to resist it. But these things it is needless to prove,
being too notorious to be denied. Only they ought to be more considered, that
when we think well how there will be hereafter as many temptations to delay,
and as powerful too, as there are now; we may discern our folly in delaying our
Repentance now, in hopes to repent hereafter.

2. But this is not all; for we shall certainly find, that the longer we delay,
the greater will the work be. And then, whatever the causes be that now
persuade us to delay it, they are more likely to persuade us to delay hereafter
than now. If they can prevail with us to neglect a necessary work, when it is
less; they will more easily prevail, when the very greatness of the work seems
enough of it self to dishearten us from going about it.

Let us then consider, how much greater a work it will be to repent hereafter,
than now. First, It is very certain, that the longer we have neglected to learn
the will of God, the more we have to learn. And the longer we have neglected to
do the Commandments of God, the more we have to do. The longer we stay before
we repent, the more sins we have to repent of. He that has long since begun
his work, and has made a considerable progress in it, will not hereafter find
so much to do, as he that has done nothing at all of it, but has then all to
begin. All those Omissions and Neglects we have been every day guilty of, come
then to be repented of; as well as the things which have been neglected and
omitted, as far as it is possible, to be done; and all this labor had been
saved, had we repented, and done our duty in due time. We every day sin, even
though we do all that we can to avoid it; (which yet we seldom do) and every
day we ought to repent of the sins of the day; and therefore till we repent,
every day much increases the labor of Repentance, because every day adds to
the number of our sins to be repented of. And our delay to repent, when we have
sinned, is one of the greatest sins of all; and every day's delay is such a new
sin added to that of the former day. And indeed, so long as a man delayeth his
Repentance, he does nothing else but heap up sin upon sin; and every thing he
does, is full of sin. And what a task does he thus make himself, to repent of
all these sins hereafter? Yea, every Conviction that we have sinned, and ought
to repent; and every purpose, and resolution, and thought of repenting, not
speedily put in execution, is an aggravation of our guilt, and makes our sins
the more sinful, the less excusable, and more hardly pardonable; because it is a
sign, that we go on in sin against Knowledge, against Conscience, against the
good Motions of God's Holy Spirit, and against the Rebukes of our own Hearts;
the delay is thoroughly wilful, and sin is freely chosen; and thus our sins
become as great as can be, and are a striving against Conscience, a resisting
and grieving of the Spirit, a quenching of its holy Motions, and a daily
fighting against God, or a resolute maintaining our ground against him. And
must not all this make Repentance a much harder work, than otherwise it might
have been? How much easier is it to pluck up two or three weeds daily in a
Garden, as we perceive them shooting forth; than to weed one that, through
neglect, is quite overrun with them? And to how much better purpose too were it
so to do? For by that means, the good Plants have liberty to thrive and
flourish; whilst by neglect all that is good is choked up, and rarely turns to
any advantage. So much easier is it, and to far better purpose and advantage to
repent early than late. When one has gone on but a few steps in a wrong way,
and will not then turn back, because he thinks it too much pains for him to do
so; how much more unwilling is he like to be to go back again, when he is gone
on many miles? He that is afraid to encounter two or three Enemies at present,
will hardly be so stout afterward as to set upon an Army of many thousands:
especially when by his delay he has given them time to strengthen themselves.
And this is the second thing that we are here to consider, that by our delay we
suffer our sins to grow not only in number, but in strength too: and as it is
easier to repent of a few sins than many; so must it needs be a far harder task
to conquer many sins in their full strength, than a few, and weaker too. Every
one knows by woeful experience, if ever he have attempted to get the mastery of
his sin, what strength every sin gains in us by our long accustoming of our
selves to it; and how much easier it is to leave off the practice of any sin,
after but once or twice committing it; than after that by frequent committing
of it, it is become habitual, and in a manner natural to us; and, when we have
by custom brought our selves to that pass, that we seem to our selves to stand
in as much need of our sin, as we do of our food and raiment, and can as little
be content without it. It Is easy to pluck up a tender Sprout of the first or
second years growth; but this, by letting it stand and grow, is every year
harder and harder to do; and at last, when it is become a strong Tree,
impossible for the strongest man to do. It Is easy to quench a small spark
that is but just taking hold of the Thatch; but it is not so easy to extinguish
the fire, when the whole House is on a flame. It may be no difficult matter to
cure a little Sore at first; but it will be more hard to do it, when by delay
it is grown into a hollow and filthy Ulcer; and hardly possible, if it come to a
Cancer, or a Gangreen. How strange a thing is it then, that we should delay our
Repentance, the only cure of a diseased and ulcerous Soul, till by delay we
become almost past possibility of being cured! Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye also do good, that are accustomed
to do evil, Jer. XIII. 23.

3. As our work by delay grows greater, so our strength for such a work, grows
less; and that makes it still harder. The more sick a man grows, or the
longer he lies under his Disease, the weaker he grows too, and the less
strength he has to help himself. Tho we are all corrupt enough by nature; and
as we are so of our selves, by much too weak to conquer any Lust without the
help of supernatural Grace: yet our giving way to our natural corruption, and
our indulging our selves in our own weaknesses, makes us still weaker and
weaker. He that exercises not his strength, by degrees loses it. And he that
instead of resisting his Enemy as well as he can, lays himself down at his
feet to be trod upon, will find that he has then less strength to raise
himself up, than he had at first to stand his ground. In like manner, he that,
instead of making what defense he is able, stands still, and lets his Enemy
give him wound after wound as long as he will; if he have a mind to save
himself at last, may find that he has not strength enough left him, either to
fight, or run away. In three things principally a man's natural strength to
withstand a temptation to wickedness, or to change an ill Custom for a better,
may seem to consist, 1. In the conduct of natural Conscience. 2. In the virtue
of deliberate Consideration. 3. In the hope of Success. But by delaying our
Repentance, we lose more and more of this strength daily.

First, Though our Natures be strongly biassed toward Evil, and we do mightily
of our selves incline that way; yet is there such a thing in us as the light of
Nature; whereby we see, in many things, that we go wrong, and walk so, as it
very much misbecometh us to do. We yet retain some Principles of Morality, and
natural Notions of Good and Evil, Honesty and Dishonesty, Decency and
Indecency, which are not quite erazed, nor worn out. And our Consciences are
ready to check us for doing contrary to our Nature, and to reproach us with the
unreasonableness and shamefulness of acting some evil things. But when we long
neglect to heaken to our Reason, and to obey the dictates of it; yielding to
our brutish Affections, and giving them the sole command of us: we by degrees
forget we have any such thing as Reason to direct us, and our Consciences fall
asleep, having nothing to do; our unruly Lusts ruling us in every thing. We can
see nothing unhandsome in what we are fondly in love with, nor can we any more
be ashamed of what we have long accustomed our selves unto; especially when we
find we are not alone in any of our sins, but find Companions enough to
embolden us in any wickedness. Were they ashamed when they had committed
abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush, Jer.
VI. 15. The Sinner, after a little time, begins to think it a piece of bravery
to be impudent, and to glory in his shame; and nothing must be thought
unreasonable, or undecent, that he has a mind to do. Thus our foolish Hearts
are more and more darkened, and our Conscience seared as with a hot iron, 1 Timothy IV. 1.

And when it is so with us, that our Reason bears no sway for the tyranny of
our Lusts; there can be no help from Consideration, because there can be no
such thing to any purpose; this being the proper work of Reason uningaged by
affection, and at liberty to do its office. Or if sometimes Conscience be a
little startled upon any occasion, and begin to be restless, and set our
thoughts on work awhile; yet alas, the condition, which by delaying our
Repentance we bring our selves into, is so sad and frightful, that we cannot
endure to think much of it; but presently turn our thoughts another way, and
busy them about something more pleasant to us. Indeed most of us have learned
well enough, how to keep our selves from all serious Consideration of either
the unreasonableness, shame, or danger of our sinful ways; being always so
busy about the Affairs of the World, or our Vanities, or in making provision
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, that we are seldom at leisure to
think much on any thing else.

Lastly, By long continuing in our sins, and giving way to our Lusts, we give
them so much the mastery and dominion over us, that when at any time we are
able to consider a little in what a wretched State we are, and begin to have
some thoughts of getting into a better; we find our selves so fast hampered by
them, and that they have taken such strong hold of us, that an extraordinary
strength is necessary to break loose from them. Hereupon our Courage quite
fails us, and we have no hopes at all, that ever we can be able to recover our
selves out of the snare, wherein we have suffered our selves to be so much
entangled; all our spirits therefore sink down into Despair; and we are not
willing to labor (as we fear) in vain, or to disquiet our selves any longer,
about what we imagine past all help. O that we could be brought in time to
Consider, how by delay we are apt to be perfectly infatuated, and as it were,
enchanted, having no use of Reason or Consideration; no Courage left us to
attempt our Freedom, or Hope to obtain it; but lie in our slavery without any
Sense of our vile Condition, and without either Wit or Strength ever to come
out of it.

4. As by Delay our Work grows greater, and our Strength less; so our time is
every day shortened; and tho we have both more to do, and less Skill and Ability
to work, yet have we less time for our work. The more time we have already
sinned away, the less we are sure is behind to Repent, serve God, and provide
for our Souls in. Tho we may know how much we have had already to an ill
purpose as we have abused it, yet we know not how little, or whether any at
all, will be granted us for a better. We are sure, That what is yet to come,
cannot be very long, because so much is already gone; and yet put both
together, were it possible, all would have been short enough for the work we
had to do in it. Now if a work be so great, that it cannot be done perfectly,
and as well as it should be done, tho a man take the whole day to it, is it not
a madness to drive it off, hoping it may be done well enough in one or two of
the last hours of the day? He that has the lost time of many Years to redeem,
had need to ply his business very close indeed, if he hope to do it in a few
days. Can we think that our corrupt hearts and minds will be thoroughly changed
and cleansed, all our sinful desires and affections quite altered, our whole
Conversation reformed, every evil habit broken off, every lust mortified, and
the whole man renewed, all Graces acquired, Sanctification completed, and
every necessary Duty performed all on a sudden, in a moment of time? If the
work be so easy, and so little time will serve to do it in, the more is our
Shame and Guilt both, and the less excusable are we, that we have done all no
sooner, having had so much time already to do it in.

And yet supposing all might be done in so little time, and we might repent
sufficiently and savingly, of a long wicked life, in some small part of it
toward the end; it ought to be considered, That a little time will hardly be
enough for a man to try and be well assured of the Sincerity of his Repentance;
and yet we know, that if it be not since^e, it will do us no good; and till we
know it is sincere, it can afford us little Comfort. He that repents earliest,
shall now and then meet with Temptations to doubt whether he has sincerely
repented or no; and it will cost him some pains to search into his own heart,
and to make himself in any good and comfortable measure sure of it. And to find
this, is the only thing that must be the comfort of his old age, and the
sweetness of his Dying thoughts. But he that defers his Repentance to the later
part of his Life, if then he may Repent unto Salvation, yet may he find the
time much too short for him very comfortably to assure himself that he has
done so indeed; and therefore though he may Repent, possibly he may not be able
so well to know it, as not to go out of this World with many fears and doubts,
and much uncomfortable distraction of thoughts about it. And though this may
possibly be the case of some, who have lived a life of Repentance; yet is it
not a thing a man would choose, or that he should not do what he can to
prevent, as I am sure he that delayeth his Repentance does not. He that lives
well, may through the tenderness of his Conscience, and jealousy of himself,
die somewhat uncomfortably; but he that lives ill almost as long as he lives, I
think must needs do so, if he be not so dozed or stupefied with his disease,
that he cannot be sensible that he is a dying; or else have the favor of some
extraordinary Revelation, which such an one of all men has least reason to
hope for.

5. For he that long delayeth his Repentance, has reason enough to fear, that
he shall have less Assistance hereafter for this great work, than now he may
have. All the helps we can hope for, come from the Holy Spirit of God, without
whose special Grace we shall never do any thing that is acceptable to him, or
available to our own Salvation. We are too weak of our selves to cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect Holiness: It is
God that works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Now that
man must have a strange measure of unreasonable confidence, that thinks he has
the Grace of God at his Command; and can make himself sure to have it just when
he shall call for it; or that the longer he has rejected it, the greater
measures of it should be bestowed upon him. Is this the way to oblige God to be
more liberal of his Grace unto us hereafter, to turn his Grace already given us
into wantonness? Is to Dishonor him as long as we can, the best way to assure
us of his help in time of need? What is it then, whereby any one can possibly
provoke God to withdraw or withhold his Grace from him? What needs any one care
how he lives, if he can be sure of Grace enough to save him at any time before
he die? And if he cannot be sure to have Grace enough at any time when he
pleases before he die, how dare he delay his Repentance any one day of his
life, lest he should die before the next day? Certainly that person that
delayeth his Repentance in expectation of Grace, when he sees his own time to
call for it; has a confidence grounded on something else than the Holy
Scripture, Far be it from us to limit the infinite Goodness of God. His Mercies
as well as his Judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out.
Extraordinary favors may be granted to some, but are not to be relied on by
any. I hope God does give Grace at last to many who have long refused it; but I
know not where he has promised that he will offer it again to them that refuse
it when it is offered. If therefore he that delays his Repentance in hope of
Grace to Repent hereafter, meet with the Grace he hoped for, he has cause to
be extraordinary thankful for an unpromised Mercy* but if any one expect to
have such an extraordinary Mercy, he has great reason to be humbled for so
groundless a presumption. For this is not the ordinary method of saving
Sinners, which God has made us acquainted with: and certainly he makes too
bold with God Almighty, that expects he should bring him to Heaven by any other
way than by that which he has pointed out unto him to walk in; or who hopes
for that assistance which he never promised, refusing to make use of that which
he has assured him of if he will now accept it. God has said, that whosoever
has, or makes good use and improvement of the Grace already given, to him
shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: But whosoever has not, or
makes not a wise improvement of what God has given, to the Donor's Glory and
his own Salvation, from him shall be taken away even that he has, Matthew. XIII.
12. God ordinarily, as well as justly, leaves such men to grow worse hereafter,
who are not willing to grow better now. He withdraws his Holy Spirit from them,
who have long resisted and grieved him. They who are not now willing to recover
themselves out of the snare of the Devil, having been taken captive by him at
his will, are deservedly left in the slavery they delight in. God says unto
them, Hearing ye shall hear, and not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and
shall not perceive, Matthew. XIII. 14. He leaves them to Satan to blind their
eyes, and harden their hearts, lest they should be converted, and Christ should
heal them, Joh. XII. 40. What a madness then must it be to delay our acceptance
of the Grace which is now freely tendered unto us, in hope of having it
tendered to us again, when we think it a fitter time for it; when God has
declared that we do thereby provoke him to withdraw his Grace from us for ever,
and never to make us another offer of it so long as we live.

6. Lastly, Our Impediments and Discouragements are like to be more and greater
the longer we delay: As a stone that is tumbling down the hill, the longer it
continues rouling downwards, goes with the greater force, and is more hardly
stopped; so our own corrupt inclinations, the longer we give way to them, carry
us on with the more earnestness in the old beaten paths of Sin toward Hell
beneath, and the more difficult is it for us to recover our selves. Our old
acquaintance and brethren in iniquity, the longer we continue in their Society
and Friendship, cling so much the closer unto us; and use all their art and
power to hold us fast; so that it is always harder to break from them. The
Devil, who before emboldened us to rush headlong upon any wickedness, without
any check, or restraint of Conscience, now fills our heads with fears and
jealousies, that our case is already become desperate; and he that before
persuaded us it was too soon, now persuades us it is too late to think of
providing for our safety. The longer we continue in our folly, the more foolish
we grow; and the less capable of being taught how to grow Wise unto Salvation.
And the wickeder we have been, and the more shamfully we have behaved our
selves, the more ashamed we grow to confess, that we have so long been mad, and
base, and brutish, and to change our course of life for that which we have so
long scorned as foolishness. There are so many restitutions, reparations,
satisfactions, and confessions to be made to our injured Neighbors; so much
humbling of our selves, and Pardon to be begged both of God and of all men whom
we have offended; there is so much more pains to be taken and diligence to be
used in redeeming our misspent time, and fitting our Souls for Heaven, that
very few who have lived long in wickedness, have courage to venture upon, and
go through all this. Besides, there are not very many persons who by living
long have less business, or fewer cares and troubles upon them of one sort or
other; however, they have thereby more bodily infirmities, and usually less
vigor, and activeness of mind. And how then can any one judge it fit to delay a
most necessary duty, which might before have been done with less disturbance,
to such a time as this, when we cannot hope for fewer hindrances and
discouragements than we formerly had, if we find not many more, as is not
unusual? From all this, I suppose, it must now be very plain to every one* That
as we are not sure of any time at all hereafter to Repent in, so neither can we
be sure if we shall have time, that we shall Repent in it. Nay, I think it is
plain enough, that it is more likely of the two, that we shall not.

SECT. VI. The third Danger of DELAY.
A Third danger of delaying our Repentance is this, That we know not, if in
some sort we shall repent hereafter, whether our Repentance then will be
accepted, and do us any good, or none. And certainly this is a Point which any
wise man would be well satisfied in, before he venture to defer his Repentance
one moment longer. Let us therefore consider well of it. Shall we defer our
Repentance till it will do us no good? And are we sure, that if we defer it
now, it will do us good hereafter? If God will not accept of it, it can do us
no good. And how are we sure that God will then accept of it? Whether he will
accept of it or not, I know not any one in the World besides himself that can
tell; and I do not remember that God himself has any-where told us that he
will. He has told us, That without Repentance he will not save us; and he has
told us, That if we repent we shall be saved: But I cannot remember where he
has told us, That though we repent not now, but put it off to another time, we
may then so repent, that he will accept of our Repentance, and save us.

It will be said by those who have no mind to repent yet, that God has told
us, That all who repent and believe the Gospel shall be saved: and that if any
man shall turn from all his wickedness which he has committed* he shall live.
And therefore, whether one repent early or late, if he repent at all, he shall
be saved. Now I very readily and gladly grant what God in his Word has told us
to our great encouragement and comfort, if we will make a right use of it: That
CHRIST JESUS came into the World to save Sinners, and those very great Sinners
too; and such as had continued very long in a state of sin; and that we have no
reason in the world to fear, that any one, how great a Sinner soever he has
been, shall be rejected of him, if he unfeignedly repent and believe the
Gospel. All this is a most comfortable truth, and we have great reason to be
heartily thankful for it. But after all this, we had need to be very careful
that we be not mistaken in the meaning of those two words, BELIEVING and
REPENTING: and that we do not understand by them any other things, than that
very Faith and Repentance unto which Salvation is promised. Now as some, I
fear, take a Faith, that implies not a holy Life, for a saving Faith; so some
may take Repentance, that implies not a holy Life, for a saving Repentance. And
it is to be greatly feared, that both these are mistaken. And whosoever considers
those descriptions of Repentance which have been already given from the words
of the HOLY GHOST himself, will, I doubt not, see cause enough to fear the same
that I do. I doubt not, but many who have long delayed their Repentance, do at
length repent in very good earnest that they have done so foolishly; and I hope
that some of them are accepted of God: but I do not think that all who repent
in earnest, of their wicked life past, and of their long and foolish delay,
repent unto salvation; and it is hard for any one to know certainly whether any
do or no. God has not told us how long any of us may hold on in our sins, and
not finally exclude our selves thereby from the benefit of Repentance; neither
has he told us, that I know of, that he will accept of the Repentance of that
man, who has to the latter end of his life wilfully delayed it, in hopes of
finding then both time and grace enough for it. But he has told us enough to
make us fearful, lest he should not. There are several Passages of Holy
Scripture that may well afright us from presuming on it; but not one that gives
the least encouragement or countenance to it. God frequently threatens wilful
Delayers of their Repentance, either to cut them off suddenly, or to deliver
them up to a hardened heart; but I cannot find, that he promises them Grace
hereafter, who will not hearken to his present Call; or that he will accept of
them in their own time. Thus we read, -- He that being often reproved,
hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove.
XXIX. 1. Happy is the man that fears always; but he that hardens his heart,
shall fall into mischief, Prove. XXVIII. 14. He that despises the riches of
God's goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads him to repentance, after his hardness and impenitent
heart, treasureth up unto himself wrath against the day of wrath, Romans II. 4,
5. Those who liked not to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a
reprobate mind, Romans I. 28. But very terrible indeed are these following
Sayings of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, Heb. VI. 4, etc. It is impossible for
those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the world to come; if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance: seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open shame. For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often
upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed,
receives blessing from God: but that which bears thorns and briers, is
rejected, and is nigh unto cursing; whose end is to be burned. Add hereunto
that other place of the same Epistle, Heb. X. 26, etc. If we sin wilfully after
we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice
for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation
which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses's law, died without
mercy under two or three witnesses; of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye,
shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and
has counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing; and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace? It Is true, these places
of this Epistle are commonly interpreted of Apostasy from the Faith of Christ
to Judaism or Idolatry; and it may be they were some such Apostates that gave
the Apostle an occasion of writing this; yet I think, that hardly any
considering man will deny, that they are to be extended as well to all those
who resolutely lead a life quite contrary to the Gospel of Christ,
notwithstanding that in words they profess themselves to be Christians; seeing
all such do equally, with the other, despise and trample on the Gospel and
Covenant of Christ. The same Apostle, Heb. III. 7, etc. propounds unto
Christians the Example of the Israelites in the Wilderness, to take warning by
in this case. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in
the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness: When your fathers
tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty years. Wherefore I was grieved
with that generation, and said, They do always err in their heart; and they
have not known my ways. So I swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into my
rest. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God: but exhort one another daily,
whilst it is called to day; left any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. Let us moreover read with trembling what we find to this
purpose in the First Chapter of the Proverbs. There we shall see the method
that God usually takes with Sinners. First, he graciously and earnestly invites
them to Repentance, v 22. How long ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity; and
the scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my
reproof; Behold I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words
unto you. But Sinners turn their deaf ear to this, and make no haste to return,
though they see God in haste to do them good. How long? says he. It Is yet time
enough, say they. But how does God resent such an Answer? v. 24. he tells them
this; Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and
no man regarded: but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof; I will also laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes.
Well, but suppose they begin now at last to consider, what danger they are in;
and repenting of their simplicity, folly and obstinacy, call upon God for help;
hear now what God says to this too; v. 28. Then shall they call upon me, but I
will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. For that
they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. They would none of
my counsel, they despised my reproof; therefore shall they eat of the fruit of
their own way, and be filled with their own devices. What says Job of the
Hypocrite, Job XXVII. 9. Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? He
asks the question, and God himself has answered it; Ezekiel. VIII. 18. Though
they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them. And says
Micah, cap. III. v. 4. He will even hide his face from them at that time, as
they have behaved themselves ill in their doings. Yea, says God, Isa I. 15.
When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; when ye make
many prayers I will not hear. So the Psalmist tells us it fared with some that
he was too well acquainted with; They cried, but there was none to save them;
even unto the Lord, but he answered them not. And all this is very just and
equal, and Sinners cannot expect to find any better treatment with God; Zech.
VII. 13. As he cried, and they would not hear; so they cried, and I would not
hear, says the Lord of hosts. Why should he? Must vile Sinners have the
command of God's Ear? And must the glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth wait on
every filthy Wretch as long as he pleases? and always be ready at his beck, and
come at his call? Has not God waited to be gracious to us, begged and
beseech'd us from day to day, even from our infancy to this hour; and must he
yet be made to wait longer, and even as long as we please; and after we have
slighted his Favors, and abused his Patience, and put what affronts we can
upon his Divine Majesty; can we expect that he should not turn away from us in
anger and indignation, and swear in his wrath, that we shall not see his face,
nor hear his voice any more? I conclude with those words of the Holy Ghost, 2
Pet. II. 20. If after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ they are again entangled therein,
and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than the beginning. For it had
been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after
they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them.

When such Scriptures as these are well considered, we shall find, that a man
has great reason to doubt, whether a late Repentance will be accepted or no.
Wonderful indeed is the Infinite Goodness of God to Sinners; he does often
more, but never less than he promises; and he does often a great deal less
than he threatens, and grants unto us that time of repentance, which we had
no reason to expect from him: but whilst we magnify, as we are bound, the
Patience, and Long-suffering of God; we must take heed how we forget his
Justice and Truth; or how we speak so of those, that we know not how to
reconcile what we say of them with what he himself has said of these. A very
late Convert may be at last converted, and upon his late conversion shall be
accepted: and I dare not say, that if he do not come in at the first or second
call, the door of Salvation shall be shut against him. I dare not say
positively, that God will never grant Repentance unto life, to any one, who
has a long time delayed his Repentance, after he is convinced of the necessity
of it; or to keep the Commandments of God, after he has covenanted and engaged
himself in his Baptism so to do; or after he has been often put in mind of his
Engagement, and has had many warnings to do his acknowledged duty; yea, or
that has presumptuously delayed his Repentance, purposing, and hoping for time
to repent afterward. I know not how much mercy God may have in store, that he
has not acquainted us with: but I dare not rely upon what I know not of. I
know not what extraordinary things God's infinite goodness may bring to pass;
but because they are extraordinary, I dare not venture so great a thing as my
Salvation upon them, seeing what is extraordinary, may, for ought I know, never
be. Because God extraordinarily fed the Israelites with Manna, and can feed me
so too if he please; I dare not neglect my common Bread when I may have it, in
expectation of such another Miracle. And I cannot see, but it is altogether as
foolish a thing as that would be, to presume on the extraordinary favors of
God to long-impenitent Sinners; neglecting to follow the common Rules of holy
life, and of keeping in God's favor, which he has given me in his Word. Shall
we neglect the express Conditions of his gracious Promises, presuming on an
extraordinary thing never promised, which is, that the thing promised shall be
given to him, that never observed the Conditions on which it was promised to be
given? If we repent when we are called to it, and continue all our life-long in
a state of Repentance, repenting always of our sins as we commit and discover
them, and endeavoring as much as we can to avoid them for the future; we may
be very sure of mercy and acceptance, because it is promised to all that do so*
But this I most confidently say, That he who being called often to repentance,
wilfully delayeth it from time to time, thinking it always soon enough to leave
off sinning hereafter, and to serve God toward the end of his life; and that
his repentance will come time enough then to find acceptance; reckons, as we
say, without his Host, and presumes on that which he cannot find that God
has promised him; and therefore has cause enough to fear that his repentance
may come too late, and it will not prove the Repentance which God made the
condition of his Promise: especially, when he considers withal, how God has
expressed his dislike of all delays, and what severe things he has said
against the delaying Sinner in his Word. Is it not strange, that one who sees
that there is no promise of Salvation, but to the penitent liver; and hears
many Threatenings denounced against such as delay to accept of the Invitation of
God to repentance; should yet be confident, that after he has by his wilful
delays, declared as much as a man can do without saying it with his mouth, that
he has no mind at all to serve God, but accounts any little portion of his
time, not knowing how short it will prove, enough, if not too much for him; he
shall yet be accepted of God at last, and rewarded by him too? He holds out as
long as he can against God, and yet hopes that God will readily grant him his
own terms, when he can hold out no longer.

I would to God we could be persuaded to consider a little impartially with our
selves, what kind of thing such a late Repentance, after long and wilful
delays, is like to prove: especially when it has been delayed till our last
sickness, and we begin to fear we have but some few days, or weeks at most, to
live. What reason can we find to persuade us, to think such a Repentance to be
the true Repentance, to which Pardon and Salvation are promised? When we would
by no means be persuaded to repent so long as we saw it probable we might live
some years longer, how is it imaginable that we then repent upon any other
motive, than a present fear of speedy damnation? And can this be thought a
saving Repentance? God's great love and kindness a thousand ways exercised
toward us; His Soveregn Authority over us, and Commands laid upon us; His
Mercy and Bounty, His Wooings and Beseechings, His Invitations and Promises,
the wonderful love of our Blessed JESUS, witnessed by his Humiliation,
Sufferings, and bloody Death, for our Redemption; nay, all the most dreadful
Threatenings of an Almighty and most Righteous offended God against impenitent
Sinners, had no force at all upon us, so long as we had either youth, or
health, or prosperity: Nothing could prevail with us, till we found our selves
declining apace toward the Grave, and feared we were just about to sink down
into Hell: and what else could it be that then put us upon thoughts of
repenting more than at other times, but fear of being tormented? And then what
can our Repentance at such a time signify more than this, That as we had always
loved our Sin better than God, as long as we were in a capacity of enjoying it;
so now that we cannot enjoy it any longer, and fear we are going to be punished
for it, though we love it as well as ever, and would act it over again, were we
able; yet we are sorry we have been so foolish, as to bring our selves into
this danger that we now apprehend our selves to be in. And seeing we can have
no more pleasure in this World, which we are now leaving much against our will;
yet we love our ease still, and are willing to do what we can to escape Eternal
Pains, and we startle at the thoughts of going impenitent, as we have always
been, to meet with our provoked Judge in the other World; and we would fain
step back again from the mouth of Hell; and therefore we fall a praying and
begging God with sad sighs, and sorrowful tears, either to pardon us, and take
us to Heaven, if we must go hence; or else to spare us awhile longer; which if
he will do, we resolve to live in obedience to his Laws as long as we live? Are
not most Malefactors thus penitent, after a severe Sentence is given, and they
see no remedy but it must be presently executed upon them? And yet it is not
because their hearts are changed, but because they are terrified with the
punishment they are to bear; not that they are on a sudden fallen in love with a
virtuous life, but because they must now live no longer. How a man should
attain to such a degree of confidence, as to hope that God will accept of a
Repentance which is not at all for his sake, but merely for our own; which has
nothing of the love of God or Goodness in it, but only a fear of Judgment and
Hellfire; no change at all of our Affections from Sin to Holiness, from Earth
to Heaven, from our carnal Selves, to God; but only a change of our Security
into Fear, and of our Pleasure into Sorrow; and it may be of our Minds into a
very serious Resolution to live better, if we shall live any longer; and that
merely because we are afraid that we shall live no longer: how any one should
think such a forced Change as this, an acceptable Repentance, I must confess I
know not, unless he have forgotten, not only his Bible, but his Reason too.

There are some things, as useful as they are easy, to be observed in dying
People, who have spent their days in wickedness. And I think they are enough to
afright any one from thinking any longer of having the benefit of a Deathbed
Repentance.

First, It is too easy to observe, That often such a Sinner's Conscience is
quite dead within him (I speak of some, not of all) a long time before he
dies, and never reviveth again so long as he lives. He is given up to a
reprobate mind, and his heart turned to stone, and nothing that should move him
to Repentance can make any impression upon it. Yea, it is somewhat a rare thing,
to see an old, habitual, customary Sinner ever come to any true sense of
Religion, his Duty, his Sin, or his Danger; or ever to concern himself at all
about Eternity. Even upon his Death bed, whatever care he takes about his Body,
Estate and Family, his Soul seems as much forgotten by him, as if he had none
at all to take care of. It is no uncommon thing to see an old Sinner die thus
unconcerned what shall become of him.

Secondly, It is as easy to observe in some of these dying Persons, who seem
to make some little ado about their future State when they are about to die;
that though they are desirous of good Advice, and send for the Minister to talk
to them, and pray for them; and confess to him some few of their most notorious
Faults; yet are they the confidentest Persons in the World of their pardon;
it is not easy to persuade them that their case is very dangerous; but after
they have confessed they are great Sinners, and have been prayed for, as though
all were done, they pass off the Stage of this World as unconcernedly, as if
they had never acted any ill part thereon.

Thirdly, It has been very often observed, that those of them who in some very
dangerous sickness have made more ado than ordinary, have cried out very
bitterly of their past wickedness and folly; have shed many tears, and poured
out many earnest Prayers, and have made many Vows to God, and Promises to Men
of leading a new and holy life, if God would restore them to health; have yet
very shortly after their recovery, forgotten all this, as if it had never been;
returning with the Dog to his vomit, and with the Sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the mire. Showing plainly, that though they might be in earnest,
yet was it but for fear; and how little credit is to be given to such forced
Repentances!

Fourthly, It Is to be observed, That whatever else these old and hardened
Sinners are wont to do upon their Deathbeds, which may look like repentance;
they are not easily persuaded to confess any very foul Sin, which is not so
notorious, that they cannot deny it; and then too, it shall be excused as well
as they can, instead of being aggravated as it ought to be. With much more
difficulty can they be persuaded to make restitution of all they have ill
gotten, or so much as to confess their Frauds, and wicked Arts of injuring
others. Rarely do they send for those whom they have offended, humbling
themselves, confessing their Faults, begging their pardon, and making them all
the satisfaction they can before they die. And what kind of Penitents are these?

Lastly, If any of these old Sinners at last be touched to the quick, and
pricked at the heart with a sharp sense of their sinful Vileness; it is not
hard for the malicious and cunning Tempter, to bring them into despair, so as
it shall be impossible for any one to comfort them, and in vain to counsel
them. Their own long-abused Consciences do now begin to revenge themselves upon
them, for neglecting them so long; and they know it is so just a thing for God
now to serve them, as they have served him, that they conclude it in vain to
seek for pardon and mercy. He that stands by the Bedside of these old Sinners,
when they are on their last Bed; may easily observe all this that I have said
of them: and that but a few of them, in comparison, die so, as that one has any
great encouragement to say their repentance was any thing else, but the grief
and remorse of a heart oppressed with fear of imminent danger, whereinto they
find themselves brought by their own folly and perverseness.

It is easy on the other side to observe the death of the truly pious
Christians to differ very much from the death of this sort of men; I mean, as
often as in their sickness they have time and freedom of mind to show what kind
of spirit they are of. In many respects, as the one dies, so dies the other:
these may be cut off by a sudden stroke, they may die of a distracting or
stupifying Disease, as well as the other; and the frame of their hearts is to
be seen only in their life, and not in their death. However, only those few
dying Persons, who have in their health conscientiously endeavored to live a
truly Christian life, and have their Repentance not to begin, but only to
finish with their life upon their Deathbed, show, if they have time, and
strength, and liberty to show it, that they die indeed like sincere Christians:
For either they end their days of trouble in much spiritual joy and comfort,
reflecting sweetly on the mighty powers of Divine Grace, whereby they have been
carried victoriously through all the Temptations of the Devil, the World, and
the Flesh, and in the ravishing expectation of entering speedily into the joy of
their Lord: Or being Persons of tender Consciences, and deeply wounded in
spirit with the sense of all their own imperfections and failings, they show
all the signs of an humble, broken and contrite heart; and close up their time
with the Prayers and Tears, Sighs and Groans of a devout Soul, longing to be
made perfectly holy in Heaven with God; and endeavoring to that end, thus to
complete and perfect all their Repentances on Earth.

Some will possibly ask, If there be so little trust to be put in a very late,
and Deathbed Repentance, Why the Ministers of Christ, when they are called to
assist the Sick, do so earnestly exhort even the most notorious Sinners, who
have spent their whole time past in wickedness, to repent of their sins; and
comfort them with the promises of Salvation, if they do repent?

This Question, I confess, deserves to be considered; both that the Minister
may take heed that he go not beyond his Commission in comforting the Sick; and
that we may all learn in due time, how far we may build and rely on such
Comforts as men in such a case can administer unto us. And therefore I here in
answer to it, say these things.

First, We very earnestly exhort the worst of Sinners, even to the last gasp,
to repent of their sins; because, though we cannot assure them, that God will
now at the last hour accept of their late Repentance, seeing he has nowhere,
as was said before, declared that he will; and though, by reason of what is
said in his Word concerning his ordinary method of dealing with Sinners, we are
rather afraid that he will not: Yet we do not know the depth of God's Mercy,
nor the riches of his Infinite Goodness; nor what he may be pleased to do in an
extraordinary way, if Sinners at last use extraordinary endeavors. And if by
such Motives, and Arguments, and Prayers as we can use, God seem to work
mightily on the spirit of the dying Sinner; though we dare not assure him of
the life which God has not promised to a Deathbed Repentance, and therefore
we cannot be sure that he will give it: yet dare we not leave him to despair,
because we know not but God may give it.

Secondly, We therefore exhort the worst of dying sinners to Repentance, and
declare unto them the gracious and comfortable Promises which God in Christ
has made to all true Penitents; because God has commanded us to Preach
Repentance unto sinners without exception; and herein, as we obey, so we
imitate our Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST, who ceased not to invite all sinners
to Repentance, or to promise good things to the Penitent, even when he who knew
the hearts of all men, knew that many of them to whom he Preached, would never
repent, nor become capable of the good things promised. God has bidden us
exhort to Repentance; but he has not told us, That we are to cease from
exhorting any one that will hear us, so long as he lives. We cannot therefore
excuse our selves, if we do not all we can to render them who will not repent,
inexcusable; it will not be safe for us to leave them this Plea, That they
wanted any Means or Helps at any time, that we could afford them.

Thirdly, We hold on to exhort, even to the last, because how near unto Death
soever the sinner may seem to be, we know that the Lord of Life and Death can
raise him up again; and we know not but he may do so, and let him live yet
longer, to complete the Repentance which may now be begun. God is pleased
sometimes by severe Chastisements, and heavy Afflictions, to awake sinners to
Repentance, who had lived in sin securely, many years; and now when the sinner
sees himself at the Pit's brink, and Hell opening its mouth to swallow him up,
he may possibly think it fit to hearken to counsels of safety; tho no more can
be said, but possibly he may yet be saved. We know not, but now he may enter
upon a Repentance, which tho it would do him no good, should he now dye, may
prove unto Salvation, if he recover, and live to bring forth the fruits of it;
which God is yet able to make him do, and has not told us that he will not do.

Lastly, We to the very Last exhort to Repentance, and mind dying sinners of
the Promises of God to Penitents; because that whether it will then avail to
Salvation, or no, yet we are sure enough it can do them no hurt. It is
certainly their duty to repent, and ours to exhort them to it; and as it would
hurt us to neglect our duty, so can it not hurt them to be minded of theirs:
For sinners to be made sensible of their sins, and of this aggravation of them,
That they have despised the Comforts and Promises of Mercy to the Penitent, is
a good thing, whatever the end may be of such sinners. God is glorified by men's
being brought to a sense and acknowledgment of his Authority and Goodness, and
of their own Wickedness and Baseness, by their confessing, That in all that is
brought upon them, he is righteous, and they are wicked. By men's acknowledging
at last, That God has been always good, especially in his great Patience and
long forbearance hitherto; and that he is now very just in his Punishments, for
our obstinacy, glory is given to God. And this ought to be done; and if this
will not qualify sinners for Pardon and Salvation, it is however a part of
their duty, and may, for ought we know, mitigate the Severity of their
Sentence, and lessen their Torments.

But now after this is said, it is a very sad thing, that men should by wilful
delays bring themselves into this uncomfortable condition. And it is a very
afflicting thing to every good Minister of Christ, to stand by the bedside of
those dying persons to whom he is able to speak no more Comfort than all this
amounts to. For first, He can speak no Comfort at all, to the sick person, but
upon supposition that he is, what he finds too much cause to fear he is not, a
sincere Penitent; and this is very sad. And secondly, He can speak no Comfort,
but on supposition of such a Repentanee as the sick person himself cannot know,
(without some extraordinary means) that he now has; and therefore cannot tell
how to apply the Comfort to himself. And this is very sad again. The Sincerity
of ones Repentance cannot ordinarily be known to himself, but by the fruits of
it in a holy Life; and by these, he that is now dying, can never know it. It is
only such a Repentance as would produce Holiness of Life, if the sick person
should recover, that is Repentance to Salvation; and when the sinner on his
Deathbed calls to mind how often his heart has in this point deceived him;
when he remembers how his love to sin has hitherto conquered all such Purposes
and Resolutions of holy living; how often he has heretofore upon the same, or
some other occasion, very seriously (as he thought) resolved, as now he does,
and yet never kept his Resolution; how shall he be able to assure himself, That
he would keep it any better now, should he yet live?

I hope what has been already said, is abundantly enough to convince us all,
both that a sinner can never repent too soon, and that he may drive it off till
it be too late. And therefore seeing Repentance is altogether necessary to
Salvation, it is a work that requires great Haste, and admits of no Delay.

The CONCLUSION.
FRom what we have now proved, it may be too easy, I fear, for many of us to
reflect very sadly upon our selves. It is certainly, if these things be so as
has been said, high time for us all to think, what we have been doing all the
while we have already lived in the world, that we may know what we have yet to
do, before we go out of it. It Is high time for us to remember, That we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done, in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
bad, 2 Cor. V. 10. We must appear, that is certain, there is no flinching or
evasion; all of us, without exception; and there will God render to every man
according to his deeds, Romans II. 6. When we call this to mind, do we not think
our selves concerned to enquire, How we are prepared to answer for our selves,
at that most dreadful Tribunal? We see, that according to our deeds or
behavior in the body, or whilst we here live, so we must then be doomed to
receive, either Eternal Reward, or Eternal Punishment; as is elsewhere plain
enough. Are we able to plead for our selves, That we have lived a life of
Repentance, Faith, and new Obedience? Then all will be well; through the rich
Mercy of God, and Merits of our Blessed JESUS, Eternal Life is assured unto us.
But if we cannot plead this, what will become of us? Know we how soon we must
dye, or how we must dye? As we dye, so must we rise to the Judgment. If we dye
before we have lived a life of holiness, our deeds have been wicked, and
according to them, we shall receive indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish; this is the reward of all that do evil. Will it excuse us to say,
Lord, we have lived wickedly it is true, but we were sorry for it when we saw
our selves like to dye, and resolved to live a better life, if thou would
have spared us a while longer? Or will it suffice us to say, Lord, we were
always resolved to repent and to live well, but thou did cut us off by death,
before we had begun to do as we had resolved, if thou would have let us live
long enough? Alas, enough has been already said, to convince us of the folly
of pleading thus; and it concerns us to grow wiser very quickly, for we know
not how little time we have to learn Wisdom in. We can many of us say already,
That our Glass is almost run out; and he whose Glass is but newly turned up,
does not know how few Sands are yet to run, e're it stop for ever. We that grow
old, know, That if we have not repented, it is more than full time for us to
begin; for begin now as soon as we will, we are sure it is very late; and a
late Repentance is a very uncertain thing to trust to. If we have not by so
long a delay, lost our Salvation, it may be feared we have quite lost the
Comfort of being sure of it as long as we live. They who are young, cannot but
know, That every day they live, they grow older; what any day adds to the time
past, so much it takes from the time to come; and the more they have lived, the
less they have to live; and they are always ignorant, whether they have a day
more to live or no. If then the young person have not yet repented, it is high
time for him too, now to begin. If he stay any longer, his Repentance will be
late too, and so much the less comfortable; and possibly it may be too late;
for it is ten to one he shall dye before he be old; and if not, why should he
grudge himself the best of Comforts in Old Age, a Conscience that can testify
that he has repented, and kept God's Commandments from his youth up till then?
I doubt not, but whether we be old or young, we are so well satisfied, at least
many of us, that Repentance is necessary to Salvation, that we would not
willingly dye without it. And we could not be so easy within our selves, as we
are, did we not either think our selves already penitent, or presume we shall
be so sometime e're we go hence. I shall therefore now close this Discourse
with a necessary Caution, lest we mistake that for Repentance, which is not;
and an earnest Exhortation to make more haste to repent.

1. Let us take heed that we be not mistaken in this great and necessary duty.
A mistake in a matter of so great importance, is very dangerous, and, I fear,
as common, as dangerous. Corrupt Nature is so averse from it, that it easily
persuades us to take something that looks a little like it, for it, because we
find it more easy, and not wholly inconsistent with our sin. And hence it
comes to pass, that we never repent to purpose, because we persuade our selves
we have done so, when we have not. We are sensible that we are guilty of many
sins; and who is not so, that believes what he reads in Scripture? Can a
Drunkard, or a Swearer, or a Fornicator, or Adulterer, or any Profane and
Debauched person choose but be sensible that he breaks the Laws of God, which
there he reads? We are sometimes a little troubled in our minds for such sins,
and are sorry that we have been guilty of them, and this moves us to fall down
on our knees, and confess them to God, and to beg his Pardon for them, and to
promise we will no more commit them. And it may be, we are then in good
earnest, and seriously purpose to perform our Promises, and we receive the
Sacrament upon it, and so seal up our Repentance; and so our hearts are at
rest, and we conclude our Peace is made; and by this hasty Conclusion, we leave
the most considerable part of the work undone; and we grow too soon confident,
ever to be sure; and presume so quickly, That our condition is good, that we
never use Diligence enough to make it good. He that thinks his Repentance quite
finished, so long as he lives, is deceived: It is the work of our life, and is
not finished but with it: Whenever it was begun, it must continue till we dye:
And it implies all this that here follows, which seems to be too little thought
on by many, who think themselves true Penitents.

First, There must be a very serious resolution to live a Godly Life after the
Commandments of God: And such a resolution supposes a due Consideration of
such things as are the proper motives to it. A man must consider the Nature of
God, and his own nature as he is man, made in the Image of God; whence it
became his natural duty to continue Holy as God is Holy. He must consider God's
Absolute Authority over him as his Creator, Owner, Governor and Preserver; and
the natural obligations that are upon him as God's Creature, to Serve and
Honor him according to his will. He must consider that the design of his
Creation was, that God might Glorify his own Goodness in making him a Creature
capable of understanding so much of God as might enable him to Glorify God on
Earth, and be perfectly Blessed in the enjoyment of God for ever. All this must
make him sensible both how vile and degenerate, how unworthy and wretched, how
filthy, and how miserable, Sinning against God has made him: And how being
fallen from his Holiness and Obedience, so long as he continues in this Sinful
state, he can have no hope ever to be Happy, but must lie under the Wrath of
God: and unless he be renewed unto Holiness, the Curse which God laid on
Sinners, which is that of Eternal Torments, must needs fall upon him. He must
consider the admirable Love of God in sending him in this Sinful and Miserable
State, a Savior to redeem him from destruction by the Sacrifice of his own
most Precious Blood; and to invite him by his Gospel to Repentance and Faith,
and to promise him the assistance of his Holy Spirit of Grace to restore him to
Holiness, and to fit him for the benefits of Redemption, the Pardon of his
Sins, and Eternal Happiness with God in his Kingdom of Glory. Such
considerations as these must beget in us a deep and humble sense of our
vileness and wretchedness; a godly sorrow for behaving our selves so unworthily
toward God, sinking much below the dignity which he gave us; a holy Shame and
indignation against our selves for this; a judging and condemning our selves as
worthy to perish, and to be punished everlastingly; and a most earnest desire
of God's Mercy and Favor; a firm belief of all that he has already done for
us in Christ; fervent Prayer for the renewing and sanctifying Grace of the Holy
Ghost, to qualify us for a full Pardon and eternal Salvation: And lastly, an
unfeigned resolution to endeavor henceforward to mortify all our lusts, to
resist all temptations to Sin, to use all the means of Holiness, to Serve God
according to the rules of the Gospel; and so doing, to cast our selves upon the
Mercy of God through the merits of our Blessed Savior. Now all this is but our
first entrance into a state of Repentance, which is also the only Sat of
Salvation on Earth. This is that which qualifieth persons of ripe age for
Baptism; and this is that which Baptized Infants are obliged to by Baptism as
soon as they come to years of understanding. And this, tho but the beginning of
a Penitent Life, is enough for those who live no longer: And implies in it a
great deal, too little thought on by many. As first, A change of mind and
judgment; our understanding being so far enlightened, that we judge otherwise of
God and our selves, of Heaven and Earth, of Good and Evil, than we did before.
We prise and value God, and Heaven, and Holiness above all things whatsoever,
even life it self: And we cannot think well of our selves, nor value any thing
in the World without these. Secondly, Such a change of desirc and will, that
all our desire is to please and honor God, and by that means to be restored
to, and continue in his favor; and not to please our selves in any thing
wherewith we know God is displeased. Our wills, are resolved to consult no
longer with Flesh and Blood, nor to be guided by our own corrupt inclinations
and judgment, but wholly by the will of God, the Gospel of JESUS Christ, and
the Grace of the Holy Spirit. Thirdly, Such a change of life and endeavor,
that just now we set our selves in good earnest on the great work, daily
mortifying and crucifying the Flesh with its corrupt affections and lusts, and
cleansing our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the Fear of the Lord. This is the first beginning of Repentance;
and if we have not done this, whatever we flatteringly think of our selves, we
have it all yet to begin. And yet is this, I fear, a great deal more, than many
who have a long time pleased themselves with a conceit that they are Sincere
Penitents, have at any time yet well thought on.

Secondly, After this unfeigned resolution to live a Godly life, there must be
a constant care upon our Souls to make good this resolution, and to carry on
this change, thus happily begun, unto perfection. We must enter upon an
habitual course of governing our Thoughts, Words and Actions, by the Word of
God; of denying our selves in all the vile desires, sinful inclinations and
lustings of corrupt Nature; and of using all fit means of subduing the Flesh
unto the Spirit, and of growing in Grace and in the knowledge of our Lord JESUS
Christ. And here again is much more than is, I fear, by all of us well thought
on. As First, A constant fixing our thoughts upon God as much as we can, as
always present with us, seeing and observing our whole behavior; an Eye in all
things to his Will and Commandments; being careful to leave nothing undone that
he has enjoined us, to do nothing that he has forbidden; to observe the
prescribed method and manner of doing every duty, as being always under his
eye. Secondly, A very diligent and frequent searching into, and reviewing of
all these things; observing narrowly what has been defective or amiss any way,
that we may be duly humbled, and all may be for the future amended. Thirdly, A
constant watching and standing upon our guard against all Temptations, whereby
we may be drawn to commit evil, or neglect the good which is our duty, or to be
slight and careless in the doing of it. Lastly, A daily using of the helps of
reading, hearing, meditating, praying, conversing with pious company, or
whatever may be a means of preserving our hearts in a Penitent and holy temper,
and of increasing our love to God and Holiness, and our hatred of Sin. He that
is not careful to do this, as well as he can, is far from true Repentance.

Lastly, After all our utmost care, because of the weakness of our Nature,
through incogitancy, and surprise, and a multitude of unavoidable business of
this life, we shall find, that in many things we offend all. And therefore we
must often examine our selves, and discovering our failings as well as we can,
we are still as we discover them, to repent of them; and concluding with our
selves, that many of them may have slipped away, and escaped our observation; we
are, together with those we have found out, to pray for the pardon of our
secret Faults. And here first, The sense of our numerous Infirmities must make
us continually more and more humble and vile in our own eyes, and take down all
that confidence we are too apt to have of our selves, more and more convince us
of the necessity of grace, and send us to God to implore, in the most humble
and fervent manner, his strength in our weakness. And secondly, We ought to
give glory to God in humbling our selves before the World; and confessing by
our whole behavior, that we esteem of our selves as vile Sinners, unworthy of
God's Blessings, and such as think it becomes us to humble our selves to all
whom we have offended, to make them all the satisfaction we can, to ask them
forgiveness, and beg their Prayers to God for his forgiveness of us.

All this is necessarily implied in the Duty of Repentance. And how easy is it
then to see, that many who think themselves Penitents, are mistaken in their
duty? Yea, how many of them who seem to be Persons not of the worst temper, but
far better than the most of us are, never repent at all, merely because they
never yet well considered what Repentance is. It is no less than has been
said; So that no one that has not well considered, and unfeignedly resolved,
and is not always careful to avoid Sin, and lead a holy life; no one that
loves not God more than all things, or that hates not Sin more than all
Evils; no one that is not more desirous to honor God, than to please himself;
none that examines not his own heart and his ways often, or that studieth not
the Word of God constantly, or shuns not all Temptations carefully, or resists
them not stoutly; none that is proud of himself, or is not deeply and
humblingly sensible of his own vileness; none that continues in any known sin,
or wilfully and ordinarily omitteth any known duty: none, I say, that labors
not as much as he can, to be a good Christian in all things according to the
Gospel of Christ, is to account himself a true Penitent.

2. And now, if we find not our selves true Penitents yet, let us, as we value
God's Honor, and our own Salvation, make haste to be so. Oh what a wretched
piece of folly is it to to cast our whole happiness upon a mere uncertainty!
What an unaccountable madness is it, instead of making our Calling and Election
sure, to make them every day we live more and more uncertain to us? Is this all
the kindness that we can afford our selves, that we will rather venture to be
miserable for ever, than take a little pains in time to prevent it? Had we
rather weep fruitlesly for our Torments, than weep savingly for our Sins? For a
little brutish Pleasure, which though we have to day, we are not sure we shall
have to morrow, shall we hazard the unexpressible Pleasures of Eternity, which
we may make sure of to day, but make it a very doubtful point, if we delay to
make sure of them to day, whether we shall ever enjoy them, do what we can
hereafter? Do we any of us know, how soon the Door will be shut upon us, and
there shall be no entrance for us into Heaven? Why then will we imitate the
foolish Virgins, and rather choose to sleep away the opportunity, than seek to
have our Lamps furnished with Oil in due season? If we be taken unprovided, we
know it will be in vain at last to cry, Lord, Lord, open unto us; Christ's
Answer will be ready, Verily I say unto you, I know you not, Matthew. XXV. 12.
Those who have worn the Devil's Livery so long, Christ will not own at last for
Persons of his Retinue.

O why will we deal worse with God, and our own Souls, than we are wont to do
with any thing else of the meanest concern to us? When we are in any trouble of
body or estate, we are in great haste to be relieved; neither delay we to
accept of help when it is first tendered to us. When any one offers us a good
gift, or other considerable kindness, we are not wont to bid him stay till to
morrow. What an untoward humor is this in us? God made haste to restore fallen
Man, and to comfort him with the promise of a Savior; Our Savior made haste
when the time was come to shed his precious Blood for our Redemption; The Holy
Ghost has not delayed by the Word and Ministry to beseech us to be reconciled
to God. But we delay still, as though, whatever else be, yet nothing that is
meant to bring us toward Heaven and Happiness were worth regarding.

Whilst we delay our Repentance, we give the Devil, our Adversary, all the
Advantages he can desire to have of us. The holy Angels of God would rejoice to
see one of us repent, Luke XV. 7, 10. And had we rather gratify the Devil by
our Damnation, than have the holy Angels rejoice at our Salvation? Whilst we
delay, the Devil needs not tempt us, nor seek to devour us; we take care to
save him that labor, by wilfully continuing in his power; and if hereafter we
shall think of repenting, we have already taken care that he shall not want
matter for a temptation from our long impenitence. Yea, we give him so sure
hold of us, that we shall not easily break loose from him. We have given him so
long experience of our yielding temper, that he is never to seek how to fit our
humor with a suitable Temptation, neither can he doubt of always prevailing,
where he has prevailed so often. Hitherto he has befooled us, by persuading
us it is always too soon to grow wise; and having been fools so long, he will
the more easily persuade us hereafter, because with a fairer color of reason,
that it is then too late.

How many of our temper has the Devil got into Hell already, by persuading
them it is already too soon, till they find it too late? What would those
miserable Souls, who have been thus befooled into Torments, now give, if they
had it, for such an opportunity of repenting as we now have? O why then should
we now lose the opportunity we have, and giddily venture thereby suddenly to
fall into that remediless condition they are now in? The next day, or hour, for
ought we know, may lodge us for ever with them in Hell; and then shall we have
weeping, and wailing and gnashing of teeth for evermore. Those tears of
Repentance, which will not then quench, might now prevent those unquenchable
Flames from taking hold of us.

O that we could every day really imagine our selves just under the stroke of
Death! and that the apprehension thereof might awake us into a serious
consideration of that Eternal State we then must enter into! What haste would
we then be in to make as sure as we could of escaping those dreadful Torments,
the very thoughts whereof seem torment enough? What strange Agonies of Soul
have many dying sinners fallen into, who have lived jovially all their days?
What thoughts have some of us, it may be, had, when in some fit of sickness we
apprehended Death approaching near us? How penitent, how religious seemed we
then to grow all on a sudden! How came we to be of such a different temper
then, from that which we were in before? O, we saw our selves, in all
appearance, then just on the very brink of Eternity; we thought our selves just
stepping into Hell, if we repented not; and then we thought it time to repent
indeed, and that it stood us upon as much as our Souls were worth to make
haste. And may we not be this moment, for ought we know, in the very same
danger that we then thought our selves in? Do we know, any of us, that there is
so much as one day, or one hour, betwixt this moment and Eternity? And why then
are we not now in as great haste to repent, as we were in then? How many that
delay from time to time, are, when they least fear it, knocked down with a
sudden blow? How many are cut off in the very act of sin, when secure in
themselves, and thinking on no such thing as dying, they were in Hell before
they thought that death was near them? Is not our delaying our Repentance the
likeliest way in the World to provoke Almighty God to send out one of these
swift Arrows to destroy us? O let us be ready, for it may come in an hour that
we think not. Whilst we so confidently promise our selves to morrow, and
flatter our selves with purposes of repenting then, a sudden destruction, a
Phrenzy, a stupidity, or we know not what, may arrest us, and not give us leave
so much as to think that we are Sinners; or to say, Lord have mercy on us.

Does not God seem, for this very reason, to conceal both the time, and the
manner of our death from us, that we may be the more watchful, and take the
more care to be always ready for dying at whatever hour, or in whatever way it
shall please him to take us hence? Did we certainly know beforehand, just
when, and how we must die, we would venture the more boldly to spend our time
in sin and vanity, till we knew the time was near; and then it may be some few
days before, become a little more serious; just as it is the custom of too
many at this time to do before a Sacrament. Therefore God will not have us to
know the time of our death, that we not knowing but it may be to morrow, may be
every day ready; and so he may have the honor, and we the comfort of a pious
life.

Moreover, as was before said, To continue in sin, in hopes that we may repent
hereafter, as it is to sin that grace may abound, which is a thing (if we
believe the Apostle) greatly to be abhorred, Romans VI. 1. So is it the most
effectual course we can take to shorten our days, and to prevent the benefit we
hope for. The fear of the Lord prolongeth days; but the years of the wicked
shall be shortened: The hope of the righteous shall be gladness, but the
expectation of the wicked shall perish, Prove. X. 27, 28.

Again, We can hardly give any rational account, why God should so strictly,
and under so severe Penalties enjoin us the practice of many excellent Virtues,
and forbid us many foul Sins, if we may hope to please him, and be saved by a
very late, or deathbed Repentance. Can such Virtues as Sobriety, Temperance
and Chastity, and many more, be thought commanded us as the proper Exercises of
a sick and dying man? Can the Sins of Gluttony and Drunkenness, Chambering and
Wantonness, Murder, Theft, Ambition, Covetousness, and more such like, be
forbidden upon pain of damnation, left a man should be guilty of them on his
Deathbed, or in his last Sickness; when it is somewhat hard to conceive, how a
man should have any thoughts of them? Or can we conceive, that the meaning of
such Commands is no more but this; You must either do these Duties, and avoid
these Sins, while you live, or repent that you have not done so, when you are
about to die? What were this but to say, That all the Commands of holy living
signify no more, but this, That a man may safely break them all whilst he
lives; if he can but keep them, when he can break them no more; or be sorry
that he has broken them, when he is afraid he is just going to be damned for
it; or resolve to keep them, when he thinks he can live no longer?

What probability is there, that any Resolution of repenting hereafter, is
sincere? We cannot absolutely resolve to repent hereafter, because we cannot
certainly know that we shall live hereafter; and if we resolve but
conditionally, to repent hereafter, that is, on supposition that we shall live
to repent, we must seem content to be damned, if we dye before that time come,
because we know, That without Repentance we must be damned. I think one cannot
in good earnest resolve to repent, unless he immediately do repent, when he
resolves upon it. How can any one imagine it too soon to do what he knows
necessary to be done, and yet may never be done, if not just now? No man can
with any color of reason be thought in earnest, when he says he resolves to
do that another day, which he knows is to be done every day, and must of
necessity be done sometime, and yet he knows not whether he shall have another
day or no. It Is plain, such a man does not resolve at all to repent, for he
loves it not, and that is the reason he does it not now, and will still be as
good a reason not to do it then; but in truth, all he resolves upon, is, not to
repent now, or to drive it off yet longer, and that is no resolution at all to
repent.

What folly is it to drive off our Repentance, till we be scourged and lashed
unto it? If we make not haste of our selves, and God have yet any kindness left
in store for us, he will whip us to it. If we will not otherwise awake out of
sleep, God, if he have not already determined we shall sleep on unto death,
will awake us with his Rod. And whether had the Prodigal better have staid in
his Father's House, and continued in his Love, and under his constant Care and
Providence, by obeying him at first; or have wandered abroad, as he did, till
extreme want and ill usage drove him home? If we will be saved, we must repent;
and is it not a very foolish thing to stay till the whip drive us to it?
Especially when it is doubtful, whether or no the Repentance which begins in
Fear, will end in Love, which yet if it do not, it will never bring us to
Salvation.

And now after all this, I hope none will be so foolish as to flatter
themselves with a vain conceit of their being Penitents, when they are not; or
to encourage themselves with as vain hopes of repenting hereafter, whereof they
can have no certainty. We find indeed one Example of a dying Penitent in the
Scripture, who was accepted of God, and we find no more but one, that of the
Thief upon the Cross. But alas! he has afforded but very small Encouragement
to any delaying Sinner, by his own happiness in being crucified by the side of
his Savior. Here is, as I said, but one single Example, and yet had there been
ten thousand such as this one was, I do not see how they could any more
encourage a considering man to delay his Repentance one hour, because no one
knows whether after that hour he shall have so much time as that Malefactor had
to Repent in, tho it was very short, or whether in that short time he shall
repent as he did. Had never any Offender but one, been pardoned by any King,
could this be any reasonable encouragement to all the Rebels and Malefactors in
the Country to hold on rebelling, robbing, stealing, murdering, and
committing all sorts of capital Crimes in hopes of a Pardon; only because once
it fell out that some such Offender was pardoned? Indeed it will follow hence,
that such a Pardon may possibly be obtained, because it was obtained: but it
follows not that it may ordinarily or probably be obtained, because it never
was any more than once obtained, that we know of. Besides, This is indeed an
Example of a late Repentance; and many Examples of a late Repentance there are
besides this, though hardly another of one so late: but we are not sure it is
an Example of a delayed Repentance; for we cannot find that this late Penitent
ever one minute delayed his Repentance after he was called to it, and convinced
that it was his duty. And indeed, seeing this man's case was very
extraordinary, he that would encourage himself by it, ought first to see that
his own Case, in all considerable circumstances, be like unto it.

If any one ask, What course is to be taken by those who have long delayed
their Repentance, but are not yet in appearance near unto death? I know not
what better Advice to give him than this: That he delay it no longer, but make
all the haste that possibly he can to repent now: And by how much the more time
he has already lost, let him use so much the more care and diligence to
improve that little which is yet behind, to his best advantage. Such an one had
need to give himself, in a manner, wholly henceforward to this great Work, and
should not suffer any business that he can well shun, to disturb him in it. He
should not now grudge to pinch himself of time in relation to all bodily and
worldly Concerns, as much as he did God and his own Soul before; or to bestow
as much upon these, if he can possibly, as he used to do upon those. No
self-examination, no humiliation, no prayers, no tears, no striving to do good,
can be too much. He had need to do almost nothing else but bewail his sinful
life, denying himself all the Pleasures, and all the Comforts of this World,
save only the necessary supports of life. This seems to me the least he can do,
to satisfy himself of the sincerity of so late a Repentance, or to lay a
foundation for a comfortable hope of God's acceptance. I shall now conclude the
whole Discourse with those words, Isa. LV. 6, 7. Seek ye the Lord while he may
be found, call ye upon him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way,
and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

FINIS.

