Imprimatur,

Liber cui Titulus, [The Protestant Resolved, etc.

Mar^. 12. 1687. Guil. Needham RR. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep.
Cant. a Sacr. Dom.

THE Protestant Resolved: OR A DISCOURSE Showing the UNREASONABLENESS Of his
Turning Roman Catholic FOR SALVATION.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXXVIII.

No Necessity for a Protestant to turn Roman Catholic for Salvation.
WE are all I hope thus far argeed, That sincere Christianity is the sure Way
to Salvation. That to be saved, we must have the Hearts, and not content our
selves with the bare Name and naked Profession of Christians. That the
Authority of God and Divine Truth, and no worldly or carnal Concern must sway
and govern our whole Conversation. If we be not religious in good earnest,
resolving and endeavoring to honor God in Heart and Life, according to the
Holy Gospel of our Blessed Jesus, it is no matter to us what Religion we
profess, or to what Church we join our selves. Wickedness and Hypocrisy,
through what Church soever our Way lies, lead assuredly to Hell. A wicked
Protestant and a wicked Papist will in Hell be of the same Communion.

True Christianity is none other but that which was taught at first by Christ
and his Apostles, and all they who believe and live according to their Doctrine
shall be saved. Herein again we are all I suppose agreed. And if so, I think it
very reasonable we should agree as well in that which I now add. It is not
material to enquire whether a Man be of the Church of Rome, or of the Church of
England, to find whether or no he may be saved; but he that would satisfy
himself of the possibility of Salvation in the Way wherein he now is, ought to
enquire whether he believe and live according to the Doctrine taught by Christ
and his Apostles; seeing they who do this are good Christians, what other Names
soever Men may bestow upon them, and all that are such shall be saved. If
therefore I may be able to satisfy my self that I believe, and live according
to the Doctrine delivered by Christ and his Apostles, I have no reason to doubt
of the Possibility of my Salvation in the Way wherein I now am, tho it were so,
that I had never heard to this day of any such Thing as a Church headed by a
Pope or Bishop of Rome. And I am yet somewhat confident that a Man may believe
and live according to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and never hear
of a Bishop of Rome; because once Men certainly did so, and yet were saved.

The next thing therefore that I have to do, is to enquire by what Means I may
certainly know, what was the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; for by the
same Means whereby this may be known, I may also know the certain Way to
Salvation. If there be no such Means left us, we are all Fools in professing a
Religion, the certain Doctrine whereof can by no means be known. If such Means
there be, there must be some certain Records safely conveyed down from their
Time to ours; for by what other Means we at this distance of so many hundred
years should be certainly informed what they taught, is by me unconceivable.
These Records then are to be diligently searched into, and impartially
examined, and whosoever is found to believe and practice according to the
Doctrine in those Records contained, may be concluded to be in the Way to
Salvation.

Such certain Records we have, even the Books of the holy Evangelists and
Apostles, which (together with the Books of the Old Testament) we call the Holy
Scripture. In this we are all again unamimous, both Papists, and Protestants
agree, that the Doctrine in these Books contained is the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, and Divine Truth. Whence it certainly follows, that whatsoever
Doctrine is contrary to the Doctrine contained in these Books, whether it it be
taught by Papists or Protestants, is to be rejected as none of the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles. It ought not therefore to satisfy me, that this or
that Doctrine is taught by the Church of Rome, or by the Church of England; for
by which of them soever it be taught, if it be found contrary to the Doctrine
of the holy Scripture, it is by the Consent of both Churches to be rejected.
Now seeing we Protestants take this holy Scripture, and it only, for the Rule
of Faith and Life; it is certain, that holding to this Rule, we do not err
either in Belief or Practice: while on the other side we cannot be sure, thot
they do not err in both, who receive another Rule; till it appear that the
other Rule which they receive, is as true and certain as ours is acknowledged
to be. Our part of the Rule, and that which indeed we take to be the whole,
being granted us; all the Question is about their part of it. Ours is on all
hands granted to be most sure and certain, theirs alone remains disputable; and
therefore I cannot yet see any reason, why I should think their Way safer than
our own, except it can be safer to follow an uncertain than a certain Rule,
which I think no body will be so hardy as to affirm.

The Rule which they of the Roman Communion advance against ours, is that of
Tradition. I am therefore next to to consider, First, what they understand by
it: And, Secondly, what greater reason I can find to persuade me, that it is
safer to trust to it, whether singly, or in Conjunction with our own, than to
our own alone, which is the holy Scripture.

This Tradition consists of such Doctines of Faith and Practice as are supposed
to have been taught either by Christ himself, or being dictated by the Holy
Ghost to his Apostles, were delivered by them to the Church, not in Writing,
but in Word only, and so have successively been handed down from Father to Son,
unto the present Age. And these are all according to the Council of Trent to be
received with equal affection of Piety and Reverence, as the holy Scripture.

Now I confess, if it may appear as evidently to me that Christ or his Apostles
left such Doctrines to the Custody of the Church, of equal necessity to the
Salvation of Christians, with those that are written in the Scpipture, as it
does that they left us these which are written in the Scripture; and if I may
be well assured, that these very Doctrines which the Church of Rome now holds,
and pretends to an Authority of imposing upon all Christendom, are indeed the
very same which were at first (as abovesaid) delivered to the Church, I can see
no reason why I should not be bound to believe the one as firmly as the other.
For seeing it is the Authority of the first Preachers of it, and not barely the
Writings of it, that bind me to believe the Doctrine; if I can be equally
assured, that as well what is unwritten as what is written, was preached by
them, as necessary to the Salvation of Mankind, I must needs also own an equal
Obligation upon me to believe them all alike.

But neither of these could I ever see cleared, nor can I conceive any hope
that I shall hereafter. And seeing the proof of both lies wholly upon them, who
affirm both; I cannot be obliged to believe them, till by such proof they have
convinced me. In the mean time, it seems enough to me, that God himself was
pleased to signify to the World his Will in writing, which I cannot imagine
why He should do, had he not intended we should learn his Will from what is
written, and not from any unwritten Tradition. And I am the more confirmed in
this Opinion by this, that he did not use this way of revealing his Mind unto
Men at the first, nor till after the World had had a very long time to discern
by experience the Unfaithfulness of unwritten Tradition. So that this and some
other Considerations whereupon the Papists use to ground their Arguments
against both the Necessity and Perfection of the Scripture, seem to me very
fully to evince both the one and the other; and so to leave no room at all for
their unwritten Traditions as any part of the Rule of Faith and Life.

Yet, seeing they, who are always preaching this Doctrine to us, That there is
no Salvation for them that are not of their Communion, preach it not as a
private Opinion of their own, or of some few others in that Communion; but as
the generally received Doctrine of that Church, which pretends to be no less
than Infallible; it concerns me so much the more to use all possible diligence,
to find out what Truth there may be in this Assertion. And that, not only
because I shall thereby discern the necessity of changing my Religion to make
sure of my own future Happiness; but also, because the Determination of this
one Point will at once put an end (as it seems to me) to all the Disputes that
are now between the Papists and Us. If I can find it true, that no Man can be
saved out of that Communion, I shall be a Fool to trouble my self with the
Study of the Scriptures, and seeking out for my self in them a Way to Heaven;
when I may be sure, by stepping over the Threshold out of the one Church into
the other, to meet with an Infallible Judge, whom if I do but follow, I cannot
go amiss. And to dispute any longer with my self, whether I should do so or
not, would but show me fitter for Bedlam than for any Church; seeing none but
the maddest Man alive would dispute for Damnation. On the other side, if I
shall find it false, that a Man cannot be saved out of that Communion, I must
needs be convinced that the Roman Church, which has determined it for a
certain Truth, has already erred both in Faith and Charity, and that having
erred, she is not Infallible: and being not Infallible, by her own Confession
cannot be that One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, out of which there
is no Salvation. So that as this Assertion of that Church shall be found to be,
true or false; even so will the Popish Religion appear also to be.

But here I meet with a very great Difficulty in my way, as I am going to seek
out the Truth or Falsehood of this Assertion; that however I may be able to
satisfy my self, yet I shall never (for ought I can see) be able to satisfy
them who are the Authors of it, any other way, than by a total Submission of my
own Judgment and Conscience too to their Determination, and a blind Obedience
to their Will. The Dispute (as is evident) is between two Churches, the one
whereof challenges to it self the big-swoln Prerogative of being the Lady and
Mother of all Churches; a Sovereign Authority of prescribing to the Faith of
all Christians; the Right and incommunicable Privilege of being the Sole and
Infallible Judge of all Controversies in Religion; finally, an unquestionable
Power of defining and declaring to all the World the true and only Terms of
Salvation. Now, that this Roman-Mother and Mistress-Church, sole Commandress
and Infallible Judge, having already in the fullness of Power determined it, and
by her Supreme Authority imposed an Oath upon her Subjects to maintain it, That
none out of her Communion can be saved, should after all this, in pure
Condescension to Men declared Heretics, divest her self of her Authority, lay
aside her Infallible Definitions, come down from the Tribunal and the Throne of
Judicature and Majesty, and stand at the Bar submitting her self and the whole
Cause to an indifferent and equal Trial, is a thing as little to be hoped for,
as it is yet unagreed upon by what Law, Jury or Judge the Controversy should be
decided. And truly on the other side, it seems to me altogether as unreasonable
in her to accept, That we Protestants of the Church of England, tho we pretend
to nothing of this Exorbitant Power over Her or other Churches, or of
determining Disputes for all the World, should yet, upon a naked Summons from
Her, whose Authority we question, and see no reason to acknowledge, forthwith
subscribe to the Sentence of our own Condemnation, without any fair and legal
Process, or indeed so much as yield to a Trial, where our professed Adversaries
must be at once the Lawmakers, Accusers, Witnesses; and yet this is most
notoriously our Case.

What course now in this Case can be taken by us? The Church of Rome tells us
expressly and peremptorily, We cannot be saved out of her Communion. Must we
believe her without any more ado? That Is indeed the way to make a short end of
all our Differences, for then we must yield to be Here Is, or else run headlong
to Damnation: But if we believe her not (as for my part I know not how we can
do, till we see some reason why we should do so) the Dispute (for ought I can
see) is like to be endless. For no such reasons can, or ought she to give us,
if she will be constant to her self, and stand to her own Principles, (as will
plainly appear anon) and if she desert her own Principles, she must yield her
self to be fallible, and not the true Church; and then in vain is all talk of
Reasons, why they that are not of her Communion should be damned.

However, suppose it be pretended (as indeed it is) that we have had sufficient
Reasons given us, why we ought to believe her in this Point. This then is the
present Question between us, Whether she has given us sufficient reason for
this, or no. She confidently affirms it, We as confidently deny it. She calls
us obstinate Heretics for denying it, and lays many a heavy Curse upon us: We
for this think her a very unreasonable and imperious Mistress, usurping an
Authority over us, which God never gave her. Who I wonder shall now be thought
fit to decide this Dispute? She will be tried and judged by no other but her
self; for She is resolved to be Sole and Infallible Judge in all Controversies
of Religion: That is in plain terms, She will accuse us, and she will leave us
no room for our own Defense; She will condemn us, and she will not permit us to
question the Justice of her Sentence. She tells us, we are bound to believe
her, and obey her, or else we must die eternally for it. We desire some reason
may be brought to convince us of this Duty: and she tells us again, she is our
Supreme and Infallible Mistress, and Mother, and Judge; and so the Conclusion
is, We must believe she has this Supreme Authority and Infallibility, because
she is Supreme and Infallible; which we can yet see no reason to believe, and
therefore cannot believe; and because we cannot believe it, we are declared to
be Heretics, and in a State of Damnation.

Seeing then, that the Church of Rome will by no means recede from her Claim to
this Supremacy and Infallibility; it seems plain to me, that there is no
possibility of satisfying her any way whatsoever but by yielding my self up
entirely to her without any farther dispute. But because I cannot do this,
without violence to my Conscience, and incurring that very Damnation, which she
would persuade me thereby to prevent; I must of necessity leave her a while to
satisfy her self about the Truth and Charity of this Doctrine as she can;
whilst I for my own private Satisfaction take into a very serious Consideration
these two things.

I. Whether I can discern any solid ground to hope, that I may be saved, as I
am now a Protestant of the Church of England. II. What more hopeful way to
Salvation the Church of Rome can me put into, should I enter into her
Communion.
If the result of this double Enquiry shall be, that I really think my self in
a fair way to Salvation where I am already, and cannot discern any more hopeful
way to it in the Church of Rome; I must needs accout my self bound in
Conscience, and under the Penalty of Damnation, to steer my course according to
the best Light I shall be able, by such a diligent and impartial Inquiry, to
attain unto, and content my self with that Religion, which seems best and
safest to me, till some better and safer can be found.

SECT. I.
The first thing I am to inquire into, is, What good ground of hope I can
discern that I may be saved as I am a Protestant. And here the first thing I am
to consider is, what I mean by the Name of Protestant, as it is owned by the
Members of the Church of England, and as I can heartily answer to it.

By a Protestant I understand no other but a Christian, adhering firmly both in
Faith and Practice to the written Word of God, and protesting against both the
Faith and Practice of the Papists, and all others whatsoever, so far only, as
they are either repugnant to the Holy Scripture in any thing, or ungrounded on
the same in things pretended by them necessary to Salvation. Such Protestants
do we of the Church of England profess our selves to be, as is apparent unto
all, from the 6 th of our XXXIX Articles, affirming, That the Scriptures
contain all things necessary to Salvation; so that whatsoever is not read
therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man, that it
should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary
to Salvation.

This is our very first Principle, as we are called Protestants, and such an
one I do heartily profess my self; neither see I yet the least cause to doubt
of my Salvation, whilst by the Grace of God I live answerably to this
Profession. For that the Protestant Religion built upon this Principle is a
safe Religion, is I think altogether as plain, as that Christianity it self,
pure and unmixed, is the Way to Salvation; because it is plain, that this
Religion we profess, holding to this Principle, can be nothing else but pure
and unmixed Christianity, being that, and no other, which is contained in the
Holy Scripture.

Is then the holy Scripture the Word of God or not? Was it given unto us of God
to be the Rule of our Religion, that is, of our Faith, Worship, and holy
Conversation, or was it not? If De verb. Dei. l. 1. c. 1.
Bellarmine may be credited, this is the Declaration of the Catholic Church,
both in the third Council of Carthage, and also in that of Trent. The Books of
the Prophets and Apostles are the true Word of God, and the sure and stable
Rule of Life. And as he shortly after adds, The most sure and safest Rule. Now,
whether it be the complete, perfect and adequate Rule, as we constantly affirm;
or only a partial Rule, or but some part of it, as the Papists contend; it
self, when diligently consulted, will be best able to inform us. For it is on
all hands granted to be the Word of God, which cannot lie; and therefore
unquestionably true in all things what soever it teaches us; and of those many
excellent things which it very plainly teaches, its one Perfection and
Sufficiency is one, and for my present Satisfaction very considerable.

I find in the first place, that God himself writ the Ten Commandments, the
complete Rule of Piety and Justice, with his own Finger, Exodus 31. 1, 18. Deuteronomy.
9. 10. and 10. 2, 4. That he commanded them to be written on the Posts and
Gates, Deuteronomy. 6. 9. and 11. 20. That Moses wrote all the Words of the Lord,
Exodus 24. 4. and delivered the Writing to the Priests to be read unto the
People, Deuteronomy. 31. 9. And that the King was to have by him a Copy of it for his
Direction, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. I find many Curses denounced against the Breakers of
it, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. and Blessings promised to them that keep it, Deuteronomy. 30. 10. I
find it was expressly forbidden to add unto it, or to aiminish from it, Deuteronomy. 4.
2, 12, 32. To turn from it to the right hand or to the left, Josh. 1. 7. And
that the good Kings were careful to order all things according to it, and to
reform what had been amiss by it, 1 Chronicles. 16. 40. 2 Kings 22. 13. And
therefore I do not wonder to hear the Psalmist, saying, The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the Soul, Psalm. 19. 7. nor to find Isaiah sending Men to
the Law, and to the Testimony, saying, If any speak not according to this Word,
it is because there is no Light in them, Isa. 8. 20.

Again, I find our Blessed Savior himself, and his Apostles after him, very
frequently appealing and referring their Hearers to that which had been written
in the Books of Moses, in the Psalms, and in the Prophets. They have Moses and
the Prophets, let them hear them, says Abraham in the Parable, Luke 16. 29.
Search the Scriptures (says Christ, Joh. 5. 39.) for in them ye think ye have
Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me. I find that St. Luke,
writing his Gospel, gives his Theophilus this good reason for it; That thou
might know the certainty of those things wherein thou have been instructed,
Luke 1. 4. The things which are most surely believed among us, v. 1. all things
of which himself had perfect understanding from the very first, v. 3. I find
St. John, who wrote last of all the Apostles, affirming, that tho Jesus did
many other Signs, which are not written in that Book of his, yet these are
written, that we may believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that
believing we might have Life through his Name, Joh. 20. 30, 31. And finally I
find St. Paul asserting the Perfection of the Holy Scripture as fully and
plainly as any Man can speak, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. saying, That the Holy
Scripture is able to make a Man wise unto Salvation through Faith which is in
Christ Jesus. That all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good Works. Now what more can we desire, than to be made wise unto Salvation?
And we are here plainly told, that the holy Scripture is able to make us so.
What more can be needful to direct us in the Way to Salvation, than what we may
learn from the Scriptare? It is profitable for our Information and
Establishment in the Truth, for the Confutation of Error and Heresy, for the
Correction of Vice and Wickedness, for our Instruction in Righteousness. It is
so profitable for all these purposes, that thereby the Man of God, the Pastor
and Teacher may be made complete, and well furnished for all the branches of
his Office, all the works of his holy Calling. In short, it is able to bring us
to Faith in Christ Jesus; And whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but
have everlasting Life; Joh. 3. 16.

Furthermore; from the same Scripture I also learn, that Unwritten or Oral
Tradition has ever been found too deceitful a thing to be relied on for so
great a matter as Salvation. I find that before the Flood, notwithstanding the
long Lives of Men, the few Principles of Natural Religion, and the easiness of
learning and remembering things so agreeable to humane Nature, yet all Flesh had
soon corrupted his Way upon the Earth, Genesis 6. 12. and every Imagination of the
Thoughts of Man's Heart was only evil continually, v. 5. And after the Flood,
the whole World was quickly overrun with Idolatry: So ill was the Doctrine
which had been preached by Noah and his Sons, preserved by Oral Tradition. Nay,
I find, that after God was pleased to give the Jews his Will in Writing, their
Teachers had so corrupted the Doctrine of God with their Traditions, that it
was a great part of our blessed Savior's business, to rescue it from those
Traditional Corruptions. He reproves the Scribes and Pharisees for
transgressing the Commandments of God by their Traditions, Mat. 15. 3. showing
them how they had made it of none effect by the same, v. 6. And that in vain
they worshipped God, teachiag for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, v. 9. And
St. Paul warns the Colossians to beware of being deceived through Philosophy
and vain Deceit, after the Tradition of Men, after the Rudiments of the World,
and not after Christ, Col. 2. 6. And the special occasion of writing most of
the Epistles, yea and the Gospels too, seems to be the Danger that Christians
were in of being seduced by false Teachers, from the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, under the pretense of Tradition. Such were the Wolves in Sheeps
clothing, Mat. 7. 15 False Apostles, deceitful Workers, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 13. Pretending to another
Gospel, Gal. 3. 6. Men of Slight and cunning Craftiness, lying in wait to
deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14.

From what I find in the Scripture, I must needs conclude, till I be better
informed, that it is a sufficient Rule for us to go by; and that, so long as we
hold us to it alone, in our Faith and Practice, there can be no necessity of
resorting to the Church of Rome, for that unto which our Bibles at home can
direct us. The Scripture is the Word of God, and sure Rule of Faith, says the
Infallible Church of Rome, if Bellarmine may be believed: This holy Scripture
is able to make us wise unto Salvation, says the this Infallible Scripture;
and we take no other but this Holy and Infallible Scripture for the Rule of our
Faith and Religious Practice, say we Protestants. What now should hinder me to
infer from hence, that if the Scripture be the Word of God, we Protestants are
very well as we are; for we have the Word of the Infallible God, and if it may
stand us in any stead, the Word of the Infallible Church (as she will needs be
accounted) to assure us, that adhering to the holy Scripture, we are in the
ready and sure way to Salvation.

Farther yet, as I am a Protestant of the Church of England, I do declare in
the words of our VIIIth Article, That the three Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius
Creed, and that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to
be received and believed; for they may be proved by most certain Warrants of
Holy Scripture. Seeing then, we receive and thoroughly believe the same Creeds,
and no other, which the Church of Rome her self professes to believe; and
which were thought by the Catholic Church of Christ, for above 400 Years after
the first planting of Christianity, to contain all Points of Faith necessary
for the Salvation of Christians; I think I have hence gathered this farther
Confirmation of my Assurance, that we Protestants are in the direct Way to
Salvation; that we are of the very same Religion, and no other, in all the
necessary Points of Christian Faith, whereof the Catholic Church evidently was
in the first and purest Ages of it. In the four first General Councils no other
Articles of Faith were held needful to be believed by Christians, but those of
these Creeds, which we entirely own and believe. Either then it is true, That
these three Creeds contain all necessary Points of Christian Faith, or it is
not. If it be true, we are safe enough, and can with no color of Reason be
said to err in Faith, or to deserve the Name of Heretics. If it be not true,
then were all those Primitive Christians as much Heretics as we are, and knew
no more, than we do, what belonged to the Salvation of Christians. And
strangely partial is the Church of Rome in approving the Faith of those
Councils, which one of their most famous Popes and Saints is said to have
reverenced as the four Gospels, and yet to condemn ours, tho in all Points the
very same. Especially when the Third of those Councils, held at Ephesus in the
Time of Pope Celestine, did expressly decree, That it should not be lawful to
utter, write, or compose any other Faith, besides that which had been defined
by the Holy Fathers congregated in the Holy Ghost in the City of Nice.
Ordering, that all they should be punished, who tendered any other to such as
had a desire to be converted to the Knowledge of the Truth, whether they were
Gentiles, Jews, or of any other Heresy. Whereby it is plain, that the Fathers in
this third Council did conclude that Creed to comprehend the entire Faith of a
Christian, And indeed a Man would think that the Council of Trent had in the
Beginning of it been altogether of the same mind, when of the same Creed it
thus declared it self; That it is that Principle wherein all that profess the
Faith of Christ do necessarily agree, and the Firm and Only Foundation against
which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail.

I may, I think, upon these Considerations, without more ado, be very well
satisfied of the Safety of the Protestant Religion. The Papists themselves must
grant, That whatsoever we believe or practice, as of necessity to Salvation,
really is so; and therefore, that we do not err either in our Faith or
Practice, whilst we live according to our own Principles. For if we err in
either, so far do they err also; and not they only, but all the Christian
World. And here we may press them with their own way of Arguing, and to much
more purpose, than they are wont to use it against us. When they would convince
us that their Religion is the safer, they are wont thus to argue; That Religion
is the safer, wherein, by the Confession of both Sides, a Man may be saved: but
both Sides confess, that a Man may be saved in the Popish Religion, and both
Sides do not confess that a Man may be saved in the Protestant Religion:
therefore the Popish Religion is the safer. Supposing now this way of arguing
for the Safety of their Religion from the Confession of both Parties be of any
strength, as they must suppose it to be, who so often and confidently use it;
then must the like Argument from the same Medium, be altogether as strong for
us. I would only beg of them to grant me this, (and I hope they will not say my
Request is unreasonable) That that Religion is the safest, all the Doctrines
whereof are the truest. If they will not grant me this, they must grant it
safer to hold some false Doctrines than all true. But if they think this
absurd, then must they give me leave thus to argue; That Religion is the
safest, wherein all Doctrines held or taught, as necessary to Salvation, are,
by the Confession of both Sides, certainly true. Now both Sides confess, that
all Doctrines, held or taught in the Protestant Religion, are certainly true;
and both Sides do not confess, that all Doctrines held and taught in the Popish
Religion are certainly true: therefore the Protestant Religion is the safer.
The same Articles of Faith, the same Rules and Precepts of Life, the same Acts
of religious Worship, the same holy Sacraments, the same holy Orders of
Ministers, which we have; the very same have they also. But they have many
things of all these sorts, which we have not; no nor any other Christians, but
those of their own Communion. And therefore to strengthen my Argument, yet more
I say, If that Doctrine and Practice be the safest, wherein all good Christians
agree; we are sure that ours is the safest, because all good Christians do
agree in them; and that theirs is not safe, because all good Christians do not
agree in them. Nay let me add this more: Our Religion is either safe and true,
in all things pretended by us necessary to Salvation; or there is no such thing
as a safe and true Christian Religion in the World visibly professed; and if
so, it will follow, that Christ has no true visible Church upon Earth, which I
am confident no Papist will say. The Consequence is plain, because all
Christians all the World over, that make any Figure of a Church, hold the same
both Faith and Practice with us, in what we account necessary to Salvation, the
Church of Rome it self not excluded.

Tho it be very certain, that we positively and affirmatively hold nothing in
Faith or Practice, as necessary to Salvation, but what is held by the Church of
Rome her self, and all other Christian Churches; yet will not the Men of that
Church allow us any possibility of being saved, whilst we are Protestants. And
he, who of late has been at some Pains to represent the Papist to us in his
fairest Dress, has labored as hard in this Point, as in any other, to show
that his Church is not uncharitable in the Doctrine She delivers concerning our
desperate Estate. Now although I am not enquiring, whether this Doctrine be
charitable or uncharitable, but only whether it be true or false; yet, for my
better Satisfaction, I will examine all that he says to this purpose.

He tells us, His Church does nothing herein but what she has learned of
Christ and his Apostles. And if he can show me this, I must needs be fully
satisfied, being verily persuaded they never taught any thing uncharitable or
untrue. To show this, he tells us, how Christ, Mark. 16. 16. has said, He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be
damned. And this is all his Church delivers in this Point. If this be all She
delivers, we cannot call her uncharitable for it, for we our selves willingly
subscribe to this Sentence of our Blessed Savior. Only we think, he did not
here teach and authorize the Church of Rome to say, That all who are not of her
Faith and Communion, shall be damned; tho she knows they believe all that
Christ sent his Apostles to teach them. I do not find in the Roman Ritual, that
the Church of Rome in the Baptising either of Infants or adult Persons, uses or
requires any other Confession of Faith, but that only of the Apostles Creed,
which is the same we use; and if to believe and be baptized in this Faith, be
enough for the Salvation of Papists, why is it not enough also for Protestants?
And if the Additional Articles of the Trentine Faith, and P. Pius his Creed be
necessary to Salvation, why is there no mention made of them in the Roman Order
of Baptism?

He adds that of St. Paul, (1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3.) where foretelling of some who
in later times would come and preach a Doctrine, forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from Meats, which God has created to be received; he
brands them with the infamous Title, of Men that depart from the Faith; giving
heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils. And several other Places of
Scripture he then produces, to show that Heretics, such as they that affirmed
the Resurrection to be past already, or denied that Jesus is the Christ, etc.
are in a State of Condemnation. Other Texts of Scripture he brings, wherein
Christians are charged to be unanimous, and condemned for causing Strife and
Divisions, warned to maintain Unity, and not to hearken to false Teachers and
Seducers, etc. But I find not by all this, that St. Paul or any of the
Apostles, taught the Church of Rome, which both forbids to marry, and commands
to abstain from Meats allowed of God; which teaches diverse Doctrines, whereof
we find not any thing in the Scripture, to condemn those for Heretics, that
adhere wholly to the Doctrine of the Scripture; or for Schismatics, who hold
Communion with all Christians, so far as they keep to the Doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles; and divide from the Church of Rome, no farther, than in those
Points only wherein they cannot hold her Communion and the Doctrine of Christ
too. I do not see, but after the same rate, as he here defends the Charity of
his Church, he might also defend her Justice, if She should pretend, that
because Christ commanded his Disciples to fetch him another Man's Ass and her
Colt; She did but what he taught, in taking away other Men's Goods, and giving
no other reason for it but this, that she has need of them.

What the Papists say more, to show that we can have no Saving Faith, is one of
these two things. Either, first, That it is not an entire Faith, there being
(as they say) many necessary Articles which we believe not: Or, Secondly, That
it is no right-grounded Faith, seeing it is not built upon sufficient
Authority, that is to say, on the Authority of the Catholic Church.

Their first Objection to the Protestant Faith is this, That it is no entire
Faith. And here I am told by the Representer, There is no more hopes for one
that denies obstinately any one Point of Catholic Faith, tho he believes all
the rest; than there is for one that keeps Nine of the Commandments, with the
Breach of the Tenth. Now this seems to me no great Encouragement to change the
Communion of the Church of England for that of Rome, if an entire Faith and an
entire Obedience be but equally necessary. I wish with all my Heart I could be
as sure, that the Church of Rome does not break the first Commandment, by her
Invocation of Saints, and Adoration of the Host; and the second Commandment, in
her Adoration of Images and the Cross; as I am sure, that the Church of England
neither obstinately denies any Article of the Catholic Faith; nor
countenanceth the Breach of any one of the ten Commandments, as that Church
seems too much to do, whilst she takes no little Care, that the People may not
know them all.

We steadfastly believe the whole Scripture, so far as we are able to understand
it explicitly; and when we do not implicitly, we receive the three Creeds,
which have ever been thought to contain the entire Faith of a Christian:
wherein then is our Faith partial or defective? I must consider that anon: at
present, seeing Obstinacy, according to our Adversaries, is a necessary
ingredient of an Heretic; I can easily assure my self, tho I do not see how
it is possible for me to satisfy them, that I am no Heretic; for I certainly
know, that I am very desirous to be thoroughly informed, and to be brought to a
right understanding of all necessary Truths; and am still in a readiness, and
full preparation of Mind, to believe any one or all of their Articles,
whenever they shall please to prove the Truth of them, either by Scripture,
or by unquestionable Apostolical Tradition. I am sure therefore, I deny not
obstinately any one Point of Catholic Faith. But till they vouchsafe me the
proof I desire, I must content my self with the Scripture, which is able to
make wise unto Salvation through Faith which is in Christ Jesus, and not in the
Pope of Rome, nor in the Roman Church.

And yet I find, that it is for this especially, that we are called Heretics,
that we adhere only to the Scripture; and that they often explain their
meaning, in bestowing that Title on us, by calling us Scripturists and
Gospellers; and ridicule us for talking of only Scripture. But when I consider,
that this is the Fundamental Heresy wherewith we are charged, I cannot but a
little wonder at it; and find less cause than ever, to think we can be
Heretics indeed, or that they can call us so any otherwise than in jest. Can
they grant the Scripture to be the Word of God, and the Gospel to be the Power
of God unto Salvation; and yet in earnest call us Heretics for being
Scripturists and Gospellers? If, submitting our Faith in all things to the
Scripture, we can be Heretics; then must the Scripture teach Heresy, and
cannot be the Word of God. What a Contradiction is this in Papists, to call us
Scripturists and Heretics; which is in effect to say, That we adhere only to
the Infallible Truth of God, and yet are guilty of obstinate Error in the Faith?

What is it then wherein our Faith is defective? It is in this, that we do not
believe all that the Church of Rome propounds to be believed. This indeed would
make us Papists, but whether it would make us better Christians than we are
already, is not so certain. A Papist (says the Representer) is one that lives
and believes what is prescribed in the Council of Trent. But this Rule of the
Papists Faith came into the World (as we think) too late, almost by fifteen
hundred Years, to be the Rule of the Christian Faith; and therefore he could
not have represented his Religion to us with greater disadvantage than here he
does. We cannot conceive how so small a handful of Prelates, most of them
Italians, sworn Vassals to the Bishop of Rome, assembled together at Trent
fifteen hundred Years after Christ's preaching, and wholly limited and directed
in all their proceedings by the Will and Command of Him, whose Authority was
the principal thing in question, and submitting all at last to Him alone,
should come by that immense Authority, to command the Faith of the Christian
World, or what Commission they could show from Christ, the Supreme Lawgiver, to
prescribe Laws of Faith and Life to all Christendom. And we can as little
conceive, how this pretended Council, could at once confirm all the General
Councils, and among the rest, that of Ephesus before mentioned; yea, and
declare the Nicene Creed to be the firm and only Foundation, and yet contrary
to the Decree of that Ephesine Council, and not very consistently to it is own
Declaration, decree so many more Points, than that Creed contains, as necessary
to be believed. Moreover, if this be the great Oracle we must consult, as our
surest Guide to Heaven; where must we meet with him, that can give us the
certain Sense of its General and Ambiguous Responses? The learned of the
Romish Church are not yet well agreed about it; and if the English Representer,
or French Expounder have had the luck to hit it, I am sure, that many
heretofore, who thought themselves as wise as either of them, have strangely
missed it: Or else that Council, and the Religion called Popery, has several
Faces for several Times and Countries, and in one place and time, shall look
like it self, and in another shall be made to look as like the Protestant
Religion, as the Artificial Painter dares make it. But that which here put us
to a stand in this, That as the Pope at first taught that Council to speak; so
has he reserved the Interpretation of its Decrees to the Sea Apostolic, or
himself only; and He is not always pleased in plain terms to let us know his
Mind; and if he should, for once, speak out plainly, it will be a little hard
for him to assure us, that none of his Successors shall hereafter contradict
him; unless he can satisfy us, that he has as well the Gift of Prophesying, as
that of defining and interpreting.

However, it is for not believing the new Articles of Trent, that we are
accounted Heretics, and out of the way to Heaven. And the reason is, because
these Articles are supposed to be as firmly grounded on the Word of God, as any
of those old ones which we believe: For the Word of God (says the Council of
Trent) is partly contained in the Books of Scripture, and partly in Traditions
unwritten; these are to be received with the same affection of Piety and
Reverence; and therefore he that disbelieves any Article grounded upon
unwritten Tradition, is no less a Heretic, than he that disbelieves what is
written in the Books of Scripture. If I knew how to be satisfied concerning the
Authority of this Council, I could easily tell what Credit I should give to
this, which it so confidently affirms. But so long as I cannot discern the
reason of it is pretended Authority, I am a little apt to suspect, that it was
not the clearness of this Principle that moved it to make so many either
unscriptural or antiscriptural Decrees; but rather the desire it had of
vindicating its unscriptural Doctrines and Practices, that made it necessary to
espouse such a Principle. And indeed when I well consider it, I am not a little
comforted by it; that this equalling unwritten Tradition with Scripture, which
is the very Basis of the Romish Religion, is one of the most incredible things
in the World of it self, and as destitute of any tolerable Evidence, whence it
may gain any Credit to it self. It must needs seem very strange to any
considering Man, That the wise God should leave us a Rule in writing, on
purpose to direct us how to honor Him, and attain to Salvation; and give it
this Commendation, that it is able to make wise unto Salvation; and yet omit a
great many things altogether as necessary to those ends, as those that are
written; and without the Belief and Practice whereof, those that are written
can no whit avail us; and yet never so much as once tell us in all that
Writing, whither we should go to seek and learn them: Nay, that he should omit
therein the principal Point of all, and without which all that is either
written or unwritten can signify nothing, that is, to tell us, That the Roman
Church is the only true Church, the only sure and Infallible Interpreter of all
that is written; and the only faithful Keeper of all that is unwritten; from
the Mouth whereof we must receive all saving Truth. This I think is a thing
that must needs be very hard for any one to believe, that believes the Infinite
Wisdom, Goodness and Veracity of God. And how it can ever be made evident, that
there are such necessary unwritten Traditions, or that these, which the Church
of Rome holds, are they; I think no Man living can imagine. I am sure if the
Papists way of reasoning be good, it is safer not to believe this. For all Sides
consent, that the Scripture which we have is the certain Word of God; but all
Sides are not agreed, that unwritten Traditions are the Word of God; therefore
it is safer to believe the Scripture only to be the Word of God, and not
Traditions. We hold us to Scripture, and the Papists grant that to be the
safest Rule; their greatest strength lies in unwritten, or (as they are wont to
speak) Oral and Practical Traditions; which in plain English, is no more but
Report and Custom; and whether there can reasonably be thought any certainty in
these, equal to that of the written Word of God given by Divine Inspiration,
can be no hard matter for a very weak Understanding to determine.

That which makes these unwritten Traditions of the less Credit with me, is the
assurance I have, that a pretense to them, and a vain confidence in them, has
produced much Error and Division in the Church. It Is well known, how far, and
how long the Errors of the Millenaries, and of administering the Eucharist to
Infants (to mention no more) prevailed on this account. And the early Schisms
betwixt the Roman and Asian Churches, about the keeping of Easter; and the hot
Contests between the Roman and African Churches about rebaptizing Heretics,
were occasioned, and upheld by Pretenses on all hands to Tradition. This was
the only Refuge of old for Heretics, when they were confounded by the
Scripture, to take shelter under Tradition: whence Tertullian called them
Lucifugas Scripturarum, Men who shunned the Light Tertul. de Praesct. c. 25.
of the Scriptures. Again, says he, They confess indeed that the Apostles were
ignorant of nothing, and differed not among themselves in their preaching; but
they will not have it, that they revealed all things to all; for some things
they delivered openly to all, some things secretly and to a few; and that
because St. Paul uses this saying to Timothy, O Timothy, keep that which is
committed to thy trust. And again, that good thing which is committed to thee,
keep. Irenaeus also makes mention of Heretics who affirmed, That out of the
Scriptures the Iren. cont. Haer. l. 3. c. 2.
Truth could not be found out by them who understood not Tradition, because it
was not delivered by Writing, but by living Voice; for which cause also St.
Paul said, we speak Wisdom among them that are perfect. St. Augustine in his
97th Tract upon John, says, that all the most foolish Heretics, who desire to
be accounted Christians, used to color their audacious Fictions with a
pretense from that Sentence of the Gospel, Joh. 16. 10. I have many things to
say unto you, but you cannot bear them now. Thus did the Heretics of old both
plead Tradition, and sought to strengthen their Plea by such places of
Scripture as these; which are the very same, that the Papists produce to the
same purpose, as may be seen in Bellarmine, and others.

But I find that the Orthodox Fathers of the Church were of another Mind. The
things which we find not in the Scriptures (says St. Ambrose) how can we use
them? Ambr. Offic. l. 1. c. 23. Let those of Hermogenes his Shop (says
Tertullian) Tert. adv. Hermog. c. 22.
show that it is written. If it be not written, let them fear that Woe designed
for those that add or take away. Irenaeus says, that what the Apostles had
preached, the same afterward Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
by the Will of God they delivered unto us in the Scriptures, to be the
foundation and pillar of our Faith. St. Hierome against Helvidius, calls the
Holy Scriptures the only Fountain of Truth. Let us bring (says St. Austin) for
trial, not the deceitful Balances, Aug. l. 2. cont. Donat.
where we may hang on what we will, and how we will, at our own pleasure;
saying, this is heavy, and this is light; but let us bring the Divine Balance
of the Holy Scriptures, and in that let us weigh what is heavier; nay, let us
not weigh, but let us own the things already weighed by the Lord. And
elsewhere, The Holy Scripture (says he) fixes the Rule of our Doctrine. And
indeed the excellent sayings of the Ancients to this purpose are so well known,
that I should be very vain to cite any more here.

If now, after all this, I should suppose, what I can by no means yet grant,
that God having ordered the Scriptures to be written, and said so much in the
Commendation thereof; they do not yet contain all things necessary to
Salvation, but that some part of those necessary things (as both some Heretics
of old, and Papists now would have it believed) was only whispered privately
into the Ears of the Apostles, as Mysteries unfit at that time to be
communicated to vulgar Christians; and that the Apostles (tho they were
commanded by Christ to preach upon the House-tops that which he had told them
privately in the Ear, Mar. 10. 27.) did not yet think themselves obliged to
obey this Command in writing all that was necessary; but rather to conceal for
a time, a considerable part of that mysterious Doctrine. Yea, suppose that this
was one principal use of St. Peter's Keys, to lock up all these Mysteries in
the Cabinet of the Churches Breast (let the Church signify what it can) to be
communicated to the World, in after-Ages by piecemeal, so as she should find
Men prepared by a blind credulity to receive them. Yet after all, I must needs
think, that we are too hardly dealt with to be called Heretics for not
believing these things, till something be produced, whereby we may be assured,
either that these things which they commend to us come indeed from Christ and
his Apostles, or that we are obliged to take the Church of Rome's word for a
good Assurance. It seems to me a very unreasonable thing, that we should be
condemned as obstinate, for not believing things never sufficiently proved,
whilst we know and declare our selves prepared in Mind to yield upon the first
rational Conviction. Why should not that Church have the charity to forbear her
Censures, till she have tried the strength of her Arguments? Why was the
Council of Trent, contrary to the Custom of other Councils, so liberal of her
Curses, and so sparing of her Reasons? One good Reason would do more to make us
of her Communion than a thousand Anathema's. Would not a Man suspect that they
have no good Reasons to show, who keep them so close? The plain Truth is, there
have been such vain Pretenses to Tradition in all Ages, one contradicting
another, that it seems impossible in this Age to discern between true and
false. Did not Clemens Alexandrinus call it an Apostolical Tradition, that
Christ preached but one Year? And did not Irenaeus pretend a Tradition,
descending from St. John, that Christ was about fifty Years old when he was
crucified? And do the Papists accout either of these to be true? Many things
might be named, which for some time have been received as Apostolical
Traditions, which the Church of Rome will not now own to be so. And those which
she owns, she can no more prove to be so, than those she has rejected. It were
easy to show this, even from abundance of their own Writers, who assert the
Perfection of the Scripture, and complain of the Mischief this pretense to
Tradition has done; and who confess, they cannot be proved to come from the
Apostles. But I shall now content my self with the ingenuous Confession of the
Bishops assembled at Bononia, in their Counsel given to P. Julius the 3 d. We
plainly confess (say they) among our selves, that we cannot prove that which we
hold and teach concerning Traditions, but we have some conjectures only. And
again; In truth whosoever shall diligently consider the Scripture, and then all
the things that are usually done in our Churches, will find there is great
difference betwixt them; and that this Doctrine of ours is very unlike, and in
many things quite repugnant to it. What said Erasmus long since on the 2 d
Psalm: They call the People off (says he) from the Scriptures unto little
humane Traditions, which they have honestly invented for their own Profit. And
Peter Suter, a bitter Adversary of his, has these words; Since many things are
delivered to be observed, which are not expressly found in Holy Scripture, will
not unlearned Persons, taking notice of these things, easily murmur;
complaining that so great Burdens should be laid upon them, whereby the Liberty
of the Gospel is so greatly impaired? Will they not also easily be drawn away
from the observance of Ecclesiastical Ordinances, when they shall find that
they are not contained in the Law of Christ? And must we be Heretics for not
believing these so uncertain Traditions? Must our Faith be accounted defective
and not entire, merely because we do not believe what no Man can make us
understand to co come from God? This seems very hard.

It is now time for me to consider the second Objection made against our Faith,
which is, That it is not rightly grounded, it is not built on the Authority of
the Church, that is, the Church of Rome. And indeed so much weight I find laid
upon this one Point, that I have some reason to think, that they, who have been
very forward at all times to give such liberal allowances of implicit Faith to
their Friends at home, would be contented with a very small measure of explicit
Belief in us, if we would once be taught to ground our Faith aright, on the
sole Authority of that Church. It seems to me, that for the talk about it, they
are no such rigid Exactors of an entire explicit Faith in order to Salvation,
but that if we will explicitly believe this one fundamental Point, the Supreme
Authority of the Roman Church over all Christians, they will deal very
favorably with us in most others; and excuse our Ignorance easilier, than they
can persuade us to be content to be ignorant. I think I have very good reason
to believe this, because I know they can have no reason to reject them that
believe but this one Point; for when once this great Gobbet is swallowed down,
the Passage will be so well opened, that all other Points of Faith either go
down with it, or will slip after it without the least straining or grutching.
The Authority of God himself, speaking in Scripture, will be of no farther
consideration to us; for that we must suppose to be included in the Authority
of our Mother the Church. And whatsoever we shall thence-forward perceive to be
the Will of our Mother, we must without all scruple, conclude it to be also the
Will of our Father. The Representer has lately told us, that tho the Scripture
(which is the Word of our Heavenly Father) may be the Law; yet the Mother, the
Roman Church, is the Judge. Having learned from her the sense of the Scripture,
we are obliged to submit to this, and never presume on our own private
Sentiments, however seemingly grounded on Reason and Scripture, to believe or
preach any new Doctrine opposite to the Belief of the Church. And there is
reason for this, if it be true which he elsewhere tells us, That a Man may very
Pap. Repr. p. 35.
easily frame as many Creeds as he pleases, and make Christ and his Apostles
speak what shall be most agreeable to his humor, and suit best with his
Interest, and find plain proofs for all (he means Ibid. p. 37, 38.
in Scripture); the truth whereof (as of all other Points of Doctrine) stands
(as he says) upon the same Foundation of the Churches Tradition, which if it
fail in one, leaves no security in any. This is indeed to advance the Church to
the very topbranch of all Authority, and to make the holy Scripture as very a
Nose of Wax, and as Leaden a Rule, as any of that Church ever thought it:
seeing a Man may form and work it into Creeds of all fashions, and find plain
proofs in it for any odd Humor, or carnal and Worldly Interest. This then (as
far as I can learn by him) is the only way for me to be a through Papist, and a
good Catholic, I must lay aside my Reason, and the Scripture, and heed no more
what either of these tell me; only I must have my Ear open to the Voice of the
Church, and be wholly at her teaching and command, and I shall be safe enough.

Upon the most serious consideration of the Character which the Papist is
pleased to give us of himself, I cannot find what it is, for which they of that
Church are so severely bent against us Protestants; save only, that we will
not, like tame Animals, without any understanding of our own, learn to come and
go at a whistle; or trot on the Road as we are driven, and stoop to take on our
Backs whatever Load it shall please the Roman Church to lay upon us, confessing
her to have absolute and uncontrollable Authority over our Faith. The standing
out against the Catholic Church makes Men Heretics, and without erring
against this, no Man is guilty of Heresy, said the Jesuit Fisher, in his Answer
to certain Questions propounded to him by King James I. This then is the only
Heresy to disown the Authority of the Roman (for that he calls the Catholic.)
Church. Again, says he, One fundamental Error of the Protestants, is their
denying the Primacy of St. Peter and his Successors, the Foundation which
Christ laid of his Church, necessary for the perpetual Government thereof. And
again, He that forsakes the Church, puts himself into a dead and damnable
State, and may have all things besides Salvation and Eternal Life. Bellarmine
speaks out, and tells us very plainly, No Man can, tho he would, be subject to
Christ, and communicate Bell. de Eccles. l. 3. c. 5.
with the Celestial Church, that is not subject to the Pope. If then we believe
this Authority of the Roman Church, we believe all; and if we believe not this,
we believe nothing at all, in the Papists account; or to any better purpose,
than to our own Damnation. So that without this Belief our Faith shall never
pass for an entire Faith; and when we once believe this, it shall never be any
more questioned, whether it be entire or no.

Now it seems a very hard matter to believe this great Point of Faith, till
very good Reasons be given us for it; and yet (it should seem) the want of such
Reasons will not excuse us from being Heretics, and in a State of Damnation,
no not tho we be never so ready to believe it, when we shall have Reasons given
us for it. For he is an Heretic (we are told) who thinks any thing against the
Definition of the Church; yet Bonacin. de Lensur. D. 2. q. 5. p. 1. from
Vasquez and others.
stands so affected, that he will think the contrary, if he be convinced by
Arguments, or if the matter be propounded to him by a Learned Man. And on the
contrary, if we do believe this, we can hardly be Heretics, whatever Errors we
believe, or this Belief draws us into. For if a Rustic (says Cardinal Tolet)
believe his Bishop about the Articles of Faith, teaching Tol. Instruct. Sacerd.
l. 4. c. 3.
him some Heretical Doctrine, he merits by believing; although it be an Error. So
weighty a Point is this, of believing the Authority of the Roman Church, and
grounding our entire Faith upon it; that I perceive I am concerned above all
things to examine it thoroughly: and this I shall have fitter opportunity to do
now I am come to the second thing propounded.

SECT. II.
Hitherto I have been considering, what ground I have to hope for Salvation, as
I am a Protestant, and of the Church of England. I am now in the next place to
enquire, Whether I can find any Reason to believe, that the Church of Rome can
put me into a more hopeful Way to it, should I turn Papist, and be of her
Communion. Now, seeing I have already found, that the great Reason, why we are
held incapable of Salvation as now we are, is this; That we have no entire
Faith; and the Defect in our Faith is this, That we believe not all the
Articles of the Roman Faith; and that which makes it necessary for us to
believe all those Articles, is the Authority of the Catholic, that is, as they
interpret, the Roman Church, to declare and define what things are necessary to
the Salvation of Christians; I perceive I have no more to do for my full
Satisfaction in the present Inquiry, but to consider, what Reason I can have
for the owning and submitting to this Authority. And to discern this, I think
this Method fittest to be taken: I will inquire into three things;

I. What things are implied in that Submission to this Authority which is
required of me. II. What the Grounds and Reasons are whereon this Authority is
founded, and which should persuade me to submit. III. Where this Authority may
be found, and to whom I must submit.
And this is all, I think, that I need to do; for I can never think fit to
submit my Faith and Conscience, and to trust my Salvation to an Authority,
which either requires of me such things as are unreasonable, or can produce no
Reason for it self, or is so lodged in Obscurity as it cannot be found.

I. I cannot leave the Communion of the Church of England, and enter into that
of Rome, in obedience to an Authority which commands me to do things
unreasonable, agreeing neither with the Nature of Mankind, nor with the
undoubted Principles of Religion. If therefore the Church of Rome require such
things of me, I must be a Protestant still, and protest against that Authority,
which She pretends to. And for ought I can yet see, I cannot submit to her
Authority, but upon the hardest and most unreasonable Terms in the World. I
must renounce my Reason and my Judgment, I must no longer trust my Senses, I
must either lay aside, or learn to speak dishonourably of God's Word; I must
not believe a Word that God has spoken, without that Church's Leave; I must
embrace a Religion, for which, according to that Church's Principles, no Reason
can be given to convince me; and when I have thus learned to do all things
without Reason, I must do, what with Reason I can never do, believe all Men
whatsoever, and how piously soever they otherwise live, if they be not of the
Roman Communion, to be in a State of Damnation. If I be deceived in any thing
of all this, I shall be very glad to know it; and I have only this to say for
my self, that they were Roman Catholics, who should know their own Religion
best, that have deceived me; and if I may be deceived by hearkening to them,
whom that Church sends abroad to make us Converts, I shall be the less
encouraged hereafter, to embrace her Communion upon their Persuasions. Whether
all, who are already of her Communion, either own or know all this, it concerns
not me to enquire; but I think it a Debt of Charity, that I owe them, to think,
(till they tell me the contrary) that they do not; and that, if they did, they
would not long continue where they are. However, till they, who taught me these
things, shall either confess their own Error, or show me my Mistake, I must
needs think them all true; and therefore also account it much safer for me to
continue a Protestant, than to turn Papist, whatever it may seem, or be to
others.

First, I think nothing can be plainer, than that it is more safe to act like
understanding, and discreet, considering Men, than otherwise; or, that the
Religion, which allows Men so to do, is safer than that which does not allow
it. Now the Protestant Religion allows Men to make use of their Reason and
Judgment, to discern between Truth and Falsehood, Good and Evil; which the Roman
Religion (as it seems to me) will not allow; and therefore it must needs be the
safer Religion.

Christ certainly came not into the World to save Sinners by destroying, but
rather by restoring and perfecting Human Nature. His business was not to
deprive us of the use of the most noble Faculty which God had given us; but to
rectify that, and all the rest, after they had been depraved by Sin. His Gospel
was not preached to close up the Eye of the Soul, the Understanding, and so to
lead Men blindfold to Heaven; but to open Men's Eyes, and to furn them from
Darkness to Light, Act. 26. 18. The Apostles preached, to teach us how to offer
unto God a Reasonable Service: Romans 12. 1. And Christ expects, that his Sheep
should be able to discern the voice of him their Shepherd, from the voice of
Strangers; and, avoiding them, to follow him only; John 10. 4, 5. St. Peter
exhorts Men, to be always ready to give a Reason of the Hope that is in them; 1
Pet. 3. 15. And St. Paul bids Men prove all things, and hold fast that which is
good; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. And St. John exhorts, not to believe every Spirit, but to
try the Spirits whether they be of God; 1 John 4. 1. How any Man shall be able
to do all this, and much more, which as a Christian he is obliged to do, and
not be allowed the free use of his Reason and judging Faculty, I am sure, no
Man can tell me; neither indeed how he can be of any Religion at all; for
before he can really be of any Religion, he must choose it; and choose it he
cannot, till he have rationally considered and judged of it, and of the Reasons
which must move him to the choice of it. And in Truth, to deny a Man the free
use of his Reason and Judgment in Religion, is to turn him into a Beast, where
he should be most a Man; and either to make it impossible for him to be of any
Religion at all, and to serve God like a Man; or else to say in effect, That
Christian Religion is altogether a most unreasonable thing, and proper only to
unreasonable Creatures.

Now the Writing Men of the Roman Church tell us nothing more frequently, than
that no private Man ought to be allowed to judge for himself in matters of
Faith; that to allow this, is to set the Gate wide open to all Heresies; that
every Man is bound to sumbit and captivate his Understanding and Judgment to
the Judgment of the Church, that is, to all the Definitions of (as they call
it) the Roman Catholic Church. Whatsoever this Church affirms, we must believe
to be true; and whatsoever She commands, we must cheerfully obey, seem the
thing to our own private Reason never so false, or never so wicked. We must not
dare to examine the Truth or Lawfulness of her Decrees or Determinations, tho
Reason and Scripture too, seem to us to be against them, as we have been lately
taught by the Representer; for as we receive from Her the Books, so from Her
only we are to receive the Sense of Scripture. Hence it is, that they define a
Heretic, to be one that obstinately opposes the Sentence of the Church. The
Doctrines of Fathers (Bellarmine some-where tells us) may be examined by
Reason, because they teach but as private Doctors; but the Church teaches as a
Judge, with all Authority, and therefore no Man may dispute the soundness of her
Doctrine. This then is the first step I must take, if I will go over to the
Church of Rome; I must resolve to see no longer for my self with my own Eyes,
but give my self up to be led by the Church, never questioning the Way I am to
go in, so long as she leads me. And truly so far as I am yet able to discern
with my Protestant Eyes, it is but needful to close the Eye of Reason
beforehand, when I am about to go, where I must otherwise see such things as
no Reason can endure. It was therefore very ingenuously spoken (as I have
heard) of Mr. Cressy, when he said, that the Wit and Judgment of Catholics, is
to renounce their own Judgment, and depose their own Wit. Yet if this be true,
I must beg his Pardon, if I dare not yet imitate his Example, or follow him
thither, where (according to him) I can have nothing to do, but to run headlong
upon any thing without Wit or Fear. Reason he is pleased to call a hoodwinked
Guide; and following it, all we can hope for, is, that we may possibly stumble
into the Truth or Church. Possibly (it should seem) a Man may stumble upon it
with his Eyes in his Head; and truly, I dare not pull them out, lest I should
stumble on a blind Leader, and we should both fall into the Ditch.

Secondly; Whenever I resolve to enter into the Roman Communion, I fear I
must also bid farewell to my Senses; or resolve never any more to trust them,
no, not about those things, which are the proper Objects of Sense; to discern
which, God gave me my Senses; and of which it will be impossible for me to have
any distinct knowledge without them.

How unreasonable and dangerous a thing this is, I must needs be very sensible,
if I be not resolved already to hearken no more to my Reason. If I must no
longer credit my Eyes about Shape and Color, nor my Ears about Sounds and
Words, nor my Nose about Smells, nor my Palate concerning Tastes, nor my Hands
and Feeling about Hot and Cold, Hard and Soft; I shall not know how to believe,
that God gave me all these Instruments of Sense to any purpose at all; I am
sure, I cannot think my self in a comfortable and safe Condition. I know not to
what end our Blessed Savior should bid St. Thomas, Handle and see him; or how
his Faith could be thereby confirmed, if such Senses are not to be trusted: nor
why the Apostle should hope to have the more Credit given to their Narratives,
by telling us they were Eyewitnesses of the things they relate; 2 Pet. 1. 16.
Luke 1. 2. Nor why St. John (1 Ioh. 1. 1.) should talk so much of hearing,
seeing and handling, as things qualifying them for bearing witness. What a
Christian am I like to be, if I can have no Assurance of what I see or hear; if
I may not trust my Eyes when I read the Scripture, nor my Ears when I hear the
Instructions of my Teachers? How could the first Christians be sure themselves,
or assure us, that Jesus is the Christ, if in hearing his Words, and seeing his
Miracles, and reading the Prophets, they might not safely trust their Senses?
If Sense be not to be trusted, all Teaching must be by immediate Inspiration;
and Faith comes not by hearing, as St. Paul affirms it does; and the Infallible
Church can teach no more than we, except she can teach without Speaking or
Writing, or any thing that is to be understood by Hearing or Seeing; and so
Oral and Practical Tradition can be of no more use to us, than to the Blind and
Deaf. On this Supposition, I may easily mistake a Harlot for my Mother, and
stumble into Babylon instead of Jerusalem, hearken to the Voice of the Wolf
instead of the Shepherd, eat and drink Poison instead of wholesome Food, and
feel no Pain nor Loss when my Eyes are plucked out.

Now if the Church of Rome do not command us to renounce all Credit to our
Senses, she cannot command us to give any Credit to her Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. And I fear, without our believing this Point, she will not
admit us to her Communion. We believe already a Real Presence of that which we
see not, yet will not this serve, unless we believe also a Real Absence of that
which we both see, handle, taste and smell. In the holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist, I am commanded to believe that there is not any Bread, but Flesh;
nor Wine, but Blood; and yet there I see, smell, taste and feel both Bread and
Wine, and nothing else. I hear it read, that our Blessed Savior took, blessed,
brake and gave Bread and Wine; and of the same he said, Take, eat and drink. I
hear St. Paul again and again (1 Cor. 11. 26, 27, 28.) speak of eating and
drinking the Bread and the Cup. And yet I must not trust any of these five
Senses, but against the clearest Evidence and Testimony of them all, I must
believe (if I can) that there is neither Bread nor Wine, but that, which
neither my Senses can discern, nor my Reason conceive, nor does the Scripture
any where say, the very Natural Flesh and Blood of Christ, under the Color and
Form, the Taste and Smell, and all other proper Qualities of Bread and Wine;
and yet neither that Color, nor Form, nor Taste, nor Smell, nor any other
Accident, which my Senses there perceive, are in the Flesh and Blood, tho there
is nothing else there for them to be in. That tho I break and chew with my
Teeth what I take and eat; yet I break not, nor chew with my Teeth the Body of
Christ; and yet I take and eat nothing else. If I cannot believe this, I am
told that I have not Faith enough, and only because I have yet Reason and Sense
too much, to be of that Communion. This is another step that I must take in
going over to the Church of Rome. And when I am got thus far, I may think it
seasonable enough to lay aside the Scripture too: For what good Use I can make
of it, without the free use of my Reason, and trusting my Senses, I do not
understand.

Thirdly, If I be a Layman, and not of so good credit with the Curate or
Bishop, as to obtain a License; that is, if I will not promise to adhere only
to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and take all that I read in that sense
only, which she is pleased to give it; I must not be suffered to read the
Scripture at all, but must give away my Bible, upon pain of being denied the
Remission of my Sins. And truly if I may be allowed to read it upon no other
terms, than of being thus tied up, to learn nothing by it, but what I am
beforehand taught without it; I shall think a License too dear, even at a very
low rate; if yet it may be obtained, as I find it questioned, whether it may or
no, any where else, but in such places as a License to read some of their own,
may prevent their itch of looking into our Translations. However, whether I be
of the Lay or Clergy, if I will learn of them who are most busy in endeavoring
my Conversion; I am sure I must be taught to speak very dishonourably of the
Word of God; and this seems to be no more than the Religion commended to me
requires.

I must needs here say, That nothing in the World does (and I think I may say,
ought) more to prejudice me against any Religion, than to find it constrained
in its own Defense, to say undecent things of that which it grants to be the
Word of God. And if I might be thought worthy to advise the Missionaries, they
should not harp too much on this ungrateful String, if they would draw any
after them that have the least Zeal for God's Honor. I am verily oerswaded,
that the good Language they bestow upon the Scripture, has kept more out of
their Church, than ever their Arguments yet won. I will not now take notice of
those too well known Encomiums bestowed upon it, by some of their Communion,
calling it a Nose of Wax, a Leaden Rule, a dead Letter, unsens'd Characters,
and I am ashamed to say what more. I shall only observe what is ordinarily
taught us and endeavored with much Art to be proved by their best, most
modest, and generally approved Authors: as, That the Scripture is not
Necessary; that it has no Authority as to us, but from the Church; that it is
an imperfect, an insufficient Rule; that it is an obscure Book, and finally, a
very dangerous one to be read by the People.

I know very well, That the Representer, and others of them tell us, That the
Papist believes it damnable in any one, to think, speak, or to do any thing
irreverently toward the Scripture, and that he holds it in the highest
Veneration of all Men living. I know also, that most of them, even whilst they
are industriously proving all that I but now said, do yet labor to mollify and
sweeten their own harsh Expressions, which they know must needs grate the Ears
of all pious Persons. I am also verily persuaded, that many Papists have a very
venerable esteem for the Scripture, and are not a little troubled to hear it
reproachfully used. And yet I cannot see that highest Veneration for it, or
that they speak not very irreverently of it, who speak no worse of it, than the
Representer himself has taught them, viz. That it is not fit to be read
generally of all without License; tho he gives this very good reason for it,
Lest they should no longer acknowledge the Authority of the Roman Church; or in
his own words, No Authority left by Christ, to which they are to submit. As tho
Men might be taught by the Scripture to be disobedient to any Authority which
Christ has set up in his Church. I cannot see any great Veneration he has to
the Scripture, in saying, They allow a restraint upon the reading of the
Scriptures, for the preventing of a blind ignorant Presumption, or the casting
of the Holy to Dogs, or Pearls to Swine, (such too is his respect for
Christians) That he has no other assurance that they are the Word of God, but
by the Authority and Canon of the Church. That almost every Text of the Bible
and even those that concern the most essential and fundamental Points of the
Christian Religion may be interpreted several ways, and made to signify things
contrary to one another. That it is altogether silent, without discovering
which of all those Senses is that intended by the Holy Ghost, and leading to
Truth; and which are erroneous and Antichristian. That a Man may frame as many
Creeds as he pleases, and make Christ and his Apostles speak what shall be most
agreeable to his Humor, and suit best with his Interest, and find plain Proofs
for all. That it alone can be no Rule of Faith to any private or particular
Person. Certainly they who talk of the Scripture at this rate, have not the
highest Veneration for it, of all Men living.

They that say, and labor to prove, that the Scripture is not necessary, may
well be supposed to think, that the Church of God might do well enough without
it. And, tho to lessen the Odiousness of this Assertion, they are forced to
confess it is a Lie, without the help of some such mental Reservation as this,
So that God could not, if he pleased, preserve his Truth among Men, some other
way than by writing it; yet does not this speak in them the like Veneration for
the Scripture, as Protestants have, who down-rightly affirm it to be necessary.
And it must needs sound ill to say, That the All-wise God has been very
careful to leave and preserve in his Church an unnecessary thing. Yea, it is
altogether as absurd to say, the Scripture is not necessary, because God could,
if it had seemed good to him, have preserved his Church and Faith without it:
As it would be to say, that Plowing and Sowing, or Eating and Drinking are not
necessary, because God could, if he pleased, make the Ground bring forth
without the one, and preserve Man's Life without the other. Nor can it be
imagined that any Man upon this account only, would venture to say, and attempt
to prove the Scripture not to be necessary in a sense, wherein no Man ever
affirmed it; if he were not so zealously bent upon lessening the Esteem which
we have for it, that he will choose rather to say nothing to the purpose, and
dispute against no Body, than to be silent, and say nothing that sounds ill of
it; and that he thinks it needful for the ends of his Church so to do.

In like manner, when they contend that the Authority of the Scripture is from
the Church, which is the thing whereof at every turn they are forward enough to
mind us; they are forced again to make some Abatements to make it seem a Truth.
It Is true, they say, that considered in it self alone, it has its Authority
from God; whereby they can mean no more, but that God is the Author of it; but
in relation to us, it has its Authority from the Church. Now I would fain
know, what any Man can understand properly by the Authority of the Scripture,
but its relation to us, or the Power it has to command our Faith in it, and
Obedience to it, as the Word of God. And if it have all this Power from the
Church, as is confidently affirmed, then tho it self be of God, yet all its
Authority is from the Church; and it must needs be true, which was said by one
of them, That it is of no more Authority than Livy or Aesop' s Fables without
the Churches Declaration. Thus is the Authority of God's Word made to depend
upon the Authority of Men, and all our Faith is no more but humane Faith
resting upon humane Testimony. And if the Authority which it has to oblige us,
be from the Church, I would know by what Authority it does oblige the Church;
it is not sure, by any Authority from Her, for then I see no reason why the
Church may not choose whether she will receive it or no; whilst yet I think,
that it is only by the Authority of the Scripture that she can pretend to be a
Church, and to have any Authority at all. However this I am sure of, that they
who say the Scripture is to be received for the Churches Sake, have not so high
a Veneration, either for it, or the Author of it, as they who say it is to be
received for God's Sake.

And in the next place, whether we, who say the Scripture is a perfect and
sufficient Rule of Faith and Manners, containing all things necessary to
Salvation; or they, who say, it is but a partial and imperfect Rule: We, who
say; it is plain and easy to be understood in all things necessary; or They, who
say it is dark and obscure, unable to inform and resolve Learners, Doubters, and
Inquirers, and that even in Essentials and Fundamentals of Religion: Finally,
Whether We, who say, it ought to be read and studied of all Men; Or They, who
say, it is not needful, yea, dangerous to be read of all, have the higher
Veneration for the Holy Scripture, is no hard matter to determine; if to
commend a thing, may be said to be more Honor to it, than to disparage it. And
tho here again, they use some Art and Color to set off such ill-favored
Sayings, as well as they can; yet serves this to no other end in my Mind, but
to make them more Ugly and Odious.

They deny not (for all this, they say) the Perfection, Sufficiency, or
Plainness of the Scripture, nor that it may be read by the People. What then is
it they say? They affirm, that it contains all necessary Truths, either
Explicitly, or at least Virtually; for some Truths it declares expressly, and
yet so, as the Church alone must give the Sense; and for all the rest, it
plainly (if the same Church may here also give the Sense) sends us to the
Church to learn them. Now I cannot (for my Heart) imagine what all this can
signify, but only a desire to lessen the Scripture's Authority, as plausibly as
they can. To me it seems very plain, that they make the Scripture just nothing,
and the Church all in all.

I think it here again, well deserves my Consideration, That the SCRIPTURE is
very copious in declaring, and repeating too, over and over again, many
necessary Points of Faith and Duty; and not only necessary things, but many
other things also it largely teaches, which are by all granted to be of less
moment and necessity to the Salvation of Men; and all this it does in as plain
Words and Phrases, as can be used. And hence I find it very hard for me to
believe, that the HOLY GHOST, by whose Inspiration it was Written, should do
all this for our Instruction, and that in a Book written on purpose to make us
wise unto Salvation, and by himself declared able so to do, and yet omit many
things of greatest necessity to that end; never so much as once, no not in any
obscure manner, pointing out to us that Church, to whose Authority we must
resort and submit. This were to leave us a Treasure closely locked up, and not
to tell us where we may find the Key, that can let us in to it, and so we are
neither the Wiser, nor the Richer for it.

Whatsoever the PAPISTS are pleased to alledg for their speaking thus of the
Word of the Blessed God, I confess I cannot think any better of their Religion
for it. Let us say what we will in Commendation of holy SCRIPTURE, they will be
sure to find something to say against it; lest, I suppose, it should be
thought, we can at any time speak Truth. And when we charge them for speaking
dishonourably of the SCRIPTURE, they so interpret their Words, as they seem to
say the same that we did, and which they blamed us for. What can be their
meaning in this, but either to make the World believe that we are in an Error;
tho, when they come to Apologize for themselves, they are forced to confess it
a Truth; or that their Religion necessarily requires it of them in its
Vindication, to vilify the SCRIPTURE; tho by saying such things of it, as they
acknowledge cannot be true, unless interpreted so, as to speak our Sense? They
must therefore in this, deal either very disingenuously with us, or very
injuriously with the holy SCRIPTURE. For my part, I cannot believe, that Men
professing the Christian Faith, and owning the SCRIPTURE to be the Word of GOD,
could ever be persuaded to speak so, as but seemingly to vilify or disparage
it, if their Doctrines could be any other way defended. Their Religion, I say,
must need it, or they too little consult the Honor of their Religion, in
needlessly uttering such Speeches, as stand in need of a very great measure of
Charity, to think them less than Blasphemy.

Fourthly, If any PROTESTANT dares venture thus far, toward the Church of
ROME; the next thing he has to do, is to resolve, not to believe one Word that
GOD speaks, without that Church's leave. I am confident, that there are not
many of our Lay-PAPISTS, that think themselves to be under this Obligation; and
that if they were sensible of it, they would make haste to break loose from it.
But for my own part, I see not how I can enter into their Communion, but I must
draw it upon my self. And this I think, would be to advance the ROMAN Church to
as great a height in my esteem, as they in her, who are most zealous for her
Infallibility, can desire. What more would they have, than that GOD himself,
where they confess he speaks, should stand to their Church's Courtesy, whether
or no he should be believed? I know it will be said, They never disallowed any
man to believe GOD. But because all men cannot understand GOD speaking in the
SCRIPTURE, the Church is appointed by Him to be his Interpreter. This I hear,
and to me it sounds not well, That GOD should speak to Men things necessary for
all to know, and which he commands all to learn and believe upon pain of
eternal Damnation; and yet not speak so intelligibly, as they may understand
Him. Certainly, he that made the Tongue, and gave man Understanding, can speak
(if he please) as Intelligibly as the Church, which cannot Speak or Understand
at all, without his Help and Teaching. And considering his Infinite Goodness
and Impartiality; till he shall tell me so himself, I know not how to believe
that he has so much more respect to the Honor of the ROMAN Church, than to
the Salvation of Mankind, that he would so deliver things belonging to
Salvation, that no Man can be able to understand, and be the better for them,
but he that resorts to that Church as God's sole Interpreter. And if indeed she
be so, it must follow, that we cannot believe one Word that God speaks without
her leave. For, therefore is she made God's Interpreter, because otherwise we
cannot understand his Word; and I am sure, what we cannot understand, we cannot
believe. It Is the Sense, they say, and not the Letter, is God's Word; and this
Sense is in the Church's Breast, and of Her alone we must learn it; and
therefore, till She give us leave, we cannot believe it, no not so much as,
that JESUS is the CHRIST; although, till we believe this, we cannot believe that
he has a Church, and therefore cannot believe She is His Interpreter.

I will not now inquire into the Reasons, Why this Church, which is God's sole
Interpreter, takes so excellent a Course to make her Children understand God's
Word. Why first, She keeps it in the Latin Tongue only, whereof the far greater
number of them understand not one Syllable. Why secondly, She does not give
them some Infallible Translation, Interpretation, or Comment of the Scripture;
a thing very easy for an Infallible Interpreter to do; and therefore, in my
Opinion, must argue a great defect in her Charity, and much unfaithfulness in
the discharge of her Trust, if she do it not. I am loath to ask such Questions
as these, because I find it goes so much against the Hair to answer them.
Indeed I think she does not the latter for a very good Reason, because she
cannot; and it is only her vain pretense to such a Power, that makes her
inexcusable if she do it not. And the former she is concerned to do, that they,
who have the Word of God only in a Language which they cannot understand, may
be constrained of necessity to depend upon her Instruction, and never to
question her Authority, nor discern her Errors. Whilst they have nothing of the
Word of God, but from her mouth, they can have no more of it, than what she
gives them leave to have; and therefore, can neither believe a Word of what GOD
speaks, nor indeed that he has spoken any thing but by her leave.

God speaks very plainly, and intelligibly enough in the second Commandment,
forbidding the Adoration of Images, as plainly, as he forbids to commit
Adultery, or to Steal. And Christ spoke very plainly, and as intelligibly,
saying, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve,
Matt. 4. 10. And again, when he said of the Eucharistical Cup, Drink ye all of
it, Matt. 26. 27. as when he said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and thy Neighbor as thy self. St. Paul very plainly orders, that
the public Worship of God be performed in a known Tongue, and shows the
great absurdity of using an unknown Tongue in God's Worship, 1 Cor. 14. And he
speaks intelligibly enough, when he says, Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, 1 Cor. 11. 28. To say no
more, we think it plainly enough said, of them that die in the Lord, that they
rest from their labors, Rev. 14. 13. In all these things we hear God speak,
and would fain believe him. But here the Church of ROME comes in with her
Authority, and tells us, That, tho GOD have said, He only is to be worshipped,
we must believe, that not he only, but also the Cross, Images, Saints and
Angels, are to have a share in our Religious Worship. And say CHRIST and his
Apostles what they please to the contrary, we must believe, that not all, but
the sacrificing Priest ought to drink of the Cup; that God's public Worship is
well performed in an unknown Tongue; that we neither eat Bread, nor drink Wine
in the Eucharist; that all who died in the Lord, do not rest from their
labors; but that the most of them go into most dreadful torments. At this
rate, for ought I can see, must I believe the Word of God, when I have once
submitted to the Authority of the Church of ROME.

Fifthly, It seems very hard for me to conceive how I should be bound under
penalty of Eternal Damnation, to espouse a Religion, and submit to an
Authority, for which no convincing Reason can be given me by them that invite
me to it. What is it in any Religion, which can commend it before others to a
man's Choice, but its Truth and Goodness? And how should the Truth and Goodness
of any Religion commend it to my Choice, till they be discovered unto me, and I
be rationally convinced that it has them? Whatever Truth and Goodnoss there
may really be in the Religion called POPERY, I am sure they can be no motives
to me to embrace it, till they be clearly laid open to my Understanding and
Judgment, that I may plainly discern them; and therefore, if any PAPIST will
take an effectual course to Convert me to it, he must by rational means
convince me first, that his is the true Church, and her Doctrines sound and
good.

How he can do this upon his own Principles, I see not yet; but rather think it
a very gross absurdity in him to attempt it. He tells me often, that no private
Person, such as I am, ought to judge for himself in Points of Faith, or therein
to follow his own private Judgment, tho to him grounded both on Reason and
Scripture. He must not therefore in disputing with me, (according to his own
Doctrine) bring either Reason or Scripture to convince me, for I must not trust
my own private Judgment, (and I know no other that I have) tho (as it seems to
me) grounded both on Reason and Scripture. I must not judge for my self by
either of them, whether what he commends to me by them, be true or no, and then
I cannot imagine to what end he uses them in any dispute with me. He must
resolve therefore, (for ought I can see) whenever he would convert me, to judge
for me too, as well as dispute with me; and then, if I cannot make a right
Choice for my self, he may do it for me; tho after all, whether his private
Judgment be any more to be trusted in such a case, than my own, I may possibly
doubt.

Either it is a matter of Faith, That the Church of ROME is the only true
Church, and that She has this Authority of determining for all Christians,
which is the saving Faith of CHRIST, or it is not. If it be not, I may be safe
enough, tho I believe it not; and it is ill done of PAPISTS to terrify me with
these big Words, which are as false as terrible, That I cannot be saved without
believing this. If it be a matter of Faith, then must I either be allowed to
judge for my self by my own private judgment in a matter of Faith, or all the
PAPISTS endeavors to persuade me to believe it, are altogether vain, unless it
be reasonable for me to believe a thing against my Reason and Judgment. When he
uses Arguments, I should think he meant thereby to convince me in my private
Judgment; but it seems, it is only to drive me out of it; and that, if I may use
it at all, it is only to this end, that I may conclude I have no use of it. All
the Arguments in the World cannot convince me, till I judge of them; and
therefore no PAPIST can offer me a Reason why I should embrace POPERY, but he
must contradict himself, and give me as strong a Reason, why I should not
embrace it, because its Principles are false. It will be all one, as if he
should say, I ought to be convinced by Reason, and yet I neither ought nor can
be convinced by it. In urging his Reasons upon me, he intends they should
convince me; in denying me the Liberty of judging for my self by Reason, he
denies that any Reasons can convince me; because it is plain, they cannot
convince me before I have judged of them, and this I must do by my private
Judgment, or by nothing, for I have no other.

But here I am told, We are allowed to make use of our Reason to find out the
true Church, which may Infallibly guide us into all saving Truth. All that is
required of us, is this, that when we have once found this true Church, we
presume no longer to judge for our selves, but captivate our Reason to the
Infallible Judgment of the Church. This is something, and yet it seems but
extorted from them, to make a little more plausible, what to me seems one of
the greatest pieces of Folly in the World; I mean, the attempt of convincing
men by Reason, who must not be allowed to judge of the Reasons whereby they must
be convinced. I find Reason, by a Traditionary Papist, compared to a
dim-sighted Man, who used his Reason to find a trusty Friend to lead him in the
Twilight, and then reli'd on his Guidance rationally, without using his own
Reason at all about the way it self. Thus are we allowed Reason to find out the
Church of ROME, our sure Friend to guide us, and on whose Guidance we must
rationally Rely, after we have captivated our Reason to her, and for her sake
have resolved to use it no more. But now, if this Reason, which is to direct us
to our Guide, be such a dimsighted thing, and as we heard before, Hoodwinked
too, so that whilst we follow it, we can have no more hope, than only that we
may possibly stumble into the Catholic Church; who will secure us, that we
shall not in this Twilight mistake a treacherous Enemy for a trusty Friend; and
then, what shall we gain by our rational Reliance on him? A dimsighted Man in
the Twilight, may easily mistake one thing for another, else should he not much
need a trusty Guide; and why he may not mistake his Guide, as well as his Way,
I do not yet know.

But that I may be satisfied, how much I gain by this liberal Concession, to
use my Reason and private Judgment in inquiring after the true Church; I will a
little consider, how the PAPIST is wont to talk with me, when he would persuade
me to take his Church for my only sure Guide. First, he tells me, There is but
one true Faith; and then, that this Faith must be held entirely; next, that
this entire Faith is nowhere to be found, but in the true Church. After this he
begins again, and tells me, Christ has a Church upon Earth; That there is but
one true Church; That out of it there is no Salvation; and lastly, That the
ROMAN Church, and no other, is that one true Church out of which there is no
Salvation. And till we have found that it is so, he will give us leave to judge
for our selves. And I would thank him for this kindness, if he would allow me
to enjoy the benefit of it, and to make any use of it; otherwise it will look
but like a Mockery. I desire therefore some clear convincing Evidence, That the
ROMAN Church is the only true Church. He cannot to this purpose, produce the
Consent of all Christians, for two parts in three deny it. Therefore he gives
me a great many Marks or Signs, sometimes more, sometimes fewer, whereby the
only true Church must be known from others, and spends a great many words in
showing me how they agree to the ROMAN Church, and no other. That wherein I
would next have same Satisfaction, is, supposing that all his Marks agree to
the ROMAN Church, and no other; how I may know, that these are indeed the
certain and incommunicable Marks and Proprieties of the only true Church? To
prove this, he betakes himself to the HOLY SCRIPTURE, and brings me thence some
Texts, whereby he says, they are clearly proved to be so. I now, with a very
hearty and sincere desire to learn the Truth, and with all diligent use of such
helps, as I can come by, read and consider all these Texts, and cannot discern
in them any Evidenee at all of the thing which they are brought to prove; and
therefore think it reasonable yet to call for some clearer proof. But now, when
it is come to this, I presently find, that his liberal Concession to make use of
my Reason and private Judgment to find out the true Church, amounts to no more
than I at first suspected, that is just nothing: For here he retires to his
Principle of PORERY, That I being a private Person, ought not to judge for my
self, what is the Sense of those Texts of Scripture, but must submit my Reason
and Judgment, to the Judgment of the Church (yea, even before I have found the
Church) and without any dispute, receive the Sense of Scripture from her alone
Thus he recals at once all that he had allowed; and undoes again, whatsoever he
had been adoing, to persuade me to his Communion. He was giving me Reasons,
which might convince me in my Judgment; and these at length resolve all into
the Authority of the Scripture; and yet, of this Testimony of the Scripture I
must not Judge; and therefore by it I cannot be convinced of any thing, but
this, that the Church of ROME is resolved to be Mistress of all Christians; and
thinks it enough to convince us that she is so, if whilst she sets some of her
Sons to hold us up in empty talk of Scripture and Reason to no purpose, she
step out from behind the Curtain, saying, Believe it, I am she.

Now I cannot possibly see, whatever others may do, (for I keep yet to my
Protestant Principles of Judging for no man but my self) how I can embrace
POPERY upon any conviction from PAPISTS; and I fear I must either take it
without any Reason for it, or not at all. If I cannot know the ROMAN Church to
be the only true Church, but by the Testimony of the SCRIPTURE; and if I cannot
understand the Testimony of the SCRIPTURE, till I receive the true Sense of it
from the ROMAN Church; and if I cannot take that for the true Sense of it, upon
Her Declaration of it so to be, unless moved by her Authority, I must be
persuaded to do the most unreasonable thing in the World, to my thinking; to
believe a Church to be the only true Church, for her own Authority, which I yet
know no more, than I do her to be the true Church; which, it is all along
supposed, I do not know at all; This I think not only unreasonable, but
impossible.

I must needs confess my self very hard to be persuaded of the tender goodness
of that Mother, who, lest her Children should get hurt by the dimness of their
sight, will needs pull out their Eyes, and keep them in her Pocket, till she
has taught them to use them better. I am very loath to part with my Reason, how
dimsighted soever, because I know not how to serve God without it. Yet if I
should dare to venture thus far, may I now have leave to take my rest here? If
my dimsighted Reason help me to stumble into my Mother's lap, may I yet think
my self safe there? Not till I have learned her Charity too as well as her
Faith, which the REPRESENTER tells us, She learned of Christ and his Apostles.

Therefore, Lastly, I must believe, that all other Christians but PAPISTS, are
in a state of Damnation. The Decree of P. BONIFACE the VIIIth, as now it stands
in the common Extravagants, is well known to be this, We declare, say, define,
and pronounce, That it is altogether of necessity to SALVATION, that every
Creature be subject to the POPE of ROME. P. PIUS the II. in his Bull of
Retractation, (tho he was not altogether of the same mind (as it seems) before,
whilst he was Aeneas Sylvius) says, He cannot be saved that does not hold the
Unity of the ROMAN Church. If so lusly a Decree, and so preremptory a
Declaration of two POPES be too little, there is abundance more to this purpose
to be met with, by him that has a mind to search for it: I only take notice at
this time, that P. LEO the X th, in his Lateran Council, and his Bull therein
read and passed, says, We do renew and approve that same Constitution (viz. of
P. BONIFACE, but now mentioned), the present Sacred Council also approving it.
And Lastly, P. PIUS the IV th, in his Bull, wherein he confirms the Council of
TRENT, imposes an Oath upon Ecclesiastical Persons, wherein they swear, That
the HOLY CATHOLIC and APOSTOLIC ROMAN Church, is the MOTHER and MISTRESS of
all Churches; and that this is the true CATHOLIC FAITH, without which no man
can be SAVED. Here Is enough in all Conscience for us PROTESTANTS to hear, and
too much a great deal (as I think) for any man to believe.

I think my self bound in Charity, to have the best Opinion I can of all men;
and therefore I dare not think, that all they who are called ROMAN CATHOLICS,
have thoroughly learned this Doctrine. There seems to me to be so much of
Ill Nature in it, that I should think my self the worst natured man in the
World, if I could believe that any considerable numbers of them, besides the
Priests, are guilty of it. Many piously disposed Souls, are not so happy, as to
have always the clearest Understandings, or the sincerest Teachers, but have
better Hearts than either Heads or Guides. Their Zeal is too great for both
their opportunities of Learning, and Patience to consider; their earnestness of
SALVATION, a thing very laudable in them, puts them into too much haste to
deliberate long, and gives an advantage to some, who watch for it, to abuse
them. Either a cunning JESUIT, or a canting FANATIC, will hope to make an easy
Prey of such Persons; for it matters not greatly of which sort the Tempter be,
whilst the Temptation is the same: The Fish minds not the Fisher, but the Bait:
Every Argument from either, is edged with a mighty Zeal and Importunity, and
sharpened with the sinest and most penetrating Expressions of a most tender
Compassion for perishing Souls. SALVATION is as confidently promised, as
earnestly desired; and whether it be to be had in the ROMANISTS Infallible
Church, or in the SEPARATISTS purged and unmixed Congregation, all is a case,
when once the man is made to think it cannot be had in the Church of ENGLAND.
If they who are so easily Proselyted either way, would take time to look before
they leap, and could but see into the consequents of those very Arguments which
most prevail with them, and are made the Traps to catch them in, they would
stand off a little, and ask a few Questions more, for their better
Satisfaction; before they could endure to think of entering into a Communion,
which would oblige them, as ever they hope to be saved themselves, to believe
that CHRIST has no faithful Followers upon Earth, but a few Subjects of the
POPE of Rome.

I can easily perceive, by diverse Books written by them who call themselves
Converts, that the main Motive of their going over to the ROMAN Church, was
this, That they could not hope to be saved in any other: And I find that most
Arguments of late used, to persuade us to that Religion, look the very same
way; And it is this Doctrine alone, that has put me upon this Enquiry for my
own Satisfaction: For I must needs confess, that this Doctrine, which some
acount so powerful a Persuasive to Popery, has always with me had the quite
contrary effect to what I find it has in them; and has been, and is at this
present to me, as strong a Dissuasive from it. If I can never be a PAPIST, till
I can believe it, I am very confident, I shall never be one. I would leave the
Church of ENGLAND the next Minute, should she require of me to believe, that
all out of her Communion were in a state of Damnation; and truly I think that
most PROTESTANTS are of my mind.

When therefore I found the REPRESENTER in good earnest to vindicate his Church
in this one Point, I presently concluded, that he had writ his whole Book to no
purpose; for let him spend all his Oil and Colors in painting POPERY to the
best advantage, so long as this one Spot appears in her Face, she may possibly
seem in her new Dress less terrible, but not one jot more lovely. Having told
us, That no one can arrive to the true knowledge of the Catholic Faith, but by
receiving it as proposed and believed by the Church of CHRIST; and that the
ROMAN CATHOLIC is the only true Church; that whosoever denies any Article of
her Faith, denies so much of CHRIST's Doctrine; That whosoever hears Her, hears
CHRIST; and whosoever obstinately and wilfully is separated from Her, is in the
same distance separated from CHRIST himself; and finally, That God adds to
this Church daily, such as shall be saved: He has told us enough to persuade
us, that no PROTESTANT in the World could have done that Church a greater
diskindness, than he has done; nor by any Misrepresentation of her, have worse
Represented her.

When the PAPISTS are pleased to ask us that unanswerable Question, as they
account it, Where was your Religion before LUTHER? They wish us withal, to take
into our Serious Consideration, the state of our Forefathers, who lived and
died in the Religion of the Church of ROME; asking us, if we dare think, that
they were all damned: We need not trouble our heads with shaping an Answer to
so frivolous a Question, because we durst never yet be so hardy as to affirm,
that all are damned, who live and die in the Communion of the Church of ROME;
but do openly declare to the World, that tho we think our own Religion the
safest, yet many of that Communion have been heretofore, and many also are at
this day, under such Circumstances, as encourage us to hope very well of them
as to their future state. However if it so well deserve our Consideration,
what is become of our Forefathers? does it not as well deserve the Consideration
of the ROMANISTS, what is become of many of theirs? Yea, What will become of
the greatest part of the Christian World, who live and die out of their
Communion? And if they would have us think the worse of the Reformation, left
by thinking well of it, we should be wanting in Charity to our Fathers, which
yet we are by it no way obliged to be; should it not move them to think the
worse of their Religion, that it constrains them to think so uncharitably, not
only of their Fathers, but of all the World but themselves only?

How many most Eminent and Worthy Persons, How many great and famous Churches,
must I be obliged, by embracing the ROMAN Faith, to believe excluded from
SALVATION? Upon these terms, I cannot see how it is possible for me to be
Reconciled to the Church of ROME, without professing my self an irreconcilable
Enemy to all the Christian World besides. I must turn Hector, and call all
other Christians, damned Heretics. I must needs say, this appears not to me,
like that Meek and Lamb like Spirit of the Blessed JESUS, which is given by him
to his Dove-like Spouse, that thus Rants it in his pretended Vicars, and their
Adherents. It seems not to be much a kin to that Christian Charity, which
hops and believes all things, and thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13. 7.

I must make nothing of condemning all PROTESTANTS and PROTESTANT Churches, of
what other Denomination soever; and these alone are no inconsiderable part of
Christians: These Heretics (says Bellarmin) possess many and ample Provinces,
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, (and why not IRELAND?) DENMARK, SWEEDLAND, NORWAY; no small
part of GERMANY, POLAND, BOHEMIA, and HUNGARY; he might have said also, of
FRANCE, and HELVETIA. It was anciently the Custom, (says Tolet) Instr. Sacerd.
l. 1* c. 18.
that the POPE did three days every year, tho now but once a year, viz. upon
the Holy Thursday (he means the Thursday immediately before Easter, called
Coena Domini) with great Solemnity, before all the People, thunder out his
Sentence of Excommunication against all Heretics, of what Name or Sect soever;
but against the Queen of ENGLAND (which was then Q. Elizabeth) by name; with
all their Believers, Receivers, Favorers, and Defenders; against all that read
their Books publicly or privately, with what intention soever, or under
whatever pretense, tho there be no Error in them, or with a design to consute
the Error, if there be any without his Holiness's License; against the Keepers,
Printers, and Defenders, in any manner, of the same; against all Schismatics,
and such as pertinaciously withdraw themselves, and depart from their Obedience
to the POPE; against any one that shall so much as say, that Calvin was a good
man; against all that appeal from the Orders, Decrees, or Mandates of the POPE,
to a future COUNCIL. And it is very well known, that they are not all
PROTESTANTS who have done so.

Neither will this suffice, I must also condemn the whole GREEK Church, which
how Ancient, and of how large Extent it is, is very well known: And some reason
there seems to be for it; For (says Bellarmin) the Greeks in the year Prefat
de Romans Pontif.
451, in the Council of CHALCEDON, consisting of 600 Bishops, endeavored to
make the Patriarch of CONSTANTINOPLE equal to the Bishop of ROME. And again, In
the year 1054, they pronounced the Bishop of ROME to have fallen from his
degree of Dignity, and the Bishop of CONSTANTINOPLE to be the first Bishop. And
tho he pretends that these Greeks were once reconciled to ROME in the Council
of FLORENCE, yet he adds, that they always returned to their Vomit. No wonder
therefore, if this GREEK Church cannot escape Damnation: And yet this poor
Reprobated Church yields not to that of ROME in any of her own principal Marks
of a true Church. I read that the Christians of her Communion, in NATOLIA,
CIRCASSIA, MENGRELLIA, RUSSIA, GREECE, MACEDONIA, EPIRUS, THRACIA, BULGARIA,
etc. do very near, if not quite, equal the number of those who are of the ROMAN
Communion.

And yet will not this be enough, unless we include in this Sentence of
Condemnation, all the Assyrian Christians living amongst the Mahometans in
BABYLON, ASSYRIA, MESOPOTAMIA, PARTHIA and MEDIA, with the Iacobites,
Armenians, Egyptians, Aethiopians, and the vast Empire of the HABASSINES: All
these I must look upon as cut off from CHRIST, merely for their disowning the
POPE's Authority, tho they should be found Orthodox in all other points. And
truly I know not how to get up to that height of Boldness, not to be afraid of
condemning so many Christians, most of which have given, and do yet give to the
World the most notable Testimony of Fidelity to CHRIST, that can be expected,
in their constant sufferings for the sake of his holy Name and Gospel.

After this Consideration of whole Churches, it seems needless for me to come
down to that of single Persons, tho confessedly of greatest Note and Eminence
in the Church of CHRIST, both for Learning and Piety. How St. Polycarp Bishop
of SMTRNA, and a famous Martyr, who would not obey P. Anicetus, but still keep
his Easter contrary to the custom of the ROMAN Church, and therein seemed
either as ignorant of his Duty, or as stubborn as any PROTESTANT: or how his
Successor in that See, Polycrates, who desended himself and his Church so
arrogantly against the Authority of the ROMAM Church, more than sufficiently
declared by P. Victor, still pleading the Example of Polycarp, and Authority of
St. John, as tho he had never heard St. Peter was made Prince of the Apostles,
or that the Bishops of ROME were his Successors in that Authority over all
Churches. How Irenaeus and all his Fellow-Bishops of the Gallican Church, who
so presumptuously took upon them to expostulate the matter with the same
Victor, and in very homely terms to chide him for excommunicating those Asian
Christians for not changing their Ancient Customs at his Command. How St.
Cyprian the holy Bishop of Carthage, and Martyr, with his Bishops of Africa,
Numidia and Mauritania, joining with him in so contumaciously resisting P.
Stephen: The Sixty Bishops in the Milevitan Council; or those Two hundred and
Seventeen, whereof the famous St. Austin was one, who not only stubbornly
rejected the Claim, but also manifestly demonstrated the Fraudulence and
Forgery of three POPES, Zosimus, Boniface and Caelestine, about appeals to
ROME. How all these shall be exempted from this Censure, I know not. Did not
the later of these African Councils decree, That the Bishop of the first See
(meaning ROME) should not be called the Prince of Priests, or chief Priest, or
any such thing, but only the Bishop of the first See? Did it not Excommunicate
every Priest that should Appeal to ROME? It seems to me, that St. Athanasius
could have no great opinion of the Infallibility of P. Liberius, when, through
fear, himself h^^ forgot he had any such thing, and consented with the Arrians
to the Condemnation of that holy Father. St. Hierom seems not to have had any
thoughts of the POPES's Supremacy, when he said, That wherever there is a
Bishop, whether at great ROME, or petty Eugubium, he is of the same Merit and
Priesthood. Neither did either he or St. Austin seem to have had a just esteem
for the Church of ROME's Authority, when they preferred that of the Eastern
Church before it, in receiving the Epistle to the Hebrews into the Canon of
SCRIPTURE. Above all, what must I think of their Great Saint. P. Gregory the
First, who called the Title of UNIVERSAL BISHOP, a new Title, which none of his
Predecessors ever used, a name of Vanity, a Profane Name, wicked, and not to be
uttered, yea a Blasphemous; saying, that whosoever desired it, showed himself
to be the forerunner of Antichrist? If I must believe this great POPE and
SAINT, I know well enough what to think of most of his Successors in the
Infallible Chair; If I must not believe Him, why must I believe those who
succeeded him? Had not He and They one and the same Authority as POPES of ROME?
Believe both I cannot; and disbelieving either, as all PAPISTS, no less than I,
must disbelieve the one, I am no better than a Heretic, and incapable of
Salvation.

Farther yet, I find that the African Council, but now mentioned, did alledg
for it self the Sixth Canon of the First General Council held at NICE, which is
this, Let the old Custom be kept through Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, so that
the Bishop of ALEXANDRIA have power over all these, because the Bishop of ROME
has also the like Custom. By this Canon these two Bishops seem to be made
equal in Power. In the Fourth General Council held at Calcedon, and Ninth
Canon, it is ordered, That if any Bishop or Clerk have a Controversy with the
Metropolitan of that Province, they have recourse to the Primate of the
Diocese, or certainly to the Sea of the Royal City of Constantinople, that the
business may be ended there. This Council seems hereby to make the Bishop of
Constantinople equal to the Bishop of Rome; and this it did, notwithstanding
great opposition made against it by P. Leo the First. So that I must involve in
the same Censure of Condemnation some of the most Famous General Councils that
ever were. This I am apt to think a very daring matter, and not rashly to be
attempted. I have indeed been taught by our Blessed JESUS, that God will not
forgive us, if we do not forgive our Brethren; but I do not remember, where he
has taught me, that God will not SAVE us, except we believe that no man but a
PAPIST can be SAVED.

II. I have now considered s^^^e of the many Difficulties I am to struggle
with, before I can get through to the Church of ROME. And truly they seem to
me, whatever men of more strength and courage may think, little less than
Insuperable. And yet after all this, if I may be convinced that the Authority
of the ROMAN Church has sufficient grounds of Scripture and Reason to support
it, I must confess no Difficulty in my way ought to dishearten me from breaking
through it. But then again, if I must believe that there is such an
uncontrollable Power in the Church, in some One Church, in the ROMAN Church by
name, yea, in the Bishop of that Church; and if I must so believe this, that I
must not leave in my Soul any room at all for the least Charitable thought of
any man's Salvation, who believes it not: I think it no less than needful, that
I have the Clearest and most undeniable Evidence in the World for what I
believe, lest the Sentence of Condemnation should recoil upon my self for my
Temerity and Uncharitableness.

Indeed if this Church may be allowed to bear witness to its own Authority, and
such a Testimony be sufficient, I cannot want it. The Council of TRENT has
more than once called her, the Mother and Mistress of all Churches. So
Infallible in her Judgment and Directions, so Absolute in her Dominion and
Command she must be, that Her sole Authority must be warrant enough, and
nothing else any warrant without it, for all things that belong to Christian
Religion. Whosoever (says Becanus in his Compendium) in matters of Faith and
Religion follows the true Church of Christ (which he there proves to be the
Roman Church only) cannot err about Faith and Religion, seeing the true Church
of Christ is Infallible. And this we are told continually, as this Jesuit does
say, that this is the shortest Compendium of all Controversies. This then being
to support the whole Fabric of POPERY, had need to stand on firm ground.

This ground I would now fain discover. Why then must we believe that the ROMAN
Church has this Sovereign Authority in Religion? I must confess my self one of
those sturdy Heretics, that cannot believe without Reason. When I hear that
Church telling me, she is Infallible, and has all Power over all other
Churches; I cannot believe it till I have some better reason for it than this,
That She must be all that, which She is pleased to say of her self; and
therefore must be Infallible and Omnipotent too, if She say it. And I am a
little troubled to say, that this is all I can get out of her for my
satisfaction, lest even PROTESTANTS should think I say incredible things of
her, and that I have no other design, but to make all the Learned Men of her
Communion seem ridiculous, in talking to us as to Children, always childishly.
But it is not in my power, to make their Arguments better than they are; nor
Civil in me to teach them what to say; and I am sure my Temporal Interest
cannot at this time tempt me to oversee the strength of their Reasons. The very
best Reasons I have yet met with, with how much Artifice and Sophistry soever
they are dressed up, amount to no more, nor better, in my opinion, than her own
honest Word, that is, her own Authority and Infallibility for proof of her
Authority and Infallibility; and therefore I must either believe them both,
before I can believe them, even whilst I am enquiring for a reason why I should
believe them, or I must not believe them at all, nor with her consent be saved.

The Missionaries tell us, they are willing to undergo any Pains or Difficulty
to rescue us from damning Error; and whilst they proceed in this Method, I have
cause to believe them; for I am confident, to prove their Church has this
Authority they contend for, is as great a Difficulty as they can meet with. If
they should here offer us (what is so much talked of by them) the Testimony of
the Universal Church, there is nothing more plain, than that they do but Mock
us. For this can be nothing else but the Church of ROME's Testimony for her own
Authority. It cannot, I say, be any thing else, because the thing they are
proving is, That She alone is the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church:
And were it any thing else, they would never discover it to us, because they
would thereby give us an unanswerable Argument against what they would prove
her to be; for if they will show us any other Church or Churches by the
Testimony whereof Her Authority may be proved, we are thereby enabled to prove
She is not the Only true Church out of which there is no Salvation. What then
can this Testimony be? Is it that of the First and purest Ages of the Church
before POPERY was brought forth? Not so to be sure, for POPERY was (they say)
from the beginning, and glories of her Antiquity above all things. Is it the
Testimony of all others in the World that profess Christianity? It cannot be,
for all these, if not of her Communion, are Heretics, and in a state of
Damnation for denying her Authority; and were it possible for them to witness
that to be which they deny to be, yet is their Testimony invalid, because they
confess themselves Fallible, and this point of Faith cannot stand upon a
fallible Testimony. By this it is very clear to me, that the Testimony of the
Catholic Church of Christ, if it be produced for the Authority of the Church
of ROME, can be nothing else but the Church of ROME's own Word; and I never
doubted, but she has a good word for her self, any more than I doubt lest it
should be thought a good proof of her Authority.

I have heard again much talk of Universal Tradition among ROMAM CATHOLICS;
but if they alledg this for their Church's Authority, they give us only the
same thing again in other Words. Universal Tradition can be nothing else but
the Testimony of the Universal Church, and that must be the Church of ROME; and
so we are not advanced one step farther than we were before. The Credit we are
to give unto Universal Tradition, depends on the Authority of the ROMAN Church,
which we have not yet sound, but are enquiring after.

If Fathers and Councils be brought in to Witness this Authority, all the noise
they make will prove but the Voice of the ROMAN Church, crying her self up for
the great Diana of the World, and thundering Anathema to all that will not fall
down and worship her. Will she abide by the Testimony of either Father or
Council, if they speak not what she has taught them, or against what she holds?
Or shall they be allowed to over rule the Oral and Practical Tradition of the
present Church of ROME? Are Councils of any Credit more than the POPE's
Confirmation gives them? And are single Fathers of more Credit than they? If
not, we have yet no more but her own Word for her own Authority.

If they bring us SCRIPTURE to prove this Authority, I must say, that as we
reverence Fathers and Councils, so we adore (with Tertullian) the fullness of
the SCRIPTURE, neither can we desire any better Proof, than its Testimony. Yet
when I consider how these men use the SCRIPTURE; I am at a stand to think, how
they can in good earnest produce it as a Witness in this matter; for after they
have said almost all the ill they can of it, calling it imperfect,
insufficient, obscure, unsens'd; they seem to ridicule both it and us, when
they bring it forth, thus disabled, for a Witness. Do not they tell us again
and again, that both the Canon and the Sense of SCRIPTURE, depend, as to us, on
the Authority and Interpretation of their Church? And can its Testimony then
possibly amount to any more than that Church's bare Word? Do not they deny us a
Judgment of Discretion, whereby we should discern for ourselves, whether it
speak for or against their Church's Authority? And will they yet produce it to
convince us of the Authority by which alone we are both to receive and
understand it? It cannot be produced to convince us in our Judgment, for we are
not allowed any use of our Judgment in the Case. It must be only to convince
themselves that we are Heretics; and I dare say, that may be done without the
Scripture, as well as with it, whilst their Church must give the Sense of it.

But because they know we magnify it, they will produce it, tho I cannot see to
what other end, than to persuade us to take heed of trusting too much to it, or
thinking it worth any thing, after it has showed us the true Church. It must
be believed no longer than it is authorized to speak by that Authority, which
is to be proved by it; so that by showing us that Authority, it loses all its
own Authority for ever. For this (says Stapleton) that God has commanded us
to believe Stapleton Tripl. c. 15.
the Church, we do not hang our Faith on the Authority of the Church, as upon
the proper and sole cause of this Belief, but partly on manifest Scriptures, by
which we are remitted to the teaching of the Church; partly on the Creed, etc.
This then is the end of producing the Scripture, that we may be convinced by
it, that we are no longer to learn of it, after we are once brought by it to
the knowledge of the Church's Authority, but thenceforward are to depend wholly
upon the teaching of the Church, unto which it remits us. All the use then that
we have of the Scripture, is to be guided by it to the Church of ROME (tho it
cannot do so much for us neither, but as that Church guides it); and having
thanked it for its kindness, we are then to bid it good Night.

Now seeing manifest Scriptures are promised us, to guide us to the ROMAN
Church, I think it reasonable to expect, that they produce such Scriptures as
are more manifest to us, than their Church's Authority, which is to be proved
by them; seeing it is by their Evidence I am to be convinced of that, which as
yet is unevident to me. Neither ought the Sense of these manifest Scriptures
depend upon the Interpretation or Authority of that Church, the Authority
whereof they are brought to prove, as a thing to me not yet evident; for so, I
shall be still but where I was before; and instead of manifest Scriptures, be
shuffled off with the Church's bare Word; I mean, with such Interpretations of
Scripture, as I have no reason to receive, but by that Authority whereof I am
yet, at least, in doubt.

Now, that there are indeed no such manifest Scriptures, I am reasonably well
assured beforehand. I have read the Scripture over and over, and find not the
least mention therein made of this Authority of the ROMAN Church. The POPE of
ROME, or his Supremacy, is never once named from the beginning of the Bible to
the end; nor can I meet with one Syllable touching either the Infallibility or
Jurisdiction of Him, or his Councils, or of any kind of Subjection due to
either, from all Christians. I cannot so much as find there, that ever there
was any Bishop of ROME, or that there should be any there afterward, much less
that all Christians are to own that Bishop for their Head, and Christ's Vicar.
And finding nothing of all this, I must needs wonder, how manifest Scriptures
should be produced, to prove this Supreme Authority over all Churches. And yet,
if there be such an Authority, and if it be so necessary for all Christians to
believe it, and submit unto it; I cannot but think that it ought to have been
as manifestly declared in Scripture, as any other point whatsoever. St. Peter,
in whom this Authority is said to have been first settled, says not a word of
it in his Epistles. St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans; who should in all
reason have been best acquainted with it, says nothing at all of it. To the
Civil Magistrate, which the Church of ROME makes to be much inferior to the
Church in Authority, they both teach us our Duty; and strange it is, if they
knew of any such thing, that they should not as plainly instruct us in our Duty
to the POPE or Church of ROME wherein our Salvation, the main thing they were
to take care for, is so deeply concerned.

But what are these manifest Scriptures at length? I find our Blessed Savior
saying to St. Peter (Matt. 16. 18.) Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And I will
give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. but I find not that all
this, whatever it may signify, was manifestly said to the Bishops of ROME. The
plain and obvious Sense (says Bellarmin) of these words is, that we may
understand De Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 10.
the Primary of the whole Church to be promised to Saint Peter, under two
Metaphors. And yet, by all the Light that he is able to afford me, I cannot
discern in these words, whatever was promised to St. Peter, the Supremacy, much
less the Monarchy of the Bishop of ROME over all Churches. And it is no wonder
if a Protestant Heretic be so blind, when such eminent Persons as Origin, St.
Austin, St. Hilary, Ambrose, Chrysostom and Cyril, could no more see it than
I, as the learned Cardinal himself there confesses. Nay, here is not a word to
assure us, that this Rock must needs be a Monarch invested with a Supremacy of
Power over the whole Church, or that this Monarch must needs be the Bishop of
ROME, or that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against the ROMAN Church;
for all this, we must be beholden to that Church's own Word, or we shall never
find it in this place.

I find again, that Christ commanded St. Peter (Joh. 21. 16.) to feed his
Sheep, and his Lambs; as indeed it is the Duty of all Pastors of the Church to
do; and both St. Peter (1 Pet 5. 2.) and St. Paul (Acts 20. 28.) tell us as
much; and so much the apter am I to doubt, whether the POPE be so much as a
good Pastor of Christ's Sheep or no, seeing he takes so little care to Feed,
and so much to Fleece them. I am sure I read of no more but one chief Shepherd,
and Bishop of Souls, which St. Peter tells us, is Christ JESUS himself, 1 Pet.
2. 25. The Apostles were all Shepherds under Him; but where is this manifest
Scripture to show that St. Peter was made Head-Shepherd, with Commission to
Feed and Rule too, not only the Sheep, but the Shepherds also? But especially,
where is the Commission given to the Bishops of ROME successively for ever, to
govern the whole Flock of Christ, with Sovereign Authority? Feed the whole, I
am sure he neither does, nor can.

Many great and wonderful things (as Bellarmin tells us) are said of St. Peter
in the Holy Scripture, and very deservedly, for he was a very great and eminent
Apostle. But the Scripture never says, That he was a great Monarch, nor that
he was Bishop of ROME, nor that he had a Throne, or but a Chair there; and
least of all, that this Imaginary Monarchy was to descend unto the next Bishop
of ROME, and to his Successors for ever; and that St. John, who long outlived
St. Peter, became thereby subject to some of those Bishops, which did not well
suit with the Dignity of an Apostle.

I read those words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 12. 21. The head cannot say to the
feet, I have no need of you. But that the POPE is the Head, and all Christians,
Kings, as well as others, the Feet; I may possibly read in some such Jesuit as
Bellarmin, but I am sure I shall never read it in the Scripture.

Many more such parcels of Scripture as these, they give us; but after the most
serious perusal of them all, I profess I cannot find any thing like manifest
Scripture for the Authority of the ROMAN Church. And therefore it seems yet as
plain to me, as that Two and Three make Five, that the bare Word of that
Church, without any kind of solid Proof, is all that she has to show for her
Authority. She says great things of her self, and talks sometimes of Scripture,
but much more of Fathers and Councils, and Universal Tradition, and indeed
every thing that is Venerable; but when all is spelled and put together, it is
but the Oral and Practical Tradition of the present Church, that is, her own
very confident Asseveration.

If we have a little Scripture for Fashion's sake, we must take it as she has
taught it to speak in her own Vulgar Latin, which the Council of TRENT was even
then pleased to make the only Authentic Translation, when it was confessedly
very faulty, and has been since that diverse times corrected. And then we must
take it in her own Sense too, tho we know not well where we may be sure to find
it. Her private Doctors she will not allow us to trust for it, nor indeed do we
find them any better agreed about it, than others are, only they have for the
most part either the Modesty or Cunning to refer all to the Judgment of Mother
Church, could they but tell us where to find it; for she is loath, once for
all, in some public Comment, or Exposition of the Scripture, to tell us what
it is. If we may be allowed to hear the Testimony of the Fathers, she must
stand at their Elbows, and prompt them what to say; we must have them in her
own approved Editions; and if they have been at School long enough in the
Vatican, or some Religious House, it is probable they were reasonably well
instructed in her own Language, before they were allowed to go abroad again.
However, ere they pass the Press, an Expurgatory Index can teach them either to
Speak, or to be Silent, as she thinks most seasonable. Councils may be heard,
but only such as have his Holiness's stamp upon them; and how we can understand
them any better than the Scripture, till he Interprets for us, is hard to say.
So that all returns to this still, That we have her honest Word for her
Authority; and this is the sole Foundation, that I can discover of this
prodigious Faith, which we must all have, or else perish eternally.

III. And now, in the last place, seeing it is come to this, for ought I see,
that I must rest upon her own Word, or nothing, for the Truth of her Sovereign
Authority, and must upon peril of my own Damnation, take upon me this invidious
Profession, to believe all men damned but PAPISTS, that I may enjoy the
Blessing of my Mother; I should be glad to know, that She her-self (as
Infallible as she is) could but probably assure me, where this Word of here is
may certainly be found.

The REPRESENTER indeed (in his confident way) has told me, That all the
Members of his Religion (however spread through the World) agree like one man
in every Article of their Faith. And if we would know for our learning, by what
happy means this wonderful Agreement is effected, he tells us, It is by an
equal Submission to the Determinations of their Church; that is, as I
understand it, by taking her bare Word for every thing. No one of them (says
he) tho the most learned and wise, ever following any other Rule in their Faith
besides this, of unanimously believing as the Church of God (or ROMAN Church)
believes. And if this be so, I wonder to what purpose their Learning and Wisdom
can serve them, any more than their Judgment and Wit, which they have renounced
and deposed. However, if this be true Representing, I shall not, I hope, find
it difficult to find out the Church's Word and Authority, on which my Faith
must stand. Every Member of it, tho he have no more than the old Collier's
Faith, can help me to it in any part of the World, for all agree like one Man
in every Article, and therefore sure in this most fundamental one. But what now
shall I think after this, if it should so fall out, that hardly one in a
hundred of these Members know either where this Church of theirs is to be
found, or what those Determinations of hers are, unto which they so unanimously
submit? Nay, what if their Church it self cannot tell them this? When She has
said all She can, to inform both them and us, suppose it be still two to one,
that we shall be mistaken in it, whatever we take to be the ROMAN Church, or
her infallible Word? This is it, that I am now, for a Close, to inquire into.

It must needs seem more than a little absurd, and exceeding hard, to tie a man
under pain of Damnation, to believe he knows not what, and what no body can
certainly show him; I mean, a Power in the Church of ROME, which all men deny,
but they of her Communion; and about which, even they who are of her Communion,
are so divided among themselves, that I do not see how ever they can agree
about it. Is there no Dispute in that Church about this Power? Have they not
been even at Daggers drawing among themselves about it? Is the Controversy yet
decided? Or can any one promise me that it ever shall? There is a great
Diversity among the Schoolmen (says our REPRESENTER) in their Divinity-Points,
and Opinions of such matters as are no Articles of Faith, and have no relation
to it, but as some Circumstance or Manner, which being never defined by the
Church, may be maintained severally, either this way, or that way, without any
breach of Faith, or injury to their Religion. I will not stay here to ask him,
what greater diversity he can find amongst the Members of our Church, than he
here grants to be amongst PAPISTS; nor why our Divisions being no greater than
theirs, nor more nearly related to any Article of Faith, should be less
consistent with the Unity of the Church (as is commonly objected against us)
than theirs are: But I ask, whether the Supreme Authority of the ROMAN Church,
be an Article of the ROMAN Faith, or no? And again, whether all the Members of
that Church, be as one man unanimously agreed about it, or no? He will say, it
may be, about the Article they are, as to the Substance of it, tho not as to
all Circumstances: But now if it appear, that these Circumstances of the Power
about which they differ, are such as the thing it self will be as good as
nothing without them; or if they be not as certainly known and believed, as the
Power it self, I think it will follow, that all their agreement about the
Thing, is as good as nothing too, till these Circumstances be also agreed upon.

Thus it is then; I must for my Salvation believe that, there is such a thing
as a Supreme Power over all Churches, in the Church of ROME; and in this all
PAPISTS as one man unanimously agree; but about the Circumstances of this
Power, there is a great diversity of Opinions among them; yet is this no injury
to their Religion. Tho without a better agreement about these Circumstances, no
man (in my opinion) can be able to satisfy me, what their Religion is; for
these Circumstances about which they differ, are no more but such
inconsiderable things as these, Whence this Power is; whether it be of God, or
of Men; of Divine or Human Right only; whether it extends over all the World,
or over all Christians only; to Spiritual concerns only, or to Temporals also;
where it resides and is lodged; in the Church-Diffusive, or all Christians,
especially the Pastors; or in the Church-Representative, or General Councils;
or in the Church Virtual, or the POPE of ROME. These petty Circumstances they
differ about, and the Church it self knows not how to agree them; but what is
all this to the Article it self, most firmly believed by all, that is, a
Supreme Power in the Church? All their Religion rests on the Determinations of
their Church; all the force of these Determinations to oblige the Faith of men,
depend on this Supreme Power; May not a man, however, well enough be assured of
his Religion, tho no man can tell him, Whence this Power is, Over what it is,
or Where it is? Indeed, what other men can do, I know not; but for my own part,
I must needs think it a very hard matter to believe this Power, and to have any
certainty of the Religion founded on this Power, without some better
Information about these Circumstances of it; and therefore before I can yield
to be of that Religion, I must beseech that Church, which will not allow us to
be saved, without an absolute Submission and Resignation of our selves to her
Authority, to tell us, if not Whence (which is yet the most material
Circumstance of all the rest) yet, at least, What and Where it is.

There is challenged by this Church, a Power of overruling our Faith by her
Infallible Judgment, and a Power of commanding our Obedience by her
Sovereignty. It will therefore concern me to ask, How I may be rightly informed
in both these great branches of her Power, unto which my subjection is required
upon pain of Damnation.

1. She claims a Power of Interpreting or giving the certain Sense of
Scripture, of Judging and finally Deciding all Controversies of Religion, of
peremptorily Defining and Determining in all matters of Faith and Religious
Practice; so that all are bound, without any further dispute or search, to
submit to all her Determinations and Decrees. INFALLIBLE then, we must believe
this Church to be, and that she cannot Err in her Definitions of Faith and
Manners: And yet where this INFALLIBILITY is to be found, is a Question she is
not to this day able to resolve: In short, I find that this Infallible Church,
which tells us that she cannot Err, when she is desired to make this apparent
to the World, can tell us certainly, both How, and in What she can Err; and in
this I doubt not, but she is Infallible enough; but who they are in all her
Communion, or in what things it is, that they cannot err, this she could never
tell us certainly, and yet it is this alone that can make her Infallibility,
(if she have it) to be of any use to us.

The REPRESENTER says, That the PAPIST believes that the Pastors and Prelates
of his Church, are Fallible; that there is none of them (and yet the POPE is
one of them, and COUNCILS are made up of them) but may fall into Errors, Heresy
and Schism, and consequently are subject to mistakes. And further he tells us,
That tho some allow the POPE the assistance of a Divine Infallibility, without
being in a General Council; yet he is satisfied it is only their Opinion, and
not their Faith, there being no obligation from the Church, of assenting to any
such Doctrine. And tho he maintain the Necessity and Right of General Councils
lawfully Assembled, yet is it not so plain, whether he count them infallible or
no, by what he says in that Chapter of Councils. This we are told, That if any
thing contrary to what Christ taught, and his Apostles, should be defined and
commanded to be believed, even by ten thousand Councils, he believes it
damnable in any one to receive it. But in the following Chapter, he speaks out,
and says, That by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, they are specially
protected from all Error, in all Definitions and Declarations in matters of
Faith: And this is true, tho he grants it possible, that the Pastors and
Prelates there assembled, may be proud, ignorant, covetous, enormous sinners,
and infamous for other vices, and at other times may prevaricate, make
Innovations in Faith, and teach erroneous Doctrines. Now a man would think,
That if all the Guides and Pastors of the Flock (not one excepted) may err,
then the Sheep, which are bound to follow their Shepherds, may err also; and if
the Fallible lead the Fallible, it is not impossible for both to err; and who it
is that is infallible, is hard to see. And again, seeing he tells us, That
Christ committed the care of his Flock to St. Peter, and that the POPE or
Bishop of Rome is in this charge, St. Peter' s Successor, and that God assists
those who have this charge, with a particular helping Grace, such as has a
special respect to the Office and Function, and that such as was given to the
Prophets, and to Moses, when he was made a God to Pharaoh. I cannot see, but it
must be as consequent to all this, that the POPE should be Infallible, as that
a General Council is so, especially when it is his Approbation that gives force
to its Decrees. Moreover, it is not easy to believe that God has made a
promise of Infallible Assistance to any number of Pastors and Prelates, who are
no better qualified, than he supposes they may most of them be, with Pride,
Ignorance, and Vice, Turbulence and Covetousness, and assembled, it may be,
under an Heretical Pope, (for such, it is granted he may be) and as vicious too,
and ignorant as any of them. However, there are two things which make it very
hard to find out this Infalliblility, where he sends us to seek it, in a
General Council: For first, they must be lawfully assembled; and next, they
must determine nothing contrary to what Christ and his Apostles taught,
otherwise it is damnable to receive their Determinations. Now it will be hard
for me to find out how lawfully they were assembled, and therefore as hard to
believe all their Decrees as Infallible; and, I fear, I must not be allowed to
examine their Definitions, whether they be according to the Doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles, or no, lest I thereby seem to follow my own private Judgment
or Spirit, rather than the Infallible Judgment of the Church Representative.
This is all then that I can learn from his Discourse; I must take it for a
Truth, that this Infallibility is lodged in a General Council, and that it can
determine nothing contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; and then
I need not inquire whether it have done so, or no; tho if it have done so, it is
damnable for me to receive its Determinations. But I will hear what others tell
me.

Bellarmin says, That all Catholics are thus far agreed, That the POPE, as he
is POPE, in the midst of his Counselors, or together with a General COUNCIL,
may Err, or Judge amiss in matters of Fact. And if this be true, he may even so
err in the whole Faith, as far as I can yet see; for he may thus err in
determining that there were such Men as Christ and his Apostles; that any of
them Preached, planted Churches, writ Books; that these are their Books, or
that St. Peter was at ROME, and was Bishop there; left the Bishops of that See
his Successors in all his Power; that there has been an uninterrupted
Succession of Bishops in that Church; that any unwritten Traditions concerning
Faith and Manners were left to the Custody of the Church; and many more such
things, which were matters of Fact, and on which the Faith of that Church
depends. Again he says, That the POPE, as a private Doctor, may Err, even
through Ignorance, in matters both of Faith and Manners. And thus the Church,
whether Virtual or Representative, may err. But I would fain hear, wherein she
cannot Err, and whether all Catholics are agreed as well in that.

The famous Chancellor of Paris, Gerson, Almain, Alphonsus a Castro, the
Parisian Doctors, yea, and no less man than P. ADRIAN the VI th (says the same
Author) have taught, That the POPE, as he is POPE, may be a Heretic, and teach
Heresy, when he desineth any thing without a General COUNCIL. And truly, If as
a Man he may be a Heretic, I see no reason why he may not be so as a POPE, for
I take the Man and the POPE to be here both one. But further, these last named
will have this Infallibility or Judgment to be in the Council, and not in the
POPE. And Bellarmin tells us, That this Opinion is not properly Heretical, and
for this good Reason (which if it should not hold, they would lose a great part
of their Church) because they that hold it, are tolerated in the Church; yet
it seems erroneous, and next a kin to Heresy. It should seem by this, that an
Error tolerated by the Church of ROME, is no Heresy; but if not tolerated,
it is. Indeed I know not well how ever she can Err Heretically at this rate,
unless she will grow so unkind to her self, as not to tolerate her own Errors.

The same Jesuit tells us again, That it was the Opinion of Albertus Pighius,
(and whether he was singular in it, or no, I shall not now ask) That the POPE
can by no means be a Heretic, or teach Heresy publicly, although himself alone
define any thing without a Council. And this Opinion he acknowledges to be
probable, yet not certain. But I think it is very certain that POPES have been
Heretics, either as condemned by, or condemning one another for Heresy.

Lastly (he says) the most common Opinion, and that for which he brings a
multitute of Authors, is this, That whether the POPE can be a Heretic or no,
yet he cannot any way define any Heretical thing to be believed by the whole
Church. This he calls the most sure Opinion, tho they who are of it, seem not
very well agreed among themselves about it: For some of them say simply, The
POPE cannot err: Others speak it with this limitation, Proceeding maturely with
the advice of his Council. But now, suppose he should be too hasty, and define
something rashly of his own head; Oh! That cannot be, (says Bellarmin) for God
will not suffer it. And yet I wish he could tell us, Why God may not as well
suffer an Heretical POPE to define rashly, or indeed rather deliberately,
according to his own Heretical Judgment, as suffer him, to whom he has
committed the Charge of the whole Flock, to fall into Heresy.

However, considering this variety of Opinions in the Church of Rome,
concerning this Infallible Judge, to which all must be subject in Matters of
Religion, I begin to think with my self, with what satisfaction of Conscience I
shall be able to live in that Communion. I must obey the Infallible Judge, or
else be damned: And who is this Infallible Judge whom I must obey? It is the
Church of ROME; this all can tell me with one consent; but tho this were true,
yet am I no wiser for it; that whole Church never yet met to Judge or Determine
of any thing. Who is it then in this Church, to whose Judgment I must submit?
It is the POPE alone, say some; and yet these some are not agreed, whether he
may not define some things rashly, without due advice, at least, when he is a
Heretic, as some Popes have been, if Popes themselves may be believed; and it
seems not impossible, that an Heretic, obstinate in Error, may define
something rashly and unadvisedly. It is not the POPE, but a General COUNCIL,
say others; and why these deserve not as much credit as the former, I know not;
for they are tolerated by the Church, and surely the Infallible Church will not
for shame tolerate any dangerous Error. It Is neither the One nor the Other,
says a Third Party, but a POPE in COUNCIL, or a COUNCIL confirmed by a POPE;
and yet whether the Determinations of such a Church-Representative be of full
virtue, till they have been universally received, is made a Question by a
Fourth Party.

Where are we now, after all this, to seek our Infallible Judge? Suppose a
COUNCIL should define it as a matter of Faith, that the POPE himself is subject
to a COUNCIL; and again, that a POPE, yea a POPE in COUNCIL define the
contrary, that the COUNCIL is subject to the POPE. This is no idle Supposition
of an impossible or unlikely thing; for whosoever knows what was done in the
Councils of CONSTANCE and BASIL, consisting of as many Patriarchs, Archbishops
and Bishops, as most of the Councils ever did; and again, what afterward
passed in the Councils of FLORENCE, and the LATERAN, under P. LEO the X th,
must know that such a thing, at least, once came to pass. Suppose then this
which once was, and if the POPE could endure to think of a Free Council, might
be again; what should I have to ground any certain Faith upon? I must still
under Pain of Damnation, submit my Faith to the Judgment of the Church. It is
not, neither I believe ever will or can be agreed upon, which is the Judgment
of the Church, that of the COUNCIL, or this of the POPE, or the other of POPE
and COUNCIL. The Contest is between those that will admit of no Judge, and
therefore of no Decision. Their Determinations already extant, are directly
contrary one to another, yet both pretended to be of Faith. That both cannot be
so, is plain; and it may be neither is so. And whether the one or neither be
so, if I would determine for my self, I make my self the Judge of the Church's
Definitions, even of those to which I must submit my Judgment, or be damned.

The other Branch of Power claimed by this Church, is that of giving Laws to
all Christians, unto which all that will be saved, must yield Obedience. About
this I find no better Agreement among them, than about the former. There is so
great a dispute among the Doctors (says one of them) Almain. de Auth. Eccles.
c. 3.
about the fullness of Ecclesiastical Power, and unto what things it extends it
self, that in this matter few things are secure. Yet that such a Power there
is, we must believe, or perish, tho none can certainly tell us what kind of
Power it is, whether purely Spiritual, or Temporal also. And an Universal Power
it must be, tho we cannot learn how far it reaches, whether to all, or but
some, either things or persons.

It is held by many (says Bell.) that the POPE has by Divine Right, a most
full Power over the whole World, in Matters both Ecclesiastical and Civil. And
for this Opinion, he names Augustinus Triumphus, Alvarus, Pelagius, Panormitan,
and others; with whom their Angelical Doctor, Thomas of Aquine seems to
consent; In the POPE (says he) is the Top-height of both Powers.

Others say, That the POPE, as POPE, has no Temporal Power at at all, neither
can any way command Secular Princes, or deprive them of their Kingdoms and
Principalities, tho otherwise they deserve to be deprived of them. For this
Opinion, he names not so much as one of their own Communion; why, I know not,
unless it were, because he knew it to be an Opinion very unwelcome at ROME; or
because he thought there were but a few inconsiderable PAPISTS that held it.
And therefore he fathers it upon the Heretics, whose Loyalty to their Princes
will better bear it.

The REPRESENTER here tells us, He knows that the Deposing and King-killing
Power has been maintained by some Canonists and Divines of his Church, and that
it is in their Opinion lawful, and annexed to the Papal Chair. And that some
Popes have endeavored to act according to this Power. Yet is he not willing
that Heretics of any sort, should carry away the Honor, which Bellarmin
bestowed upon them, of a Loyal Religion; but says, That there are of his
Communion three times the number, that publicly disown all such Authority;
that some Universities and Provincial Councils, have condemned it; and that
Popish Princes sit as safe on their Thrones, as others. Yea, and he will
engage, that all Catholic Nations in the World, shall subscribe to the
Condemnation of all such Popish Principles and Doctrines, and shall join with
all good Protestants for the extinguishing them, with all that profess and
practice them, and utter rooting them out of his Majesty's three Kingdoms, and
the whole Universe. I must do him right, notwithstanding all this; for he has
not said, That the whole Church of ROME, or any General Council has condemned
this Doctrine; or that it is by public Authority, for the offense it gives,
rased out of the Canon Law, nor the LATERAN Council; nor that Protestant
Princes can sit as safely in Popish Countries, as Popish Princes may in
Protestant Countries. And when he tells us, That the Sentence of the Supreme
Pastor is to be obeyed, whether he be Infallible or no; although I have a great
Opinion of the Loyalty of many PAPISTS, I durst hardly engage for his, if there
should chance to be such a POPE again, as himself confesses some have been.

But what says Bellarmin? A third sort there is, that takes a middle way; and
he names not a few of them, himself being one of the number. These hold, that
the POPE, as POPE, has indeed no Temporal Power directly and immediately, but
Spiritually only. And such as he makes it, there needs no more; for it will
serve his Holiness as well, and the Heretics as ill, to all intents and
purposes, yea even to the deposing of Princes, as the greatest Temporal Power
in the World. For (says he) by reason of this Spiritual, he has also, at
least indirectly, a Temporal Power, and that no less than the highest. And even
as the Spirit or Soul has Power over the Flesh, to Chastise, and even to
deliver it up to Death, in order to the Spiritual ends of the Soul: So also may
the POPE, tho not as an ordinary Judge, yet as an extraordinary, in order to
spiritual Ends, change Kingdoms, taking them from one, and giving them to
another, abrogate the Civil Laws of Princes, and determine of their Rights.
This I am sure is more than ever St. Peter had by Virtue, either of the Rock,
or Keys, or Pastoral Staff; and I am confident, he never thought of half this,
when he charged all Men to submit to the King as SUPREME, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Nor
when, v. 17. bidding us Honor all Men, love the Brotherhood, fear God, honor
the King; he omitted to mind us of the great Duty of all, the Subjection we
must yield to his Successors, the Bishops of ROME; especially, when he might
well suppose we should have been much apter to have learned it of himself, than
of any of his Successors.

It Is time for me now, I think, to consider, into what a Labyrinth I must run
my self, by going over to the Church of ROME; and how I can behave my self,
when I come there. I am going into a Church, out of which, I am told, there is
no Salvation; yet I cannot foresee, that this Church her self can tell me
surely, how I may be saved in it. Of this Church, I am told, I cannot be a
Member to any purpose, if I be not in all things Subject and Obedient to the
Supreme Head of it, the POPE. And subject to him I cannot be, if I actively
obey not his Commands; for passive Obedience is now become the despised Badg of
a Heretic. But what the POPE's Power to command is, I can meet with no Body
that can certainly inform me. It is an absolute Power over all the World, say
some. No, (say others) but only over Christians, and in things Spiritual. Well,
(says the third Party) tho it be directly and immediately only Spiritual, yet
it is no less for that; but in order to Spirituals, it reaches over all, both
Temporal Persons, Laws and Judgments. All this Power is in me only, says the
POPE. You are too hasty, Sir, say some Councils, and the Doctors of France; for
the chief Power is by Christ himself given to the Council, and even to put down
and set up POPES, as they would deal with Kings and Emperors. Which of these
now must I believe and obey?

The Prince, under whose Government I live, may command me one thing; and the
POPE, my Spiritual Father, may command the contrary. How must I now do to bear
my self evenly betwixt two such Masters? I consult my Spiritual Guides, and
take the best Advice I can get; some say one thing, and some another; and which
to believe, I stand in need of another Guide to direct me; nay, the Church it
self, knew I where to find her, (so visible is She) could not tell me which is
in the right. If I believe those, who tell me the POPE has no Power in Temporal
matters; then is my Prince in all such Matters to be obeyed, say the POPE what
he will to the contrary. If I hearken to them, that tell me the POPE has a
fullness of Power in all, both Temporal and Spiritual matters; I must obey my
Prince in nothing without the POPE's leave. If I listen to them, who say, The
POPE's Power in Temporal matters, is indeed the highest Power; yet indirectly
only, and in order to Spiritual ends, then am I so far to obey it, and no
farther. And here I am at as great a loss as ever; for who shall judge for me,
whether his Commands be needful for Spiritual ends or no? It is very unlikely,
that my Prince and the Pope should agree in the Determination of this Point;
and the difference being between them two, and their Commands, to whose award
will they stand? I must here necessarily be left to the Direction of my own, or
some other private Judgment, and which side soever I take, it is an even Wager
whether I can be saved.

I have been considering all this while for my self alone, and the satisfaction
of my own Conscience. I presume not to judge for, nor of others. They who have
more Light, and better Eyes, may go on more confidently; it is all my care, to
go safely for my self; and as inoffensively as I can to all others. I see many
Wise men among ROMAN CATHOLICS, and I dare not say the contrary, but that they
are of another Religion than I, because they are Wiser, and better able to
choose than I. If I choose as wisely as I can for my self, I cannot do any better
for my self, and I doubt not of being saved whilst I do so well. And if it
should prove so, that I choose the worse, he has no reason to be angry with me,
to whom I leave, and do not grudg the better.

I cannot yet think it necessary to Salvation, to believe that Church
Infallible, which not only in my opinion but in the Judgment of all other
Christians, (and they are (...) and more) has often Erred, and does very grosy
(...) many things; and which, if we ask her, can her self only tell us, who
they be in her Communion, that can Err, but not who they be, that cannot. Nor
can I think it safe to be of that Church, where I may not be allowed to judge or
try whether Error be taught me or no. I cannot think I am bound to Judge either
my self or others in a state of Damnation, for not denying our Senses, or
captivating our Judgments to the Judgment of an Infallible Church, which could
never determine where her Judgment or Infallibility is certainly to be found:
Or for not obeying the Head of that Church, which has sometimes no Head,
sometimes many Heads, and is always uncertain which is her Head, or where it
stands. If I must thus believe, and thus obey, no body can tell me what, and
declare I do all this, or in the Judgment of that Church which must be believed
Infallible, be no better for turning PAPIST; then I verily think I am much
safer, as I am a poor PROTESTANT. I am sure I may as safely, as I can freely,
captivate my Judgment both in Faith and Practice, to the Doctrine and Laws of
the Blessed JESUS, whom all Christians unanimously acknowledge both the SUPREME
and INFALLIBLE HEAD of the Universal Church. I will no longer lose my labor,
in seeking an Infallible Guide, which almost every body can tell me of, but no
man can certainly show me. Instead of an Ecclesiastical Monarch on E^^^h, I
will content my self with that Blessed and only Potentate, King of kings, and
Lord of lords, whom his Father has made Sole HEAD of the CHURCH, which is his
Body; who long since told us, that his Kingdom is not of this World, as, I
fear, the POPE's too much is.

FINIS.

