The ACCOUNT From WICKHAM (Lately published by, John Raunce and Charles Harris)
Examined, and found False:

And Warning thereof given to all such Well-meaning Persons among the People
called Quakers,

As through Personal Affection, want of Consideration, or Weakness of Judgment
have been betrayed, or may be in danger to be betrayed by them, or any other in
the same dividing Spirit with them, and led aside from the Way of Truth, into a
Separation from the People of God: For whose Recovery and Preservation this is
written.

By Thomas Ellwood.

Printed in the Year, 1689.

The Account from WICKHAM, (Lately published by John Raunce and Charles Harris)
Examined, and found False:
And a warning thereof given to all such well-meaning Persons among the People,
called Quakers, as through Personal Affection, want of Consideration, or
Weakness of Judgment have been betrayed, or may be in danger to be betrayed by
them, or any other in the same dividing Spirit with them, and led aside from
the Way of Truth, into a Separation from the People of God: for whose Recovery
and Preservation this is written.
FOr your sakes it is, O ye much pitied Ones, more than for any Weight in the
Account it self, or Worth in the Authors of it, that I have thus taken notice
of it. For indeed as soon as I had perused it, I felt a compassionate Concern
spring in my Heart on your behalfs, and a direction in Spirit to open some
passages therein, and relating thereto, to you, that ye might be preserved from
being taken, or, if in any measure taken, might be rescued and delivered from
the snare which the Enemy of your Souls, and of all Righteousness, has made
use of these men to set, to entangle, entrap and catch you by. And to the true
Witness of the holy God, in every one of your Consciences, who retain any
honest breathing after the Lord, and the way of Holiness, do I recommend this
my undertaking, and the sincerity of my Intention herein.

To begin therefore with the beginning of their Account, they say, The
Differences amongst Friends in these parts, did not arise amongst our selves,
but were brought in by such, who have largely endeavored to cause Division
amongst us. Now I affirm, in the presence and fear of the holy God, and upon my
own certain knowledge, that these men themselves were the chief Instruments of
bringing the Differences in amongst Friends in these parts; and They with their
Associates, have largely endeavored, yea, and labored hard for many Years to
cause Divisions amongst us. The Lord knows this is true, and many of his
faithful Servants in these parts know this is true; yea, and these men
themselves also cannot but know this is true, which makes their Condemnation
the greater.

They say, It is a Comfort to us, that we can say in the presence of God, we
have not been the cause thereof (but then, being conscious of their own guilt,
they add, for a Salvo, these words) by bringing into the Church any new
Doctrine, or any sort of unscriptural Discipline. Were I now to deal directly
with them, I would not grant them that: But since the end of my present writing
is for your Information, not to contend with them, that which I shall observe
to you is, that were they indeed never so free from bringing into the Church
any new Doctrine, or (as they term it) unscriptural Discipline, yet might they
notwithstanding, by other ways and means, have been the Cause of the Divisions
amongst Friends in these parts, as indeed they were. They traveled to and fro
and traversed the Countries, gleaning up Stories and evil Surmises from such as
were in the work of Division in other parts; and what they had so picked up,
They privately whispered and insinuated into the minds of such simple ones
whose Ears were open to them, filling them with fears, doubts and jealousies of
an Apostasy entering among Friends, etc. whereby they begat in some a Dis-esteem
of many ancient Friends, and faithful Laborers in Truth's service, preparing
and fitting them thereby to join with themselves, to oppose, in an ignorant
Zeal, the Care and Counsel which, in the openings of Life, the God of Life
conveyed, through his Servants, to the Meetings, for preventing that Apostasy
which they said was entering. And having espoused the Cause of I. S. and I. W.
who had headed a Separate Meeting in the North, they endeavored to make a
Party for them amongst the Friends of this Country, and for that end did bandy
together, and having got I. S. over to Wickham, brought him to our Meetings to
Preach over us, though he was known to be out of the Unity of Friends, and to
be one of the chief Heads of the Division, to the great grief and heavy burden
of many an upright tender hearted Friend.

They add, that they have only stood for their own and others Liberty in
Christ, that all might walk as they had received from Him, and not otherwise.
But the Truth of the matter is otherwise. Neither their own nor others Liberty
in Christ was infringed, nor were any desired to walk otherwise than as they
had received from Christ. But they stood for a Liberty out of Truth, out of
Christ who is the Truth, for a fleshly liberty, a self-willed liberty, a
corrupt liberty, a liberty to mix in Marriages with such as were not of us.
Scandalous persons were brought to our Meeting upon account of Marriage, and
countenanced and abetted by these very men, and such others as they could get
to join with them, against the mind and life of the Meeting. One Couple
especially (whom I forbear to name, being unwilling to mark out particular
persons) whereof the Man was not reputed a Quaker, and the Woman charged by her
Neighbors with having lain with her own Father to the great scandal of
Religion. Yet that Marriage these men promoted, and highly contended for, to
the great grief and burden of Friends, whose Life stood against it, and to the
great disquieting of the Meeting; I. R. alleging that the Man had been an
Absenter from the public Worship for more then twenty Years, and that though
he had not frequented the Quakers Meetings, yet he had not joined to any other
People. And when that gave no satisfaction to Friends, he plainly told us, It
must be passed; and that there was a necessity for it, otherwise things would
be worse: which made it more uneasy to Friends to meddle at al with them. But
after long debate, and many Months contending about it, having got the Woman
to sign a Paper under the notion of condemning her misbehaviour (which Paper
was then understood to be drawn up by C. H. for her, and was so favorably
worded, that it rather seemed to palliate and excuse her Offense, than condemn
it, pretending that her Father, when she lay with him, was sick unto Death,
though it was known he was able to walk abroad) they carried on the Marriage
with such an high Hand, that the most Friends could do to clear themselves of
it, was to declare they did not consent to it, but only by way of
condescension, for Peace-sake, permit it to pass, and that too with this
caution, that they should not take each other in any public Meeting of
Friends, but among their own Relations, that Friends might stand clear of them
afterward. To which, though I. R. and themselves agreed, yet were they
afterward brought to a public Monthly Meeting of Worship, where they took
each other in Marriage amongst Friends, and as Friends, I. R. being there to
preach on that occasion. And when some Friends being grieved and offended
thereat, arose and departed in Testimony against it, I. R. in reflection upon
them, and to abet the Marriage, publicly said, Let him that is without Sin
cast the first Stone: And this Couple soon after they were married there, went
and were married again by a Priest: Plenty of Instances might be given of
corrupt Marriages promoted and carried on by them over the Heads of Friends.
But by this one it may appear what sort of Liberty they stood for, and what it
is they call their Liberty in Christ. And it is to be observed, that the
Contest between Friends and them about this Couple, was before any Marriage had
gone to the Women's Meetings, and was indeed it self the immediate Cause that
Friends desired the Women's Meetings might, for the future, be also concerned in
Inquiring into Peoples clearness upon Proposals of Marriage. By which it may
also appear how false and insincere these Men are, who would lay the rise and
ground of the differences in these parts, upon Marriages going to the Women's
Meeting. But after that Friends (having been fain to use the help of the Women's
Meeting to examine that unhandsome Carriage of the fore-mention Woman toward
her Father) found needful to desire and advise such as afterward came to
propose Marriage, to lay their intentions first before the Women's Meeting, it
was truly lamentable to see (and hardly credible by any but those that did see)
what shameless Marriages were obtruded upon the Meeting, and by these Men and
their Party vigorously animated and backed against the Meeting, under pretense
of Conscience in not going to the Women's Meeting. The Instances whereof, too
many to be here inserted, lie ready for a future Service, as further Occasion
may be given for it. Ah, had these Men, and others whom they joined with, and
who joined with them, stood only for their own, and others Liberty in Christ,
had they walked as they had received from Christ, and not otherwise, they had
not let up that Spirit of Loseness, nor made these Rents and Divisions in the
Church of Christ, which they have, nor lost that Savor which once, in some
measure, some of them had, to become, as at this day, unsavory-Salt.

Next they say, That which has seemed to draw People to please Men, and to
force them to practice things wherein they have not Faith, we have no
Fellowship with, as knowing God owns it not. See here on how slight and
uncertain a Ground they have laid the Foundation of their wretched work of
Separation, which they have run, and have drawn others (more simple than
themselves) into. That which they have taken such great Offense at, and declare
they have no Fellowship with, they durst not say did positively draw people to
please Men, or did realy force them to practice thigs wherein they had not
Faith; but they say, that which has Seemed to draw, and to force, etc. Had
they indeed been any whit tender of the Honor of God, the Prosperity of Truth,
the peace of the Church of Christ, the Salvation of Souls, could they (think
ye) have made so great a bluster, have proclaimed such open War as they have
done, and set up such open Ensigns of Opposition, and Flags of Defiance,
against the Standard of the Lord of Hosts, as their Separate Meetings are, upon
no sure Ground, no better Bottom, than an Apprehension that something Seemed to
draw People to please Men, Seemed to force them to practice things, etc?

So again, in their second Page they say, We clearly saw, That if their Orders
were proposed on such terms, that all were to be rendered of a dark and bad
Spirit that did not conform, then, etc. Here ye see, they cannot say that those
things which they call Friends-Orders were proposed on such terms; but If they
were. Accordingly they say, they did withstand them that in effect, did so
propose them: They know if they had said they had been proposed directly or
positively on such terms, they should have been immediately convicted of a
direct and positive Lie. Therefore they use these shifting Expressions, to hide
themselves and deceive you. In like manner they go on there, and say, We had
great cause to be jealous, several things proposed were not from Heaven, but of
Man. So here ye may see, they don't pretend to have had a certain Knowledge, a
grounded Assurance that the things proposed were not from Heaven, but a
Jealousy only. And consider, I pray, what was this Jealousy of their's
grounded on? a Foundation, ye will see, suitable to it self and to them. We had
great cause, say they, to be Jealous, several things proposed were not from
Heaven, but of Man; for in their Birth into the Church they Seemed not to bear
the Heavenly Image, neither shake hands with Holy Scriptures. Here Is their
Jealousy, and the great Cause of it, a Seemed not to bear the heavenly Image.
But sure it had beseemed them to have gone past Seeming, beyond Jealousy, and
to have had a certain, sure, indubitable, positive Knowledge of what they
Seemed to be Jealous of, before they had made a certain positive Rent, Breach,
Division, Separation from the Church of Christ, as they have done. Ah, how has
the Lord abandoned them to blindness, who have resisted his Light in the
manifestations thereof, that they might discover their own Nakedness? The Lord
make every one of you wise, to improve these discoveries of their Folly and
Falseness, to the advantage of your own Souls, that hereby ye may see, and
seeing shun that Seducing Spirit, which has led them into these pernicious
ways, and would through their means lead you in after them. And for your
further Information and Satisfaction in this matter, I (who, I think, may
reasonably pretend to know as much what has been done in the Meetings of this
Conntry, as any other, having seldom been absent from them) do plainly and
sincerely declare, in God's Presence and Fear, that I did never hear or know
any of those things which they call Friends-Orders, proposed on such terms as
they suggest, as that all were to be rendered of a dark and bad Spirit, that
did not conform. But I do certainly know, the things they contend against, have
been gently and tenderly proposed, and in a Christian Spirit recommended to the
Witness of God in the Consciences of those, to whom they were proposed; and
while there has not appeared a rugged, harsh, prejudiced mind, resolved before
hand, in a heady will, to break the Order, and thwart the Proceeding of the
Meeting; but Friends have found any measure of tenderness in the Persons
concerned, though not come to so clear an understanding as, with satisfaction,
to comply with what was proposed, the Meeting has condescended to their
weakness, not desiring any should act without Sight, or without (muchless
against) Faith. Of which I could give many Instances. But those who have been
justly noted for dark Spirits, have been such as have declared they did not
see, and yet have set themselves to oppose, revile and vilify that, which
themselves confessed they had not a sight whether it was of God or not.

To what I. R. and C. H. say concerning Endeavors to bury them alive, and take
away their good Name, and destroy their Labors and Services for God and his
Truth, little need, I think, be said, plain it is, and too apparent, that their
Labor and Service, of latter years, have not been for, but against God and his
Truth. And more their Friends, than they are aware of, have some been, who have
endeavored to destroy those Labors and Services of theirs, which (unless they
repent of, and forsake) will assuredly destroy them. But for their being buried
alive, I am (and always was) so far from desiring they should be so, that I
wish, at least, they were now capable of being so. Ah, what Savor of Life can
any of you taste? What fresh Spring can any of you find? What green Leaf can
any of you see throughout their whole Account? The Lord give every one of you,
who are in any degree Favorers of them, or inclining toward them, a true
Savor of Life in your selves, that ye may forsake the Tombs, and and not seek
the Living among the Dead.

They speak, Page 1. Of what several Friends have suffered from such who have
been contentious for the Form, and have made it the Measuring-Line; And Page 4.
they mention Formality being made the measuring-Line of Fellowship and Unity.
That any Friends have made the Form the measuring-Line, I neither know nor
believe, but take it for a Slander. But if these Men think the Form ought not
to be contended for, they are Ignorant. If they cannot distinguish between Form
and Formality they are Weak. In every Dispensation. Truth has always appeared
in some Form, and that Form which God appoints for Truth to appear in, ought to
be contended for (if any rise up to contend against it) so long as the
Dispensation continues, to which that Form is adapted. Would these Men have a
Religion without Form? Or would they have a Form not worth contending for?
Consider, I entreat you, ye who have been at their Separate Meetings, Have they
no Form? Do they pretend to none? Are they slid back into such a Choas of
Confusion, that they are, or would be, as the Earth was, while Darkness was
upon the face of the Deep, without Form? If they have no Form, they have no
Order; and how then is the God of Order their God? If they have a Form, but
such an one as they think not worth contending for, they had as good have none.
If they have a Form which they do think worth contending for, nay, if they have
contended, even unto Separation, that they might impose a Form of their own
invention upon us, how can they, without the greatest Injustice, blame us for
contending for the Form which, we believe, the Power of Truth has led us into?
But making the Form the measuring-Line, is a Phrase of their own, not of
Friends, by which they endeavor to cloud your understandings, and prejudice
your minds against Friends. The Spiritual measuring-Line is the Spirit of God,
by which the Spiritual-minded measure Spiritual things. And by this
measuring-Line, They, that oppose the Form of Truth, are certainly known and
discovered not to be acted and guided by the Power of Truth; And yet the Form
is not made the measuring Line. Is there not a Form of sound Words, 2. Tim. 1
13? And if any, who profess Truth, should not only depart from the Form of
sound Words, but should reject, despise, oppose, contend against it, would ye
not blame, reprove, condemn such persons? But would ye have it from hence
inferred, that ye make the Form the measuring-Line?

They say, When the Women's Meetings were set up, the People were told, that was
set up to keep things sweet and clean, forgetting the fear of the Lord, which
can only effect that work. Thus they pretend to exalt the Fear of the Lord, but
it is that they might debase and destroy those means which the Lord has made
useful in his Church, for the stirring up of the pure Mind, and keeping in a
Watchful state of Subjection to the Lord in his Fear, and reclaiming or calling
back to the Fear of the Lord those, that by the Wiles of the Enemy may at any
time be drawn from it, and for the denying and testifying against such as
harden themselves against the Lord's Reproof, such as oasting his Fear behind
their Backs, persist in Evil, and will not be reformed, who by the judgment of
Truth, arising in the heavenly Power in the Hearts of the Faithful, are to be
swept out of the Family of God, as by the Besoom of the Lord. And is not that a
proper way and means to keep things sweet and clean? Did Paul, think ye, forget
the fear of the Lord; or knew he not, as well as these men, the virtuous
Efficacy of it to keep sweet and clean, when he took so great Care and Pains to
watch over the Churches for that end? When he gave particular direction for the
aged Women to instruct and teach the younger, Tit. 2. 3, 4, 5. Was not the end
of this to keep things sweet and clean? And might'not Hymenaes or Alexander, or
some other Apostate in that day, have cavilled with as much Reason as these men
now do, and have said; the Apostle forgot the Fear of God, which can only
effect that work? But the Children of Light, who abide in the Light, do, in and
by the Light, see through and over all these empty Cavils. And in true and
tender Pity, and Christian Compassion to your Souls, are these things briefly
opened unto you; that ye may see, and seeing may believe, and believing may be
saved from the snare the Enemy has laid to catch you.

And whereas I. R. and C. H. complain of some crying, Make no Bargain with that
Spirit, and feed it with Judgment, etc. And of Sitting with Hats on in the time
of their Prayer, as a Testimony before all sorts of People against their
Spirits; with much more of like kind, which ye may see in page 2. of their
Account. This I say, is deceitfully written by them to beguile the simple, and
make the Ignorant believe that these Carriages toward them were the Cause and
Occasion of the Differences between Friends and them in these parts: for they
immediately add, Now these things are repeated, that none may be so ignorant as
to think we begun these Quarrels with our Neighbors, and Friends. Now the God
of Heaven knows, and they know in their own Consciences, that in this they deal
deceitfully. For the plain and naked Truth is, that these things appeared not
in any of our Meetings in this Country, not a Hat kept on in the time of their
Prayer, nor any open show of disunion with, or dislke to their Testimony (how
much so ever some of us were then grieved and burdened by them) until they had
first joined themselves to the chief Authors and Fomenters of Division and
Separation in other parts, abetting their Cause, espousing their Quarrel, and
having made a Party for them amongst Friends in this Country, brake forth into
an open Opposition to the way and order of Truth, and by their continual Strife
and Contention, had done their endeavors to break our Meetings to pieces, and
by their unruly and turbulent behavior, had given unquestionable proofs, that
they were departed from the Fellowship of the Gospel of Peace, and of Friends
were become Enemies to Truth. And surely they had no reason to expect to be
owned by Friends in their Preaching and Praying, after they or their party had
published Friends to the World to be Apostates, Innovators, Introducers of
Popery, and the like. As for the Papers they mention, advising Friends to make
no Bargain with that Spirit, and feed it with Judgment, etc. Those Papers
declare what Spirit that was that was not to be bargained with, but fed with
Judgment, namely, that which was gone out of Truth, and had led into Division
and Separation; and if these men had not known themselves guilty, and, That
they were joined to that Spirit, and to those that by that Spirit were led into
Division and Separation in other parts, what need it have troubled them to hear
such Papers read amongst Friends for a warning and caution to Friends to beware
that they were not entangled by that Spirit? Why should these men have taken
offense at the reading of such a Paper, any more than any other Friend in the
Meeting where it was read, if they had not then been in the Strife, Contention
and work of Division, and so felt a stroke reach them in the reading of these
Papers, that were designed as a Caution to all?

Their charging Friends, page 2. with endeavoring to leaven the Minds of
convinced People from House to House, to increase then Party, and to defame
such as were not of it; is so exact a description of their own Courses, that I
am persuaded there are few Families of Friends in this Country but can convict
them of it; And I dare appeal to many of you, if ye have not found it so your
selves. Nay, does not I. R. still continue to draw some Patients of his, to
come to speak with him at his separate Meeting Place, that so he may engage
them, who else would not come there, to help increase his number? But their
charging Friends with writing, approving and printing Books against several
whom they call ancient Friends by Name, wherein (they say) are several
Falsehoods and Scandals, is so notoriously known, and has been so openly and
unanswerably proved, to be the guilt of their own party, that it argues an
extreme degree of hardness and impudence in them to mention it. Let them
produce, if they can, any one Book to justify their Charge, before W. R. writ
his foul Invective against Friends, under the Title of The Christian Quaker
distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, in five Parts. Which infamous
piece, if my Memory fail me not, I have heard I. R. say remained some
considerable time in his hand before it was printed; so that he could not be
ignorant of it: Nay, he was a Promoter and Spreader of it, after it came
abroad. Judge ye now, how great a piece of Deceit it is in them to blame
Friends for that, which their own party first went into, and necessitated
Friends to answer, in Defense and Vindication of the Truth and themselves.

After the same manner they cry out of Envious Reflections, page 2. Base
Reflections, and. Hellish Names, page 3. When as, besides what they utter by
Word of Mouth in their Preaching and Discoursing, what Reflection, that is
envious and base, is not to be found in their printed Books and Pamphlets
against Friends? How full is that Book of W. Rogers, and other Books writ since
by him, of abusive Language, bitter Words and base Reflections! What is there
else in Bug's and Bullock's Writings! And for envious Reflections and Hellish
Names, what Sheet of Paper ever contained more than those of Susan Aldridge! in
forming of which how great an hand these very men had, is not unknown to some:
But if ye look no further than the Account they have now published, there ye
shall find they say, When the Womens-Meetings were first set up, many was so
elevated with it, that they ran like Gehazi, etc. Gehazi ye know, was Servant
to the Prophet that cured Naaman the Assyrian of his Leprosy; and when the
Prophet had refused to take a Reward from Naaman for the Cure, Gehazi ran after
him in the Prophet's Name, with Lies of his own inventing in his Mouth, on
purpose, and to no other end but to get Money and Clothes of him, 2 Kings 5.
Now for these men to say of any Friends, that they were so elevated with the
Womens-Meeting, that they run like Gehazi, what baser Reflection could they
have cast! yet here ye fee they caft this base and envious Reflection upon
many. What more foul as well as false Slander could they have vented or
invented! Yet these men, ye see, in that very Paper, wherein they have thus
basely reflected on others, are not ashamed to tax others with envious and base
Reflections; whose Injustice here'in I represent to your view, and serious
consideration, that ye may weigh, and duly consider what Spirit it is they were
guided by in writing that Account: That so ye may not give your selves up,
through an affectionate fondness, to an implicit belief of what they say or
write; but may examine and try them by the true measuring-Line, the Spirit of
Truth, which uncovers their Deceit.

They reject Truth's order upon pretense, page 2. that Several things proposed
have not proved a Blessing to the Church, in such things, they were pretenended
for, viz. to keep things sweet and clean. The truly-sensible Ones, the faithful
and honest-hearted, know the contrary, not-withstanding the pains these men
have taken, by their Oppositions, to prevent the Blessing, and make things
unsavory and unclean. But, I pray consider, what has their Disorder done? how
sweet and clean have things been kept amongst them? So far has their Division
and Separation been from being a Blessing to the Church, that it has proved a
grievous Curse to many of them that have run into it; And has led some of them
utterly to part from the very profession of Truth, and sit down again under the
preaching of a Parish Priest? of which Examples might be produced in several
parts. But, not to seek Examples far from home, what shattering work has been
among them, since their Separation from Truth and Friends, even in their own
Meeting at Wickham! One that was a bold Champion in their Quarrel, a great
Contender for them against Friends and Truth's order, and went into the
Separation with them, has since turned Papist, and gone openly to mass. I
forbear to name the Person, or publish (at present) the miscarriage which drove
him from the, being unwilling to expose persons or things, unless necessitated
thereunto. Another, that had got up to be a pert Preacher among them, has of
late deserted both them and his Profession, and is now said to hanker after the
Baptists. Diverse others of their party in that Town are gone off from the very
Profession of Truth, and are gone to the Priest, or the Top-Knot, or both, as I
have been credibly informed. The Lord make these Examples warnings to you, that
ye may not tempt God, as some have done, and by him be given up to a reprobate
sense.

They strike also at the order of Truth, under the phrase of unscriptural
Discipline, page 1. and of unscriptural Orders, page 2. as if they thought, and
would have you believe the way and method of acting and managing the Affairs of
the Church now, were as expressly set down, and plainly to be read in the
writings of the new Testament, as the Discipline of the Church under the law
was, in the wirtings of the old: not considering, or not seeming to regard, the
Difference between the Dispensations of Law and Gospel; whereof the one was
expressly limited to a litteral Prescript, the other left to the Direction of
the free and unlimitted Spirit of God, which is never absent from the true
church, and by which the true Church ought to be, and is guided. They should do
well to distinguish between unscriptural and Anti-Scriptural, between that
which is contrary to the Scripture, and that which is not contrary to it,
though not expressly and fully set down in it: And ye would do well to put them
to speak their sense plainly in the case. If their meaning be, that the order
and Discipline of the Church of Christ, is expressly, particularly, invariably
and fully in term set down in the Scriptures of the New Testament, let them
assert it, and they, or others, shall soon, by God's assistance, be made
sensible of their Error. Or, if they will affirm, and undertake to prove, that
the order, way, or method of managing the Affairs of the Church of Christ, now
used amongst Friends, is contrary to the Scriptures of Truth, it shall not be
long before they shall be convicted of Falsehood and Slander therein. In the
mean time it will not be a miss to observe, what Scriptural Orders they have
brought forth, either during their jangling Contention with Friends, or since
their Separation from us. They, who so tartly twit Others with unscriptural
Orders, should (one would think) be very exact in squaring their own Orders by
the Letter of the Scriptures. How Scriptural their Practices are, in the case
of Marriage, in their Separate Meetings, I refer to your own impartial
Observations, who have been present at any of them. What they have laid down in
their late printed Account, and which they say they desired, is, That the Men
and Women might meet together, whilst we sat to wait upon God, and also whilst
all Marriages were proposed, and that Men might take care concerning their Sex,
and the Women of theirs, against the next Meeting; and then, if the Women had
any mind to be together, about any other Matters, that they thought they could
do best by themselves, they might take their Liberty, etc. I earnestly press
you to consider, and wish ye would as earnestly press them to show where this
Order which they propose is expressed in the holy Scriptures, Is there any plain
Direction of such a method there? Is there any Intimation there that the Saints
so practiced? Have they any, either Precept or Precedent in the Scriptures of
Truth for this Proposal of that, more then we have for our practice which they
reject? They say, It is a Comfort to them that they can say in the presence of
God, They have not been the cause of Division, by bringing into the Church any
sort of unscriptural Discipline, and yet in the same breath (as it were) they
propose the bringing in a Discipline no whit more Scriptural then they which
that oppose? O Consider these things, I beseech you, all ye well-meaning Ones,
who have been and are in any measure beguiled by the fair Speeches and smooth
Insinuations of these, and such like men. Bring their work to the Light of
Christ, examine it by the Light, weigh it in the true Balance, try it by the
true Touchstone, and take not every thing for Gold that does a little glister.

They add, that they desired Our Meetings might consist of qualified chosen
Friends, from each particular Meeting, and not be filled up with Youths, and
Girls, and Strangers from other Countries, to busy themselves, to head and
make Parties among us, and then carry Tales form place to place, to increase
difference. Surely none, whether, Strangers from other Countries, or others,
should head and make Parties in Meetings, or carry Tales from place to place:
yet this, I certainly know, was their practice in our Meetings, while they
continued amongst us, and by that means the Difference was much increased in
these Parts. But if they would have Strangers (by which I suppose they mean
Friends) of other Countries wholly excluded from our Meetings, I say Distance
of place, or remoteness of outward Habitations; ought not to make any such
Distinction among us. None are Strangers to us, to our Meetings, or to the
service of Truth in our Meetings, who are not Strangers to that divine Life and
Power, but dwell in it, and are subject to it, by which we have been gathered
to be a people to the Lord, and our Spirits engaged to his service. The Spirit
of Christ is an universal, free, unlimitted Spirit, and both teaches us how to
behave our selves toward Friends that come from other Countries, to sit, in
the Unity of the same Spirit, with us in our Meetings and them how to behave
themselves amongst us. But I fear these men are no more just in this cavil than
in the former. Don't they, think ye, when they go into other Countries, help
fill up the Meetings of their own Party? Ask them if they have so done, and
busied themselves to head and make Parties, and help make Division, where
Meetings have not been actually divided. And whether Strangers from other
Countries, such as are confederated with them in their wicked work of
Separation, come not to their separate Meeting in this Country, I appeal to
your own observation and knowledge, who sometimes resort thither. Judge you
then of their Sincerity in making this Cavil. And as to their other Cavil about
Youths, and Girls, filling up our Meetings, if thereby they mean that the
Meetings consist of such, 'its false: If they mean not so, but only that some
young ones are sometimes there present, it is idle. The Meetings, it is well
known, consist of the most ancient, grave, weighty Friends, of either Sex, in
the Country. And if any young people, or old either, that have been little
amongst us at our other Meetings, and whose deportment and behavior has not
ansuered their Profession, have stepped in, such have been taken out, and desired
to withdraw. But if they except against all that are young in Years, merely
because they are young, their exception is to be excepted against as not
according to Truth; And I question whether they obseve their own methods in the
separate Meetings they have set up. But if they do not, it is then without
question that they urge these things, not from a conscientious tenderness, and
with a sincere mind, but as a ground of Contention and occasion of Quarrel. So
also they say, they desired that our Meetings might consist of qualified chosen
Friends, from each particular Meeting. But I pray now, do their separate
Meetings consist of such qualified chosen persons. Ye that have been amongst
them, deal faithfully with your selves, and if ye find them false in these
particulars, urging those things in pretense, which they do not practice in
reality, suffer not your selves to be deceived by them. As for our Meetings,
they do consist of qualified Friends, from each particular Meeting, such as are
chosen by him who best knows their Qualifications, God, who qualifies them for
the service he engages them in, and enagages their Spirits in an holy Concern
to undertake the work he qualifies them for. But is it not strange that these
men, who seem ready to startle at the very Name of Form, and cry out so
fearfully against Imposition, should on a sudden so far forget themselves, as
thus to contend for Form in choosing the Members of their Meeting, and impose
upon all others, that should not be chosen and qualified as they think fit, to
absent themselves from those Meetings? What Confusion do these Men run into?

Now, having told us what they desired, they go on to tell us what they have
disliked, as that when Persons have declared, that they could not go to the
Women's Meeting with their Marriage, for Conscience sake, several have declared
to this effect, That the authority of Judgment concerning such Consciences
belonged to them, and that they had power to judge Spirits and Consciences, and
that they had not only power to desire, but to require Marriages before the
Women's Meeting, and that they could have no Unity with, neither stand Witness
to any Marriage, but what went first to a distinct Woman's Meeting, and that
such ought not to proceed in Marriage, but wait till the Cloud was over;
telling them, it was not Conscience, but Stubbornness and Wilfulness; and would
say, They knew it by an inward Sense, without any outward Demonstration, Thus
they fill your Ears with noise: and endeavor to prejudice your minds with
Reports of what they say others have said, whose Sayings perhaps they may have
mis-reported, or perverted their meanings in giving their own Sense of others
words; for, if ye observe it, they do not say several have declared these very
words which they have there set down, but this in Effect, which depends upon
their Construction of the words spoken, the true Sense of which too cannot be
so clearly understood, without knowing the Occasions and Circumstances of the
Discourse; Yet even as these Men have related them, they will not sind, upon a
due Examination, any great advantage accrue unto their Cause, not will you, I
hope, find cause of Offense, from any of these foregoing Expressions. As for
the authority of judging concerning Conscience, which I take to be the main
thing here they carp at, before it can be rightly understood, with relation to
be the present Case, the occasion and intention of the Words must be
considered. A Couple that profess Truth, lay their Intention of Marriage before
a Meeting of Friends, The intent of their doing this is, not barely and only
that their Intention may be made known, but that the Friends of that Meeting,
if no just cause of Obstruction appear, may own them, join with them, Act for
them, and stand by them in the carrying on and consummating of their Marriage.
Now if this Couple shall refuse to proceed in that Method, for the
accomplishing their Marriage, which the Meeting uses on the like Occasions, and
shall pretend a Conscientious scruple for such Refusal, has not that Meeting
Authority to inquire into the Grounds and Reasons of such a pretense, and upon
that Inquiry, power also to judge of the Sincerity or Insincerity of such a
Pretense or Plea of Conscience, so far as concerns their own Satisfaction, in
order, to their owning or not owning, acting for or not acting for, joining
with or not joining with, standing by or not standing by such Persons in their
present Procceedings? How else shall a Meeting be capable to act with Judgment
and Safety? shall a Meeting of Friends be obliged to acquiesse, and submit to
every bare Plea of Conscience from others, contrary to the firm Persuasion of
their own Consciences; and not be allowed a Liberty, Ability, Capacity,
Authority to Examine, Try, Judge a Plea of Conscience, whether it be sincere or
no, especially in a Case wherein themselves are to be concerned? Worse then
would the Condition of a Meeting be, than that of a single Person We have been
told indeed by some of them, when we have asked, of the Parties refusing, a
reason of their refusing to let their Proceedings be looked into by the Women's
Meeting, that we ought not to ask them such Questions; but that, when they have
declared it to be matter of Conscience to them, we ought to be satisfied with
that Answer, without inquiring further. But this has not answered our
Consciences, nor our Understandings. We believed that, in a Case wherein they
desired us to be concerned, we might reasonably desire to be further satisfied
th^^ so. Their excepting against any Friends, saying, (if any did say) they had
power to judge Spirits, shows how short they are of the state of the Spiritual
Man, who, the Apostle testifies, Judges all things, 1 Cor. 2. 15. Consider, I
entreat you, wherefore was the Gift of Discerning Spirits given to the Church,
as we read it was, 1 Cor. 12. 10. If it was not to be used in the Church? And
wherefore were the Saints exhorted, 1 John 4. 1. To try the Spirits whether
they were of God or no, if they have not received from God ability to Try, and
power, upon Trial, to Judge, whether those Spirits are of God or not; at least
so far as relates to their own satisfaction, in receiving or not receiving,
joining or not joining or not joining with them? If any Friend, being sensible
that a Couple was clouded and muddled in their minds (as some have been in our
Meeting by the Oppositions and Gain-sayings of these Men and their Party) and
thereby made incapable at present of seeing what the Lord required of them,
should advise them not hastily to proceed in Marriage, but wait till the Cloud
was over, what hurt was there in that to any? If it were said to some, that
their Refusal proceeded not from Conscience, but from stubbornness and
willfulness; What then! was that impossible to be true? Or impossible to be
known? or, being true, and being known, was it unfit to be spoken? If any knew
it by an inward sense, they had the better ground to speak it on. And though it
is not probable any Friends expressed themselves as these Men have set it down,
viz. by an inward sense without any outward Demonstration; yet I do not believe
that to be impossible. And if these Men hold otherwise, ye would do well to put
them to speak plainly, that you and all may see how far they are degenerated.
However, this is certain, that in those controverted Cases which came before
the Meeting in this Country, during this Disturbances that these Men made
there, whatever inward sense any Friends had of the Stubbornness, wilfulness,
and insincere Pleas of Conscience made by any whom they abbetted, the Lord
never suffered us to want Outward Demonstration thereof also, sufficient to
confirm that inward sense, and convict the Opposers.

They proceed in discovering their Dislike, saying, Also we have not liked to
send Men from the Country to the Yearly Meeting, to sign Papers against
Ministers of the Gospel for Nonconformity. For my part, I never knew any sent
for that purpose, nor any Papers signed at the Yearly Meeting against any
Ministers of the Gospel for Nonconformity. These are but false Insinuations,
by which they endeavor to fill your minds with prejudice against Friends, that
thereby they may bind you the faster to themselves. But the Lord I hope, will
break their Bands of Iniquity, and open your Understandings to see and discern
between Truth and Falsehood, that ye may reject the one, and cleave to the
other. Therefore take not their Stories upon trust, but examine and try them.
Here, ye see, they suggest as if Friends of the Country were sent to the
Yearly Meeting to sign Papers against Ministers of the Gospel for
Nonconformity. This is false. Those Friends that go from the Countries to the
Yearly Meeting, go, as in the general Love of God, so on the general Service of
Truth, to communicate the general state and condition of Friends in the several
Counties they go from, and to consider and advise together, in the openings of
Life and heavenly Counsel from God, how to be servicable one to another, and to
the whole body, in procuring Liberty Ease and Relief to those Members that are
in Sufferings by Persecution, or Labor under Necessities and Wants, whether in
this Nation or any other; And to be Instrumentally helpful to open the way, as
the Lord opens their Hearts and Understandings thereunto, that Truth may have a
free and open passage, to be propogated and spread in other Nations, either by
Books or Preaching, as the Lord shall stir up the Spirits of his Servants
thereunto; whereby the Body edefies it self in Love. But these Meetings, I
know, this sort of Opposers have long disliked and reproached; nor are they, in
reality, for any settled Meetings for Business, either Monthly, Quarterly, or
Yearly, but such as themselves may direct and govern, Now as for what they
suggest of signing Papers against Ministers of the Gospel for Nonconformity,
as I know of none such ever signed there, so there having been but one Paper,
that I remember, signed at the Yearly Meeting against any that pretended to be
Ministers, I suppose in this Cavil they aim at that. That was a Testimony
signed in the year 1677. against I. S. and I. W. who were gone from the Unity
of Friends, into a Separate Spirit, and had countenanced an open Separation in
the North, long before. And having been charged by Friends in the North with
many things contrary to the Testimony of Truth, after many Meetings had between
Friends and them thereupon, a Meeting was at length by joint consent of both
Parties, appointed to be held at Draw-Well in Yorkshire, in the 2 d. Month
1676. which Meeting lasted four days, and thereupon a full hearing of the
Charge against them, and their Defense, they were found faulty in the most
material things laid to their Charge (as by the Narrative of the Proceedings of
that Meeting, signed by above twenty Friends that were present, does appear)
And after a deep Travel of Spirit for them, that they might be brought to a
sense of their Guilt, they seemed at length in some degree bowed, and produced
a Paper, in order to give Satisfaction to Friends, containing a Condemnaiion of
themselves, and of that Spirit by which they had been misled. But quickly
after (being blaimed, as was said, by some of their own Party, and encouraged
to persist in their former Opposition) they denied their own Paper of
Condemnation, using Falsehoods and Equivocations to avoid the force of it (as
with relation to I. S. I my self from a personal Conferrence which I had with
him at I. R's House, do certainly know) and their great Agent W. R. who not
only was one of that Meeting at Draw-Well, but was said to have assisted them
in drawing up that Paper of Condemnation for them, did afterward expressly say,
It was but a Rattle to please Children; which evidenced the Naughtiness of
their hearts, and the insincerity of their dealings, who afterward concerning
their work of Opposition, Division and Separation, they were tenderly
admonished thereof in an Epistle from several Friends at London in the 3 d.
Month 1676. But they rejecting the tender Love of Friends toward them, and
hardening themselves against the good advice in that Epistle given them, went
on in their dividing Work, I. S. Traveling the Countries, and spreading the
Division and Separation further. Whereupon Friends felt a necessity upon their
Spirits at the Yearly Meeting 1677. (above a year after) to give forth a
public Testimony against them, and against that dividing Spirit they were then
led by. That all Friends might be warned of them, that no more might be
deceived by them, and that the Meeting might be clear in the sight of God, who
had laid that concern weightily upon it. For your sakes it is, O ye beguiled
ones, whom my Soul both pitties and seeks, that I have given this short, but
plain account of this matter, that ye may have a right understanding of things,
and not to be misled by mis-reports and mis-representations of matters, to the
hardening of you against the Work of the Lord, and the hurting of your own
Souls.

They express their Dislike also of Contentious Books sent, as they say, on the
Countries Charge; And all those contentious Papers that have been sent abroad
to be read in Meetings, teaching People hellish Names against their Brethren,
and to stir them up to deny the Testimony and Prayers of such whom (say they)
we believe the Lord has gifted for that Service. But they should be remembered,
that it was their own Party began their Contention in Print, and have carried
it on as vigorously as they could, till the work grew heavy to them; and now
these two, as two fresh Heads, starting up in the room of the old, begin to
renew the War in Print. If they dislike contentious Books and Papers, that
teach People Hellish Names, why do they not openly show their dislike of W.
Rogers his contentions Books and Papers? Of Francis Bugg's contentious Books?
of Iessery Bullok's cententious Books? Of Susan Aldridge her contentious
Papers, which are stuffed with such base Reflections and hellish Names, as
sufficiently manifest from whence that Spirit came that gave them forth: Yet
these (so great is their Partiality and Injustice) they can dispense with well
enough. These, or so many of them as they think suitable to their Service, they
can secretly scatter and spread abroad, and yet (which shows the falseness of
their Spirit) cry out against contentious Books and Papers that teach People
hellish Names.

As for being stirred up to deny the Testimony and Prayers of such whom these
men say they believe the Lord has gifted for that Service; they need not lay
that upon any Papers. Certain it is that the holy God, who hates Hypocrisy,
and loathes Dissimulation, has by his immediate Power stirred up the Spirits
of many faithful Friends, in these as well as in other parts, to deny the
Testimony and Prayers of this Hypocritical Generation, who to the World have
published Friends to be Apostates, Innovators, Introducers of Popery,
Idolaters* setters up of Images Idol-Prophets, a treacherous Company, possessed
with the Spirit of Belial, mercenary Judges, self-seeking slavish Drudges led
by Satan, with much more such filthy stuff; and yet (for some evil ends or
other) will thrust into our Meetings, and attempt to offer their unacceptable
Gifts amongst us, and be very angry too, if they are not received and owned by
us. Hear, O Heavens, and give Ear O Earth! Was the like ever known in any Age
or Nation! Can a Parallel be found in the Records of Time, since man had a
being upon the face of the Earth, that ever any men that had branded a People
with such infamous and unchristianizing Marks and Names, and had actually
separated from them, did fix themselves among the same People, to join in
worship with them, did bow the Knee at the Prayers of those whom they had so
stigmatized with the most odious Brands, and force upon such their own
Preaching and Praying, with envions Reflections on them, if they not comply
with, and bow thereto! yet thus has this party dealt with Friends. They have
openly branded them with the most infamous Marks, Characters and Names. They
have persisted in the defense thereof, and rather than acknowledge any Evil
they had done therein, they have chosen to rend off and separate from us,
thereby making themselves a distinct People from us, as one of their own party
(a small, but busy Agent in the work of Division and separation in these
parts) said openly at a Conference between Friends and them in Wickham some
Years ago (in my hearing, I. R. and C. H. being present) that They and We are
(...) really two distinct People, as London and York are two distinct Cities.
All which notwith standing, these men would fain be Preaching and Praying among
us, would fain have us receive their Peaching, and stoop to their Prayers; And
they themselves bow to, and seem in outward appearance to own and join with the
Prayers of those, whom they have thus exposed, reviled and vilified, and
separated from. O horrible Hypocrisy!

They add yet one dislike more, which is of such Preachers that instead of
Preaching the Gospel, spend (they say) most of their time in base Reflections,
etc. This is so notoriously known in these parts to be their own practice, that
I am persuaded there are few, if any, that have frequently heard them, but know
this to be their own Guilt.

These are the Reasons they have thought fit to publish, for which (with many
more not published, (for they love Reserves) and would willingly be thought to
have more behind) they say, Many Friends (meaning themselves and separate
Party) have rather chosen to meet apart, whereby they might peaceably enjoy the
true end of their Meeting etc So that their meeting apart, as they term it, is
here declared by themselves to be their own Choice. They do not say, God has
drawn them to it, nor that Friends have driven them to it: but that they
themselves have Chosen it; which is an Observation fit to be considered by all
those, who, though favorably Opinioned concerning them, are not baptized into
the same Spirit of prejudice and hardness with them. They have chosen to meet
apart; which is a quaint Phrase they have also chosen to cover their
Separation. O that they could come to mourn apart also, over him whom they have
pierced by that and other ungodly Practices! But though they have thus chosen
to meet apart, that they might (as they pretend) peacebly enjoy the end of
their Meetings; and, as in their 8th page is expressed, have withdrawn to such
places, where they might be at quiet, to enjoy the liberty of their
Consciences; yet, so restless is their Envy, that they will not let these whom
they have thus parted and withdrawn from, be at quiet to enjoy the liberty of
their Consciences, and enjoy peacebly the end of their Meetings: but ever and
anon they resort to their Meetings, whom they say they have withdrawn and
parted from, to make Disturbances, and stir up Contention and Strife there.
They pretend they withdrew from our Meetings, and chose to meet apart, because
they could not have their liberty to Preach and Pray among us, without being
denied and testified against. And yet now that they are withdrawn, and have set
up Meetings apart, as they say, according to their own Choice, they will not
yet be quiet, nor let others be quiet neither; but so natural is Strife and
Contention to them, for all their feigned pretenses to Peace, that not
satisfied with their own Choice, they still thrust into our Meetings, which
they have withdrawn and parted from, and will force and impose upon us their
Preaching and Praying, which by experience they know we cannot receive; as if
they did it on purpose to provoke, and draw forth a Testimony against them,
which might cause some disturbance in our Meetings, which they might improve to
the advantage of their Party. Judge now, O every impartial Soul, whether their
thus doing can proceed from a Christian and peaceable Spirit, which they so
much pretend to? or whether this Practice of theirs does not plainly speak,
that they are not really, and indeed Lovers of Peace, but seekers of occasions
of Strife and Contention; not willing to let others enjoy that quiet, which
themselves pretend they separated for.

Having opened, I think, the most, or most material Passages, which in their
Account they assign for the Grounds of their Offense, and Reasons of their
Separation, and thereby answered the End of my present Undertaking, which was
to undeceive you, by exposing their Falsness and Folly to your views, that none
of you may be further betrayed by them, for want of sufficent Information and
warning; I shall not at present take much notice of the remaining Fragments of
their Pamphlet as perhaps, but for your sakes, I had not now concerned my self
with it at all What they talk of their desire, that all that is amiss might be
forgiven, removed and buried while they omit the inseparable Condition of
Forgiveness, viz. Confessing and Forsaking, shows rather their want of
Forgiveness, than their desert of (...) or fitness for it. And when they say,
they are as ready to forgive as to be forgiven, it is a sign they are conscious
that themselves are guilty of those Ungodly Reproaching they mention just
before, and would fain persuade the Innocent to make themselves guilty too,
that, without further reckoning, they might discount one with another. But the
work is weightier then they are aware of. And they are gone far inded from a
right sense, if they do not understand, that Who go out by Transgression, must
come in by Judgment. If they are sensible they need Forgiveness from others,
they ought to seek it in the right way and proper course, whether those others,
who they think need forgiveness from them, are sensible of any such need on
their parts, and desire it, or not. For if they apprehend others fall short of
doing their duty, that will not justify, nor excuse these men from falling
short of doing theirs. Now as the right way of seeking Forgiveness is a true
Repentance of the Evils desired to be forgiven: so the proper Evidences of the
Truth of such a Repentance, are a free and sincere Acknowledgement of those
Evils, an hearty and godly Sorrow for them, and an utter forsaking of them. And
now that these men have thus intimated their desire of being forgiven, if they
shall not pursue these right and proper means thereto; it will thence the more
plainly appear to all, that in this, as well as in the rest of their work, they
are void of Sncerity, Truth and Honesty. But till they, and their Party, have
given Evidence of their Repentance, they have no reason to expect any other
Answer to their feigned offers of Peace, than that which, they say, has been
frequently given them, viz. That they are joined to a wrong Spirit, and no
peace is to be made with them, while they remain joined to that wrong Spirit.
From which as I heartily desire they might be disjoined; so I certainly know,
that whosoever makes Peace with them in that wrong Spirit, and while they
continue joined to it, will certainly break his peace with God.

T. E.
In the 5th Page of their Account they have printed a Letter, sent to the
second days Meeting in London, on the 13th of the 5th Month 1687. signed by
Joshua Kinch, etc. requiring an Answer by the 26th of that Month. To which an
Answer was returned from the same Meeting on the 25th of the same Month. But
since they had not Ingenuity or Plainness enough, to publish the Answer
together with the Letter, pretending they had no satisfying Answer; the Answer
it self is herewith now published, for the satisfaction of such as from their
dark Insinuation, might think there had been no Answer at all given thereto.
Friends, John Barnard, Isac Hemings, Joshua Kinch,
WE have read a Paper signed by you, which you directed to this Meeting for an
Accommodation and reconciling Differences, preventing separate Meetings, and
Re-uniting those to us that are separated from us in the Country, etc. And we
having well weighed the Contents, and considered from whom it comes, viz. from
and on behalf of such as have rendered us to the World to be Apostatized from
the Truth, Innovaters and Setters up of a Lordly Dominion in our own wills over
the People of God, Introducers of Popery, and but one Step from it, etc. It
gives cause of Marvel that after making and spreading such Charges against us,
and before you have taken them off again, you should make Propositions of a
more strict Unity and Correspondency with us then is at present. If you had
come forth with an Acknowledgment that we were not such, and had come to
unfeigned Repentance, for your falsely charging us to be such, it had appeared
Rational. But to desire reconcilliation with us before this be done by you,
seems very unreasonable and unsafe for you and for us. For if we are defacto
such as you have rendered us, it is not fit for you to declare an Unity with us
while such. If we are not such as you have rendered us, its fit you should take
off the approby cast upon us, and acknowledge your just Condemnation before we
can with safety declare Unity with you; and for your* saying, if the Separation
proceeds to be Public it will lie at our Doors, what do you mean, the Evil of
it will lie at our Doors? if so it seems there is an Evilinit, and therefore
you ought to avoid it, for provocation to an evil is no excuse for an evil in
the sight of God, if you think the work be good (as our separation from the
World's Worships because of Apostasy and Innovations was) why then do you seem
to make terms to evade and prevent it.

As to your complaint of Reflections and Exclusions in our public Meetings, we
say when you have condemned all those Slanderous and abusive Reports which you
have publicly cast upon us in the face of the World, and manifested the Love
of God dwelling in your Hearts toward us as Brethren, you shall find us as
ready in the same Love to receive you as Brethren without any reflecting upon
you for what is past, and be very glad to appear as Sheep of one Sheepfold
under our own Shepherd Christ Jesus, for which end we were called.

But while yon do retain those Sentiments of us which you have helped to spread
and publish against us, it is not possible for you to have a Christian Unity
with us: or that Love and Life can freely flow forth, from the one to the
other, in the fellowship of the Gospel.

Nor have we reason to Judge that you are sincere in your inclination to such
an Unity as in the Truth can be received: For that you seek to impose upon us a
subjecting our selves to the Ministry of some Men, who are known to us by good
evidence to be men of evil and vicious Practices, whom we could not for that
reason receive as Preachers among us.

And there are among us, have had experience how some of you have been so far
from Concurring to detect some of those Men, when sufficient evidence has been
produced against them, That you have rather seemed to covet them.

And as we never could admit the pretended Ministry of such among us who lie
under those Scandals, so since you seem to have owned this Separation to be an
ill thing (which we do readily agree to) and therefore neither can we admit the
Authors and Abettors of such Separation from our Friends and Brethren
elsewhere, so as to Receive their Testimony here, else we should become
partakers of that evil which we justly condemn, and you yourselves would appear
to avoid.

And we are well satisfied that you cannot justly charge Friends with excluding
or preventing any, who have been owned Ministers among us, who are not of the
one or other sort abovementioned; which are the true Reasons why they could
not be admitted of, and not because of any mere Nonconformity to any outward
orders or Impositions, as is unjustly and untruely affirmed by you.

Signed on behalf of the Second Days Morning Meeting, by Richard Richardson*
25th of the 5th. Month 1687.
THE END.

