THE Kingdom OF GOD Opened and Proved To be a Kingdom of Grace and Glory, the
one Thing necessary for all, and the Saints everlasting Happiness.

A Discovery of the Subjects of it by their Qualification and Conversation,
Scriptural Evidences for every one to try his Eternal state by; with Motives
and Means for getting and keeping a comfortable assurance of this heavenly
Kingdom.

By Tobias Else, Minister of the Gospel.

Imprimatur,

Gulielmus Sill,
Aug. 11. 1677.
Printed by T. N. for H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard, and
at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1678.

To His Most Excellent and Sacred Majesty Charles II. BY THE Gracious
Providence of GOD King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, Grace and Glory.
Great Sir,
THE Kingdom of God, the Subject of these ensuing Meditations, I humbly crave
leave to present to Your Majesty's Acceptance, Perusal and Consideration, as
containing matter of the greatest weight and worth to Your Self, and to Your
Three Kingdoms; my unfeigned hearty desire, confidence and comfort concerning
You is, that You will pursue to Your utmost Power, this great Command, Counsel
and Proclamation of Your Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in seeking first the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness: And that by Your Example, Command,
Counsel, and Proclamation (...) also endeavor that all under Your Care and
Charge may do in like manner, it being the great end of our coming into the
World, living in it, and dying out of it, next to the Glory of God, to enjoy a
better, namely, this Kingdom of God: For which end and purpose our
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks are made to
Almighty God for You, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable Life in all godliness and honesty; for this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved,
and come unto the knowledge of the Truth; which if You, and those in eminent
place under You, may be instrumental of, how greatly will it add to Your Crown
and Joy! For what is Your Hope or Joy, or Crown of Glorying and Rejoicing, are
not even we Your Subjects, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming, to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that
believe (because that Your Command, Counsel, Proclamation, Example and Charge
to every one of us (as a Father to his Children) to walk worthy of God, who
has called us to this Kingdom and Glory, was believed, obeyed and followed in
that day:) Wherefore also we pray always for You, and for all that are in
Authority both Ecclesiastical and Civil, that God would count and vouchsafe
both You and us worthy of this Calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of
his Goodness, and the work of Faith with power, that the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ may be glorified in You, and we in Him, according to the Grace of our
God and the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom I am, and ever shall be

Your most Humble and Loyal Subject and Servant, In all Faithfulness, TOBIAS
ELSE.
Kensinton, Nov. 21. 1677.
S. Matthew. vj.xxxiij. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.


SO fearful and fatal was the first sin of our first Parents to themselves and
their Posterity, who sinned in them, that we are all come short thereby of the
glory of God; and our estate is now both sinful and miserable: the knowledge
and consideration whereof should incite every one to the most serious and
vigorous desires, care, and endeavors, how he may speedily extricate himself
out of so deplorable a condition. By our wilful sin, we are fallen from God
grace and glory, unto the Creature, under sin and Satan's power, and being the
children of disobedience, we are also the children of the devil, and the
children of wrath. But God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life. He has also raised up his Son Jesus, and sent him to bless us, in
turning away ever, one of us from our iniquities, by giving himself for our
sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world. He also himself
took flesh and blood, that through death he might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is, the devil. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil; Even Jesus, who
delivered us from the wrath to come. Because he would have all men saved and to
come to the knowledge of the truth. And therefore in pursuance of his gracious
design of saving Mankind, he has here in my Text issued out his Royal Counsel,
Command, and Proclamation, But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.

In which words, there are two general Parts,

1 A Precept, in these words, But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness.

2 A Promise, in those, and all these things shall be added unto you.

In the Precept consider the word of Opposition, But; the Act, seek; the
Persons, ye; the Objects, with their emphatic^l Adjuncts and Particles, the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness.

In the Promise, we have the Copulative, and; the matter of the Promise, all
things; the manner of Conveyance, with its certainty, shall be added; the
Persons to whom the Promise is made, to you.

For Explication, seek, i. e. with desire accordin^ly, do with your might. This
word implies necessity, misery, mercy, duty, dignity, diligence, delight,
difficulty, possiblity, probability, care, fear, fidelity, fervency, constancy,
which were easy to demonstrate, had I time.

Ye, not only of little faith, ver. 30. especially, but this great multitude,
etc. and who ever else will, etc.

First, above, before all other things, chiefly, early, earnesty.

The Kingdom, a word of large extent and signification, which here at large I
may not open.

By Kingdom, is meant both Grace, Romans 14.17. the Kingdom of God is not meat
and drink but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. And glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2, 12. That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you to his
Kingdom and glory.

Of God, as the Author, Giver, Conserver, and Confirmer of it.

And his Righteousness. By Righteousness is meant Christ himself; This is his
name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness.

Righteousness especially for our Justification. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus,
who of God is made unto us Righteousness. So he is by virtue of the personal,
perfect, and perpetual holiness of his Nature, together with his active and
passive Obedience, the matter and merit of our Justification, through faith
reckoned and imputed.

And Sanctification passive and active.

Whereby by the Divine power, we are made partakers of the Divine Nature, and
thereby enabled to die unto sin, and live unto God, in holiness to him, in
justice commutative and distributive to and with others. Whatsoever we would
that men should do to us, do we even so to them. In sobriety toward our
^elves, in body, soul, and spirit. Gird up the loins of your ^inds be sober.
Present your bodies a living sacrifice, ^y, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service. ^mperate in all things.

And all these things, namely, that concern the welfare of the ^ody, which are
temporal, as Health, Peace, Honors, Pleasures, Riches, Protection, Provision,
Food, Raiment, etc.

Shall be added, cast in upon the by without carking care, in God's ordinary
providence, as in wisdom he thinks meet. Casting our care upon him, committing
our selves and ways to him; walking with him in our general and particular
Callings, painfully and faithfully.

Unto you, who in faith seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness.

This Verse is part of that famous Sermon, that our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ preached to the Multitude in the Mount; and therefore should command the
greatest reverence.

The occasion of the words is, first, Christ's observation of the worldliness of
the World, especially the Gentile world; for after all these things, namely,
the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, do the
Gentiles seek.

2. The fears, and thereupon the cares which possessed the hearts of the weak
in faith, that if they became the hearers and followers of Christ, indeed and
in truth, then what should they do for food and raiment? Why, Seek ye first the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
you.

There is not one word in this Verse, but is pregnant with matter, of infinite
unsp^akable worth and weight, and contains variety of Doctrines and Duties,
which for brevities sake I must pass over, with bare naming them.

Oh that all the Kings and Kingdoms of the world did but know, and well weigh
the mind, heart, affections, and bowels of Jesus Christ in this very Scripture;
the Kingdoms then of the world, would certainly and suddenly become the Kingdom
of the Lord, and of his Christ, which is the King of Kings desire: Should not
Kings and Kingdoms then desire it for each other? Oh that the desires and
endeavors of us all were as great, as good, as fervent, and as faithful, as
here they should be in so momentous a matter, as seeking first the Kingdom of
God, and his Righteousness.

But, as it looks backward and forward, contains these Doctrines.

1. All men naturally are carnally minded.

2. Weak Believers are even carnal, too thoughtful and careful about temporal
things.

3. It is the will of Christ Jesus, that they of little faith would not trouble
their heads and hearts with fears and cares about things pertaining to the body.

4. The best way to cure a carnal mind, is first to seek the Kingdom of God,
and his Righteousness.

Seek. 1. Every one by sin has lost his right to spiritual and heavenly things.

2. It is the duty of every one, especially Believers, to seek after grace and
glory.

Ye. The weakest true Believers may, and must, above all other persons, and
before other things, seek God's Kingdom, and his Righteousness.

First, principally or chiefly.

1. God's Kingdom and his Righteousness are the most substantial and principal
things.

2. These things are practically to be preferred before all other.

First, early. The best time of seeking God's Kingdom, and his Righteousness,
is betimes in our age, and betimes in the morning.

First, earnestly. We are to stir up our selves and others to seek spiritual
things with greatest fervency and faithfulness.

The Kingdom of God.

1. God has a Kingdom of his own. 2. He is the only Author and Founder of it.
3. He gives it to whom he will. 4. This Kingdom is both grace and glory. 5.
This Kingdom has an everlasting foundation.
And his Righteousness.

And. 1 Grace and glory are inseparable.

His. 2. The righteousness of Christ is God's Righteousness.

3 The Lord Jesus Christ and his righteousness, is the only way to glory.

4. Christ's righteousness is our Justification and Sanctification.

And all these things shall be added unto you.

And. 1. Temporal and Spiritual things are also inseparable.

2. Believers have a right to all things.

3. Heavenly and earthly things differ exceedingly.

All these things shall be added. 1. True Believers may for a time want
temporal mercies. Having nothing, yet possessing all things.

2. God will in his good time relieve all their wants.

3 God will give Believers convenient mercies, without carking thoughts, fears,
or cares.

Unto you.

Of little faith. The least degree of true faith entitles Christians to things
Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal.

Doct. The Kingdom of God is a Kingdom of Grace and Glory, which is to be
sought by all, above and before all other things, till it be obtained with all
possible care and di^igence.

The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, give unto me the spirit
of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of the mysteries of his Kingdom; the
eyes of my understanding being enlightened, I may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints,
that I may make it manifest as I ought.

That there is a Kingdom of grace and glory, the whole Word of God, the Twelve
Articles in our Christian Apostolical Creed; the Decalogue, or Ten
Commandments; our Lords Prayer, the Summaries of our Faith, Desires, and
Practice; the unanimous constant consent of the Universal Church; the different
state, disposition, and conversation of the Godly and Ungodly, and God's
various dispensations toward them, do admirably, abundantly, and undeniably
prove.

For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Giving all diligence, add to your faith,
virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to
temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly
kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity. For if ye do these things, an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So run, that ye may obtain.

There is a Kingdom of grace within us. Luke 17.21. Behold, the kingdom of God
is within you.

There is a Kingdom of glory without us. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. That ye would walk
worthy of God, who has called you unto his kingdom and glory Not differing in
nature, but degree; for grace is glory begun, and glory is grace perfected.
Beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same
image from glory to glory, that is, from one degree of grace unto another,
until grace commence glory.

Every Kingdom presupposes a King, Laws, and Subjects that are to be governed,
guided, and protected: Accordingly the Kingdom of God has a King, Laws, and
Subjects. The Lord Jesus Christ is King himself; the eternal C^uncels of God,
in his Word, are his Laws; Angels, all Kings and Kingdoms are his Subjects.

All power is given unto this King in heaven and in earth; he has a Kingdom in
every true Believer, where he dwells and reigns as King. The Sacred Scriptures
are his Laws, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not
in tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of their hearts: their b^dies, souls,
spirits; every member, faculty, power, quality, and all that is within them,
mind, memory, will, conscience, affections, thoughts, intents, desires, etc.
words, actions; and all their enemies, sin, Satan, and the world; the honors,
pleasures, treasures thereof, are his Subjects. This King of Saints is
personally in heaven, but dwells and reigns mystically in true Believers, by
his Spirit, by his Word, by his Grace. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and
he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. Now the Office of the holy
Spirit is by Regeneration to wash and cleanse our bodies, souls, and spirits
from all filthiness, that by his divine power we may be partakers of the Divine
Nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.

Ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Sanctify them
through thy truth, thy word is truth. And by applying also the blood of Christ.
If the blood of bulls and goats, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the
purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ purge your
consciences from dead works.

Ye know ye were not redeemed from your vain conversation with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ

The holy Ghost is given to purify our hearts by the grace of faith. This
King, by his Spirit, Word, Blood, and Grace, creates in us clean hearts, and
renews right spirits within us; and thereby also prepares our bodies, souls,
and spirits to be temples and habitations meet for his Majesty to inhabit and
dwell in. As our bodies are filled with our souls and spirits, so would our
gracious King have us filled in our bodies, souls, and spirits with all the
fullness of God. Be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess, but be filled with
the Spirit. Such is the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man, that
according to his mercy he saves us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost, which he sheds upon us abundantly through Jesus
Christ our Savior.

He would have his word dwell in us richly in all wisdom, for reaching and
admonishing one another. By his blood he dwells in us.

How free was he of it during the time of his p^ssive obedience, in his estate
of humiliation. He poured out his soul unto death. Being in an agony, his sweat
was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground. He offered his
side to be broached, that he might shed his hearts blood for our redemption;
the remission of our sins, reconciliation, our sanctification, and salvation.
In whom we have redemption through his blood. Without shedding of blood there
is no remission. He has made peace through the blood of his cross. Reconciling
all things unto himself, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.

The blood of Christ, through the eternal Spirit, purges our consciences from
dead works to serve the living God. Being now justified by his blood, we shall
be saved from wrath through him. In his estate of Exaltation, how free is he
also of his blood? by the virtue of it, he makes continual intercession for us.
In the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we have his blood given to drink,
which he tells us is drink indeed; and calls upon us to drink, yea to drink
abundantly.

He dwells in us by his grace. It ple^sed the Father, that in him should all
fullness dwell; a fullness of grace and truth. The fullness of him that fi leth
all in all. That of his fullness we all might receive grace for grace. Through
him great grace was upon all the Apostles, and many of the Primitive
Christians. He that descended, is the same also that ascended far above all
heavens, that he might fill all things, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors and Teachers, with gifts and graces; for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: Till we
all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
That we henceforth be no more children, t^ssed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive: But speaking the truth in love, may grow
up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ: from whom the whole
body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes
increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love.

The Universal Church is the body of Christ, his Spirit, the virtue of his
Blood, his Word, Graces, and Comforts, are the life, welfare and soul of it.
Christ our King dwells in this his body, and every member of it, which is his
Kingdom, by righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. He covers his body
with the robe of his righteousness for their Justification, which is their
upper garment: And to the Church, the Lamb's Wife, is granted, that she should
be arrayed in fine linen, her under garment, which is righteousness for
Sanctification, and purity both in body, soul, spirit, and conversation. The
very God of peace sanctify you wholly: And I pray God your whole spirit, and
soul, and body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus.

This Church or Body of Christ, looking for new Heavens and a new Earth,
wherein dwells righteousness, is diligently to be found of him in peace,
without spot and blameless. And knowing the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that though he was rich, yet for the sake of his Body, which is the Church, he
became poor, that through his poverty it might be made rich; through him have
an access by one Spirit unto the Father of lights, from whom comes every good
gift, and every perfect gift, whether of Nature, of Grace, or of Glory. For the
Lord God is a sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory; no good thing
will he with hold from them that walk uprightly. The spirit of power, of love,
and of a sound mind, are his gift, which is renewed in knowledge, after the
image of him that created the new man, to be renewed in the spirit of his mind.
For that the soul be without knowledge is not good, especially the knowledge of
God and Jesus Christ, and him crucified; all other knowledge shall vanish away,
but this is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent. And though the ungodly like not to retain God in their
knowledge, and are so far besides themselves, as to say unto God, Depart from
us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: Notwithstanding that he has
said to a people of no understanding, that he that made them, will not have
mercy on them, and he that formed them, will show them no favor, while they
walk in the vanity of their minds, having the understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their hearts: in whom the god of this world has blinded
the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, which is the image of God, should shine unto them. And therefore this
is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that does evil,
hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be
discerned or reproved. Yet to them who were sometimes darkness, but now are
light in the Lord, and walk as children of the light, they determine to know
nothing, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. Yea doubtless, they count all
things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, for whom
they suffer the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that they may
win Christ; and be found in him, not having their own righteousness, which is
of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith; that they may know him, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death, if by any means they may attain unto the resurrection of the dead;
not as though they had already attained, either were already perfect, but
humbly taking God at his word, that then shall they know: If they follow on to
know the Lord, follow after; if that they may apprehend that for which also
they are apprehended of Christ Jesus: For the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of glory, has given unto them the spirit of wisdom and revelation in
the knowledge of him: the eyes of their understanding being enlightened, they
know what is the hope of his calling, and what is the riches of the glory of
his inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power
to them who believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own
right hand in the heavenly places. And though there be some that have only the
form of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law and Gospel, and so have but a
form of godliness; such are they, who profess that they know God, yet glorify
him not as God, but in works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient,
and unto every good work reprobate, or void of judgment, who resist the truth:
Men of corrupt minds, reprobate, of no judgment concerning the doctrine or
grace of faith: Of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive
silly women, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, because they will not endure
sound doctrine; but after their own lusts, they heap to themselves Teachers,
having itching ears, and turn away their ears from hearing the truth, and are
turned unto fables: not consenting to wholesome words, even the words of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness; being
proud, knowing nothing, doting fools, or sick about questions and strifes of
words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings and surmising, perverse disputings
of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth; supposing that gain of
honor by their doubtful disputations is godliness. From such, let the humble
and weak in faith turn away.

I say, though there be some, who for the time ought to be Teachers, yet have
need that one teach them again, which be the first principles of the Oracles of
God; and are become such, as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. For
every one that uses milk, is unskilful, and has no experience in the word of
righteousness, for he is a babe. Yet for those who are truly enlightened, and
have both tasted of, and relished the heavenly gift, and the good word of God,
and have been made partakers of the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of council, and the spirit of knowledge, making
them of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord; even those that by reason
of use, or habit, or perfection, have their senses exercised to discern both
good and evil. They abhor the evil, and cleave to that which is good, being
transformed by the renewing of their minds, they prove and try what is that
good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God; for a good understanding have
all they that do thereafter. And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep
his commandments. Hereby know we also that we are in him, and he in us. For if
a man keep my words, says Christ, we will come unto him, and make our abode
with him. But he that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him. Christ will profess to such a one, Depart
from me, thou worker of iniquity, I never knew thee. But he who loves God, not
in word, or in tongue, but in deed and in truth, is known of him, and knows
God, and approves things that are excellent; even whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report.
Growing also in grace, abounding in love more and more, and in the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and in all judgment or sense, minding, savouring,
favoring the things of the Spirit, as they that are after the Spirit. For as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, being spiritually minded, serve him in
newness of spirit, mind not high things, but content themselves with mean
things. Take not thought for their life, what they shall eat, or what they
shall drink, nor yet for the body what they shall put on; knowing the life to
be more worth than meat, and the body than raiment; and that meats are but for
the belly, and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it and them. And
the body is for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. And though there are many
whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame; men of the world,
which have their portion in this life, and whose belly God fills with his hid
treasures: who say, Who will show us any good? trusting in uncertain riches,
that will be rich, and therefore minding altogether earthly things, fall into
temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts. For the love
of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they have
erred, or been seduced from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows, and turn thereby enemies to the cross of Christ, which should be their
glory; whereby the world should be crucified to them, and they unto the world,
whose end is to be drowned in destruction and perdition. Yet are there some of
the mind of the Spirit, that godliness with contentment is great gain; and
therefore having food and raiment, their conversation being in heaven, are,
without covetousness, content with such things as they have: knowing they
brought nothing into this world, and it is certain they can carry nothing out:
who in respect of want have learned, whatsoever state they are in, therewith to
be content: Knowing how to be abased, and how to abound; every where, and in
all things instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to
suffer need; careful for nothing, in every thing by prayer, and supplication,
with thanksgiving, making their requests known unto God their heavenly Father,
who knows that they have need of all these things, namely, food and raiment:
and therefore take no thought what to eat or drink, or wherewithal to be
clothed; for he that feeds the fowls, will much more feed them; and arrays the
Lilies of the field, and clothes the grass, will much more array (if need be)
however cloth the little in faith. And this should silence all our doubts,
cares, and fears, as to our protection and provision for this life, that if God
has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things. While worldlings are cumbred with many
things, and troubled about much serving, the minds of heavenly believers are
taken up with the one thing necessary.

One thing they desire of the Lord, which they seek after, that they may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of their life, to behold the beauty of
the Lord, and to enquire in his temple; where every one speaks of his glory,
even his kingdom of grace and glory. They long for, and think long till the
time, that all spe^k the same thing, and that there be no division among us,
through diversity of judgment, one of Paul, another of Apollos, and I of
Cephas, and I of Christ, as if Christ were divided, the Language of such as are
Carnal; but, that we be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the
same judgment, that being like minded one toward another, after the example of
Christ Jesus, we may, with one Mouth, glorify God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to the fulfilling of our mutual Joy, and the Joy of our Lord,
when we are like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one
mind, that being knit together in love, the way to all riches, of the full
assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of
the Father, and of Christ; for, as many as be perfect, be thus minded, whereto
they have already attained, to walk by the same rule, to mind the same things;
and, if in any thing, any of them be otherwise minded, to wait in brotherly
loving Union and Communion with each other, till God reveal even the truth to
them, as it is in Christ Jesus.

Let this mind be in us which was also in Christ Jesus, that nothing be done
through strife, or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other
better than themselves; not judging one another any more; but, judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to f^ll in his
brothers way: Let us rather follow after the things which make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another, with all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace; for he that in these things serves Christ
is acceptable to God, and approved of Men; for, there is but one Body, and one
Spirit, even as we are called in one hope of our Calling; one Lord, one Faith,
one Doctrine of Faith, one Grace of Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all. Christ's Prayer was for
our pr^ctise herein, four times in his last Prayer, he prays his Father that
Believers may be one upon this account, that the World may believe and know
that the Father has sent him, and the glory that his Father gave him he has
given them, that they may be one, that they may be perf^ct, that the World may
know, that I have loved them as thou have loved me. Behold then, how good, and
how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity: the blessing of
life, temporal, spiritual, and eternal is the fruit of it. What Man is he that
desires life, and loves many days that he may see good? let him seek the
peace of unity, and pursue it; and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace
of them that make peace; where ever it is the Lord will command the blessing,
even life for evermore. The Kingdom of Grace and Glory, is a Kingdom of Peace
also; Peace, as it is a Grace, is part of this Kingdom; as it is a Blessing,
the Lord will bless his People with Peace; so it is the Privilege of this
Kingdom, the beauty and strength of it: It must needs be a peaceable Kingdom,
when the founder of it is the God of Peace; the King of it a Prince of Peace;
the Gospel of the Kingdom a Gospel of Peace; the Preachers of it Ministers of
Peace; the Subjects of it the Children of Peace; the Laws of it Counsels of
Peace; the Senators of it Counselors of Peace: Indeed, in this Kingdom, there
is some noise of weapons, for the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that
we cannot do ^he things that we would; no Peace without this war between Saints
and Satan and Sinners, the Flesh, and the World. Your Adversary the Devil, a
roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour. Saints have a Law in
their members warring against the law of their mind, and bringing them into
captivity to the law of sin which is in their members; and he that is born
after the flesh persecuteth him that is born after the spirit; all that is in
the World, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life must be overcome. The good fight of Faith must be fought against the
Devil, whom resist steadfast in the faith; against the World, for this is the
Victory that ^vercometh the World even our Faith, against the flesh, mortify
the deeds of the Body through the spirit, mortify therefore your members,
purifying our hearts by Faith, a Faith that works by love, and works love
in their souls, who obey the truth through the spirit unto unfeigned love, not
only of Brethren, but Enemies, so that they can love them with pure hearts
fervently: That we may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, we
wrestle, not only against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against
Powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this World, against spiritual
wickedness in high pl^ces, we must take unto our selves the whole armor of
God, having our loins girt about with truth, and having on the breast plate of
righteousness, and our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace;
above all, taking the shield of Faith, wherewith we shall be able to quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked; and Hope, the Helmet of Salvation, the Sword of
the Spirit, which is the word of God; Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit,
and watching ^hereunto with all perseverance, whereby we shall be more than
Conquerors, through him that loved us; nothing shall be able to separate us
from the love of Christ, not Tribulation (though we must, through much
Tribulations, enter into the Kingdom of God) or Distress, or Persecution, or
Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword; neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels,
nor Principalities, nor Powers, ^or things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: So, that in this warfare,
though the way be not Peace, yet the end of it is Peace; it yields the
Peaceable Fruit of Righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby, even
that Peace which passes all understanding, and Joy which is unspeakable and
full of glory. The Kingdom of God, whether the Kingdom of Satan will or no,
will be the kingdom of Righteousness, of Peace, and of Joy in the Holy Ghost to
the seekers of it, the fighters for it: the kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force. By Repentance toward God, and
Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, we enter into the kingdom of God, and this
Kingdom of God enters into us: by Repentance toward God we are delivered from
the power of darkness; by Faith we are tra^sl^ted into the kingdom of his dear
Son; Repentance turns Sin, Satan, and the World out ^f the heart, that Faith
may let Christ into it: the voice of Faith is, Lift up your heads O ye gates,
and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that the King of Glory may come in; Who
is this King of Glory? Christ, who dwells in the heart by Faith; and where
Christ is, he has his kingdom of Grace: As many as receive him, or that
believe on his Name, of his fullness receive Grace for Grace; Christ and his
Grace are inseparable; he that has the Son has life; he that has not the Son
has not life: our life is hid with Christ in God.

Christ is Gods first and greatest Gift; himself tells us, he is the Gift of
God, given to the World of Mankind before the foundation of the World, in Gods
everlasting Decree; and, with, in, and through him, has given all things
pertaining to Life and Godliness, even from the first Grace of Election* to the
last Gift of Eternal Life.

Election, According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the
World.

Acceptance of our persons, according to the good pleasure of his will, he
has made us accepted in the Beloved.

Creation. To us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and
we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

Redemption. In him we have Redemption, through his Blood, according to the
riches of his Grace. A General Redemption we thus judge; That if one died for
all, then were all dead; dead in sins and trespasses, dead in Law, and that he
died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves*
but unto him which died for them, by the Grace of God he tasted death for every
man.

Regeneration The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ; therefore, if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature; all
things are past away, behold all things are become new.

Justification. By the offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to
Condemnation: even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all
men, unto Justification of Life; in whom we have the forgiveness of our sins,
according to the riches of his Grace; that they may receive forgiveness of sins
by Faith, that is in me, says Christ.

Reconciliation. Being Justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ; the Peace of Reconciliation, God has reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ: God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself;
and, Christ in his Ministers, beseeching us to be reconciled unto God.

We, who sometimes were far off, are, in Christ Jesus, made nigh by his Blood,
for he is our Peace, that he might Reconcile us unto God, in one Body by the
Cross, having sl^in the enmity thereby, and made both one, having broken down
the Middle-Wall of Partition between us, abolishing in his flesh the enmity,
even the Law of Commandments, contained in Ordinanc^s, for to make in himself,
of twain, one New Man, so making Peace. Having thus made Peace by the Blood of
his Cross, God, by him, Reconciles all things unto himself, whether they be
things in Earth, or things in Heaven; and we that were sometime alienated, and
enemies in our minds by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled in the body of
his flesh through death.

The Favor of God, In whom also we have access by Faith, into this Grace of
Favor, wherein we stand* an unconceivable, unspeakable mercy. Jesus was in
favor with God, to bring us into favor with God; whosoever finds Christ,
finds Life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord.

In this Favor is our Life; this Loving kindness is better th^n our Life, next
to the Glory of God, I know nothing in comparison, or competition, to be
minded, reg^rded, sought, made sure of, and prized, but having, keeping, and
increasing in the favor of God. It was the happiness of Christ, as Man, here
on Earth, to increase in favor with God: David entreated this favor with his
whole heart. I know no chief good besides God and his favor: the whole
Benefits and Comforts of our Election, Creation, Redemption, Regeneration,
Justification, Reconciliation, Adoption, Sanctification, and Glorification are
summed up in Gods Face, Countenance, and Favor, toward us in Christ.

Adoption. The Son of God was made the Son of Man, that we who are the Sons of
Men might be made the Sons of God by Adoption: when the fullness of the time
was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, that we
might receive the Adoption of Sons: we are all the Childr^n of God by Faith in
Christ Jesus.

Sanctification. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of
the World, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: God
has from the beginning chosen us to Salvation, through Sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth.

Consolation. Our Lord Jesus himself and God even our Father, which has loved
us, has given us everlasting Consolation through Grace.

Glorification. There is no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus;
them he also Glorifieth, they are called by the Gospel to the obtaining of the
Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, especially at the day of Judgment, when he
shall come to be Glorified in his Saints, to give Glory to them, to receive
Glory by them; when Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also
appear with him in Glory. The Glory which God the Father g^ve his Son, the
Glory which thou g^vest me I have given them. Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory
which thou have given me. To receive Glory from them passively, actively, the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ is glorified in us, and we in him, according to
the Grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ: The faithful Ministers of
Christ, and Christ himself says, What is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown of
rejoicing, are not even ye in the presence of God? ye are our glory and j^y:
for this Joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross, despising the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God, where he sees
the travel of his Soul, and is satisfied. The general Assembly and Church of
the firstborn, which are written in He^ven, shall Sing this new Song to the
honor of the Lord Jesus Christ, in Communion with all the holy Angels, Worthy
is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power and riches, and wisdom* and
strength, and honor, and blessing: And every Creature which is in Heaven, and
on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are
in them, shall say; Blessing and honor, and glory and power be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

Thus out of the Fullness which is in Christ do we all receive, and Grace for
Grace; as Grace without us and upon us, so all Grace within us; namely,
saving-wisdom and knowledge, all riches of the full assurance of understanding,
to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ;
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in him, who is the wisdom in
a My^^ery, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the World, unto
our glory, which none of the Princes of this World knew, but God has Revealed
him unto us: Even the Mystery which has been hid from Ages, and from
Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints. The Mystery of Godliness,
which without controversy is great, God manifested in the flesh, justified in
the spirit, seen of Angels, Preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
World, received up into Glory. And, unto us, by his spirit, it pleased God,
says St. Paul, who called me by his Grace to reveal Christ in me. No Man
knows the things of a Man, save the spirit of man which is in him: Even so
the things of God knows no man but the spirit of God; of him are we in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom. For this end, Christ, as our only
Mediator, has taken upon himself the Office of a Prophet; a Prophet shall the
Lord your God raise up unto you, him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he
shall say unto you. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in
times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken
unto us by his Son, who was not only a Prophet, but a Preacher of this kingdom
of God, of whom it was truly said, Never Man spoke like this Man. For, he whom
God has sent, speaks the words of God; for, God gives not the spirit by
measure unto him: the Spirit of the Lord anointed him to Preach the Gospel to
the Poor; he sent him to heal the broken in heart; to Preach deliverance to the
Captives; and recovering of sight to the blind; to set at liberty them that are
bruised; to Preach the acceptable year of the Lord: All bare him witness, and
wondered at the gracious words, which proceeded out of his mouth.

Out of his mouth comes knowledge and undestanding; It is he that Tea^heth in
the w^y of Wisdom, and leads in Right Paths; that has comp ssion on the
ignor^nt, and on them that are out of the way; to give the know^edge of
Salvation unto them; to give light to them th t sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, to guide their feet into the way of Peace; and, to see that
^here be no wicked way in them; and, to lead them into the way everlasting:
which he does by his Spirit, by his Word, by his Ministers. Whom the Father
will send in the name of his Son, at his request; I will pray the Father, and
he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even
the Spirit of Truth, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you; and, at
Believers request: for, whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do,
says Christ. If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink; he that
believes on me, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living Waters: this
spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive, which is
the Holy Ghost, which the Father will send in my Name: he shall teach you all
things, that you need not that any man teach you; but, as the same Anointing
teaches you of all things necessary to be known, believed and practiced, in
order to eternal life: and therefore, where the Spirit of God dwells, there he
is a Spirit of Wisdom, of Counsel, of Understanding, in the fear of the Lord.
Naturally we know nothing of God, of Christ, the Spirit, of our Selves, his
Word, Will, Ways, Works, as we ought to know; the Natural Man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned; no not the first
Principles of the Oracles of God: Having the Understanding darken^d, through
the ign^rance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart. The God
of this World having blinded the minds of them that believe not, least the
Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. They know not
that of themselves, they cannot know themselves: The first beginning of true
knowledge, is to know, we know nothing. For, if any Man think that he knows
any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. Oh! How many wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked Sinners are there in these
Kingdoms, that think that they have need of nothing; especially the Rich that
increase in Goods: and others, zealous of, and with Spiritual Gifts, but not
according to knowledge: ^now ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is
in you, except ye be Unapproved, or Reprobates; who think of themselves more
highly than they ought to think: and that they are sufficient of themselves, to
think any thing as of themselves, being ignorant of this, that our sufficiency
for good thoughts, words and ^ctions, is only from Gods allsufficiency, who is
the Author of every good gift, and every perfect g^ft: These are Sinners
spiritually dead in St. Paul's Judgment. Awake to Righteousness, and sin not,
for some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame, and yet
pretend and boast of the Spirit, but not the true Spirit, the Spirit of truth,
whom the World cannot receive. Indeed, they have the Spirit of the World
visible, by their love to the World, and the things that are in the World; but
this Spirit of truth the World cannot receive. All the Workers of Iniquity have
no knowledge of God: the World by wisdom knew not God, nor Christ, or
Christians, though they are the Sons of God: therefore the World knows them
not, because it knew him not; for, if they had known him, and them, they would
not have Crucified the Lord of Glory, and persecuted, and put to death, so many
Sons, Saints, and Christians, 15 John. 20.16, 33. Nor the Spirit, because it
sees him not, neither knows him, nor his word; but err, not knowing the
Scriptures: Err in their Judgments; call evil good, and good evil; put darkness
for light, and light for darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; yet
are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight.

Nor his Ways; They are all gone out of the way; they are together become
unprofitable; there is none that does good, no not one: and the reason is there
is none that understands. The Holy Ghost says, they do always err in their
heart, and they have not known my ways, nor works, either of Creation, or
Providence: They regard not the Work of the Lord, neither consider the
operation of his hands, because they have no knowledge. But they, who have
received the Spirit, which is of God, know him; and the things that are freely
given to them of God; they know, that the Son of God is come, and has given
them an understanding, that they may know him that is true: This is Life
eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
By the Spirit of truth, they know the Spirit of Truth and Error, and therefore
do not believe every Spirit; but try the Spirits, whether they are of God: they
know the Truth, and the Truth has made them free. They also know Christ the
Truth; if the Son shall make you free, then shall you be free indeed; which he
does by his Spirit: When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into
all Truth, by the Word of Truth. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word is
truth: the Law of the Spirit of Life, which is in Christ Jesus, has made them
free from the Law of sin, free from committing of it; for, he that commits
sin is of the Devil; and, whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin.

Know ye not to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are
to whom ye obey; whether ^f sin unto death, or of obedience unto Righteousness:
whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.

^ollow not that then which is evil, but that which is good; he that does good
is of God, but he that does evil, has not seen ^od, nor his Son Jesus; for, we
know he was manifested to take away our sins: whosoever abides in him sins
not, whosoever sins has not seen him, neither known him; by his Word we
come to the knowledge of God. The entrance of thy Word gives light, it gives
understanding unto the simple, by the Ministers of Christ; for, the Priests
lips should keep Knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth: Thy
Teachers shall not be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see
thy Teachers, and thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the
way, walk ye in it: When ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the
left, they are sent to open Men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness unto
light. The Work of the Ministry, is for the edifying of the body of Christ,
till we all come in the Unity of Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ;
that we henceforth be no more children in understanding, tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the slight of Men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but, in understanding, being
Men, speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is
the head, even Christ. This knowledge of God, which is the first, and chief
part of the Image of God, is a principal part of the Kingdom of God, by which
we are delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of
his dear Son.

Repentance toward God is also from Christ: him has God exalted with his
right hand to be a Prince, for to give Repentance to Israel; which is not only
our entrance into, but part of this Kingdom of Grace; even such a part, as that
without it the Ki^g^om of ^od cannot enter into us, nor be carried on to
purpose with power to the Kingdom of Glory. This Repentance is a turning from
sin to God; till we come to God, it is a Confessing and forsaking of it, till
we sin no more, that we may find mercy with God.

It is a Godly Sorrow for sin, as sin, for the evil that is in it against God,
as well as the evil that is by it against us; it is a hating sin for it self,
especi^lly for that it is enmity to God, and neither is nor can be subject to
the Law of God; for, it is a transgress^on of the Law of God: It is an
abhorring of our selves for our sins, through the knowledge of God, and his
mercy in Christ, and a true sight of sin, with full purpose of heart to sin no
more; but, to live in obedience to all his Holy, Just, and Good Laws, all our
days. I have heard of thee (says Job) by the hearing of the ear, but now mine
eye sees thee; wherefore, I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. It is
a bemoaning of our selves, that we have been unaccustomed to the yoke of
obedience, both active and p^ssive; a following hard after an Incensed God by
our Transgressions) with strong cries, sighs, groans, a smiting upon the thigh,
being ashamed, yea, even confounded that we have sinned; an accepting of the
punishment of our Iniquities, and weeping between the Porch and the Altar; an
attentive, and intentive harkening to the Call of God; O Israel, return unto
the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity! with an echo; Turn
thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned, for thou art the Lord our
God; spare thy people, take away our Iniquity, receive us graciously, so will
we render the Calves of our lips. This is after a godly manner to sorrow unto
Repentance, for godly sorrow works Repentance to ^alvation, not to be
repented of: This sorrowing after a godly sort works Carefulness in us, yea,
clearing of our selves, indignation, fear, vehement desire, zeal, revenge in
all things, to approve our selves to be clear in the matter of sin, that we sin
no more lest a worse thing come unto us. The times of former Ignorance God
wi^ked at, but now Commands all Men every where to repent. The Kingdom of
Grace is at hand, repent to get into it, repent to keep in it, repent to get
out of it into a Kingdom of Glory; repent or perish, repent and be saved,
repent and believe the Gospel, for the Kingdom of God is at hand: He that
believes shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned. There is no
entering into, or abiding in this Kingdom of God, but by a Living Faith in God,
and in his Son Jesus Christ. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. As Christ
is the Author of our ^alvation, so he is also the Author and Finisher of our
Faith. No entering into the Kingdom of glory without it: for, we are kept by the
power of God, through Faith unto Salvation. As many as are ordained to eternal
life, are ordained to believe. God has from the beginning chosen us to
Salvation, through belief of the truth, that so Christ might dwell in our
hearts by Faith, which is the Bond of our Union with him. Christ Prays for
them which shall believe on him, that all may be one in us; by virtue of this
Union, through Faith, are we born from above; Whosoever Believes that Jesus is
the Christ, is born of God: as many as received him, even to them that believe
on his name, were born, not of Blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the
Will of Man, but of God: We are Justified and Reconciled to God by Faith; being
Justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ; and
trusting, or believing in Christ, we are made accepted in the Beloved, in whom
we have Redemption, through Faith, in his Blood; the Forgiveness of Sins;
Adoption into the number and privilege of God's children: As many as received
him, to them gave he power, right, or privilege, to become the Sons of God,
even to them that believe on his Name: We are also sanctified by Faith that is
in Christ. God now puts no difference between Jew and Gentile, purifying their
hearts by Faith; God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Now this saving Grace of Faith, is the Almighty Work of the Spirit of God,
whereby, with the heart, we believe all that God has spoken, because he has
spoken it: It is a believing this faithful saying, and accounting of it worthy
of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners; It
is a believing the record that God gave of his Son, and this is the record,
That God has given to us, Eternal Life, and this life is in his Son. This is
he that came by Water and Blood, even Jesus Christ; not by Water only, but
Water and Blood: and the rather are we to believe, for there are three that
bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these
three are one; And there are three that bear witness in Earth, the Spirit, and
the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in one: if we receive the
witness of Men, the witness of God is greater; for, this is the witness of God
which he has testified of his Son. He that believes not God has made him a
Liar, because he believes not the Record that God gave of his Son; I say, it
is a believing, that all things are, or must be fulfilled, which were written
in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, and in the Gospel,
concerning Christ and his Kingdom; not because of Men's saying, or Testimony
only, but purely upon the bare Word of God, and his Son, and his Spirit; for,
in the mouth of these three Witnesses, every Word of God in the Holy Scriptures
is established: It is a confessing with the mouth the Lord Jesus, and believing
with the heart that God has raised him from the Dead. It is an humble, and
thankful hearty receiving, or accepting of Christ for Lord and Savior, and
trusting in his Allsufficiency, as our one and only Mediator, through the
virtue, value and power of his Prophetical, Sacerdotal, and Regal Offices, to
bring us through all hazards and difficulties, in a way of Grace to Glory, in
season, and safely. He that thus believes, and continues to live by Faith,
has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death unto life. This Faith, by the Holy Ghost, which is given to believers,
works Love, and works by Love: The Love of God is shed abroad in the hearts
of true Believers, by the Holy Spirit, by knowing and believing the Love that
God has to us, we come to love God: Who can know, and believe heartily, that
God is Love, and not love him? God is Love; in this was manifested the Love of
God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the World,
that we might live through him. Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that
he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins: we love him,
because he first thus loved us. All God's graces together constitute this
Kingdom of grace, but Love is the life and soul of it; even Gods love to us,
and our love to him, and our love to each other, he that dwells in Love,
dwells in God, and God in him: There is a threefold love between God and the
godly, a love of Union, a love of Communion and Complacency, and a love of
Benevolence or Communication.

1. Like as was between David and Jonathan; the Soul of Jonathan was knit with
the Soul of David, Jonathan loved him as his own Soul. Jonathan delighted much
in David, then Jonathan and David made a Covenant, because he loved him as his
own Soul; and Jonathan stripped himself of the Robe that was upon him, and gave
it to David, and his Garments, even to his Sword, and to his Bow, and to his
Girdle; and said moreover to David, whatsoever thy Soul desires I will even do
it for thee. There is between God and the goldly a love of Union, My Beloved is
mine and I am his. The Bond on Gods part is his Spirit, hereby know we that we
dwell in him* and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit; he that is
joined unto the Lord is one spirit. The Bond on our part is Faith working by
Love; Christ dwells in the heart by Faith; he that dwells in Love dwells
in God. This is the most intimate Union, as near as Head and Members, Root and
Branch, Man and Wife, Cornerstone and the Building; which may be severed, cut
off, separated, and disunited: But, this Union between God in Christ, and
Spiritual Believers, is inseparable; because wrought, preserved and maintained
by the Holy Ghost, who is God.

2. From whence follows a near Communion. Truly our Fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Can two walk together except they be
agreed? There is an Agreement between God and all True Believers by Covenant;
the Covenant and Agreement that was once betwixt Them, and Sin, Satan, and Hell
and Death, is disannulled; and, a Covenant made with God by Sacrifice by all
the Saints: and, by means and virtue of this Holy Agreement it is, that God and
his People walk together in every Holy Duty and Ordnance; there is a Holy
Communion between them; a Fellowship in Desires and Loves; I am my Beloveds,
and his desire is toward me: With my Soul have I desired thee in the night;
yea, with my Spirit within me will I seek thee early: He brought me into his
Banqueting House, and his Banner over me was Love. Behold thou art fair, my
Love, behold thou art fair, says Christ to his Beloved Spouse! Tell me, oh
thou whom my Soul loves, where thou feedest, says the Spouse to Christ? Here
is a Love-Communion, nothing but expressions of Love between them, and mutual
Joy also. Draw me, We will run after thee. The King has brought me into his
Chambers: We will be glad and rejoice over thee with Joy, he will rest in his
Love, he will Joy over thee with Singing; in our Prayers and Praises we hold up
our Communion with him. Oh my Dove, that art in the cleft of the Rock, in the
secret place of the Stairs, let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy Voice,
for sweet is thy Voice, and thy Countenance is comely: and, doubtless, he that
calls upon us to Pray, will vouchsafe his ear to hear, and a heart to answer.
Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their heart,
thou will cause thine ear to hear: This is the confidence that we have in him,
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us Pray, and
grants our Request; so he hears our Praises, and Thanksgivings: for the
Mercies obtained by Prayer, we are to offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God
continually, that is, the Calves of our Lips, giving Thanks, or Confessing his
Name: This is to Glorify God, he that offers Praise Glorifieth me. There is
an Active and Passive Praising of God; an Act^ve, when in heart, tongue and
life we show forth his Glory. Thus David, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all
that is within me bless his holy Name; bless the Lord O my Soul. And St. Paul,
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places, or things in Christ: Our
Tongue is called in Scripture our glory, in nothing more, than in Glorifying or
Praising God; therewith bless we God. I will Sing unto the Lord as long as I
live; I will Sing Praise unto my God while I have my being, is the purpose and
practice of every faithful Christian: Our Lives should praise the Lord, then we
praise God indeed, when our Conversations are only as becomes the Gospel of
Christ. There is also a P^ssive Praising of God: All the Works of God Praise
him, his Saints only bless him: our Bodies, Souls and Spirits declare, with all
the rest of Gods Works, his glory; but when they are by Gods Spirit changed
into the Im ge of God, from glory to glory, and the faculties of the one, and
the members of the others are Instruments in tune, exercising Righteousness and
true Holiness, then they much more speak the Praise of God.

3. There is also a Love of Communication and Benevolence which is Mutual,
between God and the Godly. God is a Communicative Good he is never weary of
giving: We are too often weary of asking and receiving. God is good, and does
good. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things: he that will give grace
and glory, will withhold nothing that is good. If ye then being evil, know how
to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is
in Heaven, give good things to them that ask him.

We have nothing to give to God but what we have from him; the best thing we
have to give him is our heart; My Son give me thy heart: Our whole Man, and our
whole duty is entirely to be presented to God as a living reasonable service,
and yet when we have done all we are but unprofitable servants Can a man be
profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself? Good
Lives is profitable to all things and persons, but not unto God; we cannot add
any thing to God's Essential Perfections. God is so good, that a Cup of cold
Water given to a Disciple, in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose its
reward. Our Love of Benevolence to God, is, by his gracious power, a willing
what God wills, and a nilling what he nills; a doing what he commands us, as he
commands us; and a not doing what he forbids us, because he forbids us; when
we are good our selves, and good to our selves, and do good to others; when we
forget not to do good, and to Communicate, as we have opportunity; but, do good
unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of Faith, and
remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer
adversity, as being our selves also in the Body: then are we, if I may say,
good to God, though our goodness extends not to him, but to the Saints that
are in the Earth, and to the excellent in whom we are to delight.

There is also a Real Union, Communion, and Communication between Christians in
Love; Every Saint loves all Saints: By this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye have love one to another; and, by this we know, that we are
passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren; he that loves not his
Brother, abides in death. Spiritual Love amongst Brethren is an evidence of
Spiritual Life; as soon as we begin to Love, we then begin to Live. Such a love
as was between David and Jonathan, which was a Love of Union, Complacency, and
Benevolence, must be between all true Christians: So it was in the Primitive
times, notwithstanding their diversities of Judgments, in smaller matters, the
multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul; neither
said any of them, that any of the things which he possessed was his own, but
they had all things common in Charity; neither was there any among them that
lacked; for, as many as were Possessors of Lands, or Houses, sold them, and
brought the Prises of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the
Apostles feet; and distribution was made unto every Man according as he had
need. Were all our Doubtful Disputations laid aside, and nothing but Faith, and
Faithfulness, the Truth without Controversy, Love without Dissimulation, and
Righteousness professed and practiced amongst us; nay, were but this one grace
and duty of Charity, without which we are nothing, truly Known, Believed, and
fervently Exercised in the midst of us; How soon might we all meet together in
the Primitive Pattern and Practice? if most of our Praying, Preaching, and
Practicing were of ^ods Charity toward the World, and our Charity each to
other; the Love of God would be shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost:
that as touching Brotherly Love, we our selves should be taught of God to love
one another. God who is love, and the Love of God toward us well known, would
certainly beget Christian Love and Cha^ity. These words of God deserve to be
written in Characters of gold upon the posts of our Houses, and on our Gates:
Oh that they were written upon the Tables of our hearts! Beloved, let us love
one another, for love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God, and
knows God: He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. In this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten
Son into the World, that we might live through him: Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our
sins; hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us.
Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another: No man has
seen God at any time; if we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love
is perfected in us. Behold here the great Argument breeding and augmenting love
in and among Christians by profession! God is love, known to be so, in giving
and sending his only begotten Son into the World: This Charity of God to us is
the Soul of our Souls. Charity is the Soul of our Religion, not Bodily only;
for, though we bestow all our goods to feed the Poor, and give our Bodies to be
burned, and have not Charity, it profits nothing. The true Charity, the
Chari^y that suffers long, and is kind, that envieth not, that vaunteth not
it self, or is not rash, that is not puffed up, that behaveth not it self
unseemly, that seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks not evil,
rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth; bears all things,
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things, that never
fails; this Charity, not in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth; for
the Kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power, would make these Kingdoms holy
and happy. Every grace of God is good, great, lovely and precious, of infinite
necessity; As Faith, Hope, Meekness, Temperance, Patience, etc. but the
greatest of these is Charity in sincerity. Above all things we should have
fervent Charity among our selves; for, Charity covers a multitude of Sins,
and Love covers all Sins, says Solomon.

All dil^gence must be given, to add to our Faith Virtue, and to Virtue
Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to
Patience Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly
Kindness Charity; Charity is the Bond of Perfectness: We are bid, above all
things, by St. Paul and St. Peter, to put on Charity, to follow Charity, to be
found in Charity, to have fervent Charity, to be examples in Charity; Charity
is the fulfilling of the Law, both Moral and Evangelical; it is the end of the
Commandment: yea, of the whole Word of God; Threatening, Promising and
Commanding; all is but to bring back our Hearts and Lives to the Love of God,
and one another. Oh, if the Charity of every one of us all toward each other
abounded but exceedingly, What cause of Thanksgivings to God would this
occasion to the Godly or Charitable. There could not possibly be any want in
these Kingdoms, if there were no want of Charity; Charity is all for doing
good, both to all Souls and Bodies; of what quality, rank, and degree soever,
to high and low, rich and poor together: Charity is full of Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks for all men; for Kings, and for
all that are in Authority, or eminent place, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty; for, this is good and acceptable
in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and to come
to the knowledge of the truth.

By Charity God will every body should have food and raiment; and every Soul
its portion in due season. Charity would have every Bishop and Minister, as it
were another Christ, for going about, doing good, and Preaching this Kingdom of
God and his Righteousness; or another Paul, who counted not his life dear unto
himself, so that he might finish his course with Joy, and the Ministry, which
he received of the Lord Jesus; to testify the Gospel of the grace of God,
Preaching the Kingdom of God, not shunning to declare unto them all the counsel
of God, that he might be pure from the blood of all men: charging also other
Gospel Ministers to take heed unto themselves, and to all the Flock, over the
which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which
he purchased with his own Blood; setting them in himself an Example of
unwearied diligence, in Watching, Fasting, Praying, Preaching; not ceasing to
warn every one night and day with Tears: Serving the Lord with all humility of
mind, and with many tears, and temptations, not keeping back any thing that was
profitable unto them, but showed, and taught them publicly, and from house to
house; besides ministering unto his own necessities with his own hands, and to
them that were with him. If a Brother or Sister be naked, and destitute of
daily Food, Charity says not, Depart in peace, be you warmed, and filled; but
gives them those things which are needful to the Body. What is Charity but a
Work and Labor of Love, which God will not be unrighteous to forget, showed
unto his name, in Ministering unto the Saints? which every one is to do, and
show with the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end: But,
whosoever has this Worlds Good, and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up
his bowels of compassion from him, How dwells the love of God in him? The
love of God dwells not in him at all: for, this is the Commandment, that he
who loves God, love his Brother also; and he that loves not his Brother whom
he has seen, How can he love God whom he has not seen? What is the reason and
cause of Wars, and rumors of Wars, Nation rising against Nation, and Kingdom
against Kingdom? Of Men's delivering up one another to be afflicted, of hating,
betraying, biting, devouring, and killing one another, and of the abounding of
Iniquity, but because the love of many shall wax cold? Iniquity, with the
effects, would soon be at an end, were all our heads and hearts at work in
promoting this duty and grace of Charity.

I verily hope still to see His Majesty's Kingdoms flourish and abound in this
grace of graces, namely Charity; I have Charity for all, that they will be in
Charity each with other, save the proud and covetous. The proud which are
cursed will err from Gods Commandments, especia^ly from things of Ch^rity,
while proud; I have no hope of such: pride is for contention and division; only
by pride comes contention: Charity is for peace and unity against both. The
covetous, whom the Lord abhors, count their gain to be Godliness; an heart
they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children, which have
forsaken the right way, and go astray, because they love the ways of
unrighteousness; these are for Use upon Use, to swallow up the poor alive; From
these Persons, and Practices, the Good Lord deliver the King and his Kingdoms:
O my Soul come not thou into their secret, unto the Assembly of Men proud and
covetous, mine honor be not thou united. But Charity is humble, and the humble
are Charitable; Charity is not puffed up with pride, or knowledge, not cruel,
but liberal, and devises liberal things, and by liberal things it shall stand.
It is manifest, that these two cruel evils had a great hand in our late mutual
devourings; and, except God by his wonderful Power and Providence interpose, we
are still in Eminent and Imminent danger of them.

The fear of God is another principal part of this Kingdom of God: Indeed if we
take it in the comprehensive sense, it is the sum of Religion; but, take it as
a Grace and the fear of God is to hate evil, and depart from it: the fear of
the Lord is a fountain of life; to depart from the snares of death, it is the
way of life; and this way of life is above to the Wise, that he may depart from
Hell beneath; which can never be, but by first departing from sin upon Earth.
Unto Man, God says, Behold! the fear of the Lord that is Wisdom, and to depart
from evil is Understanding. This fear of God is bred in the heart by the love
of God: Ye that love the Lord hate evil; perfect love casts out the fear of
bondage, and lets in the fear of reverence: for this we have Gods Promise; The
Children of Israel shall return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their
King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness, in the latter days: they
honor the King best who fear God most. Nothing like goodness to beget the fear
of God, and due and true honor to the King; Love the Brotherhod, fear God,
honor the King are linked together. The fear of God is a fear to sin, out of
love and reverence to the Majesty of God: he who truly fears God, fears nothing
but sin, and none but G d and for God. How can I do this great wickedness and
sin against God, says he, who is tempted to sin? while he does good, he is not
afraid of the Power, because he is the Minister of God for good to him; but,
when he does evil he is afraid; for, he bears not the Sword in vain, for he
is the Minister of God, a Revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil;
otherwise he is not afraid, of him that can kill the Body, and after that has
no more that he can do, because he fears him which after he has killed, has
power to cast into Hell. This God he fears to sin against, and therefore fears
not to be cast by him into Hell: While it is his care to cleanse himself from
all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect holiness in his fear, and to
work out his salvation with fear and trembling. This fear is Filial, and
Reverential, a Child-like fear, afraid to dishonor God; If I be a Father, says
God, Where is my honor? An earthly Father expects and deserves honor from his
child, so does our heavenly Father from his children. The honor of reverence in
carefulness to please him, and fearfulness to offend him; This is the fear of
the Lord which tends to life, and he that has it shall abide satisfied; he
shall not be visited with evil, in this fear of the Lord is strong confidence.

The love and fear of God together breeds the best obedience, which is the best
Sacrifice: the fear of God restrains from si^, which is a transgression of the
Law of God; and the love of God constrains, yea helps to the fulfilling of it:
Who so despises the Word, shall be destroyed, but he that fears the
Commandment, to break it, shall be rewarded, shall be in peace; in keeping of
them there is great reward; Great peace have they that love thy Law and nothing
shall offend them: but unto them that are Contentious, and do not obey the
truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish
upon every Soul of Man that does evil: bu^, g^ory, honor, and Peace to every
Man that works good; even to them, who, by patient continuance in well doing,
seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, Eternal Life: This is the Love of
God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous: This
is love, that we walk after his Commandments. The obedience which is of, and
pertains unto the Kingdom of God, is universal and constant: Then shall I not
be ashamed, when I shall have respect unto all thy Commandments. I have
inclined mine heart to perform thy Statutes always even unto the end. The
Principles of new and true obedience, are Faith and Love, or Faith working by
Love, called in Scripture, the obedience of Faith; neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but Faith which works by love. The
love of Christ constrains us to live, not unto our selves, but unto him, who
for us died and rose again. The obedience we owe to God in this Kingdom of
Grace, is Active and Passive; Active, not doing what he forbids, not walking in
the Counsel of the ungodly, nor standing in the way of sinners, nor sitting in
the seat of the scornful; not walking after the Flesh, according to the course
of this World; but walking after the Spirit, doing the will of God from the
heart; doers of the word, and not hearers onl^; for, not a forgetful hearer,
but a doer of the Word, in obeying from the heart that form of Doctrine which
is delivered to them, shall be justified, and blessed in his deed. Blessed is
that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. Let none of you
suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as a Busie-body in other men's matters:
let them that suffer, suffer as a Christian, according to the will of God,
patiently, for well-doing, this is acceptable with God, to whom we may commit
the keeping of our Souls, and Bodies; also in well doing, as unto a faithful
Creator: Whether our sufferings be from God immediately; I will bear the
Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him: It is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good; or mediately from Men, Blessed are they which are
persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; Blessed
are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner
of evil against you falsely for my sake; such are to rejoice, and be exceeding
glad, for great is their reward in Heaven. All that will live godly in Jesus
Christ, shall suffer persecution; hereunto they are appointed, predestined to
be conformed to the Image of his Son; as in Active, so in Passive obedience;
even thereunto are we called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us
an example, that we should follow his steps; for it became him in bringing many
Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of our Salvation perfect through
sufferings, and his Soldiers also: When was it that Christians Faith did grow
so exceedingly, and the Charity of every one of them all toward each others
abounded? their patience, and their joy, Was it not in their Persecutions and
Tribulations which they endured? The ground of Persecution is the best for
Grace and Comfort to thrive and grow upon. The Primitive Christian hearers were
used to hear the Word in much affliction, and joy of the Holy Ghost: Christians
therefore should reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in them, even the
glory of grace, yea of one grace: ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season
(if need be) ye are in he^viness, through manifold temptations; that the trial
of your Faith, being much more precious then of Gold that perishes, though it
be tried with fire; might be found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory, at the
appearing of Jesus Christ. In time of great Persecutions and Tribulations, St.
Paul remembered, without ceasing, Christians work of Faith, and labor of Love,
and Patience, of Hope in the Lord Jesus. There is a glory upon them, which
cannot enter into them, they must enter into it; If ye be reproached for the
name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon
you.

Peace of Conscience follows, upon sound and sincere obedience to God and his
Laws; upon our Justification through Faith, we have the Peace of Reconciliation
with God. The Kingdom of God within is a Kingdom of Peace; as much grace and
obedience as there is in the heart, so much peace; Grace and Peace be
multiplied: The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. It is not Gods peace, that is
not the peace of Obedience: He that ordains peace for us, works all our works
in us; Thou will keep him in perfect peace, (peace, peace) or abundance of
peace, whose mind, thought, or imagination is st^id on thee, because he
trusts in thee. Let us be true to the God of Peace, the Prince of Peace, the
Spirit of Peace, the Gospel of Peace, and live our selves in Peace as much as
in us lies with all men; and that we study to be quiet, and to do our own
business, not being busybodies in other Men's matters; walking in the way of
peace, following peace with all Men, and holiness; casting all our cares on
God, being careful for nothing, but committing our selves and ways unto him;
and the very God of Peace will give us the Peace which passes all
understanding; and, will give us some understanding of it, which will breed
that Joy in the Holy Ghost, and holy rejoicing, which is unspeakable and full
of glory, which a stranger does not intermeddle with; and, if God see it good
for us, we shall have with all men the Peace of Love and Unity: when a Man's
ways please the Lord, he will make his Enemies to be at peace with him;
however, he will make him to love, and be at peace with his Enemies, which is
much better: this is to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect, and
merciful as he is merciful; yea more, when a many ways please the Lord, he
will make all Creatures in League with him. Thou shall be in League with the
stones of the Field, and the Beasts of the Field shall be at peace with thee;
And thou shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace, or that peace is thy
Tabernacle. But, there is no peace, says my God, to the Wicked, no true peace;
for they will not be at peace with God, though he beseech them never so much to
be reconciled to him, that they might have all this peace; they know not the
way of peace, they desire not the knowledge of his ways, or acquaintance with
him, that thereby they might be at peace with him: And therefore when they
shall say peace and safety, which will be while the strong man armed keeps
his Palace, and his goods are in peace; but, a stronger then he shall come upon
him, and overcome him, and take from him all his Armor wherein he trusted, then
sudden destruction comes upon them, as travel upon a Woman with child, and
they shall not escape: but the Godly shall inherit the Earth, and shall delight
themselves in the abundance of peace; if they cannot have it in the World, and
from the World, they can have it in Christ: In the World ye shall have
Tribulation, but in me ye shall have peace; peace within, peace of Conscience,
if not outward peace from Man, one way or other peace they will have. It is
peace they would have* therefore it is they so earnestly seek it from God, and
pursue it with Men; they Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, peace be within thy
Walls, that prosperity may be within thy Palaces: for their Brethren and
Companions sake, they say, peace be within thee. Since Jesus Christ has left
this Legacy to ^he Church, peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you,
they are at suit with God and Man for it; and, having a righteous Judge, who is
King of Salem, that is, King of peace; and a wonderful Counselor, both to hear
and plead their cause; the Spirit, the Word of Promise, and the Wise, Pure and
Peaceable, to be their Witnesses, doubt not but to carry it in Gods good time,
against Satan, and the World, who are Enemies and Adversaries to the Peace and
Prosperity of Sion: That the fruits of Righteousness may be sown in peace of
them that make peace, is the end of their desires of peace, that being filled
with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, all may live to
the glory and praise of God; for, herein is our heavenly Father glorified, when
we bear much fruit: The fruit of holiness to God, the fruit of righteousness to
Men; for, the fruit of the Spirit is in all Goodness, and Righteousness, and
Truth, Love, Joy, Peace, Longsuffering, Gentleness, Faith, Faithfulness,
Meekness, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly-kindness, Charity: The
best sowing-time for these Seeds of Holiness is in the fair weather of Peace;
though Persecution, through Sanctification of the Spirit, may be good to root
them, and make them grow where they are sown: And therefore we should follow
after the persons, the things, the means that make for peace; follow peace with
all men, till we overtake and catch it, as hunters, without weariness, till
they have got their game. Especially Magistrates and Ministers, the great
Peacemakers and keepers, in Church and State, are to follow it amain, with,
and for each other, who are Commanders of it, and Counselors to it: they who
Preach the Gospel of Peace, should be for the Peace of the Gospel. The best way
to gain all to follow after Peace, is for the Leaders to begin, hold on, and
hold out. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another; and the Lord of Peace himself give us
Peace always by all means. The way to be perfect, to be of good comfort, to be
of one mind; to have and to hold the God of Love and Peace in the midst of us,
is to live in peace: he is not a Son of God, nor a true Son of the Universal
Church, that is not a Son of Peace. The Kingdom of God, which is a Kingdom of
Grace, Righteousness and Peace, is also a Kingdom of Joy in the Holy Ghost;
Every Grace has Joy in it, and being well exercised has Joy accompanying it:
Joy is the flower of Grace, rejoicing with joy unspeakable and full of Glory,
is the effect of believing in, and loving of the Lord Jesus.

Godly Sorrow works Repentance, and Repentance Joy; they that sow in Tears
shall reap in Joy; he that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed,
shall doubtless come again with rejoicing: the seeds of Grace, with the showers
of Grace, and the Influences of the Sun of Righteousness, bring forth a crop of
Joy; they who walk in the fear of the Lord will live in the comforts of the
Holy Ghost; Joy, or Rejoicing is a Duty, a Grace, a Blessing Temporal,
Spiritual and Eternal: Rejoice in the Lord evermore, and again rejoice; rejoice
not that the Spirits are subject to you, but rather rejoice that your Names are
written in Heaven: they who are Justified by Faith, and have peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus, by whom they have access into the Grace wherein they
stand, rejoice in hope of the glory of God. The Lord is to be served with
Joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things. The
Light of Gods countenance upon the Godly puts gladness in their hearts, more
than in theirs whose Corn and Wine increases; everlasting joy shall be upon
the heads, and in the hearts of the ransomed of the Lord, they shall obtain joy
and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away: this Joy of the Lord is
their strength, it is strength to their outward man; it is not only strength
to, but the very strength of the inward man. A sound heart is the life of the
flesh; What is it that makes the heart sound, and consequently the body, but
grace and joy exercised effectually? David, a man after God's own heart, whose
heart was sound in Gods statutes, How often do we find him rejoicing in God, in
his Word, delighting in the Godly, and in their Communion? Thou art the God of
my strength, says he; How! O send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead
me, let them bring me unto thy Holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles, then will I
go unto God my exceeding joy, the gladness of my joy: The God of his exceeding
joy was the God of his strength; they cannot want joy that make God their joy,
the God of hope, the God they hope and trust in; the God they hope to see face
to face will fill them with all joy and peace, in believing, that they may
abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost: By this spirit in the
inner man, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ will grant unto them, according
to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might, with all might,
according to his glorious power, unto all patience and long-sufferings, with
joyfulness, that they can do, and suffer all things through Christ which
strengthens them; they know both how to be abased, and how to abound every
where, in all things instructed, both to be full and to be hungry; both to
abound, and to suffer need; to suffer for the name of Christ, for the name and
power of Godliness; for, all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution: but they rejoice, in as much as they are made partakers of Christ's
sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, they may be glad also with
exceeding Joy. The great fight of Afflictions, partly whilst they are made a
gazing-stock, both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly whilst they become
Companions of them that were so used; and the spoiling of their Goods they take
joyfully, knowing in themselves, that they have in Heaven a better, and an
enduring substance: What is Joy, but the Exultation, Dilatation, and
Enlargement of a holy heart, running the ways of Gods Commandments with
delight, power, patience, and perseverance, working therein a fervent
willingness to be, and readiness to do and suffer any thing whereby God may be
glorified; a rejoicing in the way of Gods Testimonies as much as in all riches;
the unsearchable riches of Christ, the riches of Grace, and the riches of
Glory, are the matter of this Joy; the beholding, by faith, as in a Glass, this
glory of God, our relation to him and his dear Son; and thereby our interest
ingrace, and right and title to glory, are means both to beget, increase, and
perfect this joy, which is the strength of the heart: What is the ground of our
hope and confidence, when our flesh and our heart fails us, but God our
exceeding Joy, who is the strength of our hearts, because he is our portion for
ever? All true believers must enter into the Joy of their Lord, which is so
great and glorious, that it cannot enter into them: Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of Man, the things which God has
prepared for them that love him; God has revealed them to us by his Spirit
here, but will reveal them in us hereafter: Which made S. Paul to reckon, that
the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed in us. And therefore, though now for a season, if
need be, the people of God are in heaviness, through manifold temptations, yet
they greatly rejoice, and Joy in the God of their Salvation. This is their time
to weep, lament, and be sorrowful, while the men of the World rejoice, but
their sorrow shall be turned into Joy, and Worldings Joy into weeping and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth for ever. The weeping of the godly may endure
for a night, but Joy comes in the morning; for a short night of sorrow, they
shall have an everlasting day of Joy: as a Woman when she is in travel has
sorrow, because her hour is come; but, as soon as she is delivered of the
Child, she remembers no more the anguish, for Joy that a Man is born into the
World: In like manner, those little children, of whom the faithful Ministers of
Christ travel in birth with until Christ be formed in them, What is their hope
or Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing, but their Newborn Babes, through their
Ministry, come unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature, or age, of
the fullness of Christ; these are their glory, and joy, in the presence of our
Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming, when they shall be presented faultless before
the presence of his glory with exceeding Joy; for, when Christ who is their
life shall appear, then shall they also appear with him in glory: and though in
these last days there are Scoffers, walking after their own lusts, saying,
Where is the promise of Christ's coming? yet such as are born from above,
believe and wait for the promise of his coming; because he has said, I will
see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from
you. The end of all things, spoken by Christ in his Word, is, that his joy
might remain in them, and that their joy may be full. The end of their
fellowship, and communion with Christ, and one another, is, that their Joy may
be full even here upon Earth. Whatsoever you shall ask the Father, says he, in
my name, he will give it you: hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name, ask,
and ye shall receive, that your Joy may be full: That eternal life, namely
Jesus Christ, which was with the Father, and was manifested from the beginning,
which the Primitive Christians heard and saw with their eyes, which they looked
upon, and their hands handled; for, this Life was manifested, and they declared
it, that they might have fellowship one with another; and truly their
fellowship was with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, came into the
World, and lived in it, to the end their Joy might be full: If there be such a
fullness of Joy in the Kingdom of grace, What a fullness of Joy will there be in
the Kingdom of glory? But, the triumphing of the Wicked is short, and the Joy
of the Hypocrite but for a moment; at the longest, his hopes and his joys at
death will give up their Ghost together; while the righteous have hope in their
death, that will not leave them ashamed; and the upright shall dwell in the
presence of God, where they shall shout aloud for joy; he shall guide them with
his eye, and counsel unto death, and afterward receive them to glory, and so
shall they ever be with the Lord, in whose presence there is fullness of joy,
and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore; unto which happy
state and place the good Lord bring the King and his Kingdoms, Amen.

The Kingdom of God, as it is a Kingdom of grace, so also a Kingdom of glory: A
glorious Kingdom is the Kingdom of God, infinitely transcending all the glory
of all the Kingdoms of this World. The tongues of Angels, and the tongues of
Men cannot sufficiently express, or their understandings conceive the glory of
this Kingdom of glory: Since the beginning of the World, Men have not heard,
nor perceived by the ear, neither has eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he
has prepared for him that waits for him. O how great is that goodness which
he has laid up for them that fear him, which he has wrought for them that
trust in him before the Sons of Men! O could we see and hear, and taste, as the
Queen of Sheba did Solomon's, the Wisdom of God, the House, namely the third
heaven, he has built; the Meat of his Table, and the sitting of his Servants,
and the attendance of his Ministers, and their Apparel, their Words, Works, and
Wages, their Acclamations and shoutings with Joy, there would be no more spirit
in us than was in her. The one half of the greatness of his Wisdom, and of the
greatness of this goodness cannot be told us; it infinitely exceeds all the
fame of report; happy are those Men, happy are those Servants, which stand
continually before this God, to hear, and see, and enjoy this his Wisdom and
Goodness; happy are the People, in the account of the World, that enjoy the
honors, and pleasures, and riches of this World; but, in reality, happy are
they who have God for their God. If St. Paul, who was caught up into P^radise
heard unspeakable words, which was not lawful or possible for a Man to utter;
Who am I that darkneth this Kingdom of Glory by words? without knowledge who is
able to comprehend the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of it, which
passes knowledge. This Kingdom is made up all of glory, the three glorious
persons; namely, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, are the
glory in it, and of it; there dwells the God of glory, the Lord of glory, the
Spirit of glory. This Kingdom of glory is not Gods glory, God is the glory of
this kingdom of glory. There is one glory of the Sun, and another glory of the
Moon, and another glory of the Stars; these derive their glory from the Sun;
there is one glory of the Sun of righteousness, another glory of the Angels,
another glory of the Saints, these also receive their glory from the glorious
Sun of Righteousness; there are Angels of glory, Saints, Vessels of glory,
Thrones of glory, Crowns of glory; no persons, no manner of things, to render
this Kingdom of God inglorious: God has no pleasure in wickedness, neither
shall evil dwell with him; the foolish shall not stand in his sight, he hates
all workers of iniquity: There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a Lie; Sin, Satan,
and Sinners must never more come there: this Kingdom will have a happy riddance
of them. The everlasting presence of one only God is the heaven of heavens, and
the glory of this Kingdom of glory. Behold the Tabernacle of God is with Men,
and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his People and God himself shall
be with them, and be their God; and God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, and there shall be no more death; neither sorrow, neither crying, neither
shall be any more pain, no more curse; there will be nothing of Hell in Heaven,
no more then there will be of Heaven in Hell: But the Throne of God, and of the
Lamb shall be in this Kingdom; there will be no need of Sun, Moon, or Candle,
for the Glory of God will Lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light of it: Truly
the Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eye to behold the Sun in
the firmament: but, with invisible eyes, to see the invisible Sun of
Righteousness in the firmament of glory; Oh how sweet and plesaant will that
be. God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all: this Light shines in
darkness, but the darkness comprehends it not. The blessed and only
Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only has Immortality,
dwells in the Light, which no Man can approach unto, whom no Man has seen,
nor can see, because he covers himself with Light, as with a Garment; for now
we see through a Glass darkly, or in a Riddle: God, his Word, his Works of
Nature, Grace, and Glory; every thing we see, hear, taste, touch, smell, has
an inexplicable, and unutterable mystery in it; now we know but in part, but in
the kingdom of glory we shall know, as we are known. It does not yet appear
what we shall be; it does not yet appear to us what God is: Who can tell what
God is? but, we know, that when God-man shall appear, we shall be like him;
for, we shall see him as he is, not in a Glass darkly; but then face to face,
which will be our blessedness: Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
see God; we walk by Faith, and not by Sight here; but in Heaven we walk by
sight, and not by faith; perfectly to see God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in
heavenly glory, and to understand the Mysteries of Trinity in Unity, and Unity
in Trinity; and, that great Mystery of Godliness, without Controversy, God
manifested in the Flesh, Justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, believed on
in the World, received up into Glory, Preached unto, and among the Gentiles,
even the unsearchable Riches of Christ; to make all men see, what is the
fellowship of the Mystery, which from the beginning of the World has been hid
in God, to the intent that now, unto the Principalities and Powers in heavenly
places, might be known, by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God, which the
Angels desire to look into, to behold with understanding at once, all the
secrets of nature, grace, and glory, according to our capacities, and to live
for ever in the perfect vision and knowledge of them all, will be our life
eternal. This is life eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. If to see the Face of Relations, and Friends,
especially Saints, be so desirous; but we Brethren, s^ith St. Paul, being taken
from you for a short time, in presence, not in heart, endeavored the more
abundantly to see your face with great desire; With what desire should every
one of us desire to behold the Face of God in righteousness? that we may be
satisfied with his likeness, and the faces of an innumerable company of Angels,
and the faces of the general Assembly, and Church of the First born, with the
beauties and comeliness of God, and perfect Godliness put upon them; to see also
a new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwells nothing but righteous persons,
and righteousness; to see the great City, the holy Jerusalem, having the Glory
of God; and her Light like unto a Stone, most precious, even like a Jasper
Stone, clear as Crystal, and a Wall great and high, and Twelve Gates, and at
the Gates Twelve Angels, and Names written thereon, which are the Names of the
Twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel; on the East three Gates, on the North
three Gates, on the South three Gates, and on the West three Gates; and the
Wall of the City twelve Foundations, and in them the Names of the Twelve
Apostles of the Lamb. And the City lies four square, and the length, and the
breadth, and the height of it are equal. The Wall thereof an hundred and forty
and four cubits, according to the measure of a Man, that is of the Angel; and
the building of the Wall of it of Jasper, and the City pure Gold, like unto
clear glass; and the Foundation of the Walls of the City garnished with all
manner of precious stones; the first foundation Jasper, the second Sapphire, the
third Chalcedony, the fourth Emerauld, the fifth Sardonyx, the sixth Sardius,
the seventh Chrysolite, the eighth Beryl, the ninth a Topaz, the tenth a
Chrysoprasus, the eleventh a Jacint, the twelfth an Amethyst; and the twelve
Gates twelve Pearls; every several Gate of one Pearl; and the Street of the
City pure Gold, as it were transparent glass; where there is no Temple: for the
Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it: and the City has no
need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the Glory of God does
Lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof. And the Gates of it shall not be
shut at all by day, for there shall be no night there: a pure River of water of
Life, clear as Crystal therein, proceeds out of the Throne of God, and of
the Lamb: In the midst of the Street of it, and on either side of the River was
there the Tree of Life, bearing Twelve manner of fruits every Month, which is
in the midst of the Paradise of God, which Jesus Christ will give to him that
overcomes to eat of, that he may live for ever. Who is he that has had from
the Father of Lights the least saving glimpse of this glory, that says not, it
is good to be here? Who has had also the very least true sight of the vanity,
insufficiency, brevity, and certain uncertainty of all under the Sun, that
says not. Behold! all is vanity and vexation of spirit: my eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor my ear with hearing, nor my taste with eating and
drinking, or smell with smelling, nor the hand with touching, and handling;
Vanity of vanities all is vanity, says Solomon the Preacher. A sight of the
glory of all the Kingdoms of the World, which the Devil gave Christ an
opportunity to behold, is but a glorious vanity, compared with that Majesty of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and that excellent glory which the Apostles were
eyewitnesses of; for, they beheld his glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, the glory of his people
Israel: were the Majesty, Beauty, Comeliness, and Loveliness of all the
reasonable Creatures that ever were, is, or shall be, contracted and comprised
in one Man; How Lovely would that person be to see to? but Christ, God-man, is
altogether lovely: How great is his goodness! and, How great is his beauty, who
is the beauty of Zion, the perfection of beauty? No wonder that he is the
desire of all Nations, and that all true Saints have one thing to desire of the
Lord, namely, To behold the beauty of the Lord, and that their Soul desires him
in the night, and with their spirit within them do seek him early: Even
newborn Babes, sincerely desire the Word Christ, and the word of Christ, that
they may grow thereby; having tasted that the Lord is gracious, at his gracious
Invitation. O taste and see that the Lord is good; not as still-born dead
hypocrites, who have only tasted, in a way of profession, the good Word of
God, and the Powers of the World to come, and so fall away, Crucifying to
themselves the Son of God afresh, by not Crucifying their Lusts, and being
Crucified to the World, and thereby put him to an open shame; but, by a lively
Faith and Hope, they have seen and viewed their Beloved from head to foot; and
can, by experience, say, My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among Ten
thousand, his head is as the most fine Gold, his Locks are bushy and black as a
Raven; his eyes are as the eyes of Doves by the Rivers of waters, washed with
Milk and fitly set; his cheeks are as a Bed of Spices, as sweet Flowers; his
lips like Lilies, dropping sweet smelling Myrrh; his hands are as Gold Rings
set with the Beryl; his Belly is as bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires; his
Legs are as pillars of Marble, set upon sockets of fine Gold; his Countenance
is as Lebanon; excellent as the Cedars; his mouth is most sweet, having kissed
them with the kisses of his mouth, and they, at his command, kissed him, least
he should be angry; yea, he is in the esteem of the poorest Newborn Babe
altogether lovely. The believing Beloved Spouse is also Lovely to Christ;
Behold thou art fair, my Love, behold thou art fair, thou have Doves eyes
within thy locks, and thou art all fair, my Love, there is no spot in thee;
thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, says Christ, thou have
ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. If the
borrowed created beauty of a true Believer, a Spouse yet imperfect, be so
really ravishing to Christ; How ravishing will the beauty of the Creator of
such beauty be to the glorified spectators of it in the State of Glory, which
Christ desires on the behalf of all Believers; Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am: that they may behold my glory
which thou have given me. The beholding of this glory is our glory, if Joy
unspeakable and full of glory is to be had in a way of believing and loving of
an unseen God, and Christ and glory; Oh what unspeakable unconceivable Joys
will the perfect everlasting Vision of these afford to the glorified! This is
that they are Watching, Working, and Waiting and Hoping, or Looking for that
blessed Hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe; for, when Christ, who is their Life, shall
appear, then shall they also appear with him in glory. Christ and his Church
long to see each other, not in a Glass darkly, looking at one another at the
Windows, showing himself through the Lattess, but face to face. The Spirit and
the Bride say come; Christ says, surely I come quickly, Amen; even so, come
Lord Jesus, says all them that love his appearing. This perfect beatifical
Vision of God, in Heavenly Glory, will breed unutterable sweet fruition in the
nearest Union, Communion, and Communication, between God and the Godly, as
there is an Union in grace between Christ and every true Christian, by Faith,
through the spirit, which is inseparable: So there is an Union in glory, or a
glorious Union between the glorious Trinity and all the glorified, beyond all
apprehension and expression now; and the glory which thou gave me, I have
given them, that they may be one, even as we are one, I in them, and thou in
me, that they may be made perfect in one; not one in Essence with God, in
Christ, but one by resemblance, or similitude; an oneness there will be betwixt
God and all the Godly glorified, infinitely surpassing all other unions here
below: The Mystery of Husband and Wife, one Flesh; of King and Subject, one
Kingdom; Soul and Body, one Person; Root and Branches, one Tree; Foundation,
Cornerstone, and Building, one House; are very great and Mysterious; but this
of Grace and Glory much greater, and far more unconceivable: those are as
shadows, and so pass away; this substantial and eternal: for Brethren to dwell
(even) together in the unity of the Spirit; in the unity of that Faith, which
works by Love in the bond of Peace. Behold how good and how pleasant it is,
beyond all expression, apprehension, and approbation! But, for the General
Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and the
Spirits of Just Men made perfect, to dwell even together in unity, with Unity
in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, through all Eternity, in that glory which God
the Father gave unto Christ, and Christ has given unto them, that they may be
one, even as the Father and his Son Jesus are one; I in them, says Christ, and
thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one: How good, and how pleasant a
sight will this be to behold? here, and only here, will the Natural and
Intellectual eye be satisfied, with seeing the hearts of all knit together in
Love; and unto all Riches of the full assurance of Understanding; to the
acknowledgment of the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ; and,
that Mystery of Godliness, which, without controversy is so great; God
manifested in the Flesh, becoming one with us in Nature, that we might become
one with him in Grace and Glory; for, by one Spirit are we all Baptized into
one Body, for the body is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of
that one Body, being many, are one Body; so also is Christ, for we are Members
of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; as Head and Members make up but
one Body, so the Son of God, who is also the Son of Man; and the Sons of God,
which are as head and members, make up one Mystical Christ: a Mystery great,
beyond the capacity of Angels to conceive; which things they desire to prye, or
look into, and is the subject of their continual and just admiration: The full
Vision and Fruition whereof will administer also to every glorified Saint
matter of the highest Adoration, and everlasting Consolation. Were this one
Promise, of one heart and one way in the fear and worship of God accomplished
in the midst of us, that we might be his People, and he our God, to rejoice
over us, to do us all the good he has promised us; What greater, or better
thing could we desire on this side Heaven? why, in the Kingdom of God there
will be one heart, and one way, and one work for ever: There will be no need of
beseeching Brethren by the Name of our Lord Jesus, to speak the same thing;
that there be no divisions among them; that they be perfectly joined together,
in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment. God, and all the Godly will there
be so well known to each other, through the Light of the Sun of Righteousness,
that there will not be the least shadow of division, or fear of any separation.
This happy, perfect, and perpetual Union, is the foundation of that Communion
and Fellowship between God, Angels, and Just Men made perfect, which is
unspeakable and full of glory. What Fellowship there is between the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, is a Secret to us, if not to Angels, and Secret things
belong unto the Lord our God; but, a mutual glorifying each other there was,
is, and will be, from everlasting to everlasting: and, how far the glorified
Saints and Servants of the Lord shall be made happy in the Enjoyment and
Knowledge hereof in heavenly Glory, is so much above the reach of our
meditation, that it ought to be p^ssed over with silent Adoration: but, verily,
and ^ruly, our Fellowship will be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ, through the Spirit, and with all the blessed Angels, in such a manner
and measure, as no Tongue can utter, or Mind conceive. For Saints to draw nigh
to God, and for God to draw nigh to them in Mercy even here, How good is it? It
is good for me to draw near to God. Draw me, we will run after thee, is the
Language and Prayer of every one that is Godly: but, when by drawing near to
God, we are come to God, and are not only nigh him, but with him; How
comfortable will that Communion be? It will be a Communion in the highest
honors, the sweetest pleasures, and the truest riches: Them that honor me,
says the Lord, I will honor. It will be our heavenly happiness to receive
honor from God, and to give honor to God; this honor have all his Saints. Honor
is such an excellency, that is naturally desired of every one; sinners and
unbelievers, who seek not the honor that comes from God only, which is the
only true honor, rather than live without it, will receive honor one of
another, though thereby they are hindered from the honor of believing in God,
and in his Son Jesus Christ; which is, to give all hon r to him to whom honor
belongs, and to receive all honor from him, who is the only Author of every
good and perfect gift. The making Man a little while inferior to, or lower than
the Angels, and crowning him with glory and honor in a state of innocence, made
David fall into admiration; Lord, What is Man, that thou art mindful, or take
knowledge of him; or the Son of Man, that thou visitest, or make account of
him? What admiration will it occasion to the glorified, to be made like to, or
equal with the Angels in Heaven; and then, and there, to wear Crowns of Glory,
Honor, Righteousness, and Life, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall
give unto all them that are faithful unto death, and love and long for his
appearing? When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear
with him in glory; not only like unto Angels, but unto Jesus Christ the Lord of
glory. It does not yet appear what we shall be; but, we know, that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him, in our bodies. We look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who will change our vile Bodies, that they may be fashioned
like unto his glorious Body, which is uncorruptible and immortal: This
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.
Our Bodies were fearfully and wonderfully made in secret, and curiously wrought
in the lowest parts of the Earth. The works of God are all wonderful, sought
out of all them that have pleasure therein: This curious Piece of Man's Body is
so full of wonderful mysterious works, in every part and member thereof, that
all the Anatomists in the World could never find out, or describe perfectly its
excellency. It is quite beyond the reach of the understandings of all Souls, to
comprehend the height, length, depth, and breadth of those excellencies that
are contained in the Body of Man: Indeed, sin has depraved it, and deprived it
of much of its glory; yet remains there that majesty upon it, that commands
reverence from all other capable creatures. There are Bodies Terrestrial and
Celestial, each of which have their glory, the one before, the other after the
Resurrection: But, some Men will say, How are the Dead raised up? and, With
what Body do they come? God gives it a Body as it pleases him: It is sown a
Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body; it is sown in weakness, it is
raised in power; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, a glorious
Body; Like unto the Body of Christ, perfectly free from all sin; from Natural
and Moral infirmities: no more pains or sickness for ever. Perfect and
perpetual health and holiness will diffuse it self into every member. The
united understandings of Men, from the beginning to the end of the World,
cannot conceive, nor tongues express or set forth, the Glory wh^rewith the Body
of the meanest Saint and Servant of the Lord shall be clothed in the Kingdom of
God and Glory; the Body has many Members, and those Members of the Body which
we think to be less honorable, upon these we bestow, or put on, more abundant
honor, and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness, for our comely
parts have no need; but God has tempered the Body together, having given more
abundant honor to that part which lacked; so that when one member is honored,
all the members rejoice with it: If such abundant honor, and more abundant
comeliness be put upon the Body in the state of imperfection and corruption;
What honor, and comeliness, will God bestow upon the Body in the state of
glorious perfection, when this corruptible must put on uncorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality, then will the head wear a Crown of an eternal
weight of Glory; The eyes will be fully satisfied with seeing their glorious
Redeemer face to face, and the faces of the general Assembly of the firstborn,
and the stately Buildings made without hands, the place of their everlasting
abode, with the honors, pleasures, and riches of its furniture, which from the
beginning of the World no eye has seen, O God, besides thee, what is prepared;
The Tongue, Man's glory, will be everlastingly employed in warbling forth the
glory of God, and the glory with God, in the highest Praises, in Singing the
Song of Moses and the Lamb: glorious things are spoken of thee, and in thee, O
City of God. The glorious Words which will proceed out of the mouth of Christ
will be the Wonder and Joy of Angels and Saints: It will be the Work and Wages
of the Glorified to be speaking to themselves in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, Singing and making Melody in their hearts unto the Lord. What melody
will it be to the Ear to be ever hearing this new Song, sung in perfect
harmony, with Ten thousand times ten thousand, and Thousands of thousands,
saying with a loud voice, Thou art worthy, who wast sl^in, and have redeemed us
to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and N^^i^n,
and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests; worthy is the Lamb that was
sl^in, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and
Glory, and Blessing; Blessing, and Honor, and Power, be unto him that sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. But, Why do I speak of
what is unspeakable, and undertake to write of that which is so unconceivable?
He that was caught up into Paradise, which is the third Heaven, heard
unspeakable words, which it is not possible or lawful for a Man to utter; and,
if it were possible for them to be uttered, it would be impossible for them to
be understood: The Ear will have its perfect hearing there. Does not the Ear
try words, says Job? no need of trying words in Heaven, where every one is a
perfect Man, not offending in a Word. It is natural to all, to natural Men
especially, to spend their time in nothing else but either to tell or hear some
new thing: as natural, so spiritual persons have their delectation, the one in
hearing what Men say, the other in hearing what God says.

I will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace to his
People, and to the Saints, even that peace which passes all understanding.
Faith, and all other Graces and Comforts, comes by hearing the Word of God
Preached and Read; the benefit of hearing here in this life, under the means of
Grace, is an unvaluable blessing. What glory then will it be to hear of nothing
but glory? every one there will be very attentive to hear what God the Lord
will speak, who has the words of eternal life. If all bare Christ witness, and
wondered at the gracious words which proceed out of his Mouth, when on Earth, in
his estate of humiliation, much more will all in Heaven bear witness, and
admire, and adore the glorious words which will proceed out of his mouth, in
his state of Exaltation; his mouth is most sweet, his words are altogether
lovely: here, here only will the Ear be satisfied with hearing. Let me hear thy
voice, says Christ to the Church his Spouse, for sweet is thy voice. If the
sanctified voice of his Church, in Prayers and Praises, be so sweet to Christ
now; How sweet will her glorified voice be to him in his glory? and, How sweet
will Christ's voice be then and there to his triumphant Church? his voice will
be sweeter than all theirs. In Heaven there only is the hearing ear, and the
persons and things worthy to be heard: What Instruments of Music there will
be, and Musicians to time and tune, and sound them, to delight and ravish the
sense of hearing, God only knows. The voice of Harpers harping with their Harps
have there been heard. Music upon Rivers of Water make the sweetest and most
solemn sound: At Gods right hand there are Rivers of pleasures, where there
will be such Music, as will ravish the ears and hearts of Angels and Saints
for ever. What spiritual Meat and Drink there will be in Heaven, to delight and
please the spiritual taste or palate, who can tell? Sure I am, there will be
feeding and feasting in Heaven. Our Lord Jesus will be the true Bread as truly
in Heaven without Ordinances, as on Earth in his Ordinances; and so will his
precious Blood be drink really and spiritually also: but, the manner of eating
and drinking there is such a Mystery, as cannot now be known, and may not be
spoken to. If every Saint can say, How sweet are thy words unto my taste; yea,
sweeter than Honey to my mouth? If the word of Christ be so sweet to a
Christian sanctified; How sweet will the word Christ be to such an one when
glorified? How sweet are the fruits of holiness and righteousness to a true
believer, who sits under Christ the Tree of Life with great delight? How sweet,
I say, is his fruit to his taste in the way of an Ordnance? but, to him that
overcomes, Christ will give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst
of the Paradise of God; which, whosoever eats of, shall live for ever. To taste
that the Lord is gracious here, is good; to taste that the Lord is glorious
will be best. The glory of the Body is but the Body of Glory, for our vile
Bodies to be changed, that they may be fashioned like unto Christ's glorious
Body; What a high expression of glory is this? When Christ was Transfigured in
the Mount, his face did shine as the Sun; and when he revealed himself to St.
John the Divine from the excellent Glory, his Body was clothed with a Garment
down to the foot, and his Paps girt about with a Golden Girdle, his head and
his hairs were white like Wool, as white as Snow; and his Eyes were as flames
of Fire, and his Feet like unto fine Brass, as if they burned in a Furnace, and
his voice as the sound of many Waters; and his Countenance was as the Sun
shines in his strength: so shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father; but, the glory wherewith the Soul will be filled will
be much more glorious, by how much the Soul excels the Body: The glory of ^he
Soul, will be the Soul of Glory; and the Glory of Christ put upon the Body and
Soul, the Glory of them both. It does not yet appear what we shall be; ^ut,
when he shall appear, we shall ^e like him, as in our Bodies, so also in our
Souls. We have, for substance, the same Souls with Christ* ^he same faculties
and qualities; as understanding, will, memory, conscience, and affections, with
their executive powers; which are so precious, that one Soul in Christ's account
and esteem, is more worth than one World. What is a Man profited, if he shall
gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? or, What shall a Man give in
exchange for his Soul? It is too good to be exchanged; none besides the
Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier of Souls knows the worth of them: They are
invaluable; our Souls are like unto Christ's in divine glorious qualifications,
having the perfect Ideas or Image of God imprinted upon them; consisting in
Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness.

Christ, as God, is the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image
of his Person; and, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be
equal with God, in his incommunicable excellencies; but, as Man participates
only of the Communicable properties of God, in this different from mere Man,
that being God-man in one Person for ever. God gives not the Spirit, the Gifs
and Graces thereof by measure unto him; but unto others the measure of the
stature or Age of the fullness of Christ, who is the head of the Body, the
Church: who is the Beginning, the Firstborn from the Dead, that in or among
all things he might have the preeminence; for, it pleased the Father, that in
him should all fullness dwell, the fullness of the Godhead bodily; to the end
we might be complete in him, and of his fullness, not only receive Grace for
Grace, but, with open face, beholding, without a Glass, the Glory of the Lord,
we might be changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory; Even as by the
Spirit of the Lord, now we see through a Glass darkly, in Heaven face to face;
now we know in part, there we shall know even as we are known. This is Life
Eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent;
we shall know him perfectly and perpetually; perfectly, not infinitely; his
Understanding is infinite, his Essence incomprehensible: we, at our best
estate, but finite, and therefore unable to comprehend so Infinite and Immense
a being; and, whether we shall have the h^ppiness of knowing his Essence or
Being, not only of seeing him, but of seeing into him, and knowing what he is,
as well as tha^ he is; since it is so great a question with Divines, and so
much disputed, and a greater mystery, I shall not dare to pry into it, but
personally we shall know God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; we shall know him to
be our God. Every one in Heaven will be able to say Infallibly, My God, and my
Lord for ever: which is infinitely more, than to say, Heaven, Angels, and
Saints are mine, with all their Glory. Every glorified Saint shall have the
honor, pleasure, and treasure, of having and enjoying one God for his
everlasting Portion. In the enjoyment of God and Heaven, all ho^ors, pleasures
and riches are only enjoyed: What honor God will put upon the glorified Saints
in Heaven, he only knows; but, honor them he has said he will; and, with
Titles, so many, great, significant and noble, as will give them the fullest
satisfaction. How empty, unsatisfying and fading, are all the Titles of honor
which the Great ones of the World glory in, in comparison of those, wherewith
Saints are dignifyed even in this World?

For the Sons of men to be called the Sons of God, is a Title of honor, that is
to be expressed no other way; but, with a Behold what m^nner of love the Father
has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God. All the Titles
of honor in the World together cannot make a Man so honorable as this one, of
being Servant to Jesus Christ. To be an Emperor of the whole World, to be King
of all the Kingdoms of the World, are Titles incomparably inferior to this.
Every Title given to Saints in Scripture, has so much honor, pleasure, and
profit in it unto them, as can never fully be set forth on this side heaven.
They are made Kings and Priests unto God their Father, they are Prophets, they
are styled, The Children of God, The Resurrection, The Kingdom, The Marriage
Chamber.
The Beloved of God, the dearly Beloved of his Soul, and the Brethren of
Christ; with many more so full of excel^ency, as the heart of Man cannot
conceive. It is made a Character of a Citizen of Zion, That he honors them
that fear the Lord. It will be the duty, work, and wages of Heaven, for Angels
and Saints to give the highest honors to each other; It will be far from every
one there to take away one another good Name, which is so precious a thing.
Next to the admiring, adoring, loving, reverencing, praising, honoring, and
glorifying the Name of God, they will have each others Name in great
veneration; they will have a Name given them, even an everlasting Name, better
than of Sons and Daughters, which cannot be taken away. He that has a Name
above every Name that is named, not only in this World, but also in that which
is to come, and gives them high and honorable Names, will preserve them so
through all Eternity: If they are notwithstanding blessed, when Men shall hate
them, and separate them from their company, and reproach, and cast out their
Name as evil; If they then are to rejoice, and leap for Joy, for behold their
reward is great in Heaven; How happy will they be, when they shall never hate,
or be hated more, nor ever be separated from the Company and Communion of so
blessed a Society as is in Heaven; nor reproach, or be reproached; nor their
Names cast out as evil; nor ever be guilty of reflecting the least dishonor
upon one another. There will be nothing here to obstruct the fullest enjoyment
of the fullest delight, their delight will be in the Lord, and he will be ever
giving them the desires of their hearts; they shall be abundantly satisfied
with the fatness of his House, and he will make them drink of the Rivers of his
pleasures; For, with God, is the fountain of Life: In his light shall they see
light. The pleasure of beholding this Light, of handling the word of Life, and
of living in the Love of God, will yield everlasting Consolation to the
glorified. Light and Life, and Love, are things so glorious, that the Essence
of God is declared by them. God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all. The
Son of God, even his Son Jesus Christ, is the true God, and eternal Life. God
is Love, and he that dwe^leth in Love dwells in God, and God in him. He that
Loves not, knows not God, for God is Love. For Saints to be clothed with
Light, as with a Garment, and to live in and with that Light, to which the Sun
being compared, is darkness; How pleasant and pleasing will it be, both to the
bodily and intellectual eye: Never will any eye be satisfied with seeing, till
God who is Light be seen. The pure in heart are blessed in seeing God; the
everlasting loss of the Beatifical Vision, and fruition of God, will be the
Hell of the ungodly. The pain of sense will easilier be born than the pain of
loss. The Vision of God is the Heaven of the Godly. O it is a blessed sight to
see God, and to be seen of him; If a glympse here of his glorious Majesty be so
joyous; How glorious will a full and fixed sight of him be in Heavenly Glory?
May I be blind to all the glory in this World, so I may live in a believing
foresight, and lively hope of beholding that inaccessible Light, which is too
glorious for Angels to behold, without covering their faces. This Light is Life
it self, the original of life to all, whether of Nature, Grace, or Glory: God,
in Scripture, is said to be the true and Living God, in opposition to false and
dead Idols: Life is his being, he is because he Lives; and, our Life is hid
with Christ in God, even that of Nature, of Grace, and of Glory; in him we
Live, and Move, and have our Being: Life in it self is a happiness. O how
precious a thing is Life! Skin for skin, and all that a Man has will he give
for his Life. The Life of a Fly has been thought to be more worth than the
World; The Life of a Man, doubtless, is more worth, than many Worlds which are
without Life: but, it is the Life of Grace which makes the Life of Man his
comfort; and the Life of sin to be a Living Death to him: But, the Life of
Glory, which is ever to be glorifying and enjoying God, is the glory of Life.
To live with Life it self, and for Life it self to live in us; How infinitely
satisfying will it be to them who are glorified? That we shall be ever with
this Lord of Life and Glory, is the most comfortable word in all the
Scriptures: If any Man serve me, says Christ, where I am there shall also my
servant be. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me. The
presence of Christ makes Heaven. It is our Life eternal to live with him who is
Life eternal; and, to live to him; for none of us in Heaven lives to himself;
we live there wholly unto the Lord. His Glory there is as truly our end, as it
is here, he will give to every one glory enough; but he will not give his glory
to another: None must glorify himself there; God All-sufficient will glorify
every one sufficiently. I will glorify the House of my glory, says the Lord.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory, will be the
Heavenly Ditty and Duty. Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever* Thou
art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. The main
end of our Election, or Predestination, Redemption, Justification, Adoption,
Regeneration, Sanctification, Preservation, and Glorification, is to glorify
God in our Bodies, and in our Spirits which are Gods: Our vile Bodies are
fashioned like unto Christ's glorious Body; so are our Souls transformed,
renewed, sanctified, and cleansed with the washing of Water, by the Word, that
they might be presented to God himself, glorious, not having spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing; but that they should be holy, and without blame before him
in love, to the Praise of the glory of his Grace. God is Love as well as Life;
the Life which he lives, is a life also of Love: What lovely living will it be
in Heaven to live with love it self? To love, and be beloved by God, who is
Love, will be the Saints everlasting happiness: God will for ever be in love
with all the Glorified Angels and Saints; and they again will for ever be in
love with him I Love them that Love me, says God; not only God Essentially,
but God Personally is Love: The Father is love, the Son is love, the Holy Ghost
is love. The knowledge we shall have of the Trinity loving each other, with the
love of Unity in an infinite manner, and measure, will very much contribute to
our heavenly happiness. If the Union, Communion, and Communication of Love,
between Husband and Wife, be so great a Mystery; How much greater a Mystery is
that, which is between Christ and the Church? But, O how mysterious a secret
are the Transactions of mutu^l love between Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity! If God so loved the World, in this was manifested ^he Love of God,
because he sent his only begotten Son i^to the World, that we might live
through him: herein is love, that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins. I say, if God so loved the World, What manner of
Love has he bestowed upon his only begotten Son? The Father loves the Son,
and the Son loves the Father, and the Holy Spirit loves both the Father and
the Son; and the Holy Ghost is loved of the Father and the Son; and in their
mutual loving and glorifying each other, as they were happy infinitely from
Everlasting, so they would have been to everlasting, though all persons and
things had never been created. Gods essential glory is neither capable of
addition, or diminution, by reason of its infinite perfection. God is not the
happier for Angels, or Men; he needs neither their love or service; but there
is no being happy for any Creature, save in the full enjoyment of God, and his
loving favor through all Eternity: his loving kindness is life eternal. We
love him, because he first loved us; he loved us from all Eternity; So God
loved the World, and by so doing, has engaged himself to love us to eternity;
whom he loves, he loves to the end: That which makes his love altogether
lovely, is, That he set his love upon us, because he loved us; no Merit or
Motive in us why he should love us: there were Motives and Merits indeed why he
should not love us; when, by wilful sin, we had cast away the Mercies of our
Creation, he might have cast us off, and cast us out to the loathing of our
persons; In the day we were born, and lay polluted in our blood, then he looked
upon us, and behold this time was the time of love; he then said unto us, when
we were in our Blood, Live. His Love was our Life. If God loved us so, when we
were sinful, What manner of Love will he bestow upon us when sinless? Our sin
Original and Actual incapacitates us to receive the Mercies, and enjoy the
Love, the Lord would willingly vouchsafe us: But, in Heaven, we shall be able,
and perfectly capable, and God infinitely willing to load us with all his
Benefits; God will never be weary of giving out his Loves, nor we unwilling or
weary in a Joyful and Thankful receiving of them, and returning the same to our
best Beloved. It will be love of the nearest union, the highest, and holiest
Communion, and the freest and fullest Communication. The glory which the Father
gave unto Christ, he has given to Christians, that they may be one in glory,
even as the Father and the Son are one, I in them, and thou in me, that they
may be made perfect in one. A Mystery that cannot be seen otherwise than by the
light of glory. From this most intimate union, there does arise such a
Communion between Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost, and the Triumphant Christian
Church, as will yield infinite and uninterrupted satisfaction; much of this
Communion will be a mutual Commendation: Behold thou art fair, my Beloved,
behold thou art fair; behold thou art fair my Love, yea pleasant! thou art all
fair* my Love, there is no spot in thee, says Christ of his Church Militant.
When Christ presents to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish: there will
be no want of expressions, for commendation of her; nor will the Triumphant
Church want triumphing matter, and words to set forth the Praises of her,
altogether Lovely, and dearly Beloved Head and Husband; when he comes to be
glorified in his Saints, he will be admired in and by all them that believe:
then will the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ be glorified in us, and we in him,
according to the Grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus; he will rejoice over us
with Joy; he will rest in his Love; he will joy over us with singing when his
Glory shall be revealed, that we may be glad also with exceeding Joy. When
Solomon was anointed King, the People rejoiced with great Joy, so that the
Earth rent with the sound of them: When Saints are Anointed Kings, by the King
of Kings, What shouting for Joy then will there be in Heaven? There is Joy in
the presence of the Angels of God, over one sinner that repents. When all
Sinners, by Repentance, have commenced Saints in Glory; then, not only the
Angels of God, but the God of Angels will rejoice over them with Joy
unconceivable and full of Glory: Then will God supply all their needs according
to his riches in Glory, by Jesus Christ; the riches of the glory of the
Mysteries of Christ, which now are unsearchable, will then be laid open: The
Lord shall open unto his Heavenly Family his good Treasure, where every one
shall have full and free liberty to take his everlasting portion of glory; not
for himself only, but for the Community: the glorified have a partnership in
each others happiness. Every one in Heaven has a full view of, a share in, and
a right unto, the glory of every blessed Angel and Saint, which greatly adds to
their glory, therefore it is such a weight of glory. In the Primitive Church
they had all things common, neither was there any among them that lacked (...)
the Church Triumphant, where there is perfect Charity, all things will be for
ever common, because they are of one heart, and one Soul. In this covetous
World it is far otherwise; every one stands much upon his own glory: The Wise
Man does glory in his Wisdom; the Mighty Man does glory in his Might; the Rich
Man does glory in his Riches; but glorifieth not God with them in b^ing rich in
good Works; making others poor to make himself rich: contr^ry to the Example
and Pr^^^ise of our L rd Jesus Christ, that though he was Rich, yet for our
sakes he became poor, that we through his Poverty might be Rich, with the
Riches of his Grace, and the Riches of the glory of his Inheritance; being
heirs of that Kingdom, which G d the ^ather, in his everlasting Decree purposed
to them: We have obtained an Inheritance, according to his good pleasure, which
he has purposed in himself, being Predestined, according to the purpose of
him who works all things after the Counsel of his own Will; and not only
purposed, but prepared for them from the Foundation of the World: In my Fathers
house, says Christ, are many Mansions; I go to prepare a place for you, which
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of Man,
the things which God has prepared; what God has prepared Christ has
purchased: Our Inheritance is the purchased possession. We lost not only our
selves, but all our right to the Kingdom of Glory. All have sinned and come
short of the glory of God. By the grace of Redemption our Lord Jesus Christ
has recovered this forfeited Glory. That Kingdom and Glory which Christ has
purchased, God has promised to the Poor in this World, whom God has chosen,
rich in Faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that
love him; and, because he is faithful that promised, this Kingdom is preserved,
which is an Inheritance Incorruptible and Undefiled, and that sadeth not away;
reserved in Heaven for them who are the called according to his purpose; even
the purpose of God according to Election; not of Works, but of him that
calls; for, as there is a Kingdom purposed, so are there persons that are
purposed to this Kingdom, and prepared to it; that he might make known the
riches of his glory on the vessels of Mercy, which he has before prepared unto
Glory, even a pecu iar or purchased People; the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood: for we were not redeemed with corruptible things,
as Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of Christ; that we might be the
heirs of the Promise of the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them
that love him; who are kept by the power of God, through Faith, unto Salvation:
for, as there is an Inheritance in Heaven, reserved for all that are called
according to purpose, prepared, purchased, and Children of the Promise; and, if
Children, then Heirs, and Joynt-heirs with Christ in his Kingdom of Glory; so
these are kept, by him that is able, from falling, and presented faultless
before the presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy: These are the persons
unto whom it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and to enjoy
the Mercies, Graces, Comforts, and the glorious Privileges thereof, both for
time and eternity. Thus have I, through the gracious assistance of Gods Holy
Spirit, in some measure opened the Mysteries and Treasures of the Kingdom of
God; which, as it is a Kingdom of Grace, so also a Kingdom of Glory; having
finished the Doctrinal part, the Application follows.

1. For Information of the Necessity, Excellency, and Utility of the Christian
Religion. There is an absolute and infinite necessity, that every one should
profess and practice the true Religion in the Doctrine and Duties of it, which
are according unto Godliness, for the attainment of Grace and Glory; which, in
conjunction with the Glory of God, is the one thing necessary. Such a thing
there is, as Pure Religion and undefiled, whereby we bind our selves in a
Solemn Covenant, to be what God would have us to be; and, to do, what God would
have us to do, upon which our endless state depends: and therefore to be really
Religious, which is a living to God, is no indifferent thing; because the
invisible things of eternity, which Religion is concerned about, are the
greatest realities, and of the greatest moment to every Immortal Soul, which is
capable of being unspeakably happy or miserable, in Heaven or Hell through all
Eternity. God and Christ, and Grace, and Glory must be had, there is no living
or dying in Peace without them. Behold, now is the accepted time, to accept
them, and to be accepted! Behold, now is the day of Salvation! which if it be
neglected, an eternal night of Damnation follows.

There is also an excellency in Religion, which appears, in being conversant
about matters of such transcendent worth and weight; as namely, the glorifying
of God in ways of Grace and Glory: upon this account therefore it is, the
Righteous is more excellent then his Neighbor. Religion is for Godliness which
is profitable to all persons, and things; having promise of the Life that now
is, and of that which is to come. Happy is the Man that in the way of Religion
gets Godliness, for the Merchandise of it is better, than the Merchandise of
Silver, and the Gain thereof than fine Gold; she is more precious than Rubies,
and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared unto her; Length of
days is in her Right hand, and in her Left hand Riches and Honor; her ways
are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

2. This Doctrine of the Kingdom of Grace and Glory speaks doleful and dreadful
Tidings to the wicked and ungodly. The unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. No Whoremonger, nor Unclean Person, nor Covetous Man, who is an
Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no Man
therefore deceive himself with vain words, for because of these things comes
the wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience; the loss of this Kingdom
will be more intolerable to the Wicked, than the enduring of the eternal
torments of Hell, because the loss is infinite; God is lost, and the Eternal
weight of Glory is lost. The pains of Hell are after a sort finite, though
infinite in duration; and between finite misery, and infinite glory, there is
an infinite inequality.

3. If there be a Kingdom of Grace and Glory, Are not they then besides
themselves, that think and say, That a holy diligence, and strictness in
Religion, and the Duties thereof, in order to its attainment, is more ado then
needs; that practically say, It is vain to serve God: and, What profit is it
that we have kept his Ordinance? and, Behold! What a weariness, etc. When the
Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the holy Angels with him, and shall
sit upon the Throne of his Glory, and shall gather before him all Nations, and
shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the
^oats, and shall set the Sheep on his Right hand, but the Goats in the Left;
when the King shall say unto them on his Right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World:
When he shall say also unto them on his Left hand, Depart from me ye Cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: When the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power; when he shall come to be
glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe; when
Christ shall reckon with his Servants about the improvement of their time and
talents, for we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad; and shall say, Well done thou good and faithful
servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over
many things; enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord: and when he shall say to him
that received one Talent and hid it in the earth; Take the Talent from him, and
cast ye that wicked, slothful and unprofitable Servant into outer darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth: then will the holy diligence of
the Saints and Servants of the Lord be justified; and the minds of them that
judged diligent Godliness to be more ado than needed, will be otherwise minded,
and wish, too late, they had been wise and faithful; that by their Lord, at his
coming, they might have been found so doing, as those that were faithful unto
death, and receive the Crown of Life.

4. That there is a Kingdom of Grace and Glory, speaks the dignity and
happiness of the Saints; Let their condition in this World, as to the things of
the World, be never so bad; be they poor and persecuted, having nothing, they
possess all things; things Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal are their right;
all things are yours, says the Apostle: Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas,
or the World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come, all are
yours; and, the reason is, because Christ is yours: he that has Christ, has
all things. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all;
How shall he not with him also freely give us all things. They who have a true
interest in God and Christ, and Grace and Glory, cannot want for real
Treasures, Honors and Pleasures, either in this, or the better World.

5. That there is a Kingdom of Grace and Glory, speaks also the great love of
God, wherewith he has loved us, and the exceeding riches of his Grace; That
God of his free Mercy toward us in Christ Jesus, should take any of us out of
the state of Nature, Sin, and Misery, to reinstate us into his Grace and
Favor; That from the presence of his Grace he might translate us into the
presence and Kingdom of his Glory: What manner of love has God the Father
bestowed upon us? God so loved the World, that he sent his only begotten Son
into i^, that whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting
Life; this is love passing knowledge.

2. The second Use is for trial and examination of our selves, as to our right
and title to glory. The last Article in our Christian belief, is the Life
everlasting, which every one will say he believes, That there is a Kingdom of
Glory, is without controversy. The great Question is, To whom this Kingdom of
Glory belongs? I have before proved by Scripture, That there is a purposed,
prepared, purchased, promised, and preserved Kingdom of Glory; and that there
are certain persons in Gods everlasting decree, purposed, prepared, purchased,
promised and preserved to be the heirs of this Kingdom for ever: But, all the
difficulty is, how every one may arrive to a comfortable assurance of his
Interest in, and right and title to so glorious a Kingdom, as God and his
Christ, in infinite Wisdom, and Mercy, from all Eternity has purposed,
prepared, purchased, promised and preserved; and that he is one purposed,
prepared, purchased, promised, and reserved unto this Heavenly Kingdom: This
may be known by those and only those, that give all diligence to know it; such
are they that with purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord: the things they
purpose, they purpose not according to the Flesh; that with them there should
be, yea, yea; and, my, nay* thou have fully known, says St. Paul, my purpose;
If we can know the purposes of our hearts, if the purposes of our hearts be
only to the gl^ry of God, and glory with God, for the way and means conducive
to this end, ^s truly as to the end it sel^; then we may surely know, tha^ ^his
Kingdom is purposed for us, and we purposed to it. Are the purposes of your
hearts set within you against sin, all sin, the ways, the occasions, the
temptations to sin; against Satan, and the World, the honors, the riches, and
the pleasures thereof, as they stand in oppositi^n unto, and competition with
God, Christ, Grace, Glory, and your immortal Souls? Are you fully purposed for
God-Glorifying, and God-Enjoying, in time and for eternity? This is one great
evidence, that you shall be glorified with him, and enjoy him in this purposed
Kingdom of glory, if you hold on, and hold out unto the end. The Kingdom
prepared is theirs, who are serious and sincere, in preparing themselves for
it; Indeed, the preparations of the heart in Man are from the Lord, but the
Lord gives to every Man a heart to make Conscience to prepare himself in the
use of all good means, for that eternal weight of Glory, which God has
prepared for him a Vessel of Mercy, according to the riches of his Glory, which
he had before prepared unto glory; for, we are his Workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has before ordained or prepared, that
we should walk in them: The whole Church of God is prepared as a Bride adorned
for her Husband; a Vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the Masters use,
and prepared unto every good work. Ministers are Gods Instruments herein, to
turn the disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just; to make ready a People prepared
for the Lord; for which end, their feet are shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of Peace. How beautiful are the feet of them that Preach the Gospel of
Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? Under Christ, God has trusted
every one with the care of his own Soul, and given him a Talent to employ and
improve for its Sanctification, and Salvation: for, this is the will of God,
even our Sanctification, who will have all Men saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the Truth; and, it is his Will, that every one should be a
faithful and wise Steward, to give his Soul its portion of meat in due season;
and that ^ervant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes; and he that knew
not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes:
for, if the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast* and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward; How can any think to escape
who neglect so great Salvation? Search therefore, and try what preparations are
you making for Death, Judgment and Eternity in good earnest; the Kingdom
prepared, and the People prepared for it, are preparing with all their might
for an entrance to be ministered unto them abundantly, into the everlasting
Kingdom of their Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: and, it is for certain, that
this Kingdom is prepared, that every one should prepare till they be prepared
for it. And, we may further know our Title to this Kingdom, if we are willing
to go, if I may so say, to the price of it; though it be purchased for us, and
we purchased to it; for, we are bought with a price. The Kingdom, and the
Subjects of it, were bought at no lower a rate than the precious Blood of Jesus
Christ: yet in a way of duty though not of merit, must we make account to lay
down a certain price, before we can actually possess this Kingdom; It cost
Christ dear of his Father for our sakes; he laid down his life for it: but,
considering the worth and the weight of this glory, we may have it at a cheap
rate. Something Christ expects we should part with; and something we are to do
and suffer, before he give us the Kingdom: We are to buy the Truth; but, not to
sell it. We must come to the knowledge of the Truth before we can be saved;
and, before we can come to the s^ving knowledge of the Truth, it will cost us
the daily diligent use of all the means of grace as long as we live. Grace and
Glory differ only in degree: It is Christ's Counsel, to buy of him Gold, which
is Grace, that we may be rich; white Raiment, that we may be clothed;
Eye Salve, that we may See: He that has no Money, may, and must buy Grace and
Glory without Money, and without Price, or go without them. The Kingdom of
Heaven is like unto a Treasure hid in a Field; the which, when a Man has
found, he hides; and, for Joy thereof, goes and sells all that he has, and
buyeth that Field. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-Man, seeking
goodly Pearls; who, when he had found one Pearl of great price, he went and
sold all that he had, and bought it: a sure sign he valued it above all he had.
Christ is the Pearl of great price, grace and glory is the Kingdom. This Pearl
of great price is to be bought without price: a thankful acceptance of it is
all that is required, to the enjoying of it. He that has, by selling all he
has, bought this Pearl of great price, has the whole Kingdom of grace and
glory into the bargain; he that has the Son, has life, Spiritual and Eternal.
Try we therefore our selves, how willing and ready we are, to part with our
all; all our sins, our beloved lusts, our right eye, our right hand, our right
foot, all our honors, pleasures and riches, yea, and our lives, if they stand
in our way to Christ and Heaven. If we be truly willing to be any thing, to do
any thing, to suffer any thing, according to the will of God, blessed is that
Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing.

The Kingdom of ^od is a promised Kingdom, and the heirs of it are the children
of Promise, and children that are under a Solemn Covenant and Promise to walk
worthy of God, who has called them unto his kingdom and glory; which
accordingly they are desirous, laborious, and careful to do, being greatly
engaged thereunto; for this is the promise that he has promised us, even
Eternal Life, which is our ^ope; In hope of Eternal Life, which God, that
cannot lie, has promised, and he is faithful that promised; and all the
children of the Promise judge him faithful, who has promised; and therefore
they hold themselves obliged to be faithful, in all their promises unto God,
and Man: And, as God is true, their word toward him, and each other, is not yea
and nay; but, in Christ Jesus yea: and, the Motive is, For all the Promises of
God in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God: because Gods
Promises are yea and Amen, ours therefore ought to be so. The Character of a
Citizen of Zion is one that speaks the truth in his heart; that Swears to
his own heart and changes not. Let us search our hearts, and try our ways, as
to our Promises, relating to our own selves, whether there be truth and
faithfulness in them all: We are to be Covenant-keepers, as well as
Covenant-makers; whether our Covenant-promise refer to God, our selves, or
others: He that is not true to himself, can never be faithful to God or Man;
and is not careful to perform all his promises faithfully to the Lord, will
certainly prove untrue to himself and others: It is a sin of presumption for
any, to hope that God will fulfill his Promises to him, while he m^kes no
Conscience of making, and keeping Promise with God and Man. Gods Mercy is in
the way of our Duty. Oh let us seriously enquire into our Consciences,
Converse, and Conversations, whether we be habitually punctual, as to our
Promises; Are they indeed like unto Gods Yea and Amen? then have we good hope,
through grace, that all Gods Promises, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, will,
in Gods good time, be made ours; wherein are treasured up the unsearchable
Riches of Christ.

This kingdom of God is preserved to them that are kept for it, by the Power of
God, from every evil work, and he will preserve them unto his Heavenly kingdom;
such are they, and they only, that keep themselves in the love of God, looking
for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life: The Mercy and Grace
of God lays hold on them; and they, by the help thereof, lay hold on Eternal
Life: Do we use all Gods holy Means faithfully, to lay hold on Eternal Life?
when this Life is ended, Eternal Life will lay hold on us: But, the greatest
Evidence of our right to glory, is Christ dwelling in us; Christ in you, says
St. Paul, the hope of glory: Know you not, says the same Apostle, how that
Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates, or unapproved? and our
dwelling in him, no surer sign of our dwelling with Christ in glory, than his
dwelling in us, and our dwelling in him through grace. We know that the Son of
God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that is
true; and, we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ: But, How
may we know this? Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he
has given us of his Spirit; now, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he
is none of his: and, if Christ be not ours, his Kingdom c^nnot be ours.

The Spirit of Promise wherewith we are sealed, is the earnest of our
inheritance; the Spirit sealing, is the making persons of ungodly, godly; and
setting them apart for God and Glory: the earnest is part of the sum, to give
assurance of the whole. How shall we know, that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens; but by the earnest of the Spirit, which God has
given to us, and which has wrought us for the self same thing, according to
his Mercy, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost,
which he sheds abundantly upon the heirs of glory, through Jesus Christ our
Savior: there is no entering into Heaven, but by Regeneration; we must be new
Creatures, or lost Creatures for ever. Only those that are born from above by
God, are to live above with God: Jesus says, Verily, verily, except a Man be
born from above, he cannot see the Kingdom of God: Verily, verily, except a Man
be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
And, we may be sure, that Christ dwells in us, and we in him; that we have his
Spirit in us, and are Regenerated, If we are in the Faith, and are sound and
sincere believers, and such as love and obey the Lord. Examine your selves,
whether ye be in the faith; prove your selves. Know you not your own selves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you? ^n whom? in you that are in the Faith, that
Christ may dwe^l in your hearts: By Faith the Spirit is received; by the
hearing of faith, the doctrine of Faith, mixed with Faith in them that hear it,
who are born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word
of God; for of his own will beg^t he us, by the word of truth, working the
truth of ^aith in us; and, whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is
born of God; and every one that loves is born of God; that loves him that
begat, and loves him also that is begotten of him; and every one that does
righteousness is born of him. If we can prove our Regeneration, we may
certainly infer our Eternal Salvation. All the graces of the holy Spirit
constitute the Divine Nature, which is conveyed by the Holy Ghost in the way of
Regeneration or the New Birth; now Regeneration, or the New Birth, is a very
great secret, and can be known no other way by us, but by the several graces of
the Spirit, and their operations upon the whole Man, and influences into the
Conversation, to discourse at large of every grace: And, how we may know we
have them in truth, I leave to a better opportunity; at present these three,
namely, Faith, Love, and New Obedience; may suffice to be spoken to for the
evidencing of our Regeneration and Salvation; as soon as we begin to Believe,
we begin to Live. Faith is the first Life of Grace; it knits and unites us to
Christ who is our life: It is out of his fullness that we receive by Faith, and
grace for grace. It is that grace by which we behold, with open face, as in a
Glass, the glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same Image, from glory
unto glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord. They that believe on the Name of
the Son of God, may know that they have Eternal Life, because that they believe
on the Name of the Son of God; Now he that believes on the Son of God, has
the witness in himself, the witness of God; for this is the witness of God,
that he that believes on the Son has everlasting Life; and he that believes
not the Son shall not see Life, but the wrath of God abides on him, because he
believes not the Record that God gave of his Son; and this is the Record, That
God has given to us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son; and he that
has, believes or receives Christ, has life; and he that has not the Son,
has not life: so that our Eternal Life depends upon our faith or faithfulness
in believing; that is, in the truth of our assent to the truth of the whole
Word of God, only upon the authority of Gods speaking it; especially in
believing or assenting to this faithful saying, which is worthy of all
acceptance, That Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners; and,
consenting unfeignedly to have him for our Lord and Savior; trusting only upon
the Merit of his death upon the Cross; his Resurrection and Intercession for
our acceptance with God; our Justification an Glorification; committing our
selves, and all our concernments wholly to his guidance and government; call ing
all our care and burdens upon him, as judging him to be able and faithful, to
carry us through all the duties, dangers, and difficulties of this life, unto
life eternal; all which is the nature and work of Faith; which, whosoever has,
and lives by it, shall never perish, but have everlasting life: This is the
^aith that works love, and works by love, even to believe the love that God
has to us, who is love. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son; In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent
his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him, herein is
love. This love breeds love; Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love
one another; much more ought we to love God; and indeed, if we do soundly
believe this love of God toward us, which passes knowledge, we shall answer
this love with love again; In loving God above all, even with all the heart,
with all the Soul, and with all the strength, and with all the mind; for he
that loves Father, or Mother, more than God, is not worthy of him; and he that
loves Son or Daughter more than God, is not worthy of him; and then love we
him indeed, when we love whom he loves, and what he loves, and hate what he
hates.

Now God the Father loves his only begotten Son, the Lord Jesus Christ; and he
that loves him, loves God, and is loved of him: And Oh, What infinite reason
have we to love both God and Christ, when they have so loved us? God the
Father, in sending his Son into the World to bless us; and Christ, in coming
into it, that he might give himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify us unto himself, a peculiar People, ze^l^us of good works: Therefore,
if any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maranatha. As
God loves his only Son by Eternal generation, so he loves his Adopted Sons by
Spiritual Regeneration; and they again love him: I love them, says God, that
love me; herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us; we love
him, because he first loved us: his love is the ground and cause of our love to
him, and to one another. Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of God,
and every one that loves is born of God, and knows God; he that loves not,
knows not God, for God is love: In this was manifested the love of God
toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the World. Herein
is love, beloved, if God so loved us, we ought to love one another with a love
of Union, Complacency and Benevolence, being of one Mind, Will, Way, about one
Work: God-glorifying, Delighting in each others Persons, Communion, and
Communication; Like David, the Saints were all his delight: as we have
opportunity, doing good to all, but especially to the Household of Faith; for to
do good and Communicate, is a Sacrifice God is well pleased with; but, whosoever
has this Worlds good, and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up his
bowels of Compassion from him; How dwells the love of God in him? the love of
God dwells not in him at all, nor does he dwell in God; for he that dwells
in God, dwells in love, and he that dwells not in God, shall never dwell
with him: But he who loves God and Christ truly, loves all Saints, as God loves
them, with a special love; and, as God loves all Saints, so he loves them
always, even to the end: so do all true lovers of God, and his Saints; as they
love them all, so they love them always; even to the end. If we thus love the
Brethren, we may know that we are passed from death unto life. Our love must
extend to enemies, even the worst of our enemies; though we cannot love them
with a love of Union and Complacency, we must love them with a love of
Benevolence, because it is a Gospel-Command, and therefore a Gospel-Duty, to
love our enemies, and do good to them that hate us; If we only love them that
love us, What do we more than others? but, if we love them that hate us, we do
more than others; then are we the children of our Heavenly Father, and are
merciful as he is merciful, and perfect as he is perfect: And if we love not
our enemies, we are enemies to our enemies, Gods enemies, and our own. To love
heartily a professed practical enemy, is a greater duty, and difficulty, than
most professors are aware of; How far are they from loving their enemies that
do not love their brethren? and, without loving of their brethren, and our
enemies also, and doing good to them that hate us, there is no going to Heaven:
as we must love whom God loves, so what God loves; his Word, Works, Ways,
Righteousness, his Ordinances and Sanctuary, etc. God loves the Gates of Sion.
O how I love thy Law, and I have loved the habitation of thy House, and the
place where thine honor dwells, says every one that is godly: As we must
love what God loves, so must we hate what God hates, and as God hates; now God
hates sin with a perfect hatred, so must every one that loves the Lord, hate
sin and wickedness with a perfect hatred: Ye that love the Lord hate evil,
because he hates it; we cannot but sin while sin dwells in us; but, when it
is acted it must be hated, and is hated by every one that is godly; What I
hate, that do I, says St. Paul: We must ab^tain from all appearance of evil,
hating even the garment spotted with the flesh: if we will approve our selves
to be the faithful and fervent lovers of the Lord, let us seriously try the
truth of our love; It is that to the Soul, which the pulse is to the Body, a
Symptom of Life. Gods love is our life; our love to God is our great evidence
that he loves us; I love them that love me: This is the Souls pulse which
beats continually. What is Spiritual life but Spiritual love to God, as God,
and as our chief good? Can we say, that Gods beloved, which is Christ is our
only chief beloved? If I can say, I am my Beloveds, I may be sure that my
Beloved is mine: Nothing makes persons so perfectly one, as perfect love; which
is not love in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed, and in Truth. A love to
the Person beloved, above the Portion enjoyed; a love to every one, and every
thing the party beloved has a kindness for; and a hatred of aversion,
displicency, and abhorrence of that which is contrary to love, and the person
beloved. By this also we may know that we love God, and the children of God,
when we keep his Commandments, for this is the love of God that we keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous; and hereby we do know that
we know him, believe in him, and love him, if we keep his Commandments; he that
says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the truth
is not in him; but whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is the word of God
perfected; hereby know we that we are in him: as our love to God is a sign of
his love to us, so the keeping of his Commandments is an evidence of the truth
of our love to him; according to our Lord Jesus his Question to Peter, three
times, Love thou me more than these? Love thou me? Love thou me? Thou
know that I love thee, says he; How? Feed my Lambs, feed my Sheep: Do you
think Christ would have believed Peter, or Peter believed himself, touching his
love, if he had disobeyed this Commandment? Christ says to all, If ye love me
keep my Commandments; and he that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it
is that loves me: Now the Commandments of God are both Moral and Evangelical;
Moral, contained in Moses his Ten Words, called the Decalogue, or Ten
Commandments; Evangelical, called the Law or Doctrine of Faith, concerning the
Salvation of Mankind by our Lord Jesus Christ, come already in the flesh, to be
believed by all that will be saved, neither is there Salvation in any other;
for there is none other Name under Heaven given among Men, whereby we must be
saved: And therefore when any one does, Oh! that every one would, ask this
serious question seriously, What must I do to be saved? the only answer to it,
is, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. This is his
Commandment, That we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and
love one another, as he gave us Commandment. There is a Law of Love as well as
of Faith; Love is the sum of the Law, and has the Power and force of a Law in
it: All the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Love. To God above all.
Love thy Neighbor as thy self. If there be any other Commandment, it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely, Love to God, and our Neighbor: Love
works none ill to his Neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law:
As love is the Fulfilling of the Law, so sin is the Transgression of the Law of
God. The Moral and the Evangelical Law is against sin. Sin not; stand in awe
and sin not, is one great Command from God, which we must live in continual
obedience unto: Our great fear, desire, care, and endeavor, must run out this
way, that we sin not. Sin is the chiefest evil, as it opposes God the chiefest
good; therefore we are commanded to abhor that which is evil, and abstain from
all appearance of evil; If we will enter into life, we must keep this
Commandment, no entering into Heaven with Sin: There shall in no wise enter
into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or
makes a lie; For, God has no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell
with him. Sin and Sinners must be turned into Hell for ever. The wages of sin
is death: we must be saved from sin, before we can be saved from Hell. Let us
try what Conscience we make of this Command; Do we fear to sin? Can we say we
fear none but God, and nothing but Sin? he that fears the Commandment shall
be rewarded. Do we live in no known sin, either of Heart or Life; of Omission,
or Commission? When we are overtaken with sin, are we sorry for it after a
godly sort, until, by an humble confessing, and an hearty forsaking it, we are
reconciled to God? If we be unreconciled to sin in our hearts, and to a way and
course of sin in our life, we may be sure God and we are reconciled. When we
were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. Our Eternal State may be known by
our dispositions and conversations toward sin: as the very bent and by-ass of
our hearts and lives are for, or against sin, habitually and practically, so
will God determine our Eternal condition for Heaven or Hell: In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil. Whosoever abides
in Christ sins not: whosoever sins has not seen him, neither known him.
Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, and he cannot sin, because he is
born of God. Yet is there a truth in this, if we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us; if we say we have not sinned, we make
God a liar, and his Word is not in us: but he that commits sin, is of the
Devil, and whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that
loves not his brother, which is a Damnable sin; for he that loves not his
Brother, abides in Death; and not to love, and to hate, in Scripture, is of
the same signification. Whosoever hates his brother is a Murderer: and, ye
know, that no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him: He that loves not his
Brother, has neither Spiritual Light, Life, or Love in him. He that says he
is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness, and walks in
darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because that darkness has blinded
his eyes. This sin of not loving, or hating a Brother, is darkness that so
blinds the eyes, that whosoever is guilty of it, is under this Judgment, he
knows not whither he goes. I doubt not but everyone that loves not his
Brother, thinks he does love him, because he loves him in Word, and in Tongue,
and thinks he shall go to Heaven. Alas, What does it profit, if a brother or
sister be naked, or in prison, and destitute of daily food, and one say unto
them, depart in peace; be you warmed and filled, notwithstanding ye give not
them those things which are needful to the body? Does such a one love, or hate
his Brother? Is he not in darkness, and walks in darkness, unto outer
darkness? if he that hates his Brother, say, I love God, he is a liar; for he
that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen; How can he love God whom he
has not seen? There is a wide difference between the godly and ungodly's
sinning: It is too true that both of them sin. The godly Man's purpose, promise,
and practice, is habitually and ordinarily against all sin. The wicked Man's
Trade, Custom, Conscience, Work and Way is sin; he is known to be wicked, by
being a worker of Iniquity; he lives in sin; in a state of sin; in the practice
both of sins of Omission and Commission, which they who are Godly do not, dare
not do; they also do no Iniquity: the transgression of the wicked says, That
there is no fear of God before his eyes; they that fear not God, fear not to
sin; by the fear of the Lord Men depart from evil. The fear of the Lord is to
hate evil. The Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself, to stand in
awe that he sin not. Every godly man is negatively and positively holy, in
heart, speech, and behavior. His Prayer is his Practice. Incline not my heart
to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with men that work iniquity. I have
inclined mine heart to perform thy Statutes always, even unto the end. No
corrupt communication proceeds out of his Mouth, but that which is good, to
the use of edifying: he speaks the truth in his heart; his speech is always
with grace, seasoned with salt, sound, that cannot be condemned. The mouth of
the Righteous speaks Wisdom, his Tongue talks of Judgment: his Tongue is
his glory, so called in Scripture, and used only for Gods Glory; with it he
Prays to, and Praises God. The high Praises of God is in his mouth; Prayer and
Praise, with heart and voice, is a good Man's daily practice. He walks
uprightly; that is, he walks not after the Flesh, in the lust of Concupiscence;
he makes, he takes no provision for the flesh, to satisfy it in the lusts
thereof: In rioting and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, in strife
and envying; all bitterness and wrath, and anger and clamor, and evil speaking
he puts away from him, with all malice; yea, all that is in the World, the lust
of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of heart and life:
Whatever else God forbids, he forsakes; he avoids and hates every false way and
work; he approves himself to be a Citizen of Zion, for he backbiteth not with
his Tongue, nor does evil to his Neighbor, nor takes up, receives, or
endures a reproach against his Neighbors; that Swears to his own hurt and
changes not; that puts not his Money to Usury; nor takes reward against the
Innocent. As he walks not after the Flesh, so he walks after the Spirit,
because he lives in the spirit, and also walks in the spirit, which is a
walking in wisdom, or in the light; a walking in faith, and love, and truth,
after Gods Commandments; for this is love, that we walk after his Commandments,
Moral and Evangelical, the rule of our life; for, as many as walk according to
this Ru^e, Peace be on them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God. What God
and his Commandments are to us, that are we to be unto him and them: God is
holy, just, and good; all his Commandments are holy, just, and good, such are
we to be before God, and the World; holy, just, and good in our dispositions,
communications, and convers^tions. This was St. Paul his Prayer for his
Thessalonians; The very God of Peace sanctify you wholly; and, I pray God,
your whole Spirit, Soul, and Body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. This is the will of God, even our Sanctification in our
Bodies, that we should abstain from fornication, for which end every one should
know how to possess his Vessel in sanctification and honor; not in the lust of
concupiscence, even as the Gentiles, which know not God; for, God has not
called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness, because our bodies are the
Members of Christ, and the Temples of the Holy Ghost; Shall we then take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Know ye
not that he that is joined to an Harlot is one Body; and therefore the holy
Apostle exhorts, To flee Fornication, and all youthful lusts, for, every sin
that a Man does, is without the Body; but, he that commits Fornication,
sins against his own Body: and yet our Bodies are not our own, to use them
as we please, because they are bought with a price; and therefore we are to
glorify God in our Bodies, as well as in our Spirits, which are Gods, by
presenting them a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is our
reasonable Service; not conformed to this World in outward adorning, of
plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of Apparel, but in
behavior as becomes holiness. No sin is to reign in our Mortal Bodies, that
we should obey it in the lust thereof; neither must we yield our Members, as
Instruments, or Weapons of unrighteousness unto Sin, but as Instruments of
righteousness unto God: as the Body must be holy throughout, so must the Soul
also, in all the faculties and powers thereof; Mind, Will, Memory, Conscience,
and Affections; be renewed in the Spirit of your Mind, and put on the new Man,
which is renewed in knowledge; that, being transformed by the renewing of your
mind, ye may prove what is that good and acceptable, and perfect will of God,
till ye be a willing people in the day of his power; to be what he would have
you to be, to do what he would have you to do, and to suffer what he would have
you to suffer; choosing the things that please him; having a good conscience in
all things; willing to live honestly; yea, living in all good conscience, which
is to exercise our selves to have always a conscience void of offense toward
God, and toward Men; their conscience also bearing them witness; and, when
others accuse, excusing; for, their rejoicing is this, the Testimony of their
Conscience; that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God, they have had their conversation in the World; and,
having renounced the hidden things of dishonest^; not walking in craftiness,
but by manifestation of the Truth of their profession, by the holiness of their
Convers^tion, commend themselves to every Man's Conscience in the sight of God;
and their hearts being spr^nkled from an evil Conscience, and purged from dead
Works, to serve the living God; have the answer of good Conscience toward God,
which breeds peace of Conscience: the Peace of God, which pass^th all
understanding; and, as the^r Minds, and Wills, and Consci^nc^s, so their
Memories are sanctified; they hide the Word of God in their hearts, or
memories, a repository for this heavenly Manna, to be laid up and kept in; for,
then are we saved, if we keep or hold fast in memory what is Preached unto u;
and we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we hear, lest at
any time we should let them slip out of our memory, or run out as leaking Vess
l; and, whereas they that like not to retain God in their knowledge, or to
acknowlede God, and therefore are given over to a reprobate mind; void of
judgment, fulfilling the desires or wills of the flesh, to do those things
which are not convenient, being convinced by their own defiled, accusing
Conscience, forgetful hearers, deceiving their own selves, for which cause God
gives them up unto vile affections: yet the Sanctified Soul having crucified
the Flesh, and mortified the inordinate affections thereof, set their
affections on things above, not on things on the earth, having their
conversation in heaven: These are Israelites, in whose Spirit, Speech, and
Behavior, there is no guile; for, he is an Israelite which is one inwardly,
and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the Letter,
whose praise is not of Men, but of God. Behold, the desire and delight of God
is in truth, in the inward parts, the hidden Man of the heart, in that which is
not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price; these are the upright in heart and life, who dwell
in the presence of his grace here, and in the presence of his glory hereafter:
those who are holy, are just, doing as they would be done by; and if a Man be
just, and do judgment and justice, that which is lawful ind right, has not
lift up his eyes to the Idols of the House of Israel, neither has defiled his
neighbors Wife, neither has come near a menstruous Woman, h th not oppressed
any, but has restored to the Debtor his Pledge, has spoiled none by violence,
has given his Bread to the hungry, that has taken off his hand from the poor,
and has not given forth upon Usury, neither taken any increase, that has
withdrawn his hand from Iniquity, has executed true judgment between Man and
Man, has walked in Gods statutes, and has kept his Judgments to deal truly,
he is just, he shall surely live with the General Assembly and Church of the
firstborn, which are written or enrolled in Heaven, which are the Spirits of
Just Men made perfect. The Just are good also, not good as God, or good to God;
our goodness extends not unto him; so there is none good but one, that is
God, who is eternally, essentially, absolutely, infinitely, and originally
good. Every good, and every perfect gift comes from above, from the ^ather of
lights. When God had made every thing, he saw that it was good; but, when he
had created Man in his own Image, then it is said, God saw every thing that he
had made, and behold it was very good. Man, at first, was made very good, he
was naturally good, before he sinned; he was very good, through the Image of
God upon him; and before he is good again, this Image of God must be in a
supernatural way restored unto him, which consists in Knowledge, Righteousness,
and true Holiness. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and, What does the
Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God? Nothing can make our Natures good, but the Divine Nature; the
good work must be begun in us, before we can think a good thought, speak a good
word, or do a good work; till then we are disobedient, and, unto every good
work reprobate, and void of judgment; being sanctified, we are meet for the
Masters use, and thereby prepared unto every good work, yea thoroughly furnished
unto all good works: Let us examine our selves, Are we holy, as God and his Law
are holy? God is our only perfect pattern, his Word or Law our rule to walk by:
His command is, be ye holy, for I am holy: God is essentially holy, and
personally holy; the Father is holy, the Son is holy, the Spirit is called the
Holy Ghost. The Law is holy, the People of God are holy; called holy Brethren,
and a holy Priesthood; chosen in Christ before the foundation of the World, to
be holy, and without blame before him in love; his workmanship created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that we should
walk in them; Redeemed and delivered out of the hands of our enemies, to serve
him without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life: effectually called out of darkness into mavelous light, to be holy in
all manner of conversation; presented a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish:
Have we then this holiness in our hearts and lives, the end of our
Predestination, new Creation, effectual Calling, and Glorification; which is to
love God, and hate evil? Godliness is Godlikeness; Do we as God does? Love
righteousness, and hate wickedness? Are our hearts sound, sincere, and perfect
in his Statutes? Have we respect unto all his Commandments? Are we negatively
and positively holy? Do we deny ungodliness and worldly lusts? Do we, and are
we fully and firmly resolved to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present world; and, to have our fruit unto holiness, then shall our end be
everlasting life? Are we just both to the just and unjust? Do we speak the
truth in our heart, and act accordingly? Do we to all men as we would be done
by? or, Do we go beyond and defraud our brother in any matter? the Lord is the
avenger of all such? Do we, desire we, labor we to owe no Man any thing but
love? He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much: Do
we render to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom to whom
Custom; Fear to whom Fear; Honor to whom Honor? Are you like God, without
respect of persons, just in all your dealings; to low and high, small and
great; to the poor that want power to come by their own, as well as to the
rich? Are you just and faithful in matters of Distributive and Commutative
Justice to all men, in all estates, bond and free; in all times, good and bad,
prosperous and adverse; and, that always? then shall ye be recompensed at the
Resurrection of the just; while the unjust, whose Damnation is just, are
reserved unto the day of Judgment to be punished, for, every transgression and
disobedience shall receive a just recompense of reward: Every Man according to
his Deeds, Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, Eternal Life, to them, who, by
patient continuance in well doing, or doing as they would be done by, seek it:
But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey
unrighteousness; that do not as they would be done by; Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul that does evil; that works not
Righteousness, speaks not the Truth in his heart, that backbiteth his
Neighbor with his Tongue, that receives, endures, or takes up a reproach
against his Neighbor, in whose eyes a vile person is not contemned, and
honoreth them not that fear the Lord, that swears to his own hurt and
changes, that puts out his Money to Usury, and takes reward against the
Innocent; he that does these things shall surely perish. Are we good indeed,
and in truth, though not very good? Are our hearts and lives good; make the
Tree good and the Fruit will be good; every good Tree brings forth good
Fruit. God is good essentially, and personally; it is his Nature and Property
to be good, to make good, to do good, so there is none good but one. Thou art
good, and do good, says David of God the Father; Christ says of himself, I
am the good Shepherd; thy Spirit, says David, is good: These three Persons,
namely, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, had every one a hand in making
Man very good at first; Let us make Man: so also in re-creating, or renewing us
after the Image of his goodness, are we also filled with goodness. The Lord is
good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works: God anointed Jesus
of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with power, who went about doing good, and
the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness: Are we good in all Estates, in all
Places, in all Times, in all Companies? As we have opportunity, do we good unto
all Men, especially unto them who are of the Household of Faith? Does our
goodness extend it self to the Saints that are in the Earth, and to the
Excellent in whom we delight? Do we also good to them that hate us, and Pray
for them which despitefully use us, and persecute us? then are we the children
of our Father which is in Heaven, for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil,
and on the good; and Servants to our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who, when he
comes, and reckons with them, will say to every one, Well done thou good and
faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, enter thou into
the Joy of thy Lord: And, How great is that goodness, which God has laid up
for all them that are good, and do good, and trust in him before the Sons of
Men? Since the beginning of the World, Men have not heard, nor perceived by the
ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for
them that wait for the hour which is coming, in the which all that are in the
Graves shall hear the voice of the Lord Jesus, and shall come forth, they that
have done good unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done evil,
unto the Resurrection of Damnation. I have been the longer upon this use of
Examination, as being a matter of the greatest moment not to be deceived in:
That which is our greatest concern in this World, next to the glory of God, is
to have an assured interest in the Kingdom of Grace, and also a true Title to
the Kingdom of Glory. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness,
is the word of Exhortation, which high and low, rich and poor, young and old
are to attend unto with all possible sincerity, seriousness and diligence. It
is the duty and the dignity, from the King upon the Throne, to the Beggar upon
the Dunghill, to seek this Kingdom of Grace and Glory. The greatest has as
great need to seek it, as the meanest; all are come short of the glory of this
Kingdom, because all have sinned. Our greatest fear should be, least any of us
should seem to fall short for ever of so glorious a Kingdom; and, our greatest
care, desire, and endeavor should be, next to the glory of God, to enjoy him in
the way of his Grace here, till we arrive at the full vision and fruition of
him in Heavenly Glory. This Kingdom of God is lost, because we are lost; it is
lost to us, and we lost to it: but, not so far lost, but the true seekers of it
may find it, and themselves be found in the right way of seeking it. It must be
found, otherwise the seekers of it lose themselves and this Kingdom for ever.
Many will seek to enter into the Kingdom of Grace and Glory, but shall not be
able. There be many that say, Who will show us any good? but few there be that
strive to enter in at the strait Gate, and walk in the narrow way which leads
unto life, and therefore few there be that find it. There is no rational
Creature upon the face of the Earth, that is exempted from this duty of seeking
first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness: Sinners, as well as Saints,
are to hearken unto, and obey the Counsel, Command, and Proclamation of Jesus
Christ herein. The chiefest sinner has a Call and Command to seek it, which is
his Warrant, and a Promise for his encouragement: Ask, and it shall be given
you; Seek, and ye shall find; Knock, and it shall be opened unto you. The
chiefest Saint has no dispensation against this Duty, Counsel, and Command;
but, looking diligently, lest any Man fail of, or fall from the Grace of God,
least any root of bitterness spring up, seeing he looks for such great things,
is to be diligent, that he may be found of him in peace, without spot and
blameless, at his coming; that when Christ who is our life shall appear, he
also may appear with him in glory: Sinners, such I mean, as are unconverted,
and are strangers and enemies to God, his Christ, Grace and Glory, and their
own greatest enemies; have most need to be exhorted, excited, and persuaded, to
seek first these things, namely, the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness;
which can never happily be done, till they be first dissuaded, and prevailed
with from self-seeking, self-pleasing, flesh-pleasing; for the satisfying
whereof, earthly things are minded, and sought after inordinately: and
therefore it is the Wisdom of our Lord Jesus, before he persuades to the
seeking of Spiritual and Heavenly things, by Reasons, Arguments, Motives, and
Disswasions, to free the Minds, and Hearts, and Affections of his hearers, from
their anxious and troublesome thoughts, fears and cares, concerning carnal and
earthly things pertaining to the Body; namely, what they should eat, what they
should drink, and what they should put on. Take no thought for your life; Is
not the life more than meat? and, The body than raiment? Your heavenly Father
feeds the Fowls of the air, Are not you much better than they? Why take ye
thought for Raiment? consider the Lilies of the field; if God so cloth the
Grass of the Field, Shall he not much more cloth you? therefore take no
thought, saying, What shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewithal
shall we be clothed? for, after all these things do the Heathens seek: but, let
Christians seek first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, even those
things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God, and set
their minds and affections on things above, and not on things on the earth. It
is much below every Christian by profession only, so to love the World, as to
seek the things that are in the World; for, all that is in the World, the lust
of the flesh, and the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, is not of the
Father, but is of the World; and therefore if any Man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him: What J^remiah said to Baruch, I say to thee, O
Christian! Seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not: seek thou
the Pleasures of the World to satisfy the lust of thy Flesh? seek them not:
the pleasures of sin are but for a season; the displeasures of God against thee
for thy sin, are endless, easeless, merciless, and remediless. A lover of, and
a liver in pleasure, can never be a lover of God, nor God a lover of him, nor
can he ever be a liver with him while such. She that lives in pleasure, is
dead while she lives, and damned when she dies. Because she lived in Pleasure
on the Earth, and waxed wanton, and nourished her heart, as in a day of
slaughter, receiving the reward of unrighteousness, as they that count it
pleasure to riot in the day time. How much she lived deliciously, so much
torment and sorrow will God give unto her. Seek thou the honors of the
World? Art thou ambitious to be some body in the World, in Name, or high Place
of Preferment, seek them not? if thou be godly, it is thy honor, as truly as
thy end, to honor the Lord; and, them that honor me, says God, I will honor.
If thou be'st wicked, or a fool, which is all one, the Wise Solomon will tell
thee, Honor is not seemly for a fool. To receive honor one of another, and not
to seek the honor that comes from God only, is the sin and dishonor which
every unbeliever is guilty of, and a great let and impediment in the duty of
seeking first the Kingdom of God. Seek thou to be rich in this World? labor
not to be rich: yet, if Riches increase, set not thine heart upon them. Will thou set thine eyes, and heart, upon that which is not? for Riches certainly
make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven. But, they that
will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, especially the lust of the pride of Life, in putting on of
Apparel, whose adorning is that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, and of
wearing of Gold; in erecting and furnishing stately Buildings, and pampering
and p^easing the flesh, which drown Men in destruction, and perdition; for, the
love of these things is the root of all evil; which, while some coveted after,
they have erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows. It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle, than for
such a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God: What is a Man profited if he
shall gain the whole World, with all its honors, pleasures, and riches, and
lose his own Soul, and his portion of grace and glory? or, What shall a Man
give or take in exchange for his Soul? Is not the Redemption of the Soul
precious? It was not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but
with the precious blood of Christ, who gave himself for our sins, that he might
deliver us from this present evil World. God never intended the whole World to
be the portion of every Man; God only is Man's Portion, and Man is Gods portion:
Why should any Man then wrong that noble part within him, his Soul; as to seek,
pursue, and follow after such beggarly things, as Riches, and Honors, and
Pleasures, and take up with them as his only hope and happiness, which every
wicked worldling does; the mean while neglecting, and making light of the one
thing necessary; seeking to enjoy God, and Christ, and Grace, and Glory; in
whom, and from whom alone they may infallibly have the true, durable,
unsearchable, satisfying, everlasting riches, honors, and pleasures. Oh! did
but the great ones of this World consider, and know what deceitful baits,
snares, and temptations, these worldly dignities, pleasures, and treasures,
through Gods permissive Providence, and Satan's Subtilties, prove to their
lustful and deceitful hearts; Would they so eagerly hunt after them, and undo
their Bodies and Souls in the pursuit of them? True, there is no evil in them,
but, through an evil unbelieving heart, there is much evil by them: Search the
Scriptures, and see, how many rich, and honorable, and pleasurable persons, are
gone, or will go to Heaven; not many wise men, after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble are called: God, that has chosen the poor of this
World, rich in faith, has not chosen the rich in this World to be poor in
faith: There is a sore evil under the Sun, namely Riches, kept for the owners
thereof to their hurt. Did the Rich in this World, in Scripture called the Men
of the World, which have their portion in this life, well consider, how little
their Riches will profit them in the day of wrath; they would not be so
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches, but in the living God, who gives
them richly all things to enjoy; they would do good, be rich in good Works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate, that they may lay up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on Eternal Life, which is the worst I wish them; and, the best use they can put
their uncertain riches unto. Oh! How many are, and will be, undone for ever, by
a deceitful World, a deceitful Devil, and a deceitful heart, from which I
beseech the Lord to deliver our most Gracious Sovereign the King and his
Kingdom; that we may all, as one Man, with oneness and trueness of heart, set
our selves, according to our Solemn Engagement in our Christian Covenant,
unfeignedly to renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, which must first
be done, before we can obey this Heavenly Counsel, Command, and Proclamation of
our Lord Jesus Christ, in seeking first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness; which, let every one of us account it our greatest duty,
choicest work, chiefest interest, and highest dignity, to be exercised therein;
let us, as we have opportunity, exhort one another daily, while it is called to
day, least any of us be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin, Satan, and
the World, to make light of our Lord and Savior his Counsel, Command, and
Proclamation; but, let it rather be a principal motive to us, to make the
Exhortation the more effectual, since it is the Counsel of Christ, the
Wonderful Counselor, who says, Counsel is mine; let us, with all readiness
and thankfulness, accept and embrace it, as being worthy of all acceptance;
for, it is the Counsel of the most worthy Person, most Wise, and able to give
the best Counsel; a Person on purpose sent from God the Father, his only
begotten Son, the second Person in the glorious Trinity, made Man, and now
God-Man for ever in one Person, named Jesus Christ; he it is that has given
this excellent Counsel to the World, namely, to seek first the Kingdom of God,
and his Righteousness; which is not only his Counsel, but Command; for, all
Power is given unto him, in Heaven, and in Earth, to Counsel and Command: God
the Father has anointed him to be a Prophet, a Priest, and King, so he was
here on Earth, and remains such in Heaven for ever. A Prophet to give Counsel,
a King to Command, that it be received, and a Priest, on our behalf, to God the
Father, to make continual intercession for us, that his Counsels and Commands
may be effectual to us for our salvation: and, he is actually and effectually
the Author of Eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him in this Command,
that seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness: A Command, that can
no ways be thought grievous; a gracious command indeed, to seek a Kingdom, not
an Earthly, but an Heavenly Kingdom; the Kingdom of God: Gods Kingdom, a
Kingdom all of G^^ce and Glory, where he dwells in all his glory. Wh^t Prince,
that h^th many Kingdoms will Counsel and Command a Subject, especially a
Rebellious one, to seek one of his Dominions: but our g^^cious Prince and
Savior, does Counsel and Command every one, every where, to seek the Kingdom
of God, by way of Proclamation. Ho, every one that ha^h no Money, come, buy
Grace and Glory without price: Wherefore do you spend Money and Labor for that
which satisfies not? Incline your ear and come unto me; hear, obey, and your
Soul shall live: inviting all, ^o^ ^^ly by Counsel, Command, and Poclamation,
but, by Promise, for their encouragement: Ask; and it shall be given you; Seek,
and ye shall find; Knock, and it shall be opened unto you; for, every one that
asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks, it
shall be opened. The experience of all that are in a state of Grace on Earth,
and in a state of Glory in Heaven, that have not lost their labor in seeking,
should be a powerful motive to every one that is to seek, and is at a loss for
Grace and Glory, to seek, that he also may find; for, he that seeks finds,
even Eternal Life, in the Promise, which God that cannot lie, has promised,
before the World began; and, will be righteous in performing, to all them, who,
by Faith, lay hold thereof: for, all the Promises of God, in Jesus Christ, are
Yea, and, in him, Amen; unto the glory of God. The General Assembly in Heaven
will give in this testimony; There failed not aught of any good thing which the
Lord has spoken unto us, all came to pass: whoever turns Gods Promises into
Prayer, God will, for certain, turn his Promises into Performances unto them.
Oh do not lose Grace and Glory for want of asking, seeking and knocking. Is the
Lord God a Sun and Shield? Will the Lord give Grace and Glory? Will he withhold
no good thing from them that seek him? ^^th he ^a^^, A new heart will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you; I will take away the Stony heart
out of you^ flesh, and I will give you an heart of Flesh; I will put (...)
spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Sta^^ and ye shall ke^p my
Judgment and do them; yet wi^ (...) be enquired of you to do all this for you?
Is this all (...) requires, to be enquired of? Is seeking the way to ^^^ing?
seek the Lord while he may be found; Call upon him while he is near: the Lord
is nigh m^^ all them t^^t call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth:
t^^ hand of God is upon all them for good that ^^ek him. God never said, and
never will say, to any of the house of Jacob, Seek my Face, Favor, Kingdom,
and Righteousness in vain: But, then we must seek this Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness right: It is not every seeking that will serve turn, nor every
seeker that finds; true it is, that every wicked Man may, and must seek first
Gods Kingdom and Righteousness: It is a Wicked Principle in them, who affirm,
That a Wicked Man may not Pray: Because he cannot Pray, he may, I hope, Pray,
That he may Pray: May he not desire Grace? I am sure the desire of Grace is
Grace in every one; common grace at least, which is to be Excited, Exerted, and
Improved for special Grace; the blessing of God can turn common grace into
special; to him that has, and improves it, it shall be given: the right
seeking is with the whole heart; then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go
and Pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you; and ye shall seek me, and find
me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. God is for the whole
heart; My Son give me thine heart: they only are blessed that seek him with the
whole heart. I entreated thy favor with my whole heart, says David: The only
way to get Mercy, Grace, and Glory from God, is to entreat the Favor of God
with the whole heart, with the mind, will, and affections; even all the powers
of the Soul must be vigorously at work, in this spiritual duty, in seeking
first the Kingdom of God. The Members of the Body must be also Instruments
herein; the strength of the inward and outward Man is to be put forth, our
Natural strength, our Spiritual strength, all the power we have, and can get
from God: We had need to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might,
and to Pray, That he would grant us according to the Riches of his Glory, even
his glorious Power, to be strengthened with all might, by his Spirit in the
inner-man; since we wrestle not against flesh and blood only, but against
principalities, against powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this
World, against spiritual wickedness in high places. We have three potent
enemies to out-wrestle, the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, all combined
against us; we have God to wrestle with by Prayer, and all other holy means for
the obtaining of Grace and Glory; if we be not Conquerors, through Christ,
strengthening us, we lose, not only the prize of an incorruptible Crown, but,
by our unfaithfulness and cowardice, bring upon our selves an infinite weight
of Judgment. It is he that overcomes, that shall not be hurt of the second
Death; and he that is faithful unto death, who will wear the Crown of Life; to
him that overcomes God will give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God: But, the fearful and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and Murderers, and Whore-mongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and
all Liars, shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second Death. If the first Death, the Separation only
of Body and Soul, be the King of Terrors, What a King of Terrors, and Horrors
will the Second Death be, which is an Eternal Separation, both of the Body and
the Soul, from the Presence of God and his Glory, and the enduring the Wrath of
God, in Body and Soul, in Hellfire, through all Eternity? Wherefore, let us
gird up the Loins of our Minds, and be sober, and hope to the end, for the
Grace and Glory that is brought unto us, at the Revelation of Jesus Christ:
Life and Death Eternal are set before us, let us choose Life, and cleave to him
in our Wills, who is our Life; Let our Affections be set on things above; Let
our Conversation be in Heaven; that our Commoration and Everlasting abode may
be there also; This is to seek the Kingdom of God with all our heart, and with
all our might. It must be sought also with understanding; the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Grace, and of the Kingdom of Glory must be known: It is our Heavenly
Fathers good pleasure to give a Kingdom unto them, and them only, unto whom it
is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God; but, to others, in
Parables, that seeing, they might not see; and hearing, they might not
understand. The Kingdom of God, which is a Kingdom of Grace and Glory, is such
a Mystery, that none can heartily desire and endeavor after it, but such as are
acquainted with it. Oh! were the Eternal worth and weight of Grace and Glory
known to us; would the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, give
unto us the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, for the enlightening the eyes of
our understanding, that we might know what is the hope of his calling, and what
the riches of the Glory of his inheritance in the Saints, we could not choose
but be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as we know, that our labor, in seeking first the Kingdom of God,
would not be in vain in the Lord. Verily, this Kingdom is not sought as it
ought to be, because it is not known as it should be; seek therefore to
understand it, that you may seek it with understanding: Consider what I say,
and the Lord give you understanding in the Mysteries of his Kingdom, which must
be sought also in a way of believing; I Believe in God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and the Life everlasting, is the sum of our Christian Creed, or
Belief, which, whosoever confesses with his mouth, and believes in his heart,
shall be saved; for, with the heart Man believes unto Righteousness, and with
the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation; for, the Scripture says,
whosoever believes on the Lord Jesus, shall not be ashamed or confounded: Now
Faith is the substance, ground, or confidence, of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen. Through Faith we understand that the Worlds were
framed by the Word of God; through Faith we understand or believe an unseen
World, where such things are prepared for them that love God, that a Natural
and Carnal eye has not seen, or can see; nor ear heard or perceived; neither
ever entered into the heart of Man; but, God has revealed them to, and for
Believers, by his Spirit, who look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen; for, the things which are seen are Temporal, but the
things which are not seen are Eternal: this is the victory that overcomes the
World, even our Faith; it overcomes the good things of the World, and the evil
things of the World, through Faith: the reproach of, or for Christ, is esteemed
greater riches than the Treasures of the World, and the Honors thereof; by
Faith, Moses refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, for it has
respect unto the recompense of the reward; by Faith it is, that true Christians
chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, as knowing, their light affliction, which is but
for a moment, works for them, a far more exce^ding and eternal weight of
glory. Through Faith we res^st our adversary the Devil, who, as a roaring Lio^
walks about, seeking whom he may devour, whom resis^, steadfast in the Faith,
and he will flee from you; for the Captain of your Salvation, the Lord Jesus,
was made partaker of Flesh and Blood, that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is the Devil; and deliver them, who, through
fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage: for this purpose
also the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy not only the Devil,
but the works of the Devil in us; purifying our hearts from all sin by Faith:
Without this Faith, it is impossible to please God; for, he that comes to God,
must believe, that he is; and, that he is a Rewarder of all them that
diligently seek him, his Kingdom, and his Righteousness: take we heed
therefore, lest there be in any of us an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God; to provoke him to swear in his wrath, we shall not enter
into his rest: for, To whom swear he, that they should not enter into his rest?
but, to them that believed not; for, they could not enter in because of
unbelief. This is the Sin that shuts so many out of Heaven, and shuts up
as many into Hell; he that believes not, is condemned already, because he has
not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. True believers are
the only true seekers of the Kingdom of God, and will be the only enjoyers of
it. Oh were our Faith as real, as this Kingdom is substantial! What manner of
seekers would all of us be? It is not heartily believed, and therefore not
heartily sought after: were it sought believingly, it would be sought
faithfully. Faith breeds faithfulness; they are near a kin: What is
Faithfulness, but a fullness of Faith, a stirring up the work of Faith with
power, to receive out of the fullness which is in Christ, grace for grace;
grace, to exercise grace, so to walk, even as he walked in faithfulness, both
to God and Man; especially in transacting and negotiating the great Work of his
Mediatory-Office, in our Redemption, and Reconciliation. Jesus Christ, the
Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, was faithful unto him that appointed
him: Such are all true Christians or Saints, called faithful in Christ Jesus;
as also Moses, faithful in all his house; and Abraham; they are Stewards of the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God: Moreover, it is required in Stewards, that a
Man be found faithful to God, himself, and others; for, as every Man has
received the Gift, even so Minister the same one to another, as good Stewards
of the manifold Grace of God. In seeking the Kingdom of God, before it can be
attained, there is much doing and suffering-work to be performed, which
requires much faithfulness: he only is the wise and faithful Servant, whom his
Lord, when he comes to take an account of his Stewardship, is found so doing;
as the Servant of Christ, doing the Will of God from the heart; not following
that which is evil, but that which is good: He that does good is of God, but he
that does evil has not seen God. Hypocrites say, but do not: but, a doer of
the Work, this Man shall be blessed in his deed, or doing. What St. John said
of his Gaius, beloved, thou do faithfully; whatsoever thou do to the
brethren, and to strangers, ought to be verifyed of every one who seeks the
Kingdom of God. Seek faithfully; do all that is to be done for the obtaining
it, by patient continuance in well-doing, and faithful also in suffering for
righteousness sake, we must, through much tribulation, enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven; think it not strange therefore, concerning the fiery Trial, which is
to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you; but rejoice, yea,
count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse Temptations, inasmuch as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may
be glad also with exceeding Joy, for great is your reward in Heaven, being
heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ: If so be that we suffer with him,
that we may be also glorified together; wherefore, let them that suffer
according to the will of God, in seeking the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, commit the keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto
a faithful Creator; since God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are faithful; his
Word faithful, Ministers faithful; for so we are to account them, being the
Ministers of Christ: Moreover, it is required in Stewards, that a Man be found
faithful. Since it is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
there is a Kingdom of Grace and Glory; whatever we do or suffer, in order to
the enjoying of it, let it be done in the fear of the Lord faithfully, and with
a perfect heart. So also diligently, those things which are excellent, are
difficult, and hard to come by, such are Spiritual and Heavenly things; namely,
Grace and Glory, which are most excellent, and therefore not so easily
attained. The great and difficult Work that lies upon our hands, is the making
our calling and election sure; for this end, every one has, or should have, a
particular and general calling, to work in both, to keep him from Idleness, and
to put him upon duty and diligence. Each calling requires much labor and
diligence. It is the will of God that none should stand idle. This is his
Command, That if any would not work, neither should he eat. It is not only the
Character of a good Huswife, but of a good Christian, that she eats not the
bread of idleness. It is not for Men and Women, who have Souls to save or lose,
a Heaven or Hell to live in for ever, to live a moment idle: Time, which is for
Eternity, is too precious a thing to be Idled away, to be spent in any thing,
but diligent seeking the Kingdom of God. What is the Proclamation of Jesus
Christ, but, Hearken diligently unto me; and eat ye that which is good. There
is Meat for them to eat, even hidden Manna, Angels food, which endures unto
everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto them who labor for it;
with this Meat the Soul of the diligent shall be made fat: there is nothing to
be had but poverty without diligence. He becomes poor that deals with a
slack hand, but the hand of the diligent, with the blessing of the Lord, makes
the godly so rich, as he adds no sorrow with it; while the wicked, who will
be rich, pierce themselves through with many sorrows. The unsearchable riches
of grace, and Treasures of glory, are gotten in a way of holy diligence: they,
who have escaped the corruption that is in the World, through lust, and are
made partakers of the Divine Nature, besides this, are to give all diligence,
to add to their Faith, Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge
Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to
Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly kindness Charity, till they
abound in them; for so an entrance shall be Ministered unto them abundantly,
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. If so much
diligence be required to grow in grace, What diligence is requisite to the
getting of it? If Ministering to the Saints be a Work, and labor of love, which
none can attain to the full assurance of hope, without showing diligence
therein unto the end? What Work, and labor, and diligence, will every grace
cost, before it be attained and perfected? This should by no means discourage,
but quicken us; our labor will not be in vain in the Lord. Let us not be weary
in well-doing, for, in due season we shall reap, if we faint not: If we are at
the pains to sow holiness in the Seed-time of this life, we shall reap
happiness in the harvest of Eternity; they who labor for rest, shall rest from
their Labor, and their Works shall follow them: a Man that is diligent in this
Heavenly business, of seeking the kingdom of God, he shall not stand before
mean Men, he shall stand before the King of Kings in all his Glory.

This Kingdom is to be sought fervently, both in Speech and Spirit; open thy
mouth wide, says God, and I will fill it: we must cry mightily to God in
Prayer for it; the effectual fervent Prayer of a Righteous man avails much;
not slothful in business of the greatest concernment; fervent in spirit,
seeking the Lord; laboring or striving fervently in Prayers; that we may stand
perfect, and complete in all the will of God. It is good to be zealously
affected always in so good a thing, as seeking the kingdom of God, which must
be sought also violently: the kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force. Violence in other cases is irregular and dangerous,
and especially in a way of sin, when Men do evil with both hands, earnestly,
the times are then evil with a witness; but, their mischief will return upon
their own heads, and their violent dealing will come down upon their own pates;
especially upon them that lie in wait for Blood; that hunt every Man his
brother with a Net; and upon her that lies in the Bosom to deceive and
destroy: the Violent Man, or Man of Violence, is called the Proud, or Evil Man;
It is the Violent Man that purposes to overthrow the goings of the Upright, by
hiding Snares and Cords, spreading Nets, setting Gins for him, while evil shall
hunt the Violent Man to overthrow him. God has purposed to preserve the
upright Man from this Man of violence, though a Brother; for, a Brother
offended, especially without cause, is harder to be won then a strong City, and
their Contentions are like the Bars of a Castle. There is no going to Heaven or
Hell without violence; evil Men are more violent in serving Sin and Satan, than
good Men in serving God, which is an aggravation of their Sin; and a very great
shame it is for such as are bound for such a place as Heaven is, and going to
God, should be so slow and slothful in their pace thither, while the ungodly
are making such have to Hell. Is a corruptible triple Crown of Earthly Honors,
Pleasures and Riches, in the way to Hell, worth so much striving and running
for? and, Is the Incorruptible, Incomparable Crown of Life, in the way to
Heaven, not worth much more? Every one has a Race to run, a Prize to get, the
way to run in is Gods Commandments, the Prize Eternal Life; if thou will enter
into Life keep the Commandments. The great duty is, so to run as to obtain. In
the Olympic Games, the fighters and the Runners, which were violent, painful
Exercises, were to put forth all their strength; they had therefore their
honorable Encouragements to animate them. The Apostle alludes to these, to put
Christians upon the like activity, because they have many Duties to exercise,
which cannot be performed without painfulness and violence; but, one moments
being in Heaven, will more then recompense all their labor. Let us get our
hearts enlarged, that, with holy violence, we may run the ways of Gods
Commandments unto the end, that our reward may be great in the Kingdom of
Glory, which we must also seek valiantly. We have violent, valiant, and potent
enemies that stand in our way to this Kingdom, to withstand and conquer, before
we can enter into it; the Devil and all his Angels, a flattering and a frowning
World; and worse than all these, namely, in-dwelling sin, a home-born enemy,
that is more deceitful, and dreadful, than all our other adversaries, which
must be mortified before we can be saved: We have all Gods holy, just, and good
Laws to obey, in every thought, word, and work, in the greatest strictness and
spirituality, which requires much resolution, and courage in us, to perform
always even unto the end: It is therefore very remarkable, that when God
enjoins every one to observe, to do according to all the Law, turn not from it
to the right hand or to the left, he subjoyns this, and repeats it three times,
be strong, and very courageous; be strong, and of a good courage; be strong,
and of a good courage; to observe to do according to all the Law, without
erring on either hand: It is the narrow way of life, that leads to the strait
Gate, which, whosoever walks therein, shall enter in thereat. This can never be
done without constant courage, and fixed resolution against sins of Omission
and Commission, and the lively performance of all holy Duties, the means of
getting Grace, and growing therein; which is our power to resist, mortify, and
overcome, what God has forbiden us, and to do whatsoever he has commanded us:
necessary hereunto is the putting on, the keeping on, the daily fighting in the
whole Armor of God; which, that it may be done valiantly, and successfully,
must be done in the name and strength of the Captain of our Salvation, the Lord
Jesus; this way David vanquished all his Enemies that compassed him about like
Bees; the Name of the Lord was the strong Tower he ran into for safety; he made
the Lord his strength, and he became his Salvation: our strength, valor, and
prowess is from Christ, which teaches our hands to War, and our fingers to
fight; that we wax valiant in fight, turning to flight the Armies of the
Aliens: What is it that a Christian cannot do, through Christ strengthening him
with all might, by his Spirit in the inner Man. True Believers are the only
valiant Men in the World; none have so many and great enemies to contest with
as they: What wonderful exploits did those Worthies in the Hebrews do, through
the power of their Faith? they turned not their back upon the World, the Flesh,
or the Devil; in all these things they were more than Conquerors. Tribulation,
distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword, death, life, Angels,
principalities, powers, things present, things to come, height, depth, nor any
other creature, can separate true Believers from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus: through God they do valiantly, for he it is that shall tread down
our enemies, that we may pass in season and safety, through a Kingdom of Grace
to a Kingdom of Glory, which we must seek vigilantly; be vig lant, says St.
Peter, because your Adversary the Devil walks about, seeking whom he may
devour; if we be not vigilant as well as valiant, we may easily be devoured by
Satan; he stands Sentinel night and day, watching that he may recover them,
who, by Repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth, through the Mercy and
Grace of God, have recovered themselves out of his snares, to take them
captive, or alive at his will. When we have such a wakeful, wrathful, watchful,
and powerful Tempter so nigh us, we had need to watch that we enter not into
Temptation. Saints have sinners their Tempters, and their Enemies every way. O
how infinitely necessary is it, that every Saint stand day and night upon his
watch; that he watch and keep his heart with all diligence; that he Pray with
David, Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, keep the door of my lips, that I
sin not with my Tongue; that I may keep my mouth with a bridle, while the
wicked is before me; for, the Tongue is such an untameable evil, that if any
Man offend not in word, the same is a perfect Man; such ought all Saints to be,
even perfect, having so many that watch for Iniquity; that make a Man an
offender for a Word; and lay a Snare for him that reproves in the Gate; and
turn aside the just for a thing of naught; and because in wrath they hate them:
Cast Iniquity upon their Names, their Calling etc. Defaming their Persons, by
giving out, or taking up evil Reports against them. I heard the Defaming of
many, fear on every side: Report, say they, and we will report it. All my
familiars, (everyone of my peace) watched for my halting, saying, peradventure
he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our
revenge on him: with such Men have many a poor persecuted Christian to deal
with. Should we not then watch unto Prayer? yea, watching thereunto with all
perseverance; for, he only is blessed that watches, and keeps himself, and
his garments unspotted from the flesh, and the World. This Kingdom of God must
be sought early, that is, betimes in our age, early, or betime in the morning,
which is the meaning of this Word first: seek first the kingdom of God, that
is, early; Indeed, all our lifetime, how-long-soever, is to be employed in
seeking the glory of God, and glory with God; but, the flower of our age and
time is to be spent in a more special manner, in looking after Spiritual and
Heavenly things, and making sure of them; we have Precepts, Promises, and
Presidents, to quicken our endeavors: Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy youth; they that seek me early shall find me: Christ Jesus was our pattern
herein; when the Child Jesus was Twelve years old, he was found in the Temple
sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them
questions, that all that heard him were astonished at his Understanding and
Answers, and when they saw him they were amazed: His custom was to rise up a
great while before day to Prayer, and after to Preach this kingdom of God; by
Prayer he sought it for us, in his Preaching he offered it to us; to this very
day, in the Ministry, he is seeking first the kingdom of God, in a way of
Prayer and Preaching for us. David, a Man after Christ's own heart, was at his
Devotion early in the morning; O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee;
My voice shall thou hear in the Morning, O Lord; in the Morning will I direct
my Prayer unto thee, and will look up. There is a kingdom of Grace and Glory,
and few there be that find it: What is the Reason? They do not first seek it;
They do not begin when God would have them begin, early, young. Children, under
the Old and New Testament, were early dedicated to God, and were under his
command, of seeking and serving him betimes, and commended for so doing. Oh
that young ones that have no Worldly fears, and cares in their heads and
hearts, to trouble and hinder them, would know the time of their Visitation!
their best time to acquaint themselves with God, and to seek the things of
their everlasting Peace. How many more might go to Heaven, if they would first
seek the kingdom of God, if they would be every way early at this work, hold
on, and hold out to the end seeking: Behold! now is the accepted time, even the
time of youth; Behold! now is the day of Salvation: Oh the infinite advantages
that children have for good and godly education. If children now, while
children, especially those who are under godly education, be not the children
of God; it may be, when they are not children, they shall never be the children
of God, but the children of his wrath for ever. I am sure it is the will of
God, that children, while they are children, should be his children: Christ
would have very young ones to enter into the kingdom of God; insomuch, that
when the Disciples rebuked those that brought young children to him, that he
should touch them, he was much displeased, and said, Suffer the little children
to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God; but
then the kingdom of God must be sought primarily, and chiefly; first, before
other things; first, above other things; we are always to begin and end with
God, in our seeking and seeing him, and in seeking for our selves, Spiritual
and Heavenly things are first to be desired, and labored after; for, we have
no command in Scripture to seek other things, but a Promise, that they shall be
added, or given in on the by, if we first seek the kingdom of God, before other
things, and above other things, as the principal and chief matters of our
lives. There is but one thing necessary, which is, to get well to Heaven: There
is but one thing to be desired and sought after, the beholding the beauty of
the Lo^d in his kingdom of grace and glory: This is the principal thing, and
principally to be regarded. What greater things, wholly to swallow up our
minds, thoughts, cares, desires, and labors, than God, Christ, Grace, and
Glory, which are also to be sought with delight and complacency; as the highest
object of our delight; delight thy self in the Lord, is his Command, and our
sweetest Duty. It is not enough to do holy duties, except we delight in them;
not for themselves, but for God, and the things of God, Spiritual and Eternal.
Here our delight is to be placed, as suitable to, and worthy of it; and, all our
other delights, in other things, are but to raise our delight in God: What poor
things are transitory honors, pleasures, and riches, to delight in, that are
but for a season, in comparison of those true and indurable riches, honors, and
pleasures, which are at Gods right hand for evermore? We may either want those
to delight in, or want delight for them, however so much as to satisfy, they
are not Commensurate and Adequate objects of delight, as being uncertain and
insufficient; but these, which are Spiritual and Eternal, through Gods
All Sufficiency, are both sure and sufficient, which breed satisfaction and
delight; they that acquaint themselves with God, are at peace with him, have
good from him, receive the Law from his mouth, and delight in it in the inward
Man, and lay up his words in their heart; that return to the Almighty, and put
away iniquity from their Tabernacles; that have the Almighty for their defense,
shall also have their delight in the Almighty; and the Almighty who delights in
Mercy, to delight in them. What is it to seek the kingdom of God, but to seek
the greatest delight? and, Should we not delight in seeking delights?
especially when our seeking or praying is Gods delight. The Prayer of the
upright is his delight. The kingdom of God and his Righteousness are things
full of delight. With what delight should we think of them, speak of them, and
seek them, till we find them, enjoy them, experience, and taste them? Oh taste
and see that the Lord is good! There is more delight and sweetness in tasting
and eating of Honey, than in hearing a discourse of its sweetness, and seeing
it. If there be so much sweetness and delight in the word of God, What
sweetness then in the Word, that is God? in the multitude of my troublous,
ragged thoughts within me, says David, thy comforts, or promises, delight my
Soul: unless thy Law had been my delight, I should then have perished in mine
affliction. The delights that are to be found in God, and in his Law, are
enough to sweeten the bitterest condition: There is much trouble and sorrow in
seeking the Kingdom of God, and tribulation to be endured, before it be
enjoyed; but, the delights in the right seeking it, and the infinite delights
there are to be had in the everlasting possessing it, will more than recompense
for all the pains and sufferings: the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed in us; and
therefore this Kingdom of Grace and Glory is to be sought constantly, that is,
without ceasing, day and night, or very frequently, constantly, that is,
perseveringly; for God will render to every Man according to his deeds; to
them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality, Eternal Life. Be thou faithful herein, O Christian! unto Death,
and Christ will give unto thee, in the Kingdom of God, a Crown of Life; for,
only he that shall thus endure seeking unto the end, the same shall be saved.
Even he that does seek this kingdom of God, which is a kingdom of Grace and
Glory, with his whole heart, understandingly, believingly, faithfully,
diligently, fervently, violently, valiantly, vigilantly, early, delightfully,
and constantly, which is no more than God requires, and the unconceivable
excellencies of this kingdom deserves: Is not the kingdom of Grace it self,
nay, one Grace of this kingdom, more worth than all the Glory of all the
kingdoms of this World? The very trial of our faith, and so of every other
Grace, is more precious than Gold that perishes. How precious is Faith it
self? Who that has the Faith of Gods elect in the least degree in his heart,
would part with it at any rate? nothing in this World better than life; skin
for skin, and all that a Man has, will he give for his life: But, How many
have lost their lives to save their faith, that they might believe to the
saving of their Souls; they have died for the Faith, that they might die in
Faith: And, as for Hope, which is a patient waiting, and looking for that
blessed Hope, and the Glorious appearing of our Lord Jesus, when we shall
appear with him in Glory, at death; but, more Gloriously at the day of
Judgment, when he shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, to be
Glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe; who has
this good hope, through Grace, that would part with it for more than all this
World, were it Ten thousand times ten thousand better than it is? Alas, if in
this life only we have hope, we are of all Men most miser^ble; but, since we
can, and do rejoyc^ in hope of the G or^ of God, we are happy enough in our
hope, which (...) laid up for us in Heaven: Now abides Faith, Hop^, Charity,
these three, but the greatest of these is Charity; Faith and Hope we shall
leave behind us, having no need of them in Heaven: When we are at the end of
our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls, there is an end of our Faith: but
Charity, which is the bond of our perfection in Heaven, never cease. What is
our Eternal Life in Heaven, but an Eternal Life of Love? our dwelling in and
with God will be a dwelling in Love; and God who is Love dwelling in us. There
will be fervent Charity indeed between God, Angels, and Men: here, because
Iniquity does abound, the love of many does wax cold: there will be neither
Sin, Satan, or Sinners, to quench the flames of Mutual Love and Charity: if
Charity have so many Gracious and wonderful effects, and fruits here, What
glorious effects will it produce in Glory? Thou have ravished my heart, thou
have ravished my heart, s^ith Christ, with one of thine eyes, with one Chain of
thy Neck, a Chain of Mercy and Truth. Does Mercy and Truth, and other Graces in
his Spouse, ravish the heart of Christ? What ravishing Joy will there be, when
Mercy and Truth meet together in Heaven, and Righteousness and Peace kiss each
other? when Grace shall be turned into Glory; when Charity, a Grace, a Duty
now, shall be Charity a Duty also, but our Glory and Reward: Will not Christ
say of his Spouse then, How fair, and how pleasant art thou, O Love for
delights? If the Created Glory of a Christian be so Glorious in the eyes of
Christ, How Glorious will the Increated Glory of God in Christ be, to the
beholders of it, to all Eternity? Let us therefore stick at no care and pains,
to make sure of a kingdom, which God has made so sure to us in his Everlasting
purpose, and preparation, and is purchased for us at so dear a rate, as the
precious Blood of Christ, and promised and preserved to us in his Everlasting
Covenant: Here have we no continuing City, let us seek one to come with the
heirs of Promise, who look for a City which has foundations, whose builder and
maker is God: It is the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, where
God himself, an Innumerable company of Angels, the General Assembly and Church
of the Firstborn, and Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament, and God the
Holy Ghost the Comforter, dwell all together; Glorifying one another in an
unspeakable manner for ever: and, Should not the Glory of this Kingdom of
Glory, and the Heavenly Society therein, invite, and constrain us all in these
Kingdoms, to look after such a state and place. Is not every one infinitely
obliged to seek this Kingdom, not only for himself, but for the Community, if
it were possible every moment? Is there a Kingdom of Grace which may be had
here in this World, and a Kingdom of Glory hereafter in another World? Is this
a faithful saying? and, Is it not worth every ones acceptance? Is not the
Grace of God in truth, and power, the one thing needful here? and, Is not Glory
in the Kingdom of God the one thing needful there? Why are we then careful and
troubled about many things, when one thing is needful? Why do we not all, as
one Man, choose that good part, which shall not be taken away from us? There is
nothing else in this World, but, either it will be taken from us, or we from
it: Should we not labor to know in our selves, that we have in Heaven a better,
and an enduring substance, an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and
that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us, where we should lay up for our
selves Treasures, Honors, and Pleasures, that Moth and Rust do not corrupt, and
where Pride and Covetousness, two notorious Thieves, do not, dare not, cannot
break through and steal; that where our Treasure is, there our hearts and hopes
may be also? But, let us lay up for our selves Treasures upon Earth never so
safely, the Moth and Rust do, and will corrupt them; and these two Thieves will
break through and steal: the care of getting and keeping these Earthly
Treasures; and the fear of losing them, put too many besides themselves, and
their duty, in seeking those things which are above. The only way is to be
careful for nothing, but in every thing, by Prayer and Supplication, with
Thanksgiving, to make our request known unto God; and the Kingdom of God, which
is not meat and drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy, in the Holy
Ghost, which passes all understanding, will keep our hearts and minds through
Christ Jesus, that our conversation will be without Pride, in minding high
things, seeking great things for our selves, or covetousness, being content
with such things as we have, because God has said, He will never leave us nor
forsake us: and we are therefore to take heed, and beware of covetousness, for
a Man's Life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses;
having food and raiment we are therewith to be content: for, we brought nothing
into this World, and it is certain we can carry nothing out: God, his Kingdom
of Grace and Glory, with content, is great gain: What will it profit a Man to
gain the whole World, and lose God, his Kingdom, and his Soul? Men of corrupt
Minds, and destitute of the truth, suppose that Gain is Godliness; but, the God
of this World has blinded the minds of these Men which believe not, lest the
Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them; yet, if God, who
commanded the Light to shine out of darkness, would shine into their hearts, to
give the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ; and the Excellencies of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus, and the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith; those things which were gain to them,
they would count loss for Christ; yea doubtless, they would count all things
but loss for the excellencies they see in God, Christ, Grace, and Glory; and
would willingly suffer the loss of all things, and count them bu^ d^ng, if by
any means they might attain unto the Resurrection of the dead, for the price of
the High calling of God in Christ Jesus; who has called them out of Darkness
into his Mavelous Light of Grace, which has made them meet to be Partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints in the light of Glory, against they be
translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son, where they shall be ever with him,
to behold his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father; the
brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, for we shall see
him as he is, not through a Glass darkly, but then face to face; with open
face, beholding the Glory of the Lord, we shall be changed into the same Image
of Glory; the Lord Jesus Christ shall change our vile Body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his Glorious Body; now we are the Sons of God, and it does
not yet appear what we shall be, but we know, that when Christ who is our life
shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in Glory, and we shall be like
him in our Souls; for, if we h^ve been planted together in the likeness of his
death, we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection, which God the
Father, according to the working of his mighty Power wrought in Christ, when he
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own righ h^nd in the Heavenly
places, and has raised us up together, and m^de us sit together in Heavenly
places in Christ Jesus; and according to his abundant Mercy, begotten us again
unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, to an Inheritance
Incorruptible and Undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
them, who are kept by the Power of God, to rejoice indeed with Christ in joy
unspeakable and full of Glory, which all they who first seek the Kingdom of
God, and his Righteousness, may assure themselves of. But, such as invert the
Order of Christ, that first seek the things of the World; and the Kingdom of
God, and his Righteousness on the by; that take Earthly things for their Home,
Heaven, Portion; and the Heavenly Glory for a Reserve; they forfeit, and will
come short of this Glory, which will be their greatest misery; remaining the
Children of the Devil, they shall be like him in Deformity and Damnation:
Christ shall say to them on the left hand, at the Great Day, Depart from me ye
Cursed, into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: they who
refused to be as happy as God would have had them, shall be as miserable as he
can make them: the pain of loss, and the pain of sense, both which the Godly
escape: the Ungodly shall feell in Hell Eternally. Who can imagine what a loss
God and the Kingdom of Glory will be? and, Who can endure almost to hear of
dwelling in Everlasting burnings? they that are Enemies to the Cross of Christ,
whereby the World should he Crucified to them, and they to the World; whose God
is their belly, whose Glory is their shame, who mind Earthly things, their end
is to be punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the Glory of his Power, for the suffering the Vengeance of Eternal
Fire: How much better is it for every one of us, in the fear of God, to be
obedient to this Heavenly Call, Counsel, Command, and Proclamation, of our dear
Redeemer the Lord Jesus; seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, that we may be accounted worthy to escape all these things, and
to stand before the Son of Man in his Glory? otherwise, How shall we escape the
Damnation of Hell, if we neglect so great Salvation? See that we refuse not him
that speaks; for, if they escaped not, who refused him that spoke on Earth,
much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from
Heaven. Christ speaks yet in his Word, and by his Ministers, who are his
spokesmen; he that hears them hears him; and, he that despises them,
despises him that sent them: and, they that despise the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, shall be lightly esteemed. Be it far from us to put Christ
upon complaining of us, as against his Israel of old; All day long have I
stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying People: least we
hear him say, because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my
hand, and no M^n regarded; but ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would
none of my Commands; I also will laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your
fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a Whirlwind; when
distress and anguish comes upon you, then shall ye call upon me, but I will
not answer: they shall seek me, my Kingdom of Grace, and Glory, but they shall
not find me, nor it; they shall ask, but they shall not have: they shall knock,
but it shall not be opened unto them: for that they would none of my Counsel,
they shall have none of me or my Kingdom: but whosoever hearkneth diligently unto
this Word of Christ, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of Grace
shall dwell in them, and they shall dwell in the Kingdom of Glory, where they
shall be for ever quiet from fear of evil; but then we are to seek it first,
that is, early and principally, or chiefly in the morning of our Age, and in
the morning, in respect of time; we must not dare to put off a Work of this
weight, worth and moment, to the last moment, as too many do, with a Lord have
Mercy upon us: our first and best time, the opportunity of time, all our days,
is little enough to be spent in asking, that we may have in seeking, that we
may find in knocking, till an abundant entrance be ministered and opened unto us
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Seek we
first the Kingdom of God above and before other things, as that which is most
necessary for us so to do. That which is of the most, and greatest consequence,
and necessity, should be first done above and before other things, which are
less necessary; things indifferent, when they come in competition, must give
place to things Necessary and Indispensable. It is not so necessary to our
everlasting happiness, whether we be rich, or poor, high or low; as that we be
holy, which must be, before we can be happy; and there is an absolute, and
indispensible necessity of our being both holy and happy. Grace and Glory are
so far from things indifferent, that they are the one thing needful, and
therefore first to be sought, as not only necessary, but most excellent wisdom,
which is Grace and Glory; and much more, even Christ himself, is the principal
thing; happy is the Man that finds Wisdom, for the Merchandise of it, is
better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the Gain thereof than fine Gold;
more precious than Rubies, and all the things that can be desired, are not to
be compared to it; length of days, riches and honor, peace, plenty, and
pleasantness accompany wisdom, which is a Tree of Life, to them that lay hold
thereof, and happy is every one that retains Wisdom. God and Godliness only
is profitable to all persons and things, having promise of the Life that now
is, and of that which is to come; and are not things which are Spiritual and
Eternal, and so absolutely necessary, yea infinitely necessary and profitable,
not only for this, but the better life, to be preferred, and sought, before
things Temporal; and the rather, because we have a promise of Christ to assure
us, that if we seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, all these
things shall be added unto us. If my Soul follows hard after God, his
Kingdom, Holiness, Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace, with them that call
upon the Lord out of a pure heart; surely then Goodness and Mercy shall follow
me all the days of my Life; yea, so sure, as when I walk in the Sun my shadow
follows me. The Lord God is my Sun, the Lord has given me Grace and Glory;
no good thing will he withhold from me, while I walk uprightly with him. Thus
much by way of Exhortation and Excitation to Sinners: A Word to Saints,
especially such as are Ministers, by one that am the least, that am not meet to
be called a Minister, or Saint; be we exhorted and comforted, and charged,
every one of us that we walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, who has
called us unto his Kingdom and Glory, and called us also with an holy Calling,
according to his own purpose and Grace, into so high and honorable and holy
Calling as the Ministry, which is both our General and Particular Calling, as
having no other Work to do, save to make first our own calling and election
sure; least that by any means when we have Preached unto others, we our selves
should be Cast-awayes: and then, to help others herein, Who is sufficient for
these things?

We are, or should be, the Lights of the World, sent by Christ, the true Light,
to turn Men from darkness to light: we are a Royal Priesthood, called out of
darkness into his mavelous Light; God, who commanded the Light to shine out
of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the Light of the knowledge of
the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, if we be Ministers indeed: for,
no Man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron: for we are not to Preach our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our
selves the Servants of all for Jesus sake; handling the Word of God by
Manifestation of the truth; Commending our selves to every Man's Conscience in
the sight of God, which can never be so effectually done, until it please God,
who separates us to the Work, also to call us by his Grace, to reveal his Son
in us. How needful is it, that Christ be formed in them, who are to travel in
birth until Christ be formed in others? It is the Gift of the Grace of God
given unto us, by the effectual working of his Power, which makes us able
Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the
Preaching among the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ, and to make all
Men see what is the fellowship of the Mystery, which from the beginning of the
World has been hid in God, that the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of
the same Body, and partakers of his Promise in Christ by the Gos^el. Moreover,
it is required in Stewards of the Mysteries of God, who are to be accounted the
Ministers of Christ, that a Man be found faithful. The faithful word is to be
committed to faithful Men, who shall be able and apt to Teach others also, as
they have been Taught of God; that they may be able by sound Doctrine, both to
exhort and to convince the gainsayers. The Glorious Gospel of the blessed God
is committed to every Ministers trust, who should be able to say with St. Paul,
I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled me, for that he counted me
faithful, putting me into the Ministry; that the Ministry be not blamed: no
offense is to be given in any thing, but in all things are we to approve our
selves as the Ministers of God, skilful in the Word of Righteousness; having,
by reason of use, our Senses exercised, to discern both Good and Evil, that we
may be sound in the Faith, in the Doctrine of it, showing uncorruptness, not as
many, which corrupt or deal deceitfully with the Word of God, carried about
with diverse and with strange Doctrines, with every wind of Doctrine; but as of
sincerity, consenting only to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, and
sound also in the Grace of Faith. Ministers, by whom others believe, ought
themselves to be sound Believers, fervent and faithful Lovers one of another,
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment: Let us
not therefore Judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that no Man
put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall, in his Brothers way; Let as many
as be perfect, be thus minded, whereto they have already attained; let them
walk by the same Rule, mind the same thing, and, if in any thing, any one be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal in this way only, even this unto him, that
we may, with one mind, and one mouth, Glorify God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ: Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace,
and things wherewith one may edify another, who are to speak unto Men to
Edification, and Exhortation, and Comfort; no corrupt Communication should
proceed out of our mouth, who are Gods mouth to the People, and the peoples
mouth to God, but sound speech, that cannot be condemned; which is good to the
use of edifying, that it may minister Grace unto our Hearers. Our Speech and
Preaching is not to be with the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the Spirit and of Power; that the Faith of our Hearers may not
stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God: For this end are Ministers
to beseech the Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of
the Spirit, that they strive together with them in their prayers to God for
them, that he would open unto them a day of utterance, to speak the mystery of
Christ, that they may make it manifest as they ought to speak, not as pleasing
men, but God, which tries their hearts, that so the Word of the Lord may have
free course (may run) and be glorified, and they may come unto their people in
the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, keeping back nothing that
is profitable, not shunning to declare unto them all the counsel of God, that
they may be pure from the blood of all men, such an one was Tychicus, a beloved
Brother and faithful Minister in the Lord to make known all things. And Paul, I
have showed you all things. Taking heed to themselves, to their Doctrine, and
to all the Flock, over the which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers,
teaching them publicly, and from house to house, not ceasing to warn every one
night and day with tears, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves,
to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the Truth, that they may recover themselves out of the snare
of the Devil, who are taken captive by him at his will. Ministers by whom also
they believe, good Ministers of Jesus Christ, nourishing up their Flock in the
words of Faith, and good Doctrine, whereunto they have attained, gentle among
them, cherishing them even as a Nurse cherishes her children, so laboring as
to support the weak, and comfort the feeble-minded, studying to show themselves
approved unto God, Workmen that need not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the
Word of Truth, to give them their portion of meat in due season, among whom
they have gone preaching the Kingdom of God, instant in season, out of season,
reproving, rebuking, exhorting with all long-suffering and doctrine, making
manifest the savor of the knowledge of Christ in every place unto God a sweet
savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish, to the one the
savor of death, and to the other the savor of life, ruling them well over whom
the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers, that they might remember and obey them
who have the Rule over them, submitting themselves, for they watch for their
Souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not
with grief, for that is unprofitable for them. These Elders that rule well,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine, are well worthy of double
honor, both countenance and maintenance; who feed the Flock of God, which is
among them as much as in them is, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither
as being Lords over, or overruling Gods Heritage, but Ensamples to the Flock,
in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity, blameless
as the Steward of God, a Lover of Hospitality, apt to teach, a Lover of good
men, and good things, sober, vigilant, just, holy, temperate, of good or modest
behavior, patient toward all men, one that rules well his own house, having
his wife and children in subjection, with all gravity behaving themselves among
them that believe holily, and justly, and unblameably, whereof they are
Witnesses, and God also, even then when they have cause to think that God has
set them forth as it were appointed to death, and made them a spectacle or
Theater unto the World, and to Angels, and to Men, because they are Fools for
Christ's sake, that others may be wise in Christ, weak and despised, that their
people may be strong and honorable, being also content both to hunger and
thirst, to be naked and buffeted, reviled, persecuted, defamed, and made the
filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things, and to have no certain
dwelling place on Earth, that they may have a certain dwelling place in Heaven
for ever. If Bonds and Afflictions abide or wait for the faithful Ministers of
the Gospel, none of these things move them, neither do they count their life
dear unto themselves, so that they may finish their course and their Ministry
which they have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace
of God; for what is their hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing or glorifying; is
not the sound conversion, and salvation of their Flock, even in the presence of
our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? Certainly they are their Crown and Joy,
what manner of persons then above all others, ought Ministers to be, who are
workers together with Christ, beseeching one another, who preach the Grace of
God to others, that we receive not the Grace of God our selves in vain, giving
no offense in any thing, that our Ministry be not blamed: but in all things,
without vainglory, commending or approving our selves as the Ministers of God,
in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distress, in stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, and tossing to and fro, in labors, in watching, in
fasting, by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy
Ghost, by Love unfeigned, by the word of Truth, by the Power of God, by the
Armor of Righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by Honor and
Dishonor, by evil Report, and good Report; as Deceivers, and yet true; as
unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold we live; as chastened, and
not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich;
as having nothing, yet possessing all things; and whether we be, through many
Tribulations, besides our selves, it should be for God; or whether we be sober,
it ought to be for our peoples sake, we should give attendance to Reading,
Praying, Studying, Meditation, Examination, Exhortation, giving our selves
wholly to them, that our profiting may appear to all, taking heed unto our
selves, and unto our doctrine, continuing in them; for in doing this, we shall
both save our selves, and them that hear us. If the Glory of God indeed, the
Salvation of our own Souls, and all theirs committed to our charge be our very
end, in our patient continuance in well-doing, and suffering for Conscience and
Righteousness sake, we are made manifest unto God, and may trust also to be
made manifest in due time in the Consciences of all; having our selves a good
Conscience, that whereas we are spoken evil of, as of evil doers, they may be
ashamed that falsely accuse our good Conversation in Christ; for our rejoicing
should be the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our
Conversation in the world, and more abundantly to them-ward, who are our care
and charge in the Lord. Therefore my beloved Brethren of the Ministry, let us
be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, and though
Israel be not gathered, and we may seem to have labored in vain, and spent our
strength for naught, and in vain, yet surely our judgment is with the Lord, and
our work with our God, he shall be our strength, and we shall be glorious in
the eyes of the Lord, forasmuch as we know that our labor is not in vain in
the Lord.

If necessity be laid upon Ministers with a woe unto them, whatever they
suffer, that preach not the Gospel, and eight woes to them who are Hypocrites,
that say, but do not, Matthew. 23. What necessity is there also that Christians
do take heed whom they hear, what they hear, that they hear, and how they hear,
that they may not be hearers only, but doers of the work, that they may be
blessed in their deed. The Apostle exhorts, comforts, and charge every one
(as a Father does his children) that they would walk worthy of God, who has
called them unto his Kingdom and Glory, which is no more than that their
Conversation be only as becomes the Gospel of Christ, putting off concerning
the former Conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to the
deceitful lusts, that their Conversation be without covetousness, and so of all
other worldly and fleshly lusts. The lust of the flesh, and the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life, with all ungodliness, is to be denied; we are not
only to abstain, but to flee from fleshly lusts which war against the Soul, not
fashioning our selves according to our former lusts, when we were dead in
Trespasses and Sins, w^lking according to the course of this world, according
to the Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that now works in the
children of disobedience, among whom we all had our Conversation in times past,
in the lust of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind,
walking after the flesh; for they that are after the flesh are carnally minded,
do mind the things of the flesh; so then they that are in the flesh, and live
after the flesh, cannot please God, cannot walk worthy of God unto
all-pleasing; no man can serve two Masters, for either he will hate the one,
and love the other, or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. We
cannot serve God and Mammon, their Commands are so contrary the one to the
other, and therefore to walk worthy of God, is not to make provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, it is to wa k honestly, or decently, as in
the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not
in strife and envying, not in the lusts of concupiscence, not in the vanity of
our mind, in fleshly wisdom, not to walk in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of scorners, or to walk in any
way that is not good, but to abhor and eschew that which is evil, that they may
walk with God; to walk with God in the name of the Lord our God, is to walk
worthy of God; to walk before him as always in his sight with a perfect and
upright heart, not allowing in our selves, or indulging the least sin, but
abstaini^g from all appearance of evil, as that which is only displeasing to
God, and because it is so, and hating it upon that account, that we may walk in
Christ Jesus, as we have received him to be the Lord our righteousness,
trusting only therein for justification and salvation, and for our only
perfect pattern; for he that says he abides in him, ought him self also so to
walk, even as he walked, who always did those things that pleased his heavenly
Father, herein leaving us an Example, that we should follow his steps who did
no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, he was so holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners; as the Father gave him Commandment, even so
did he. In the Volume of the Book of God, it is written of me, says Christ, I
delight to do thy Will, O my God, yea thy Law is within my heart. How willingly
and patiently did he suffer for, and from sinners: O my Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. Christ came from Heaven on purpose to suffer in our stead, and for our
sakes, according to the Will of God; he was wounded for our Transgressions, he
was bruised for our Iniquities, the Lord laid on him the Iniquities of us all;
he was oppressed and afflicted, yet opened not his mouth, he was cut off out of
the Land of the Living. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, to put him to Grief,
to make his Soul an offering for sin; that he might pour out his Soul unto
death, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the Cross. Christ also suffered for us, who his own self bare our sins in his
own body, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps; for it is the
Will of God that we suffer for well-doing, for if we suffer with him, we shall
also be glorified together. Christ his active and passive obedience for us, and
our active and passive obedience for him, and for his Glory, is our way to
Glory. How patiently did our Lord Jesus suffer from, then when he suffered for
sinners; when he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed himself and his Cause to him that judges
righteously. If when we do well and suffer for it, and for Conscience toward
God endure Grief, suffering wrongfully, take it patiently, this is
thank-worthy, this is acceptable with God: Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to enter into his Glory? If we suffer, we shall also reign
with him; for we are called according to purpose, through the foreknowledge of
God, and predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son in sufferings,
and that we also as he, must through much Tribulation enter into the Kingdom of
God; forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, let us arm our
selves likewise with the same mind, by putting off the old man, and putting on
the new man; he that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin, that he
no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to the Lusts of Men,
but to the Will of God; let us be followers of that which is good, who is he
then that will harm us? but and if we suffer for Righteousness sake, let us not
be afraid of their terror, neither be troubled. Let them, as Christ Jesus did,
that suffer according to the Will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls to
him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator, which is to walk worthy of God,
who has called us unto his Kingdom and Glory, and if we be faithful herein
unto death, will not be long ere he call us into his Kingdom of Glory, where we
shall receive the Crown of Life, but then we must walk in the Spirit, and the
Spirit will walk in us, which he promises to do, if we keep our selves from
Idols, come out from among them, and be separated, and touch not the unclean
thing; if we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit, we cannot walk
worthy of God, his Kingdom, of Grace and Glory, without walking in the Spirit.
It is the Spirit, and walking in the Spirit, that makes us worthy or meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light; it is only through the
Spirit we do mortify the deeds of the body, that we may live a life of Grace
and Peace, and Joy; we are carnally minded by nature, and the carnal mind is
enmity against God, not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, which
is death: nor can we be spiritually minded, which is Life and Peace, if so be
that the Spirit of God dwell not in us; for as the body without the Spirit is
dead, so the Soul without the Spirit of Christ is dead also; and they who are
naturally or spiritually dead, cannot walk, we must be quickened and sanctified
by the Spirit, before we can live or walk in the Spirit. To walk in the Spirit,
is to be spiritually minded, or of the mind of the Spirit; for as many as are
led by the Spirit, or they that are after the Spirit, do mind the things of the
Spirit; now the things of the Spirit are either spiritual or eternal, Grace or
Glory; or what relates to it, which the minds of spiritual persons are taken up
with* such are all holy duties commanded by the Spirit, and the fruit of the
Spirit, which is in all Goodness and Righteousness, and Truth, Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, etc.
which constitute the divine nature in us, whereby we lead the divine life,
which is our walking with God in the Spirit, or glorifying God in our Body and
in our Spirit, which are Gods, walk we then in the Spirit, and we shall not
fulfill the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, nor walk in pride. To walk
worthy of God, his Kingdom and Glory, is to walk in wisdom toward our selves;
if thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self, and toward them that are
without, and to walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming our
time as we have opportunity to do good unto all men, especially laboring to be
so wise, as to win Souls; for they that be wise Teachers, turn many to
righteousness, and shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the
stars for ever and ever, the wise shall inherit Glory. To walk in Wisdom, is to
understand what the Will of the Lord is, and to do thereafter; for a good
understanding have all they that do his Commandments; it is to understand the
way wherein we ought to walk, and to walk therein. The Wisdom of the prudent is
to understand his way, which is Gods way; this was David's prayer, Teach me thy
way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain ^ath, cause me to know the way wherein I
should walk, lead me in the way everlasting: and Gods promise, I will instruct
thee and teach thee in the way which thou shall go, I will guide thee with mine
eye, and his performance, he led his people forth by the right way, that they
might go to a City of habitation. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and
afterward receive me to glory, says David: his practical resolution, I have
chosen the way of Truth; I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou
shall enlarge my heart. It is to behave our selves wisely in a perfect way, and
to walk within our house with a perfect heart. To understand also the Work of
God, his Work of Creation, Redemption, Providence and Grace, and to do with all
our might, maugre all opposition whatsoever our hand finds to do, whatsoever
Gods Providence lays before us, to go through with it, considering there is
no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave, whither we are all
going: That we may be always so doing, we had need to pray mightily to God, so
to teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom. The
Works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein,
they are honorable and glorious, he has made his wonderful Works to be
remembered, known, taken notice of, admired and praised; God has also ordained
or prepared, that we should walk in good Works, then walk we in Wisdom indeed,
when we are prepared and ready unto, and zealous to maintain every good Work.
To walk worthy of God, is to walk in Faith, we walk by Faith, not by sight,
Faith is our sight, the evidence of things not seen, without which it is
impossible to please God. To walk in Faith, is to live by the Faith of the Son
of God, the life which we now live in the flesh. It is a continual coming to
God, in the Name of Jesus Christ, till we come to God, a believing that he is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. It is also a daily
receiving the Lord Jesus; and of his fullness receiving and Grace for Grace,
that we should show forth the praises or virtues of him who has called us unto
his Kingdom and Glory. To walk worthy of God, is to walk in love, as Christ
has also loved us; to love God and one another, as Christ has set us an
example, and given us a Commandment: This is his Commandment, that we should
believe on the Name of his Son, and love one another, as he gave us
Commandment. Our walking in Faith, is that we might walk in Love, Faith works
by Love, Faith unfeigned works Love without dissimulation. Let us not love in
word, neither in tongue, but in deed and truth; not a talkative love, but an
active, vigorous, faithful, fruitful love, is acceptable both to God and man;
even the love that is kind, and thinks not evil, is not easily provoked, like
unto Christ's Love, which he showed evidently in his active and passive
obedience, doing good to all men, not being weary in well-doing, especially
unto them who are of the household of Faith, loving all Saints as Saints,
imitating Christ as in his active, so in his passive obedience, suffering with
them and for them, with all long-suffering and patience, being their Brethren
and Companions in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ,
for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus Christ. Hereby perceive we
the Love of God, because he laid down his Life for us, and we ought to lay down
our Lives for the Brethren; we love not the Brethren, if we love our Lives
better than them. This is Love, that we walk after the Commandment of Christ;
they that walk worthy of God, walk in the Ways of his Commandments, with and
before the Lord humbly, obeying from the heart that form of Doctrine which he
delivered them, that they may serve him thereby in newness of Spirit, and in
newness of Life; they who would enter into Life, must thus keep the
Commandments; for blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have
right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates of the City.

Is there then a Kingdom of Grace and Glory? Is it purposed, prepared,
purchased, promised and reserved in Heaven for us? Have we a real interest in,
and a true Title to this Kingdom? O let the high praises of God then be in our
hearts, in our lips, and in our lives, who has called us unto this Kingdom and
Glory! Let David's resolution and practice be ours, I will sing unto the Lord
as long as I live, I will sing praises unto my God while I have any Being,
every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name; his
Heart, and Tongue, and Life were fixed and prepared for this blessed Work,
called therefore the sweet singer of Israel. My heart is fixed and prepared, O
God my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise; I will greatly praise the
Lord with my mouth; he prays that he may praise: O Lord open thou my lips, and
my mouth shall show forth thy praise; his whole Life and Conversation nothing
else but a continual Hymn to God. How fearful was he to sin; O-let me not
wander from thy Commandments, refraining his feet from every evil Way, that he
might keep the Word of God, hating every false Way, rejoicing in the Way of his
Testimonies, as much as in all Riches; inclining his heart to perform his
Statutes always, even unto the end. Was it David's Duty, Delight, and Work to be
still praising God, and is it not ours? Have we not, or may we not have as
great reason and occasion to bless God as he? every one that will may have God
and Christ, and Grace and Glory, to praise and bless God for as his portion and
happiness for ever. If every one of us with David could say, Whom have I in
Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. He
may also say when his flesh and his heart fails him, God is the strength of
his heart, and his portion for ever, which is matter great enough to praise the
Name of God for with a Song, and magnify him with Thanksgiving. It is the
silent Work of all the Works of God to praise him passively, and the highest
duty of Saints to bless him actively: All thy Works shall praise thee, O Lord,
and thy Saints shall bless thee. David calls upon the whole Creation to pay
this homage of praise to God as their duty and Gods due: Praise ye the Lord
from the Heavens, praise him all Angels, all Men, Kings of the earth, and all
People, Princes, and all Judges of the earth, both young Men and Maidens, old
Men and Children, Sun, Moon and Stars, Earth, Sea, let them praise the Name of
the Lord, for his Name alone is excellent, his Glory is above the Earth and
Heaven, his glorious Name is exalted above all blessing and praise. O the
Treasures of Excellencies that are in God, in every one of his unsearchable
Names, his Word, and his wonderful Works, his Works of Creation, Redemption,
Providence, etc. which are external; of Election, Predestination,
Justification, Adoption, Regeneration, Sanctification, Consolation, which are
internal, and the everlasting Kingdom of Glory, matter for eternal praises.
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, and his greatness is
unsearchable, so are all his other Attributes. God is especially to be praised
in his Sanctuary; every one there, is to speak the praises of the glorious
honor of his Majesty, and the glorious Majesty of his Kingdom. Glorious things
are spoken of God in his Kingdom of Grace, and more glorious things, here
unutterable, are spoken in the Kingdom of Glory. Behold now is the accepted
time to prepare and tune our hearts, tongues and lives in the Kingdom of Grace,
for this Duty and Work of praise in the Kingdom of Glory; what is it to
glorify God, but to praise him, whosoever offers praise, and orders his
Conversation aright, glorifieth him. It is merely for want of the knowledge of
God and Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, and our unacquaintedness with the
glorious excellencies of this Kingdom of God, which is a Kingdom of Grace and
Glory, and our interest in it, that we speak no more of the glory of this
Kingdom, and glorify God no more by speaking to our selves in Psalms and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs, making melody in our hearts unto the Lord, giving
Thanks always for all things unto God and the Father, in the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Were all in these Kingdoms Eyewitnesses of the Majesty of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and Ear-Witnesses, as Peter, and others were, of his
receiving from God the Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice to
him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well-pleased; I say, Were these things ever before our eyes, and ever sounding
in our ears, there would certainly be more seeking and praying, and praising
God for this Kingdom of God, which contains all the glory we can possibly want,
or wish, than now there is: Have we not a more sure Word of Prophecy,
whereunto we should all of us do well, that we take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in our
hearts. Do we not say that the whole Word of God is true? Is there any that
professedly deny a future state of glory? Why do we not all bless God for it,
till we bless God in it? Let every one then that has understanding, sing
praises to God, sing praises, sing praises to our King, sing praises, for God
is the King of all the earth, and the King of glory, sing we praises with
understanding. Our Tongue in Scripture is called our glory; therewith bless we
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places, or things in Christ, which is the best
use we can put it to. If we be strangers to this heavenly duty of singing
praises to God in our hearts and houses with our glory, it is much to be
feared, that as our chief end is not the glory of God, by our not glorifying
God, so our last end will not be glory with God; without controversy it is the
duty that is most pleasing to God, as it is most commanded by him, and
practiced instantly by the perfectest Saints. The holier any man is the more in
prayer, and the most in praise; evening and morning, and at noon David prays
unto God, seven times aday does he praise him. Hypocrites can pray, Saints only
do bless and praise the Lord. The good and old way of speaking to God our
selves, and one another in Psalms and spiritual Songs, is much given over in
these Kingdoms. The good Lord give us Repentance, that this sin be not laid to
our charge. We have lost very much of the special presence and providence of
God, by our neglect herein; our Prayers are not heard and answered for want of
our solemn Praises. We obtain mercy by our Prayers, and keep them by our
Praises. It were well if one in ten with a loud voice glorified God for those
daily mercies they receive from God. There are not found that return to give
glory to God, after mercies received from God, save some few strangers. What
are our hearts and lips, and lives good for else, but to warble out in
spiritual Songs the praises of him who has called us out of mavelous
darkness, into his mavelous light. The glad tidings of a Kingdom of grace and
glory, should open our hearts to pray to God to open our lips, that our mouths
may show forth his praises; which that all may do, let the Word of Christ dwell
in us richly, in all Wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing with grace in our hearts to the Lord; and
whatsoever we do in Word or Deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving
Thanks to God and the Father by him, and above all for himself, and the Kingdom
of God and his Righteousness. For Counsel and Consolation, and I conclude:

Our honorable Magistrates and reverend Ministers who are taught of God, that
are Counselors themselves of Peace, and seek the Peace and Prosperity of
Church and State, I neither need nor dare give them one Word of Advice in this
matter; only taking the liberty and boldness, by way of Petition, most humbly
to desire them who have obtained so great mercy to be the heirs of grace and
glory, that they would, according to the Power and Prudence, Wisdom and
Goodness which God has graciously and liberally given them, improve it to the
very utmost, that if it were possible our most gracious and excellent Majesty's
Three Kingdoms may become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; not by
Profession only, but in very Deed and in Truth: For the Kingdom of God is not
in Word, but in Power, since God our Savior would have all men to be saved,
and to come to the knowledge of the Truth; and because he can swear by no
greater, does swear by himself, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his Way, and
live; Turn ye, turn ye from your evil Ways, for why will ye dye? and now
commands all men everywhere to repent. Why should not first of all
Supplications Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all men,
for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, which is good and acceptable in
the sight of God our Savior, and I also heartily believe wi l be well-pleasing
to our most Gracious King, and all in Authority, having laid so l^rge and sure
a foundation of Peace to build as large a Kingdom of godliness and honesty
upon. It is in your power to compel every capable Subject in these Kingdoms, to
seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and to thrust Laborers
into this Harvest; for the Harvest is great, and the Laborers are few, for the
turning of every one unto Righteousness; the unlimited Love of God, who has so
loved Mankind, the general Redemption of the whole World b^ the precious blood
of Jesus Christ, the promise of the universal Spirit of Christ, the freeness
and fullness of the Covenant of Grace, which if the Lord please I shall have
occasion fully to handle in my Book of Scri^tural Oracles; and the express
Command of Christ, Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every
Creature, the promise of his presence and assistance, his own practice, and the
practice of the primitive Preachers, in publishing through the World the glad
Tidings of the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, are motives and encouragements
great enough to put Magistrates and Ministers upon endeavoring an universal
Conversion, Reformation and Salvation among all their People. O could our King
and Governors be instrumental to bring these Kingdoms, so to seek till they
find a Kingdom of grace and glory, what an exceeding eternal weight of glory
would the King of glory crown them withal for their labor of Love at the last
and great day: Hearken to a King speaking from the King of Kings; Be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord
herein with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Let the Kings of the earth set
themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together for the Lord, and for his
Anointed, saying, Let us break the bands of Wickedness, and cast away the cords
of our Iniquities from us. Let us exalt the King of Kings upon his holy hill of
Zion, that the Heathen may be his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
earth may be his possession, and all Nations whom he has made may come and
worship before thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name. Let our most excellent King
Solomon be first herein, who is a King of Peace, that came into his Kingdom in
Peace, rules in Peace, will dye in Peace, and enter into that Peace which
passes all understanding: If he follow Peace with all men, and Holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord. His establishing a great Peace amongst
us, constrains me to believe he will be a means of raising a holy War through
his Kingdoms and Dominions against Sin, Satan, and the World, for the glory of
God, and the everlasting good of many a poor yet precious Soul, so that all our
contentions and mutual devourings shall end in a holy, amicable contending
earnestly for the Faith of the Gospel, that we may stand fast in one Spirit,
with one mind, and one mouth, glorifying God even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, receiving one another as Christ also received us to the glory of God;
than which, what can be more pleasing to God, honorable to our selves,
creditable to Religion, profitable and comfortable to His Majesty's Three
Kingdoms? If there be joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one Sinner
that repents, what joy will there be in Heaven over all the Sinners in these
Kingdoms that repent? The Lord our God in the midst of us will be mighty to
save us, he will rejoice over us with joy, he will rest in his love, he will
joy over us with singing, if as Brethren, being called unto liberty, we use not
our liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another; for
all the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self; but if we bite and devour one another, let us take heed
that we be not consumed one of another. And it shall come to pass, that as the
Lord rejoiced over us to do us good, so the Lord will rejoice over us to
destroy us, and bring us to naught; which will assuredly come to pass, if we
bless our selves in our hearts, saying, We shall have peace, though we walk in
the imagination or stubbornness of our hearts, to add Iniquity to Iniquity, the
Lord will not spare, but his anger and jealousy shall smoke against us, and
all the Curses written in his Book shall lie upon us, and he will blot out our
names from under Heaven: Cursed also is every one that does the Work of the
Lord negligently or deceitfully. But I am persuaded better Things of you, and
Things which accompany Salvation, and that we are not of them who draw back
unto perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of our Souls. Let us
take heed, lest there be in any of us an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God, but exhort one another daily while it is called to day,
lest any of us be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, looking also
diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness
springing up trouble us, and thereby many be defiled; for we are made partakers
of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end,
and also of his Kingdom of glory, for the securing whereof these plain
Directions are absolutely necessary to be put in practice.

I. That all Sins be avoided and hated, especially Unbelief, Pride,
Covetousness, Carnality, Lying and Hypocrisy.

II. That all the Duties of Holiness be rightly, zealously and constantly
performed both public and private.

III. That all the Graces of the Holy Spirit be had and exercised.

They who would set themselves in earnest to seek the Kingdom of God, must
heartily set themselves against all sins; stand in awe and sin not, while you
are seeking, if you would find this Kingdom. Seek the Lord while he may be
found, call upon him while he is near; but then it follows, Let the Wicked
forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous, who is a man of Iniquity, his Thoughts,
and let him return unto the Lord, who will have mercy upon him; but then he
must have nothing to do with Sin, who will have any thing to do with God and
his kingdom, otherwise God will have nothing to do with him; the wages of Sin
is not Heaven, but hell; every final impenitent, unbelieving Sinner, is to be
shut out of Heaven, and shut up in Hell to all eternity. Sinners, you must quit
your state, and course, and way of sin, before you can enter the state of
Grace, or walk in the way of Life; Grace and Glory are inseparable, so are Sin
and Hell. O have nothing to do with any the least, yea, the very appearance of
evil, as near as you can, except to hate, abhor, leave and loath it, and your
selves for it, as ever you hope to speed in this most important duty, of
seeking first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; more especially, let
Unbelief, Pride, Carnality, Covetousness, Lying and Hypocrisy be abandoned and
abhorred, as the root and source, and spawn of all other abominations. These
are the Master evils that hinder men from being and doing good: We must be
negatively, before we can be positively holy; Wash ye, make ^e clean, put away
the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; first cease to do evil, then
learn to do well, etc. If we would cease from evil, we must take heed of the
evil of Unbelief in the heart, which is a sin that gives every Truth of God
the Lie. Every one that believes not, goes about to make God a Liar. The very
Word of the Scripture is, He that believes not God, has made him a liar,
because he believes not the Record that God gave of his Son; as Faith is a
coming to God by Jesus Christ, so Unbelief is a departing from the living God.
O take heed of it, as also of the sin of Pride, which is a lifting and setting
up our Wisdom and Will, against the Wisdom, Will, Word, Way and Work of God,
preferring our own Honor before Gods Glory. Pri^e was the first and worst sin
that could be committed virtually, and interpretatively it is all iniquity; as
all sinners were in one, and came from one, so all sins are summed up in this
one, namely Pride, which is the Parent of all other abominations. The only sin
that is so sinful. This was the sin that made good Angels Devils, and our first
Parents and us evil, like unto them, yea, only evil, and that continually; by
it we have lost God, our selves, our knowledge of him, all our righteousness
and true holiness, and all the happiness of Heaven; it is so desperate a sin,
that it will not suffer any one to seek after God, his Grace and Glory. The
wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God, he will
be happy without God. In seeking first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, O seek first to be delivered from the pride of heart and life:
otherwise you may ask and not have, seek and not find, knock and it shall not
be opened unto you. Covetousness, which is Adultery and Idolatry, a loving and
desiring after the World, and the things of the World so inordinately and
overcarefully, as both to neglect, and make light of the things of God which
are above. The Covetous, whom the Lord abhors, his prayer and practice is,
Lord, Who will show us any good? his Labor is only for his mouth, and
therefore his laying up much Goods for many years, is to take his ease, eat,
drink, and be merry; he is one that lays up Treasure for himself, not caring
to be rich toward God. O take heed, and beware of Covetousness; for a Man's
Life consists not in the abundance of the Things which he possesses: And let
our Conversation be without Covetousness, content with such Things as we have,
seeking first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these Things
shall be added unto us; for the Lord has said, I will never leave you, nor
forsake you: Covetousness is but for Carnality; it caters for the flesh, making
provision for it, satisfying it in the Lust thereof. The carnal mind is enmity
against God, not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. The Lust of
the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eyes are great Eye-sores to Religion, and great
Impediments to our seeking first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness. If
we would be spiritually minded in seeking those Things that are above, we must
not be carnally minded, in seeking great Things for our selves here below. We
can never fight the good Fight of Faith, or take the Kingdom of Heaven by
violence, without abstaining and flying from fleshly Lusts, which War against
the Soul. Fleshly persons, who live after the Flesh, in the Lust of
Uncleanness, can never be valiant Volunteers to fight under the Banner of
Christ, for the conquering of Sin, Satan and the World, which must first be
done, before the Kingdom of Heaven be taken. The Flesh does lust against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are so contrary the one to
the other, that we cannot do the Things we should, while we walk in the Flesh.
Let us not therefore walk according to the Flesh, or War after the Flesh, for
the Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal. Let not us be carnal, but spiritual,
putting on the whole Armor of God, which will be mighty through God to the
pulling down of strong holds, and mortifying the deeds of the Body, namely
fleshly Lusts, which War against the Soul, that in all Things we may be more
than Conquerors, through him who loves us, even our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
the World is crucified unto us, and we unto the World, as also the Flesh; for
they that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh, with the Affections, Passions,
and Lusts, by whom also we resist and overcome the Devil; for he was made
Partaker of Flesh and Blood, that through death he might destroy him that had
the power of death, that is the Devil. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil, the Works of the
Flesh, which are manifest to be Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Pride, Covetousness, Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Strife,
Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings. Now they which
follow such Things, can neither seek or ever hope to inherit the Kingdom of God.

Lying is another sin which in a special manner is to be hated and avoided by
us, if indeed we will set our selves heartily to seek the Kingdom of God; which
is the uttering of an untruth with an intent and purpose to deceive, a sin that
transforms men into Devils: They who are given to Lying, are of their Father
the Devil, who abode not in the Truth, because there is no Truth in him; when
he speaks a Lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a Liar, and the Father of
it. A lying Tongue is one of the seven Things the Lord hates, and is an
abomination to him: Lying Lips are an abomination to the Lord, and therefore a
righteous man hates Lying; but they that deal truly, are Gods delight, and God
is their delight; they that delight in the Lord, he will give them the desire
of their hearts, for the prayers of the upright are his delight: But they who
delight in Lies, who bless with their mouth, but curse inwardly, without
Repentance, are to be cursed eternally. The fearful and unbelieving, and all
Liars, shall have their part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone,
which is the second death Let none who seek this Kingdom of God be like the
Devil, a Liar, but like God, who cannot lie. Let us fear to lie to the Holy
Ghost, or to lie of, or to lie to one another by the example of Ananias and
Saphira, who were struck dead with a Lie in their mouth: Wherefore with David,
Let us hate and abhor Lying, and putting away Lying, speak every man Truth with
his Neighbor; for he only that speaks the Truth in his heart, is of the
Generation of them that first seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness;
that seek and shall see the face of the God of Jacob. Take we heed also, and
beware of the Leaven of Hypocrisy professing what we mean not to practice,
pleasing our selves with a form of knowledge and godliness, denying the power
of it. Hypocrites, they say, but do not; they pray, but practice not; believe,
but live not as they believe; they are Covenant makers, but not Covenant
keepers; drawing near the Lord with their Mouths, and honoring him with their
Lips, but removing their Heart far from him; with fl ttering Lips, and with a
double Heart, do they speak to God and man; there can be no faithfulness in
their Mouth, for their inward part is very Wickedness: the Prayers and other
Duties of such wicked men, are an abomination to the Lord. Whatsoever is done
in the great business of Salvation, is to be done heartily, as to the Lord, and
not unto men. If any man speak, he is to speak as the Oracles of God, not as
pleasing men, but God, which tries the Hearts, that God in all Things may be
glorified through Jesus Christ; able with the Holy Apostle to call God to
Witness, that neither at any time uses he flattering Words, for a Cloak of
Pride, or Covetousness, nor of men seeks he Glory, but whether he eats, or
drinks, or whatsoever else he does, the Glory of God is sure to be at the end
of it, his own Salvation, the pleasing of all men in all Things, not seeking
his own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved; which no
worldly, fleshly Hypocrites can say, who receive honor one of another, and
seek not the honor that comes from God only; so desirous are they of
Vainglory: For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus, but their own
Belly; and by good Words, and fair Speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple,
but themselves most and worst of all, while in opposition to the Glory of God,
which should be their highest and chiefest end, and their only aim, the
honoring, pleasing and enriching themselves, by unlawful ways and means, is
their end and business These double-minded, double-tongued, and double-dealing
Hypocrites are far from the Kingdom of God; lay aside first Hypocrisy, and
desire Truth in your inward parts; then first seek the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, with desirous expectation to find it. Be sure none of these
forementioned Evils be your peculiar bosom beloved sins, search out your own
sin, keep your self from your iniquity, if you would have good success in
seeking first the Kingdom of God.

II. Let us put off, and put away far from us these, and all other sins, in the
fear of God, or all our seeking the Kingdom of God will be but labor in vain.
Sinners, God calls Heaven and Earth to record against you this day, that he
sets before you Life and Good, Death and Evil, Blessing and Cursing, and
desires you to choose Life, even eternal Life: O choose not Sin and Death
before it. Let my counsel be acceptable unto you, break off your sins by
righteousness, and the iniquity of your covetousness, by showing mercy to the
Poor, lest God be wroth, smite you, and hide himself from you; but rather seek
good, and not evil, that ye may live; be not faithless, but believe God upon
his Word, Seek ye me, says God, and ye shall live. Their heart shall live that
seek God, his Kingdom and Righteousness, in the use of all his holy means,
which I need but almost to name, they are so often insisted upon, but too
seldom, duly practiced, as namely:

1. Hearing the Word preached in season and out of season instantly, as
Ministers are to preach it with solemn Preparation; Intention, Retention, and a
loving Affection in the hearing of it, turning every Truth and Duty you hear
into practice without delay; for not the hearers of the Law, but the doers are
justified and blessed in their doing.

2. Frequent Fasting, frequent Praying and Watching thereunto with all
perseverance, and supplication for all men, that they may be saved, and come to
the knowledge of the Truth, which is our striving to enter in at the strait
Gate; Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads unto Life, and
few there be that find it, even of them who seek to enter in, and are not able,
because not willing to be at the pains and patience which is necessary to the
finding the narrow Way, and walking in it, till they be meet and worthy to
enter in at the strait Gate; there is no pulling down of strong Holds, casting
down Imaginations or Reasonings, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, or bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, and the Laws of his Kingdom, but by this good old way of
Fasting, Praying, and watching to purpose; every man that striveth for the
mastery, especially of spiritual enemies, is to be temperate in all things;
some do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, we an incorruptible: If we would so
run as to obtain, so fight as to overcome, we must keep under our body, and
bring it into subjection, that our Old Man being crucified, the body of sin may
be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin, lest that by any means,
when we have done all save this which is the main, we our selves should be
everlasting Cast-awayes; better the body of the flesh, and the body of sin be
destroyed in the severest way of duty, than the soul be for ever lost in a way
of sin, how pleasing soever to the flesh: Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot
offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from thee; it is better for thee to
enter into Life halt or maimed, rather than having two hands, or two feet, to
be cast into everlasting fire; by Fasting, Praying, and watching, Heaven
suffers violence, and only the violent take it by force. Holy Fasting,
especially alone and by our selves, Prayer without ceasing, keeping our Hearts,
Lips and Lives with all diligence, by circumspect watchfulness from sin, and
all occasion and temptations thereunto, are Gods gracious means appointed us
for the obtaining of Grace and Glory.

3. Reading, searching, and meditating of the Holy Scriptures day and night,
that the Word of Christ may dwell richly in us in all Wisdom, with fervent and
faithful Prayer before and after the duty, for the Spirit of Truth to sanctify
us through the Truth; duties much neglected both in Families, and in our
private communion with the Lord, and I fear by too many of us slightly,
indifferently, and indiligently done. Were the Word of God read, searched and
meditated daily by us as it ought to be, it would make us wiser for our selves
in all respects than we are; it is able to make even Children that exercise
themselves therein, wise unto salvation. It is very great pity, and a very
great sin it is, that every one that cannot, does not learn to read, and every
one that can does not walk in Wisdom, redeeming his time to search these Sacred
Records day and night, in which he thinks he has eternal life. I make no
doubt, but our most Gracious Sovereign the King, and Governors will, out of
their Christian Wisdom, Care, Zeal and Charity, which in many things they have
manifested, take order also, that all who are capable, both young and old in
these Kingdoms, may be diligently taught to read the Holy Scriptures, that they
perish not for want of knowledge, that so the good Word of God may be daily
read publicly in all Faimilies with Prayer and Praise, to the Praise and Glory
of God, the Increase and Advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, and their own
immortal Honor: Which I daily pray may come to pass, and am in a longing
expectation of, as knowing, there is Wisdom, Wealth and Willingness, Power and
Prudence, every way Ability and Opportunity in you, our Governors and
Counselors, for the accomplishing and effecting so great and good, and
necessary and pious a Work; besides the many Thousands that wait for your Call,
Command, Counsel, Countenance and Encouragement to assist herein; which labor
of Love to so many perishing Souls, will never be forgotten by the Lord; and
the administration of this Service, will not only supply the want of Saints,
but will be abundant also by many Thanksgivings unto God. Now the Lord make all
Public Persons in Church and State Public spirited herein, that the fruit of
Righteousness may be sown in Peace, by them that make Peace to the Glory of
God, and the Public Good. Were the Law and Gospel, which is not to depart out
of our mouth, read and meditated therein day and night by us all, high and low,
rich and poor, etc. that we might observe to do according to all that is
written therein; this would make our way prosperous, then we should do wisely,
and have good success, especially in seeking the Kingdom of Grace and Glory,
which is our best Wisdom to do, every one for himself, and each for other, till
we find it, and attain it. Whosoever delights in the Law of the Lord, and in
his Law does meditate day and night, shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers
of Water, that brings forth his fruit in his season, his leaf also shall not
wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper; the universal faithful practice
of these duties would, through the blessing of God, do Wonders among us.

4. Examining our selves frequently and seriously by the Law and Gospel, what
effect they have had upon us as to the change of our state from sin to grace,
from death to life; and whether our hearts and lives are so sound in Gods
Statutes, that we have respect to all his Commandments, that we may never be
ashamed. Without this constant practice we cannot know our selves: Know ye not
your own selves, says the Apostle, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be Reprobates. How shall we know our selves to be elect or reprobate, why
examine your selves, prove your own selves. If we wholly neglect, or
negligently perform this duty, we may then certainly conclude our selves to be
Reprobates. What are all the marks and signs for trial of our everlasting state
laid down in Scripture for, but that we might know our selves by them, whether
we belong to God, or the Devil; and whether we are going to Heaven, or Hell.
Without this careful, constant examination, trying and proving, a man may think
himself to be something, when he is nothing, and so deceive himself, and
others: Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into Heaven. Many will
say to Christ on that great day of examination, Lord, Lord, have not we
prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils? And in thy Name
done many wonderful Works? To whom he will profess, I never knew you, depart
from me ye that work iniquity. Let every man therefore examine himself, and
prove his own Work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not
in another; then shall he not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ
has not wrought in him to the Law, and to the Testimony, if he speak not
according to this Word, it is because there is no light in him. If every one
that does evil, and he that does truth, would come to the light, it would make
manifest whether their deeds were wrought in God or no: All things that are
reproved or discovered, are made manifest by this light, for whatsoever does
make manifest is light; were this duty well managed, more would go to Heaven,
and fewer to Hell.

5. Conferring, talking, communing and reasoning together in love concerning
the things of the Kingdom of God, would be a happy means to help one another in
seeking to find it: Too often our words in Preaching, praying and praising to
them that hear us, seem but idle Tales, and are not believed, till this
Christian duty of Communication be frequently exercised. Here we have liberty
to speak to one another capacities and necessities, we could not hear one
another reasoning of Righteousness, Temperance, Death, Judgment, Heaven and
Hell to come, but our hearts would burn within us, for Christ himself would be
one amongst us, as with his Disciples at Emmaus, talking with us, and opening
to us the Scriptures; so that our coming and communing together, would
certainly be for the better, and not for the worse; for this end, to revive the
duty of Christian Conference, I do fully purpose, by the Grace of God, as I
have begun to bring the Holy Scriptures under such Heads, that the Word of
Christ may dwell richly in all wisdom in young and old, that will exercise
themselves herein with delight and meditation day and night; for the
accomplishing whereof, the Prayers of all fearing God are again humbly and
earnestly desired and expected.

6. Teaching Children early to read and know the Holy Scripture, Training them
up, or Catechizing them in the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and all
others who have the like need that are but Children in knowledge, is another
excellent means to increase the Kingdom of Christ. How many unprofitable, dull
Hearers are there in these Kingdoms, which, for their time ought to be
Teachers, have need that one teach them again which be the first principles of
the Oracles of God; that, to their shame be it spoken, have not the knowledge
of God, nay, that say to God and their Teachers whose lips should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at their mouth; for they are the
messengers of the Lord of Hosts, depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. These have double necessity of counsel, care, and
compassionate compulsion both from Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority, to
learn, to know their duty, danger and necessity, if God peradventure will give
them Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth, that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken alive as captive by him
at his will. The Harvest truly is plenteous, but the Laborers are few; pray we
therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth Laborers into his
Harvest, such as will preach not themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and
themselves the servants of all for Jesus s^ke; servants that will not strive,
but be gentle unto al^ men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing
those that oppose themselves till their eyes be opened, and turned from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith
that is in Christ. The work of Conversion and Reformation will never happily go
on, till the counsel of that most Reverend, Learned and Godly Bishop Usher, be
univers^lly, diligently, zealously, and consta^tly pu^ in practice both in
Churches and Families, which being apposite to my purpose, I have here
Transcribed.

Your Majesty's care can never be sufficiently commended in taking order that
the chief Heads of the Catechism should in the ordinary Ministry be diligently
prop^unded and expl^ined unto the People throughout the Land, which I wish were
as duly executed everywhere, as it was piously by you intended. Great Scholars
possibly may think that it stands not so well with their credit, to stoop
thus low, and to spend so much of their time in teaching these Rudiments, and
first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ; but they should consider, that the
laying of the foundation skilfully, as it is a matter of the greatest
importance in the whole Building, so it is the very Masterpiece of the whole
Building: 1 Cor. 3 10. According to the Grace of God which is given unto me, as
a wise Master Builder I have laid the foundation, says the great Apostle. And
let the Learned of us all try it whenever we please, we shall find that to
lay this Ground work rightly, (that is, to apply our selves to the c^pacities
of the common Auditory, and to make an ^g^or^nt man understand these mysteries
in some good measure) will put us to the trial of our skill, and trouble us a
great deal more, than if we were to discuss a Controversy, or handle a subtle
point of Learning in the Schools; yet Christ did give as well his Apostles, and
Prophets, and Evangelists, as his ordinary Pastors and Teachers, to bring us
all, both Learned and Unlearned, unto the unity of this faith and knowledge;
and the neglecting of this, is the frustrating of the whole work of the
Ministry; for let us preach never so many Sermons to the People, our labor is
but lost as long as the foundation is u^laid, and the first principles
untaught, upon which all other Doctrine must be builded. Thus far the worthy
Bishop, in his Sermon before King James at Wansted.

7. Often remembering and real renewing our Covenant with God, whenever the Holy
Sacraments are administered. Baptism is but to be administered once, but we are
solemnly and frequently to remember, and make use of our Baptismal Covenant
upon all occasions, especially in avoiding all occasions and temptations, and
motions to sin within or without, in time of tribulation and desertion, and at
the point of death; we are buried with Christ in Baptism, wherein also we are
risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, that so many of us as
are b^ptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into his death, therefore are we
buried with him by Baptism into death; that like as Christ was raised up from
the dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life. By Baptism we are planted together in the likeness of his Death, and also
in the likeness of his Resurrection, that our old man might be crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin. Covenant making, and Covenant keeping, is the sum of our Religion.
We are sworn in our Baptism to believe all the Articles of our Christian Creed,
and to live by faith, to walk in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the
Lord blameless, to pray according to the Lords Prayer without ceasing for
Grace, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we may live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present World, that so with comfort we may look
for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ; and as we have sworn, so we are to perform it, even in
keeping all the righteous Judgments of the Lord; so also the Holy Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, which if there be opportunity, should often be received by
us, wherein we show forth the death of Christ till he come, is another
excellent means appointed by God, both to convey and assure to us the Kingdom
of God, as also to strengthen and confirm us in the Grace we have received,
that we draw not back to perdition, but going from faith to faith, from one
degree of Grace unto another, we may receive the end of our faith, the
salvation of our Souls. Let us show the Lords death till he come, by often
eating this Bread, and drinking this Cup; but let us examine our selves, lest
eating and drinking unworthily, we be found guilty of the Body and Blood of the
Lord, and so eat and drink damnation to our selves.

III. All the Graces of the Holy Spirit must be had and exercised, we must go
to the God of all Grace for every Grace, he will give Grace and Glory, first
Grace, then Glory. It is through Grace we have good hope, the Grace of
Regeneration according to his mercy; he saves us by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he sheds on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior, that being justified by his Grace, we should
be made Heirs according to the hope of eternal life; there is no hope of
eternal life without Grace. It cannot be expected I should discourse of all the
Graces, these may suffice.

1. The first Grace we are to labor for, is Humility, by which we come to know
our vileness and unworthiness, that we are no better than wretched and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and have need of every thing, and
yet deserve nothing; that we are not sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. The way to be rich in
Grace, is to be poor in Spirit, God will give Grace to the humble; the more
humble, the more holy; Saint Paul the chiefest of sinners, less than the least
of all Saints in his own account: yet not a whit behind the very chiefest of
the Apostles in Grace and Gifts, laboring more abundantly than they all; yet
not I, says he, but the Grace of God which was with me. Be clothed with
humility, walk humbly with God, humble your selves under the mighty hand of
God, and he will exalt you in due time, God will save the humble person.

2. Acquaint your selves with God, know the God of your Fathers; This is life
eternal, to know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent;
the principal part of the image of God, is the knowledge of him. If you would
have his mercy and his favor, you must have understanding; for to a people of
no understanding, he that made them will not save them, and he that formed them
will show them no favor; they who like not to retain God in their knowledge,
are not like to go to Heaven; that the Soul be without knowledge it is not
good, the Soul cannot be good without knowledge, it is the image of God which
makes the Soul good. The new man, which after God is created in righteousness,
and true holiness, is renewed in knowledge; we escape the pollutions of the
World through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Grace also
and Peace are multiplied unto us, through the knowledge of God and of Jesus our
Lord; yea, all things that pertain unto life and godliness are given unto us,
through the knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and Virtue: Therefore
if you determine to go to Heaven, determine not to know any thing so much as
Jesus Christ and him Crucified. Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get
Wisdom, and with all thy getting, get Understanding, get Wisdom, get
Understanding; ^orget it not, embrace her, and she shall bring thee to Honor
and Heaven. She is a Tree of Life, to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is
every one that retains her.

3. Repent and believe the Gospel; I put them together for brevity sake, as I
find them; Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus, are our very
entrance into the Kingdom of God. True Repentance, which elsewhere I have
described at large, lets the Kingdom of Sin and Satan out of the heart, that
Faith unfeigned may receive Christ and his Kingdom into it. Repentance is a
turning from Sin and Satan, and the World, and Faith is a coming to God by
Christ, a choosing and closing with him as our Lord and Savior, a receiving of
his Fullness, and Grace for Grace; that we may glorify God, and be glorified
with him in our Bodies, Souls and Spirits, which are Gods. Seek first the
Kingdom of God in a way of repenting and believing, and you are sure to find it.

4. The fear of God, especially for his Goodness, is another Grace to be
desired and labored after toward the attainment of the Kingdom of God.
Reverential filial fear of God, is the first beginning of true Wisdom, which is
the principal thing to be looked after. The fear of the Lord is the instruction
of Wisdom; What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way
that he shall choose. None are wise but fearers of God. Behold the fear of the
Lord that is Wisdom, and to depart from Evil is Understanding. The fear of the
Lord, is to hate Evil, and the evil way, yea, every false way, which every
prudent man is careful to do, that he may walk in the way of Life, which is
above to the wise, that he may depart from Hell beneath; I know no greater or
better wisdom, than departing from Sin and Hell, for fear of God; to walk in
ways of holiness out of love to God, for the obtaining a Kingdom of Glory;
whosoever would receive a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let him have Grace,
whereby he may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, passing the
time of his sojourning here in fear, working out his own salvation with fear
and trembling.

Above all, put on Charity, no Grace brings us more into favor with God, and
all good men, yea, even the worst of men sometimes than Charity. A man that is
truly charitable both to Body and Soul, is a man almost by himself, and that
has that Charity which suffers long, and is kind that envieth not, that
behaveth not it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
thinks not evil, with all the other properties, is in a more excellent way to
the Kingdom of Glory, than any other; and therefore my advice is, that every
one would strive to excel in this most excellent Gift, Duty and Grace of
Charity; that he would follow after Charity, till he be found in Charity; an
example in Charity, fervent in Charity, in that Charity that covers a
multitude of sins; that the Charity of every one of us all toward each other
abounding, all our things may be done in Charity, that so we may be in Charity
one with another, which is the end of the Commandments, and the bond of our
perfection. O the unspeakable excellencies of Faith and Hope, and other Graces,
but the greatest of them all is Charity; Charity makes a man so good, that when
one will scarcely dye for a righteous, or just man, peradventure for a good or
charitable man some would even dare to dye, if not, he dare dye for himself, or
for the Brethren, which he ought to do, when lawfully called thereunto. None in
so sure and safe a way to the Kingdom of Glory, as a man of Charity. Put on
therefore (as the Elect of God) bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, as Christ forgave you, but above all these things put on Charity,
which is the bond of perf^ction, and besides being partakers of the Divine
Nature; and giving all diligence to add to faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to
patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly
kindness add Charity; for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

5. To Charity, add also Chastity; which is a virtue not only necessary and
preparatory, but essential to the Kingdom of God: for there shall in no wise
enter into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination,
or makes a lie. Having therefore promises for this end, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God, that we, who according to promise look for new He^vens, wherein
dwells righteousness, may be d^l^gent to be found of him in peace without
spot and bl^meless, that we may then be presented as a chaste Virgin to Christ.

6. Get Self-denial; Live in the daily practice of it, if you would not have
God deny you himself, his Kingdom, Grace and Glory; if any man will come after
Christ, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow him: He must go
the same way that Christ went, that means to come to Heaven; he has led us the
way, for he is our way, he himself went every step to Heaven in a way of
Self-denial, his wisdom, will, way and work, was wholly subjected to the
wisdom, will and pleasure of his heavenly Father: I seek not, says he, mine
own Will, but the Will of the Father which has sent me, and I do always those
things that please him; every one of us is to please his Neighbor for his good
to edification, and the reason is, for even Christ pleased not himself, leaving
us an example, that we should follow his steps. Our own wisdom, will and way,
standing either in competition with, or opposition unto the wisdom of God,
which seems foolishness to us, is to be denied; the world by wisdom knows
neither God, nor his Son Jesus Christ. The hidden wisdom which God ordained
before the World unto our Glory, is such a mystery, that none of the Princes of
this World knew, and therefore they crucified the Lord of Glory. Nor can any
natural man receive the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness
unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: Let
no man therefore deceive himself, if any man seem to be wise in this World, let
him deny himself, become a Fool, that he may be wise to deny his own Will, as
well as his own Wisdom; that he may be willing in the day of Gods power, to be
what God would have him to be, and to say, not my Will, but thine be done on
Earth as it is in Heaven, which is the highest Wisdom. Self-love must also be
denied: Naturally men, though they will not own it, are Lovers of their own
selves, which makes them covetous, and proud, to be Lovers of Pleasure, more
than Lovers of God. The love of God for himself, and love to our Neighbors,
without dissimulation, is the cure of Self-love, which is false love, and
therefore true hatred. Self-love is Self-hatred. The Times are perilous, when
men are Lovers of their own selves, covetous, proud, Lovers of Pleasures, more
than Lovers of God, having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof.
Hold fast the form of sound words with a sound mind by the Spirit of Faith, and
of Power, and of Love; that instead of denying the power of Godliness, you may
exercise your selves unto all Godliness, in denying Ungodliness, and worldly
Lusts: that you may live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present evil
World. Learn in what state soever you are in, therewith to be content. Learn
both how to be abased, and know how to abound. Be content to be poor in this
World, which is the true meaning of being poor in Spirit, that you may be rich
in Faith, and Heirs of a Kingdom; the comfort and content of a man's life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses. The Kingdom
of God is not meat and dri^k, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. Let your Conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such
things as you have, that your Conversation may be in Heaven.
Heavenly-mindedness is your duty, let it be your delight, to seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, in whose
presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for
evermore for all thos^, and only those, that have and exercise the Graces of
the Spirit in truth and uprightness. Labor therefore in the last place for the
Grace of Sincerity, which is not so much a Grace, as that which makes Grace to
be ^race. If I may s^y so, what is Faith but Fancy, if it be not unfeigned? Or
Love, but Lust, except it be without dissimulation? What is Obedience good for,
if it be not universal and constant? Our hearts and lives are not sound, if we
have not respect unto all Gods Commandments to perform them always unto the
end. Suppose our Gracious Majesty the King command nothing but what is holy,
just and good for His own Honor and Interest, and the good of His Subjects,
will he judge those persons sincere to him, that lives in open disobedience to
any of his righteous Laws? God and man would, and should be served in sincerity
and truth. God is to be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, he is rich in mercy,
but to whom? to them that call upon him in Truth. The good and the right way
is, only fear the Lord, and serve him in Truth with all your heart. God is for
the heart, and the whole heart; man looks on the outward appearance, but the
Lord looks on the heart; the heart, and the sincerity of it, is all in all
with God; Grace and Mercy is with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity with incorruption. Sincerity is the Salt that keeps our Love and
other Graces from corrupting and perishing; it is the root of the matter which
makes the heart good and honest in bringing forth the fruit of right^^usness
with patience unto perfection: Whereas the seed sown in the heart, where there
is no root, ^i^hers away; the Word of the Truth of the Gospel brings forth
fruit in them that hear it, who kn^w the Grace of God in Truth: Do not my
words, says God, do good to him that walks upright? God is good to those
that be good, and to them that are upright in their hearts, which David
intimates in his Prayer. None are good indeed, but the upright and sincere,
their hearts are good, their lives are good, they are like Saul and Jonathan,
lovely and pleasant in their lives, and their death is precious in the sight of
the Lord. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man
is Peace. He shall enter into Peace, that walks before God in Truth, and with
a perfect heart, doing that which is good in his sight; uprightness, integrity,
and sincerity in heart, speech and behavior, is very pleasing to God. Behold
thou delightest in, or desire Truth in the inward parts, They only are the
Sons of God, who are blameless, harmless, or sincere, speaking the Truth in
love, as being sincere, which is all one; speaking the Truth from the heart, is
a character of a Citizen of Zion, and the property and duty of the true
Ministers of the Gospel, who are not as many, which deal deceitfully with, or
corrupt the Word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of
God speak they in Christ his Doctrine, showing uncorruptness, sincerity, sound
speech, that cannot be condemned; ordering also their Conversations in the
World, by the grace of God in simplicity and godly sincerity, that they may
approve things that are excellent, that they may be sincere and without offense
toward God and toward man, till the day of Christ. They who are allowed of God
to be put in trust with the Gospel, are even so to speak and live, not as
pleasing men, but God, which tries their hearts; not at any time using
flattering words, for a cloak of covetousness, whom St. Paul would have the
Brethren to mark: And I most humbly beseech His most peaceable Majesty, for His
own, and His Kingdoms sake and safety, He would also mark them who cause
Divisions and Offenses upon what pretenses soever, either in the State, or
Church, or Families, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, for they that are
such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words
and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple, walking in craftiness,
doing the work of the Lord deceitfully: But such as would first seek the
Kingdom of God with comfort, must labor to be Israelites indeed, in whom is no
guile, that they may grow in grace, in every grace, going from grace to grace,
from strength to strength; for the pure in heart, and he that has clean hands,
and is sincere, perfect and undefiled in the way, shall be stronger and
stronger, till he be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus, being
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man, to exercise himself in
all holy conversation and godliness, in every condition, in every relation; for
the truth and strength of grace lies much in relative religiousness. None are
really holy, that are not relatively holy; they who are not good, loyal and
sincere loving Subjects to His most Excellent Majesty the King, are far from
the true power of godliness, and so in all other Relations, which I leave to a
fitter opportunity to handle. What more plain in all the Word of God, than that
every Soul is to be subject unto the higher Powers? How apt are men to forget
it! Put them in mind therefore, says St. Paul, to be subject to Principalities
and Powers, to obey Magistrates: What follows -- To be ready to every good
Work: Why? for Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but to the evil. He is a
Minister of God to every one for good, both to the good and to the evil, to
make evil men good, and good men better. The Supreme Power, which is the
Ordinance of God, is not to be resisted, upon pain of damnation; but all Dues,
Duties, Tribute, Custom, Fear, Honor, the rather to be rendered with all
cheerfulness, and humble thankfulness: for Magistrates are Gods Ministers,
attending continually on this very thing; wherefore let every one of us, as it
is our bounden duty, show the truth and power of our godliness herein, for we
must needs be Subjects, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake, to
our Superiors in the Lord: And that they may rule for God, and for good, let
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made by us all
for the KING, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty; for this is good and acceptable
in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all men first to seek the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and come unto the knowledge* and the
acknowledging of the Truth, which is after godliness, that they may be saved:
for which end the Divine Power has given unto us all things that pertain unto
life and godliness, through the knowledge of God and Jesus our Lord, that has
called us to glory and virtue, whereby are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises, that by these we might be partakers of the divine nature,
and the divine life.

The last direction for getting and growing in grace, is to get well acquainted
with every promise of grace, and every promise unto grace, to m^ke a believing
lively application of them to your selves. Turn these Promises into Prayers,
and God will turn them into Performances. He has purposely made them known
unto you, that he might make them over to you; for all the Promises of God in
Christ Jesus are Yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God, and your
salvation, if having these Promises, we cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God The promises of
God are the breasts of Consolation from whence new born Babes desire or suck
sincere milk, that they may grow thereby in grace unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature or age of the fullness of Christ, till they become such
as have no need of milk; for every one that uses milk, is unsk lful, has no
experience in the word of righteousness, for he is a Babe, but of strong meat
which belongs to them that are of full age, of perfect, even those who by
reason of use, habit, or perfection, have their senses exercised to discern
both good and evil.

For Consolation to all the Sons, and Saints, and Servants of the Lord, that
hearken unto the counsel, command and proclamation of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, that first seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, as you
have heard, that have this Kingdom and righteousness in you: Look unto Jesus,
lift up your heads and hearts, for your redemption draws nigh, when the time
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Let us comfort one
another with these words, God and Christ, and Grace and Glory are ours, we are
sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise
of his glory, all things are ours, for we are Christ's; Paul, Apollos, Cephas,
the world, life, death, things present, things to come, all are ours in
possession and reversion. This All should comfort us, it is worth being a Son,
a Saint, a Servant of God, to be as rich as Heaven and Earth, yea richer, in
having God for our portion. Let not the Consolations of God seem small to us;
the promises of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, are all
ours, here are the unsearchable riches of Christ, treasured up for the heirs of
promise, wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto them the immutability
of his counsel, confirmed them by an oath, that by two immutable things, in
which it were impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong Consolation,
who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us, which is
Christ in us, the hope of glory: for we look for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, to be
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, when he shall come to be glorified
in his Saints, and they in him. Its worth going through the Kingdom of grace
all the way, which many poor Christians are fain to do in a way of persecution
and tribulation, to the Kingdom of glory, where they shall ever be with the
Lord, whose presence will make amends for all. There God and Christ will be
all, and in all, here Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, hope, and love;
but when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, we shall also appear with him
in glory; then shall we be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and know the love of Christ which
passes knowledge; now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what
we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for
we shall see him as he is; then shall we be filled with all the fullness of God,
that will do for us exceeding abundantly above all that now we ask or think,
unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages world
without end.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father which has loved
us, and has given us everlasting Consolation, and good hope through grace,
comfort our hearts, and establish us in every good Work, to keep us from
falling, till we be presented faultless before the presence of his glory with
exceeding joy. To the only wise God our Savior be Glory and Majesty, Dominion
and Power, both now and ever. AMEN. FINIS.

