SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE ANSWER To an ENQUIRY into the GROUNDS and
OCCASIONS OF THE CONTEMPT OF THE CLERGY:

With some ADDITIONS*

In a Second LETTER to R. L.

By the same Author.

LONDON, Printed for N. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill near the Royal
Exchange. 1671.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SInce I was last with you in this kind, I have almost been of as many
Professions and Employments, as there be City-Companies: and have had as many
several Names as the Grand Seignior has Titles of Honor; for setting aside the
Vulgar and Familiar ones of Rogue, Raskal, Dog and Thief ((...) may be (...) by
way of (...), (...) well as out of Prejudice ^r Offense) as also those of more
certain (...); as Mallolous Rogue, ill-natured Raskal, Lay-Dog, and spightful
Thief: I say, setting aside all these, they have traveled me almost quite
through the Map. For in a moment, I got to the Streights, shot the Gulf, cut
the Line, and was presently, Barbarian, Indian, Turk and Jew. And,
notwithstanding this, the Business went on at home all the while besides; for
there I was Rebel, Traitor, Scot, Sadducee, and Socinian: and then, you know, I
had but a little way to Antichrist himself.

I thought it therefore the best and most honest way, not to conceal these
things; that you being fully satisfied, of that pernicious poison that was in
the former, you may carefully avoid the dander of being infected by this
second; but if you are so bold as to venture a blowing up; look closely to it:
For the Plot lies deadly deep, and twill be between your Legs before you be
aware of it; for this is full out as Jesuitically contrived as the other was
said, and thought to be. But, of all things, have a care of putting it into
your pocket, for fear it takes Fire; or runs away with your Breeches. And if
you can shun it, read it not when you are alone; or, at least, not late in the
Evening: For the Venom is strongest about Midnight; and seizes most violently
upon the Head, when the Party is by himself. And if you happen of any doubtful
Expression, be sure you take it for the present, in the worst sense; for you
may abate again, after the heat of the Weather be over. And if at any time you
find the Viper begin to creep upon you; run instantly out of your Chamber, and
get into any company, and fall to railing immediately as hard as ever you can
(nay, say somewhat to your self as you go along in the Streets) for fury and
passion whets the Blood, and keeps the Enemy at a distance: and is found to be
as good against any Bookish Infection, as a Glass of Sack is against the
Plague. I shall not tell you one Line of what is in it. And therefore consider
well what you do, and look to your self. But, if you be resolved to meddle, be
sure have a care of catching cold: and keep to a moderate diet, for there is
danger, and jeopardy in it besides.

And I must desire, that when you come at a Neighboring Minister of the
Answerers, looking over his five hundred Sermons, that you do not believe me:
For I find, that he did not look them all over with his outward Eye, but only
called them over in his mind. And I desire also, that the Answerer would
believe himself, and not me: For I would not, by any means, have him write a
Book only about that Mistake. And, indeed, whereas he says in his first page,
that one design of his Writing was to make an acknowledgment, that a great part
of what I writ was true: I wish that either he would have let my Truth have
shifted for it self, without the help of his acknowledgment (for, I profess, he
has prevented me killing I know not how many Otters) or else that he would have
divided his Letter into two parts: and have placed the Answer by it self, and
the Acknowledgment by it self: Which if he had done, and picked them duly and
carefully; he might have written all that, which he calls Answer, upon very
little more than his Thumbnayle.

And I must particularly beg of the Scripture Non-Conformists, that they be not
too severe upon a small Lay-mistake: For my Bible not lying just under my
Elbow, I find, I have in one place made our Savior say that, which indeed John
Baptist spoke before hand for him.

And, because I am in the begging humor, I must crave further, that if any of
you hear of a second Answer coming out against my former Letter, concerning my
putting the Tarts before the Chickens (for I am given to unders^nd, that such
an Objection is n^ed) that by all means you presently stop the Press: for most
certainly Chickens ought to have the precedence of Tarts; both by an
indispensable right of nature, and by the justest rules, and traditions of
Cookery: And I shall always be ready to acknowledge, rather than defend such
mistakes.

SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE ANSWER To an ENQUIRY into the GROUNDS and
OCCASIONS OF THE Contempt of the Clergy, etc.
SIR,
WHat Service you or I should do to Church or State by cracking of N^ts, I do
not understand; excepting the case of Chestnuts, upon which, a^ it has been
reported, the Kingdom of Naple^ has some Mysterious dependence; but however to
this Employment our old Friend, and Acquaintance W. S. advises us, rather than
to disturb the world with idle wishes, and dangerous endeavors of doing any
good. For, although what I sent you in my last, may possibly be most of it
true, and might in the opinion of some hasty men, be counted useful; yet there
be others of a more wary, and deliberate Judgment, that say it must not be
true, neither shall it be true, because there is an ancient, and received
Axiom amongst Statesmen; That all things that are true are not fit to be said
at all times; as the Answerer to my first Letter most politically observes.

Now, Sir, this same Friend of ours does not tell me plainly, whether he
expects to hear from me again; and if he does, for my part, I know no more what
to write, than he knows me. For his Love and Tenderness toward me, is so very
great, that it will suffer him to answer but to very little of my Letter (as
you know, Sir, Friends, if they be dear indeed and indeed, are very loath to
cross, and contradict one another) and therefore he troubles not himself much
about that; but only he assigns me over to, God knows, how many further
Answerers: as, first of all, I am to be quarreled with by all the
Schoolmasters of the Nation, for undervaluing the great Ordinance-days of
Humiliation and Repetition. Next o^ all, I am to be versifyed upon par^icularly
by the Westminster Scholars; who are to persecute me severely with Poetical
Squibs, and Crackers. If these do not effect the Business, then Cowley is to be
raised from the Grave, on purpose to make a Pindarique upon me. After all this,
the Convocation is to meet, and have a Session on purpose, to pick out one of a
nimble Pen, and a ready Wit, to recover the reputation of the meanen Clergy.
But, if these all fail, and should not humble me, then by way of Pigeons and a
Postscript, he advises the Gentry of the Nation to raise all the Traind Bands,
and County-Troops, to be in Arms against me; and having well whetted their
Swords, to make sharp Thrusts at me, and to wound my reputation, in order to
the Redemption of their Cozen Hellen, who was carried Captive to a small
Vicarage. In short, Sir, it is very plainly the opinion of the Answerer, that
if some body does not take me in hand, and (as he says, p. 22.) do not seek to
lessen the value of my Letter, and that very speedily, the Church will
certainly be all sunk by Michaelmas next, and the State will tumble after it in
the following Spring. Bless me! think I, what is the business? a man cannot wish
a few honest, and innocent wishes, but that presently he must be rhym'd on,
confuted, and fought; but that he must be bound over to Westminster Squibblers,
hard Thrusters, and Reputation-wounders And for what? Only for endeavoring to
procure the meaner sort of the Clergy a little more Money, and a few more Books.

But, perhaps, Sir, there may be something else; We bad best therefore look a
little into the Answerer; to see where the offenses lie, and where we are
likely to be quarreled; for this Gentleman letting off the Gun very easily,
fights but very little himself; but only sets out the ground for the Battle,
and claps his hands, and cries, Holoo, to the Armies that are drawing up.

But before that be done, I cannot but take notice, that although our Friend,
for old acquaintance sake (which possibly might be begun at Padua; for where
else I should be acquainted with any W. S. I cannot devise) in many places, is
very prodigal of his sweet Expressions toward me; yet, I perceive, it is
always done with a very wary prudent reserve* For his Love and good Opinion of
me seldom hold above a Page together, if so long. In one place of his Preface,
he thinks him whom he answers, a v^ry ho^st Gentleman; but in another Huff
(says he) We are as good men as himself, and have reason to quarrel with the
world, that we are not more admired and honored. For my part, I began to call
for my Whinyard, being almost afraid that he would have drawn; but all was over
presently again; for, in the next Side, he falls into such a commendation of
me, for joyding the Credit and the Serviceableness of the Clergy together, as
if he would have fed me with nothing but SugarSops and Soft Jellies; but yet,
for all that, before he closes up his Preface, he sets my unwilling teeth to
the difficult task of cracking Nuts. Nay, sometimes his Affection rises, and
falls, within six Lines compass; for in the beginning of the first Page of his
Answer, he seems somewhat timorous, and doubtful: Either (says he) the Au^hor
does truly believe, and affectionately bewail, or does very vainly, if not
hypocritically too, enquire into the Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of
the Clergy. But this trembling and jealous Fit was quickly over; for the very
next Line, he loves me like mad; saying, that he does readily believe
(notwithstanding the fr^quent drolling that might make some severe men to
doubt) that I am in good ear^est. When I had read these words, doubtless think
I now 'twill be a Match; and I may venture now surely to speak for the great
Cake. But alas, This Passion called Love, is such a Passion for changeableness!
for before I had made an end of that Side, all was Dough again, and he falls
into another Qualm; and do^bts whether in many things I have said well.

And thus, Sir, he carries me from Page to Page; sometimes he makes me rich in
imagination, and as Illustrious as a Peer of the Realm; but, by and by, he
takes away all my Treasure, and Credit, and ( p. 80.) gives me an inevitable
choice of Fool or Knave. Some flattering and half Friend would have only said,
as he does, that all the Gentry covet my Company; and that my Acquaintance lies
with the Learned Clergy only. But alas, Sir, he knew full well, that this might
have huff'd, and quite spoiled such an unsettled temper as mine; and therefore
he knew how to spend good words moderatly, and how to put in a dash of
Humiliation with d^scretion. To keep company only with Worthies, and the
Learned, is too fatning and foggy; it would in time intoxicate, and breed
conceit, and bad humors; and therefore my Friend knew very well, how healthful
and seasonable it would be for my Constitution* to take sometimes fresh Air,
and to send me abroad to gather Briefs. The truth of it is, I must perfectly
resign up my self to his management; for whether I do or no, I perceive, he
will dispose of me according to his good pleasure: Sometimes I am permitted to
be in the right; sometimes I must be in the wrong; e'ne according to the humor
that he is in; for once in so many Pages, to keep me meek, it is convenient,
that Faults should be found; and then he applies both eyes to the Book, and
looks for them with all earnestness and diligence: And indeed, Sir, if I may so
say without seeming conceited of my own undertaking; the Answerer might as well
have excepted against all the Book; and to make short of it, have pronounced it
one entire and continual Lie from beginning to ending, with as much reason, as
to except against many of those places, which he has picked out ^o confu^e:
Which will more plainly appear by the choice of the Objections, that he has
made against my Letter: For having most carefully rer^sed his Answer, I
profess; Sir, to you, that, in my opinion, the most sturdy ones which are to be
found in his whole Book, are such as follow; viz:

That there is somewhat in Homer, besides an Account of Achilles's Toes, and
the Graecians Boots. That take two Lads, the one sixteen, the other fourteen
years of age; he of sixteen shall be wiser than he of fourteen, Caeteris
paribus, i. e. as he explains himself, ^f at ^ourteen, the foresaid sixteen Lad
happened to be as wise as the other is now. That ev^ry Gentleman that keeps a
Chaplain, has not a Cozen Abigail to wait upon his Lady. That it is lawful to
take a Preface from Adam, because the New Testament refers to the Old. That
there is a Neighboring Minister of his, that has above five hundred Sermons by
him; and having lately very well looked over the same, f^nds not one of them to
begin with an ingenious Picture. That it is very allowable to shred into a
Sermon good store of Latin and Greek (at least Latin) though it be in a Con^rey
Parish; because old Mr. Dod uses to say, so much Latin, so much Flesh. That it
is a great joy, and re^reshment to a Ministers own understanding to quote
several Languages, though no body understands them but himself. That though it
should be admitted, that for the most part in a Country Village Latin might be
spared; yet, if it be out of St. Austin, it is very useful, though no Creature
in the Parish understands one Tittle of it; because ignorant people are not to
be imposed upon. Lastly, That those little Sentences, viz. as it were, if I may
so say, and with reverence be it spoken, are very mollifying Sentences; and may
with as much reason be used, as si ita loqui liceat, or detur verbo venia.

These, Sir, as far as I can perceive, are the most knocking and destroying
Objections against my Book. As for the rest, he either most plainly, and
grossly mistakes me; or else he tries to do it, but says the same that I do
(only he does not know of it) when he thinks he contradicts me: All which will
appear aftenwards in their due places: for I would willingly be as careful to
observe his Method, as he has been industrious to mistake my Meaning.

The first thing, wherein I am so shamefully and horribly out, is, that I have
not sufficiently reckoned up the Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the
Clergy. For that I having referred all to Ignorance and Poverty, I have, says
he, ( p ^, etc.) most carelessly l^ft out the Papists, Jesuits, Quakers,
Nonconformists; and (by his leave) he has forgot one, as well as I forgot the
rest, and that is the Draining of the Fens; there being a near relation between
Atheism and the Contempt of the Clergy. But no man can think of all things at
once.

Well; and do you think, Sir, that our old Friend is in good earnest, or does
he droll? Does he in his Conscience believe that the Papists do slight and
undervalue our Clergy? Do they lay their Plots, and Stratagems to make us daily
more and more despised? and does he think that they are really, at the very
bottom of their hearts, Adversaries, and Enemies to the Church of England?
Well, suppose they be; what would he have me to do in this case? Must I set
sail presently for Rome, or dispatch a Letter forthwith to the Pope, desiring
him out of all love, to tie up all his Priests and Jesuits; and not to suffer
any one of them to cross our Seas: and furthermore to let his Holiness know,
that in good truth, he does not do at all like a Gentleman, to let his Agents,
and Emissaries ramble up and down with Swords, and long Perukes, and other
fashionable disguises; inveagling those of our Church, and searching up and
down in unknown habits, for some of the least of our Learned Clergy; puzling
them with Sophismes, and making their Triumphs over them? Do you not think,
Sir, that he would listen to this, as he did to the Quaker, that went over to
convert him. Surely the Answerer cannot be so ignorant of the Romish Church,
and Constitutions, as not to see, that so long as the Pope believes himself
Supreme, and Infall^ble, or (which is all one) endeavors to carry on the
humor o^ being thought and believed so to be; so long as the Protestants stand
in their opinion for Schismatics; and they believe, or, at least, say they do,
that there is no salvation out of their own Church; so long as they think
themselves obliged, or pretend to think, that they ought to use all Arts, and
Means, to restore all again to themselves, and to frustrate all the Intents of
the Reformation; Lastly, so long as they think themselves Judges, or will judge
what Means are most likely to be effectual to bring about their designs, shall
we imagine that they will beg our leave to comb their Perukes, before they come
out of their Dressing Rooms? or that they will take our advice what street they
shall walk in; about what Corner they shall ply; what Company they shall keep,
and whom they shall dipute with? Now, Sir, because I thought it next to
Impossible, to hinder altogether their contriving our contempt (it being in a
manner in the Body of their Religion so to do) as also that there be several
wise and wholesome Statutes of this Realm, with all care and prudence at first
made, and since often renewed (and now lately enforced by strict Proclamation)
to prevent their bad intentions toward us, and to defeat, as much as may be,
their plots against us; if the Answerer would but have considered of these
things, and had he but had that same gratifying Master of his, who used, as he
says, so to open his understanding in the Case of Juvenal and Florus; perhaps
he might begin to ghess, why I did not particularly insist upon the Papists, as
great occasions of the Contempt of our Clergy, but left them, and many such
things, to be treated of by him: In doing of which (although I am not apt to
boast of good works) I think I did very frie^dlily: For had I not left two or
three such things untouched, he would have been hard put to it (as far as I
perceive) to have found Furniture for his Answer.

But yet for all that, If I were very highly pleased with my own Model; and
were resolved to hale, and fetch in all to my two chosen words of Ignorance and
Poverty, and stiffly to defend the same; I could then, Sir, for a need, tell
him, that many have been tempted to turn Catholics (as they call them) for
want of preferment; and many have been abused and slighted by them, and brought
themselves and others of their Profession into Contempt, for want of Knowledge*

Now, though I never expected, that all the Clergy of England should be so
subtle in Logic, so cunning at untwisting a Complex Theme, so experimentally
skilled in Subject and Praedicate, so accurate at forming a Verb, and at
hunting out an Etimology to the first Original (as I perceive the Answerer is,
by what he so earnestly recommends in several places) but that here and there
one in a County might possibly be worsted by a keen and pinching Jesuit; yet
certainly, if the Clergy in general, were better furnished with all sorts, and
advantages of Learning, it would be more difficult for those diligent Enemies
of ours, to meet with so many frequent opportunities of Victory and Conquest:
and thereby, you know, Sir, the Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the
Clergy would be much lessened, though not altogether removed: For I hope, that
no body counts me so extravagantly mad, and doting, as to think that I should
believe, that it might possibly be so contrived, that there should not be any
Living Creature in Orders in the whole Land, but should be so rich, and
Learned, as that he should never tempt any man to disesteem him; or that he
should behave himself so worthily, and discreetly, that it were impossible for
the vilest Raskal, Varlet, or Insidel in the world not to respect him, and
attend to his Doctrine; (which is a thing that the Answerer has a great mind
that I should say, because he can contradict it) seeing that I had said several
times in my Letter, as also in the Preface, that I would propound nothing, as
near as I could, but what was hopeful, and practicable. Which thing, if he had
been at leisure to have minded, he need not then have held up his hands so
high, and repeat it ten or twelve tim^s with such wonderment, that I should
refer all to Poverty and Ignorance.

I am very loath, Sir, to go about to abate the Answerer's prizing himself, for
discovering so many other several occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy*
besides those which I mentioned: but I perceive he seems mightily concerned (as
you know, Sir, one Friend cannot but be for another) that I should be so
lamentably mistaken, as to say, that whatever lessen the val^ of the Clergy, or
render it less serviceable to the world, than might be reasonably hoped, may be
all referred to Ignorance and Poverty. For, says he, (p. 7.) The Occasions of
the Contempt of the Clergy are not only (on our part) Ignorance and Poverty.
Again (p. 18.) You had said enough, says he, if our Ignorance and Poverty had
been only some, or the main of those things that lessen our value, and ^ot the
only things. And (p. 22.) Wheresore again, somewhat else is sometimes the
occasion of the Contempt of the Clergy. And, (p. 23.) I wish, says he, you had
not said, Wh^tever lessen the value, etc. -- So that I perceive, if I had said
that Poverty and Ignorance had been some of the Causes, or the main, or chief
occasion, or the like, it had passed well e^ough; (I might possibly have had
the Gentleman's Daughter;) but to say they are the only; that there is nothing
besides; to put in that stabbing word whatever, it was an unkind, and
unfriendly Expression.

Truly, Sir, you know pretty well my temper; and I believe, would vouch for me,
that I had no malice in my heart, when I said Whatever. But I much wonder that
the Answerer, who did so often, and solicitously wish, that that same offensive
word Whatever had been left out, should overlook those others that are in the
same Sentence; viz. than might be reasonably hoped; or if he did not, what did
he think they meant? he may believe me, that those words were not put in by
chance, and (being slow to confess) now made use of to deliver me from a
dreadful Mistake: But I intended thereby to signify two things; first, That ^
would enquire into such causes, and grounds, as might be reasonable, and proper
for me to enquire into; and not into such things, as were already taken care of
by the Laws of the Realm, or Canons, and Constitutions of our Church, as was
before hinted. And had we an Act of Parliament, that were in as good force,
against the Poverty of the Clergy, (which a worthy, and very learned Author in
a late Treatise tell us, H. Th.
might be so ordered, as it might not be very grievous to the Subject) as
against the foreign, and domestic enemies of our Church; I had left out that,
as well as those many other causes, which the Answerer thinks fit to mention:
But indeed as to that other business of want of Learning; that would scarce be
easily remedied by a Vote of the House, except it were extraordinary full.

Another thing that I intended by those words, was, that I would meddle with
nothing that was almost impossible to be wholly avoided: and therefore, at that
time, I did not think it convenient (though perhaps afterward I may) to tell
the people, that there are a great many very wicked ones in the world, and
always will be. Such I mean, who defying Heaven, and even God himself; it is no
wonder that they are not sparing to a Clergyman; although he has a very large
Parsonage, and although he has all those same Books, that the Answerrer says
(p. 46.) he has heard of: nay, though he be one of his neighboring Doctors;
with his rattling Coach: For we have those that can curse and swear, as loud as
that can rattle, and rumble, let the road be never so uneven, and the Coachman
drive never so hard; and so they will, so long as they give themselves up to
the Devil. But I thought it not fit to write a Letter to Him, to chain up his
busy spirits of darkness, from intermedling with affairs on Earth; nor to
insert him for one Ground or Occasion of the Contempt of the Clergy. But this,
I think, may conveniently be said, that whatever number we have of those that
are despisers not only of the Clergy, but of all that is good; and that were I
to write my first Letter again; I cannot (by the blessing of God) think of any
more proper way, either to recover them from perpetual ruin, or to abate their
infecting of others, than with all earnestness to wish that their might be
daily additions of such to our Worthy Clergy, whose Counsel, Value, and Example
might win them by degrees into some sense of Religion, and better opinion of
those that are more peculiarly the Maintainers of the same.

I know there be some, who having a great mind to dislike something or other,
think they have made a considerable Objection against what I writ before, by
saying* that I was very silent as to the carriage, and conversation of the
Clergy: which may be pattly true, and yet no great omission; because I thought
with my self, that if there were any want of advice, and exhortation to the
Clergy, it might be more proper to be performed by such as had Authority over
them, and power to mind them of Ecclesiastical censures: but, for my part, I
know very little Service that I could do in that kind, unless I should have rid
up and down the Country, and turned Parrettor, or Informer; and so bring in a
Roll of such as are idle and negligent in their Profession: An employment, I
must con^ess, that I do not much approve of, but shall leave it to the ready
and listening Nonconformists; whose ill will to the present establishment of the
Church, would make them very glad of the office: and, I am confident, they
would bring in a very fine bill since St. Bartholomew the famous, if they were
but entrusted with the contriving of it.

And perhaps this may in part satisfy what the Answerer thought he said against
me ( p. 10.) viz. that Integrity, together with Learning, and an Estate, is
more considerable than either of them or both together. Yes truly that it is,
by above ten in the hundr^d: But yet for all that, he need not to think, that
supposing the great Tithes should be bestowed upon a Vicar, that he should
presently fall to breaking all the Commandments, and saying the Creed
backwards: for that it is, or at least must be his meaning, if he intended to
gainsay what I had written, that is, that Learning, and a good convenient
Estate are of none, or very small account, and use in a Clergyman; if there be
but integrity of Life, and good conversation: Which, I say, I think is not
extraordinary true: For take this same Integrity, that has but little money,
and very few Books; and give this Integrity a good Library, and the knowledge
thereof, and an hundred pounds a year; and if this Integrity be not more
considerable, and do more good in the world, than poor, naked and unlearned
Integrity, I never saw the like o^ it; especially in a Clergyman, who you
know, Sir, since miracles are ceased, are supposed to come to a better knowledge
of the mind of God, and better able to discover the same to the people that are
committed to their care, by dedicating themselves; and their time, to that
D^sign and Service.

It is j^st to as much purpose, and as much against me, what the Answerer says
on in the same Page, viz. That very rich and very learned Clergymen have been
despised; witness the Bishops in the late times. Yes truly, I must needs grant
an old Friend of mine, that taking away all their Estates, the Archbishops
Head, and putting many of them in Prison, are notable Signs of their being
despised: and he may remember also, what the same despising Raskals did to our
Sovereign the King; and what would he infer from thence? If any thing at all,
it must be, that Riches and Knowledge are altogether as useless, and as subject
to Contempt, as Poverty and Ignorance: If he please, he may so infer; but when
he has done, he will scarce be able to hire two in a County to believe him,
unless they be very special and inward Friends.

But of all Stra^agems that he makes use of, to show how vain, and successeless
all my endeavors were likely to be; that certainly argues the most of close
and thick thinking, which he lucks upon ( p. 12.) Nay, says he, I will venture
further a little ^o ^ake it appear (and indeed if there were ever Venture made,
this was one) that Ign^rance and Poverty are not the onl^ grounds of Contempt;
for some Clergymen are as much slighted for their great Learning, a^ others
are for their Ignorance. Now, although he says in his Preface, that he would
not much boast of convincing the world, how much I was mistaken; in what I
undertook; yet, I am confident of it, that this Contrivance of his did inwardly
as much rejoice the Cockles of his heart, as he phansies, that what I writ did
some^imes much tickle my spleen But wherein, I pray, Sir, are they slighted? O
says he, in their Preaching; a Learned Scholar-Preacher can neither keep the
People awake, nor make them write after him, whereas a plain right down less
learned Divine shall make them stare, and start again; so would an honest
BlockRiver with his Beetle, heartily calling at the Church-Door, once in five
or six Minutes, as well as the most Ecclesiastical Fist, powerfully exercising
upon Edifying Wainscot.

But does he think, Sir, that Ignorance will out-preach Learning? He is to
remember that in^o want o^ Learning, I put also Discretion, and want of the use
of Learning; and also consideration of the capacity of the Auditors; and there
be many other things, besides Greek and Latin, hard Words, and some Mysterious
Points, which to preach to Common People, you had as good give them a Lecture
about Squaring the Circle: And therefore he did not hear me say, that the
greatest Meer^Scholar is always either the most admired Preacher, or really
does the most good, because many other Circumstances are required, upon which
the Fame, and Success of a Preacher does sometimes depend: But yet, thus far I
durst venture to say, (seeing that we are got upon the Venturing-Pin) that he
that understands the Holy Scriptures best, and ther^in the Mind of God
explained; (under which I comprehend all Learning requisite for the same) he
also that has the Command of true and useful Rhetoric; discerning what words
are most proper, and intelligible; and how they are so to be ordered as they
shall not make either any harsh, and unpleasant noise, nor be difficultly
understood; and that has besides an audible and graceful Voice, a comely and
unblameable Gesture; if this man thus accomplished, be not more respected, and
likely to do more good in general, than he that wants all, or has but some few
of these, then it is a most rash and idle things, to wish the very meanest we
have of the Clergy, to have had the opportunities of any better improvement.

But, O, the sanctifi^d postures* the fam^liar and condescending Similitudes,
and the insinuating and (...) Voice (...) I hope, Sir, they do not r^solve ^o
muzzle my Clergyman, or think that I intended only (...) mute Divine; one that
should only frown, and forehead ^is P^rishioners into a Godly Life, instead of
prudently reproving them; and saying nothing to the purpose, should only cheer
up the people, with drawing up his Chaps into a pleasa^ Smil^, when the Use of
Comfort is ready to come* Of which Religious (...), we had a great plenty in
the late ^ealous times* those, I mean, that use to turn up the Glass, and spend
a quarter of it, in rocking themselves into a still Fit of Prayer, and then
breaking out into a sudden fright of Devotion, as if they were risen from the
dead. We are, (thanks be to God) past those days, when the Pulpiteers use to
strip, and truss themselves, as if they were to show some spiritu^l tumbling;
and so having hung up their Cloaks, and put back their Hair behind their Ears,
sometimes they were for bending backwards: as if they would take up a Shilling
in their Eyelids; sometimes again for stretching upon the Cushion, as if they
would turn over their heads, and show you the double Summetset; but then, if
there came to be any extraordinary Show, and the Occasion did require* any
transcendent Feats of Activity, and great Agility of Body, such as a public
Thanksgiving, or a Solemn day of Humiliation; ^uch a time called only for close
Drawers, and the Breeches were to be left at home, because they were great
dampers of the power of the Spirit, and a vast hindrance to the efficacious
carrying on the Work of the Day; and the immediately succeeding Tax: Then, it
was that Godliness chiefly consisted in the management of the Eye; and he that
had the least Pupil was the most righteous; because most easily concealed by
the rolling white. Then it was, that they would scarce let a round-fac'd man go
to Heaven; but if he had but a little Blood in his Cheeks, his condition was
counted very dangerous; and it was almost an infallible Sign of absolute
reprobation: And I will assure you, Sir, a very honest man of a Sanguine
Complexion, if he chanced to come nigh an officious Zealot's House, might be
set in the Stocks, only for looking fresh in a frosty morning; and yet, for all
that, these pale and world-renouncing Saints, should slyly lick up all the
Sweetmeats of a small Parish, and religiously suck down a Pint or two of
Malaga, and then despise the Creature, unless taken with moderation.

What the Answerer meant, in saying, that an unlearned Preacher had many ways
to keep people awake, and to make them as busy with their Pens, as the Clerks
are in their Chancery-Office; whereas a man of Reason, and true Eloquence
should not so much as draw forth one Sigh, Tear, or drop of Ink, I do not
understand; for, for my part, I see nothing to the contrary, but that a person
of good Education and Discretion (if he did not think it useless and
fantastical) may hollow as loud, as the most illiterate of all; for, Sir, if
you remember, care was taken, that such as were designed for the Ministry,
should have not only all their outward Limbs, but also good, strong, and
lasting Entrails; which, you know, Sir, if the Mouth does but open, and things
be but a little ordered, will make noise enough. If indeed people were to be
bellowed, or blown to heaven, then certainly their H^rdsman with his Horn,
might save more people of the Parish, than the Minister, though he splits his
Throat; and I deny not, but that a man may be scared by a whole Cannon, or a
Crack of Thunder, but scarce into a good Life that will hold and continue; and
although to the late famous Triers, it was an approved of Sign of Conversion,
to have been in a great Storm, of Tempest, and to have been a little frighted
or affected therewith; yet I cannot forbear to say, that that person, who has
been kept awake by a mere hideous noise, and such a strenuous Voice that will
not so much as let the poor Jackdaws rest quietly upon the Steeple: when he
gets but once out of that jarring Din, he may presently fall asleep, and as
well try to meditate upon a Sound of Trumpets, as any thing that he remembers
toward the amendment of his Life.

I did partly, Sir, promise to observe the Answerer's Method; but I am afraid I
shall not be altogether so good as my word; and i^ I fail, I suppose it is no
great matter; for I do not perceive, that the closeness of his Siege is such,
as should strictly require any such thing; therefore, before I proceed any
further, as he tells me ( p. 5.) that he has no reason to thank me, that I
should take notice of no other Occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy, but
Ignorance and Poverty; so, I am sure, I have very little reason to thank him,
for trying to make people believe, that I should say, that whatever disgrace or
Contempt did lie upon any of the Clergy, it was altogether their own Faults; To
which purpose, I am confident he speaks nigh twenty times in his Book. By two
or three places, Sir, you may ghess at his meaning in the rest, ( p. 6.) he
says, I do almost insult over the Poverty of the Clergy; and that I do in a
manner excuse the Laity for despising the Clergy; and ( p. 18. he wonders at me
for thinking that the Clergy is wholly accessory to their own shame; whereas it
is often times their Misfortune, as he says, ( p. 23.) and the matter had not
been much, if he would have been content, to have been mistaken all alone by
himself, but he must draw in the Countrey-Gentlemen, and scandalize them; and
set them to make a groundless and senseless Speech, from what he pretends they
should find in my Book; saying, Look you here, Parson, have you seen this Book?
here is one that has made it as plain as the Sun, that you are a company of
dull Block-heads, and that the reason that you are no more respected, is all
your own fault; and so you may even sink in your own sorrows, there is no body
likely to pity you.

Surely, Sir, the Answerer has got my Book purposely printed for his own
mistaking; For, I can find no such thing at all in mine: namely, that all the
discredit, or calamity that falls upon any of the Clergy is wholly, and
altogether occasioned by themselves. But the contrary I find almost every page:
as, suppose a Lad should be imposed upon, and made believe he is fit for the
University; and thereupon should be presently sent away with Cato, Cordelius,
and Textor's Epithets for Gunpowder Treason; and with (...) -- and perhaps the
beginning of the next verse, so fitted to his tongue, that it is ready to start
out of his mouth at the first sight o^ the Theater, or Kings College Chapel:
and suppose when he comes there, that his parts are such, that the Muses come
upon him but very slowly, or that he cares not much for their further
acquaintance; having been sufficiently banged out of all love to them at School
already: or, suppose he having a mind to study, has neither Time, Books, nor
Money to purchase them: but must go to the Stationers, to look what is the
English of a word: and that his friends being either not willing, or not able
to maintain him there above five or six months; he goes and seeks his fortune;
and so, as it is in the Fable, he skips into the pond, in hopes of a flock of
Sheep; but it so falls out, that he never arrives to the preferment of above
twenty pounds a year; whereupon, Sir, upon these and the like occasions, it so
happens, that such an one possibly proves not very serviceable to the Church,
nor much esteemed of by the people. Now can any one in the world, besides the
Answerer, be so mad as to think, that I who had reckoned up these, and many
such occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy: and finding thereupon, here and
there, a person in orders not so honored and useful, as might be wished;
should presently bid him (or tempt others, by what I said, to do it) go hang,
damn, or bury himself alive; go sink, drown or dye in a ditch lik a Dog: he may
e'ne thank himself; it was perfectly his own fault, a great lazy lubber, that
might have had a Living of six or sevenscore pounds a year; and he must be
modest, and go puling into a private corner with one of sixteen; an idle and
unambitious Coxcomb, that might have had his Barns top full of Corn, besides
two great stacks in the Yard; and when he should be gathering in his refreshing
Harvest, for him to be counting up his few in-coming eggs, or scrambling with
the poor Pigg for Plums under the Damsin tree: an ill contriving Rascal, that
in his younger years should choose to lug the bag and the bottle a mile or two
to School, and to bring home only a small bit of Greek or Latin most
magisterially construed; and would not enter himself into one of the great
Schools of the Land; where he might have received his belly full of knowledge
in full chargers; and afterward having five or ten pounds a year plentifully
allowed him by his friends, should forsake the University, and the Advantages
thereof, and go sneaking into the Country, and spend the prime of his years
with a comp^ny of small Grammar-Singers: a careless and improvident wretch,
that should be so overseen, as to be descended of such an humor some and
^hlegmatick Father, who (...) so surely, and dull as to bestow upon him neither
Estate nor Parts; or that should be so inconsiderate and undiscerning as that
he should suffer himself to be begotten of such mean and ordinary Parents;
whereas there be so many sine and tall Gentle-folks in the world, that could
have given, or procured him present preferment: away miserable and low
contented mortal! Weep on, and dye, sinking in your own sorrows, and in your
own contrived miseries; for you are likely to have no help, pity or respect
from us.

After this rate, Sir, he discredits the Country Gentry, in that Speech, which
he makes for them: as if he could find any one creature in the whole Nation
(that ever saw my B^ok) besides himself, so egregiously weak, as to mistake me
so grossly, as he represents them to do.

Neither, Sir, would it satisfy the Answerer to endeavor to make people
believe, that it was my opinion, that whatever disesteem any of the Clergy did
lie under, was perfectly occasioned by their own choice, and wholly to be
attributed to their own neglect, and imprudence: but he must needs go about to
draw me in, to undervalue the whole Clergy of the Land: which he has as much
reason to hope to do (from any thing that I said) as to try to persuade me,
that I promised in my first Letter to cut my own throat; and, for that purpose,
he has so ordered the business, that in the Mercurius Librarius, to the end of
the Title of his Answer, these words are added, viz Wherein is contained, a
sober Vindication of the Clergy of England from the imputation of Folly and
Ignorance. Now, Sir, although I did not spend much time in contriving a set
commendation of our wise and honorable Clergy, yet in several places I said so
much, and acknowledged it so far, that I thought that no body, that would but
at all attend to what I writ, and were not very humoursome, and peevish
besides, could possibly mistake my meaning; my design being not to make a
needless, and solemn commemoration of the Learning and Wisdom of our Clergy
(which the whole world has always admired, and have reason still to do, and our
Adversarries to dread) but still to increase the number of our Admirers, and
that we may become a greater terror to the Enemies of our Church. Neither,
Sir, was I altogether ignorant, how much the ordinary sort of our English
Clergy do far excel in Learning, the common Priests of the Church of Rome. But,
Sir, as I told you in my last, as there were very good reasons (ever since
Infallibility, and the several Arts thereunto belonging, was laid aside) for
which it might be convenient, that our Common Clergy should be richer than
theirs: So for the same reasons, it might be requisite (or at least very
desirable) that it should be more learned; but for all this, Sir, the
Answerer, taking no great delight in understanding what I meant, on he goes (
p. 25.) most historically showing, that the English Clergy, since the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth 's Reign, is much improved; and the reason is, because they
can now preach much better, than the High Sheriff could then: whom I must grant
to be a most admi rabble Preacher, if his Fancy, and Biskets held out good to
the end of his Sermon; to which, were it worth the while to reply, it might be
said, that supposing the Clergy be somewhat improved since those days he
speaks of; and that the rest of the world stood staring still at the same low
degree of understanding, then a Clergyman, although but a little amended in
his judgment, and excelling those of former times, would be much valued, and
respected. But suppose the Laity have an odd kind of Fancy to enquire, to
improve, and in their way and proportion to grow in knowledge also; then a
little improvement in the Clergy will not possibly be so hugely wondered at, as
the Answerer expects it should be, unless he could procure an Order to have all
that are now living in the world, to be presently knocked on the head, and to
fetch from the grave the HighSheriff, and his ignorant Halberteers to admire
the growth and increase of Learning, that is now to be found in the present
Clergy. But, for my part, I must confess, I know no reason to deny, that the
Clergy of the ^and does daily considerably improve; but withal, I do not
perceive where the Murder, Witchcraft, or the Jesuitisme of the business lie,
either in wishing that they may still proceed; or in ghessing why they go on no
faster.

I believe, Sir, you are sufficiently tired with reading the small Devices,
that the Answerer makes use of to defeat the design of my Book, and the hard
shifts that he is sometimes put to, to contrive but a conscionable Mistake; but
when his parts grows low, and his Invention flags, then he is for seeking out
for one of my own supposed Ob ections (and presently shutting the Book, lest he
should read any of the Answer) he spends his time in paraphrasing upon that.
How often, Sir, he falls into this humor, it would cost the Reader near six
pence to know. I shall give you therefore at present, Sir, but one instance of
it: About the beginning of p. 32. he wonders at me very much for seeming to
say, that the worst of all Scholars are picked out for Divinity. F^r, says he,
Is it not a strange thing, that they who h^ve diverted to other Studies, should
for a great part, prove excellent in their kind, able ^awyers, expert
Physicians, andC. yet they only who settle to Divinity, should for the most
part prove otherwise. Yes truly, it is a very strange thing; and I believe the
like was scarce ever heard of; ^especially by an Answerer, who will neither
read, nor ghess tollerably: For, if he had but taken that some Prospective^
Glass, which he advised me to look upon the ^aity (...) (p. ^.) and had he but
turned either end of it upon what I said, (p. 11, 17, 21, and 81.) perhaps his
wondering in time would have somewhat abated; for there he might have sound,
that very few determine themselves to the Protession of Law, or Ph^sick,
without the consideration of some Estate; upon which they foresee they may be
probably maintained, until they gain skill enough, and reasonable Con^idence,
to profess, what they design; and, sure I am, that there is scarce now to be
found a Lawyer in the Nation, that ever got, or is likely to get Sauce for a
Pullet, but (besides his Universitypreparations) has spent the best part of his
time for six or seven years together to fit him^lf for his intended Employment;
and as for those many others that go only to the Inns of Courts, to learn and
admire the excellent Knack of eating without a ^rencher, or to know the Porters
Name, and the four Terms; these are only a shame to themselves, no great
discredit to the Profession; because they never intend, nor endeavor to
practice; and if they should go about it, it would be but to very little
advantage for them to give a proof of their ill spent time; for he that
palpably loses his Business at the Bar, once and again, merely for want of
skill, and not out of pardonable mistake, he may e'ne run home to his Chamber,
and lay aside his Gown; for his Sword will as well become him in
Michaelmas-Term, as in the Long Vacation.

And these, Sir, are the choice and best of the Reasons, that I can find in the
(...); upon which, he will not suffer any of the inferio^r sort of the Clergy
to come to any higher degree of knowledge, before they enter upon their Holy
Employment. The next thing, that he undertakes to show, is, that supposing the
Ignorance of any of the Clergy be such, as it were convenient to wish it less;
yet that I have either not truly assigned the causes of it, or have omitted
many. And here in the first place, he falls upon me as severely, as the very
Castle-keeper himself could have almost done, for finding fault with the common
Method of Schooling: In which, his first assault, abo^t Greek and La^in, is so
forcible and furious, his Reasonings so killingly close and destroying, and all
his Directions so securely backed and guarded; that I was almost tempted to
renounce logic, and all its works, and never to come again within a Furlong of
an ^ntwister of complex Themes; but presently to clap ^at under Arm, and to run
as hard as Legs would carry me, to the first man that sold any Amo or (...).
About the middle of p. 35. (a place I am sure I shall no more ^orget than
(...)) after a mild and gentle preface, as sweet and courteous as Friend could
devise, viz. I beg your pardon, says he, if I be not altogether of your
opinion, as to the business of Schooling. When alas! (little thinking I of any
such danger, so nigh at hand) without mercy he seizes upon me with the utmost
violence, and dint of Logic, and beginning with a most confounding disjunctive
Syllogism, called by the wicked and hard-hearted a Dilemma, or Cornute (which
you know, Sir, is the most barbarous and unchristian than can be invented by
man of Argument) he tells me after this inhumane and savage manner; Either,
says he, it is necessary that Greek and Latin should be learned, or not. Now,
for my part, Fire or Water; burn or drown; I know not which to choose. If I say
not; than he has me most cruelly upon the Hip, and brings me over with a most
deadly Gulsh: For I, thinking nothing of this Mischief, had gone, and foolishly
said, that there were very good Books in Latin and Greek; and therefore, seeing
I cannot avoid it, I must say Yes; though it be to the undoing of my Wife and
Children. Yes, says he? then if necessary, those Languages are to be learned at
School, or not. Well: it is ^'ne as good to be undone at first a^ at last; I
must say Yes again. Very good! says the Answerer; and now we have got you thus
far, I proceed, and assume. Nay, think I, now I perceive, he intends to kill me
alive; now come French, Spaniard, Turk, Tartar, or any devisable thing; for
nothing, I am sure, can be so heathenish, and void of all Grace, as a cruel and
blood-thirsty Assumer: But I must be content; for on he goes, and to make an
utter end of me, says, that if Greek and Latin are to be learned at School,
then a good proficiency is there to be be made; and if a good proficiency, then
nothing but the mere words of the Languages are to be studied. But I know, Sir,
he will be ready to say, that he does not conclude so: but I care not for that;
for he must conclude so, if he intended to conclude against what I said: For I
said nothing against the ^anguages, but only that some other delightful
Employments might be mixed with them; and that a very competent skill therein
might possibly with more advantage be gained out of some other Authors, than
out of Dictionaries, or Janua's, which are not much better. A Lad surely may
bring up a little ^rithmetick and Geometry (beside a good Bouget of Latin and
Gre^k) without breaking the Horses Back; especially if his Fathers man comes
but along with him. And as the Answerer says, he has heard of Fathers,
Councils, and the like; so I have heard there is a Greek Euclid; and that there
be many Latin Books, out of which Knowledge, together with words may be
conveniently learned. But alas! now I think of it, old Folks will not give unto
Children any Reason, for fear it should choke them. What, give a Child rank and
surfeiting sense! It will breed Worms, the Itch, Kib'd Heels, and Scabby Heads.
Children must have only Water Gruel, scall'd Milk, Bread and Butter thin
spread, and gay'd, and easy digestible words. A Triangle brings down the Pin
of the Mou^h, and a Square, if it be any thing large, certainly inflames, and
causes the Squi^zy. And, as the Answerer says, ( p. 37.) It is Memory alone
that is to be cherished and employel in Lads; that being the great Sto^chouse
and Foundation of all Learning. Yes truly, it is so; but for all that, I do not
much approve, that a whole File of Lads shall be all hanged up indifferently
together, for not being able, in the same time to get, and repeat so many
Inches, or Feet of words; whereas perhaps some of them, having naturally but a
small Faculty that way, have as much reason to be whipped, because their Hair
is not curled and flazen, or their eyes are not gray. And whatever Sense the
Answerer may pretend is to be found in SchoolBooks to assist and help the
Memory, yet it is usually so undiscernable to Lads, that you had as good set
them to get by heart all the Signs from Temple Bar to Westminst^r, as many
Tasks that that they are oft-times obliged to.

And as for the business of Homer, if the Answerer will promise me not to be
angry, I will for once choose rather to be of my Lord Bacon's Opinion than his;
who tells us in his Advancement of Learning, that he can without any difficulty
pronounce, that the Fables of Homer (notwithstanding he was made a kind of
Scripture by the later Schools of the Graecians) had no such inwardness in his
own meaning; but however, as the Answerer well observes, there is somewhat else
in Homer besides. Achilles's Toes. But I profess* Sir, my mind d d so run upon
the so often commended (...) of the (...) ((...)) that I might easily forget
the Buckle-Garters. But is there nothing else in that ancient and venerable
Poet, but dry Stories of Footmanship, and such like low Accomplishments? Was it
not he, that laid down the first Elements of Physic, and Chyrurgery; and gave
the first Glimpses for scraping of Lint, and spreading Plasters upon Leather?
Is he to be undervalued, that is not only the Most Ch^istian, but most
Protestant of Poets; in whose Works you may not only find all Practical
Divinity, as fast as in the li^le Book of Piety it self; but most Cases of
Conscience warily resolved, and knotty Controversies accutely decided? Is he to
be called a Rumbler, who glides as smooth as a Star, or a fired Rocket of Tow?
who was not like common confined Mortals, born at one dull place; but at no
less than seven the most eminent Cities of the East? Is he, with whose Works,
Alexander alone could take rest, when as the whole World besides could not
content him; is he, who has been so solemnly quoted in all Ages, and so
generally relied on as the only Standard of Grecian Clossicalness, to be
compared with Garagantua, that was famous for nothing else but Torchch^ls?
Alas, Sir, this is nothing to what might be found in Homer, if people were but
diligent, and go but deep enough into the Original. There is the Jesuits
Powder, that the world has made such a great stir about, lies so evidently in
one place, that reading but the very Verse with true Accent, will almost cure
an ordinary Quartan: And again, there is the Philosophers St^e; for which
people have been groaping so many Ages: I could say somewhat concerning a
certain long word in the second Iliad, that would encourage an often frustrated
Philosopher, to call for his despairing Bellows, and presently to blow up a
fresh. And indeed most of those Rarities, which latter Ages have counted
themselves happy, and ingenious in the finding out; as the Compass, Printing,
the Circulation of the Blood, and the like, are fundamentally all in Homer; and
if people had not been lazy and distrustful, might have been long before
brought to light, by a little help of Dydimus and Eustathius.

And this puts me in mind of what I have heard so often said concerning his
Latin Brother, Prince Virgil; namely, that if all Arts and Sciences were
absolutely lost, burnt or sunk; and only Virgil left secure, in the Capit^l;
they might be all most easily recovered out of him, by one that has but
patience, a black Eye, and a good Commentator. In one corner of a Verse lie
very close all the Secrets and several Systemes of Astronomy; and though
Ricciolus has seemed to search many Authors for his curious Observations, and
to have spent many an hour in his ingenious Contrivances; yet, if you trace him
home, and watch him but closely; you will find, Sir, that he is only a
Paraphrase of four or five Pounds price upon those bare fruitful words of the
Poet -- quo sidere terram. From another small quantity of Princely Verse may be
retrieved, if need should be, all the practical as well as fundamental Laws of
Policy; and that Candia stood out twenty years, only by a right understanding
of -- Apibus quanta experientia parcis; keeping close to the Letter; and was
afterward taken by some Idle, and looser interpretation of the same words;
there is nothing more plain. Nay, Sir, I shall tell you a little further, what
a Nonconformist not long ago hinted to me, viz. That if the present Fathers of
our Church would but lay aside a^l Ecclesiastical History, Fathers, Councils
and Canons; he (...) undert^e to d^aw up, out of the Evingelical and
Prophetical Writings of Virgil (as he called them) such a Body of Divinity and
Church Discipline, as should exactly agree with the Primitive 'Doctrine and
Intentions of ^ur Savior; and more than that (giving me a private jogg) he was
almost sure, that if this great Poetical Divine had lived in our days, he would
have turned out at Bartholomew; for he found some notable Insinuations in the
Authar against the Surplice, and renouncing the Covenant. So that, Sir, upon
further considerations, I must be forced to acknowledge what the Answerer says (
p. 38.) that together with the Fabulous part of Poetry, there is a great deal
of useful Lea^ning to be found.

But withal, Sir, I must beg leave to put in a Caution or two, as to what was
said a little before concerning Homer; and then not a word more of Homer all
this Year. And first of all, I have made some little enquiry concerning
Alexanders's laying him under his Pillow,; and I find, that the Learned differ;
some placing him only upon a Stool by the Beds side, and others over his Head
upon a little Ridge; the ancient M^nuscripts not fully agreeing about (...) and
(...); and as for Rablais, I shall not undertake for his being of the Refo^med
Religion; but as to Divine Mysteries, I think that Homer and he may equally
pretend: and though Comparisons are odious, yet I am some what forward to
acknowledge, that the mighty spirit of Garagant^a declining the vulgar way of
coming into the World, and cunningly crawling up the Hollow Vein, and so making
his Escape under his Mothers Ear, is not much inferior either for honor or
strangeness to that Seven-City Birth of Homer. I meet indeed sometimes with
idle extravagant people, that are so profane as to compare his Poems to
ChivyChase; but such I always check; showing them plainly, that when the Poet
has a mind to recreate his Readers to purpose, then by the elegant help of his
little tickling (...) and (...), he could do it so effectually, that nothing
ever came more delightful from the Town of Athens. What more Theorbolike than
(...). What more smooth and celestial than (...). But indeed when the Bro^d
Sides of Pol^phloisboio's, the Hyppodamoio's, and the Poluscar^hmoio's are
dreadfully discharged toward the upper end of the School, and the noise
thereof come grumbling down like a Cart over a wooden Bridge; I will not say,
but that a small Lad or so, of a tender Constitution, may chance to creep
underneath the Table. But to make an end, Sir, of this; questionless there is a
very peculiar and secret worth in several Authors; and if you want a Bit of
ancient Authority, to plant Classically upon the Title Page of your Book, there
is none that is more fit, or has been more serviceable, than the worthy Poet
before mentioned. Nay, so serviceable has he been in this kind, that I durst
almost venture to say, that if he should by any Misfortune be afterward
utterly lost, he might be so far picked up by pieces out of TitlePages, that
there should scarce be wanting one (...). --

And thus having done with Greek and Latin, I shall now, Sir, follow the
Answerer to p. 39. where he tells the world, that if he would have made the
worst Construction of all things, (and indeed worse I think no body could have
made very easily) it is my Opinion that thirteen or fourteen years of age is
old enough for a Boy to be dubbed a Fresh-man in the University; whereas I only
said, it is but very low and (...) diet to live sixteen years upon the mere
strength of words: but notwithstanding that, he hurries on in a most sharp
con^utation of me caeter is paribus, as he did about Greek and Latin* but yet
somewhat warily, quoting by the way Dr. Hammond, and another that were admitted
into the University at thirteen, and did well. Whereas, in that place, it never
entered into my thoughts to consider to what years it was best to continue at
School: but only, let the time be what it will, I thought that some of it
possibly might be better spent. But the Answerer does no more here, than in
many other places besides: For where the confutable matter grows scarce and
thin; then he is for making some certain opinion for me; and having deputed me
to say such, and such words, he begs leave to suggest somewhat, (p. 40.) and
then he falls with all Vengeance upon that same poor opinion of his own
devising: and knocks it and bangs it, to dust and ashes. And this humor is so
powerful upon him, that within two or three pages he is at it again, viz. (p.
43.) it does not, says he, always necessarily follow, that Rope-dancers in the
Schools prove Jackpuddings in the (...). No verily, it does not; and I knew it
very well: but that does not hinder but that it may sometimes follow, or very
often, or usually happen (as I said page 33.) I pray, Sir, when you meet the
Answerer next, desire him to look a little better to his words: He could not be
content to put in always instead of usually; but he must bind it, and ram it
with necessarily; saying, it does not always necessarily follow. I owe him, as
I remember, a little curiosity for treating me so barbarously about that same
troublesome word whatever. I wish with all my heart, that he had not said
always; for an old friend, an old acquaintance to say always! and to put in
necessarily besides! it was certainly a most unhappy oversight. But then, I
liked that which follows singularly well; i. e. having made me to say, that all
that ever had been Praevaricators and the like, did always necessarily prove
Triflers in the Pulpit. There, says he, I think I have caught him bravely; for
I know some that never came there; and others that have, who behave ^bemselves
very gravely and seriously. Yes, and so do I know several; that have been
courted, or for^'d to undertake those public places of wit; who are now in
their several prof^ssions, as considerable persons, as belong to our Nation:
But yet for all that, as I believe, that it was not quibbling which made them
so consi^arable; so still I am apt to think, that such exercises do provoke
slender-witted Lads, to spend too much of their time in such Trifles; who
having no such tempting Examples, nor hopes of applauded jests, might possibly
have employed themselves in such studies, as might have made more for their
own, as well as the Worlds Advantage.

I wonder what the Answerer counts worth the while, when he says (page 44.) he
thought it worth his, to add a supplement to those things, which I had reckoned
as causes of that Ignorance that is in some of the Clergy. I am not, Sir, so
ridicu^ously silly, as to say that nothing might be added: But yet in all sober
sadness, the Answerer must excuse me, if I right down say, that the Account
which I have given, does not at all appear imperfect, by any addition that he
has made. For first of all, says he, I have skipp'd over the dullness of some
men's natural parts. Surely those places were not rent out of my Book, that
tells him, not only that a Lads parts ought to be ghess'd at, and ofttimes
might; but that discreet and wise Physicians should also be consulted, before
it should be determined that he should live by Learning. I did not indeed give
any particular directions that every Lad, before he was so determined, should
take a certain p^rge; and according as that should be found to move the humors
quicker or slower, so he should be resolved upon, as sprightful and
apprehensive, or as dull and incapable: But excepting that one thing, all care
was taken that any man (besides the unreasonable Answerer) could possibly
expect: But yet for all that, he says also, that I forgot the short stay which
some make at the University; which in truth, as he says, I had great reason to
have taken notice of. Which I did, as I think, so plainly, that I know not how
to have done it more, unless I should have got it encross'd upon Vellom in
great Text hand, and have ordered every word to begin with a vast red Letter.
But these omissions of min^ he hints at by the by only: But (page 45.) he
pitches upon three very ^emarkable things, which he says, by my favor, he
thinks I have not considered, and yet they are such as do much concur to the
keeping of some of the Clergy low in Learning, viz. want of (...), w^nt of
time, and want of learned (...). Now, Sir, if you remember the Answerer says
that he gave a shilling for my Letter and read it. But, for my part, I profess
I can scarce tell how to believe him; for he writes and answers, as if he ^ad
lived altogether at the Molucco Islands, or, as he says of himself in his
Preface, like one that is out of the World of Books. What can we do, says he
(page 45.) without Books, unless Learning were infused and inspired into us by
a Miracle: and again, What can we do with Books, unless we had time to read
them: Very right; and so said I: And I know no difference; but only I said it
in Michaelmas Term, and he says it in Hillary. It is, Sir, to me a very strange
thing, that the Answerer should seem perfectly to forget what I said; and yet
take the very same words, and print them, and sell them for supplements and new
discoveries at the Kings Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, which were sold three
months before at the Angel in Cornhill.

And thus, Sir, I have in short considered what the Answerer had said as to
Schools and Universities. It is time for him now to call me to an Account
concerning preaching. Which he does (page 53.) and first of all he sets upon me
with a charge general, for endeavoring to bring the whole O^ice of Preaching
into Contempt. I wonder that, when he was about it, he did not thrust it home:
and accuse me of cutting off the late Kings head; or that I had a design to
burn all the Bibles that were to be found; from the largest that lies on the
Desk, to the smallest Geneva; not leaving, if possible, so much as a Psalter or
Primer in the whole Land: and that to his knowledge I did intend to begin this
Antichristian work upon the first of June; that the billets most certainly were
already provided; and that I had spoke for the brush wood to be brought out of
Kent. When people fall a ghessing, I love they should ghess to some purpose. I
hate all small ambiguous surmisers; all quivering and mincing conjecturer^:
give me the lusty, and bold Thinker; who, when he under^kes ^o prophecy, does
it punctually. You write, says the Answerer, at that rate, as if you had a
design to bring the whole Of^ce of Preaching into Contempt. Who can ^ell, Sir,
what my design was, but my self, any fur^her than it may be judged by my word^?
let every body design ^or himself: why sho^d one man design for another? would
not the Answerer think, Sir, that I were very frantic; if I should tell him,
that I beg his pardon; but in my opinion he writes after that rate, as if he
had a design to disparage himself and his Profession: or, that he has managed
his business so slenderly, as if I had hired him to set forth a mean Answer;
and thereby to build my self a Reputation upon the weakness and mistakes
thereof. This, Sir, would look like a sly and ill natured Insinuation: or like
one of those same disingenuous squints, with which the Answerer (p. 57.) says
my Letter looks upon the Clergy. But i^ it for certain that I am against all
Preaching? and that my design is to bring that holy exercise altogether into
Contempt? might not some favorable and tender hearted man by no means be
persuaded to think otherwise? no, by no means, say^ the Answerer: for that
Irunning through the whole method of Preaching, he finds that I am against all
Prefa^es, Simi^itudes, Divisions, mollifying Sentences, Latin and Greek, flesh
and fish, Mr. Dod and all that is good.

And o^ all things, Sir, which trouble the Answerer, I perceive nothing does it
more, than that I should speak slightly and meanly of Prefaces. That seems,
says he, ( p. 55.) to me that our very Prefaces are (...), and meanly spoken
of: and if s^; ^hen ^arewel all Religion: farewell Church and Steeple: farewell
Pulpit and Cushion: what take away our dear Prefaces! Can he be a well wisher
to Preaching, who will not so much as let us begin our Sermons? and can he be
an encourager of hearing the Word, that will not suffer the attention of the
Auditors to be pr^pared by a considerable Preface? or a friend to the reading
of the Bible, that will not allow so much of the first of Genesis, as to make
men^ion of Adam? what, against Prefaces! has he so little knowledge of the
Scriptures as to forget St Luke the great Evangelical Orator? is he of no worth
or example with him? methinks the beginning of his Gospel might have taught him
more modesty, and manners; than to be against Prefaces? and is there any hurt
to begin a Sermon with Adam, seeing there is such a great affinity between the
Old Testament, and the New; and that many Texts in the New do so plainly refer
to the first Adam? Yes truly: because it seems not convenient that the Sermon
upon good Friday should have the same beginning with that upon Trinity Sunday:
because I stinted them on this side Adam, and that too, when the Text was in
the Revelatio^s, saying nothing ^t all but that they might begin at the Flood,
the Captivity or the like: because I knew it was the humor of some to spend
half the hour in beginning to begin their Sermons; fetching their Preface as
far off as they could turn the Bible backward: and lastly, because it seems
reasonable that people (as far as might be) should be instructed in all the
several duties of their Religion, and have the greatest and most useful parts
of the Scripture explained to them: therefore am I against all Prefaces. I
wonder he did not conclude, that in my heart I was against Adam, Moses and the
Prophets, he might have done it as well, if he had but thought of it. St. Luke
has a short and suitable Preface of four Verses, to his whole Gospel: but
begins neither with Adam nor Belshazzar: and you know, Sir, St. Chrysostom,
the Orator of the Church, has many Volumes of Homilies or Sermons: but, as I
remember, there are very few Preface^ taken from Adam; and yet you know, Sir,
the New Testament did as much refer to the Old and first Adam, in St.
Chrisostome's days as in ours; the affinity being not ^uch increased since: and
if the Answerer please to look, he shall there find the Holy Father to have
Prefaces proper and peculia^ to the time, occasion or subject of his discourse:
and so have all Orators, a^swerable ^o the matte^ they intend to speak. Tully,
you know, Sir, and Demosthenes were often called upon for Speeches, but they
knew how to prepare their Auditors without disturbing Romulus or Theseus: and
yet you know, Sir, there was a very close reference between Catelin and
Romulus: for Catelin should have burnt the very City of Rome, which Romulous
had founded. But the Orat^r thought it better to begin with Quousque tandem
than Cogitanti Romulo: And I believe his present Majesty much wondered to what
Nation he was restored, when the Rhetorical Mayor welcomed him to his
Corporation with a long Complement derived from Adam. I am not, Sir, (God
sorbid that I should) against the Answerer's putting into his Prayer (for
perhaps it may be part of it) that the words which he is to preach may be as
goads, and as nails fastened by the Master of Assemblies. But if he should
begin every Text in the Bible with that very same Preface (which he may equally
do) I believe some idle people would say somewhat; I cannot certainly tell
what. The Answerer, Sir, invites me (p. 52.) very kindly to hear him preach,
and that, if I will go over he will give me one of the best of his Sermons. But
if I do, Sir, I think to send him word to desire him (for that day) to forbear
Belshazzar; let him do all the year besides, as he thinks fit. I shall also
take it for a Favor, if he would not begin his Sermon thus, As Abraham sat in
the Tent Door, and lifting up his Eyes, and looking, behold three Angels
appeared before him; so if you please to stand with patience and expectation,
you shall see me coming toward you in th^se thre^ Particulars. And, if with
any convenience he can dispense with it, I would beg of him, that he does not
take that of Isaiah; Come ye buy, and eat; yea, come buy Wine and Milk, without
money and without price; or if he does, that he would not tell me, that his
Text is like a spiritual Sack-Posse^; for I was told so once, and I scarce ever
loved Sack Posset since. Possibly also I may obtain at his hands not to take
that of the Apostle to Timothy, This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all
acc^ptation, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinnners, of whom I
am chief; not but that it is a very good place of Scripture; but it is a Text
that has been imagined ju^t like a Christmas Feast; consisting of three Dishes;
the sirst Dish was to be commended for its soundness; This is a faithful
Saying: the second for its sweetness; it is worthy of all acceptance: and the
third dish was a Proposition, consisting of five Ingredients. Now, Sir, if the
Answerer had had but the untwisting, the dressing, and the serving up of this
Luscious Proposition, what a Feast would the people then have had? what
wonderful variety of Subjects and Praedicates might this Dish have afforded?
How many choice and Princely Bits might have been here discovered? and how
plentifully might it have been stuffed and larded with juicy Latin and Greek? a
Dish of Propositions? I would go a Mile to see, if it were but one simple one
in a Dish; and to consider, how puzzled the Kings Carver would be to take off
the Subject from the Praedicate, without endangering the poor thin lurking
Copula. Now I know, Sir, some are of such nice and fashionable stomachs, that
common sense and truth will not down with them, unless it be hash'd, and
fricasse'd; they must have their Barricado's of greedy desire, and Esculado's
of virtue, and Christ must be the Dauphin of Heaven; but, for my part, I had
rather have any plain and homely entertainment, so it b^ (...) and wholesome;
than a whole Pl^tter full of such feasting Prefaces; which with a little new
garnishing shall serve for Easter, Whitsontide, and all the Holidays in the
year; for your Propositions are a sort of Diet, that will keep a long time in
Sowse-drink; if they do but now and then change the Pickle, and take a new Text.

I do not at all question, Sir, but that you know very well before, (as well as
now) what that meant, which I said about Prefaces. But I have very little hopes
of the Answerers being so suddenly improved, as to understand me yet; who has
given such late Instances of his slowness before: But however I proceed, Sir,
to the business of dividing of Texts: and what I said as to that in my former,
was upon this account; namely, that it was a thing very easily to be observed,
that many that went into Holy Orders to inform and save men, spent too much of
their time in Logical ostentation, and nice Divisions of their Texts; and after
such a manner, as they had very little Authority for so doing, either in
ancient Holy Writers, or in other good Authors; of which, I believe, we may
search a great many, before we can find any Melting, dropping or dissolving the
matter that they intend to treat of. We are bluntly told by the Orator, Bonorum
duo sunt genera, and Accusationis tria sunt parts; and by Caesan, Gallia est
omnis divisa (not neatly and featly liquefacta) in parts tres; and I know not
how the King would take it, if they should tell him, that his Dominions were to
be melted into England, Scotland, etc. and notwithstanding the Answerer thinks
himself so plain and practical, when his Text falls asunder into Subject and
Praedicate; or into Antecedent and Consequent; yet for all that I Will undertake
if this be in a Countrey-Village, he had better let down the Tress of his Text
into the Fore Horse and Thiller; for they understand no Subjects and
Praedicates; only the Kings Subjects and the Kings Praedicates. They much
mistake me (as the Answerer did) that think I was ever any further against
Text-dividing, than either where it was not understood, or was not necessary.

I always thought that he that took that to the Corinthians for his Text* Sin
not, had much better have let it continue whole (it being but short) than to
divide it into a Command, and a Prohibition; a Command, Sin; a Prohibition,
Not. I have also sometimes thought, that their Logical pains may be somewhat
spared; who when there is no need of it, divide every thing (be it what it
will) into Affirmative and Negative: For instance; it is said Job 1. There was
a Man in the Land of Uz: Homo non Lapis, a Man not a Stone: Homo non Lignum, a
Man not a Tree: Homo non Leo, a Man not a Beast. And by the way, Sir, mind what
poor Lignum and Leo are forced to signify for the letter sake. In like manner
I thought him also in the late times a little too nice, and tender of his
credit; and somewhat too profuse of his Logic and Rhetoric; who being to
preach upon that of the Acts; Silver and Gold have I none, but such as I have
give I thee: Whenever he had named his Text, desired the people* in all have,
to take the words not literally, but allusively, for that he had good store of
money chinking in his pockets; besides what he left at home in his coffers.
Doubtless a cautious foresight* of following objections, and an early removing
of the same, are great instances of wisdom, and discretion: but he that taking
that of Malachy concerning the Sun of righteousness etc. labored most
e^rnestly to convince the people, that it was not the Moon of righteousness;
for the Moon shall be trodden underfoot. Rev. 1^. 1. And again he that shall
tell us that God was pleased to send his Son into the World, not his Daughter:
or the like. Such as these, I must needs confess* have somewhat too low
apprehensions of the capacity of their Hearers. He that undertakes to preach
about Repentance, or true Religion: nothing certainly is more necessary and
proper for him* than to let the people know, that they do not consist in looks,
eyes, and noyses; for such things with some are mistaken for Godliness. But
when the Scripture tells us There was a man in ^he Land of Uz; or that God was
pleased to send his Son; that any body should think, that this man might chance
to be a stone; or this Son to be a Daughter, is strange to conceive.

We read that Christ opened the Scriptures: and expounded out of them the
things concerning himself. We read also upon what occasion it was that Felix
trembled; and what a great number were converted (without Predicaments) by one
Sermon of St. Peter. What the immediate Successors of our Savior and his
Disc^ples did; we have little left concerning their manner of Preaching; though
it is to be supposed that they spent their time in bringing people to the
Christian Faith; by expounding to the Jews the Prophets, and convincing them
that Christ was come* and by converting the Gentiles to a Religion that
contained the best Principles of Life. What was done after the Church was in
some measure settled: and that the number which was received into Orders was so
considerably increased, as that there might be, at least in Cities and great
Towns, some continuing Ecclesiastical person; may be best seen by such as were
afterward Governors of particular Churches; which, as we find, made it their
business to confirm people in that Faith which they had received; and to
strengthen them to all good Works; which they did by preaching against such
Heresies and Errors, as they found the people were apt to be carried into; and
by fortifying them against such Vices, as they perceived the time and place was
most inclinable: And that this was the manner of their Holy Employment, is very
plain by St. Basil and St. Chrysostom, and many of the rest; where one may
read a great many go^d Sermons, but very few Texts, or peculiar Sentences of
the Bible pi^ch'd upon* much less so Logically and Metaphorically dressed, as
some affect. I believe there were very few Texts that melt^d and dropped asunder
for the first five hundred years. Notwithstanding (as the Answerer observes)
the Scripture tells us, My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain; for they had the
Bible as well as we, and knew the meaning of that place, as well as the
Answerer. But yet, for my part, I never was, nor yet am against a Text being
taken, or being divided; there being (as may be by and by mentioned)
considerable conveniences in both; but yet one may presume to think, that it is
much better only to say; Good people, we are met together this day in the Name
of God; and I do intend to exhort you to Charity or Temperance, or to convince
you of the Providence of God; and this I shall do (by Gods help) according to
the Scriptures; than to take formally and solemnly some place of Scripture,
where the word Charity, Temperance, or Providence is, and spend the whole time
in Logical Cuts, Metaphysi^al Curiosities, and Learned Impertinences: And
hereupon (...) may not be amiss, to take notice of what a very Worthy
Clergyman observed; There be, (says he) two sorts of Mi^sters that occasion
their own contempt; the idle, negligent and careless; the other those who
over-do, or do more than enough; such I mean* as affect nothing else, but
quaint and cur^ous Phrases; or are unmeasurable in their Quotations out of all
Authors Ecclesiastical and Profane; or sore aloft in unnecessary Speculations
far above the capacity of their Auditors. These over-do, and magno conatu
magnas nugas, take great pains, and eviscerate themselves, as it were, to weave
a Web, which when it is ended, is fit for no other use, but only as an
unprofitable thing to be swept away. The Answerer perhaps would be apt to say,
that this was some pert and self-conceited Divine, that admiring his own Style,
and way of Preaching, talks thus: were it not that a very Learned and Reverend
Bishop did much admire, and solemnly commend his Ingenuity, Learning, Worth and
Integrity. But to return, I say, it is much better of the two to follow the way
of the Homilies of our Church, which are plain, practical, and may be
understood by most; than to be so nice, critical, and s^holastical, as few or
no body shall be the b^ter.

But yet notwithstanding I am not of their mind; who thinking themselves the
profound Reasoners of the Age, and the deep Enterers into Truth, do thereupon
despise all taking of Texts, and dividing thereof; those I mean, that, for
fashion sake, shall take you indeed Text after Text; as if they would explain
to you all the considerable Mysteries of Religion; and acquaint you with all
the Enc^uragements that tend to a good Life, that are to be found in the Bible*
and carry you thorough such a body of Divinity; but the Sermon, I thank you,
(except it be just the beginning) shall be very near the same* for a new Text
may be taken with that prudence and wariness, that the same Sermon shall serve
a man many a day; as suppose this Sunday he takes that of St. Matthew, My Yoke
is easy, and my Burden is light; about a Month after, it is time possibly to
take forth: and then he i^ for that of St. Paul to the Romans, viz. Which is
your reasonable Service: and a while after for that in the first Epis^le of
John; And his Commandments are not grievo^s. Now, Sir, here is the craft of it;
if they take Texts suitable to the occasion, and divide them accordingly, they
could not then for shame, and Conscience, but meddle with one word or other
that is there to be found. But if they read the Text only in the whole; and
take it between finger and thumb, and show it plainly to the people; that it is
a good* Text, a fair Text; and that there is no deceit in the business: after
the Parish have had this general view, he may privately pocket it up again; and
then for Christian Religion, and the Excellencies thereof: only this Caution is
to be observed; that if the Text be in the New Testament, any where between St.
Matthew and the Revelations, then it is to be shown, that Christian Religion is
much beyond the Mosaical Doctrine and Dispensation; but for variety, if the
Text be in the Old Testament, then the case is altered; and you are to show
that the Mosaical Doctrine is very far short of the Christian. Nay, Sir, some
there be, that are so daring, that shall venture to take a Text about Swearing
or Adultery, as plain as can be picked, and as hopeful to bring forth a
Discourse of those Subjects, as could be wished; and yet, for all that, with a
little sly Preface shall draw you (before you aware of it) into the old
business of Christian Religion. Now, Sir, the next thing that the Answerer has
to do, is to take notice, that this looks like a disingeniou^ Squint upon
Christian Religion. Yes, Sir, he may so; and go on, and tell people, that it is
my whole Design to bring in the Turk; he may do it with as much Conscience, as
to report that I was against the whole method of Preaching.

And as some are so bent upon Preaching nothing but Christian Religion; as if
Joseph of Arimathea was just newly come over: So others there be, that have
their particular and darling Notions, which they will force to be intended in
almost every Verse of the Bible; for instance, one, suppose, having spent some
considerable time i^ studying the Nature of Original Sin, and finding as he
thinks, such wonderful things, as were never plainly discovered before; hence
is he presently so full of the Secrets of Original Sin, that if the Parish
should join, and add six pence more in the Pound to his present Tithes, they
would scarce get a Sermon about any thing else: You may set him to preach about
the Birth of our Savior his Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, or what you
will, Original Sin is still the word for all that; and this calls to miud what
my Lord Bacon reckons a great hinderance to the advancement of Learning, and of
doing good in the world; viz. people addicting themselves to some one peculiar
and beloved opinion; and so making all things of that, and bringing all things
to that; they will suffer nothing else to be in the whole world; and thus
Gilbertus having made some few and lucky experiments upon the Loadstone, not
usually observed before, presently writes a Body of Natural Philosophy, and
turns all the whole world into Loadstones. Thus, Sir, Sleep draws me to bed;
and Business pulls me out in the Morning; Affairs abroad draw me from home; and
Occasions at home draw me back again: And in short, man is born, lives, and
dies by nothing else but Magnetical attractions. And to conclude this, Sir, I
cannot ^orget him, who having at some time or other been suddenly cured of a
little Headache with a Rosemary-Posset, would scarce drink out of any thing but
Rosemary Cans, cut his Meat with a Rosemary Knife, and pick his Teeth with a
Rosemary Sprig: Nay, Sir, he was so strangely* taken up wi^h the excellencies
of Rosemary, that he would needs have the Bible cleared of all other Herbs, and
only Rosemary to be inserted. I think, Sir, (notwithstanding this Digression) I
am not far from my business; viz. that it is very convenient both for the
Minister and people to be acquainted with variety of Matter; and that it be
delivered, according as there* be opportunity; seeing that after this manner
are the Homilies of our Church most wisely and gravely composed; as also those
of the ancient Fathers; treating about the most considerable and difrent
Subjects in Divinity.

Having now told you, Sir, in what Sense I was against Prefaces and Divisions;
I should now proceed to what follows: but because it seems, that the Answerer
having consulted his Neighbors about their Texts, found so few of them lik^
any thing, I thought fit to let him and you, Sir, know what abundance of
Likenesses (besides many other dainty things) I happened on, in one little
pretty Sermon, called the Wedding Ring ^it ^or the Finger, or the Salve of
Divinity on the Sore of Humanity. Do you perceive, Sir, he is got alr^dy upon
the Ro^es, before he be past the Title*Page; Finger and Fit; Salve and Sore;
Divinity and Humanity. But to go on to the Similitudes; The Text it self,
indeed, was only like the Iron Gate that opened to Peter of its own acc^rd;
dividing it self into three parts; and that is enough for any one Text. But
then as for Man and Wife, they should be like, or are like all the Two's that
are to be found in the Bible, or almost any where else. First, Husband and Wife
should be, as the two milch Kine, which were coupled together to carry the Ark
of God; or as the two Cherubims, that looked upon one another, and both upon
the Mercy* Seat*; or as the two Tables of Stone, on each of which were engraven
the Laws of God. But in some Families, Man and Wife are like Jeremiah 's two
Baske^s of Figs, one very good* the other very bad; or like Fire and Water;
whilst one is slaming in Devotion, the other is freezing in Corruption. Husband
to the Wife is sometimes* like a Fore-horse in a Team, that will not draw; and
the Wife is oft-times to the Husband as the ^vy is to the Oak, for a certain
bad reason there given: they should indeed be like two Candles burning
together; or like t^o sragrant Flowers bound up in one Nosegay, or like two
well tuned Instruments; or lastly, like two Springs meeting Again, Husband and
Wife are as a pair of Oars, to ^ow their Children and Servants to their (...)
Haven; or like a Cock and a Hen, b^th scraping together in the Dust-heap, to
pick up something for their little Chickens; and they should be like the Image
in the LookingGlass; or like an Echo that returns the Voice it receives; or
like any thing else. And thus much concerning Liknesses. Now, Sir, if you be
for Sleight of Hand; you shall see as fair turns, as ever were shown
above-board. When Man was mad^, the four Elements were taken out of their
Elements: That Is done as truly according to Art, as old Hiccius himself could
have done. Again; He that made Man and all the rest, made Man over all the
rest: Neat and cleaver as may be! Though man had many Creatures to serve him,
yet he wanted ^ Creature to solace him. Poor Chuck; take a Glass of Sack for
keeping the Letter so pre^ily! Though Man alone may be good, yet it is not good
for man to be alone. Brave, I profess! I think we had best take him off; for he
will spoil himself. Where there is no Generation, there can be no Regeneration.
Better and better; I think he improves. He that made man meet for help, makes a
meet help for man; though man wants supply, yet man cannot supply his wants.
But to conclude this pleasant (...): Though some have styled Woman to be like
Clouds in the Sky, yet a Preacher should not be silent, for those who are
silenced from Preaching. If you have a mind, Sir, to see any more of this
sanctified Wit: you may have it in the Non-such Christian Professor in his
Meridian Splendour.

And now, Sir, according to what I was about before, I go on concerning
Quotations out of Learned Languages: against which, I said nothing, when it was
either needful, or profitable; but to come crawling in with Ne quid nimis, or
Ignoti nulla cupido, for pure Latin-sake it sel^, is very insignificant to
those that do not understand it; and not mightily rejoicing to those that do.
But then snppose that which is quoted, be very proper, expounding, and elegant;
and out of the most Primitive Fathers: Nay, though it be out of the Bible it
self; I know not to what purpose it is, where I am sure and certain no body
understands me; for he that tells a perfect ignorant Parish, Quorsum haec
perditio? or, Faciamus hic tria Tabernacula. If he be not very honest, may not
he impose upon them In nova feri animus, to what purpose is this waste? or,
arma virumque cano; Let us make here three Tabernacles; without the people
discovering the bad Translation: But I know, the Answerer is of opinion that
there is such a native and unexpressible richness in some words, that cannot be
possibly rendered and communicated. Yes, there is so; a great richness and
hidden Treasure, and I suppose will continue so, where the people do not
understand. Give a Country man one of the Answerer's happily compounded words
out of Plutarch, and you had as good give him a Slice of a Millstone, or a
corner of a Brick; The Answerer indeed that can relish, and i^ well acquainted
with the haut goust of a long Greek word may, as he says, do himself a
kindness, and gratify his own understanding; but the poor unintelligent may
set with dry lips, and be starved for all Plutarch. But O, says he, p. 64.
Ignorant people ought not to be imposed upon: and if you should give them the
English without the Latin they might suspect you: and when you tell them it is
St. Austin, they give great heed. And does not he think, that they would be as
atten^ive, if he should baptize them, marry them, bury them, or do any thing
else to them in Latin? nay, might he not excommunicate all such a Parish, and
make them smack their Lips again, telling them it is a delicious and
comfortable place out of the Father? or give them to swallow down eight of the
bigest Curses in the Bible, instead of the Bea^itudes? I do not question, but
all this might be done.

We have now, Sir, very nigh done with Preaching: I know nothing else that the
Answerer is still concerned for, but his little mollifying Sentences: as it
^ere, as I may so say, and with reverence be it spoken. And here I much admire,
that he did not quote that of I saiah, we hid, as it were, our faces from him:
or that in Leviticus, There is, as it were, a plague in the house. That I might
have been utterly ruined, and confuted out of Scripture it self. This would
have been as proper, and as destructive of what I meant, as his quoting against
me that out of De^teronomy, my Doctrine shall drop as the rain. But if I must
needs trouble the world in telling the Answerer, who they were that I chi^fly
intend^d; they were those who in the late times (and have not as yet left it
off) called themselves Gods special Saints, his Favorites, and (as I may so
say) his Intimado's, but in reality were more Olivers than Gods. Those I meant,
who reading of Jacobs wrestling with the Angel; and of coming boldly to the
throne of grace: and being puffed up with all inward pride and religious
self-conceit (which they called gifts and spiritual worth) were arrived to all
possible degree of rudeness, immodesty, and almost blasphemy, in their
Devotions and Discourses of God. You may easily, Sir; know them by this
Doctrine, which some of them use to preach upon: viz. That it was the peculiar
privilege and prerogative of Saints to be (as I may so say) saucy: And
therefore such as these thinking themselves Gods great Assistants here upon
earth, his special Confidents, and (as I may so say) Trustees of all Affairs of
Religion: They would in their Prayers and Sermons tell God, That they would be
willing to be at any charge and trouble for him: and to do (as it were) any
kindness for the Lord: The Lord might now trust them, and rely upon them; they
should not fail him; they should not be unmindful of his business; his work
should ^ot stand still, nor his designs be neglected: They must needs say, that
they have formerly received some favors from God; and have been (as it were)
beholden to the Almighty: but they did not much question, but they should find
some opportunity of making some amends, for those many good things, and (as I
may so say) civilities, which they had received from him: Indeed, as for those,
that are weak in the Faith, and are yet but Babes in Christ; it is fit that
such should keep at a distance from God, should kneel before him, and stand (as
I may so say) cap in hand to the Almighty: but as for those, that are strong in
all gifts, and grown up in all grace, and are come to a fullness and ripeness
(or, as they might better say, to an imp^dence and sauciness) in the Lord
Jesus; it is com^ly enough for them, to take a great chair, and at the end of
the Table, and with their cocked hats on their heads, to say: God; we thought
it not amiss to call upon thee this evening; and to let thee know, how affairs
stand: we have been very watchf^l, since we were last with thee; and things are
in a very hopeful condition: We hope, that thou will not forget us, for we are
very thoughtful of thy concer^s: We do some what long (...) hear from thee; and
if thou please (...) give us such a thing (Victory) we shall be (as I may so
say) as good to thee in som^thing else, when it lies in our way, etc. And thus
you see, Sir, what frightful stuff I am forced to repeat, to bring a slack
Answerer to some little knowledge of what I meant by, as it were.

I a^ now, Sir, come to the last thing, about which the Answerer is not
satisfied, viz. that supposing that the Design of m^ Letter was very honest;
yet the manner of i^ is such, as it will do more hurt than goo^. Which if it
does, I can think but of two ways; either by encouraging the Nonconformists, or
by setting the Lai^ more against the Clergy. It is possible there may be some
few people so l^mentably deceived. If there be, they shall be considered by and
by; in the short part, which I intended to add, wherein the Answerer will not
be concerned: But in the mean time, we will see, what reason I have given them
for any such mistake from what I ha^ said.

First of all, says the Answerer, The grounds and occasions of the contempt of
the Clergy, though it be not a Text, yet it is a Theme* a weighty and serious
Argument, and ought to have been handled accordingly; but the manner of my
enquiry is too jocular, drolling and sportive, etc. To which I have in the
first place to say, That although I think it not at all immodest to manifest my
Design, the end of that being only to prove that I was, and am still very
honest in the same; and likewise though it be allowable to endeavor to defend
what I had written, this being only to signify, that it was not done out of
pure idleness and humor; but upon such Reasons as might be further explained,
when occasion should require: yet, I must confess, I am not as yet come to that
degree of self-conceit and confidence, as to recommend my own words, phrase, or
style; and I had rather the Answerer should find fault with the manner of my
expression, and delight himself in thinking, that it is not suitable to the
subject, than be guilty of so much folly and impudence, as vigorously to
maintain, or magnify the same: Only thus much, Sir, may possibly be believed
by you, and perhaps by some few besides; that (as much a Play as the Answerer
thinks my Letter to be, let it be Ignoramus, Seldom, or any other Play, I stand
to his courtesy) I did not put in one idle or extravagant word, on purpose to
render any of the Clorgie contemptible: but did only just endeavor to keep
people awake till they read it. But I pray, by the Answerers leave, Who are
they that think it too light and drolling? I am afraid they are some that use
to begin half their Sermons in the year with Belshazzar, or the like (though
the Text be not about Tribulation, for then the Answerer has learnt us to bring
it in very well) and I Will tell you why, Sir; I heard of a Gentleman, that lives
within a mile of an Oak, who read over my Letter, approved of it very well
(which is somewhat more than I should say, but let that go) liked its design,
believed and hoped it might do good; and verily thought the Author was
innocent, and free from all bad intentions. It happened, that afterward he
calls to mind, that upon some odd time (it might possibly be in that great Thaw
the Answerer makes mention of) his Text dropped or melted asunder into its
particulars: The Gentleman presently takes the Book, and beginning again, cries
out aloud, fire, fire, heresy, rebellion; so that now you can no more get him
near that Book, than a Col^ to a Windmill. Another also I hear of, who lives
not ^ar from another Oak, who happening upon the foresaid Letter, did in like
manner read it, and was very reasonably contented, and thought most of it true:
Afterward he found it out, that he had married to a very true and literal
Abigail. Hah! says he, What! are y^u there with your Bears? Come, give me pen,
ink and pap^r; it is all of it a most dangerous confounded lie; it is against
both the Universities, against both the Houses of Parliament, and against all
the Gentry and Commonalty of the whole Nation. But by chance my Cosen called
him to bed; and he having slept, the Book was pretty true again by next
Morning. And I suppose, Sir, you have seen a Book called the Friendly debate, a
Book that shows a very, honest Author, be he who he will; but because he mixed
a little pleasantness with his unanswerable proofs of the folly of his
Adversaries; hereupon presently must he be called a Scoffer at Religion, a
droll upon all Godliness, a Doctor of the Stage, and I know not what besides.

Now, Sir, for my part, I must confess, tha^ I am no great weigher and measurer
of words; I have but one Rule, the end of which is only to be understood; and
it is very likely, that when I had occasion to mention such toys and trifl^s,
by the use of which Ministers do sometimes bring upon themselves contempt, that
I did not then call for a great Canopie and foot-cloth, and setting my self
magnificently in the Chair, with set rebuking countenance, and words as stiff
as steel, speak to the ^ternal discouragement of pun or quibble; and then
summoning together all the harsh M^taphors, and idle Similitudes of the
Country; bid them all be accursed, and for ever shun my presence; and, whereas
they pretend to be the glory of all sense, and joy of the und^rstanding, tell
them they are a compan^ of empty Rascals; and (...) let them all be gone.
Perhaps this way might have done; it is a very hard matter to please every
body. But, as the Answerer hints, there is one part of my (...), that concerns
the Poverty of the Clergy; a Grave and Tragical subject which ought to be
lamented, not insulted ov^r. I know not how, Sir, to avoid his believing, that
I do most mightily pride my self over the mean condition of some of the
Clergy; though I should tell him never so often, that the great design of my
Book was to wish, that there might be no such mean ones to be insulted over;
and though I should let him know, that I am so far from any such unchristian
humor, that there is none more willing to devote part of his Estate for the
raising of their Revenue (if public Authority should so think fit) than my
self: but in the mean time, what have you done, what have you propounded, says
the Answerer, toward this? Indeed I was not so lightheaded, and fondly doting
upon my undertaking, as to imagine that immediately after the Printing of my
Letter, the Parliament should resolve themselves into a Grand Committee; and
forthwith consider of some present way of raising the Revenue of the meaner
sort of the Clergy: But for all that, I am not so dead-hearted, but to hope in
time that ways may be thought of to bring about such a great blessing to this
Nation; for howsoever despairing some may be, yet I must confess, it rejoices
my heart more than a little, to call to mind, how the Bishops have augmented
the Vicaridges in their Gift; and to hear o^ several sums of money now employed
toward the redeeming of the great Tithes, and to understand that there be many
well disposed People, that have already given back their Impropriations to the
Church; and that there be others, that have made such Purchases, on purpose, so
to settle them afterward; and above all, to consider the great care and good
inclinations of our present Parliament toward the Church; who are not only
highly watchful to main^ain the Peace, and present Rights thereof; but seem to
be as willing to contribute toward the further Prosperity of the same. I have
not indeed propounded any way, as was said before; but if you look, Sir, into ^
learned Author before mentioned, you will there see a way propounded in the
twentieth Chapter of his late Treatise: And in the mean time, I hope I have
said nothing to aba^e the charity, or good purposes of pious Ben^factors; or to
stop the assisting hands of our present Governors. And I perceiv^ the Answerer
by his Letter, seems not to be much against what I have said, but only does not
approve of the manner of expression; and would have had me to have pitied,
lamented, and howled. Now Sir, suppose instead of speaking my mind as I did, I
should have covered my self with sackcloth, and besprinkl'd my head with
ashes, and with mournful and sad countenance, and a long rope of Onyons (to
carry on the work of crying) have taken a journey to visit the low condition of
some of the Clergy; and should have gone about with a Bell, and a tone as
doleful as the man that uses to carry it; and have cried, alas! alas! poor
Gentleman, your House is ready to fall, and your Glebe is very narrow, and
somewhat short. Alas! alas! here take an Onyon; I am come to cry with you this
evening, and to bewail your missortunes and mean circumstances. This is the way
indeed to kill the poor Minister before the following Sunday, and to make
Widows apace; but what good else it should do, I know not: Or perhaps the
Answerer would have had me to have drawn a Scheme of a small Benefice, and have
demonstrated, that a Family of six or seven cannot be honorably m^intained
with twenty or thirty pounds a Year; and so putting down A. and B. for the
Minister and his Wife, three or four of the following Letters for the Children,
and an U. for the Vicaradge, have sci^ntifically proved that A. B. C. and the
rest that follow, would easily eat up, and wear out more than U. if they had
it. Indeed, although I was not in all places thus Mathematically grave and
serious; yet, where it was needful, I was more considerate than the Answerer
perhaps may imagine; and did not frame and devise more inconveniences, than the
world is sensible of; and where it was requisite, I reckoned up and well
weighed all circumstances. Although I did not use a Quadrant to take the height
of every Vicaridge chimney, nor cast up exactly how many straws a diligent
Starling might carry away in a day, if the Bird rose early in the Morning. And
notwithstanding, the Answerer thinks me so woefully and exceedingly
hyperbolical; yet as to the number of yards of whipcord, and the dilapidation
instruments, I was so very near the borders of strict, Grammatical and sober
truth, that I know a Divine, on this side the Line, who was almost ready to set
on another lock upon his Study do^r, to secure his whipcord from that
Jesuitical plot, that he p^rceived my Letter had against it: And, if n^ed were,
I could tell him of another, that thinks my Letter wholly written against his
filling the Tumbrel, though there be some other things slily put in to disguise
the business; and many more such stories I could tell you: For you know, Sir,
my manner of Life and Profession; oft-times calls me into company, where people
(as sure as the Answerer thinks he has got me) talk very freely of my Letter,
when they think the Author is many miles off. And the other day I was, Sir, in
a place, where I heard that some people (besides the A^swerer) were angry; but
for what, they professed they could not tell: and amongst the rest, I must be
asked, Whether I had observed any hurt in the Book? To which I answered (it not
being convenient at that time to be modest) no verily, I saw none. Upon this,
Sir, I began to think a litt^e with my self upon what grounds any one should be
dissatisfied; and I considered, that the things that I did represent as idle,
useless or blameable, are either in themselves really so or not: if they be,
and people be convinced thereof, it is far more manly and Christian to abate or
forsake them, than to be angry for nothing; but if so be I have undervalued
expressions that are rich and precious, and disliked things that are very
commendable or allowable; I suppose people are not such fools as to run after
my idle fancy, and to fear my displeasure: let them go on; I am mistaken, and
there is an end of it. And he that thinks it his best and surest way always to
begin with Adam, let him, if he please, begin with the Praeadamites; I do not
intend to quarrel. And he that judges it convenient and saving to trifle and
quibble in his Sermon, let him do it also in his Prayer (if he be so resolved)
and take along with him a pair of Hawks bells, if the Rubric will allow of it;
I Will assure him I will not write against him, for I have done. In like manner,
if any man be determined against being rich, and is offended at me for wishing
him the great Tithes, let him stay where he is; for I do not intend to get a
Writ to the Sheriff, to force him into a better Preferme^t: And if there be any
one that will not have his Dairy increased, but will dote upon the sweet
society of his single Cow; if he be so set upon her* let him ^ake his pleasure
still, and fetch her up daily, and sometimes kiss her (as the old Woman did,
when she said, every one as they like.) But in my opinion, a small Laity Boy,
although he cannot reduce a Sylogism, nor knows any thing at all of the first
ten Persecutions, may do the business as well; if she be not very cursed and bad
tempered. And if after this, any body be still angry, let him hold off a little
before he raves, and consider, that I am not so dainty-mouth'd, as that I must
have discourses purposely provided for my own curiosity and squeamishness;
because, Sir, you may very well remember, that what I hinted at in my former,
were not things of my own disliking; but as I told you, were generally
displeasing: And indeed, in my first Letter, I did rather make it my business,
to give a short History of what was derided or blamed, than studied to invent
or complain of what might be represented unprofitable or ridiculous.

And though the Answerer may think, Sir, that I have made it my business ever
since forty two to listen at Church windows, or taking the pretense of my
Briefs to go amongst them; or to e^ploy my diligent Factors in several
Counties, or to ransack all the Sermons that have been Printed since the
Reformation, to get together (as he says, p.67.) twenty or thirty passages not
accurate or Scholar like, and to represent these with all possible
disadvantage, to the disparagement of the Clergy; yet he and the world may
know, that this was so far from my employment or intentions, that I had quite
finished what I d^signed in my first Letter, before I thought it convenient to
insert so much as any one story; and however harsh, unkind or disingenuo^s I
have been before, yet I will now be so civil, as not to say what little pains I
was at, or how few Books I searched into, to furnish my self with fit and
proper Instances to explain my meaning. And I cannot help it, if some of the
politic (those I mean that are loath to part with some dearnesses or other that
they use in their Preaching) go along with the Answerer in censuring what I
did, as an untimely and unhopeful attempt: but I profess, I have so little
skill in the nicety of seasons, and critical ripeness of Books; that I know not
of one line, but might b^ Printed as well in seventy, as in seventy one. If
indeed what I said, had been some mighty secret of State, and known only to the
Privy Council, the Answerer and myself, we possibly out of our reaching
prudence, and well-weighed determinations, had resolved not to declare as yet,
but to lock up things, that ordinary Tradesmen perceive and complain of, and
that even Children of ten years of age observe and make sport with; is
doubtless one of the great intrigues that spring forth from the very inwards of
Policy. I go, suppose, to hear a Sermon, where there be five hundred or a
thousand People; and the Minister, out of imprudence, b^d education, or some
other misfortune, happens to think of very strange Metaphors* or to make use of
very bad Tales, Similitudes, or the like: Mum, say I to my self; I intend to
have all that, no body else shall have one tittle of it: but perhaps, before
the People get out of the Church yard they begin to repeat; and the secret that
I designed for my own private censure, by the next morning is gotten all about
the Town. Or suppose I am acquainted with some of the Clergy, whose condition
is so very low and disconsolate, that they are ^d to run up and down half the
week, ^o procure a Parish-meeting, to pick up or borrow three or four
shillings; or are almost ready to pawn their Bibles sometimes, to get a little
of the Ans^erers that same to go to Market: this likewise by all means must be
conce^led, bec^se of the Answer^rs old Observation, All things that a^e true,
^re not to be said at ^ll times.

And now, Sir, I was just going to say, that I had done with the Answerer;
which could I say with a safe conscience, it were the h^ppiest thing that I
have said these (...) Months; but I must not escape so, ^or after I had spent
the prime of my streng^h, and wasted my best spirits amongst Greek and L^tin,
Prefa^es and Divisions, M^phors and Similitudes, and many other such like
^nemies; up starts a fr^sh and dapper Gentlem^n called a Postscript: Dear Sir,
I know not whether ev^r I shall write to you again; therefore let me beg it of
you for on^, as you value your own r^putation, your (...)* your h^h, life and
liberty, and the welfare of your Relations, for the (...) beware of P^cripts;
you never (...) the ^urdy blows, the s^p th^usts, and the deep (...) that such
an Adver^ giv^* I know, Sir, your temper inclines you to bold and great things;
and it is not a Letter, and a L^tter too, that can easily afright you: but yet
I beg it once again, that you reckon a Postcript (...) most dangerous of all
after* claps. As for Appendixes, Corollaries, Supplements, Conclusions,
Continuations, and such like small shot, these are not to be dread^d, but when
a Letter comes tail'd with a Postscript, and concerning Abigail too, that takes
you off just in the middle. What a fool was I, that I could not as well have
put in Bette or Bid* Susan or S^rah; but must make the Answ^r ang^y, and
(...) in Abigail: or if I had put her in, wh^t had I to do to trouble my self
c^rning the Chaplain's setting so close to her? Is it to be exp^cted that every
Gentleman should maintain two Tables, to keep them at a distance? or that he
should keep a S^rvant on purpose to watch private winks, treading upon toes*
twit^hing of napkins, or breaking of merry th^ughts under board? And is there
any thing more natural, than for pre^tinesses to (...) looking, and ^or looking
to b^get admiration? and what i^ admiration and love together, afterward beget
a Vi^aridge? I hope a Ch^plain tha^ has been (...), trusty, and (...), if
preferment falls, may d^rve before a strang^r. W^ll* I see I was a fool, and
there is an and of it. But for all that I believe the Gentlemen have not as yet
laid their swords in oil, nor trimmed up their firelocks, as the Postscript
advises: For they have sent me word, that they love me, and understand me; and
that the Answerer is out of his wi^s.

With whom I am so p^rfectly tired, that I can scarce s^ hi^ B^ok, but that I
am presently r^dy to f^ll asl^p. He that ^isunderstands but now and th^n, an^
where the is any (...) or ground ^or it, is very pardonable; but to do it thr^h
and through, from his v^ry Pr^face to his Postscript; nay, even as far as Dr.
Jegon's verses upon the Scholar of Benn^t College, is so very extravag^nt and
humoursom, that it is scarce to b^ (...); and for all this trouble that he has
put me to, he thinks he has made me abundant s^tisfaction, in not duelli^g me,
or in not (...) with me as some sh^rp and se^re Answerer might have done; but
h^s as he says p. 83.) discoursed with me all this while as with a stranger,
and h^s very little betrayed that he has any knowledge of me. Whereas had he
not been very sparing and court^ous, he could have blasted my credit, and for
ever wounded my reputation: He could have told the World, That my great
Grandfather, to his knowledge* was a very turbulent fellow in Queen Elizabeth's
reign; and did most h^ly wish that the Spaniards might have succ^ded in their
Invasion: That my great Uncle by my Mothers side, was supposed to have had an
hand in the Gunpowder Plot, upon some small prejudice that he had conceived
against King James; that my nearest Relations, in the late times, were most of
them Church-Rob^ers, Sequestra^ors and Excise-men; and that one of them in
particular, was intimately acquainted with Bradshaw and Ir^ton; that I my self
was born in the most quarrelsom and seditious Town in all the Nation^ and that
I would not suck of any body but of ^ p^evish and s^hismatical Nurse, nor ^at
any milk, but such as came from a kicking and ill-na^ur'd Cow; that so soon as
I could climb up a chair or stool, my only d^light was to tear Bibles, and all
good Books apiec^s; and a^terwards (as I grew able) to pull down the
Churchyard-pales to let in the Hogs, to root out new buried people out o^ their
Graves; that I did not care for robbing any man's Orchard, or plucking any man's
Geese, but the Ministers; that I had a little one, privately out at Nurse, by
that time I was eighteen years of age; and that I gave five and sixpence a
week, besides soap, starch and candle; his name was Belshazzar, and he had
brown hair; and so on and on I went, with a constant and peculiar spite
against Ministers, till, to the discredit of our Church, I writ the Contempt of
the Cl^rgie. After this sort, Sir, might the Answerer have dealt with me,
supposing he would have been s^vere, and taken notice that he was acquainted
with me; but suppose, Sir, that his Information fails him, and that the person
he writes against, may ^ither be of the House of Commons, one of the
Lifeguard, a Build^r of Ships, or a High Constable; then let me tell him, that
if I be one of all those (which I am, for ought he does know, or ever shall
know) that he has lost almost all the eighty first page, and abundance more up
and down his Book: for wherea^ he there advis^s me to get a License to be
Univ^rsity Preacher, to set up a running Lecture, to call togeth^r the
neighboring Ministers, to learn them to preach without Preface, Division,
Inferences, or the like; it had been altog^ther as proper for him (unless he
had known me better) to bid me cock my Gun, prime my Pan, face about to the
right, or to have set me to any other employment, till he had been more sure,
where I dwelt, or how I spent my time: for why should any trouble themselves to
enquire after me, for I am very well, thank God, and wish all mankind so. But I
know it is the humor of the Answer^r, and some few more, to believe things to
be true or false, according to the Authors age, bulk, profession, complexion,
and County. Such a thing, says one, is as plain, and evident as may be, if the
Auth^r lives at London; but if at York; in my opinion he is somewhat obscure;
and remove him but to Durham, and he is the greatest liar in the world, next
unto the huge one himself. Yes truly, says another, that may possibly be; nay,
I can scarce see how it can be o^herwise, if he were not so very fat and
ancien^; and for ought any body knows, the Author is as thin as a Wafer, and
never did as yet see fifty.

But as I said before, Sir, I am quite tired, and have nothing more to say to
the Answerer, but only to let him know, That had it not been for the sake of
that little, which is now to follow, I had been so rude and unmannerly to him,
and so very kind to my self, as not to have taken any notice of what he had
written. And indeed, before I go any further, I must solemnly beg pardon of
every one that has r^ad his Answ^r, for seeming so far to suspect the^ir
Judgments, as to go about to point and direct ^o mistakes, that lie so thick
and obvious; and having obtained that, Sir, I hope also, that where your self,
or any other Reader, shall find your selves very much grieved, with the
trifling and small entertainment which this second Letter only affords, that
you will at^ribute some part of it to the slenderness of that ^uff, which the
Answerer gave me to deal wi^h, as well as to my great indiscretion in
undertaking it. And so farewell Ans^erer for this year, and all that shall
follow.

An^ thus, Sir, I have bri^fly (...), that as it was altogether against my
design, to bring any of the Clergy into contempt, so I have said nothing, nor
after such a manner, as should by any Reasons be concluded to do the same; but
if there be any so weak, and so regardless a^ to mistake me; they are either
some of the giddy and soft-headed non-Conformists, or some of the idle and
inconsiderable Laity.

As for the first, Who think themselves the only Saints of the Ag^, and to be
now in chains for Christ, and his cause: Let me tell them, that they have no
reason at all to rejoice at my first Letter, because they there find, that such
is the imprudence or unhappiness of some of the Clergy, as sometimes to
occasion their own contempt. For, if they please to examine again what is there
written, they will then perceive their dear Brethren to be as much concerned as
any body else, and to have as great a share in those Instances that are
produced out of idle Sermons: But I did not set them out by themselves upon two
a^counts; First, because till they do conform, care is taken by Authority, that
they may not publicly render the Ministry contemptible by their ridiculous
Preaching. And in the next place, because all their fooleries, idlenesses, and
insignificant cantings are so peculiarly and faithfully set ^orth in the
forementioned Friendly debates, that I could scarce think of any thing that
could be added; but, because those Reasons I find were not sufficient, and that
I hear that some of them say, It is now very plain, how the world is altered,
and what lamentable preaching and trifling there is, now they are silenced:
therefore, because I would not have them too much spoiled and exalted, in
thinking themselves the only poor remain of people, that can dispense the word
profitably, and speak sense, rhetoric and godliness; they may please to
believe it, that if I had thought they would have been so mistaken, I could
have found out as many follies and extravagancies, in one days time, out of
their Sermons and Discourses, as in a week any where else. To tell stories, you
know, Sir, is endless and tedious; but however, for once I must beg l^ave to be
a little troublesome, that what I now said, some body ^lse may believe besides
my self. There is therefore one now amongst them, who is counted one of their
most preci^us suffer^, and a ^ost h^ling instrument; who is so full of idle
phansies, metaphors, similitudes, and all such like frothy disparaging stuff;
that you may set him almost against twenty of the most imprudent conforming
Preachers, that are to be found amongst us. Of his rich vein of wit, I shall
only give you one instance; which is upon that of the Psalmist, But his delight
is in the Law of the Lord. Where he observes, that every word has its emphasis,
and therefore he begins with the first word, BUT, This BUT, says h^, is full of
spiritual Wine; we will broach it, and taste a little then proceed. He had
better have said, it was full of spiritual cakes, or precious stones: for this
But will hold no more Wine than a Not or a Sieve; and one had as good go about
to broach one of them, as this But: or if he would have made the thing
credible, he should have said, that this But is a Hogs-head full of spiritual
wine; (as one did that repeated it out of the Author) then you know, Sir, it is
as plain and possible as may be, and we might have broached presently: but of
all things, I should have been most pleased, if for once he would have spoken
in Latin, and told us, that this sed or verum enim (...), is ^ull of spiritual
wine; for then the wit would have been more admired for lying a great way off.
I suppose I need not go on, Sir; you cannot but be sufficiently satisfied
concerning the great stretch of his fancy. I might also, Sir, seeing that we
have set him abroach (as he will have it) give you just a taste of his
Metaphorical faculty. What think you of a Chest or Cupboard of truth? or of the
Rainbow of Justice? Mercy turns Justice into a Rain bow; the Rainbow is a Bow
indeed, but has no Arrow in it. Here the Author was double happy; Metaphor and
Wit into the bargain: Or what think you of sweeping the Walks of the heart; or
of Prayer being a spiritual Le^h* and of throwing in the angle of Prayer, and
fishing for mercy? Or la^ly, What think you of Gods laying the soul a
whitening? Do you not think, Sir, that it would very much alter the countenance
of the Wash-maid, to find two or three large souls bleaching amongst her
linen? But to speak the truth of it, the peculiar knack, gift and glory of
this Gentleman, consist chiefly in making of likenesses; in which he is so
lucky, and transcendently accomplished, that in a small Treatise of his, called
a Christian on the Mount; in a very short time, I found Meditation to be like
almost a hundred several things.

In the first place, Meditation is like a withdrawing-Room; we are very well
satisfied, if he will not carry us much further: then he calls us out to
victuals, and after that* Meditation is like chewing of the Cud: how we must
walk abroad, and Meditation is like climbing up into a tree; but if that be not
high enough, it is like a Mount or a Tower high: but if we have got any strain
with climbing, Meditation is like going into a Bath: and if after bathing we
grow hungry again, and faint, Meditation is the palate by which we feed; and
immediately after, it is like Isreal's ^ating of Manna: and five lines after,
like a Cordial to be drunk do^n: So that in a very little compass, Meditation
is climbing, bathing, tasting, eating, drinking and chewing the cud. Within two
or three pages after, the Christian is to take the Air again, and to be
mounted, but not so high as before, but upon a fiery Steed; and then Meditation
is the Christian's curbing bit: and I know not well how it comes about, but it
is also like a powerful Loadstone; and for all that, the next line, t is like a
cork to a Net. And soon after, like distilling of Waters, and like beating of
Incense; but now we go far and deep, and Meditation is like digging spiritual
gold out of the Mine of the Promises; but we soon come above ground again for a
little while, and Meditation is like digging about the roots of a Tree: but
down again presently, for M^ditation is like digging in the Mine of Ordinances.
We had not been in this Mine as yet, we had only dug in the Mine of the
Promises before: but I am afraid, Sir, you will say you have enough, if not, we
go on. And Meditation is like the s^lvidge, which keeps the cloth from
ravelling; or like a hammer that drives the nail to the head; or like rubbing a
man in a swoon; or like a Be sucking out of the flower of truth preached, and
working it in the hive of the heart. Furthermore, Meditation is the ballast of
the heart, the bello^s of the affections, and the H^n that hatcheth good
affections; and like the sails of the Ship, notwithstanding that it was like
the ballast just now: but I suppose the Auth^r does not mean the same Ship he
meant before, but some other. But suffer me I pray, Sir, t^ put these (...)
more into the Press as an (...) of hi^ sai^s in ^, like oil to the Lamp, like
a Gun full of powder, (but prayer without faith, is like a Gun discharged
without a bullet) like wet tinder, like a whip, like a prospeciive glass, a
golden ladder, a d^ve, a touchstone, a spiritual Index. It was just now the
oil, but he holds not long in the same mind, ^or now it is the lamp it self,
that is to be fed with the oy^e of reading; but then join it with examination,
and it is like the Sun on the Dial. And lastly, join it with practice, and it
is like a pair of Compasses.

And now, Sir, am I not as good as my word; have I not shown you a man, that is
very fruitful and pr^cious? Is it pos^ible to be weary, where there is such
variety of fancy? He begins with you at home, then calls you abroad, brings you
back again, then out at Sea, th^n for the Indies, carrying you into Mines,
several Mines, Promise-mines, and Ordinance-mines; this must needs be melting
and dissolving. And I q^estion not, as this Gentleman leads us through a great
part of (...) and natural Philosophy, so, had h^ thought of it, and been but at
a little more l^isure, his fa^cy c^uld have made M^ditation like all the
Animals in (...), and all the Pl^nts in Gerrard; for some small reason, or
pretty report or other: For when his hand was in, what had it been for him to
have said, that Meditation is like an Ostrich, a Pheasant cock, or a
Robin-red-breast; or like a Whale, a Pike, or a Gudgeon; for I do not at all
doubt but that a very small Inventor, may d^vise as good a reason for all those
likenesses, as he that said, that faith was like a Flounder, that laid a
Christian flat upon the Promises.

After him comes another Bartholomew Gentleman, with a huge hamper of Promises;
and he falls a trading with his Promises, and applying of Promises, and resting
upon Pr^mises, that we can hear of nothing but Promises: which trade of
Promises he so engrossed to himself, and those of his own Congregation, that in
the late times he would not so much as let his near Kinsmen, the Presbyterians,
to have any dealing with the Promises: And to forward this trade of Promises,
the poor deceived creatures must be lately abused with a new sort of
Concordance, by V. P. consisting of Commands, Threatenings and Promises; and
besides, lest people should take hold of, and apply a curse instead of a
blessing, and a threatening instead of a promise, they are all set forth with
their particular marks: so that now I suppose, the trade of promises will
suddenly hereupon be much amended, and grow strangely quick and lively. And to
be short (because this Gentleman has been sufficiently taken notice of by a
late worthy Author) except it be idle preaching about experiences,
dispensations, manifestations, discoveries, improvements, pledges, privileges
and p^erogatives; outgoings, ingoings and returns, and such like senseless,
insignificant, canting words and phrases; there is scarce any thing to be ^ound
in him, or any of those that are admirers of his way.

And, as this so much admired one, has a peculiar trade in promises, so others
there be, who are very much for trafficking with Christ: And in the late times,
we may remember what a subtle trade was driven this way, and what a perfect
merchandise they made of Christ; and what abundance of eminent holders forth of
Christ, and his Cause, were sent into the Country to sell Christ for spoons,
bodkins and thimbles: But amongst all those that were then employed, none ever
was found to make so very good a return of Christ as H. P. was observed to do;
for he could presently call the people together, and tell them, That he heard
at L^ndon, that they were without Christ, and he came on pu^pose to bring them
Christ, and what a great deal of money he* was offered upon the road for
Christ, but he was resolv^d to part with Christ to no body, till the Beloved
that he was preaching to, had had the refusal of him; and if they did intend to
trade with him, they must down with their dust instantly; for to his knowledge,
the Papists did offer a very vast sum of money for Englands Christ: and
therefore, if they did not make all possible h^ste to send in their plate and
jewels, he would be soon shipped, and carried away to Rome. But may some say,
What if cruel Civalier should come, would not then our Christ be in great
danger, after all o^r cost and charges; might not he plunder us of our Christ?
No; Cavalier ind^d is cr^el, and may get away your (...) of (...), may get away
your Children, may g^ away your Wife, and ^ay g^t aw^ your very Bible, and he
may com^ also for your Christ, but he cannot get away your Christ; for Christ
is yours, and he is Gods; and therefore down with your money. I do not say that
all that were sent forth then to repeat the word Christ (for that was then, and
is still by many called preaching of Christ) did carry along with them such
knavish intentions; but sure I am, that the vain repetition of such good words,
is still too often that which the Nonconformists call powerful preaching, when
as th^re is nothing at all that is meant by themselves, or can be und^rstood by
their Hearers* And this made Bishop Tailor say in his Epistle to the Reader
before his short Cat^chism, That a plain C^techism does more instruct a soul,
than a wh^le days pr^e which some daily spit f^rth, to bid men get Christ, and
persecute ^is servants; for he was very well aware, that these great Zeal^ts,
that talk so much of Christ and his Interest, were as forward to cheat, steal,
or commit any villainies, as those that had never hea^d of Christ, or the
Doctrine that he preached. And ind^d, I had now taken but very little notice o^
what was then done amongst them, i^ that idle, empty and insi^nificant
pre^ching had ceased with the ti^s; bu^ still I find people so studious to
deceive, and so willing to be dec^ived, that such pr^ttle, amongst many, still
bears the name of the only saving, powerful and edifying preaching. And indeed,
though I will not accuse every one of that party, that now stand separated from
us, of the utmost extravagancies of these folli^s; yet I am very certain, that
the greatest part, or at least the most famous and (...) amongst them are so
gener^lly addicted to c^nting, insignific^nt phrases and tedious tautologies;
that should we compare their continual religious nonsense, with the
indiscretions of the C^nformists, these, would app^ar tolerably sober and wary
Rhetoricians.

And this is so plain from what has been already mentioned, that very little
need to be said further; but only it happens that I have now by me, a Book
called, Apples of gold for young men and young women; a Book so famous amongst
them, that it has to my knowledge deceived the World to no less than eight
Editions: and yet when we look into it (notwithstanding the subject is very
large and profitable) we shall there find little besides Christ, the Soul,
Conscience, Eaith* and such like very good words, over and over repeated to
very small purpose, and as often ushered in with an engaging, and crying
introduction of, Ah! young men, young men; and sometimes, Ah! young men and
women. It is all one, Sir, where you open the Book, his Rhetorical humor is so
very much the same. Ah! (says he, p. 181.) young men, young men, if you must
needs be leaning* then lean upon precious pr^mises, lean upon the rock that is
higher than your selves, lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ, as John did; John
leaned much, *Joh. 21. 20.) and Christ loved him much. Ah! lean upon Christ's
wisdom, lean upon his power, lean upon his purse lean upon his eye lean upon
his righteousness, lean upon his blood, lean upon hi^ merit. Now, Sir, we well
understand, and know the meaning of Chr^sts Wisdom, Power, Righteo^sness, and
the like: but to make a huge clattering of Christ, and a long empty tattle of
leaning, and to make people sigh and cry by mere repetition of Scripture words,
when perhaps there is little (...) sign of sense, than shaking of the head, and
wringing of hands, h^ve much more in it of popular deceit, than popul^r
R^etorick: but having set out with the word lean, for the fine fig^rative
noise, and easiness together, that is to b^ con^inued as long as lungs can
hold, never minding ^o what it is joined, or how it is appli^d* And whence do
you think, Sir, cam^ al^ this idle rant about leaning? only from John's being
plac^d next to our Savior at Supper, and laying his head or elbow in his
bosom; therefore, young men, if they would be leaning, they must run their
heads into our Saviors purse, and put their elbows into his eyes. And from
this place of Scripture alone arise all their insignificant canting, about a
believ^rs l^ning and rolling upon Christ, it being no where else mentioned in
the whole N^w Test^ment; but only where it is said, that Jacob leaned upon the
top of his staff. And as he h^re runs away with the word le^ning; so the very
same method he uses ^or any thing else, that he shall happen upon. It is said
you ^now, Sir, Mal. 1. 14. Cursed be the deceiver which has in ^is flock a
male, and yet off^reth to the Lord a corrupt thing. Upon which (...) ^ollow;
Ah! young men and women (who are like the Almondtree) you have man^ males in
your flock, your strength is a male in the flock your tim^ is a male in the
flock* your parts are a male in the flock, and your gifts are 'a male in the
flock, etc. And whereas here he mentions only strength and parts in general, as
b^ing males in the flock; yet if his breath would have lasted, he could have
made every finger and toe that a young man has, to be a male in the flock; and
I wonder how he missed judgment, memory, fancy, and the five senses; for these
doubtless are all males in the flock, if he had not forgot them. And this is
that in which chiefly consist the power and edifyingn^ss (as they call it) of
their preaching, and by which they think themselves so far to excel the
instructions of the conformable Ministers; as if these could not say the word
Christ as often in an hour, as the most powerful and edifying of them; and I
wonder where lies the mystery and great difficulty of this gifted sort of
Rhetoric. I am discoursing suppose about the pardon of sin, and I bring in
that of the Psalmist, Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, etc. Upon
which occasion I exert my gifts, and pour forth thus. It is not, blessed is the
hon^able man, but blessed is the pardoned man; it is not blessed is the rich
man, but blessed is the p^rdon*d man; it is not blessed is the learned man, but
blessed is the pardoned man; it is not blessed is the politic man, but blessed
is the pardoned man* it is not blessed is the victorious man, but blessed is
the pardoned man. Or I am preaching suppose about remembering the Creator in the
days of our youth; and I gush forth after this manner: Ah* that young men and
women would but in the morning of their youth seek, yea, seek early, seek
^arnestly, seek affectionately, seek diligently, seek primarily, seek
unweariedly, this God, who is the greatest good, the best good, the most
desirable good; who is a suitable good, a pure good, a satisfying good, a total
good, and an eternal good. Now, may not a Conformist, though of an ordinary
invention, and not endued with the sublimest giftednesses of our Separatists,
say, seek, seek, seek, seek, etc. or good, good, good, good, etc. I am very
serious Sir, and you know it; and I wish those that I am now speaking of, would
think so too, and lay aside their groundless pretenses to gifts, and preach
like men and Christians: for I bless Almighty God, I love all the World, and
wish that all men were wise to the salvation of themselv^s and others. And
notwithstanding, that many of them are so ^orward to boast of their spiritual
seize and improvements, and will ^ell you, How often they have sweat at
prayer, and how long they frequented Ordinances, and what abundance of days
they kept, and time they spent, in applying of promises, and r^gistring
experiences, before they could arrive to this converting and heart-dissolving
preaching: but yet for all that, it savours so much of the natural man, that I
question not at all, but that the very glory, and heart-breakingness of it
(which chiefly consist in an endless repetition of the same words) may be
easily acquired by a Lad of sixteen years of age in a Months time. To make,
Sir, this plain, I Will give you but one instance of very high improvements in
this kind; it is upon this particular, viz. An old Disciple, an old Christian
is rich in spiritual experiences. Whereupon he thus proceeds: O the experiences
that an old Christian has of the ways of God, of the workings of God, of the
word of God, of the love of God! O the divine stories that old Christians can
tell of the power of the Word, of the sweetness of the Word, of the usefulness
of the Word! O the stories that he can tell you concerning the love of Christ,
the blood of Christ* the offices of Christ* the merits of Christ, the
righteousn^ss, the graces of Christ, and the ^nfluence of Christ! O the stories
that an old Disciple can tell you of the indwellings of the Spirit, of the
operations of the Spirit, of the teachings of the Spirit, of the sealings of
the Spirit, of the witnessings of the Spirit, and of the comforts and joys of
the Spirit! O the stories that an old Christian can tell you, of the evil of
sin, of the bitterness of sin, the deceitfulness of sin, the prevalency of sin,
and the happiness of the conquest over sin! O the stories that he can tell you,
of the snares of Satan, the devices of Satan, the temptations of Satan, the
rage of Satan, the malice of Satan, the watchfulness of Satan, and the ways of
triumphing over Satan! These you see, Sir, are stories which an old Christian,
an old Disciple can tell you. But do you not think, that one may procure a very
young Christian, such as I before mentioned, who by the help of two or three
Systemes, and a little skill in Indexes, should be able to ^ell you as many
divine stories as these, and a hundred more, if it should be convenien^* may
not he in a small time learn to begin with divine stories of God, the
Scriptur^s, Christ the holy Ghost, of sin, of Sa^ and may he not improve in the
use of his Systeme, and in time venture to turn on, and t^ll you divine stories
of the Covenant of Grace, of the Sacraments, of the five Points, of the ten
Commandments, or of any thing else, with very great eas^, according as he
thinks to continue his divi^e stories.

I suppose, Sir, it were needless to go about to satisfy you further, that
this gifted sort of preaching, that pretends more than ordinary to come from
above, has as little in it of difficulty or miracle, as of profit. I cannot, I
must confess, imagine wherein the powerfulness and inspiration of that gloss
consisted, that is made by one of this party that I am now speaking of,
concerning going out of our selves, and saying, come Lord, return, O Lord; not
return, O my trade return; O return, O our Ships return; not return; O our
peace return; but return, O Lord, return, O Lord. Nor of that which was made by
another upon those words: The fear of the Lord is clean; clean within, and
clean without; clean above, and clean below; clean on the left hand, and clean
on the right; clean on this side, clean on that; clean at home, and clean
abroad. Now am I as sure as can be, that some of these people will presently
cry out, and say, that I am against the fear of the Lord, and against Christ
and his interest; and that I am against all soul-softning means, and all
soul-melting means. And (as it is in the forementioned Apples of Gold) I am a
discourager of all that is Godward, of all that is Christ-ward, heavenward,
and holinessward; and that I am for soul-hardning company soul-hardning
principles, and soul-hardning examples, and f^r suffering of people to go on in
delusions that are Christ*dethroning, and Conscience-wasting, and soul-undoing
opportunities. If they do, I cannot help it; but however, I bless Almighty God,
that I was born of Christian Parents, and that I was brought up in the
Christian faith; and I hope that (by the Divine assistance) I shall continue in
the same, and in well-doing to my lives end. And whatever opinion they may have
of me, I know not; but notwithstanding, I do most heartily wish, that such as
have spent their time in reading of Books and Sermons about exp^riences,
getting of Christ, and the like, would change them all away for the whole Duty
of Man, that abounds with very pious and intelligible rules of godly living,
and useful knowledge tending to salvation.

And I do wish furthermore, that such of the Nonconforming Clergy that are of
this humor, way and style; that they would advise, or suffer, at least, such
as are now, or have been heretofore their Hearers and Admirers, to read some
other Books besides their own, and hear some other men Preach besides
themselves: For, as it has been already made out, that the way of their
discourses is not so much above humane industry and invention, as that it
should require any more extraordinary assistances, or more peculiar
illuminations, than the Conformists may have just reason to pretend to: So, in
good truth, as confident as they are of the heavenliness and convertingness (as
they call it) of their method and expressions, they have very little grounds or
good Authority for that manner they proceed in. For, suppose, they should be so
full of themselves, and their own indowments, as not to attend to the examples
of the first famous Christians, Saints, and primitive Fathers, nor to the Rules
of the best and most judicious Orators; yet if they will be eitheir guided and
persuaded by what our Savior preached himself, or by those directions which he
gave to his Disciples for so doing; they will find very little encouragement
either to dote upon, and admire only their own proceedings, or so severely to
censure and undervalue those that show not all willingness to* be deceived by
them. And in the first place, we are plainly instructed, as to what our Savior
himself spoke, taught or preached; as well as after what mann^r he expressed his
^eaning. We very well remember what he said to the young man, that enquired how
he should attain eternal life. He did not say, Get me, get fast hold of me, get
your arms full of me; but keep the Commandments, and give away your estate;
which last in those times was necessary* for such as intended to be Disciples
of Christ. In like manner, when the Publicans and Soldiers came to John
Baptist, Christ's forerunner, to know what they should do; he did not bid them,
Take hold of him* fasten upon him, and put their arms round about him; but bad
the first of them (whose employment might tempt them to cheating* and bribery)
exact no more than what the Emperor demanded: and bad the others, be contented
with their wages or pay; and not do vi^lence, p^under or steal. And it was well,
that it was Christ himself and his great Preache^ that said this, or else by
chance (amongst these lofty Teachers) this might have gone for gross, carnal
reasoning* and for such dull moral instructions as Alexander or Caesar
themselves, that never believed any thing of Christ, might have given to their
Collectors and Armies. By these places and the like, Sir* it is very easy to
perceive after what manner our Savior taught and preached; for whatever he
spoke was pre^ching, although what he said upon the M^unt (being a more
continued discours^) was more particularly called his Sermon: So that thus ^ar
we see, that whilst Christ preached Christ, that is himself and his Doctrine;
here is not a word of getting of Christ, or getting into Christ, or getting a
share, a stock, an interest in Christ, or any such like staring, and
insignificant expressions. In the next place, let us see wh^t order and
instructions he gave to his Disciples about their preaching. St. Mark tells us,
Mark 16 15. That he bad them go into the w^rld and preach the Gospel, etc. St.
Matthew tell us, Mat. 28. 19, 20. he bad them, Go and teach all Nations,
baptizing them, etc. and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever he had
commande^ them. Now, Sir, if there can be any other meaning of these last
words, than that (after people were baptized, or admitted into Christianity)
the Disciples should spend their time in teaching and explaining such things as
Christ himself had taught or preached to them, which were not such riddles,
charms and tickling stuff, as these people too often put upon their Hearers,
then (if his Majesty will please to give me leave) I will promise never to come
at any Church again, so long as I can find out the least creeping Conventicle:
So that if these people will be either content to preach no loftier, than our
Savior did himself, or as he appointed his Disciples to do, I am sure they
must not preach as they do now, unless they have got some secret reserve of
Gospels for their own peculiar use; or have received some new instructions and
orders, since our Savior was taken up; for in all the Gospels which we are
acquainted withal, we can find nothing else but that Christ was The Christ; and
that God for the future would be worshipped after the manner therein declared.
And he that preaches this, viz. what Christ did and suffered, and what he
spoke, preaches Christ, or his G^spel, or him crucified, or him and the
resurrection, or the Kingdom of God, or remission of si^s, or the new Covenant,
or grace and mercy through Christ; all which and many more signify the same,
and not he that thunders out Christ a thousand times in a Sermon; saying, Ah!
none but Christ, none but Christ. Ah! none to Christ, none to Christ; no works
to Christ's, no duties, no services to Christ's; no prayers, no tears to Christ's;
no righteousness, no holiness to Christ's; lay out for Christ, make sure of
Christ, close with Christ, cleave to Christ, unite with Christ, rest, lean,
roll, toss, tumble and wallow upon Christ. There is mention made (you know,
Sir) Mat. 28* 20. of Christ's being with the Apostles to the end of the world;
which related to the divine assistance of the holy Ghost, which they and their
successors should have toward the propagating and continuing Christian
Religion in the world: but these people are for receiving Love Letters from
Christ, they are for strange entercourses, corr^spondencies, returns,
expresses, and I know not what. And, if it had not pleased God to have abated
some of those extravagancies, by restoring our Church, in time we should have
come to heavenly Proclamations and ^eavenly Gazetts. And I well remember there
was one amongst them, that pretended to have got such an int^st in Christ, and
such exact knowledge of affairs above, that he could tell the People, That he
had just before received an express from Christ Jesus concerning such a
business, and that the ink was scarce dry upon the paper: At other times he
would sink himself in the Pulpit, and tell the people, he would be with them
again presently, he would only speak one word with Christ; and so pretending to
have talked with Christ, he would come up again soon after, as full of Christ,
and his advice, as might be. And to conclude this, Sir, how many hundred and
hundred times have you heard that place in the Colossians, viz. Christ is all
in all, brought in at the close of any thing that went before, only because it
is melting, and may produce sigh or groan; for, if they would but consider of
the Bible, as well as get by heart words and phrases out of it, they might then
have taken notice of those many heavenly exhortations, contained in the same
Chapter to the Co^ssians, of living more peaceably, godlily and righteously
than they had done, before they were converted to the Christian Faith; and in
particular, that they should be (...) as kind, just and faithful to every man
(...) they had to deal withal (let him be Greek or Jew, Barbarian or Seythian)
as they us^ to be, or should be, to their own Neighbo^rs and Citizens; for that
now, Christ was (...) all, having taken away all distinctions, and made of all
mankind one people. It is not, Sir, my intent here to comment upon Scripture;
but I would to God, that these people that talk so much, and so endlesly the
word Christ, would spend more time in explaining his Doctrine; if they did, I
am sure the world would not only be much wiser, but more peaceable and bett^r.

And as I would not have these people count themselves the only godly and
saving Instructors, by abundant saying over new T^stament words; so it is a
very idle thing ^or them to endeavor to have their preaching believed more
sanctified and searching, because they talk often-ti^es concerning the Bible,
giving only empty and loose commendations of the Scriptures in general. There
are (thanks be to God) a great many Bibles in this Nation; and though the
Conformists do not possibly ^y one in every window, yet their Houses need not
be supposed to be without the Scriptures, nor themselves without the knowledge
and use of them. And what if whilst they are in the Pulpit, with finger
thrusted into the middle of the Book, they do not brandish it up and down, as
if they would discharge the whole of it together at some bodies head? What if
they do not hold it sorth with stretched out arm and voice; and cry aloud, This
is the Book, this is the Book; here it is, here it is; no Book like this Book,
no word like this word, no writing like this writing, no reading like reading
here, no searching like searching here, no considering like considering here;
Christ is here, Jesus Christ is here, the Lord Christ is here, the precious
Promises are here. Yes doubtless (if it be a Bible) they are all there; and so
is Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, and all the rest. But what
is any body the better for this? Who will read, search or consider one word the
more for this empty amazing noise; or for such as that, which I find also in
one of them: Search the Scripture, study the Scripture, dwell on the Scripture,
delight in the Scripture, treasure up the Scripture; no wisdom to Scripture
wisdom, no knowledge to Scripture knowledge, no experience to Scripture
e^perience, no comforts to Scripture comforts, no delights to Scripture
delights, no convictions to Scripture convictions, no conversion to Scripture
conversion. Let them show us any where in Scripture (notwithstanding their
extraordinary skill therein) where any thing is advised or commanded after this
slothful and slighty way. If they be for elegant composure of long periods, let
them observe after what manner the Acts of the Apostles are recorded; if they
be for shorter sentences, let them examine other parts of the holy Scriptures;
and if they would attempt to prophecy, let them read the Prophets, and let
them attend to that copious invention, as well as loftiness of expression that
is contained in them. Surely if they were not charmed with laziness, their own
conceits, and a contempt of all that are not in their way and phrase, they
would judge it better, to explain to the people the principles of Christian
Religion, and to give some sober directions of living well, and persuasive
reasons to begin a good life, and proceed in the same, than to think that time
only sanctimoniously laid out, that is spent, in crying Here, here; look, look;
See, see; whereas there is nothing to be se^n, but the outside of the Book, nor
any thing to be heard but a long string of words to the same purpos^; and yet
this alone must be called flashing, holy violence, pressing upon, and breaking
into the so^l; and all other sober, (...), and well examined instructions,
earthly and ^eathenish.

Not less i^le and extravagant is that humor of theirs, of loading their
Sermons with abundance of Scripture, where it is p^rfectly needless, and
altogether impertinent. How far the true knowledge of one place depends upon
others, the rest of the world, that do not boast so much of Scripture, do very
well understand; but to heap on Scripture after Scripture to no purpose at all,
but to make their followers Bibles stare again with turned down proofs, and the
strings and clasps to gr^an, with being overcharged with doubled leaves, is
much too small a foundation ^or them to call or think themselves the only true
dispens^rs of the Word of God. And that wherein the excell^ncy of th^se men's
humor may be pl^inly p^rceived, is this, That the less the (...) ed Scrip^re
be really for their de^ ((...) it do^s but sound a little toward their
meaning) the more it is admired, this arguing long searching, and experimental
skill in the Bible, and a more hidden and well digested art of applying of
S^ripture. I have a Book, Sir, that teaches me how it is to be done upon that
of St. Matthew; Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God* Now,
Sir, to bring in all those places of the Bible where the word pure is, may be
done by a Scriptureless Divine of ordinary Concordance-parts; but to stuff in
plenty of Scripture occasionally, unexpectedly and wonderfully, is a peculiar
privilege, and perfection of the godly. The Doctrine therefore must be this,
That the Saints of God are pure Saints; nothing that is ^mpure can see God,
nothing that is impure can come to God; for he that comes to God, must believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that dilig^ntly seek him, Heb.
11. 6. And again, Jude ver. 4. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand --
What? not unbelievers, b^t Saints, pure Saints: An unbeliever must not expect
to be one of those ten thousand, he must not look to be one of that number; for
he that expects to be one of that number, must so number his days, that he may
apply his heart unto wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12. he must be car^ful ^f his time,
count up his time, and think upon every day; but especially the great day, the
day of Judgment. For as the Psalmist has it, To day if you will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provo^ation, and as in the day of
temptation in the wilderness. And so, Sir, you may go on, with hear, voice,
harden, heart; which you please: And this serves instead of telling you, what
is meant by purity of heart, and what conversation fits a man for the vision
and fruition of God.

And thus much I thought seasonable at present, to be said conc^rning the
preaching of the Nonconformists; wherein I would not willingly be so mistaken,
as to be thought to charge every one of them with that ^olly and frothiness
that is above men^ion'd: for I must acknowledge, that I know several o^ them to
be modest, serious and learned. But withal, I also know, that the small
inconsiderable triflers, the coiners of new phrases, and drawers out of long
godly words, the thick pourers out of Texts of Scripture, the minical squeakers
and bellowers, and the vain-glorio^s admirers only of themselves, and those of
their own fashioned face and gesture: I know, I say, that such as these shall
with all possible zeal be followd and worshipped, shall have their bushels of
China Oranges, shall be solac'd with all imaginable Cordi^ls, Essences and
Elixers, and shall be rubb'^ down with Holland of ten shillings an Ell; when as
others of that party, much more sober and judicious, that ^an speak sense, and
understand the (...), but less confident and less censor^ous* shall scar^ be
invited to the fire side, or be presen^ed with a couple of pippins, or a glass
of small beer with br^wn sugar.

And as these People that are thus highly treated, have no reason to presume
upon their parts, improvements, and extraordinary inspirations, because they
can utter forth abundance of Scripture words, of very good concern and
signification; if they were soberly applied: So in like manner, it were very
well if they would not altogether judge of the blessedness of their endeavors
by the tumult running: after them, or because they find by experienc^ that they
can force from people tears and sighs, and such outward signs of the hearts
seeming to be affected: for all this, and much more may questionless be done*
without either sense, oratory or Religion; long sentences (such as before
mentioned) rattl'd forth as fast and furiously as may be, with Christ,
Scripture, or the Soul, every line; together with hands, shoulders and head
devotionally managed, may be easily conceived to make weak and silly people
gaze more, wet more, and wipe oftener, than any thing that our Savior himself,
or any of his Apostles ever said. And this I know to be certainly true, because
I have often seen people placed so far from the Minister, that they could only
see him make very much concerned faces, and show often the heavenly part of the
eye; and might suppose, by the great pains he took, that he was about business
of very great weight and moment; and perhaps now and then one single melting
word loudly pronounced might come down, and no more; and yet such as these
weepingly inclined, should be as full of all outward expression of devotion, as
if they were just then to be converted: and therefore I would not have them
delude themselves, and think that their Hearers weep at their pressing Religion
more home, and searching the heart more thoroughly than others; but at the
noise, the tone, and fierce repetition of words, And I think I am not at all
uncharitable, if I say, that many poor undiscerning people having oft-times so
little ground for being zealously moved, are as perfectly deceived as ever any
body was, that took Sir Martin Mar-all's wide gaping, for melodious singing.
And it is doubtless as easy a matter to make people cry and sob again, without
doing them the least good, as it is to make a Dottril stretch, or them yawn
without helping them toward heaven.

I have but one thing more to beg of these People; and that is, That they would
not only cease to call their preaching alon^ spiritual, illuminating, and I
know not what; but also that they would not think that they can, or ever did
pray by the Spirit: For till I see their children speak Hebrew at four years of
age (which some say may come to pass, if they be brought up in a Wood, and suck
of a Wolf) and themselves (without studying) all those Languages that are
mentioned in the second of the Acts, I shall never believe it; but if they
mean, they have several prayers of their own making, differing both in sense
and phrase; or that they do not place every wo^d after the same manner; but
sometimes put Eternal before Almighty, sometimes Almighty before Eternal; or
that they do not always confess the same number of sins, but sometimes put in
adultery and stealing too, sometimes adultery alone; then is this so far from
having any thing of the Spirit in it (in that sense which they would pretend
to) that it is no more ext^mporary, than that this Morning is read; Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel; and to morrow, O be joyful in the Lord all ye Lands: Or
that sometimes we pray for rain, or fair weather, sometimes for health o^
peace, according to our necessities; only with this difference, that this is
printed, and by Act of Parliament, and what they say, is not. But suppose they
come to that degree of confidence, as to begin at a venture; and having a
private method, a ^ock of Scripture phrases (to be brought in after any manner)
with helpful ahs, ^ms, (...), spittings, wipings; and admitting besides rude
expressions, improprieties, often repeated transitions (when invention fails)
and the like, that they hold out their intended time: nay, furthermore; suppose
they seldom or never say the same whole line, placed after the same manner; and
that they do not confess that by reason of their solitary lives they are as
wanton as the salacious Sparrow, nor pray unto God for syrup of Barberies, nor
desire the Lord to give them That same; and that they do not teach God Almighty
how to defend the Trinity (as I have heard them do a quarter of an hour
together) and how he is to distinguish between numerus numerans, and numerus
numeratus; and that the rheum does not fall down oppressingly upon the spirit
and lungs, but that they proceed very clearly and smoothly; yet still there
need be nothing of such a sort of inspiration, which they mean; for there being
so many several words in the world, it is not at all impossible for a man (if
he shall so resolve and make it his business) never to speak the same whole
sentence in all his life. And as for their saying, that they can plainly
perceive a difference between a Prayer that is framed, and one that is suddenly
and spiritually poured forth; I am so very unwilling to believe this, that if I
do not procure a thin pale-faced Hec. as rank a one as can be got in this Town,
that shares his time between swearing and cursing, and he shall be taught a
long Prayer, with a confession of all the villainies that have been committed on
this side the line since the Flood, and well filled also with such phrases and
words as they delight in; and being double cap'd, and having well learnt his
tone and gestures, a Meeting of these Spiritdiscerners shall be called: and if
this very small Saint thus accomplished (supposing he does not put in sometimes
an Oath, instead of, O Lord) does not wet as many Handkerchiefs, and draw ^orth
as deep, and as many groans, as any of their greatest Pre^enders to
illumination, then will I never hear Common Prayer again: for if I could ^ell
where to hear people pray miraculously, it were very imprud^nt to run after, or
listen to frail and mortal compositions.

And by the way, Sir, I would not have the Papists please themselves too much
(as I have heard they have done upon my first Letter) with an opinion of their
own prudence and preaching abilities, notwithstanding those imperfections,
which I so freely discovered amongst our selves; for by what I find, by chance,
in one of their Sermons, concerning Contrition, I perceive that they can
persecute a Metaphor, till it be as ridiculous as people can possibly endure to
hear it. It begins thus: The Falcon when he has taken his prey, ^e desires no
more thereof but the heart, and therewith he is content; so our Lord Jesus,
when he had ransomed us out of Hell, he desires no more but a meek and a
contrite ^eart of us; therefore as the Falconer, ere he will give the heart to
his Falcon, first he will cut it, and then take out the blood and wash it: So
must thou give thy heart to our Lord; first cut it with the knife of
Contrition, and then take out the blood of sin by conf^ssion, and after wash
with satisfaction; and so with the knife of his Passion, cut your hearts and
not your clothes, having in mind that the blade of this knife was made of the
Spears head and Nails, that his precious Body and Heart was thrilled withal;
the have was made of the holy Tree of the Cross; and the wyrel was made of the
Crown of Thorn that was about his Head. Whet this knife on his blessed Body,
that so har^ and cruelly was tormented on the Cross; make also the ^heath of
thy knife of the white Skin of our Lord Jesus, that was painted with red bloody
wounds; then with the Cords that ^e was bound to the Pillar, bind this kni^e to
the girdle of thy heart; and I doubt ^t, be thy heart never so hard, it will
begin to break. It is doubtless a very strange heart indeed, that will not
suddenly break all in pieces at the noise of such Rhetoric. And whereas it has
been observed, that some of our Clergy are sometimes over nice, in taking
notice of the mere words that they find in Texts; so these are so accurate as
to go to the very Letters. As suppose, Sir, you are to give an Exhortation to
Repentance, upon that of St. Matthew; Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand. You must observe, that Repent is a rich word, wherein every letter
exhorts us to our duty: Repent, R. readily; Repent, E. earnestly; Repent, P.
presently; Repent, E. effectually; Repent, N. nationally; Repent, T. thoroughly.
Again, Repent roaringly, eagerly, plentifully, heavily, (because o^ h) notably,
terribly: And why not, repent rarely, evenly, prettily, elegantly, neatly,
tightly? And also, why not, A apple-pasty, B baked it, C cut it, D divided it,
E e^t it, F fought for it, G. got it, etc. I had not time, Sir, to look any
further into their way of Preaching; but if I had, I am sure I should have
found that they have no reason to despise our Church upon that account; and
they cannot but see it themselves, if they do but look over and consider their
own infirmities: and I would have them know, that what I said in my former, was
not intended to help on their und^rvaluing us, but our own amendm^nt.

And as much mistaken are the Laity of this Nation (which was the next thing I
promised to speak of) if there be any of so mean a judgment, and so idly and
wickedly bent, as to think that I designed to encourage them in the contempt of
our own Clergy; being always so very far from promoting any such d^sign, that
there is no one in the world that ever was more sensible of the groundless and
humoursom exceptions and prejudices, which some of those small and
inconsiderable people have entertained against our Clergy in general, than my
self: into which, Sir, although in my former Letter I did not think it
requisite to ^nquire, by reason the intention of that was only to look into
such things, as to some few at least, besides my self, did seem to weaken the
(...) and service of some of our Clergy; yet in this second, I judged it
convenient to separate their foppish and unreasonable objections from such
imprud^cies and misfortunes which I mentioned in my first.

And in the first place comes rattling home from the Universities the young
pert Soph. with his Atoms and Globuli; and as full of defiance and disdain of
all Country Parsons, let them be never so learned and prudent, and as
confident and magisterial as if he had been Prolocutor at the first Council of
Nice. And he wonders very much that they will pretend to be Gown^en, whereas he
cannot see so much as Cartes's principles, nor Gassendus's syntagm^ lying upon
the Table; and that they are all so sottish and stupid, as not to sell all
their Libraries, and send presently away for a whole Wagon full of new
Philosophy. I Will tell you, Sir, says one of these small whiflers, perhaps to a
grave sober and judicious Divine, the University is strangely altered since you
were there; we are grown strangely inquisitive and ingenious. I pray, Sir, how
went the business of motion in your days? we hold it all now to be violent. I
hear your old dull friend Aristotle drowned himself, because he could not
understand the flux and refl^x of the Sea; if he were now alive, and good for
any thing, we could save his life. I can presently demonstrate to you how it is
to be done, if you will but lend me pen and ink, and suppose but the motion of
the earth, and two or three more things that I shall tell you. Yes, but for all
that, this youth of so much worth, ingenuity, inquisitiveness and
demonstration, may be very ignorant, and be very much a Coxcomb, and have so
little grounds to contemn so worthy a person, that if the Gentleman please to
carry him into his study, and show him his Plato, Plutarch, and some other of
his Greek Authors, the poor thing perhaps may find as much reason to hang
himself, as Aristotle did for disposing himself otherwise; for he never stands
to consider, that there be Authors, such as Eu^lid, Tully, Pl^tarch, and many
others that have been for many Generations of constant fame, and are likely so
to continue, when as we find that curiously laid Hypotheses have their periods,
and their credit much depend upon the humor of the world; and a Country
Divine that is well skilled in those Books (together with such as peculiarly
belong to his Profession) may deserve very good respect, and be of great use to
the world; although he has not the convenience of every Philosophical
News-Book, nor can call every spot in the Moon by its proper name, nor has a
Letter sent him of every new Star that peeps into the world. But to proceed,
Sir, upon Sunday the searching young Philosopher vouchsafed to go to Church;
the Gentleman preaches concerning the Resurrection, and having shown what
method his Text directs him to observe, he teaches his people according to the
Scriptures, that Christ did certainly rise from the dead, and that the same
power is able to raise us also; and (although we shall have been long dead) to
call together all the scattered parts of our bodies, and to make of these
glorified bodies. Very dull, says the young despiser; upon my word and
knowledge very dull: What a good Text was here spoiled, to divide it into this
and that, and I know not what, when as it would have gone so easily into corpus
and inane; or into the three Cartesian elements? Besides, like an old dull
Philosopher, he quite forgot to suppose the motion of the Vortexes, upon which
the grand busines^ of the Hypothesis of the Resurrection altogether depends.
But this it is to trust people with Texts, that cannot tell what to do with
them. How many brave opportunities did the Minister lose of bringing in materia
subtilis, and materia secundi elementi? If I had been in his place, I could
have done it at least eight times; and then he must go and dronishly tell us,
that the scattered parts of people that had been long buried and wasted, should
upon the sound of the Trump be all summoned together, etc. and never think to
tell us, that the body which had been long absorpt in six foot of earth, should
break open the cortex of the grave; and freeing it self from the maculating
dirt, the flat, the square, and the round particles should be all associated;
and combining themselves into a celestial and well concocted mass, should
become a shining and fixed Star of glory. After this, Sir, he returns
triumphantly to the College, not only very full of the vanquishment of the
Minister of the Town, but also thoroughly confirmed in what he has so often
heard, that all Country Parsons, be they who they will, are the strangest and
most mean things that belong to the earth. But why so fast dear child? Is it
impossible that the word Parson, especially if you put Country before it,
should admit of any milder signification? And is it necessary that every man,
though of very good worth and knowledge, if once he be settled out of the noise
of the Bells, and does not every day see the Schools, should presently grow
deaf and blind, lose all his memory and parts, and general ignorance should
suddenly surprise him, so soon as he removes his name off the Tables? Perhaps
it is but a report; and I do not apprehend but a Gentleman may understand as
well at Barnet, as at his Lodgings in Lincolns-Inn-fields; neither does he find
any such present decay and wasting of parts, so soon as his Coach gets off the
stones; nor such great improvement of himself, when he is coming down
Highgate-hill.

The next despiser of the Clergy is the small Ingenioso or Experimenteer; who
having perhaps blown a glass, seen a Papermill, or a Bell run; that knows
within two houses where the best Chemist in Town dwells; and dined once where
one of the Royal Society should have been; and looked another time into the
door at Gresham, when the Company was sitting: he comes down with a receipt of a
miraculous sort of Ginger-bread, with a little pot of double rerfin'd Jesimy,
and a box full of Specifickperfum'd Lozenges, and a little licens' dessence of
Orange; and he calls the Minister and the chief of the Parish together, and he
falls to his i^genious tricks and operations, and freezes a dish to the stool
by the fireside; sets up half a dozen Tobacco-pipes, and then makes them fall
into a Mathematical astonishing figure: after this he desires to withdraw, and
puts Claret and Beer together, and brings them out unmixt; and then he calls
for a glass of water, and with some few words, and a wet finger, makes the
glass first to fret and complain, and then the liquor to sparkle and foam; and
they must be all fixed and wonder, and he alone must smile, as if he understood
the reason. And so he rides up and down the Country, and every Town he comes
at with a May Pole, he wonders what the Aristotelean Parson and the People
mean, that they do not presently cut it down, and set up such a one as is at
Gresham-Colledge, or St. James' Park; and to what purpose is it to preac^ to
people, and go about to save them, without a Telescope, and a glass for Fleas.
And for all this, perhaps this great undervaluer of the Clergy, and admirer of
his own ingenuity, can scarce tell the difference between aqua fortis and aqua
vitae, or between a pipkin and a crucible, or a furna^e and a closs-stool. And
besides, he forgets to call to mind how many honorable and worthy Clergymen
are now members of that Society, (of which he knows no more than merely to
prattle) who have given so many and so large testimonies of their ingenuity, as
do plainly show, that one that is in Canonical black, may look through as long
a glass, and see as far into a Millstone, as he that wears a light Drugget:
and it must not be denied, that a great part of what has been as yet, or is
likely to be discovered amongst them, must be attributed to the diligence and
quick-sightedness of Ecclesiastical persons, as well as others. I know there be
a great many, who foreseeing that it is much easier to undervalue and abuse
knowledge, than attain to it; if they can but contrive a clearer tale, and
charge it upon that Royal, Honorable and Learned Company, they reckon
themselves pre^ently much more ingenious th^n they that should happen to fi^d
out the Longitude, or a perpetual motion; but let them ^ast up their stories,
and p^rhaps they may find, that the unordain'd part of that Society, may have
rid upon as many pacing saddles, have weighed as many pikes, and are as ready
to save the charge of snuffers, as those that are in Orders.

But still, Sir, there be more contemners behind; for after these follows the
young Gentleman, newly entered into the Modes and small ^ecomplishments of the
Town; who admiring himself in his Morning-gown, till about eleven of the clock,
then it is time to think of setting the Muff; and if he chance to find out a
new knot for fastening it, that day is very ingeniously spent: then he walks
three or four turns in his Chamber, to make himself considerable; and looking
in the glass, and finding it so to be, (having first turned down a new place
onward in Littleton) he stretches forth, and in approbation of his own worth,
(...) himself down the stairs: then at the gate, it is to be considered, where
he shall eat; after that, which of the Houses he shall go to, and if he brings
home a little of the Prologue, and learns but two or three of the Players
names, his memory in the evening shall be commended, and his improvements
acknowledged. And as for this Gentleman, he having nothing ( poor ^eart) to say
against the (...), he combs his Peruke at him; and (though the weather be
temperate) he walks the room, and sweats very much against him; and by way of
objection, now and then propounds three or four steps of a Corant; and if he be
so far entered into profane, as to tell him, that he has brought him a new
Psalm from London, and then gives him in writing a baudy Song; he need not be
witty again all the time that he stays in the Country.

But the great destroyers, Sir, are still to come; for next appears the modish,
grave, and well considering Gentleman, that often calls himself to account, and
always finds himself full weight and measure, but all the Clergy to be very
light and contemptible, for several reasons. And in the first place, he
observes, that Divines are a sort of people that mind only the inconsiderable
things of this world; they never take notice how this Dukes, or that Lords
livery differ from another; and they will idly suffer many a Noble-mans Coach
to pass by, and never consider the thing that is behind, or whether* they be
Horses or Mares, English or Flanders. Which of them can tell the private
passage out of Covent Garden, into -- without asking at the Barbers shop? or
where the several Ambassadors lodge; where they dined yesterday, and where they
shall dine to morrow? And then for the humor of the Town, alas! Sir, there is
not one Divine of forty, that does or ever can understand any thing of it. How
hard a matter is it to judge, whether it be best to dine at Speerings, or to
slide in afterward; and what time of year and weather is most proper for the
outward room, and what for the inward? How much practical Rhetoric is
requisite to make a Coaehman fully believe, that he shall have a couple of
shillings, and at the same time, resolve to let down the ^oot, and with a
ste^dy mind walk softly out to a Coffee-house, a little before you come at your
Lodgings? Again, what accuracy of palate and breeding is necessary to have a
clear apprehension of a mighty and lofty dish; and to do reverence and strict
justice to a glass of Florence, Champagne, Frontiniack, Bordeaux, Languedoc,
Flascon de vin, vin de Bourgongne* vin de Pr^ssoirage, vin Pare, vin de Parole,
and Taffal^tte; and to begin small Princes with a Loach, and to end the
Emperors with a neats tongue? Be not deceived, Sir, it is not Logic,
Metaphysics, Fathers and Councils, and all the rest that ever can exp^ct to
know or do these things, or half of them; besides, if we consider the great
rudenesses that are oft-times by Clergymen committed, in barbarous managing
of hat, immoral picking of teeth, uncouth and unfashionable sneezing, clownish
pronouncing of words, that should have been gracefully lifp'd, and rude and
flat setting both feet upon the ground, when one should have stood in tittering
readiness upon the toe for a conge; when we consider, I say, these and five and
fifty thousand things more, we must plainly conclude, that it is only for great
head-pieces, men of birth and education, of prudence, and a mighty reach, to
pretend to honor and reputation; not for poor unobserving Book-men that go in
black. Then, to all this must be added, the vast skill that is required to the
tendering a visit, with approved and modish accuracy, that it be done punctually
at the critical minute, neither before nor after; that the servant that comes
to the door, be duly spoken to, according to the Rule provided in that great
affair; that the Gol^shoes be left in their true and proper place, that the
Footboy be expert in observing his tutored distance, that he gives allowance
for Summer and Winter, and that he never stands exactly behind, but bearing a
respectful point or so, North or South of his Master. Then having got over all
these difficulties, and made a suitable address, there is further to be
weighed, whether the visit is to be a silent visit, or a speaking one; and if
any thing is to be said, whether the visitor is first to open, or to expect
till discourse be offered; and when, and in what order the health of the Family
is to be inquired into. Lack a day! says one of the accomplished, in what a
lamentable condition have I seen a mortal Clergie-man, when he has asked for a
Son or a Daughter that has been dead a Month; whereas he should have felt out
all those things by degrees, and never have run himself into the danger of a
stumbling excuse, for not knowing of it before; how will his puling Conscience
be put to it, to rap out presently half a dozen swingers to get off cleaverly?
But still, Sir, there be many things behind; It is no such easy matter upon my
word, to judge how much of the hankerchief shall ha^g out of the coat pocket,
and how to poyse it exactly with the Tortoise shell-comb on the other side; and
if there be Peruke to be ordered, where is the man of the Church that can tell
when it is to be done to Old Simon the King, and when, After the pangs of a
desperate Lover. Heavens and Stars! It is such a task to be considerable, and
of any moment in the World, that it would almost crack the brains of the most
steady Clergieman, but to hear repeated all the accomplishments that are
required, to make up a man of worth. But then suppose a Divine of extraordinary
parts and quickness, and that has got, I know not whence, so much of our modish
blood in his veins, as to apprehend, in some low degree, what makes men for
ever blessed, and should arrive to some set forms of being acceptable; how will
they make shift for Speeches and Complements, Passes and Repasses, Parties and
Reparties? Put the case, Sir, that a fair Lady, or person of honor, by some
chance or other, drops a glove or hankerchief: Where is now, say they, your man
in Orders, that can presently snatch it up in an ecstasy, deliver it with bonne
grace, and instantly say something suitable to so great and sudden occasion?
Nay, furthermore, suppose we should give them some of the grounds and elements
of our being immortal, and lay down before them some of those inestimable
principles by which we become excellent and admirable in the eyes of men, women
and children, and should discover to them some of our several vows to God,
Madam; as I am a sinner, Madam; as I hope for mercy, Madam; as I beg your
pardon, Madam: As also some of our raptures and heights; as I am a sinner
before God and your Ladyship, as I hope to find mercy in heaven, and in your
Ladyships breast; as I desire to commit my self to God, and your Ladiship's
disposal; as I desire to observe only Moses 's, and your Ladyships commands.
Nay, to all this should we throw in some of our gentile and very helpful words;
as, intrigue, harangue, obligation, devotion, altars, shrines, sacrifices,
gustos, flambos, contrastos, and Orlandos, Ferdinandos: I say, suppose a
tenderhearted Gallant, having a little pity and compassion for the low
condition and style of the Clergy, should unbosom and reveal himself after this
free and open manner; yet still black is black: for there is so much of native
gentility in the just use and nicking of these things, and so much of mystery
in the right hum^ring of a fashionable word, that there is b^t v^ry small hopes
that any Clergie-man should be ever happy or valuable in this life. But still,
Sir, we forget the great business of mankind, the writing of Letters: Where is
the Divine that can do it, either to Mistress or Friend, as a man that knows
the World, the humor of the Town, and that has lived upon, eat, and read men?
And suppose we should bestow upon a poor low thinking Black-coat, one of our
best forms, such as follows; it is five to one he would commit some
Ecclesiastical blunder or other, in setting his name too near, or in the
folding or making it up.

Most bright and transcendental Madam,
I Presume by the intercession of this course and erroneous Paper, to arrive at
your fair and infallible fingers; and to pay the utmost tribute of my Devotion
at the high Altar of your perfections. The great concern, Madam, of my life now
is only to sacrifice the poor remain of it, to your intrigues; and to make all
my interests and inclinations to be observant of your Commands, and to do
homage at the shrine of your Virtues. Nay, Madam, I am in some curiosity,
whether I be above, or on this side heavens Canopy; for no sooner was I beamed
upon by your shining Ladyship, but I seemed presently to be altogether taken
up. The delicacies of the Palate are to me grown all insipid; and it is the
contemplation, Madam, of your glories alone, in which I can find any satisfying
Gusto. In fine, Madam, were there not hopes of seeing once more your Angelical
self, and receiving some benediction from the flambos of your eyes, I could
presently resolve to commence blindness; and were it not for the Oriental
perfumes that come from your breath, it should not be long before I should put
a period to my own. Should I, Madam, go about to make an Harangue answerable to
all those Jewels that lie from your eyelids to your fingers end; it must be as
lofty as Tenariffe, and as long as ^he Aequinoctial line: and therefore instead
of that, I have nothing else but to prostrate at your feet the everlasting
disposal of

MADAM, The most devoted of all y^ Vassals, and the meanest of your Foot-stools.


Alas! alas! a Clergy man must not expect to write thus; his blood is so low
and ^reeping, that it can never be inflamed to this pitch of passion and
expression, with all the lovelinesses in the world. Now, Sir, would it not vex
any creature upon earth, to see trifl^s and feath^rs, knots of ribbon and
^inges, visi^s and devoirs, a few fas^ionable words and phrases, and a form or
two of a (...) L^tter, and v^ry little besides to undervalue charity and piety,
real worth and s^bstantial knowl^dge, only because it is in black, and the name
of it is a Divine.

I have nothing more, Sir, to say to these People, only it would be a
delightful thing if any of them upon what I now said, should mistake me as
thoroughly as the Answerer did about Greek and L^tin, Pr^faces and Divisions,
Patrons and Chaplains; and presently cry out, that I am against all meat and
drink, gustos and flambos, altars and sacrifices, feath^rs and garters, perukes
and goloshoes, head and heels, body and soul of the Laity: For I suppose,
notwithstanding any thing that I have said, a man may put on a new suit twice a
week, eat and drink of the b^st he can procure, have all his fashionable
dr^ssings, and modish attendants; and ^et be modest and discreet, and not think
it any vast break and elegance to toss his h^ad at a Clergi^-man, because his
hair may be (...); nor to despise him to dirt, because he is constan^ly obliged
to the same Canoni^al ^bit.

But this last, Sir, that I was just before speaking of, is but a vow to God
man, a great looker over his Shoulder; a silent and moderate despis^r of all
Ecclesiastical persons: that only professes by ^is troth, and as he is a
Gentleman and a Sinner, that there is nothing in nature to be found so
altogether ignorant of human affairs; and so empty and inconsiderable as a
Clergieman: For after him comes the Tearer, and Confounder of all that belongs
to Divinity; that troubles not himself to reason out the point; whether a
person in Orders, may not possibly understand as much, speak, and write as
well; and do as much service in a Nation as others; but to make it all sure,
and short, swears at home; that they are all of them a Company of mean and
undiscerning people. Now, Sir, what great Judges these are, and by what
measures they proceed; and how likely they are to be very severe discerners of
what is worthy, and what is not, may be easily seen by those deadly witty Arts
they make use of to disparage that holy Profession: and by which also they
would raise themselves the reputation of men of parts, and wit: and the first
thing wherein they are so sev^re and satirical, is upon their names and habits.
And you may soon see, Sir, the portion of Wit that is amongst some of them, and
the smallness of their Objections; when to say, There goes a Black Coat shall
be reckoned a very good and sp^cial fan^y: or to say, (...) to you Parson, or,
Good morrow Parson* if the word Parson be humoursomly and sturringly
pronounced, (as some of them can do it) if well considered, is a very notable
abuse. And I Will warrant yo^, that arch Blade that luck'd upon a married
Minister, and asked him how Mrs. Parson did; thought himself in little less
than a rapture; and it was well, if he did not go presently to bed, and take a
dose of Diascordium. B^t it i^ a Clergie-man chance to meet an Old Testament
Wit; and that he sets into his tricks and drollings; then he must expect to be
called Levite: and that you may not think his fancy to be stinted, sometimes he
calls him Tribe, sometimes (...), and for variety sake, at other times Numbers.
I need not, Sir, go about to commend these; they having been so often approved.
But of all the Wags, and ^ly ones, that thus play upon a Clergieman; he
certainly is most dreaded, that calls him Doctor; which if it be spoken with
the utmost keenness of intention, which that word may admit of, it goes the
deepest into the Bones, of any thing that can be said. I cannot forget (before
Sashes and Broad Hats came into fashion) how much I have seen a small Puny Wit
delight in himself, and how horribly he has thought to have abused a Divine,
only in twisting the Ends of his Girdle, and asking him the price of his
Brimmer; but that Fancy is not altogether so considerable now, as it has been
in former Ages.

Another witty way they have of undervaluing this Profession is, that they will
not go to Church: as if a man of a very ordinary reach, and fancy, might not
stay at home; or if they do go, they will spend their time in talking, and
laughing, when there is no occasion at all for it; nor reason to do it: For as
I was concerned in my former, (and also in some part of this) that there should
be such Discourses uttered by some, as might tempt people to abuse and slight
the Preacher; so am I as much concerned now that there should be such idle,
foppish, and extravagant people, that should undervalue the whole Profession of
the Clergy at a venture* from the hig^est to the meanest; let their C^rriage
and Behavior be in all Circumstances grave and unblameable; and let their
Sermons be as serious, judicious, learn^d and profitable, as Pen can write; for
although it be to no purpose to deny, that by reason of the unhappy Education
of some, the low condition of others, and the wilful Miscarriages of a third
sort, many of our Clergy are often slighted and disregarded; yet on the other
side, it is a sign of nothing but per^ect Madness, Ignorance and Stupidity, not
to acknowledge that the present Church of England affords as considerable
Scholars, and as solid and eloquent Preachers, as are any where to be found, in
the whole Christian world. And if these people would but a little examine
themselves; and not count every Oath, Curse, abuse of Scripture, and the like,
for Wit, Humor, Judgment, and every thing; they would find themselves not so
wonderfully overstock'd with Ingenuity and Knowledge, as utterly to despair of
receiving from the Pulpit any use^ul Advice or Information. And I have
oft-times much wondered, that such as make so great pretenses to Wit and
Accom^lishments* should pitch upon so easy a method of being admired, and
valuable in this world; whenas they see that the grounds upon which they
endeavor to be so famous, and illustrious, are so presently apprehended, that
the low-born Coach-men, Carmen, and Porters are come to as great perfection, as
the loftiest of these Speakers. That certainly was a pretty attentive Child,
who, as he was lighting himself home upon a Saturday night (after his Work was
over) was heard to say over, and sort all the Oaths and Curses that he had
learned in the whole Week, from his ingenious and eloquent Masters. And I
cannot but approve of the Modesty of that Youngster, who being highly pleased
with that excellent Fancy; viz. Son of a Whore; and not happening
conveniently of Tapster or Drawer to spend himself first upon, was first to
break his mind to an Oyster-woman; and so being once entered, the Youth soon
improved; for afterward, if the Candle burnt not clear, or the Pipe had a
crack in it, or his Horse stumbl'd, or Dog or Bitch lay in his way, they were
all Sons of Whores. Nay, if a Trial in Westminster Hall goes not right, the
very Case it self was a Son of a Whore Case; and that Purge that gripes, or
gives a Stool more than ordinary, is a Son of a Whore Purge. I know, Sir, that
these Hussing Despisers of all Black-Coats think they urge very hard for the
necessity of their thundering, and terrifying Style; by saying, that the
degenerate part of the World, were it not for that, would grow saucy and
unmanageable; and the unworthy and mean-spirited Creepers would make no
difference between themselves, and the brave bold Commanders of the Age* Curse
(say they) the Groom, or Ostler three or four times lustily, just before you go
to bed, and your Horse will very near cast his Coat, and begin to shine by the
Morning; and give a Drawer half a dozen Grenades as he goes down the Stairs;
and if he be so irreligious, as to bring up any thing, but tru^ Terse, you will
for certain shortly hear, that he has murdered his Master, and hanged himself
with his own Garters. In short, Sir, were not people quickened to Duty, and
Observance, by such brisk and remarkable Expressions, the world must suddenly
end; and the very Gentry of the Nation would be as much neglected and
disobeyed, as we find the modest and cowardly Clergy now to be. Indeed it is
great pity, but that Gentle-folks should be duly reveren^'d, and attended upon.
But I was thinking, Sir, (supposing Swearing and Cursing to be so very
necessary to the standing Government and Welfare of a Nation) that a small
Instrument (about the stature of Puginello) might possibly be so contrived,
with two Rows of Stops, one for Swearing, and another for Cursing, that might
upon all occasions express it self with as much Discretion, Propriety, and
Elegance, as the very Owner of the little tool should be able to do himself.
But then indeed, Sir, as to the extemporary and occasional Wit, that is
osttimes shown in abusing the Holy Scriptures; that must never be attempted by
such a Gentleman of Wanscot; but must be performed by humane mouth it self; for
there is so much of suddenness of apprehension, and experimental skill in the
application of Scripture, that is requisite to that business; that to go about
to perform it by Holes, Springs, or Wires would be much more difficult and
chargeable, than Paradise, or Sands's Wat^. Works. For suppose, Sir, a
Gentleman going to Dinner to -- House, and walking through the Narrow Ally,
mistakes his way; then, Sir, what Engine, upon the sudden, of Wood, or
Pastboard (but Gentleman himself) could presently say, Straight is the Gate,
and narrow is the way, and few there be that find it. Do you see, Sir, how hard
it is? There is not such a place again for that occasion, and for that very
particular Alley, in all the Bible. Well, Sir, he proceeds, and coming at last
to the great House; he knocks at the Gate, and the Porter being not just at
hand, then comes out that of the Psalmist, Lift up your heads O ye Gates; and
be ye lift up, ye everlasting Doors, etc. Upon which, the Porter hearing such
great Wit, and Divinity, at the Gate; presently runs, and opens; the Gentleman
enters, and there finds a Servant sweeping; then comes very properly that of
the Prophet concerning the Besom of Destruction: For indeed, what more exactly
like the Desolation of Babylon, than the sweeping away a little Dirt out of a
Courtyard. After this he walks into the Hall; where he happens upon the Butler
and two Jests; Good morrow Pharaoh, s^ys he, (for you know Sir, Pharaoh had a
Butler) where is your Master Pilate? (for you know also, Sir, that our Sa^iour
was carried into the Common Hall:) where by the way, Sir, you must observe,
that a true Wit is as good in the inside of the House, as at the Gate. Dinner
time draws nigh; and soon after, the Victuals appear: The Gentleman is desired
to sit down: No, he shrugs, and begs pardon; having read, that the first shall
be last, and the last shall be first; and then he shrugs again. However at
last, Sir, we fall to; and amongst other good things, there is somewhat that
requires Mustard; upon that he desires his Neighbor to remove a little of the
Mountain to him: for if ye have Faith like a Grain of Mustard Seed ye shall
remove Mountains. By and by, Sir, half a dozen Chickens are brought in; which
presently he commends for a Dish of very sat Jerusalems; because of, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest, etc. though if he had pleased, he
might as well have called them, a Dish of Prophets, or a Dish of Would-nots;
for you know, Sir, Jerusalem, Prophets, Chickens, and would not, are all in the
same Verse. In short, Sir, my Lord Mayor himself cannot provide a greater
number of Dishes, than this Gentleman shall have always in readiness Divine
Phansies: Nor less ingenious can he show himself to be in his return (if there
be occasion) than he was in his coming; for a Child cannot drop before him in
the Streets, but presently, Tabitha, arise; be it Boy or Girl; nor a Porter
ease himself of his Burden; but, Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, etc.
nor a Water-bearer be at a Conduit, but, Paul may plant, and Apollos may water,
etc. I know not, Sir, how many there be of this sort of people in the world,
who have nothing to say against a Priest, but only to swear more than ordinary
in his Company, or to apply a few Scripture words with impudent Non. sense. If
there be no such at all; then what I have now said belongs perhaps to those
that dwell at the Moon. But if there be, I would to God that (in the mean time
till they come to some sense of Religion) they would in some measure consult
their own Credit and Reputation; of which, if they be so nice and tender, as
upon all occasions they pretend to be; they might plainly perceive, that this
their childish way of Scoffing at God, and his immediate Servants, is so far
from leading toward Wit, or Honor, that it is nothing else but dry, blunt,
infacetious Atheism.

And seeing, Sir, we have been now speaking of some that think themselves the
very Princes of the Age, and Wit; it may not be amiss to hint also at another
more modest sort of people, who are not for such notorious scosfing at God, and
swearing down Towers and Steeples: but yet having but a small opinion of
Religion, and little regard to honesty and conscience; (wit and humor serving
instead of that (they must needs undervalue, and laugh at all such, whose duty
and serious employment it is, to explain the Scriptures; and from thence to
exhort to all Meekness, Temperance, and Righteousness: those, I mean, who, if
they can but cheat a little Boy of his Link, and Livelihood; blow out a poor
man's Candle; and make him prick his fingers; beat down a basket full of the
biggest Apples: or pawn a young Gentleman for the reckoning, and then call it
by the right name; they are in their own opinions very much wiser than all the
grave and formal Clergymen in the nation: who are commonly so very dull as to
think, that one that is in the prime of his fancy, invention, gayness, frolic,
and achievements, should submit to set forms; and to eat, drink, and walk the
streats by Canon.

Now, Sir, I must needs say, suppose a very ancient and solemn Professor of
Cobling, be very intent upon the great business of reparation, and all things
promising highly well: the Awle glides nimbly through; the Candle consents, and
burns very clear; nothing of fear, cloud, or disappointment appears; but he
sings, or thrums at the great likelihood of the restoration of the shoe;
seeing nothing but that the Evening may close well; his sleep be undistur^'d;
and his endeavors be crowned with being paid next morning: on a sudden, Sir,
rushes upon him darkness, despair, and a sprightful Gallant; that spoils all
his hopes, ^hatters his Tune, and in short, with one puff blows out every bit
of his burning Candle, and blossoming designs. Now, I say, this was very well
blown; for if Cobblers should not some times be frustrated in their plots and
contrivances; but should always succeed in their brisk and jolly humor,
without disturbance or interruption, they might in time come to disrespect the
great Masters of Fancy, and place too much confidence in the old shoe part of
the world. But for all this great and just disappointer may go to Church next
Sunday; and give due respect and attendance to his Instructor, notwithstanding
he did so utterly defeat the Cobbler. I also deny not, but that he that in the
Evening lets in the air at three or four Windows; may possibly keep people from
sleeping too securely; and so preserve their houses from being afterward
burnt. But suppose a Divine has a mind to walk right on to his Lodgings, and
not to make such remarks and observations in his passage: there is no reason
that he presently should be counted a senseless sot, and others the only Wits
and Humourists of the Age. For you know, Sir, if the night be very dark, and
people be but fast asleep; Windows, commonly so called, are very frail, and
^rangible things; and they will easily give way to a cudgel though clownishly,
and unhumour somely applied; as well as if directed by the most ingenious and
frolicksome hand. Whereupon I say again, as we ought to take special care that
we do not set too low an esteem upon these enterprises: so on the other side,
not so to overvalue them, as to think, but that our forefathers possibly might
have attempted something in this great kind: And therefore if the Minister, in
his Sermon gives sober rules, and advice to live peaceably, and modestly; and
to make satisfaction for offenses committed; he may with much more reason be
believed, and listened to, than wondered, or laughed at: for the Jest is never
a whit the less, though the Glass be paid for. I have also (according as my
occasions would permit) taken into some consideration, that great affair of
Apples spilling. And I am thinking, Sir, that if the Basket stands a little
leaning against the wall, or sloping* upon a board: and that the Apples be very
round, and the surprise be very sudden, and that the meditating Governess be
very old, stiff, or lamed; I no then verily believe that much of the lamented
fruit may get into the kennel, before it can possibly be recovered. But suppose
there be not such great advantages to make all things thus easily hopeful: and
yet that the contrivance is such, that the humor takes, and the frolic
succeeds; however let us behave our selves with some calmness, and modera^on;
and not as if we had killed a Giant, or ^ew the Dragon. I must therefore always
confess, that I did more than a little admire, at the smooth and even temper of
that Gentleman; who finding a pail of Islington Milk standing all alone at the
door, and putting it out every drop into the street went on as unconcerned
about his business, as if he had done nothing, but washed his hands that day:
whereas if such a special opportunity had fallen into some other humourists
hands, who was apt to overplume himself upon such enterprises; he would have
run presently back, to have told it at his Lodgings; have counted himself as
great a Wit, as Ben Johnson, Fletcher, and Beaumont; and have utterly despised
all the starched humourless Blackcoats for six weeks after, because of the
great adventure of the Milk.

If I were at leisure, Sir, I might also briefly mention another sort of more
shrewd and judicious Despisers: who have a very strange opinion of Religion,
Scripture, and the Clergy: but they profess it is not out of humor, frolic,
or any prejudice; but that they have looked far back into the History of the
World, observed the rise and decay of Kingdoms, consulted the Laws and
inclinations of humane nature, and have very well weighed, and examined the
nicest circumstances, and possibility of things: and hereupon do very much
wonder, that such thinking creatures as men, should be so long deluded with
^ugbears and tales; and the groundless traditions of the mistaken and imposing
Priests. And I need not, I suppose, Sir, tell you, that these are the Disciples
of Mr. Hobbs. And what strict weighers, and punctual examiners of things these
are like to be, you may very near ghess, by the easiness of their Conversion to
his Doctrine and opinions: one he comes, and says he is very confident that Mr.
Hobbs is a Gentleman, and a great Discoverer of Truth; for he hears of several
very accomplished and creditable persons, that do very much admire the old
Gentleman, and are close adherers to his Principles: and therefore he is
resolved to be a ^ine person too; and to be as accomplished, and creditable as
they; and to believe all, say all, and admire all; that they believe, say, and
admire; so soon as any body would be so kind as to tell him any one thing that
Mr. Hobbs holds: For if he could but get it once by the end, let him alone for
the improving and management of it: another says, he is altogether as sure that
all the world is in a mistake, except Mr. Hobbs and his followers: for that he
was lately at a meeting, where a friend of his asserted right down Atheism to
the very teeth of a Clergyman: or, that if there were any God at all, it must
be a kind of ^ooden God, such as Mr. Hobbs's God: and he knows this friend of
his to be so much a Gentleman, and of so much integrity, and consideration,
that he would scorn to say any such thing, if he had not well examined it, and
found reason to conclude so: and therefore, for his part, he shall take his
word, and Judgment concerning the business of a God, before any methodical
Priest that dotes upon his Bible. Yes, says a third; Mr. Hobb^'s Philosophy is
certainly the only Philosophy: he must needs be a brave man: I durft almost
swear, says he, that what he holds is absolutely true, let it be about what it
will: or else such a one would never have shown so much ill breeding, and
encouraged so much error, as to begin his health with such ceremony and
observance. If it please the f^tes, the next company I come into, I Will put it
about, two in a hand, upon my word; and it shall run, To Mr. Hobbs, and the
utter confutation of all Spirits and spiritual men; and so he is sufficiently
entered, and fast enough. O, by all means, says a fourth, Mr. Hobbs must needs
be in the right: I Will pawn half my Estate upon it, that he is: He shall dispute
with all the Ecclesiasticals for a hundred pounds of my Money. For he perceives
now where the pinch of the business lies: for he has worn him above this half
year in his pocket, day and night: and have above twenty places of moment
turned down: some before, and some after the Candle was out. O, says he, how
ignorant, and deadly cold am I, if by chance I leave him at home: he is a great
deal more comfortable and warm than a squirrel in the sleeve. But if you happen
upon one, that has worn the Philosopher so long; that two or three of his
Phrases are got through his pocket, and at least have insinuated themselves
into his temper: He proves presently a Chairman in all companies: and if he
lucks but upon a Clergyman, he is as great a Prince, as ever Mr. Hobbs gave
power to. Then, come Sir, says he, Come now for your Immaterial substances:
have you ever a one about you, Sir? I hear that you are nuch acquainted with
them: you live by the Spirit, Sir, it is a wonder that you should not have one
in your pocket: I have got honest Material Mr. Hobbs in mine. I could show you
for a need, Sir, Spirit of Wi^e; Spirit of Salt, or Spirit of Hartshorn: but I
have enquired, and never could get, or see any Spirit of Substance. Spirit of
Substance! that is fine indeed. What, Essence of Essence? Pretty I pro^ess.
Indeed we have had a very curious time of it: a company of very seeing Priests
and searching Philosophers: that should go on, and on, and teach one another
such plain, palpable, and manifest contradictions. Ask them, how such an Effect
come to pass: it is done, say they, by an incorporeal Substance: wonderfully
acute indeed! that is, by no body: or by a no body body: or by a no thing
thing. It was very well for this Nation, that Mr. Hobbs was born at last; and
half a dozen of us of willingness, and parts, to understand him; otherwise the
world had continued in a brave blind condition. It is not, Sir, to my purpose,
at present, to meddle with, or examine their Masters Principles: but I much
wonder, seeing they may be daily convinced, how much he has been mistaken in
his Mathematical attempts; that they should take his bare word, and believe him
not to be failing in his other Writings; because he considently says, he
proceeds by evident connection, and demonstration. And whereas heretofore it was
a work of many years study, and seriousness: that could entitle one but to be
suspected of Atheism: now he that has but seen Mr. Hobbs's Boots, and can make
but a Mouse-trap, is as fully priviledg'd, as if he could pluck up the Earth by
the roots, or make a man.

I believe, Sir, there may be several others that without any reason at all are
ill affected toward the Clergy. One thinks that whatever Episcopacy be, yet
the Lands thereunto belonging are not jure divino: another is of opinion that
the Clergy must by no means ride, because they are to go, and teach all
Nations. And others there be, who are therefore against Tithes, because they
think they give them. But these were partly mentioned in my former: and if they
were not, it is all one; for I can say no more at present, being suddenly sent
for into Devonshire: where I expect to find such employment, as will certainly
secure the world, from me being ever troublesome in this kind again. I am once
more,

Sir, Your humble Servant, T. B.
May 2. 1671.
ERRATA.
Page 148 l. 19. r. cleaver. Page 149. l. 17. r. traloe'^. P. 153. l. 12. r.
'lack.

Books Printed for, and Sold by Nathaniel Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill near
the Royal Exchange.
Folio.
THe admired Piece of Physiognomy, Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the symetrical
Proportion and signal Moles of the Body explained, with the Interpretation of
Dreams; to which is added the Art of Memory; Illustrated with Figures, both
pleasant and profitable; with very large Additions: By Richard Sanders. Price
12 s.

The so well entertained Work, The new World of Words, or, A general English
Dictionary, containing all Terms in Navigation, the Aetymology, Definitions,
and perfect Interpretations of the proper significations of hard English words
throughout the Arts and Sciences, Liberal and Mechanic; as also other subjects
that are useful, or appertain to the Language of our Nation; a Work very
necessary for strangers as well as our own Contrymen, for all persons that
would rightly understand what they discourse or read, Collected and Published,
with above two thousand words added in this third Edition, by E. P. Gent. Price
10 s.

Mare ^lausum or, The Right, and Do^inion, ^r Ownership of the Brit^sh Seas,
laid down in two books, by John Seldom Esquire a very learned piece, fit for
Scholars, and all Gentlemen and Travelers. 10s.

Quarto.
The Conveyancer's Light, or, The Complete Clerk, and Scriveners Guide; being
an exact draught of all Presidences and Assurances now in use; likewise the
form of all Bills Answers and Pleadings in Chancery, as they were penned by
diverse learned Judges, eminent Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both ancient
and modern; whereunto is added a Concordance from Richard III. to this very
time; with very large Additions. 12s.

Don J^n Lamberto, a Comical History of the late past times in Droll. 1s.

A ^reatise of Taxes and Contributions, very requisite for Statesmen, etc. 1s.

A n^w Description of the County of Surin^m.

The ingenious Satyr against Hypocrites.

The Batchelours Banquet, or fifteen degrees of Marriage.

Large Octavo.
Moor's Arithmetic, much refined, and dilig^ntly cleared from the former
mistakes of the Press. A work containing the whole art of Arithmetic, as well
in ^umbers as Species, together with many large Additions: By Jonas Moor, Esquire

Baker's Arithmetic, with large Additions. 2s. 6d.

Fax Nova Linguae Latinae, a new Torch to the Latin Tongue, very much enlarged:
By Paul Jaz Berennii, a ^ransylvanian: The fourth Edition. 8s.

Abecedarium Scholasticum, or the Grammar Scholars Abecedary. By Tho. Huntt,
Master of St. Saviors Free School in Southwark. 1s. 6d.

The Psalms of King David Paraphrased, and turned into English Verse according
to the Common Meter. By Miles Smith. 3s.

Culpeper's last Legacy to his Wife, with the Addition of 200 choice Receipts
and Aphorisms in Physic, never published before. 2s. 6d.

Culpeper's School of Physic.

Culpeper's Semiotica Uranica, or his Judgment upon Diseases, also a Treatise
of Urins, useful for all that study Physic. 2s. 6d.

The Accomplished Cook, the Mystery of the whole Art of Cookery: By the many
years experience of Robert May. 5s.

Wits Interpreter with Addition of these Courtly Games, viz. L'hombre, Piquit,
Chess, Gleek, and Cribbidge, etc. 5s.

Loveday's Letters, newly Reprinted. 2s. 6d.

The Complete Midwifes Practice, so plain that the meanest Capacity may easily
attain the knowledge of the whole Art, Illustrated with several Cuts in Brass.

The History of the Turkish Wars in Hungary, etc. and other Provinces of the
German Empire, from 1432 to 1664. 2s.

A Storehouse to the Latin Tongue, an excellent help to Learners, by J. P.
^erennii.

The Glories and Triumphs of His Majesty Charles the Second. 2s.

A Platform for Purchasers, a Guide for Builders, etc. by W. ^. Surveyor. 2s.
6d.

An Historical Essay, endeavoring a probability, that the Language of China is
the primitive Language, by J. W. Esquire 2s.

Small Octavo and Twelves.
A Treatise of Contentation, fit for these sad times, by J. Hall Bishop of
Norwich. 1s.

The natural History of Nitre, by W. C. 1s.

The Art of Simpling, etc. by W* Coals. 1s.

The Queens Closet Opened, etc. 2s* 6d.

Ovids Metamorphosis, Farnaby's Notes.

Juvenal and Perseu, Farneby's Notes.

Farn^by's Phrases.

Dux Grammaticus, per John Clerk.

The fearful state of Francis Spira. 8d.

Adagia Scotica, Scotch Proverbs, etc. 6d.

A Di^course of the Small Pox, and Observations on the French Pox, by ^. W.

Cocker's new Copy-book, or Englands Penman.

A new and exact Map of the World, with the newest Discoveries of all the Parts
in Persia and other places, with a Description thereof, fitted for all
Chimney-pieces, etc.

A large new and exact Map, with a true Description of the City of London, and
its Ruins faithfully surveyed, wherein is declared its Original, Antiquities,
Monuments, Customs, Rights and Privileges, according to the ancient Charters
granted by several Kings; with its jurisdiction; a distinction of the Wards,
with the names of the Streets, Lanes, and Alleys, etc. a Relation of the
Firing, and the manner how it is to be Rebuilt, etc. in Cloth and Colors. 12s.

An historical Discourse of Fixed Stars, with Mathematical Demonstrations, by
Sir Chr. He^don. 1s.

Cl^aveland revived, Poems, etc. 1 s. 8 d.

D^* (...) on the French Disease.

The Man Midwife, being a Guide for Midwives and Childbearing Women in times
of Conception and Bearing, and Nursing their Children, fit to be known.

The Royal Buckler or Lectures for Traitors, being a rational Tract to persuade
men to keep Alliegeance to His Majesty and Successors, declaring the necessity
of Subjects to show their Loyalty.

An Epitome of Barclays Summum bonum.

The Life of a Reverend Divine, Dr. Tho. Fuller, Author of the Holy War and
State, and many other learned Books.

Danger of continuing, and the greater of Apostatizing to the Romish Religion,
by R. F.

There you may be furnished with all sorts of Stationary Wares: Blank Bonds of
several sorts, viz. Bonds single, English or Latin; double, English or Latin;
Counter, single or double; Arbitration; several Payments; Performance of
Covenants; to save harmless; Sheriffs Bonds. Bills of Debt, Letters of
Attorney, Bills of Sale, Releases; Bills of Lading, English, French, Du^ch,
Italian, or Spanish; Polices for Merchants, of all sorts; Indentures for London
Apprentices, or foreign Plantations, etc.


