Imprimatur,

GVIL. NEEDHAM.
July 18. 1687.
A LETTER TO A FRIEND, Reflecting on some Passages in A LETTER to the D. of P.
IN ANSWER TO THE Arguing Part OF HIS FIRST LETTER To Mr. G.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers at the Sun, over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. 1687.

A LETTER TO A Friend, etc.
SIR,
HAVING by your favor had a sight of the late Letter in Answer to the Arguing
part of the D. of P 's. first Letter to Mr. G. I now return you it with my
thanks, and some Reflections on so much of it, as attempts to demonstrate the
Infallibility of the Romish Faith, and denies the certainty of ours. For
whatever becomes of the Conference, which gave occasion to this Letter, the
Contents of it thus far are of as much Concernment to You and Me, and indeed to
all Protestants, as to that worthy Person to whom he writes it. The man is, you
see, a great pretender to Logic, but you find him making much more use of his
Rhetoric; and indeed it is to this, if to any thing, that he is beholding for
so much as a pretense to the other; and if we feel no harm from this, we need
not fear that the other can hurt us. You may be sure he wants no Wit, whom Mr.
G. intrusts to hold his Cards, and play his Game too, with so well known a
Gamester. Pardon me for using his own Language in a matter so serious, I say
not, as his Letter, but as the Subject of it. His Style is pleasant and taking
enough, his way of Arguing merely popular, and his Art accommodate to the
design he is upon, of deluding the less thinking. Lastly, his C^nfidence is
such, as we ought to expect in men that talk of nothing lower than
Self-evidence, absolute Certainty, and Infallibility.

I wish with all my heart, that his value for Souls, so precious to God, be
really as great, as he would have us think theirs is little, who (as he
deridingly speaks) set up for Ministers of the Gospel. If he find any of them
so regardless of their Duty, as he faith they are; let him freely, for me,
spend all his Rhetoric in Exclamations against them, as he has begun to do,
Page 5. But when he talks of every Bodies speaking for himself one day, and
bringing in his own account; and asks, if the Happiness or Misery of their
Souls will not depend on that account? And then expostulates with our Ministers
in this manner, Can you suffer them to run that terrible Hazard, without making
them able to justify their accounts themselves, and furnishing them with
Assurance that they can, and with no more to say, but that they hoped Dr. St.
would make his party good with Mr. G. Ibid. I am apt to think him some Convert,
who knows not what to say, either for the Church he has chosen, or against
that he has forsaken. He has heard, it may be, something to this purpose said
against the Priests of that Church, whereof he now is; and not knowing what
else to say, nor yet how to be silent, he says the same against the Ministers
of ours. Because our Ministers know that every one of us must give account of
himself to God, therefore they not only give us leave, but earnestly exhort us
to read and study the Gospel of Christ, whereby we must be judged; which is a
Liberty very rarely granted in the Church of Rome. And because they know also
our Happiness or Misery depends on this account we shall be able to give of our
selves, therefore they will not have us depend upon their Word only, who are
not able to acquit us in the day of Judgment, as the Romanists must do upon the
word of their Priests, or upon nothing at all that I know of; but in preaching,
they explain the Scripture to us, are importunate with us to search it; they
Catechize us, exhort us to confer often with them, commend good Books of
Instruction to us, use all ways they can to make us grow in Grace and Knowledge,
and to enable us to give our account with joyfulness. But how comes this man,
if he be a Roman Catholic, to talk of furnishing them with assurance that they
can? If they may be assured that they can give up a good account, may they not
be assured that they have the Grace of God, and of their Iustitisfication and
Salvation? And if so, then what is become of that Decree of the Council of
Trent, -- We must not affirm, that they who are truly justified, ought to
conclude with themselves, without any doubting at all, that they are justified;
seeing no man can know by a certainty of Faith, under which there can be no
falsehood, that he has obtained the Grace of God? If no man ought or can be
assured that he has the Grace of God, how are our Ministers bound to furnish
us with Assurance that we can justify our Accounts our selves? Can a man
justify his accounts, that is not sure he has the Grace of God? Possibly his
meaning may be no more, but that our Ministers give us not sufficient Assurance
of the Truth of our Faith; and for want of that, we cannot justify our
accounts. But if this be his meaning, it is very untowardly expressed, and
after all, it will be a little hard to conceive, how the bare Assurance of the
Truth of what is taught, should enable a man to justify his account, without
an Assurance of Grace too, which the Council denies that any man can have.

He tells us next, That Truth is Truth, because it is built on intrinsecal
grounds, and not on private men's Abilities, or their saying this or that. And
hence infers, that Till those grounds be produced, it cannot be with reason
held Truth. Ibid. He might as well have said more plainly, What any thing is,
that it is, whatever be the Reasons why it is so, or whoever says it is, or it
is not: Yet can no man with Reason believe it, till he have a Reason to believe
it. All this is true, and I think every body knew it before he told us it; nor
is it the truer, because he has said it, and therefore we have no more Reason
to believe it, than we had before. But seeing Truth is Truth, whatever private
men say we think it can depend no more upon the saying of a Romish Priest, than
of an English Minister; and therefore we think also, that the Vulgar Papist, at
best, has less certainty of the Truth they hold, than the Vulgar Protestant of
the Truth we hold, whilst, besides the word of the Priest, the former has no
grounds at all to build his Faith upon; but the later has, besides the word of
the Minister, the Word of God in the Scripture, which he may consult when he
will. Moreover, if we cannot with Reason hold a Truth, till the intrinsecal
grounds of it be produced, then two things more must be true, which I fear this
Roman Catholic will not grant us. First, That we cannot with Reason hold any
thing for a Truth, namely, because the Church of Rome has determined it; for
her determination is no intrinsecal ground of the Truth, but only an outward
testimony or declaration of it; and then what is become either of her
Infallibility, or of her Authority to command our Faith? Secondly, That the
Common People must be allowed their Judgment of Discretion; for how without the
free use of that, they shall discern the Intrinsecal grounds of Truth when
produced, and so with Reason hold it, I fear our Author cannot easily
demonstrate: which yet if he cannot do, he must by his own Principles be forced
to grant, That the Church of Rome has no more Infallibility or Authority than
the Church of England has; she is to be believed only when she produces the
Intrinsecal ground of Truth, and not otherwise, unless we must believe her
without Reason; and so far is the Church of England to be believed, or any
Church whatsoever. And so this Author has (unawares I suppose) set us all on
even ground, and I hope we may be able to maintain our ground against all that
he says hereafter for himself, or against us, to gain the advantage of us
again.

First, He falls upon the Certainty of the Protestant Faith; which he hopes
very easily to overthrow; and it will be as easily done, if it stand upon no
surer ground than he would have it. Suppose (says he) Mr. G. could not prove
Protestants are not certain, are they therefore certain? page 4. This he first
imagines, that all the certainty of our Faith is This, that Papists cannot
prove it to be uncertain, and then it is pretty to see what sport he makes with
his own imagination. But let him play on, it seems time for us to be in earnest
and more serious, when the certainty of our Faith is struck at. It is too
weighty a matter to be played away at a game of Cards; which is all he is
commissioned to. Yet will he make the World believe, that we have thrown it
away already; nay, he will needs make us believe it too. You know well enough
(says he) that to prove Protestants have no Absolute certainty of their Faith,
is no hard task for a weak man. I say nothing yet of the word [ Absolute] but
ask, how know we this? Why, we know any man may find it confessed to his hand
by Protestants, page 6. Who I pray are these Protestants? Dr. Tillotson, in his
Rule of Faith, page 117, 118. I have so great a reverence for that very
Excellent man, that I am not unwilling, though he be but one Protestant, that
he should pass for many, and too many for all the Traditionary Catholics to
answer his Rule of Faith; but his Confession, that Protestants have no
certainty of their Faith, I must desire some good Catholic to show me in those
two Pages, or in any other part of his Book, when he can answer it, for till
then I despair of finding it. We do not yet therefore see this Confession, no
nor he neither, if he may be believed against himself (some People have need of
good Memories to save their Credit) for page 23. he tells us, We seem to grant
we are thus Absolutely certain, or Infallible by Virtue of Tradition. How?
Confess we have no certainty, and yet seem to grant we are Infallible; and that
too by Virtue of Tradition? This is to make us right Traditionary Papists,
indeed, whether we will or no, such as Rushworth, Dr. Holden, Mr. Cressy, and
Mr. White; all contending for the Infallilbility of Tradition, and yet
confessing that what the greatest part of Mankind must be satisfied with, is
Probability and Conjecture; as he may find in the 120 th; and following Pages
of Dr. Tillotson's Rule of Faith; where if he find them wronged, he has the
liberty to vindicate them if he can. Only I will here give him and his friends
a seasonable warning, That if any Protestant shall, being now minded of it by
him, begin to plead Infallibility by virtue of Tradition; it will behove them
in time, after their many shiftings from Post to Post, to seek them out yet a
new one; for when both Parties pretend a like to Infallibility and Tradition,
neither of these can be any longer a sit Medium whereby to prove which is in
the right.

It is agreed (as he says well) on all hands, Men are saved by believing and
practicing what Christ taught, not barely by believing Scripture is Scripture,
Page 7. And it is as true which he tells us, Page 8. Where Churches differ in
Faith, infallible Faith in one cannot stand with certain Faith in the other.
Whence he may do well to take notice, that when our certainty is once proved,
no more is needful to confute their Infallibility. Now the Question is, (says
he) Whether Protestants are absolutely certain, that they hold now the same
Tenets in Faith, and all that our Savior taught his Apostles? Page 6. Which
Question in that Challenge of his, Page 22. is thus explained. Make manifest,
that Protestants have absolute certainty, not only of the Scripture, which they
call their Rule; but of the Faith, which they pretend to have from that Rule,
or else suffer another thing to be manifest, viz. That you cannot do it, and
thither I am sure it will come. The Proof, he often tells us, is our part; and
though he be so confident, that we cannot make it good; yet are we not afraid
to undertake it, even all that he here calls upon us to prove, leaving out the
word [ Absolutely] till he tell us what is meant by it, as he will do anon. The
certainty that we have of the Holy Scripture, which we acknowledge to be our
Rule of Faith, we manifest after the same manner, as they do theirs, except
only, that we ground it not on the Infallibility of their Church; and yet, if
that will do us any good, we have it too confirming our certainty. But so much
certainty he yields us; only he asks, Did our Savior teach, and do Protestants
believe no more, than that the Book so called, is Scripture? Page 6. Yes, tho I
do not find that our Savior ever taught that the Book so called is Scripture,
one great part whereof was not written when he taught; yet do we believe that
it is Scripture, and Divine Scripture' the Word of God, containing in it all
things necessary to Salvation, and that all things therein contained are true.
Now this being granted us, that our Scripture is God's Word, we think that we
do sufficiently prove the certainty of every Article of our Faith when we show
it to be solidly grounded on that Word; and this being shown, our Faith is
either certain, or they who deny it to be so, must affirm the Word of God, on
which it is wholly grounded, to be no good ground of Certainty. Neither indeed
can these men deny the certainty of our Faith, without denying that of their
own too, so far as it is the same with ours; as indeed it is in all our
necessary Articles, ours being no other but those in the Creeds, which are as
well theirs, as ours.

Thus far then we have often proved the certainty of our Faith, and if he
require it, will be ready to do it again. But this he knows well enough, and
therefore would set us a harder task; but it is by all Laws of Disputation in
our choice whether we will accept of it or no. Two things more he will have us
prove. First, That we are Absolutely certain of all this: And Secondly, Not
only this, but of all that more which our Savior taught his Apostles. But that
we are not obliged to prove either of these things, we are at least as sure, as
he is that we cannot; and that I will confess to him is sure enough, taking his
words in his own sense.

For first, he tells us, Page 23. The profession of Absolute certainty makes a
fair approach toward the Doctrine of Infallibility, or rather it is the self
same with it. And again, in the same Page he makes Absolutely certain, and
Infallible, all one thing. When therefore he can meet with Protestants that
Profess themselves absolutely certain in his sense, that is, Infallible; it is
fit he should call upon them, as we do on Roman Catholics, to prove all is
their due, which they as absurdly as presumptuously arrogate to themselves. But
whilst he has to do with Protestants of the Church of England, who are of a
modester disposition, let him not put them to the Blush for him, by telling
them it is their duty to prove themselves to be as much wiser than they know
themselves to be, as the Church of Rome thinks her self wiser than all other
Churches.

And truly the next part of his demand is as unreasonable as this, to bid us
prove that we are absolutely certain of All that Christ taught his Apostles. We
are certain, as was said, of that which Christ and his Apostles have taught us
in the Holy Scripture, writ on purpose to inform us of what they taught; and
this we have reason to think enough, and all that we are bound to be certain
of; because, we cannot imagine, if they writ not all that we are bound to know
and believe, why they were at the pains to write so much; for if it be as these
men tell us, that to believe but a part is as damnable as to believe nothing,
they had as good have writ nothing as not the whole that we must believe. A few
lines more might have instructed us in that all more which ('it is said) we
should certainly believe, or a few words might have directed us to the
Infallible Church to learn it. Were those good men so scanted of time, or
sparing of pains, that they could not afford us this all more; especially
whilst they spend so much of both in writing largely, things supposed by all
not Absolutely necessary? And did the Primitive Church also grudge her Children
the full knowledge of this all that Christ and his Apostles taught as the
necessary Faith of Christians? We do not find in any of the ancient Creeds one
branch of this all more, which the Trent Council so lately taught and commanded
by virtue of Tradition. To say no more, we have certainty of all that is taught
us in Scripture, and we know of no more that Christ and his Apostles taught us.
The Papists say there is more, and we are bound to believe it; cannot now this
Gentleman see by his own Rules of Disputation, that he and his Brethren ought
to bear their own burden, the proof of all this more, that he would have us say
we are certain of?

You see I hope by this time, that we decline no proof that is incumbent upon
us. We prove the Scripture to be the Word of God; we prove every Article of our
Faith by the Scripture; and thus we prove we have sufficient certainty of our
whole Faith. Our Rule being certain, the Faith which agrees with it is certain
too. If there be any thing more, that it is supposed Christ taught, and
Christians must believe, he that affirms it, is obliged to prove it, or no
longer to quarrel with those who know nothing of it.

Well, I perceive this Author has a mind to show what he can do to prove we
have no certainty of our Faith, in kindness, to us I suppose; that he may ease
us of the mpossible task, as he accunts it, of proving that we have. And he has
done it unanswerably, it we will believe him. I declare openly (says he) that
you cannot answer this Discourse. However we will try, and we have some reason
for it, seeing he tells us it nearly touches our Copyhold, which he may well
believe we have no mind to part with. We have it thus, Page 30, 31.

I. God has left us some Way to know surely what Christ and his Apostles
taught. This is a certain truth; what is then the inference from it?

II. Therefore this Way must be such, that they who take it, shall arrive by it
at the end it was intended for, that is, to know surely what Christ and his
Apostles taught. Alas! what dallying is here! Who is the wiser for this
inference? Or who knows one jot the more by it, than he did by the Antecedent?
If God has left us a Way to know, then by that Way we may know. If such be his
Inferences that he here engages to make good, he needs not fear to make good
his engagement, though his Inference be good for nothing. But his next may be
better. Let us hear it.

III. Scripture's Letter interpretable by Private Judgments, is not that Way.
Who does the man here dispute against? Our Doctrine is, that The Scripture only
is the Rule of Faith, or, The Scripture contains all things necessary to
Salvati^n. I suppose it is against us that he would be thought to dispute in
this unanswerable Discourse; and why does he not in terms contradict our
Doctrine, saying, The Scripture only is not the Rule of Faith, or the Scripture
contains not all things necessary to Salvation? If, because he had in his
Proposition used Way for Rule (which is very indifferent to us) he ought in his
Assumption also to use the same word; yet, why says he not Scripture only, but
Scripture's Letter? And why more yet, Scripture's Letter interpreted by private
Judgments? All this packing of the Cards is not for nothing. However let us
deal fairly and above-board.

If then by Scripture's Letter he mean (as some of his Friends do) unsensed
Characters, I confess Scripture's Letter cannot be the Rule, or Way to know.
But such insignificant things we are unacquainted with in the Holy Scripture,
which we own; if there be any such in his, it will lose nothing by throwing
them out. Yet if he can think it reasonable to allow as much to the Scripture,
which is a Letter from the infallible God, to Men, as he expects we should
allow to this Letter of his, that it contains good Sense expressed in words
significant and intelligible, we deny his Assumption, that Scripture's Letter
is not this way.

Again, if by these words, interpretable by private Judgments, he mean the
Scripture any way interpretable, as any private man may possibly wrest the
words to make them comply with his own Sentiments, or through ignorance and
laziness, and neglect of such helps and means as are fit to be used, may
misunderstand them, he must have as wide a Conscience, and as little Modesty,
as the impudent and wicked Author of Pax Vobis, who has the face to fasten such
a meaning to the 6th of our 39. Articles, which has no respect at all to the
Interpretation of Scripture, but only to the Sufficiency and Canon thereof. But
if his meaning be, that Scripture, as it may be understood by a private Man of
a competent Judgment, using such helps as are proper, is not the way; we again
deny his Assumption. For we suppose these things, That the Scripture is Gods
Word, That it was written to be understood, That it was written for the
Instruction of private men, That they are concerned to understand it, That they
may believe and live as it directs; That they have means left them of God for
the understanding of it, so far as it is of necessary concernment to them; And
that using these means as they ought, they may understand it, and thus it is to
them the way to know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught as necessary to
their Salvation. And now let him show, when he can, that these Suppositions are
unreasonable or false.

But he offers at a Proof of what he says; For (says he) we experience
Presbyterians and Socinians (for Example) both take that way, and yet differ in
such high Fundamentals as the Trinity and the Godhead of Christ. I might here
talk with him in his own ridiculing Language, Page II. We bring our Argument,
and he his Instance against it. What are People the wiser now? And which shall
they be for, the Argument, or the Instance? For if an Instance, such as this in
Presbyterians and Socinians, is enough to stand in Bar against any Argument
proving the Holy Scripture to be the Way to know what Christ and his Apostles
taught; what Reason can he give us, why the like Instance should not be as good
against an Argument for Tradition's being the Way? Tradition it seems is so
precious a thing with these men, that Experience is nothing in comparison of
any Argument that they have advanced to defend it; but the Scripture is a thing
of so little worth, seeing it favors them so little, that Experience, or any
thing else, is thought enough to show the Folly of trusting to it. But to let
this pass; the force of his Argument is this, If any Men can be found who wrest
or misinterpret Scripture, then can it not be the Way to know what Christ and
his Apostles taught. Now to find men wresting the Scripture, he needed not have
sought amongst Presbyterians and Socinians, he might have met with Instances
enough amongst Popes and Councils. But for the validity of the Consequence, he
must yet seek a little farther, or get a Decree of some new Council to make it
good; tho this will not do his Work neither; for it is granted us, that the same
Infallible Authority which by a bare Declaration can make an Article of Faith,
may be mistaken in the Arguments it uses to prove it so. And indeed this
Argument proves nothing, but that he has no good Opinion of the Scripture. For
must a Rule be no good Rule, because some who use it, misunderstand it, and
abuse it? Must a Way be a wrong Way, because some that take it, will not keep
it? In short, till it be proved that God has left such a Way or Rule, as no
man can possibly err out of it, mistake it, or abuse it, and that it is not
enough that he has left us such a Way or Rule, as men may understand and
observe if they be not wanting to themselves, it will not follow that the
Scripture's Letter in the Sense we have owned it, is not the Way, tho not only
Presbyterians and Socinians, but the greater number of Mankind should own it,
and yet differ about fundamental Points contained in it; no more than it
follows, that because we see men misinterpret and break good Laws daily,
therefore those Laws are unintelligible, or cannot be kept, and must be thought
insufficient to show them what the Lawgiver expects from them.

Yet, if this Instance in Presbyterians and Socinians be not a sufficient Proof
that Scripture is not the way left us by God to know the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, you must expect no other in this unanswerable discourse; for all
that follows, is but two [ Therefores,] and one Conclusion twice repeated, as
you here see.

IV. Therefore Scripture's Letter interpretable by private Judgments is not the
way left by God to know surely, what Christ and his Apostles taught, or surely
to arrive at right Faith. And again,

V. Therefore they who take only that way, cannot by it arrive surely at right
Faith, since it is impossible to arrive at the end, without the means or way
that leads to it. And so you have an unanswerable Discourse. Is this the Thing
the Mountain has at last brought forth to send us home a Laughing? Is this the
Man that undertakes to read Logic to the D. of P.? What trifling is, this in
him, who pretends to so much care of Souls? Thus he should have argued to have
made sure work:

God has left us some Rule, which no man can possibly misunderstand or abuse.
But Scripture Letter is not such a Rule, as no man can possibly misunderstand
or abuse. Therefore, The Scriptures Letter is not the Rule which God has left
us.

Had we now denied the Minor in this Syllogism, then his instance of
Presbyterians and Socinians, would have done him good Service. But if we had
chanced to have denied the Major, as in all likelihood we should have done, he
had been at an utter loss, as we shall clearly see now we come to consider how
he handles his own Rule, viz. Tradition.

The next Question is, How it may appear that the Church of Rome is Infallible?
To prove she is, he will grant us to be his part, if he think it need any
proof, as I question whether he does or no. For page 12, he tells us, It is
vain to talk against one Infallibility, unless we will set up another. An
Infallibility, he supposes there must be among men, and then the old Argument
must take place, that seeing no other pretends to it, but the Roman Catholics,
it must be among them; we must therefore either prove it to be with us, or in
vain shall we deny it to be with them, whether they prove it or no, for some
where it must be. But now suppose we deny that there is such a thing to be
found among men? Then will he have us grant, That there are no means by which
men may be secured from being deceived; and then, they will not take all that
pains that are necessary to compass that good, which for ought they can tell,
they may not compass with all their pains. Ibid. But here he is too hasty, for
tho we know not where to find infallible men, now living on Earth, yet we know
there is an Infallible and Living God, and He by Men endued with his Infallible
Spirit, has given us his Word plainly Written, and this Word is a sufficient
means to secure us from being dangerously deceived, in any thing necessary to
our Salvation, if we diligently attend unto it, and use the proper helps of
understanding it. And this is our encouragement to take all pains to compass
the good we desire, that the same Infallible God who has given the means, has
assured his blessing to them that diligently use them. Yet I a little wonder,
to hear him talk of men's being discouraged from taking pains to be well
assured of the truth, for want of an Infallible Guide, when it has been the
common Argument a long time, whereby such a Guide has been commended to us,
that it would save us the pains of examining the particulars of our faith. If
we be in love with ease, or if we be content to take pains, all is one, there is
enough in the Infallibility of the Church of Rome for all; the pleasure of the
one, or the necessity of the other, may be a Motive sufficient to enter into
that Communion, wherein we may, it seems, have our free choice of either. What
cunning Gamesters are these men, that hope to win with any hand? Certainly they
trust more to their Art, than to their Cards.

After we have been sent from place to place to seek this Infallibility, where
now shall we find it at last? In Tradition if any where, for we have missed it
everywhere else. And there we have already found it, if our Author must be
trusted. The certainty of Scripture is from Tradition, therefore there is no
refusing that Tradition causes certainty, and makes faith as certain as
Scripture, page 7. Yet it may be this Certainty comes not up to Infallibility:
yes it is the very same as you heard before, and he adds, page 23. This makes
Tradition to be an Infallible ascertainer of some things at least; and so
unless some special difficulty be found in other things, that light into the
same channel, it must needs bring them down Infallibly too. Now it is very
true, that we have the Books of Scriptures by Tradition, and what other way
such ancient Books could be conveyed unto us, I confess I do not know; neither
indeed can I see what greater Certainty any man can reasonably desire, that
these indeed are the very same Books which the Authors of them left to the
Church, and which the Church has always received as the Word of God. And this
Tradition, we look upon as a ground of sufficient certainty of this matter of
Fact, wherein no man was ever wont to desire better, nor in reason can. But
then first, This Tradition is not that of the Church of Rome only, which is the
only Tradition that I ever heard of, that has been pretended to be the ground
of Infallibility, but a more Universal Tradition of all Christians; if some of
whom had not been more careful to preserve these Books, than they of Rome, we
might, for ought I know, have lost some of them, at least, that Excellent
Epistle to the Hebrews. And in the next place, this Universal Tradition, is no
more but Humane Testimony, and that can be no ground of Infallibility, which
excludes all possibility of Error. A Moral Certainty is enough to stand on such
a foundation, and all that can be rationally desired in this case. These Books,
as writ by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, are the foundation of our
Christian Faith; and he knows, I hope, that neither Papists nor Protestants
content themselves with Tradition, but produce abundance of other Arguments,
for the Confirmation of Scripture's Divine Authority. And whereas he says, it
makes Faith as Certain as Scripture, no man can doubt but conveying the Book to
us, it conveys to us all points of Faith contained in the Book; and witnessing
the Book to be writ by men divinely inspired, it also gives as good credit to
the Faith contained in it, as humane Testimony can give. But he means another
thing, when he thus explains himself, Unless some special difficulty be found
in other things that light into the same channel, it must needs bring them down
infallibly too. These other things are things unwritten in that Holy Book; and
without more ado, we will promise him, that when ever he can show us those
other things, and assure us that they light into the same channel of Universal,
not only Roman Tradition, and are so conveyed to us, we will entertain them
with the same Certainty as we entertain the Scripture, upon account of that
Tradition only. But for these other things, which are to be parts of Faith too,
I fear we must either fish for them in the Channel of Tiber, or not at all find
them.

All Traditionary Christians believe the same to day, which they did yesterday,
and so up to the time of our Blessed Savior, page 8. So says Mr. G. And says
our Author, There is no denying this, but by denying that Traditionary
Christians, are Traditionary Christians. But suppose these Traditionary
Christians, be so called from their adhering to a Tradition, which reaches not
so high as our Blessed Savior's time, but only pretends to it, as they are by
others, if not by themselves; may we not call them Traditionary Christians, and
confess too that they believe the same to day as they did yesterday, yea, and
as they did ever since the Council of Trent, or some hundreds of years before
that, and yet deny that they believe the same, that was believed quite up to
the time of our Blessed Savior? Yes, this is and will be denied, till he can
prove it.

Next Mr. G. faith, If they follow this Rule, they can never err in Faith. And
his Friend tell us, This is palpably self-evident, and p. 9. therefore they are
infallible. But unless the Rule of Tradition, which they follow, be longer than
it is yet proved to be, they may follow it, and err all along by following it.
And let it be never so long, yet if they follow it not they may err, and
therefore are not infallible; except he show, that they cannot choose but
follow it. So that unless it be first, as was before said, proved that God has
given a Rule which no man can possibly swerve from, (which supposed, not only a
Pope or Council, but all who have it are infallible) we must all be content to
be fallible still. Yea, but, They could not innovate in Faith, unless they did
forget what they held the day before, or out of malice alter it. Our Author
undertakes to make this out more clearly, and therefore we will hear what he
says for our better information, page 18. He asks, Did Christ teach any error?
and he may be confident we will say He did not. Then it follows, When a Father
believed what Christ taught him, and the Son what the Father believed, did not
the Son too believe what Christ taught? No doubt of it but he did. Run it on
(then says he) to the last Son that shall be born in the World, must not every
one believe what Christ taught, if every one believe what his Father believed?
It is certain he must. And will you then (says he) go about to persuade us,
that there actually is a company of men in the World, who adhered to this Rule,
all Sons believing always as their Fathers did, whereof the first believed as
Christ taught, and who notwithstanding erred in matters of Faith? No, he may be
sure on it, we will never be so unreasonable, except he can first persuade us to
enter into the Roman Communion, where we must lay by our Reason, and renounce
our Private Judgments, and then I know not what absurd things we may be brought
to do. Were it not very easy here for a man of less rediculing Wit than he
triumphs in, to make as fine Sport with his Non obstante here, as he does with
another, page 33, and could do. I doubt not, with two more, which he knows of
in the Councils of Constance and Trent? But I leave him to sport alone. We will
grant him it is impossible to prove, That men have erred, notwithstanding they
never erred; and let him, if he please, note it in his Almanac, amongst his
Self-evidents.

But notwithstanding, (I would not have him want this word to play with) I say
notwithstanding all he has here said, one little thing is yet to be proved,
viz. That these Traditionary Christians, adhere undecliningly to an
unquestionable Tradition, descending really and unvariably from Christ and his
Apostles, and could not possibly do otherwise; that is, That they never either
did or could err from the Faith first taught; for this is but supposed
hitherto, and from this self-evident supposition, (for it is as evident (says
he) as that Traditionary Christians are Traditionary Christians) he necessarily
concludes thus, Suppose Traditionary Christians neither did nor could err, it
is certain they neither did nor could err. Make what you can more of it.

There be two things, which, if they be incident to men, may, as is already
confessed, cause an innovation or alteration in Faith, Forgetfulness and
Malice. But our Author hopes we can have no advantage by pleading either of
these, in bar to the Infallibility of Tradition. You do not, I suppose,
desire, (says he) that we should prove, that men had always Memories, or that
Christians were never malicious enough to damn themselves, and their posterity
wittingly, and yet it can stick no where else, page 32. Yet were there no
danger of men's forgetting what had been taught, it is hard to say, why the
Penmen of the Scripture, should have been at the needless pains to write it;
Nay, St. Peter himself, if men's Memories be always so faithful, seemed to be
too forgetful of this, with so much diligence as he expresses to Endeavor
that they might be able after his decease, to have these things always in
remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.15. And that by giving them unto them in Writing. And if
such Malice as he talks of, can never possibly be found amongst Christians, or
men professing themselves so; to damn themselves and Posterity wittingly, I
would fain have him tell us, how it comes to pass, that we find at this day
among such Christians, so many thousands by wickedness of all sorts hastening to
damnation themselves, and taking as little care to provide any better for their
Children? May not Christians through Malice and Wickedness, be as careless of
preserving the Faith, as of maintaining Holiness in themselves or their
Posterity, when they know that Sin is as damnable as Error.

Again, supposing neither Forgetfulness nor Malice, enough to spoil the Rule of
Tradition, What if all Sons did not understand aright, all that Fathers had
taught them? Is not this as possible, as for some not to understand aright,
what Christ and his Apostles taught them? And such there were amongst their
hearers. What if some Sons were so negligent, as to take no care either to
remember or teach what they had been taught by their Fathers? Have we not daily
experience of such careless persons, who yet want neither understanding, nor
Memory? What, if some through Ambition, Vainglory, and Popularity, set abroach
new Doctrines, and taught them for Apostolical Traditions? What, if others to
save themselves from Persecution, concealed part, and corrupted more of the
Doctrine of Christ by their own Traditions, taken not from Christ, but from
their forefathers, Jews, or Gentiles? And to say no more, What, if some through
a blind zeal, ignorant, devotion, superstitious rigor, and vain credulity,
added many things to the doctrine of Christ, which by degrees grew into more
general esteem, till at last they were owned and imposed as necessary to be
believed and practiced? What, i^ Error any of these ways brought forth, grew,
multiplied, spread, obtained most power, and drove out all that held the naked
truth, out of all those Countries where it came? Because Instances brought by
us, are unwelcome to this Gentleman, I will leave him, to furnish himself with
them out of all Histories.

But now, he will, I suppose betake himself again to his only Refuge, That when
any of these fell into Error, they left their Rule, Tradition. I long (says
he) to hear it made out. That an erring Church can still plead Tradition, and
adhere to it, p. 18. For, that a Church may follow Tradition at one time, and
leave it at another, is no news, p. 15. If this be no news, then, though we
should grant Tradition to be an Infallible conveyance of the Truth, yet, would
it not make, even that Church, which now adheres to it, to be Infallible; and
therefore the Church of Rome (though we should confess her at present, to
adhere to Infallible Tradition) could not prove her self thereby to be
Infallible. That Church only is Infallible, which cannot err. The Church that
at one time follows Tradition, may leave it at another, and so doing errs.
Therefore if the Church of Rome be Infallible, she must prove, not only that
she follows Tradition, for so she proves only that she does not err; but also
that she cannot leave it, for Infallibility excludes all possibility of erring,
by leaving Tradition, She must therefore seek out a new Medium to prove her
self Infallible. For hitherto, according to his own way of reasoning, she has
but the same privilege that all Churches have, not to err so long as she holds
to Tradition, and does not leave it.

Yet, if it may be proved only that the Church of Rome does not err, I think
we are obliged to Communicate with her. And therefore it were enough for her to
prove her self free from Error, which is a much easier task, if she be so, then
to prove her self Infallible. To prove the former is enough, and in vain she
attempts to prove the later, till the former be proved. Why then labors she to
no purpose? For as light as this Author makes of Instances, yet all the World
knows, that a single Instance, in one Error, is enough to answer all the
Arguments can be brought for her Infallibility; seeing it must needs be false
to say she cannot err, who in any one thing does err. And truly, I think her
very claim to Infallibility, is enough to prove that she does err, and
therefore is not Infallible.

That an erring Church may plead Tradition, himself does not greatly deny,
which is one thing that he longs to hear made out. And he needs not go to the
Greek Church, his own will abundantly show it him. But, That an erring Church
adheres to Tradition, if he means true Apostolical Tradition, and adhering to
it wholly and only, I know no man that will undertake to make it out, to save
his longing. Let him show us the Church that holds to this Tradition, and we
will not only grant she errs not, but will also be of her Communion, though we
will not grant her to be Infallible, and so an happy end will be put to all our
Disputes at once.

I confess, it seems very odd to me, that men should call us Heretics, and
condemn us for erring in Faith, and at the same time prove the Articles of
their own Faith, by the Infallibility of their Church, and ground that
Infallibility on Tradition, and prove that Tradition to be an Infallible
conveyance, by an Argument, which if it proves any thing to the purpose, must
prove, that no man that has been taught the Faith, can ever err from it; and
yet, still withal, confess that a Church following Tradition now, may leave it
afterward. If a man may leave the Rule, and by leaving it, err in Faith, then
his holding to it formerly, did not secure him from all error in Faith. And if
a man cannot err from what he has been taught, then can no man that has been
taught the Faith, be an Heretic. In short, Christ and his Apostles taught one
and the same Doctrine, Innovations, it is certain, and Alterations have been
made in this Doctrine, it is no matter whether it was through Forgetfulness, or
Malice, or some other motive, such things undeniably there are amongst
Christians, and therefore some have been taught otherwise than at first men
were taught; so that without all dispute, the Rule of Tradition is somewhere
broken. The Church of Rome says, all have broke it but she only, but how
proves she this? She says, she holds the same to day, which she did yesterday,
and so up to our Blessed Savior's time. We call again for a proof of this, She
tells us, if she followed this Rule, she could never err in Faith. But did she
follow this Rule? She says, she did, and if you will not believe her, there is
an end.

And here I might end your trouble, but that I have spied a few gleanings yet
behind, which may possibly be worth gathering up. He tells, page 25. We give
only a General Latitudinarian Rule, common to all the Heresies in the World:
You know Sir, that the Holy Scripture is our Rule, and this is indeed the
General Rule given by God to us all, and in this sense Latitudinarian too, that
it contains all things necessary to Salvation, and common to Heretics, it is
and ought to be, tho they miserably abuse it, and tho I could tell him too of
Heretics, that trusted more to his Rule than to ours. He therefore must pardon
us, if we cannot give him a better Rule than God has given us, neither can
think fit to throw it away, because some men will abuse it. Yea but, it makes
light and darkness very consistent, and Christ and Belial very good friends.
Ibid. I hope you read not this without a more than ordinary concernment for the
man, who ever he is, that has so little reverence for God and his holy Word,
for he cannot but know that the Holy Scripture only is our Rule, against which
he ventures to utter so much Blasphemy. All the return I shall make for this,
is my hearty prayer, That God may give him Repentance unto life.

In his 26 page, we are told, That the Difference constituting our Protestant
Rule, as distinguished from that of those most abominable Heretics, can only
be [As my own Judgment or others of my side, thus or thus interpret Scripture's
Letter] and wriggle (says he) which way you please, there it will and must end
at last. Who can expect less, but that where men pretend to Infallibility, they
should also pretend to know what is our Rule, better then we our selves, poor
fallible Creatures do? To what purpose should we tell them again and again,
what is our Rule, when they are resolved beforehand, not to believe that we
know what it is. If this conceited Sir would give us leave to know our own
minds, I would tell him once more, That Plain Scripture is our Rule, and that
the Interpretation of it by any Sect of people, Romanists or others, is
extrinsecal to it, and no constitutive difference of it. In general, it is the
Word of God; in contradistinction to the Roman Rule of Scripture and
Traditions, it is the Written Word, or Scripture only; and as differenced from
both Romanists and other Heretics and Sectaries, it is Scripture plainly
delivering a sense owned and declared by the Primitive Church of Christ in the
Three Creeds, Four first General Councils, and Harmony of the Fathers. This I
hope is plain dealing and no Wriggling, and here we take up our stand, let him
endeavor to draw us whither he can.

After he has been quarrelling with our Rule, and with us for not giving a more
distinct Rule, he next complains of us for not following our Rule. Not one of a
Million, even of your own Protestants (says he) relies on, or ever thinks of
relying on your Rule of Faith, in order to make choice of their Faith, or
determining what to hold. Ibid. Tho I fear many of them are too negligent, yet
I hope he is out in his account, or else I know he is uncharitable in thus
judging, without taking an account of them. I am apt to think they are more
attentive to their Rule than he imagines, or else they would be a little more
indifferent which Religion prevails, than most of them yet seem to be. Yet be
it as he would have it, it is the fault of the people only, neither of our
Religion nor our Rule: And he knows well enough how easy it is for us too to
spy such faults abroad.

After much talk to the same, I mean, to no purpose, he asks page 27. How few
use all the Fallible means (for you allow them no other) which they are to make
use of to find out their Faith? Again I answer, too few; but yet many more than
he could wish did make use of them. And how Fallible soever these means be,
they are as Infallible as any afforded the people in his Church, and as much
more certain, as the Word of God is more certain than that of a Priest.

But now comes the great Secret of all, which was never discovered till now.
Not the Letter of Scripture, but honest Tradition is our Rule, page 28. Nay,
and this is evident too (though we could none of us see it all this while, what
bad eyes have Protestants?) That the Tradition of our Fathers and Teachers, and
not Scripture's Letter is indeed our Rule, page 29. Where are we now? In the
Church of Rome e're we were aware of it? We are all good Roman Catholics on a
sudden, we are become an Infallible Church and did not know it. What Virtue is
there in these fine Letters, and how insensibly do they work upon us? Fear not
Sir, he has proved it I Will warrant you, and that unanswerably, as he does all
things. Children simply believe their Fathers and Teachers, page 27. Therefore
their Rule is Tradition. This is true, only we must remember, it is a Tradition
of Scripture only. Next, all hearers do not inquire whether others give not
more congruous explications of Scripture, then their own preachers do.
Therefore they follow Tradition. They do indeed follow what the preacher has
delivered to them from the Scripture, and what he has made them see plainly
there, they think it needless to run as far as Rome, to see more clearly by
unwritten Tradition. Lastly, The Reformers meant not that the believing Church
should have the Liberty to Interpret Scripture against the teaching Church, or
Pastors, or coin a Faith out of it, contrary to the present or former
Congregation of which he was a Member, page 29. Therefore again they follow
Tradition. They do indeed Apostolical and Scriptural Tradition. And herein both
Pastors and People are well agreed, that they are neither for Coining faith,
and therefore will neither of them give leave to the other so to do. They have
a good old Faith delivered to them both by Scripture, and the Primitive Church,
and to this they are resolved to stand.

Thus Sir, having given you my thoughts of this ingenious Letter; I leave you
to think what you can of it better, desiring you only to think no worse of your
own Religion for it, till you hear more from

Your very faithful Friend and Servant.

FINIS.

