A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen, Upon Ephesians. 5.16. Redeeming the
Time, because the days are evil.

By the Reverend Father Philip Ellis Monk of the H. Order of St. Benedict, and
of the English Congr. Chaplain and Preacher in Ordinary to their Majesty's.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel, 1687.

Ephesians. 5.16. Redimentes tempus, quoniam dies mali sunt.
Redeeming the Time, because the days are evil.
IF this great Apostle (Sacred Majesty,) command all who were to succeed him in
the Apostolical Office, and in the care of Souls, to Preach the Word in season
and out of season; certainly, this which I have chosen, or rather which is
recommended this day by the Church to your particular consideration, and is
delivered by Him as a Compendium of Morality, is ever in Season, and ever in
the Crisis: The management of our Time, being like the Dictates of our
Conscience, in no circumstance to be neglected, being in the number of those
Precepts which admit of no dispensation.

For Time being in a continual Flux and Motion, every particle of it which is
not improved is lost; but, blessed be God, not lost beyond Redemption, for what
is impossible to Nature is possible to Grace; what all the industry of Man
cannot retrieve, nor the Wealth of both the Indies recover, the poorest and
weakest Christian is taught how to Redeem: Redeem the Time.

Should a Merchant see that Vessel sink before his Eyes which was laden with
all his Hopes, and almost all his Wealth, where he had treasured up the labors
of his past life, the comforts of his present, and the unknown joys of his
future happiness; yet admist his Agonies should hear one promising to repair
his loss with the small remainder of his Fortune; how greedily would he embrace
the offer, and hearken to the expedient? Should an Eminent Lawyer whisper a
young Spend-thrift in the ear, that he will put him into a method how to redeem
a morgag'd and imbesled Estate, and this without any cost or charges, and even
any advantage to himself; Would not he look upon this Man as his better Genius,
not only as the most charitable, but also the most friendly Person in the
World, and follow his counsel in despite of all their reasonings and
dissuasives, who encourage his profuseness, and lend a helping hand to his
ruin? Should the Captive be taught how to recover his Liberty, the Conquered
his Honor, the Stigmatized and Scandalous his Reputation, or the Malefactor how
to gain his Judge, and compound for the greatest Crimes with the smallest
Punishment; I presume much Rhetoric would not be necessary to win their
attention. Now this is what I come to offer you, and what the Apostle exhorts
you to: But methinks, Exhortation should be needless where Self-interest pleads
so strong; and I should have nothing to do, but to show you the practical Part,
were all Men agreed in the Thesis. But most People know not the true price of
Time, know not how to spend it when they have it, or how to go about to redeem
it when it is misspent.

Wherefore, the true value of Time; the great abuse of it, and the most
excellent manner of redeeming it; I beg leave, may be the Subject of the two
following Parts of my Discourse, after we have implored the Divine Assistance,
by the Intercession of the Virgin Mother, Ave Maria.

Redeem the Time, because the days are evil.
St. Aug. in his 24th Sermon upon the words of the Apostle, observes there are
two things which render our days evil, the misery and the wickedness of Men.
But since misery is only the punishment of wickedness, and wickedness the cause
of misery, it is the mis-spending and not redeeming our Time, which denominate
the days evil: Mis-spending, relates to the present, and to the future when it
becomes present; not redeeming, regards what is past; so that both together
infect the whole Stream, and render our days guilty of a double iniquity. For
it is no small aggravation of every sin, (tho so little reflected on, and made
so light of by People now adays,) that in the perpetration of evil is included
the omission of doing well; that the same parcels of Time we dedicate to Vice,
ought to be consecrated to the exercise of Virtue; that the contrary practice,
besides its proper and specific wickedness, is guilty of Injustice and
Robbery. In fine, That in the day of Judgment a separate account will be
demanded of what we have, and what we have not done. This is evident from the
Bill which shall be brought in and found against the Delinquent, and is already
declared by our Blessed Lord, Mat. 25. where every Article of the Indictment is
Negative, You did not feed me, you did not cloth me, you did not visit me, and
the rest. But here is not alleged so much as the breach of a Commandment; then
Irreligion, Luxury, Detraction and Extortion are smaller Crimes, which will
bear no Action. But since lesser Articles cannot supersede the greater, it
follows, These are upon another Rule, unless such gross offenders shall be
ranged with Infidels, who are already judged, and carry their Sentence in their
Faces, jam judicati sunt. But for the rest of Christians, who think themselves
innocent because they abstain from these blacker Crimes, it is necessary
another Indictment should be prepared, setting forth the Omission of good
Works, and convicting them of mispending their Time, which, as appears from our
Saviors words, is alone sufficient to plunge them into everlasting Flames,
Quia non fecistis. Therefore, because you did not, for no other reason, go you
cursed into everlasting Fire.

And after all this, amidst so much knowledge in a Point which concerns us so
highly, and which we firmly believe, is it not a Subject rather of Tears than
of Expostulation and Discourse, that nothing is so little considered by Man, as
the true value of Time? I know the Divine, the Philosopher, the Lawyer, the
Tradesman, and even the Libertine unanimously agree that Time is the most
precious thing in the World, but all of them upon different Motives. The
Philosopher prizes it in order to Science, the Lawyer manages it to improve his
Fortune, the Tradesman to procure a Subsistence, the Libertine to indulge his
Appetites, but the Divine teaches it to be only valuable, as leading to an
happy Eternity. To value Time upon the account of Speculation, is merely
Heathenish; to value it for a Temporal advantage, is merely Human; haec Gentes
requirunt; to value it for the abuse of it, is diabolical; but to value it for
the true end, is the estimate of a Christian. Wherefore, all the manegery of
Time, or rather the applying of it otherwise than to the true end, for which it
was given, and to which it naturally tends i. e. to Eternity, is an unjust
alienation, because it turns the Means into the end, and frustrates the Design
of God and Nature.

It is not my business to subtilize upon the nature of Time, or Metaphysically
enquire what it is, whether the revolution of the Heavens, or the measure of
the motion and rest of Bodies, or a particle of Eternity which we now use, Cic.
I. 1. de Invent. Rhet.
as the Orator calls it? Let us leave this disquisition to Philosophers. There
is a certain Definition which every Christian carries in his Breast, that it is
a Term assigned us by Providence, to work out our Salvation in it. This Term is
diversified according to the several Men it affects; and what is many Years to
one, is but a few Months, or Days, or Hours to another. Yet this shorter
Period, is a Man's whole Time, his whole Course; as the Moon and other Planets
complete their Revolution and fulfill their Motion, as well as the Sun and
Superior Heavens, which are much longer in performing theirs. Wherefore, it is
a astrange Folly, and little less than Impiety, which is so common in every
bodies mouth, that such an one came to an untimely end, or was cut off in the
Flower or middle of his Age, when that very Person so lamented as unripe for
the Sithe, had lived out his whole time as well as Mathusalem; and so has the
Infant who is taken in the Womb, or having but one day upon the Earth, as much
as the Child of an hundred years, as the Scripture most properly styles those
who end their days in such Puerilities as they began them, with as little
consideration why they came into the World, what they are to do in it, what
Account will be demanded after it; Their Divertisements and what they call
Pleasures, being as silly, and wanting nothing of the Child, but Innocence.

But if it be agreed on, that Time is precious, what Frenzy has seized Mankind,
and makes them so lavish of what they esteem so dear? What Spirit makes us so
fond and careful of Temporal advantages, so greedy of what is not our own, and
so negligent of the thing which only belongs to us? Omnes si quidem res aliena
a nobus est, tempus autem nostrum est. Bern. l. Medit. c. 6. Senec.
For as Seneca and St. Bernard admirably observe, all other things are Foreign,
nothing is properly ours, but Time: Or supposing other things to be never so
much our own, yet the value of Time ought in reason to be greater than the
estimation of what we only owe to Time; and who squanders it away, tho he
pretend to Prudence and Conduct in other matters, can deserve that style no
better, than one who receives his Rents with great exactness and
circumspection, but keeps no account how he lays them out; or, another who
busies himself about what belongs not to him, or is exact in trivial matters,
but neglects the main; like that unfortunate Prince, who valued himself more
upon the touch of the Lute, than the Art of Government.

All other things are Foreign to us, aliena a nobis sunt; they are beneath us;
we now and then descend to them out of necessity or for diversion, but the
management of Time is the business of Man. This only is our own, but it will
not stay with us; it is short and swift, properties which inhaunce the value,
and show it was given us only for use. Part of it steals away from us before we
reflect upon it, part others steal from us; and of that which we are actually
using, a great deal runs at waste. For setting aside the Years of our
undiscerning Childhood, and inconsiderate Youth, and unweldy Old Age, only the
middle part of our Lives, which hardly make up a fourth, we think worth
improving; and how few arrive to this term? Not the fourth part of Mankind; and
of those that do, not the Hundredth part, I am afraid, ever think whereabouts
they are, but trifle away the present, which is in their power, to build their
hopes upon a future, in which it is at least probable they shall have no share,
and in which for certain, they will be more unfit for labor. But of this riper
and more digested part of our Lives, how much is taken up in necessary
attendance on our Bodies and Fortunes, how much consumed in rest and repasts,
how much in refreshing the Spirits and unbending the Mind? And of the
remainder, which amounts not to above a fifteenth proportion, how much is
wasted in Disquisition and Error, and mistaking our business, in idle
expectation, fond hopes and unactive fears? And after all this subduction, have
we time to spend in useless Discourses, impertinent News, tedious Visits or
unprofitable Studies? But it seems we have so much plenty still, that every
Sense and Appetite puts in for a share, and wantons away the select and more
precious hours. We have time for Drunkenness, Cheating and Circumventing,
Slander and Detraction, Luxury and Murder, and, as if the wickedness of the day
were not sufficient for it, we take in great part of the Night. We suffer every
one, who has a mind to lose his own time, to make bold with ours; and when all
other Injuries and usurpation of our Goods is presently informed against, and
prosecuted as far as the Crime will bear, even to death, for a Garment or a
small Sum of Money; there is no Man brings an Action against the Aggressor that
robs us of so much time in formal Visits or unprofitable Discourse, nay, we are
not sensible he has done us any wrong; but soon after we grow weary of the
rest, and prepare to do the same injury to others, inviting them to spend an
hour in this or that divertisement. To spend an hour? (cries St. Bernard,) Do
you know what you say! To spend an hour, which the mercy of your Creator has
indulged you to do Penance, to obtain Pardon, to acquire Grace and purchase
Glory? O donec pertranseat tempus! To pass the time away in which you ought to
appease the Divine Justice, to hasten toward an Angelical Purity, to bewail
your past offenses; the Evangelical Treasure which you ought to buy with the
expense of all you have. To spend the time! O absurdity of speech! O stupidity
of mind! To quicken the speed of Time, which is ever upon the wing, and cannot
be persuaded to stay with us. If we manage our Time to so much advantage, what
pity it is we are confined to so small a compass, and our lives crowded into so
narrow a space! Great pity indeed, that Men, who Husband a little so well, have
not a larger Fortune to improve! a sad thing, that from amidst these laudable
Exercises one must be snatched away on a sudden, as if our Industry and
Application had not merited a longer term!

But, Christians, let us once in our lives be serious, and consider in cold
Blood what we are doing, whiles so great a Treasure slips between our fingers!
Let us once in our lives tell true, and ingenuously confess what we are driving
at, what we hope to gain by so prodigious and irrecoverable an Expense? I dare
not tell you St. Bernards opinion of your Proceedings, That all the time you
have not God before your eyes, is to be reckoned as lost: Bern. i^ Declam.
Omne tempus in quo de Deo non cogitas, hoc te computes perdidisse. But this I
am bold to affirm, that all Time not spent in order to Eternity, is misspent;
if employed only upon things indifrent, it is to be accounted for, if upon
things criminal, it is to be satisfied for, if it be not redeemed; and even
those Actions which pass for the most innocent, when not directed to the right
end, become defective, and in some measure criminal; nay, even things
necessary, when they exceed the limits of necessity, are put to the account of
mis-spending. I need not speak of Time spent in those things, which even the
corruption of this Age, with all its glosses cannot Varnish over, which appear
in their own Colors, do what we can, and condemn us while they are acting. I
need not speak of Time spent in santring up and down, hearing or relating News,
Dancing, Gaming, which have not any other end than a short refreshment of the
Spirits, beyond which, they are amusements, which we tolerate in Children, and
nothing but want of Reason can excuse; For assure your selves, want of
Reflection in a riper Age will not do it; for how can Not-Reflecting excuse us,
when Ignorance it self shall be reputed a Crime, and he that does not know,
shall not be known?

Now go and tell me your State and Condition will not allow you to spend your
Time better; if this be so, that State of yours deserves very ill of you; it is
unlawful in it self, and therefore to be abandoned: And methinks, no one should
be unwilling to quit that miserable Servitude where he has not leisure to be
good. But if the State be good, it is sanctified by virtuous Practices; and if
you supersede that Sanctification, you render that Criminal, which of it self
is good and laudable. But the goodness of most States depends upon the
execution of them.

It was a common Saying among the Philosophers, That every Man is the Artificer
of his own Fortune; I am sure, every one is the Artificer of his own Happiness,
who by cooperating with the Grace and Time which is given him, may improve the
most ordinary Actions into virtuous and meritorious, or by neglecting this
casie improvement, render himself accountable for the most indifferent things.

That Direction of the Apostle, Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do,
do all to the Glory of God, is a Precept (for so the Fathers style it,) of a
vast extent, and reaches not only the more remarkable, but also takes in the
minutest Actions, and every moment of our Lives. In the Eyes of God a thousand
Years are but a moment, and in the Service of God a moment may be worth a
thousand Years; it may redeem an Age, it may purchase an Eternity. Unhappy Man!
who neglects a moment, which may render him so for ever! a momento Aeternitas;
Eternity depends upon a moment, because Eternity is the end of Time, which is
nothing but a Flux of moments; and that fatality which will certainly happen in
one, may happen in any one.

And now certainly, I have said enough of the due value of Time, which must be
presupposed, as well to the appretiation and esteem of the thing, as to the
redeeming of it. If you are satisfied in the value of it, you cannot but be
grieved to the very heart, that you have parted with it so easily, passed it
over so slightly, and spent it so idly and irreligiously, and by consequence,
will be very glad to hear how you may redeem it, which is the Subject of my
Second Part.

Redeem the Time.
The highest point of Wisdom that Man can arrive to by Philosophy, is to make
use of his Time when it is in his hands; but to recover it when it is gone, to
retrieve it when it is lost; to rectify the Errors and Miscarriages of it when
it is no more, is one of those Arcanums of Religion, which are hid from the
Wise and revealed to Babes. It was the Saying of Pittacus, celebrated so much
by Antiquity, and which entitled him to a place among the wisest of Men, (...),
Learn to value your Time, but to redeem it was a Lesson that great Master never
learned himself, and became only an Apostle of the Church to teach. But who is
able to pay so great a Ransom? And what Exchange can one make for his Time,
more than for his own Soul? The price is easy and obvious, and in every Man's
power, Caute ambulate, only walk warily, (...), circumspectly and watchfully;
do now what before you ought to have done, and a guard upon your Actions for
the future, shall repair the damages caused by your former negligence. But
walking warily, implies not only a Cessation from Evil, but also a Repentance
of it; To redeem the Time therefore, says St. Anselm, is to redeem the
Offenses of a Misspent Life, with Tears and penitential Works, Est anteactae
vitae peccata, flendo, and poenitendo redimere.

If Sorrow then is a Tear, which cannot recover the smallest Temporal loss, so
valuable in order to Eternity; and do our Hearts remain still without sense,
and our Eyes without moisture? Will amendment for the future cross the Book?
Will an humble acknowledgment of the Debt compound with our Adversary in the
way? Will a present diligence, in performing what is otherwise our Duty, atone
for so much negligence in managing the Talent deposited in our hands? And is
the Price thought too dear with us? Or do we stand with our Hands in our
Pockets, demurring upon the Bargain? Does not Reason as well as Religion prompt
us to lay hold of it immediately? And since the Mercy of our God is so liberal,
to take him at his word, (as I may say,) and enter the Vineyard this very
moment, tho at the 9th, tho at the 11th hour, when the short remainder of the
time may make up the loss of all the rest! Oh! the unspeakable comforts of this
Promise! Oh! the incredible stupidity of Man! which stands unmoved at such
large Invitations, such a general Amnesty, such unexpected Promises, as
transcend not only a reasonable Hope, but even the boldest Presumption!

The Morning comes, Isa. 21.12.
(says the Prophet,) and also the Night; tho your Day be far spent, there is
still Time enough to enquire after the means of your Salvation; Si quaeritis,
quaerite, If you seek, seek in earnest, return and come: And that we should not
doubt of a merciful Reception, he gives us this assurance by another Prophet,
That he will forgive our Iniquity, and that he will remember our sin no more.
Jer. 31.34.

Surely, there is some unknown Pleasure and invincible Fascination in Idleness,
which cannot be unti'd by such powerful Countercharms as these. Custom, (which
is but standing Error,) has prepossessed our Minds, stupifi'd and immersed in
Flesh and Blood; that to do nothing is easy, when indeed it is the greatest
pain the reasonable Creature can endure; arguing either a childish Weakness,
that we cannot act, or a shameful Ignorance, that we know not what to do. And I
believe the Man of Reason will grant me, that Ignorance, as it is a punishment
upon us for doing what we ought not, so is it the greatest torment to a Soul,
which is perpetually thirsting after Knowledge: And as for the more unthinking
and grosser part of Mankind, they cannot deny, but all Pain comes from
Weakness. Our own Notions therefore bear testimony against us; and if what we
call a gentile life, speaks either our Weakness or Ignorance, the gentile Liver
is the most unhappy Creature in the World: For Happiness is so far from
consisting in either of these, that both are essentially destructive to it; and
whosoever hopes to compass this end by contrary means, will find himself at
last in the other Extremity. To be plain, whosoever promises Happiness to
himself without much labor, sets it at too high a price, at which no wise Man
would buy it, if it be not to be purchased but by living idly; for at this
rate, one must be Miserable to become Happy.

But how unnatural a thing is it for that Creature to be idle, Ambr. Praef. in
Luc. Basil. ap. Mel. 89.
who alone of all Creatures stands condemned to labor? as St. Ambrose observes:
Upon which consideration St. Basil doubts not to brand this Vice of so great
reputation in the World, with the infamous Character of a sin against Nature;
because there is nothing in the whole Frame of Nature idle or unactive. Our
Blessed Savior testifies of the Godhead it self, My Father (says he,) John
5.17.
still works, and I work; Pater meus usque modo operatur. All the Hierarches of
Angels (as one assures us, who had been in the third Heaven,) are Administering
Spirits: The Prophet declares, they have no rest day nor night; but incessantly
pour forth their harmonious Acclamation, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath:
And what I should have mentioned before, The sacred Humanity of Christ came not
to be served, but to serve; Non venit ut Ministraretur, sed ut Ministraret. The
Celestial Orbs have never had any respite from their perpetual motion; all
things below are in a continual Tide, a regular Succession of Causes and
Effects; Every Creature groans, and brings forth even till now, says the
Apostle: And if the invisible things of God are understood by those things
which are made, The Operations of Nature are so many Emblems of the Diligence
he requires at our hands toward the working out our Salvation; God having made
them not only for our use, but also for our instruction. In fine, the whole
World is a large Volum, as St. S. Athanas. in Vit. S. Ant.
Anthony calls it, where we may read our Duty, and meet with it in every line.
Nay, if Man would but take the measure of his Moral Actions from the
observation of his Natural, the continual working of the Heart, circulation of
the Blood, respiration of the Lungs, pulse of the Arteries and activity of the
Fancy, will teach him Assiduity in the exercise of those nobler Faculties,
whose Actions depend upon the liberty of his Will; how constant and regular his
Motion ought to be in the Service of God; And that his Soul is as much dead,
when it is idle, and surceases from doing well, as the Body will be, when all
these Vital Operations are at an end.

I know not any one, who would not esteem it a horrible Execration, to wish he
had neither Hands nor Feet; yet, such is our misery, that while we make no more
use of them in order to our own good, or that of our Neighbor, than if they
were quite disabled; even in that respect we count our selves happy: For take
away from the Lady, the Gentleman, the Courtier, etc. the power and convenience
of doing nothing, and being not in the labors of Men, the subtilest Logician
can scarce explain in what formality, their Happiness, i. e. the advantage of
their Condition consists? Their privilege seems to lie in an exemption from
the general Malediction inflicted upon the rest of Mankind; In the sweat of
their brows they shall eat their Bread: But then they must draw their Pedigree
from some other Line than that of Adam; for no more is any Child of his free of
this Obligation, than he is from the cause of it; and if we Inherit the one, we
must necessarily be partakers of the other. For as Holy Job expounds this
Sentence, Man is born to labor; Labor being not only a necessary means to
preserve his life, but one of the ends why it was given him. And our Blessed
Savior revives and inforces this Doctrine, in the Parable of the Master
entrusting his Servants with so many Talents, with a Negotiamini, Manage and
improve them; and this not for a spirt, when the fit takes you, but donec
veniam, without intermission till he calls them in, and you to give an account
of your Stewardship; by which Servants, every body understands the whole Mass
of Human Nature, without excepting any State or Condition; and by the Talents,
a necessity of working, according to the Abilities this great Master has
dispensed to every particular.

Now if a Man who had well considered the weight and strictness of this
Obligation, without knowing the Follies of Mankind, and their vain amusements,
should look out into the World, he would tell me, I make a Discourse in the
Air, and to the Walls; for every one is active in his respective Station, and
employed in his Duty, when he should see their earnestness at such a distance,
as not to discern the matter they are so intent upon: How People have along the
Streets, and press one another like Waves, which are broken and severed with a
contrary Tide: When he should behold some warmly disputing at a Table, others
walking musing and solitary, some Reading, others discoursing with abundance of
Gravity, others sitting in crowds, in recollection and silence; he would
certainly bid me hold my peace, and not disturb these serious Men, with
advising them to begin, what they are already doing. But if I should lead him
nearer to them, within ken of their Actions, and hearing of their Discourse,
when he should discover their Lives and their Talk to be all of a piece,
Atheistical in good earnest; When he should see these People running to a Show
or to a Riot, to circumvent their Neighbor, or to oppress the Innocent; or
coursing about the Streets, merely to show their Equipage or themselves: When
he should find those silent and recollected People at the Theater, whom he
thought at a Sermon; That Lady at her Glass, and in a profound contemplation of
her self, whom he thought at her Oratory; that Gallant reading a Romance or a
Novel, which he mistook for a Prayer Book: When he should hear others talking
profanely in the very Church, blaspheming the Divinity they pretend to worship,
pretending to Reason, and yet practicing Debauchery. In fine, most Men acting
and talking after such a manner, that what is counted the most innocent
Discourse, is Murder, I mean, censuring their Neighbors Actions, and taking
their Lives in pieces, as if they were dissecting an Anatomy, to discover the
root of a Disease.

In a word, When he should be satisfied, that the plurality of Men is busied in
unlawful, or scandalous, or trivial things, and almost all besides their
business, he would cry out, They want a Physician more than a Divine; and I
spend my Time as unprofitably as the rest, with Preaching to Men in a Lunacy.

But if he should be commanded with the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 8.8.
to pierce the Wall, and view the Abominations that are done within, and all
the Idols of the House of Israel, with the several sorts of Adorations which
are paid to them; as the avaricious Man sacrificing his Soul to a little Gain,
the voluptuous Man to his sensual Appetite, the Vindictive to a brutal Revenge,
the Ambitious to the shadow of Honor, the Luxurious to the most infamous of
Passion, the Flatterer burning Incense to his Prince, and the Hypocrite to his
God; he must needs conclude that true, what the Jews said in their Conventicle
of Vice, The Lord has forsaken the Earth, and the Fear of him is wholly
extinguished.

But if amidst this Man's astonishment, one should bid him have a care what he
says, for these are Christians, Men who make a Conscience of their Actions,
People of Credit and Honor, who would not do an ill thing for the World, who
believe they shall account severely for every idle word, and every moment spent
unprofitably. In short, That they are redeeming their Time, and are heartily
sorry for all their sins, tho they appear to be actually inflaming the
reckoning; that they are executing their Penances, and putting their morning
Resolutions in practice, tho they seem to be at the Gaming-house, the Theater
or Tavern; would not he turn upon me as one of the number of mad Men, or an
impudent Cheat, endeavoring to impose upon his Senses, and obtrude the grosest
impossibilities, and most palpable contradictions upon his certain Knowledge
and Reason?

Yet whether this be not the present State of this Nation, I mean, the case of
most People, Judicate domus Israel, your Judgment, O House of Israel! If God
should once again send the Prophet Jeremy to search every Street, and enquire
out a just and sober Man, any one who seeks the Truth, I am persuaded, he
would bring in the same Evidence he did before; Jerem 5.1.
Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; Thou have consumed them,
but they have refused to hear correction; They have made their faces harder
than a Rock, they have refused to return. The more Time thou give them to
repent, the more Time thou allowest them to sin; they are so far from redeeming
what is past, that there is like to be no end of the Score.

But perhaps they are poor and foolish, ignorant of the ways of our Lord, and
the Judgments and Law of their God; Vadam ergo ad Optimates, I will go
therefore to the great, the most knowing and discerning Men, the advantage of
whose Birth and Education has raised them above the Level, and purged their
Heads from that Grosness and Phlegm which stupifies the rest; for they cannot
but know the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God: Sed hi simul
confregerunt jugum, ruperunt vincula; But these have altogether broken the
Yoke, and burst the Bonds. At their looking out into the World, their first
business is to forget the Religious Education of their tender Age, and to
efface the instructions of their Parents and Preceptors, by doing every thing
they were forbid. The first Tincture they receive from the World, is Vanity,
which as Job observes, soon ripens into Pride, [Vir vanus in superbiam
erigitur,] and then they think themselves born as free and lawless as a wild
Ass-colt in the Desert. Because they have no necessity of sweating for their
Living, they think themselves Masters of their Time; because Divine Providence
has provided so largely for them, as to exempt them from the Drudgery of the
World, and set them apart for nobler Actions; they think their Business lies
only where their Pleasures do. What a frightful Idea have these Men of
Happiness, when their own Judgment places them in the State of corrupted and
abandoned Nature, endowed only with a liberty to Sin, or rather in the State of
Damnation, a Non-necessity of doing well?

But, my Noble Auditory, how can you entertain so mean or cruel a thought of
God, as to fancy he has made a Law from which he exempts that sort of Mankind,
which is the most able and best qualified to perform it? Or that he has singled
out the best part of his Creation, Men and Women of most sense and reason, as
the fattest Victims for Sacrifice, to spend their Time in silence and idleness,
and not to be in the labors of Men, assigning them no Province, no Soil to
cultivate, that they might have no means toward their Reprobation? If this be
the end of your Creation, O ye Men of Greatness, of Riches and Honors! I cannot
but acknowledge with Tears, that you so well correspond with it. But if the
advantage of your condition consists in a capacity of serving God and your
Neighbor in a more excellent manner, as well through the great leisure you
enjoy, as the plenty and power you have to do it with, your Time is so much
more valuable, as it may be more beneficial; it is more easily redeemed, by the
many Expedients which are before you, and the abuse of it so much more enormous
and punishable; upon which that Commination of the Holy Ghost is grounded,
Potentes potenter tormenta patientur, The great shall suffer great Torments;
and again, Quantum sese exaltavit, etc. As much as he has exalted himself; and
bin in delights, give him so much Torment and Grief.

My Time will not allow me to instance in every particular advantage of your
State; but give me leave to conclude this Discourse with one which comprehends
the rest, and seems to be the property of the Nobles and Gentry, Devotion. If
this be a Duty incumbent upon all Men, so that no State, no Circumstance or
Condition can prescribe against it, in capite Libri scriptum est de vobis, you
are the first in the Role, as being Emancipated from those ties and
encumbrances, in which the laboring, that is, the far greater part of the World
is involved. If the Laborer, who moils all day to procure a small refreshment
for his craving Appetite, or to support a Family, be not excused upon that
account, from consecrating his Actions in the Morning by Prayer, and giving an
account of them in an Evening Recollection; shall you be passed by as
Extralineary, who may perform that almost every hour of the day, which the rest
cannot but at set intervals, and borrowing Time from their Rest? If that
complaint, which is so common in every bodies mouth, That they have not Time to
say their Prayers, be injurious to God, and an implicit accusation of his
Providence, as if it had not furnished us means to perform the Duty it enjoins?
What name shall we find for those false pretexts and fond excuses which you
make, for whom that Precept seems to be more particularly calculated, sine
intermissione orate, pray without ceasing? If a sick Man complain of want of
health, or a poor Man of want of Necessaries, he becomes an object of
Compassion, and it would be the highest Barbarity to revile him for what is not
in his power to avoid. But if a Man in perfect Health should complain of a
Distemper, or one sitting at a good Table, should cry he is almost famished,
risum teneatis amici? Nobody would refrain from laughter: and yet it is
incomparably more absurd for any one to complain he has not Time to pray, which
he ought to be doing while he is complaining. But for those who have nothing
else to do, or at the most, only incident and casual avocations, it is a
subject of Tears, and a folly to which one would think Men of good sense, of
all people in the World should be the least subject. You have not time to Pray;
but you have time to be Drunk; You have not time to Pray; but you have time to
spend in idle discourse, in scandalous and uncharitable Reflections, in
chambering and wantonness. You have not time to Pray, but how many hours do you
wast in Gaming, when the loss of your Money, is the least expense; and what you
gain, cannot redeem, is not the price of a moment of the Time you lose? O
Heavens! how glad will ye be one day of half an hour, out of so many thousands
which dance over your heads unregarded! what would not a Damned soul give for
those scraps of Time, which you cast away as superfluous?

But certainly, the man of business has not Time to be devout: yet he has Time,
but it seems not to that end; or if to that end, yet Affairs of a greater
importance intervene and challenge it to themselves. If it be so, the Man of
business is, by necessity, the most Irreligious person in the world: For if you
prefer any thing to your Prayers, it is an evident sign you judge it of greater
importance, which is a Spiritual Idolatry, postponing the Creator to the
Creature. But if you acknowledge those things you prefer to your Prayers, to be
of an Inferior order, you are highly unjust. No wonder then if at those few
broken moments, and ends of Time, which are the Refuse of your pleasure, or
what you miscal, your business, when you vouchsafe to come before the Divine
Majesty with defiled Hands, and a Mind painted all over with the imagery of of
Creatures, and a Heart totally immersed in sensual, if not criminal,
affections; no wonder I say, if your Prayers are not heard, which drop from you
with as ill a Grace, as Alms from the Miser, which are huddled over with as
much precipitation, as if you were making an escape from God Almighty, which
are accompanied with so many indignities, that you bid fair with Jacob for a
Curse rather than a Blessing, and fall upon your Knees, not to obtain pardon,
but to receive sentence, or rather to increase your Judgment, such as the Royal
Prophet wishes the counterfeit Repentant, Oration ejus fiat in peccatum; your
very Prayer becomes an additional sin.

I know some will be apt to think, surely this Man mistakes his Auditory, and
fancies himself preaching in a Cloister, or reading Ascetick Lectures to People
wholly estranged and secluded from the World. But they may spare that thought:
I know the place I fill, I know and revere my August and noble Audience; I am
sensible I am speaking, as in the most Awful, so to the most discerning,
ingenious, lettered, and judicious Assembly of the World. I speak to a Court,
to Men of Business, and whose Time is much taken up with weighty employments: I
speak to the Flower of both Sexes; I speak to Ladies, Soldiers, Philosophers
and Divines; but that is not all, I speak to Christians; and if any appear not
in that Quality, I speak not to them: But all who own that Character, must at
the same time render to my Doctrine. I do not persuade you to relinquish, but to
sanctify your state; and certainly Piety, which is profitable to all things, is
more than ordinarily necessary to them, who are surrounded with more than
ordinary dangers, which renders Prayer more requisite in a Court than in a
Convent; Because, as St. Bernard observes, Temptations there, are more
serpentine and wily, more rife and alluring, the Pavement more slippery where
one stands, the Bruise greater when one falls, and the Rise more difficult when
one is down. The same I affirm respectivly of every state which admits of many
distractions, and very much engages and takes up the mind; as those Distempers
need the frequenter Antidotes which recur the oftnest, and lie heaviest at the
heart; which renders this Verity clear and beyond dispute, That a Monk in his
Cell is not half so criminal in omitting the solemn obligations of his Order,
as a Courtier who dispenses with himself in the constant observance of Piety,
how plausible and specious soever his pretenses may be. Tell me not of the
contrary Judgment of the World, which is all placed in iniquity; no Man chooses
his enemy to be his Judge. We are not to bend our Rule to the Practice or
opinions of Men, but we reduce them to the Rule, and by that pronounce of their
Rectitude or Obliquity; ad Legem magis et Prophetas: We decide not matters of
Right by matters of Fact, but the contrary; we judge of the Lawfulness of the
Action by comparing it with the Law.

To conclude. The Time is precious; therefore we are commanded to be watchful
how every moment of it goes away, vigilate itaque omni tempore: It is short;
and what follows, says the Apostle, but that those who use this world, be as if
they used it not? that is, even they who have most to do in the World, are to
be so intent upon the managing their Time, that the World should rather steal
from them, than their Time. It is the only thing we can call our own, therefore
let us preserve it; Fili, conserva tempus: but it is swift, therefore let us
work while we have it, dum habemus operemur; but it is evil, therefore let us
sanctify it, operemur bonum; but much of it is already wasted, therefore let us
redeem it, before our Glass be out: Revel. 10.
for he that has sworn by him who lives for ever, that Time shall be no more,
has warned us, that fatal Period is very near: Tempus prope est; Revel. 1.
This life is the time of Labor, and the service of God the chief business of
Man, from which no one is exempted, and they the least, as I have shown, who
think they have the best Plea. It is in the power but of a few to consecrate
themselves entirly to the service of God, but to admit Temporal affairs in
their Order, and range them in a secondary place, is the Duty of every one. It
is impossible to debar our selves all Recreations and Pastimes, but very
possible, and even necessary, to choose those which are innocent: The Heathen
Philosopher will not allow you others than such as are commendable and
beneficial: No one for his recreation is to descend from good Actions to bad:
no one to spend his Time has leave to mispend it. Let us sum up all that has
been said, in the wise Man's advice directed to every state and condition,
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, Eccl. 9.10.
do it with thy might, (Instanter, with diligence and speed) for their is no
work nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave, whither thou art
hastening: Quo tu properas. Dulg.
And to which I beseech God of his infinite mercy to prepare Us all by a speedy
Repentance for having misspent so much of our time, and an earnest endeavor to
Redeem it, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and the Holy Ghost; Amen.

FINIS.

