The Fifth SERMON Preached before the King and Queen, IN Their MAJESTY'S
Chapel at St. James's, upon the FEAST of S. Francis Sales, Jan. 29. 1685/6.

By the Reverend Father Dom. PH. ELLIS, Monk of the Holy Order of S. Benedict,
and of the English Congr. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. 1686.

THE FIFTH SERMON Preached before THEIR MAJESTY'S, On the Feast of S. Francis
Sales, Jan. 29. 1685/6.
Talis decebat ut esset nobis Pontifex, sanctus, innocens. Hebr. chapter 7. v. 26.
It was fitting we should have such a Bishop, holy, and innocent.
THese words are part of that Divine Character which the Apostle gives of Jesus
Christ, the Supreme Pastor and Bishop of our Souls, distinguishing him from the
High Priests of the Levitical Race, and establishing his eternal Priesthood
according to the Order of Melchisedec, Sanctus, Innocens. For, as it was
fitting that a new Lawgiver should publish a new Law; so was it necessary he
should create a new Priesthood, more perfect then the former, more excellent,
not only in Power and Efficacy, but also in Sanctity and Innocence. And since
this Law was to be so confummated in all Points, that it should never be
repealed or excluded by a posterior Law more perfect then it self; so was it
fitting we should have such a Bishop, so replenished with Holiness and
Innocence, as all who were to succeed him in the Pontifical Dignity, and
Direction of Souls, might abundantly receive of his fullness, and some in every
Age should actually enjoy a larger, and more conspicuous share of his Holiness
and Innocence.

Of this number was the eminent Prelate, to the memory of whose innocent Life,
and holy Conversation, the Church has appointed the present Solemnity. A Bishop
so holy and innocent, that, as he was the glory, so is he the reproach of this
corrupt Age. For if the worst of Times, and the most barren Soil, could produce
Innocence, and nourish Holiness, and bring Virtue to the highest Maturity, how
fond and frivolous are our Excuses? how does our Justification aggravate our
Offense, when we strive to lay our own Burden upon our Neighbors Shoulders,
and charge our voluntary Depravations upon the Iniquity of the Times? But I
argue wrong: For since we are so ready to catch at every shadow of an Excuse,
to palliate our Vices, and to shelter our Cowardice, not daring to offer at a
good Life, or desponding, and falling back as soon as we have made the first
step; therefore, Decebat ut talis esset; it was fitting we should have such a
Pastor to guide us, such a Conqueror to lead us on, such a Bishop to encourage
us, such a Doctor to teach us, and such an Orator to persuade us, that the Land
of Promise is not so inaccessible as false Spies represent it, that the
Inhabitants are not inhospitable, that Sanctity, and Innocence are not such
impracticable Virtues as the World would have us believe. We have it from his
Doctrine, we have it from his Practice; we cannot find a more faithful Account
of it then in his Writings, nor can we in reason exact a more authentic
Testimony then his Life, which mutually support, and witness to one another;
his Life was holy and innocent, because conformable to his Doctrine; and his
Doctrine is proved to be so, because attested by his Life. They who admire the
sublimeness of his Instructions, when they read them, will find them not above
their own level, when they see him practice them: and such as despair of rising
to that height, when they read his Performances, will be convinced, when they
consult his Rules, that every honest State of Life is capable of perfection,
that is, of Sanctity and Innocence. Facere and Docere, Acting and Teaching was
the twofold Innocence, the twofold Sanctity of this Holy Man, and therefore
shall make the two Parts of this Discourse, after we have begged light from
above by the Intercession of the Mother of Innocence, Addressing to her more
then Angelical Purity, with the Angelical Salutation, AVE MARIA.

It was fitting we should have such a Bishop, Holy, and Innocent.
I Will not trouble you with the Scholastic Distinctions betwixt Holiness and
Innocence, or involve you in the Niceties of the Moral Philosopher, when he
marks out the Boundaries of each Virtue, and declares the difference and
property: for though indeed Innocence import nothing positive as to the force of
the word, but only an exemption from Crime, and is distinguished from Holiness,
as the Disposition from the Effect; or at the most, innocence being but an
imperfect Holiness, as Holiness is the perfection of Innocence; yet because the
common notion which Men have of this virtue, implies a purity of body and mind.
I am willing to leave you in possession of that Idea, which the Saint favors
in his writings, and proceed to show how eminently he possessed it in his
Person.

And to begin with the inferior part, the Body, following the Apostles method,
primum est quod animale: the Spiritual Innocence being never so illustrious, as
when it is superstructed upon the Corporal.

But not to mention the previous Dispositions to it, as the Piety and Sanctity
of his holy Parents; for though other Virtues are not transmitted, yet Innocence,
and Chastity seem to be priviledg'd above the rest: Not to draw any Argument
from the Angelical meekness of his Countenance, or Modesty of his behavior,
before Nature began to breath, or Concupiscence to exert it self; we will
represent him ex puero virum, in the bloom of Youth, in the pride of Nature, in
the luster of a most perfect Beauty, in the midst of abundance of Health,
Nobility, Riches, and by consequence of Temptations: And being thus Nobly
attended you may expect to find him in the Courts of Princes, the Sea whence
all Greatness flows, and whether naturally it returns; being likewise so
dangerously attended, you may expect to meet him at the Comedy, or at the Ball,
or at the ordinary haunts of Youth; Youth which seems to receive the Blessings
of God only to pervert them into the Occasions of sin, having much Health, much
Time, much Money to lavish, and in every action stands responsible to God for a
threefold prodigality of his Favors. A Truth that made so deep, and so early
an impression upon our young Saint, that he was resolved to be before hand with
Nature, and not to quit the possession of Innocence, for the hazard of a future
Repentance.

He then possessed what he afterward left in Writing for our instruction, that
Chastity is that holiness of Life, mentioned by the Apostle, without which none
shall see God, as St. Jerome and St. John Chrisost. expound. He had learned from
the same Apostle that we are not our own, sed ejus, qui pro nobis mortuus est,
and resurrexit, but have passed away our Title, and rendered the possession of
our selves to Jesus Christ, whose glorious Body (if the Apostles Argument has
any force) is not only a proof of our future immortality, but is also an emblem
of the present incorruption he requires at our hands, and which we promised in
our Baptism, to be holy in Body and Spirit, that is innocent. He had learned
that his Body must either be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, or a Den of
Serpents: If the Temple of the Holy Ghost, then Chastity, and Innocence must be
the Priest, and Concupiscence the Sacrifice, cujus templi sacerdos, and
sacrificatrix est pudicitia; and therefore making a vigorous effort in the very
flower of his Youth, he gave the Victim a mortal blow, and laid it dead at the
foot of the Altar by a vow of perpetual Chastity: And the grace that enabled
him to make this holocaust of himself, did so constantly attend him all the
rest of his Life, that neither the heat of Youth could ever sully the whiteness
of the Lilly, nor the most wily Stratagems of the Devil damp the Odor, nor the
more rude assaults of the World shake the firmness.

Methinks I behold him in the posture of the Cherubin that was placed at the
entry of Paradise to render it inaccessible to sin. He had Wings to fly, and a
Flaming Sword to resist; thus doubly Armed he stands Sentinel to Guard the Tree
of Life, his Innocence; watchful to Defend all the Avenues, his Senses; least
death should enter through those Windows. If the Enemy Attaque him by open
force, (as he did more then once by Persuasions of corrupt Men, and by the
importunities of abandoned Woman) he uses the Sword of his Zeal, either putting
the Tempters to flight, or subduing them to Repentance. But if the Emissaries
of Hell press so hard upon him that Nature inclines to take Quarter, he will
not hazard the day by fighting it out, but conquers by his Wings; he flies and
overcomes, as the chaste and innocent Joseph did, of whom St. Basil of Seleucia
says, fuga utitur pro armis, his defense was in his flight, and he was truly
brave because he had the courage to run away. And now he returns covered with
Glory, that is in secure possession of Innocence, to reproach on the one side
our Cowardice, on the other our Rashness, and Presumption: Our Cowardice, that
we dare not so much as grasp at a virtue which makes us, says he, almost equal
to the Angels, and without which we cannot be Men: Our presumption, that we
dare, like the simple Insect hover curiously about the flame to try whether it
be as sweet as it is fair, till w^ perish in the very trial. For if he that
loves danger shall perish in it; he that goes to meet it, loves it; he who does
not remove the Occasion from his own doors, lays a snare for his own Feet; he
who does not eject the Scandal from under his Roof, and lodge it beyond the
reach of a grounded suspicion, lays a Snare for the Feet of his Neighbor; and
he who does not fly from the Net when it is spread in his way, is already
caught.

I have insisted longer upon this groundwork of Virtue, then perhaps the rules
of Panegyricks will allow; but the necessities of my Auditory, the force of my
Text, and the honor of this Saint required no less; an uncorrupted, and
inviolate Chastity, being so necessary a foundation to a consummated Innocence,
that without it the whole Fabric is ruinous, wants the strength, symmetry, and
beauty of a regular building, is always sinking and yielding, though never so
often repaired by acts of Repentance.

But let us proceed from the cause to the effect, or rather from one link of
the Chain to an other; let us contemplate the purity of the Water that flows
from so incorrupted a Spring, preaching issuing from Practice; Innocence,
teaching Holiness;

Your attention, and my Second Part.

great Saint speaks of a perfect Religious man, vita ejus erat sermo facti
ejus, the purity of his Doctrine is only an account of the purity of his Life,
and both together only one continued, uninterrupted series of a Practical, and
an Affective Innocence. If we regard his Life, we shall find it so estranged
from the World, as if he knew it not: But if we look upon his Writings, we
shall find there so dismal, and yet so exact an account of it, as if he had
Traveled through all its corruptions. He knew it therefore only to condemn it,
and like Moses from the top of Mount Nebo took a view of that Country he was
never to enjoy. God having reserved for him a better hope; yet not taking the
present possession out of his hands, but keeping it from his Heart. He did not
call him into the frightful desert with a St. Paul, a St. Anthony, a St.
Bennet; he did not Command him to Sell all, and give to the Poor, with a St.
Francis. The Divine wisdom knew very Well that in an age, so enervated, and
softened with ease, and Luxury, few would take that word, which in the best of
us begets only a steril admiration; and by the most is looked upon as so
impracticable, that it is hardly credible. For though we are expelled Paradise,
yet we expect God should converse with us as before in our own likeness; we are
ashamed to embrace a Virtue that is not in a fashionable dress, and if that
great Queen would have us follow her, she must appear in her natural Garb, and
easy Way, in fine Linen and soft Garments; as she was habited before sinners
forced her to put on Sackcloth.

Wherefore the Divine goodness condescending to our infirmity, and (as the
Prophet speaks) softening the Yoke by abundance of Oil, Esai. 10.27.
sets a Pattern of Holiness before our Eyes in the Person of St. Francis Sales,
so easy to Imitate, and Copy out, so adapted to all states, and conditions,
that it flashes like light in every ones Face, Ps. 19.7.
nec est qui se abscondat a calore ejus, and breaths such a gentle warmth upon
every Heart; that we are blind, if we do not see it; that we are insensible if
we do not feel it; and inexcusable if we do not follow it.

If I should propose to the Nobility the Example of a Paulinus, or a
Cassiodorus, suing to be discharged of their Honors and Employments, as so
many Fetters, and Impediments in their way to Heaven; I might disgust, but
should never persuade: But when I bring evidence that Greatness in this World
is not inconsistent with Humility, and to serve your King and Country in the
most eminent stations excludes neither Sanctity nor Innocence, why do you not
imitate?

If I should propose to the Courtier the Example of an Arsenius crying to you
as the unknown voice did to him, si vis salvus esse fuge: If you would be saved
fly into Solitude, and hide your self in the covert of a Rock, you would think
I deserve that desert whether I invite you. But while my Saint commands me to
tell you, that your estate is not desperate, though it be dangerous, and that the
Lilly may flourish among Thorns, that you may be Innocent in the midst of
Corruption, why do you abandon your selves as those that have no hope?

If I should propose to the Ladies a Paula melting in a continual stream of
Tears, a Magdalen in her Grott, a Mary of Egypt feeding upon Roots, a
Francisca covered with Sackcloth, and add to it, hoc fac, and vives, this you
must do to be Saved; I should turn this Chapel into a valley of Tophet, the
Preachers voice would be drowned with execrations upon his head, and acts of
despair would echo from every Breast.

But while my Saint commands me to set before your Eyes a Philothea nobly Born,
St. Franc. Sales directs all his Instructions in the Book of the Introduction
to a Devout life, to every pious Soul under the name of Philothea.
nicely Bred, easy and gentle in her Behavior, neither scrupling a decency in
Clothes, nor in Attendance, allowing her self an inoffensive cheerfulness in
Discourse, and other Recreations not unbecoming either her Sex, or Condition;
and all this without any prejudice to her Innocence, reflection upon her
Reputation or impediment to her Sanctity; what color of excuse is left you to
cover that of your Confusion? Why are you not merry without dissolution,
affable without effrontery, gentile without profuseness? Such was Philothea.
She allows you Visits, and Recreations; but not at the expense of your
Innocence: She allows you a good Table, but not that your Neighbors fame
should be the Salt to every Meat, and every thing taste insipid, which does not
relish of the Satyr. Philothea did not so. Why do you corrupt your lawful
Diversions into criminal excesses? your Apparel into a subject of Vanity, and
occasion of Scandal? and turn those Riches into Ostentation, which ought to be
hid in the bosom of the poor, if you would either preserve your Innocence,
redeem your offenses, or perfect your Sanctity. And this was the Practice of
Philothea. In a word, decebat ut talis esset, so sitting and even so necessary
was it to all states and conditions, that when Vice began to establish his
Throne upon the ruins of Piety, when Relaxation Invaded the Rights, and Usurped
the Title of Religion, when Virtue was Pictured like a fury, with Scourges in
her Hands, and was as much apprehended as she was before neglected, so fitting
and even so necessary, I say, it was the Divine providence should show such a
Bishop to the World, whose Authority might convince an incredulous Generation,
and whose Example might encourage the weak, whose meekness might soften the
most obdurate, whose advices might strengthen the languishing hand, and inspire
the dejected heart; and in fine, whose pathetick Exhortations might melt down
the Heart of stone, and fetch Waters out of the hardest Rock; when he teaches
us both by Word and Example that the way to Heaven, is neither so craggy nor so
steep as the descent of Hell: that you may climb the one with less pains then
plunge down the other: that there are pleasures attending Innocence to which
the most indulged Appetites can never arrive; that Virtue has more Charms then
Vice; that Sanctity is but high Reason, and when you live like Gentlemen you
commence Saints. For what can be so reasonable as to live soberly, justly, and
piously in this World? What more gentile? What more sordid and base then the
contrary Vices? Yet in these Three Heads our Saint after St. Paul sums up all
your Obligations, renders them familiar by his Practice, and softens them in
his instructions.

Here the Bishop learns how to support with ease, the formidable burden of his
charge; the Ecclesiastic to perform the Duties of his Character; the Religious
to maintain the Innocence of his Life; and the Secular Man experiences the
facility of Virtue: The Great, and the Rich are taught the advantage of their
condition, by having the power to do good to others; a Godlike capacity: The
Virgin is instructed how to secure that great Treasure, an Angelical purity:
The Married Person has methods laid down, how to extract Antidotes out of
Poison, and as Fish live in Salt Water without drawing the Brine, so to
converse in the great Sea of the World, without taking in either its Vanities
or Corruption.

If you be a Man, i. e. St. Francis Sales's admirable treatise of the Love of
God.
you have a Theotimus for your Pattern; a Philothea if you be a Woman; if you
aspire to perfection, what better guide can you choose then his love of God
which rises every line till it lose both the Reader and it self in an Ocean of
Charity, till it plant the imitator in the Third Heaven? If you cannot follow
so great a flight, despond not; you have his Introduction to a Devout life, so
accommodated to all Capacities and Conditions, that we may without Impiety
apply to it what St. Gregory said of the holy Scripture, ubi agnus ambulat, and
Elephas natat, where the Lamb walks and the Elephant swims; the more simple
Reader is satisfied, and the more elevated understanding is transported. If you
are unsettled in matters of Religion, read his Triumph of the Cross, and you
will sit down abundantly contented, and more than sufficiently convinced. If
the care of others be committed to you, what so moving as his Sermons? What so
persuasive as his Instructions? Smooth as the profound current, perspicuous as
the shallow, resembling the Nile flowing with sweetness, and faecundity, but
comparable only to themselves.

If you want spiritual comfort or advice, let his Entertainments and Letters be
your Counsel, which solve every emergent difficulty, dispel every scruple,
satisfy your doubts, and set the most perplexed cases in the clearest light.

To conclude, as out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks; so out
of the Innocence and Sanctity of his Life, he Copied his Instructions. His
Writings are his Obelisk, his own Panegyric: and if you imitate they are yours
too, if you desire to imitate they are most excellent directions; but if you
will not they are your Sentence and Condemnation.

For is it not as much your duty to embrace Innocence, and to press forward to
Sanctity? Is it not as much your Interest? Have you not the same Capacity, the
same Encouragements, and Assistance? Do you want either Liberty or Grace?
Neither. Do you want Knowledge, or Instruction? You cannot pretend it: But if
you want Will, and Application, who can you blame, but your selves? Perditio
tua ex te O Israel; if you fall, you cast your selves down the precipice; if
you perish, it is by your own hands; Why will you die O House of Israel? for
your perdition is from your selves.

Our B. Master assures those who tread the paths of his Sanctity and Innocence,
that at their Journeys end, they shall repose upon Thrones, and sit judging the
Tribes of Israel; not by pronouncing sentences of death upon them, says St.
Jerome, but by making it evident to all mankind by the comparison of their
Lives, that such as would not follow the tract they had beat and smoothed with
their own feet, should have nothing to say for themselves, why judgment might
not pass upon their convicted crimes, quia vobis credentibus illi credere
noluerunt.

And it is worth our serious and timely study to consider what Plea we shall be
able to make, at the severe Tribunal against such a cloud of Witnesses, the
Lives of so many Saints that will appear against us. Perhaps we were Ignorant
of our Obligation: And have you not the same Law written in your Hearts, as you
are Men, and the same Gospel Preached unto you, as you are Christians, And both
the one, and the other revived and inculcated by their instructions, shown to
be practicable, and even easy by their Example? If it be true that qui ignorant
ignorabitur, he that is wilfully unknowing in the great concern of his
Salvation, shall not be acknowledged for a Disciple of Christ; he that neglects
to learn either out of sloth or prejudice, or temporal interest, is wilfully
Ignorant; he that shuts his Eyes against the Light, is as criminal as he that
Rebels against it, and deserves as severe Chastisement.

But I could not practice what I knew. Erubesce Sidon ait Mare, cover your Face
that the World may not see you blush at such a childish and unmanly Excuse.
Were not they of as noble a Birth, of as tender a Complexion, of as nice an
Education? Had not they the same Passions to bridle, the same Concupiscence to
war against, the same Body of Sin to conquer? But they had Grace. And how often
has it been given you? How often have you scornfully rejected it? Have you not
the same supernatural Light, the same holy Inspirations? The same efficatious
Sacraments? As winning Examples, as Pathetick Exhortations, as vigorous both
interior and exterior Helps, What could I do to my Vineyard that I have not
done?

But I have pressing Avocations, a tide of business, an Estate to raise, a
Child to Marry, a Law suit to follow, a Family to provide for; and in fine such
impediments as no body can imagine, and I cannot overcome. And are these the
heads of your Excuses? Are these your particular Difficulties? Why? They are
every bodies Song, a mere Narrative which is in every bodies Mouth, and which
the sloathful Man in the Proverbs delivers more compendiously, Leo est in via,
There is a Lion in the way. But they are so far from proving what you intend,
an exemption from Holiness, and Innocence, that they are convincing Arguments
you stand in greater necessity of practicing those Virtues, and walking
carefully, Caute Ambulate.
(as the Apostle speaks) because you go upon a slippery pavement. They are
Arguments indeed why you cannot renounce the World, and bury your selves in a
Cloister; but do not prove at all that you cannot live Innocent in the World.
You cannot estrange your selves from Creatures; but cannot you with hold your
affection? You cannot support great corporal Austerities; but cannot you keep
the Rein upon your Appetites? You cannot spend whole days in Contemplation; but
cannot you set apart an hour for Prayer? You cannot observe perpetual Silence;
But cannot you refrain from broaching, or dispersing Scandal? Cannot you
moderate the flippancy of your Tongue? You cannot distribute all your Goods to
the Poor; but cannot you relieve their necessities out of your superfluities?

You cannot suppress the eruptions of your Passions; but you may keep a watch
over them. You cannot contain from Pleasures that are lawful; but you may
abstain from the unlawful. You cannot depose the grandeur of your Condition,
nor quit the luster of your State; but you may keep within the bounds of
Christian modesty, and abStain even from the appearance of Evil, as the Apostle
commands.

This is the Summary of the Doctrine of our Saint, the Spirit of his Writings,
the Sweetness of his Spirit: And how rigorous soever he was to his own Person,
he commands me to tell you, if you practice these easy Instructions, you shall
enjoy Innocence in the midst of Corruption; Holiness in the midst of
Infirmities; Poverty in the midst of Riches; and Peace in the midst of
Distractions; vade and tu fac similiter. But for your encouragement to believe,
what your own experience can only persuade, It was fitting we should have such
a Bishop, Holy and Innocent, whose Holiness, though attested by unquestionable
Miracles, yet in so corrupt an Age, his Innocence was the greatest Miracle. And
if he that lives well (as St. Augustine assures us) cannot die ill; he that
lives Innocent, cannot but die Holy; And therefore on the Feast of the Holy
Innocents, he was called to the nuptials of the Lamb, and added to their
Number. A Martyr of Love; an indefatigable Pastor; the Apostle of his Country;
the Mirror of Chastity, Humility, Patience, and of all the gentile Train of
peaceful Virtues; the very Manna which Heaven rained down upon this Age, savory
and delicious to every Palate that has any Taste of Devotion; and to conclude
his Elogium, the Holy Innocent of the declining Church, as the others were of
the Infant Christianity; the later Crop, as the others were the first Fruits,
collected into the Garners of Heaven: Whether I beseech God that you may follow
him, by a studious immitation of his Virtues, and an assiduous Lecture of his
Writings;

In the Name, etc.
FINIS.

