THE RIGHT FOUNDATION OF Quietness, Obedience, and Concord Discovered in Two
Seasonable Discourses, SHOWING,

1. The folly of Man's Devices. 2. The stability of God's Counsel. 3. The
mischief of Strife and Vainglory 4. The practice of true Humility.


By Clem. Elis, A. M. Rector of Kirkby in Nottinghamshire, Author of the
Gentile Sinner.

LONDON, Printed for John Baker, at the Three Pigeons in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXIV.

To his Grace HENRY Ld Duke of Newcastle,
Lord Lieutenant of Nottinghamshire, and Privy-Counsellor to His most Sacred
Majesty.
May it Please your Grace,
WIthout any Apology, either for my weakness, too apparent in this Performance,
or for my boldness in the Dedication; I here in all humility beseech your Grace
to accept of this very slender Present; though it can signify no more, but only
this, that I acknowledge a duty incumbent upon me, and (though I shall never be
able to make full payment) I am very desirous to do all that I can toward the
discharging of it.

In these little things which I have the confidence to call Two seasonable
Discourses, I have endeavored to do some part of that great Duty, which I owe
both to God and the King, both to Church and State, and particularly, to that
Congregation wherein, under your Grace's noble Patronage, I am set to exercise
the Ministry committed to me.

It cannot therefore, I hope, look like a Presumption, to give your Grace this
account, how your Tenants are instructed by me in their great Duties of
Religion and Loyalty. And if in that which is here humbly offered to your
Grace's eye, any Satisfaction be given in that particular, I must account it
reason enough why I thus expose my Infirmities to the view and Censure of the
World; and also why I despair not of a Pardon, if it make so bold with your
Grace, as to tell the World, wherever it comes, that it is but the smallest
part of that great Debt and Duty which is owing by

My Lord, Your Grace's most Humble and Obedient Servant. Cl. Elis.

The FOLLY OF MAN'S DEVICES, AND STABILITY OF GOD'S COUNSEL.
A Seasonable Discourse ON Prove. XIX, 21.
There are many devices in a Man's heart; nevertheless the Counsel of the Lord,
that shall stand.


MUch of the Wisdom of the ancient Heathens has been conveyed to after Ages in
Proverbs. And these were in so high esteem with the learned of them, that
even their gravest Philosophers thought them some strength to their Arguments,
and their most Eloquent Orators no little ornament to their popular harangues:
yea, in so great Veneration were they had with the generality of Mankind, that
they thought fit to father them on their Gods themselves, and to signify this,
caused them to be written over the doors of their Idol-Temples, to the end that
they might be the more universally learnt, and religiously reguarded by men.
What a price then may we justly set on these Proverbs of Solomon, whose rare
Wisdom for its singular eminency is its self become Proverbial? If their
Antiquity may serve to enhance their value, they are above four hundred years
older than those which derive from the so much famed Wise Men of Greece. If
their Form be regardable, they are short, close and pithy Sentences, comprizing
a great deal of most sacred truth and necessary instruction in the fewest
words, apt by the acuteness and smartness of the expression to imprint the
sense more deeply in the Mind, and both by that and also their conciseness and
brevity, mightily befriending the Memory. Like the most precious Iewel's, they
are neither great nor burdensome, easily portable and of inestimable worth. Or
like Chemical Spirits, the least drop whereof is of a very diffusive Virtue and
strong Operation, such is their Universal use, that we cannot miss amongst them
the most excellent Rules of Duty both to God and Man, suited to all Relations
in Family or Kingdom, to all conditions of high and low, rich and poor, to both
Sexes and all Ages. Lastly, they are truly such, as deserve, not only to be
written in Golden Letters on the Walls of our Churches, but to be indelibly
ingraved on the Tables of our Hearts, as the Sacred Oracles of the Living God,
teaching us that only true Wisdom that is from above, which as St. James
tells us, is first pure, then peaceable, Jam. 3, 17. Even that Wisdom whereby
we are taught (as here in the Text) to attend to God's Counsel and to lay aside
our own devices; the best way of honoring our Father which is in Heaven, and
maintaining Peace among our selves who are Brethren upon Earth.

This Proverb is made up of two Propositions, joined (or severed rather) with
this adversative Particle, nevertheless, signifying unto us thus much, that tho
the former of these two Propositions contain a certain truth which well
deserves our serious consideration, yet the consideration hereof will do us no
good, but only increase our trouble, by discovering unto us our weakness and
folly, if we do not firmly believe, and finally acquiesce in that much more
weighty truth which is taught us in the latter. This we shall the better
understand by observing, First, The two Subjects of these two Propositions;
and, Secondly, What things are affirmed of these two Subjects.

1. The two Subjects are, in the former Proposition Man, in the latter, the
Lord.

1. The Subject of the former is Man, a poor, weak, mortal creature, groaning
out a few troublesome days on Earth, under the afflicting sense of infirmities
and wants; hastening every moment toward Death and Corruption. Who cannot well
tell himself what he is, or whence he came, or whither he must go: and who
knows himself by nothing so well, as by a feeling of his own manifold
imperfections. He is the work of another, in the hands and at the sole disposal
of another, on whom he totally depends for his life, motion and being. The
History of his Life and Death Job has left us in a few words, Job. 14. 1, 2.
Man that is born of a Woman is of few days, and full of trouble. He comes up
like a flower, and is cut down; he flees also as a shadow and continues not.
Would we know the very best of him that is to be known? This is it, Verily,
every man at his best state is altogether vanity. Psalm. 39. 5. How vain must be
the devices of his heart, who is himself at best but vanity?

2. The Subject of the second Proposition is the Lord; the most Great and
Incomprehensible Glorious God, the Eternal and Inexhaustible Spring of Being
and Blessedness; the Independent, Self-sufficient, infinitely great, wise, and
good Creator, Preserver, and Governor of us and all the World: without whom
nothing ever was, is or can be; In whom we live and move and have our being,
Act. 17, 28. Who gives to all, Life and Breath and all things, V. 25. The
unexpressible, unconceiveable, I AM that I AM, Exodus 3, 14. The Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end, Rev. 21, 6. All in All, 1 Cor. 15. 28. Above
all, through all, and in all, Ephesians. 4. 6. Of whom, and through whom, and to whom
are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen. Romans 11. 36.

2. Seeing now these two are of such widely distant natures, we must needs
expect that very different things should be affirmed of them, as here indeed we
find.

1. Of Man it is said, that there are devices in his heart. He is always full
of Thoughts and Imaginations, Considerations and Consultations, Projects,
Plottings, and Contrivances; thinking what may be, designing what he would have
to be, studying how to effect it: as one that is yet at a loss and unresolved,
and knows not well what to do with himself, or for himself. He is not what he
would be, nor where he would be, nor as he would be; and thinks much with
himself, how to mend himself; but knows not which way is best to go about it.
His thoughts are very often nothing else but the wild and extravagant roavings
of a rambling Fantasy, and at best but the uncertain and unsatisfactory
reasonings of a very dimsighted and fallible Judgment. But on the other hand,
vastly opposite to these devices, here is attributed to the Lords Counsel, the
certain result and determination of an infinite and infallible Wisdom.

2. Of Man is again said, That the devices of his heart are many, signifying
not only their number or multitude, but also their great variety and confusion.
They are numerous and multiform, and disorderly; seldom the same an hour
together, rarely well digested or methodized, hardly ever unblended, but a very
Miscellany of he knows not what. Many things a man thinks upon, many thoughts
he has of every one of those many things, and all these often very
tumultuously clashing against and justling out one another. He thinks, and is
vexed at his own thoughts and with them; he devises, and unravelleth presently
his own devices; he deliberates and disputes, as he now thinks very wisely with
himself; and in a moment is grown too wise for himself, calls himself fool,
answers and confuteth all his own Arguments, yet can draw to no Conclusion.
He concludes, resolves, chooses, and applauds his own choice; says to himself,
well and wisely done; yet immediately undoeth all again, and he counts it his
wisdom to break his resolution. But in opposition to all this in man, of the
Lord it is here employed, that his Will and Counsel is but one and certain, like
himself, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, stable, fixed and
immutable.

3. Of Man (tho it be not expressly said in words) it is to make good the
Antithesis, necessarily employed, that all his devices are ineffectual, or very
rarely effect and bring to pass the thing that he would have; at least of
themselves they cannot do it, but are vain. In this sense it will be truly
said, Man walks in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain, Psalm. 39,
6. After much and busy contriving, after great, solicitous and tedious
studying, nothing is got, the Mountain is delivered of a Mouse, disappointment
and vexation is the issue of his Travels. As his playsom Phantasy in a Dream is
always wantonly frisking and skipping from one thing to another, and in
imagination has every thing to the full that it would have, feasts it self
with its own sportings, and is pleased: yet anon the man awakes and is empty,
finds that all was nothing but a foolish dream, and either he is vexed at his
imaginary loss, or laughs at his own folly: so the devices of man's heart, seem
they never so wise and sure, are usually all frustrated in a moment; and it is
well, if they leave so much good behind to pay for all, as a true and humbling
sense of the devisers folly. But now of the Lord, it is expressly said that his
Counsel shall stand, it is always to the purpose, and never misseth of
effecting what was designed, but shall be fully accomplished. The remnant of
Judah shall know whose word shall stand (or be fulfilled) mine or theirs. Jer.
4, 4. 28. My word shall surely stand against you for evil, v. 29. 12. The evil
that I have determined and foretold you of, shall surely come upon you. This is
it, for God's Counsel to stand. Be the devices of man's heart never so many, and
ordered with all the wisdom, policy and strength, that humane nature is capable
of, whatsoever confidence the Authors of such devices may have in their own wit
and prudence, nevertheless the Counsel of the Lord shall still take place of
all, and shall stand in spite of all, when they have done both their best and
worst. And though what men design may come to pass; even then, when they are
become Masters of their wishes, and are apt on that account to glory in their
wisdom, yet does it not always follow their devices, as the effect does the
proper cause of it, but by the disposal of the Divine Counsel, for that, and
that alone stands and shall stand, and can never be defeated.

The plain sense and meaning of this Proverb being thus laid open before us, we
may very easily discern the scope and drift of it to be this, viz. To make us
sensible of the folly and vanity of men's arrogance, in setting up for
themselves in the world, without a due regard to the all-disposing providence
of the Almighty God; in going about to make their own Fortunes by their own
skill and industry, without a due respect to the Will and directions of the
universal Governor of the World. That being convinced hereof, we may not trust
to, or depend upon the wisdom of men, whether of our selves or other men, how
much soever they pretend, or are thought to be the great Masters of
State Policy; but submitting our selves entirely to the Will and Counsel of the
Lord, we may be solely directed by it, totally rely upon it, and heartily
acquiesce in it: verily believing and confessing, that all the world is
governed by it; and that therefore all the Affairs thereof are by it most
wisely ordered, so as shall in the end appear to have been most for his own
honor, and the eternal good of those that faithfully serve him. This is a
Lesson which Nature it self teaches us, and all men are forced to acknowledge
the truth of it, when they are at leisure to attend to reason. Man purposes,
but God disposes, has been long a common Proverb in the world. The Lot,
(says Solomon) is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the
Lord. Prove. 16, 33. He does not only foresee, but wisely order the things and
events which to us seem most casual. Yea, so effectually does he order them,
that it would be labor lost, for all the men in the world, to undertake the
ordering of them otherwise. There is no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel
against the Lord. The Horse is prepared against the day of battle, but safety
is of the Lord, Prove. 21. 30, 31.

This is a very seasonable Lesson for all men to learn in this Projecting,
Plotting, and Designing Age, and part of the world wherein we live. Now that
men seem grown up to that prodigious insolence and pride, as to quarrel with
even God himself about his Government, to find faults in his works; every one
would fain seem wise enough to be the modeller of a better form of Government
both in Church and State, then the wisdom of former Ages has been acquainted
with; and nothing will satisfy men but a world of their own making, and the
reputation of some new invention, tho it be a Babel of confusion. Indeed men
that would seem wise above their neighbors, go always big with some new
nothing, and are very ambitiously bent upon undoing what has been done; their
chief faculty lies in destroying and demolishing all the Monuments of ancient
wisdom, that nothing may remain in the eye of Posterity, but mere rubbish. And
who then will not be proud of any thing, when they know of nothing better? It
has been for many years too visible that our new devisers seem agreed in
nothing more than in contriving mischief and ruin, and like Samson's Foxes,
tho their faces look to contrary quarters of the World, yet they join together
by the tails, and therein carry Firebrands to burn down the standing Corn and
Vineyard of God. And such will be the mischievous devices of man's heart, whilst
it is not wholly subjected to the Counsel of the Lord.

Before we come to the particular doctrines of the Text, we must inquire a
little into the extent of this word Man, as it is here used. And we need not
restrain it to any particular sort, sect or party of men; it may very well be
allowed to signify the whole race of Mankind: tho more especially, the wicked
or unregenerate part, who are not yet either so thoroughly illuminated by the
light of the Gospel as to see, or so thoroughly sanctified by the grace of
Christ, as to choose the Lord for their God: that is, who account him not the
only Good, which they ought to propound unto themselves in all their designs,
and who make not his Will the only rule of all their desires and practices, the
only foundation of all their hope and comfort.

It is too true indeed, that there is no man living, but has too many devices
of his own corrupt heart in this state of imperfection. For, tho God made man
upright, Eccl. 7, 29. And the very fabric of his body so contrary to that of
other Animals, which either crawl upon the earth, or go always looking down
toward it, should be his constant remembrancer, that he was made to
contemplate something higher, than what they are concerned to know; that his
soul should be always aspiring toward Heaven, and his eye should be ever fixed
upon his God, and all his motions should be governed by his Will and Counsel,
that sits in the Heavens and shall laugh, (Psalm. 2, 4.) and have all the
Heathen in derision, Psalm. 59. 8. Yet alas, sin has strangely bowed man
downward, and made him too like in many things to the Beasts that perish. And
although it be the work of grace to raise him up again, and restore his
Primitive posture of soul; yet will not this great work be done completely, so
long as he is but growing here on earth; he will be always sucking into himself
too much of what is earthy, and death must first transplant him into a better
soil, before he can be altogether heavenly.

But now the unregenerate man abiding in the same posture whereunto by his fall
from God he was brought; and in a state of separation from his Maker; not being
yet born again of the holy spirit of life and the incorruptible seed, nor
ingrassed into the true Vine, the second man from heaven heavenly, and thereby
reunited unto God the true principle of Unity, is evermore at variance with
himself, divided in his thoughts within him, distracted into a confused
Multitude of designs, by the great variety of contrary Objects pulling and
hailing him contrary ways unto themselves; so that he can never stand fixed in
one point, or any long time together go the same way. His heart and mind within
him is become the very seat of tumult and confusion; there is nothing but mere
Ataxy and Anarchy; right reason being dethroned, and spoiled of all authority,
and his thoughts within him, like a Seditious Rabble without any Head or
Commander to order and overaw them, in a continual noise and hurry; and, as was
said of that Riotous Multitude, (Act. 19. 32.) The more part know not wherefore
they are come together. Something they would have of those many things whereof
they find a want; but what it is, they cannot tell; and yet by any means they
must and will have it, or else they will not be quieted; but they know neither
where, nor how, nor of whom to seek it. Now how is it possible for peace and
due subjection to Government to be preserved in Kingdoms and States, so long as
men are not able to make peace at home in their own hearts, nor know how to
command or quiet their own thoughts and disorderly affections, but are
continually by their own devices raising and fomenting an endless Civil War in
their own Breasts; downright Rebels to themselves, and Enemies to the Monarchy
that God himself has founded in man?

Having thus seen what we are to understand by man, these four things we may
now learn from the Text.

1. The heart of man, till it be rightly fixed on God, is a very unconstant
thing, unsettled in its thoughts, full of various devices and Counsels. 2. The
Devices and Counsels of man's heart, till they concentre in the Will and Counsel
of God, are very vain, and cannot stand. 3. The Will and Counsel of God is
always one and the same, and never changes. 4. Whatever the devices and
projects of man may be, they can never alter or frustrate the Will and Counsel
of the Lord.
Let us but have our faith well confirmed in these four things, and we shall
soon see and feel the excellent usefulness of them, not only for the quieting
of our souls in a contented and joyful acquiescence in God's wise Government of
the world; but also for the establishing of a blessed and lasting Peace in
Church and State, in a due subjection unto, and well pleasedness with the
present Government, under which by the good providence of God it is our lot to
live.

I. The heart of man, unfixed on God the only complete and satisfactory good,
is a very unconstant thing, altogether unsettled in its own thoughts, full of
various devices and changeable Counsels.

Man is a thinking creature, and his thoughts are always busy within him,
whether he will or no. And till he can come to the knowledge, and be taken with
the beauty of that one most perfect and delightsome Object, the innumerable
Excellencies whereof, may wholly engage all his more noble faculties, and find
them sufficient employment, is thoughts will ever be ranging about the World,
and wildly wander up and down from one thing to another, hoping to meet in
every thing with something that he wants; but finding it in nothing, they
cannot rest on any thing. Hence they are as vain and various, as unconstant and
changeable, as the things about which they busy themselves are empty and
transient. Whether we consider the end men aim at, or the way they choose to
bring them to it, this is very evident.

1. Consider we first the end that all men aim at, the thing which they
ultimately desire, in the common name and general notion whereof they are all
agreed. This is happiness, and it is no less than the full and final
satisfaction of man's soul, the enjoyment of his hearts desire. This is
certainly the thing that all would have, and that without which man can never
rest, and which all men, until they have the Lord for their God, do feel the
want of in themselves; and therefore concerning this the thoughts and devices
of their hearts are many and various, and wonderfully confounded. For lack of
heavenly light they cannot discover where it lies; missing it in what they
already have, they flatter themselves with foolish hopes, that it may be found
in any thing, which they have not yet tried. The poor man finds it not in
Poverty, and is apt to think it may be found in Wealth; and therefore are his
thoughts always busy at work in devising how he may be rich. The rich man
cannot meet with it amidst all his abundance, and sadly finds that no Treasure
can be enough to purchase it; his thoughts are therefore hard at work to
contrive some other way to get it; and perhaps is made to hope, it may be found
in honor and greatness. Another that is mounted up to honor, begins to find
his very height uneasy, and his greatness heavy, his station very slippery,
and a fall both very possible and often mortal; and his thoughts are set on
work to devise a way to retirement, ease, and pleasure. The voluptuous Epicure,
finds some sour sauce with all his sweet morsels, something there always is to
imbitter his delights, and he cannot swill and glut himself so long and so
undisturbedly as he would, but either he must be sick, or his fullness is
uneasy. Thus the restless roving heart of man wanders in the dark, and loses
it self in its own wanderings, and is made most unhappy by its own devices how
to be happy. Whilst it is uncertainly led by blind affection, and wants the
sure conduct of a divinely enlightened understanding, not able to discern that
infinite Good, which offers its self to its choice in every thing, the very
thing it seeks for becomes its stumbling Block in the way: the man falls and
hurts himself against the very thing that he would have; he turns away in a
chafe to something else, and still to as little purpose, and with as bad
success. O the strange uneasiness of every condition to an heart that is void
of God! Whatever it be that such a man has, be sure it is not that very thing
which he would have. That which is present is always naught; and that which is
not yet, is always better, till it be here; and when it is come, it is the
worst of all. The ignorance of what is the only good keeps us always miserable
under all our long wished for and much endeavored changes. Man is always
crying out, Who will show us any good. Psalm. 4. 6. Whilst the infinite good is
before him every moment. He is ever complaining he cannot see it, but the fault
is in his own eyes. The Sun shines, but he is blind. God, who is only good.
Matt. 19. 17. is in all conditions present, but man will not be convinced that
it is the light of his countenance alone that can make him happy.

2. But suppose we now, that men have already fixed their thoughts not only
upon happiness, but upon the only chief good that can make them happy, the
Blessed God: yet will their thoughts continue manifold and various, and
inconsistent with themselves, so long as they have not hit upon that only sure
way of enjoying him, which himself has taught us. How do they clash and combat
within him, like the thoughts of a man lost in a Wilderness? Who, tho he know,
and long to be at the place whither he aimed to go, yet is utterly at a loss
which way to take of the many that lie before him: he stands musing and
thinking with himself, which is the most likely way to bring him home; now it is
this, and anon it is that, and presently again it is neither; thus he stands
disputing till the night overtake him, and even then his thoughts travel, and
suffer not sleep to give him rest. O the vain projects of foolish man, so long
as he makes not with the Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 24. the Laws of God his Delight
and his Counselors.

The ground of all this variety and confusion in the thoughts and devices of
man's heart is very obvious. It is impossible it should be otherwise, so long as
that, which he aims at, is certainly such as will deceive him; or whilst he
walks in doubtful paths without a sure guide. Man was not made to be his own
God, nor was any creature made to be a God unto him, so that he should possibly
find that in himself alone, or in any other created being, which may give him
real satisfaction. If Man be not God, it is as certain he cannot make his own
happiness. Nay, man is made such a creature, as can know and feel his own wants
and weaknesses, and this is his Makers mercy to him, that he may not be always
miserable by resting in himself; but being moved by the sense and feeling of
his own emptiness and infirmity, may seek that out of himself in God, which he
finds he cannot be well without. Till then a man's heart can fix upon that one
thing which has enough in it to satisfy all its desires, and get into that
one way which will bring him to his desired happiness; his thoughts can have no
rest, nothing wherein they may unite; But he is, as that double minded man St.
James speaks of (Iam. 1. 8.) Unstable in all his ways. This is a thing too
obvious to every understanding, to be any longer insisted on. We go on
therefore to the next thing.

II. The Devices and Counsels of a man's heart, till they concentre in the Will
and Counsel of the Lord, are vain and cannot stand.

This is a truth which being duly considered, as it well deserves, would
certainly be enough to bring men out of love with their own devices, and make
them weary and ashamed of their own Plots and Projects. Who is there so foolish
as to be willing to disquiet his own soul, and cast away his peace for nothing?
And this truth, That all such Devices and Counsels as concentre not in the Will
of God are vain, and tend to no good issue, but shall end in disappointment and
vexation, is so clear, that though men are very hardly brought to make the
right use of it; yet is it impossible for them so long as they have any degree
of reason above mere fools and children, to deny it. We shall at present
consider but a few things to put this past all dispute. 1. What we are, and how
little grounds of hope we can find in our selves. 2. What other men are, and
what slender probability there is; that either by their help, or against their
will we should effect our designs. 3. What God is, and how impossible it is to
prevail against his Providence.

1. Let us remember what we are. Consider but in our selves the greatness of
our ignorance, and the weakness of our power, and we shall easily be convinced
of the vanity of our own devices.

1. Our ignorance is such, how great soever is the opinion we have of our own
wit and policy, that indeed we do not know our selves perfectly, and much less
our neighbors. And yet we must know both, before we can certainly say, that
this or that will fit either us or them. Our hearts are very Labyrinths, full
of intricacies and windings, and he is a wise man indeed that understands all
the little secret corners of his own heart so well, as to know exactly what
will fit and fill them. Again the nature of things is too much in the dark as
to us, we know but very little of it, and what we seek being yet untryed by us,
we are very unfit to judge how suitable it will be unto us; or whether any of
those things which we think we now most need, will fit us any better then what
we have already; yea, suppose the best, that the things which we so earnestly
desire have something in them suitable to our wants and wishes, yet may they
also have much more against us, and hurtful to us, which we cannot yet discern
at a distance; but may feel afterward to our sorrow. Yet more, so very
changeable are both persons and things, that what seems to us the best to
day, may seem as bad to morrow; and what now, if we had it, would really be
some ease to us, to morrow may prove as great a grievance: what might be now
either Food or Physic, may to morrow by some corruption in it, or change of
constitution in us, be very little better than Poison, yea bodies politic
change tempers as well as bodies natural; and those very Laws, which were with
great wisdom at first enacted, as the properest Medicines for curing the
present diseases, have in a very few years after, upon this account, been found
a worse disease then the other. Men are too short sighted to see what will be
most suitable to another Age, or perhaps to any considerable part of the
present. This our ignorance is therefore enough to teach us not to build any
confident hopes on our own devices.

2. But suppose our knowledge and skill were really as great, as usually is the
Politicians self-conceit; yet must we needs confess, that our strength is very
little, and how wisely soever we can devise and contrive, we are too weak to
bring about our own devices. This will appear more fully anon, tho indeed it is
clear enough of it self. Who can be so mad as to think he can do what he lists,
that he can overrule providence, control the World, and bring to pass all that
he would have to be? All which he must suppose himself able to do, that can
find cause in himself to hope he may accomplish the devices of his own heart.
Considering then our selves only, all we can say is this, Vain man would be
wise. Job. 11. 12. But he is not so; Man's goings are of the Lord, how can a man
then understand his own way? Prove. 20. 24. Our eyes are too bad to see, our
arms are too weak to work what is best for our selves or the World; no hope can
we have in our selves alone.

2. And therefore next, let us think what other men are. This consideration
will make it appear a very improbable thing, for any one single man, or indeed,
for any one Party or Faction of men, to be able to bring about their own
devices. Do we suppose these men to be our friends? Are they at present our
Accomplices or Partners? Or suppose we them our Enemies, and such as appear
Adversaries to our designs? Or lastly, are they likly to sit Neuters? Which of
these soever they be, they give us little encouragement. This only we are sure
of, they are men, and but men; they are therefore subject to the same
infirmities as we our selves are; they are unknown, they are mutable, they have
peculiar interests of their own, they are all subject to the same overruling
Power: Are they in Appearance our friends? Who can know whether they be so
indeed? Who knows whether they will prove firm and faithful to our Counsels?
Are we sure that their hearts are as our hearts, that we may safely give them
our hands and take them up into the secrets of our Bosoms? Whatever they be
now, can we tell whether they will be the same to morrow? Can we tell what the
temptations of one day, what the very fears and jealousies, covetous, or
ambitious desires of their own hearts, yea what the terrors of a nights dream
may bring forth? He that dares too confidently trust his own heart is but a
fool, how much more is he so, that dares trust another? If they join really
with us now in our murmurings, discontents, and dislikes of that which is, are
we sure that they join also as cordially in our desires and wishes, and that
the future variance and disagreement of minds about that which we would have
shall not breed more confusion, and far greater inconveniences unto us all,
then the very worst of those things we now concur to oppose and remove? Are
these men our Enemies and such as are like to oppose our designs? And are we
then sure that we are equal or superior to them in strength? Or if we be* are
we also as sure, that they are not our overmatch in policy or interest? Have
not they devices of their own as well as we? And are they not as much in love
with their own devices as we can be with ours? And will they not venture as far
to accomplish their designs? Have they not interests of their own? And shall
they not be as zealous to promote them? As impatient of all opposition to or
attempts against them? Is the party we oppose but small and inconsiderable? And
can we know how soon it will increase either by the accession of others who
will not show themselves till necessity call them forth, or by the revolt of
some other of our own? Or know we how many distinct parties there may be, whose
designs are as inconsistent with ours as theirs are, and therefore rather then
suffer either to prevail to the ruin of their own, are concerned to assist the
weaker? Lastly, are these men Neuters? Can we have any assurance that they will
continue so when they are in a strait betwixt two, and are like to be devoured
by both or either? Are they not lovers of Peace, upon what Principles it
matters not? And shall they not be inclined even by that love, when they see
they must side with one, to oppose the first disturbers of their Peace? Can we
from men's faces or looks have any probable guess, with whom they will join when
it comes to Trial? Is is not most likely, it will be with their lawful
Governors, under whom they have so long enjoyed their beloved Peace and
Quietness? May not Egypt (if we have such a thing to trust to) prove a bruised
Reed, and run into the hand of him that leans upon it? If we be but so wary as
to look about us, we shall find too many of our own spirit; and because such,
the less our friends. They are for themselves as well as we, are as ready to
sacrifice the public good to their own ambition. Their peculiar interests
engage them as stronglyto oppose unto ours their own devices; and with as much
fury and craft, from the same selfish principles, to endeavor our
disappointment and defeat to prevent their own; and to hasten our ruin, as the
first step to their own advancement. If again we look behind us, and observe
the Histories of former Ages, we cannot miss of abundance of sad examples of
rash and giddy Enterprisers miserably shipwrack'd by their own devices, caught
deservedly in their own Nets, and fallen into the Pits they dug for others.
If we providently look before us, we shall see but little likelihood that the
succeeding generation will applaud or approve of our doings; but rather fall
upon new devices of their own to undo all that we have done, or rather to build
what we have destroyed. In a word, if we know not what is in man, God knows,
that all his thoughts are vanity, Psalm. 94. 11. So little probability have men
of bringing to effect their own devices, when they consider what other men are.

3. If men's devices have so little encouragement either from themselves or
other men, how much less can they have from God when they consider, what he is.
viz. The just Judge of all the earth that will do right, Genesis 18. 25. Tho hand
join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished, Prove. 16. 5. Let them use all
Arts to strengthen themselves in their Conspiracies, he that is higher then the
highest regards, and will be higher than they, Eccl. 5. 8. Well said one who
was no Saint, If this Counsel be of men, it will come to naught; but if it be
of God, take heed how ye oppose it, lest ye be found to fight against God, Act.
5. 39. What hopes can men have that their devices shall prosper without Gods
Blessing, seeing not a Sparrow falls to the ground without him? And what
confidence can men have that God will bless their devices, whilst they make not
^im of their Counsel? If they advise not first with him to know his Will,
before they begin to device for themselves, they take a preposterous course to
engage him on their side; and be sure where ever he takes part, there goes the
Victory. But if men will be so wicked, as to advance their own devices against
the Ordinance of God, they must needs make him their Enemy, whosoever being so
makes it in vain for all the World to assist them; there is no fighting against
Omnipotence. A Blasting instead of a Blessing must those men expect from our
Heavenly Father, who, neglecting his commands, will presume of their own head
to regulate his Family, and govern his Kingdom by their own devices. As
impossible it is that such devices should stand, as it is to dethrone the
Almighty, and divest him of all Authority and Dominion, who has established
his Throne in the Heavens, and whose Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103. 19.
Let men therefore consult, contrive, and act what they can* Let them associate
themselves together, they shall be broken in pieces: let them gird themselves,
they shall be yet broken in pieces; let them take Counsel together, and it
shall come to naught, speak the word, and it shall not stand, Isai. 8. 9. etc.
Let them either now consider it to move them to repentance, or they shall at
last find it to their utter confusion, that notwithstanding all the wisdom of
their own devices, The Lord shall have them in derision, Psalm. 2. 4. They shall
be before him but like the Chaff which the wind drives away, Psalm. 1. 4. So
impossible is it for the devices of man's heart to stand, when they are not
united in the Will of that God who rules Heaven and Earth.

III. The third thing we are now to observe is this. The Will and Counsel of
the Lord is always one and the same and never changes.

With God (says St. James) there is no shadow of turning, Jam. 1. 17. Whatever
changes there be in the world amongst the creatures, it is impossible for the
great Creator of all things to be any other then what he was from all Eternity.
He will not lie, nor repent, for he is not a man that he should repent, 1 Samuel
15. 29. This is a piece of humane weakness, to change purposes. If therefore at
any time we read of Gods repenting or changing his purpose, as indeed sometimes
we do in his own word, we must be sure so to understand it, as it may agree to
the perfections of God, and not fasten upon him any of the imperfections of his
creatures. It is said indeed of God, Genesis 6. 6. It repented the Lord that he
had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. And 1 Samuel 35. 23.
The Lord repented that he had made Saul King over Israel. And concerning
Nineveh it is said, Jonah 3. 10. God repented of that the evil he had said that
he would do unto them, and he did it not. Sometimes God is said to repent of
what he had already done, as if he could wish it undone again; and sometimes of
that which he had declared that he would do, as if, upon after thoughts, he had
changed his mind. Now should we understand such sayings as these, as the words
sound at first hearing, not considering the immutable nature of him, of whom
they are spoken, we should thereby run our selves into one of the grossest and
most wicked errors in the World, being tempted by such expressions, to fasten
upon God an imputation of such levity and inconstancy to himself, as a wise man
would account one of the greatest affronts we could offer him. But all this is
indeed spoken of God, after the manner of men. The change that is, is not in
God but in us. What God has once done, he ever approves of; and whatever he
purposes to do, that he certainly will do. Tho when we look only upon what is
spoken and done, there is some appearance to us, as if there were some change
of mind in the speaker or doer; yet is there no such thing. We hear what is
said, and we see what is done: God has threatened to destroy, yet he spares:
He has done something, which afterward he undoeth in some measure again. And
hence he seems to us to repent of his sayings and doings, because he does
herein as men are wont to do, who repent and change their minds, and for this
cause, by reason of this similitude of the doings of God and men, are these
expressions applied to God. We are ignorant of the Will and Counsel of God, and
can know no more of it, then he himself is pleased to discover unto us; he has
not discovered the whole of his Will unto us, but only so much as himself
thinks fit for us to understand. Hence we know but in part, and are very
subject to mistake. To clear this, know we must that Gods Will being but one,
is partly revealed to us in his word and works, and partly concealed from us,
reserved only to himself.

1. The secret Will of God is not another from that which is revealed, as if
there were two Wills in God; but both are one Will, whereof part is revealed,
part is not; and both together are his one, eternal and immutable Purpose and
Counsel. As God needed not, could not have any Counselors to advise withal,
about what he was to do. With whom took he Counsel? Isai. 40. 14. So shall his
Counsel always stand, and without any alteration, be completely fulfilled. My
Counsel (says God) shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure, Isai. 46. 10.
This part of Gods Will and Counsel being never imparted unto us, we cannot know
it but only by the event; which when we see, whatever it is, we must conclude,
that it was Gods unalterable Will, either to effect it himself, or to permit it
to be so effected by others, infallibly fore-knowing it, and resolved not to
prevent it.

2. Gods revealed Will is so much of his Counsel, as he has thought fit to
communicate, and by what means he pleases, make known unto us. Whereby he
either acquainteth us with his own doings and purposes, or directs us in our
duty, and how we are to demean our selves in the world.

That Will of his, which makes our duty, shall stand as the Law and Rule of
our duty: And that Will of his which declares his purpose shall stand, as the
firm foundation of our hope and expectation; both in that manner, as he from
all eternity had determined, whatever appearances of change and variation there
may be to inconsidering men.

God is the sole and absolute Governor and King of all the World: and the Law
whereby he governs all things can be no other, but his own Will and wise
Counsel. Every thing he orders and rules agreeably to the nature which
himself has given it, in order to the end for which he made it. Why he made
the World just so, and no otherwise then it is made, we are not worthy to
inquire; nor can we know any further then he has taught us; it was his Will so
to do, and that ought to satisfy us. How he will order every thing in the
World from first to last, he cannot be obliged to tell us; and it is too much
for us to know: but that all shall tend to the demonstration of his own Power,
Wisdom and Goodness, and the happiness of those that love and serve him, we are
sure; and this again should fully satisfy us. Man he has made a reasonable
and free Agent, and as such he is resolved to govern him. His Will, revealed is
man's Law to live by, and by what parts and parcels soever, in what variety
soever of Precepts according to the diversity of time and circumstances of
persons, places, relations, etc. all perfectly foreseen by him; still his Will
is one, and he executes it according to his own Eternal Counsel, with that
variety of dispensations, as he has determined. His Commands it is his Will we
should obey, and that according to our nature, freely; it is not his Will to
necessitate us so to do, and to use us as Stocks and Stones which have neither
Understanding to consider, nor Will to choose. And it is his Will that the
obedient shall be rewarded with blessedness, and he encourages them to
obedience by many promises, which he will fulfill and make good to the full, if
the condition of obedience be performed, and thus are all his promises of this
kind to be understood. And he threatens severe punishments to the disobedient
to deter them from their disobedience, and these shall certainly come upon
them, if they repent not; and thus are his Menaces to be understood. In short,
what changes there would at any time be in men, according to that freedom of
choice which he has given them, he knew eternally; and what changes would
thereupon follow in the World, or in any part of it, he not only fore-knew, but
foreappointed; and what reasons there would be for the delaying either of his
promises, or his threatenings, or for any other change or circumstance, all was
perfectly fore-known; and there can be nothing new to him; and therefore no
change at all of his Eternal Counsel, but all things are exactly as he once for
all has determined.

When therefore God is said at any time to repent, it signifies no more but
this, that the thing is come to pass which God foresaw, and that ho now does
not that, which he had always resolved to do, when such things should come to
pass; here is a change indeed in his outward Actings, but none in his Will.
When Gods promises are not performed, there is a a nonperformance of the
condition, which he was never ignorant of, but foresaw, and now he acts no
otherwise, than upon the foresight thereof, he had resolved to do. But we,
because these things foreseen by God are not revealed to us, are apt to think
there is a change where there is none at all.

The reason why Gods Will is always one and the same, is the infinite
perfection of his Nature, which can admit of no degree of mutability. What can
move a man to change his Mind or Will, but his finding or at least suspecting
he has taken wrong measures in his former deliberations and resolutions* It is
the rough want of foresight in men, that their purposes are alterable; and when
things fall out, whereof they had no knowledge, they see cause to be of another
mind then formerly they were. It Is always the discovery of something which they
were ignorant of, or did not consider, that produces this change in the minds
of men. But there can be no such reason for God to change his purpose and
Counsel; as he is Almighty, and can do whatever it pleases him to do, so also
is he Omniscient, infinite in knowledge and wisdom, and nothing past, present
or to come can be hid from him. All things lie naked and opened (or unbowelled)
before him; the whole World, and all the Ages of the World, from its Creation
to the Consummation of all things, are in his view at once, not the most secret
thought of man, nor the minutest circumstance in things can escape his Eye.
Knowing therefore eternally, as well all that shall be hereafter, as all that
now is, or at any time has been, nothing can happen contrary to his
expectation, and therefore nothing can possibly move him to any the least
change of Counsels: but he must needs be, as in his nature and being, so in his
purposes also immutable, the same yesterday and to day, and for ever. And this
granted, we shall very easily see into the truth of our next Proposition, as
necessarily following from this Immutability of God.

IV. Whatsoever the devices and projects of man may be, they can never be able
to frustrate or alter the Will and Counsel of the Lord, but it shall firmly
stand, and most punctually be fulfilled.

And it must needs be so, if but for this one reason, that there can be no
device or project of man, but God did eternally foresee it and has provided
for it. Yea, he is both wise enough and powerful enough, either to frustrate it
and make it of no effect; or to overrule it, and bring to effect his own Will
and Counsel by it. Men cannot surely be such Fools as to think that the
infinitely wise God can be outwitted or deceived by any humane Policy; or that
the Almighty God can be overpowered by humane strength or force; or that the
most vigilant Governor of the World who never slumbereth nor sleeps, Psalm.
124. 4. Whose eyes are in every place beholding the evil and the good, Prove.
15. 3. Can be surprised by Humane Treachery. No Conspiracy in what dark Hell or
Vault soever it be laid and hatched, can be hid from him; no Confederacy or
Combination can be too hard for him, who is irresistible as well as immutable,
and therefore can never be disappointed of his Will. Our God is in the Heavens,
he has done whatsoever he pleased, Psalm. 115. 3. Yea, The Counsel of the Lord
stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations, Psalm. 33. 11.
And v. 10. The Lord brings the Counsel of the Heathen to naught, he makes
the devices of the People of none effect. Hence that bold Challenge of the
Prophet to all the Churches Enemies, Take Counsel and it shall come to naught:
speak the word and it shall not stand, for God is with us, Isai. 8. 10. And
again, The Lord of Hosts has sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought so shall
it come to pass, and as I have purposed so shall it stand, Isai. 14. 24. The
Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disanul it, v. 27. The Counsel of
the Lord lies very deep, Clouds and darkness are round about him. And whilst
vain men would be so wise, as to design for themselves without him, and presume
to teach or help him to govern the World, they unawares subserve his secret
Counsel, and by an unseen hand are carried contrary to their own intentions, to
promote those very designs of his which they strive with all their might and
policy to defeat. Let them consult, God shall infatuate their Counsels: let
them attempt, God shall frustrate all their attempts. He must be wise indeed
that can impose upon God. Ioseph's Brethren taking notice of his Dream, and his
Fathers special affection to him, grow jealous of him, and to prevent his
coming to have dominion over them, sell him for a Slave unto Strangers: and
what do they in all this, but unwittingly help him up to that dignity and
honor which God had designed for him, that they may hereafter bow before him
with the greater shame? Pharoab, lest the Hebrews should increase too fast, and
grow too many for him and his people, decrees the destruction of all their
Male Children, but see how the providence of God turns this about to his
ruin, for hereby Moses is exposed, and being found by Pharaoh's Daughter, is
brought up in his Court, receiving thereby an education suitable to his future
dignity, who was to be the leader and deliverer of that people which was to
spoil the Egyptians. Saul will by all means suppress David, and exclude him
from succeeding him in his Throne, and what does he herein, but by pursuing and
exposing him to dangers, give him the fairest opportunities of showing his
fidelity to him, and his wisdom and valor to the people, so winning their
affections over whom he was to Reign? The Princes of mere Envy bring Daniel to
the Den of Lions, but only to this end, that by a Miracle of God's goodness to
him he might be advanced above themselves and to their own ruin. Haman
prepares the Gallows for Mordecai, and designs the honor for himself, but is
herein an instrument of God, hereby to bring the honor unto Mordecai and
himself to the Gallows of his own setting up. The Jews would void the Counsel
of God by crucifying Jesus, and in crucifying him they brought to pass what
Gods hand and his Counsel had determined before to be done, Act. 4. 28. They
kill him lest the Romans should come and take away their Place and Nation, Joh.
11. 48. And for this both were afterward destroyed by the Romans. They will
seal up the Sepulcher, and set a watch of Soldiers to prevent his Disciples
never intended design of taking their dead Master away by night; and thereby
they provide a strong Evidence of his Resurrection from the dead. Let men do
what they will or can, God will make men know themselves to be but men, and
that it is not they but he that rules all things according to the pleasure of
his Will. His Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion throughout
all generations, Psalm. 145. 13. When Devils and Men have done their worst, it
shall stand; and therefore must his Counsel stand too, whereby he rules and
governs all things without consulting men. He puts down one, and sets
up another, Psalm. 75. 5. By him Kings reign, and he gives them sometimes for a
Blessing and sometimes for a Scourge to the People. If we would have them a
Blessing, there is no way but obedience and an absolute submission to Gods Will
to procure that, and if we have by our sins deserved the scourge, no Devices or
Counsels of men can prevent that. God will be God, and we should be thankful
that we are Men, and show it by giving him a reasonable service, and contenting
our selves in keeping within our own compass. We may easily break our hearts
with our own devices, but we can never frustrate Gods Counsel, that shall stand.

Having thus very briefly run over the Doctrines of this Text, for the
confirmation of our faith, we now proceed to see of what excellent use all this
may be unto us for the rectifying of our opinions, or the regulating of our
life and conversation. And we shall be sure to find matter enough in these few
things we have learned, for our instruction, correction, encouragement, and
consolation in the ways both of Religion and Loyalty.

1. The Instructions which we shall at this time take notice of from the
doctrine delivered are two; the one respecting the time past, the other the
time to come; both presently necessary to be diligently attended to, if we be
desirous to understand our duty to God as good Christians, or to the King as
Loyal Subjects.

1. Let us reflect a little in our thoughts upon the time past, and being
instructed to whose goodness we are to ascribe all those good things we have
hitherto enjoyed, all those deliverances from evil, that have been hitherto
given us: All these, how great, how many soever, are to be attributed only to
the good Will and Counsel of the Lord, that has forborne to punish us for our
own devices, that has delivered us from the devices of men. Have we hitherto
of a long time enjoyed the blessings of Peace and Plenty in a good and fruitful
Land? Have we been blessed with a good Government, wholesome Laws, the free
exercise of our Religion, and use of our Estates? Let us thankfully acknowledge
our selves indebted to Gods goodness for all this. If the Lord had not been on
our side, may England truly say, if the Lord had not been on our side, when
men so often have risen up against us, they had swallowed us up quick, they
were so wrathfully displeased at us. How many and various have been the devices
of men against us? Of men of much different stamps, of contrary complexions, to
subvert the Government, to destroy and corrupt our Religion, to undermine our
Peace, to make us a Prey to our Enemies, and to set us at variance among our
selves* to devour and cat up one another at home? Ever since it has pleased
God to own us for his People, to set any mark of his special favor upon us, to
manifest a peculiar Providence over us, in setting over us religious Princes to
be the Defenders of the Faith, amongst us, and our gracious Protectors in the
sound Profession of the Catholic Faith, and pure worship of God; how has the
Prince of darkness bestirred himself, and set all his instruments on work to
create us trouble? What strange devices and devilish contrivances has he put
into men's hearts to obstruct the work of God amongst us and set forward his
own? One while he begins his work at home, in the very midst of us, tries
what he can do by the powers which are by the providence of God set over us,
puts Fire and Faggot into their hands to consume us; and when he sees that
this will not do, but that there is one even in the fiery Furnace with us, that
is able to abate the fury of the Fire, and bring forth the reformed Religion,
like Gold out of the Furnace, more refined and pure: not able to endure the
Luster and brightness of it, he gets him away as far from it as he can, and
begins the work anew, and lays the Plot at the greatest distance, that it
may ripen out of sight, and come upon us at full strength: he fetches his Race
even from as far as Rome, and is resolved to bear us down with foreign Force;
he leads up Armies marching under consecrated Banners, manneth out Navies
Christened by the Name of Invincible, and with these he will come upon us like
a sudden Deluge; and who is the Lord (says he) that he should deliver them out
of my hand? Will not this do against the Lord of Hosts? Then is he resolved to
return back again in a disguise, and fall to work in secret Holes, and Cells,
and Vaults, he will lay his Snares in the dark, and who (says he) shall see?
Close Plots and private Conspiracies of men sworn upon the Sacrament to
Secrecy who can be so quick-sighted as to discover? And now let it be Poison,
or Dagger, or Gunpowder, or what Hell can invent, so the Anointed of the Lord
may fall and perish, and the Protestant Religion be rooted out, all is well
enough, he has served his own ends and the Popes, and what Devil can desire
more? But still there is no enchantment or divination against Israel; so long
as God is with us, what can Hell do against us? He must now therefore contrive,
if possible, how to drive out God from among us; and no way so likely to do
this, as to sow amongst us the Seeds of Division, God is love, and will not own
those for his Children who do not like Brethren dwell together in Unity. As
long as we stand entirely one, united in one body, we have too much strength to
give him hope of an easy Victory; but he knows well enough who has said, that
a house divided against it self cannot stand. To make a breach therefore,
whereat he may enter, he fills men's heads with fears, jealousies, and scruples;
makes them look like Monsters to one another. He works upon men's fantasies and
imaginations, and presents before them as to Men in a dream strange Phantasms
and Apparitions. Some conceive they see Superstition and Popery in those very
persons and things which are under God, our best fence against them; and so do
these words always run in their minds, that they can call nothing which they
are taught to dislike by any other name then those, and Antichristian. Some
again imagine they see Tyranny in the best formed Monarchy that the World has,
ready to swallow up at once all Liberty and Property. Others think they see
Christ coming to reign upon the Earth, and commanding them to go before him, to
prepare his way by levelling the Mountains and raising the Valleys, dashing in
pieces the Kingdoms of the Earth like a Potters Vessel, binding their Kings in
Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron. Thus by his subtle delusions
were men, like such as are rouzed up in some frightful dream with a dismal cry
of Fire, Fire, made to run about so long to quench an imaginary fire, no where
visible but in their own hot heads, till they had kindled a real one, that had
almost burnt down not only their own but all the houses of God in the Land. But
notwithstanding all this, it pleased God to awake us, and that by little less
then a Miracle, in the wonderful restitution of our present most gracious
Sovereign. And now, who would not think that our former miseries and our
present Peace, and the long missed blessings of a gracious Government, should
so strongly work upon us, as to persuade us to keep well when we may be so? But
the Deceiver is still too cunning for us, and knows how to turn the very
Motives of Union, into the occasions of Division. He takes advantage of those
very Confusions yet fresh in our Memories into which he had formerly brought
us, to keep alive our Jealousies on all hands of one another: so that at this
day mutual suspicions and ill opinions keep us at as great a distance in the
days of Peace, as Pikes and Muskets did in the time of War. Still we are in
Sides and Parties, devising how to supplant and ruin each other. The
remembrance of former days unhappily fomenting and hightening our suspicions
and jealousies to that degree, that we seem rather the Laughing Stock then the
terror of our Enemies, and Rome it self cannot choose but laugh within it self
to see us so industrious in doing her work for her, and by our contentions and
separations making an open way for that very evil which men pretend above all
others to be afraid of. And now seeing we have been at so much pains in
assisting our professed Enemies to destroy us, what can we imagine could have
all this while preserved us against all those devilish devices that have been
hatched both abroad and amongst our selves at home to undo us, but that great
and good God alone who overruleth all the devices of men, who sits in the
Heavens above all Powers, who says to the Sea, Hitherto shall thou come but no
further, and here shall thy proud Waves be stayed, Job. 38. 11. The Lord
reigns, let the earth be glad thereof, let the Multitude of the Isles be glad
thereof, Psalm. 97. 1. This Isle may be glad thereof. He is great in Zion, he is
high above all People, Psalm. 99. 2. His right hand and his holy arm has gotten
him the Victory, Psalm. 98. 1. It is his right hand, and not our Sword, his wise
Counsel not our Policy, his wonderful goodness, and least of any thing our
righteousness that preserves us in safety. Except the Lord build the house,
all our Builders shall labor but in vain, we shall quickly with our own hands
pull it down upon our heads. Except the Lord keep the City, all our Watchmen
shall wake in vain, our own devices, our own sins will be sure to fire all, and
we shall soon be like to Sodom and Gomorrha. Therefore not unto us, not unto us
but unto the Lord alone let us ascribe the honor and the glory of our
preservation, and all the wonderful deliverances which he and he alone has
given unto our gracious King and this whole Kingdom in him. It is only because
his Counsel always stands unmovable and cannot change, that our own devices
have not long e're this utterly ruined us, or that the manifold devices of our
Enemies have not prevailed against us.

2. As we are instructed hence to attribute all our past Mercies and
Deliverancies to the goodness of God, who alone could disappoint the devices of
men against us; so are we hence also taught, how both at present, and for the
time to come, to behave our selves toward God, let the times prove never so
troublesome to us by reason of the restless devices of men. We must always be
sure to bear in mind, and fix immoveably upon this one point, that the Counsel
of the Lord is altogether unchangeable, one and the same for ever, and shall
undoubtedly stand for a Law to us, and for a Bar against every thing that can
be devised by men against us not agreeable unto it. Conclude we certainly that
the Lord he is God, and will be so, maugre all the devices of Fools that say in
their heart there is no God. That he will always govern the World by his own
Will, and confound the wicked in their own devices. That all things being
ordered by him must needs be wisely ordered, and therefore as no device of man
is permitted by him, but in wisdom; so of his goodness he will either confound
these devices in his own time, or by them accomplish his own Wise Counsel, to
the destruction of his Enemies, and the good of his Church and faithful
Servants. All things shall work together for good to them that love him, Romans
8. 28.

Let therefore our Behavior be always such as becomes the faithful Subjects of
the Great God and King of all the World: and our business, as we are such, is
pure obedience to the Laws of his Kingdom, and not to help him to rule and
order things by our Wisdom, as tho he could stand in need of our devices, or
had thought good to make us of his Great Counsel. Let us mind our Duty in
attending to and executing cheerfully his Commands, and not intermeddle with
that which is properly his work, any otherwise then he himself shall give to
any of us Authority to Act under him. Unto some he has given his Commission to
Act and Rule his People under him, and for him. By his Wisdom Kings Reign, and
Princes decree Justice, Prove. 8. 15. The Powers that be are of God. He has put
a Sword into their hand, and they bear not that Sword in vain, Romans 13. And
they that will not stand in awe of it, deserve to feel it. He has also set
some in the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. And has made them Overseers over his Flock
to feed it, Act. 20. 28. And we are commanded to obey them that have the Rule
over us and watch for our Souls, Heb. 13. 17. These are God's Commissioned
Officers, put in Authority under him, and over us; and as they are to do their
own duties in their several places toward God, whose Servants they are, and to
whom they must give an account as well as we; so can they not do their duty
unto him, but by governing us, and using all such means as he has ordered, or
allowed, to keep us in due subjection both unto God and them, and to see as
much as is in them, that we do our duties too. Let no devices therefore of
other men out of whatsoever School they come, persuade or provoke us either to
follow theirs, or set up new devices of our own against this certain Will of
God, or to cast off the Yoke of Christ by our restless endeavors to free our
selves from the Yoke of Men. We cannot be Christ's Subjects if we will be our
own Masters. It is just that he assign to each Servant in his Family his proper
work, and call them to account as he shall please; if we shall arrogate to our
selves a right of Judging them, whom he has set to Judge us, we place our
selves in his Throne and usurp his Prerogative, which is the highest Treason
against the King of Kings: and can we think that such shall go unpunished by
him? Let our condition be never so uneasy, let our Grievances be never so
many, let our sufferings be never so great, let us be sure to keep in mind,
what we are, and whose we are, and what is our Business to do. We are not Gods,
nor Lawgivers to our selves, but Men under his command that made us and
redeemed us. We are not our own, but his that bought us with a price, 1 Cor. 6.
20. What then can be our work, but that which becomes the Subjects of so
absolute a Monarch? Thankfully to own the Privileges we have, of his grace and
goodness, hitherto enjoyed, acknowledging that the very least of them far
exceeds all our merits: contentedly to rest in his choice for us, and in the
state and condition his Providence has assigned us, acknowledging always that
to be very good, and best of all at present, which he has appointed: wholly to
resign our selves with all our concerns and interests into his hand, unto his
sole disposal, saying heartily, it is the Lord, let him do whatsoever seems
good to him, not ours but his Will be done. Concluding that as his Will must
stand and cannot be disappointed, so it is fit we should own him in our hearts
to be what really he is, our Supreme Lord and absolute Governor, and show our
selves well pleased, that his Will should stand; and, be it what it will that
he does, agreeable to our wishes and hopes or not, we being his Creatures as
well as Subjects, we that should be both willing to it, and delighted in it. We
may be very sure of this, and that should be full enough for us, that God
cannot Act against himself, nor contrary to his own nature, and therefore he
can never do otherwise then wisely and well, and that he will make it appear so
in the end, whatever it seems now. If then God grant us a plentiful, peaceable
and flourishing state, and give us Kings and Governors that are David's indeed,
men after his own heart, and nursing Fathers unto his Church, encouragers of
true Piety, and Protectors of their Subjects in their just Rights and
Liberties, he does wisely and well; and we are to be thankful to him as for an
undeserved blessing; and if, on the other hand, God for the punishment of our
sins of Pride and Rebellion, Profaneness and Formality, etc. shall give us
Saul's or Ieroboams, oppressors of their Subjects, or Persecutors of Religion,
still we must confess that God does wisely and well, and like himself as a most
just Governor; it is less then we have deserved, and it is no more then we
need. He is both just and good, as well in punishing as rewarding, and we ought
to bear with patience, yea and thankfulness the chastisement of our sins. Let
it be our business then to persecute and mortify our Corruptions and Lusts,
and God will provide that we want not sit Governors, when he sees us desirous
to live in obedience unto him. The instruments in Gods hand may be changed, as
he sees his work requires, but still the same God reigns, and his Counsel
must stand. Thus much for our instruction.

II. In the next place, the Doctrine of this Text is an excellent corrective
for the malignant humors wherewith the Body of this Kingdom has for some time
too much abounded. It may serve to restrain the heady and furious attempts and
practices of some, and to abate the discontents and silence the murmurings of
others among us. And these two sorts of People are very easily met with in most
places.

1. There are too many in the World, who will needs be thought as wise, not
only as their Humane Governors, but as God himself. And indeed, it were less to
be wondered at, if such men were only to be found in that Church, which has so
long pretended to an infallibity of Judgment: tho, blessed be God, whatever it
be in its Doctrines, it has not yet proved so in its Treasonable and Bloody
Attempts and Practices. But that any men of such a mischievous self-conceit
should be found among them that call themselves Protestants* and Reformed
Christians, is a thing wonderful indeed, and ought to be as much lamented by
us, as our Adversaries will be sure to rejoice in it, and make a bad use of it.
And surely such poisonous Weeds could never have sprung up among us, had it not
been from that evil seed which those Seminaries employed by the Evil one, have
cunningly sowed in our good Field whilst the Keepers of it slept. There is a
viperous Brood of men, tho they are not willing to own their own Original, or
it may be have been engendered so much in the dark, that they do not know their
own Parents, which cannot live but by eating out the Bowels of that Government
under the warm Wings whereof they shelter themselves. These things are always
big with new devices, not how to serve, (as has been much pretended) but
rather to direct or correct Providence. And by their Practices, they might
persuade men to believe, that in all their Prayers they do not desire of God so
much to guide them, as to follow them whithersoever their own wild devices
shall lead him. If Religion have not yet discovered unto such men their folly
and wickedness, yet, a man would think, that unto men that talk so much of
Providence as they have been wont to do, their own so often frustrated devices
should be sufficient to convince them of their vanity, and make them feel how
hard it is to kick against the Pricks; and that very confusion of Languages
that is amongst them, so that they have not been ever able well to understand
one another, should discourage them from all designs of building another Babel,
or advancing their own devices in spite of Heaven. Will men that are so high
pretenders to a divine spirit and a new light, be always like those silly ones,
of whom 'twas said, They are ever learning and never come to the knowledge of
the truth, this easy truth, that the Powers that be, are ordained of God, and
that whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they
that resist shall receive to themselves damnation? Romans 13. 1, 2. What but the
want of that Self-denial, wherein they are wont so much to glory, can make men
so dull, as not to be able in so many years, no not with the encouragement of
Indulgencies, or the Rod of Discipline, to learn so plain a Lesson? Will men be
always so much children, as to think they can do more or better for themselves
by their own devices, then their Heavenly Father will do for them by his wise
Counsel, if they will approve themselves his dutiful Children, and show their
entire submission to him their Supreme Lord, by obeying those whom he has
placed over them, and submitting themselves (as he commands them, 1 Pet. 2.
13.) To every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; whether it be to the King
as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the
punishment of Evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well? Will men
always be so absurd, as to think they best secure the Liberty of their
Consciences, by rebelling against those whom they must needs be subject to, not
only for wrath, but Conscience sake? Romans 13. 5. If it be so hard a task to
yield Obedience to the standing Will of God, written so legibly in his word,
and so often proclaimed unto us by his Ministers, as the Rule of Duty; how much
harder will it be found to submit with Alacrity to his secret Will when it
shall be declared in the course of his Providence by the Event, in a patient
suffering even for well doing? How shall men have the face to call themselves
Christians by the name of Christ (except it be by the same figure as the
Jesuits are by the name of Jesus) who so wholly neglect the commands of
Christ, and lean more to their own devices then to his promises? Do they think
to make themselves more happy, and to prosper better by their own Consultations
and Conspiracies; by Plotting of Insurrections and Murders, and by such devices
as these to secure their Religion and their Liberties, (tho, blessed be God,
such danger (if there be any) is yet at a distance) then by preparing
themselves, as we are all commanded on pain of sorfeiting our Christianity, to
bear the Cross and suffer for righteousness sake? If when ye do well and suffer
for it ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto
were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that
ye should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 20, 21.

Yet truly, were there nothing of Religion in the case, there be two things
nevertheless, which well considered would go near to check all such devices,
tho to the devisers they may seem to aim at what is best.

First, Which of us is so wise, as to know certainly that his own Projects
shall either succeed according to his mind, or be approved of by others, or
produce the public good, or indeed his own? I think there is no man that can
in reason pretend to such a certainty, and, considering the various and
contrary tempers of men, it is hard to come up to a probability. If so, then
the certain, or but likely Troubles and Commotions, War and Bloodshed, that
the whole Nation may suffer in order to the accomplishment of these uncertain
Devices in such great changes as are usually designed, should make him that
loves his Country, (which love is the fair color such men commonly paint over
their foulest designs withal) very shy in setting abroach his own devices. It
is a very easy matter to set discontented men together by the ears, but not so
easy to make them friends again, or persuade him, that thinks he has the
advantage, to sheath his Sword; nor yet can he that raised the Fray, be sure
that himself shall not be wounded in the Scuffle. Men are much easilier agreed
to pull down one Government, then to set up another: because it is much easier
to find one, which has something in it contrary to all the several private
interests of the Conspirators, then one that will promote them all; which it
may be are too various, ever to meet in one point, or indeed within the Compass
of any one Model, that which the common cry of Liberty does sufficiently
declare. Love thy Country, that is God's Will: and for the love of it, lay
aside thine own devices. My Son fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle
not with them that are given to change, Prove. 24. 21.

Secondly, Do these men indeed love themselves, and their own safety? Let them
then for their own sakes, take the safe way. Keep the many devices of the heart
within the heart, for if they once be suffered to pass the Tongue, there is no
longer any safety. He must have a faculty more then humane, who can be sure,
that that man, unto whom he first reveals his secret, (and revealed it must be
or it can do nothing of what he would have it to do) has not another device
ready to defeat his, and make him pay the charges of both. If men therefore
would in all their Consults advise with God's Will, the Public Good, or their
own private Peace and Safety, those many devices which quicken in their hearts
would die there too, and have the same Womb and Tomb.

2. A second sort of People, which this Text should correct is, that very
numerous part of Mankind, the Querulous, Murmuring and discontented, whom
nothing that is present will either please or silence. If these be not all so
daring as to devise, they are so ill natured as to be angry, that all their
desires, how unreasonable soever, are not fully satisfied; and to satisfy them
will be found no easy matter, especially till themselves seem better to
understand them. They would have the World to be Governed according to their
mind, but how that should be, their thoughts are not to this day well agreed.
They think too well of themselves, not to think too ill of their present
condition, as too much below their Merits: and therefore cannot be reconciled
to the Public Management of Affairs, whilst it gives them not the
opportunity of bettering themselves every day according as the every days new
devices of their hearts shall prompt them. The great complaint among such is,
that the wicked are exalted, and good men discouraged, and the course of
Justice is perverted; and the common discourse is of the wickedness of the
times, and the looseness of Government and Discipline. It is true, that if at
any time such things as these are visible, and whilst men are men, they will
be at all times too visible, good men cannot choose but be very sensible of it,
very sadly bewail it, and mourn before God for the sins of their Brethren,
Rivers of waters will run down David's eyes because men keep not Gods Law, Psalm.
119. 136. Yea, and what becomes every one of them in their respective Stations
and Callings with all humble submission and modesty, yet with all Godly Zeal
and Courage, they will be ever ready to do toward the amendment of men's lives,
the rectifying of errors, correcting Abuses, and redressing all Grievances. But
they begin at home, as is fit, and proceed regularly, and keep to their proper
provinces, and are more ready to do their own duty, then to complain that
others do not theirs. To make the Failings of Princes and faults in Government,
and the Grievances of the Nation a common Table-talk and to be always
signifying to the World their discontents and uneasiness, is too great an
Argument of a Proud and Factious Spirit, and savoureth too rankly of a mind
corrupted with Seditious and Rebellious Principles, and too much Estranged from
the God of Peace. In thus doing men show they regard themselves and their own
Wills more then the Will of God. What evils has the Government at any time
brought upon us that we have not by our manifold sins too much deserved, at
least at the hand of God the Universal Governor, if not at the hands of those
who rule under him? And how many Blessings may we enjoy under the worst of
Governments which we have never in the least deserved? Dare we undertake
presumptuously to prescribe to God, and proudly say, that either we are such,
as he ought not to punish at all, or at least, such as he ought not to punish
after this manner? If God send a Plague, or a Famine, or any kind of Mortal
Sickness on a People for their sins, is it reasonable for them to murmur
against the Air and unseasonableness of the Weather? And if God chastise us
with evils of any other kind, by what or whomsoever, shall it be more
reasonable to quarrel with and complain of the Instrument or the Messenger for
executing upon us the Will of God, then to seek out where the fault lies
whereby we have provoked him to anger, and to amend it? Iehu received the
promise of a Kingdom to the fourth Generation for executing punishment on those
whom God had determined to punish, 2 Kings 10. 30. Yet did not Iehu depart from
the sins of Jeroboam which made Israel to sin. God sometimes gives a King in
his wrath, and takes him away again in his displeasure, Hos. 13. 11. If he
deliver men into the hands of their Oppressor, tho he be the King of Babylon,
they must serve him and be quiet, because they see it is the Will of God so to
deal with them, Ier. 27. Patience under our Sufferings, and repentance of our
sins, and reformation of our lives, and obedience to our Superiors in all
lawful things even to the utmost, to show we own their Authority, and decline
not the hardest of their just commands, are the best ways of reconciling our
selves to God, and turning his Judgments away from us, and not to stand
murmuring and complaining of that which in justice he is pleased to inflict
upon us by what hand soever. Why should a living man complain? A man for the
punishment of his sins? Lam. 3. 39. Thus much for Correction.

III. In the next place, let us be exhorted, first, ingeneral, to attend God's
Will in all things, and let that take place of all the devices of our hearts.
Alas, what would become of the World, if God should disregard it, slacken the
reins of his Government, and permit all to the hands of men? Phaethon's guiding
the Chariot of the Sun, and firing the World, would look no longer like a
Fable. Hot spirits and giddy heads with their bold devices and rash enterprises
would soon turn all things upside down, and put more then one Nation into a
combustion. Men are of too different complexions and divided interests ever to
unite in Peace and Order: contrary humors and principles would always produce
contrary Laws and Rules, and every Party would be concerned to maintain that
which would best uphold it, not only to the ruin of the opposite Party, but to
the rending of the public Peace and Welfare. Then, and no sooner, let men talk
of carrying on their own devices and designs when they either know themselves
to be too strong for all men, or can assure themselves that all men will be of
their mind.

If any shall now ask whether we would have them sit still and unconcerned how
matters go right or wrong, and whether it be not every man's duty to endeavor
with all his might the rectifying of what he sees amiss in Kingdom or Church?
To this some Answer has been given already, to which may be added thus much
more.

1. Be very sure that what you think to be amiss, be so indeed, before you go
about to mend it. Men are too apt to make their own irregular desires and
wishes, yea, and not seldom an irrational Conceit and Phant'sie, or even such a
thing as this in some other men or party for whom they have a kindness, the
rule of right and wrong, and so judge every thing to be amiss, which they, or
such as they count their friends dislike. Measure things by their proper rule,
not that of Self-interest or Affection, but God's Word; view and examine them
by a true light, be not misled by men's reports, or vain surmises, but try all
things and then hold fast that which is good. If you take not this course,
instead of mending what is amiss, you will only mar that which his good. Be
sure that what you would amend be against God's Will, or else it needs no
mending, and none will owe you thanks for your vain devices.

2. Be as sure in the next place that you are every way rightly fitted and duly
qualified for the work you take in hand. See that you have both skill and
strength and good Authority for what you undertake. It is not every bold
Bungler that has face enough to praise himself and laugh at others, who is fit
for such a work as is the reformation of Kingdoms and Churches. It is not all a
thing to hold a Plow-staff and a Scepter. Be content to employ your Talents
accordingly as you are fitted with them, and think it is Gods Will you should
busy your selves in those employments for which he has best furnished you,
and in those stations wherein he has thought fit to place you. If he had
designed you for higher Callings he would probably have given you a more
suitable Education, and furnished you with better Tools. And if other men, who
pretend to higher things, shall tell you that they are wise enough both for
themselves and you, and thereby would tempt you to second them in their
devices: be sure first that they have indeed all that which you find wanting in
your selves to fit them for being your leaders in such bold Attempts, and
that is not only Wisdom and Strength, but good Authority and a just Call unto
the work from God. Let them produce their Commission, and show you, thus it is
written, and that must be the Will of God declared in his word, not whispered
into the Ear by a Pidgeon, not dictated from an infallible Chair, not sent in
some flash of new Light, or suggested by something blasphemously called the
Spirit within them, for the truth of all which you must at last be content with
their own bare word, which is sure to deceive you. If you have not Authority
from God for what you do, he will say, Who has required these things at your
hand? Isai. 1. 12. To support the tottering Ark of God must needs appear a
thing well pleasing unto God, but let Uzzah do it, and he dies for it, 2 Samuel
6. 7. Be his zeal what it will, he must have patience and expect his Call. Men
must know, that tho it must needs be good to be zealous always in a good
matter, Gal. 4. 18. Yet should they take time to consider and pains to satisfy
themselves, that the matter be indeed as good as now it seems to them; and that
their zeal for it be good too, for all zeal even for good is not so, and that
the good zeal carry them not beyond the bounds of their Authority. Zeal for God
must have the Will of God for its Rule, it is otherwise a blind zeal, a
blemished Offering which God will not accept. It Is a very absurdity and
contradiction to Act in Zeal for God against Gods Will. It is not a man's own
Conscience that is his Lawgiver, or that can Authorize him of its self to any
Action; it is a part of its office to direct us, but it must be by the Law of
God to do his Will, and must produce his Commission to prove its own Authority
to command. Gods Counsel only can be our Authority in such cases, and that must
be revealed to us, before it can warrant us in our work.

3. Where the Command of God is express, there is no disputing about convenient
or inconvenient, the thing is by command made necessary, and must be done
whatever follow. But where there is no command from God, and you would do a
thing because you think it expedient and needful to be done; be sure you do it
not till you have Authority from those whom God has placed to govern you,
neither go about to move them for such Authority till you have good reason to
believe that what you go about will bring good, and not more hurt then good.
Many little inconveniences are rather to be born then one great mischief so
much as hazarded. I had rather endure some little fits of sickness, then purge,
when I cannot do it without destroying my Body. Labor to see through to the
end of your work before you set upon it in earnest. They repented of their
folly too late, that by removing one Tyrant brought in a Multitude, much more
shall they who not content to bear some small inconveniences under a lawful
Prince, shall by Rebellion make way through Anarchy for Tyranny. What
Government in the World was ever yet without some inconveniences, it is the
condition of all things under Heaven to be imperfect and to admit a mixture of
Evil. If a Beam or Post in my house stand so as either somewhat to deform it,
or to be otherwise inconvenient, yet before I remove it, I would consider
whether I can do it with safety, and not bring down the Building to my greater
trouble and cost. God never intended every Kingdom to be an Heaven, no more
then that all men should be Angels. Let him therefore that would correct what
is amiss in his own judgment, be sure he shall not turn all into an Hell of
Confusion, and by a vain endeavor to make all men Saints or Angels, let in a
Devil which he knows not how to drive out again.

Having premised these needful cautions it is easy now to see what we are to
do, under what Government soever we live.

Our first business is, to find out that which we are sure will stand, and can
never deceive us, the Revealed Will of God, and let all our devices be, how we
may most effectually obey it. Let us never be so rash or conceited, as to hope
any device of our own can prosper that is not governed by this. Let God
therefore preside in all our Consults, let his Book lie open before our Eyes,
and advise with him before we attempt any thing, and then I am sure we shall
never be a Rebellious People, and unless our former sins have taken too fast
hold upon us, it may well be hoped, no miserable people neither.

And certainly God has not been sparing in revealing unto us his own mind, so
far as we should be concerned to know it, especially as it is to be the Rule of
our Behavior toward our Governors. Let every Soul be subject to the higher
Powers, Romans 13. 1 Is a standing Rule which God will never cancel: And submit
your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. is as
sure and plain. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to
obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work, Tit. 3. 1. Give unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods, Mar. 12.
17. Render to every man his due, Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom Custom
is due, Romans 13. Let Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of Thanks
be made for all men, for Kings and for all that are in Authority, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
All this, and much more to the same purpose is plain enough without either
Rhemish or Geneva Notes to explain it to us. Nothing of all this is Apocrypha,
nor the Tradition of men. And he that can devise how with a safe Conscience to
resist the Power and not violate therein the Will of God, must have an Art to
make Gods Word say what he will. You see your duty as clear as the light can
make it, Be subject, submit, obey, pay Tribute, pray heartily, suffer
patiently, resist not at all; if you will be happy, do it; if you have any love
for God, for your Country or your selves, do it. Think not that God can ever
bless any Rebellious or Treasonable Designs. His Will of Duty is, obey or
suffer: his Will of Government is, He that resists shall receive damnation.
Let all your devices be, how by doing the one to escape the other. For the
Counsel of the Lord that shall stand.

Next, observe the Will of Gods Providence in the Event, and rest your selves
fully satisfied in it. Having made your Prayers unto God to direct all things
to his own glory and the good of his Church, continue in well doing, persevere
in the Faith, and say, O Lord, thy Will be done. Think with your selves, that
this is the due homage you owe unto God, this is the true love you owe unto
your selves, this is a just debt you are to pay unto the World. Pay therefore
your debts, and give every one his due.

1. Be just to God, and let him be your God indeed, and you do not take him for
your God, if you do not cheerfully rest in his Government, if you do not
heartily rejoice in all his doings, and give him thanks in all things always.
Why should you not do thus, but that you think he does not well, or that he
has not an overruling hand in all that is done? And either way, you cast him
off from being your God, seeing you disown either his Goodness or his
Providence.

2. Be just to your selves, grudg not your Souls that peace and comfortable
rest in God which they might enjoy. If you expose your selves to the devices of
men, whether of your selves or of any others, you bring your selves into a
restless state of trouble and vexation. Say therefore unto your own hearts,
stand still and see the Salvation of the Lord.

3. Be just to the World of Mankind, and wish it not so ill as to change one
infinitely wise and good and powerful Governor for a Multitude of foolish, weak
and wicked Tyrants, the Lusts and Humors of Carnal Men. What a Bedlam would the
whole World soon be^ome, if all men were left to be ruled by the devices of
their own hearts?

IV. In the last place, let all such amongst us as fear the Lord, and rejoice
to do his Will, draw much comfort to their Souls from this Spring of
Consolation. What is there in the World that such men can reasonably be afraid
of? The Counsel of the Lord that shall stand, when all the World has done its
worst; and this is his Will and Counsel, That nothing shall harm us if we be
followers of that which is good, 1 Pet. 3. 13. Against all the devices of Men
or Devils, this is our Armor of Proof, Gods Will shall stand. We know not
indeed what sharp chastisements our manifold Sins may require, but we know
this, that it is his Will thus to purge away our Dross, and resine us for
himself, that we may be bound up among his Jewels. We know not what strong
Physic our diseased Souls may stand in need of, but this we know, we have both
a wise and good Physician, that knows our temper and what will fit it, and
whose end is his own honor in our life and health, and who has no delight in
our torment, nor design to destroy us. If God permit the devices of wicked men,
of what Sect or Party soever they be, to create us some disturbance, it is but
either by the smart we feel to confirm us more in our just dislike of such
Religions as are to be upheld by Blood and Cruelty, or if he bring us thus to
the fiery Trial, to carry us the sooner into Heaven, that we may be safe out of
the reach of all infection or vexation. A man's heart devises his way, but the
Lord directs his steps, Prove. 16. 9. The Pilot steareth, but God gives the
Wind, and directs the Ship whither he pleases. And this is the never failing
comfort of all good men, that God is always at the Helm. The Clouds are turned
round by his Counsels; that they may do whatsoever he commands them upon the
face of the World or the Earth. He causes it to come, whether for Correction,
or for his Land, or for Mercy, Job. 37. 12, 13. Blessed be God, we have often
tasted of his Consolation, and by our former Manifold Experiences of his
goodness, should learn yet more to comfort our selves with hopes of future
Blessings; and that he who has so often delivered us already will deliver us
unto the end. There are but these three things can give us cause to doubt of
it. Our great unthankfulness for past Mercies, our present uneasiness under and
disobedience to his Government, and our distrustfulness of his Providence.
Therefore that we may be able to comfort our selves in him and the Stability of
his Counsels, let us make sure of these things.

1. That we heartily praise his Holy Name for all the rich Mercies we enjoy,
and the great deliverances he has wrought for us at all times, and more
particularly for those singular tokens of his Mercy in the many Deliverances
and continued Preservation of the Person of our Dread Sovereign Lord the King:
a Mercy, which many years Confusion and Misery should in all reason have taught
us before this time how to value, and which God himself may seem to commend to
our special notice by those truly wonderful Methods he has used to confer it
upon us; so wonderful, that hardly any thing can seem more so, then that there
should be yet any among us, whom the observation thereof has not convinced of
the vanity of all Rebellious and Treacherous devices. Many devices and much
talk there has been of late about the Succession, but had our Gracious King
and his Royal Highness been taken in the Nets of their Enemies, an unhappy end
had been put to that dispute, and who should have succeeded in the Throne, any
or none, one or many, it is happy for us we are not driven to consider. A long
Succession in all likelihood we should have had of intolerable Calamities, and
might have despaired of seeing Peace in our days. It is an easy thing to lop
off more Boughs in an hour then will grow again in many years. Governments are
like Glasses, the easiest things to break in pieces, but the hardest to cement
again.

2. Let us continue in an absolute Obedience and resignation to God in all the
Branches of his Divine Will, and particularly in a subordinate Obedience unto
his Anointed. Let the fear of God overaw us in all our undertakings, and let
the same fear move us to Honor the King, and restrain us from all disloyal
Attempts and Thoughts. There is no comfort for Rebels but what they must fetch
from their own devices, and before they can find any solid comfort in those,
they must cease to be rebellious either against God or the King, by submitting
all their devices to the Counsel of the Lord.

2. Let us place our whole trust in God alone, for vain is the help of man. His
Breath goes forth and all his thoughts perish. Then we best honor God, when
in doing his Will sincerely, we trust in him only, and doubt not of his
Protection, who is both our King and our Father, and our Merciful God. He is of
one mind, and who can turn him? And what his Soul desires, even that he does;
for he performs the thing that is appointed for us, Job. 23. 13, 14. To
conclude, let all our devices be only such as may concentre in the Counsel of
God, and Gods Counsel shall be the strength and accomplishment of all our
Devices.

Now to the Blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God, who gives Salvation
unto Kings, and delivers his Servant our Gracious Sovereign from the hurtful
Sword, be Honor and Glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
THE CERTAIN RULE OF Peace and Love IN THE CHURCH.
Phil. II. 3. Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in
lowliness of mind let each esteem other better then themselves.


THat Sacred Truth, which our Blessed Jesus has revealed unto us in his
Gospel, is the Doctrinal Foundation whereupon the Christian Church does stand;
if this were lost, there could be no such thing as that which we call a
Christian Church upon Earth. The joint Consent of Christians in this Sacred
Truth is the erecting of this Spiritual Building upon that firm Foundation; and
where this consent is not, in the Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, the
Church cannot be one. The Love and Charity of Christians, which they have in
the first place unto Christ their Head, as Members of one body, united under
him, and living by him; and in the next place, unto each other mutually and
suitably to their proper stations and offices in the Body, is the Cement
wherewith these living stones in this Spiritual Building are held together; and
where this decays, the Walls chap, and the House goes to ruin. All this we
may read in those words of St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. where the Apostle
telling us what care Christ took after his Ascension into Heaven for the
planting and governing of his Church upon Earth, the edifying of the Body of
Christ, as he expresses himself, v. 12. says, all was to this end, that
speaking the truth in love, we may grow up into him in all things [increase in
or unto him] which is the Head, even Christ. From whom the whole body fitly
joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to
the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the
Body, unto the edifying of it self in love. Now if this be the great end, for
which Christ furnished men with gifts for the Preaching of his Gospel to all
Nations; that by embracing that one truth Preached, they might become one Body
of Christ, and continue united in love, as the Members of the same Body,
governed and directed, as well as enlivened by Christ the head of the Body, and
mutually caring for, and assisting one another, according to the measure or
proportion, Faculty or Office of every several part, for the benefit of the
whole, its health and growth and preservation; it can be no wonder here to find
the Apostle so earnest in his Exhortation to Peace and Unity. If (says he)
there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the spirit, if any Bowels of Mercies. It must needs be a matter of exceeding
great weight and concernment, we must needs conclude it is something whereby
God is highly glorified, and the Salvation of Christians greatly promoted,
which St. Paul would obtain at their hands by all these affectionate
obtestations; yea, it is such a thing, as he says, would complete and perfect
his joy, fulfill ye my joy, says he. He was now for the sake of that Gospel of
Peace and Joy to them, which he had Preached unto them, a Prisoner in Bonds;
and he seems to desire no more to make his Bonds easy to him, and his
Imprisonment a delight, but only this, that they be like minded, or mind the
same thing; having the same love, of one accord, of one mind. That they would
live in Unity, loving one another mutually, as one Body with but one Soul;
having the same affections, carrying on the same designs, all joining heads,
and hearts, and hands in a vigorous pursuit of the same end by the same Methods.

This is a request so very reasonable, that a man would wonder what need there
could be of ushering it in with so much earnestness: the thing he desires is
so evidently good in it self, so apparently conducive to the happiness both of
Church and State wherever it is practiced, so much the interest of every single
Member of the Body, that it is almost unimaginable, how any man should be so
absurd, as not to gratify with all readiness, I say not the Apostle, but
himself, in a matter wherein it is so visible, that every man's private welfare
is so deeply concerned. What man is there among us that does not profess
himself (of what Party or Faction soever he be) most ready to join with the
Church in singing, Behold how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell
together in Unity? Psalm. 133. 1. It is so, without all doubt, and all of us
willingly grant it to be so; yea, and all of us would be glad to see it; but
then, it must be upon those terms only as it can never be hoped for. Like two
Armies in the Field ready to join Battle, both are very willing to hear of
Peace, and would be content not to hazard their lives in the Fight; but each
will have Peace on its own terms only, and neither will abate an Ace of its own
demands; and so still they are agreed in nothing, but in being unreasonable,
and desiring that which cannot be. All the difficulty therefore is, to find out
an expedient, whereby all Parties may agree, not only in a general desire of
Unity; but also in the likeliest means or effecting it. And truly this would
be no very hard matter to bring about, were we all really as good Christians,
as we would be thought to be. We should not need to run as far as Rome to seek
for an infallible Judge to put an end to our Divisions: Which why any man
should see cause to do, I know not, except he be persuaded that no hand can
heal them but that which made them. Would we but only have that real Veneration
for the Holy Scriptures, which all Protestants pretend to have, and submit our
Wills and Humors, which some men have been apt to mis-call the Spirit, to the
directions of that Holy Spirit which we all acknowledge to be infallible; and
follow his advice concerning the means, whose exhortation to the thing we all
acknowledge to be very reasonable, much of the difficulty would soon disappear.

In order to the establishment of so excellent and desirable a Blessing of
Love, and Peace, and Unanimity among Christians; something there is, which must
be laid aside, as that which certainly obstructs and frustrates all Peaceable
Attempts; and something there is, which must be learned and practiced, which
will mainly promote this glorious design. But men are not so ready to do,
either the one or the other, as the Principles of Christianity oblige them to
be. What these things are we read in the Text. Let nothing be done through
strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better
then themselves.

Here we have the best expedient in the World for the maintaining both of Unity
in Faith and Doctrine, and of Unanimity in Love and Affection, and of
Uniformity of Practice and Behavior, and consequently of the Peace and
Tranquillity of both Kingdom and Church. O that all they who profess themselves
to be desirous of the happiness and prosperity of both (as certainly all good
Christians are) would begin to account it their greatest Wisdom to learn with
Christian Politics of such as St. Paul, men endued with the Spirit of Divine
Wisdom, which has this double commend^tion, that it is first pure and then
peaceable, Jam. 3. 17. And would lay aside that other kind of Wisdom, which
they have too long admired, and been in love with, which is earthly, sensual
and devilish, where by envying and strife fill the World with confusion and
every evil work, v. 15, 16. How soon would the World look with another face?
How soon should we see that happily effected to the unspeakable joy and glory
of Christendom, which has so long miserably baffled all the great Wits of the
World?

The Rules here given us to this end by the Apostle are two,

1. The former shows us, what we must remove out of the way, that Peace and
Love may enter and take possession, in these words, Let nothing be done through
strife and vainglory.

2. The other teaches us, what is that right truly Christian temper of
Spirit, whereby Peace and Love may be cherished and maintained, in these words,
But in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better then themselves.

Let us now suppose, not only that all who read this are in profession
Christians, but also sufficiently convinced that it is every man's both duty and
interest, strenuously to endeavor all he can in his proper Place and Calling,
that the Unity of the Spirit may be kept in the Bond of Peace, as the Apostle
exhorts, Ephesians. 4. 3. That our Jerusalem may be as a City that is compact
together, Psalm. 122. 3. That we may yet see those happy days, wherein we may
take sweet Counsel together, and walk unto the House of God in company, Psalm.
55. 14. And this supposed, the Business of this discourse is not to persuade
such men to do, what they can need no persuasion to do, to desire the return of
Peace and Unity in the Church; but to take the right way to endeavor it, and
to put every man his hand to the work in good earnest; Acting by those
never-deceiving Rules which St. Paul has here given us. And this that we may
all do, our present Business is to learn, 1. To understand. 2. To use them. And
that in the same order as here they lie before us.

I. The first Rule here given us is this, Let nothing be done through strife
and vainglory. Or thus. These two things, strife and vainglory must very
carefully be avoided by us in all our Actings, if we would contribute any thing
to the Peace and Unity of the Church. And God knows, they are every where too
visible, as the two Doors at which all our Disputes and Divisions, and
whatsoever is destructive to true Concord and Unity, then which nothing is a
greater stranger among us at this day, are wont to enter but never can find
their way out again. To learn, first, what these things are, and Secondly, how
we are to remove them out of the way, will be enough for the understanding of
the first Rule and its use.

1. Let nothing be done through strife or contention. This strife is a
quarrelsom humor, a Spirit of Opposition and Contradiction, a strange
crossness of temper wherewith very many men are exceedingly troubled
themselves, and are as troublesome to others: who are never well as long as
they are quiet, or suffer others to be quiet; their very life seems to consist
in being sick of every thing almost that they see or hear, and they feed upon
the faults and infirmities of Mankind. The chief exercise of their Souls is to
be always gainsaying and contending right or wrong. They study not for the
Truth, but for the Maistery and pester the World with disputes and invectives;
not to confute Errors, and shame Vice; but to vent the boiling humor, and to
vex those by whom they are vexed, tho not by any thing done to offend them;
it is enough that they are not of their opinion, and that they are such as they
are pleased to choose out for their Adversaries, and to shoot their poisoned
Arrows at, even bitter words. Men of this currish snarling temper must be
snapping at every thing that comes in their way, and barking at all that comes
not from themselves; and usually the best things are with them the greatest
faults, if they be not the Authors of them, as rarely they are of any good,
excent what by following their own litigious humor, they may sometimes chance
to stumble upon. Something they must ever have, whatever it cost them, to
oppose to every thing that another either affirms or denies. This is certainly
as wicked and devilish a temper, as it must needs be very uneasy; and that
which has served Satan to as many evil purposes, as any evil himself was ever
Father of. A pious and ingenious Writer calls it very fitly, the Devil's
Goliah-stratagem, which has served him not only to desie, but even to defeat
the Armies of the Living God. To these men may well be applied what the Apostle
says, 1 These. 2. 15. They please not God, and are contrary to all men. In a
word therefore, by strife, I suppose we are here to understand, that froward
and selfish humor, whereby a man is so wedded to his own will and conceit,
that he is always in a posture of defyance to every thing that opposes either;
and prizeth his own opinions, only because they are his own, above the best
reasons of other men; is discontented with every thing that suiteth not exactly
with his own Sentiments or Desires, and so idolizeth his own imaginations and
inventions, that he thinks the public Welfare, the Tranquillity of the World,
and whatever else will not fall down and worship them, but a cheap Sacrifice
unto them. This or something of it, is the thing which we are in the first
place to remove out of the way.

Now how great reason every man has to correct this peccant humor in himself,
when ever he finds it stirring, and wholly to disburden his Soul of it, will be
very easily discerned by him that shall consider but these three things. 1. The
evil root from which it grows. 2. The utter inconsistency of it with the truth
of Christianity. And, 3. The pernicious influence which it has upon the Church.

1. The root of it is not always one, but whatever it be, it is never good.

In some men, it seems to be nothing else, but a certain kind of Childishness,
or a Pettishness and Peevishness of Nature, as Children are crying earnestly
for every new thing they hear of, and will by no fair means nor foul be
quieted, till they have it; and when they have got it, are as soon weary of it
again, and as apt to cry for something else, though they cannot tell you what
it is; and it may be for that same thing again, whereof but now they were so
weary; and those Children above all others that are the greatest fantlings, and
most indulged by fond Mothers, are commonly noted to be of this pettish humor:
such a giddy inconstancy there seems to be in many men. Some little things
there be for or against which they are wont to be very eager; and yet can they
give no considerable reason either for their like, or dislike of them; but they
are dissatisfied with what is present, and (tho they cannot well tell what to
call it) they are very angry with those in whose power they think it is to give
them what they want, and give it not. Their phant'sies are keenly set upon it,
and quiet they will not, nor cannot be without it, nor will they suffer those
that are near them to be at quiet for them. Surely this is not the temper of a
sober serious Christian, who like a good natured Child, is content, so he have
his wholesome Food, which his Father allows him; tho he cannot have it
dressed according to his own phant'sie: and is as unwilling, as afraid to make
any disturbance in his Fathers Family about things that are not of very great
concernment.

In others, this looks like a contracted Disease, brought upon themselves, by
some disorderly usage of themselves. It seems to be a Sickness and
Squeamishness of Soul, much like unto that of the Stomach, which arises from a
disorderly Diet; whereby it is come to pass, that it na^seateth every thing,
but only that which is most hurtful, and serves only to feed the distemper.
Or, as men in some diseases long for many things, but relish nothing that is
offered them; taste greedily, but spit it out again with a loathing. Some men
having disordered their heads by poring into some of the profoundest Doctrines,
which are too deep for them; and having confounded their Brains with (at least
to them) unintelligible Notions, are come at last, to think every plainest
thing mysterious, and dispute like Skepticks about it. Some have so baffled
themselves with wandering through a Wood of Opinions, that they can find no way
out again, but presently fly out of every Path that they enter into, tho for
no other reason, but a phant'sie only, that it may not be the right. Some have
been so nicely educated, and taught to be so curious, that they dare hardly
taste of any thing that another has made ready for them, for fear of poison,
or at least fluttishness; every Ceremony is to some Antichristian, and
Idolatry; and to others a very Idol, and Christ himself shall rather want his
Worship, then it shall be endured by some, or not be worshipped too by others.
All this is far from the healthful temper of the sound and serious Christian;
who whilst he can have the Daily Bread of his Soul which may feed him to
Eternal Life, sits down contentedly with the rest of the Family, feeds
heartily, and gives God thanks, asking no question for Conscience sake, either
who first invented the fashion of the Dishes, or to what uses they have been
sometimes put; all his care is to see it be the Food his Father has provided
for him; and that all things are observed about it, that he has commanded; and
for other things, he leaves them to their ordering, to whose care the
Government of the Family is entrusted.

In others again, this seems to come from an angry and waspish nature. Some
men's Souls seem to be all Fire, or else as Tinder, the least spark presently
sets them all on fire. They cannot hear so much as a word with any Patience, or
Calmness, that sounds not just as they would have it; and it is all one to
anger them, and not in every little thing to humor them. And be sure of this,
that an angry man stirs up strife, Prove. 29. 22. A wrathful man stirs up
strife, but he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife, Prove. 15. 18. And as
Coals are to burning Coals, so is a contentions man to kindle strife, Prove. 26.
21. How far this is from the Meek and Lamblike temper of a good Christian, I
need not now stay to show.

In another sort of men, this may spring from a preconceived prejudice against
the persons of men; and then, as he that has been taught before hand to have
an ill opinion of his Physician, is apt to disgust every thing that he
prescribes, without so much as once examining, what it is or how likely to
conduce unto his health; and by this means often deprives himself of the
readiest means of cure, by a most unreasonable jealousy of being poisoned: so,
when men are once possessed with a prejudice against the persons of others,
especially of their Teachers and Governors, they grow jealous of their
instructions, and commands; and dispute where they should learn, or obey; and
quarrel with their duty, not because they think it is not so, but because they
know by whom it is enjoined; and imagine they can never enough oppose what
comes from those, whom they have learned to suspect or hate.

Others are, it may be, not well pleased with their Lot and Station in the
Church, and cannot be pleased with any thing whilst they are displeased with
that, but will think themselves concerned to dispute against every thing that
comes from such as are advanced above them. Envy is a very restless and
quarrelsome thing, and in whatever Breast it once gets entertainment, that man
shall never want an evil tongue; if he have not wit enough to dispute, he shall
never want Malice enough to rail or slander. Strife can never be a stranger to
the Envious, they are often Companions, and go hand in hand in Scripture, as
Romans 13. 13, etc.

We must not here pass by, without any Notice, that which is called the Root of
all Evil, the love of Money. Where the love of this World is, there is not the
love of the Father; and then be sure, there will be too little love among the
Brethren. What a Multitude of Strifes and Contentions hence daily grow up in
the World (every one seeking, who shall get most of it) no man can be ignorant.
And as little can it be doubted, that this is the cause too of some disturbance
in the Church. Where shall a man hope to find a Church that is Sanctuary enough
against Covetousness? and where Covetousness finds room, it will be no news to
see Altar set up against Altar. If every Party in Religion have a Craft of its
own to get Wealth by, every Party will cry up its own Diana, and no Diana shall
want an Army to fight for her. It has sometimes been accounted a piece of good
policy, to reconcile the Factions to the Government of the Church, by giving
them a share in it. And where this is practiced, the Covetous will sure have so
much policy too, as rather to be Factious, then to be poor. There is no danger
of disturbance from the moderate and peaceable; let him therefore dwell poor in
a corner, feasting by himself on a good Conscience; it is pity to prejudice his
expectation of a greater reward in Heaven by giving him preferment here on
earth. But the importunate man is troublesome, and must be preferred lest he
weary us; and the turbulent and seditious man is dangerous, and must be bribed
to be quiet. And shall we now think the worldling a fool, to be either modest
or peaceable when he fears to be poor by being so? Again, Contention keeps up a
Party, and a Party keeps and maintains us: If we stir it not, the fire will go
out; the Zeal and Charity of the Faction will cool together: we have overheated
our opposites, and made the Church too hot for us; and if we keep not our
friends warm, they will not keep us from starving. Thus it is well, if whilst
God and Religion is the word, and fairly writ in the Banner, Mammon be not set
up in the heart, and the Battles that are fought be not all his.

Lastly, I shall name but one thing more, and that is Pride. And perhaps it
might have been enough to have named this one for all: seeing we are told,
Prove. 13. 10. that, only by Pride comes Contention. Whilst one will brook no
superior, and another no equal, what is become of Peace? One is angry because
he thinks his Merit above his Fortune; and another as angry because he thinks
another Fortune above his Merits. One is vexed to think his own Glory eclipsed
by another shining too bright, and another is in a Fume, that any man should
dare to take notice of his Spots. One strives to keep himself up at the hight,
and thinks he grows lower, as he sees any other grow higher; and they must all
either be kept so much below him, as to look like almost nothing, or he can
hardly think himself any thing. Another thinks himself hot advanced at all, so
long as he sees but one step more, by which he may ascend; and will never leave
justling, 'till he get up to the highest. It is a fine thing, to march in the
Head of a Party; and if this honor may not be bad, yet is it something to
follow such a Leader, especially in braving Authority to its Face; and it is no
little glory to be thought wiser then the most, and especially then our
Teachers and Governors, or to be thought sufficient to set up for our selves.
And it is an odious thing to be told of our Errors and Faults, and more odious
yet to tell our selves and our followers of them, to call our selves Fools, and
confess we have befooled others. And if we contend not to uphold what we have
done, we shall seem to destroy what we have built; or to suffer tamely that to
be built, which we have destroyed; and how intolerable a thing is this to a
proud Spirit? He that is of a proud heart stirs up strife, Prove. 28. 25. But
cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out, yea strife and reproach
shall cease, Prove. 22. 10. From whichsoever of these roots strife arises, or
whatever else it may be that gives being to it, be sure we may, it is very evil.

2. In the next place, to show how altogether inconsistent this contentious
humor is with the right Gospel temper, a very few words may suffice. The
peaceable State of the Gospel was in the Prophets foretold in such expressions
as these. They shall beat their Swords into Plough-shares, and their Spears
into Pruning Hooks, Isai. 2. 4. The Woolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and
the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf and the young Lion, and
the Fatling together, and a little Child shall lead them. They shall not hurt
nor destroy in my holy Mountain, Isai. 11. 6. and 9. Accordingly, we meet with
nothing in the Gospel of Christ, but the sweet breathings of Love and Peace. At
the first revealing of our Blessed Saviors Nativity, those Heralds of Heaven,
the Holy Angels are sent down into the World, to proclaim Glory to God in the
Highest, on Earth Peace, good Will toward men, Luke 2. 14. He that then was
born into the World was the Prince of Peace, the work he had to do was to make
Peace and Reconciliation, his Commands were Peace and Love, his blessing was to
the Peacemaker, and his Legacy at his death was Peace. He came to reconcile us
unto God, and he came also to reconcile us one unto another, and to make of
twain one new man, Ephesians. 2. 15. He himself was the great Exemplar of Love and
Mercy, of Condescension and Meekness, of whom it was said by the Prophet
Isaiah, He shall not strive, nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in
the streets. A bruised Reed shall he not break, and smoking Flax shall he not
quench, Mat. 12. 19. He lived in all due obedience to the Powers, and in
conformity to the Customs that then were; and commanded all to render unto
Caesar the things that were Caesar's, as well as unto God the things that are
Gods, Mar. 12. 17. He smartly rebuked the two Sons of Thunder, James and John,
when they would in imitation of Elias, have called down fire from Heaven on the
Samaritan Village, that had affronted him; telling them, they understood not
the true Gospel Spirit, Luke 9. 55. When he was led like a Lamb before the
Shearers, as one that is dumb so opened he not his mouth, Act. 8. 32. When he
was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but
committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 23. So little of
contention was there to be seen in him. And he has given in charge to all that
follow him, that is, to all Christians, to deny themselves, and take up his
Cross, and to learn of him to be meek and lowly of heart; who disdained not to
stoop so low, as to wash the Feet of his Disciples, and lower yet, to converse
with Publicans and Sinners. Now, most certain it is, that if any man have not
the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8. 9. And his Spirit is the
Spirit of Love, and Meekness, and Patience, and Peace, and Unity; and teaches
all that have it, not to hate, but to love their Enemies, not to curse but to
bless them, not to render evil for evil, but to overcome evil with good, Romans
12. 21. And to pray for them that despitefully use and persecute us, Matt. 5.
44. And. The Servant of God (says St. Paul) must not strive, but be gentle
unto all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing such as oppose
themselves, 2 Timothy 2. 24. And if this be spoken more especially unto the
Governors and Teachers of the Church, yet is it not only, that they may know
their own duties, but that they should teach others also to walk so as they had
them for an example, Phil. 3. 17. And as much as in them lies, live peaceably
with all men, Romans 12. 18. The Apostle ranketh strifes among the works of the
Flesh, which they that do shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 20.
They therefore that indulge this humor, must lay aside not only all pretense
of being Spiritual, but all claim to the Kingdom of God. Whereas there is among
you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? For
while one says, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal?
1 Cor. 3. 3. Where there is strife and envying, there is confusion and every
evil work, Jam. 3. 16. And who sees not that this is utterly inconsistent with
the Gospel of Purity and Peace.

3. And therefore lastly, must it needs be destructive to the happiness of the
Church; unless any man can be so unreasonable as to think, that Confusions, and
Heresies and Schisms can consist with its happiness, which evils the Apostle
joins with strife, as the effects with their cause, or at least, as those close
Companions which are very rarely separated, Gal. 5. 20. etc. Sure it is, that
an house divided against it self cannot stand, Matt. 12. 25. The strength of
the Church which is the house of God, lies in the Unity of Faith and Love.
Strife is the very cutting asunder of that Bond of Peace wherein the Unity of
Spirit is to be held. It is the violent forcing asunder the stones of the
Spiritual Building, and dashing them in pieces one against another. Unity of
Affections there can be none where strife comes, but a biting and devouring one
another, and being devoured one of another, Gal. 5. 15. And indeed an opening
of a broad way to some common Enemy to enter in and make havoc of all. And the
Unity of Faith is in no little danger. Men of a contentious Spirit are always
brim full of Objections against every thing, and must swell till they burst, if
they have not leave to give vent to their uneasy Souls (always in travel to
bring forth something new) in troublesome disputations, which are soon begun,
but not so soon ended. When the humor is once set abroach, it runs
everlastingly. It would be labor to no purpose to say more of this, the
mischiefs of Strife have been a long time too visible not to be seen of all,
tho they seem to be too little considered by the most, even so visible as to
render the visible Church of Christ on Earth almost invisible too. Let us only
here add the wise Kings Observation, and, if it come not too late, as I hope it
may not to some of us, let us take his advice too. The beginning of Strife, is
as when one lets out water; therefore leave off contention before it be
meddled with, Prove. 17. 14.

How this Malignant, and (God knows) at this day too predominant humor, which
so destroys the healthful State of the Church, may be purged out, the Second
Rule will teach us. In the mean time, a Question is, I suppose, ready to be
here asked by some, which seems not impertinent, and therefore deserves some
answer. It is this.

Qu. Are we Christians bound, without any dispute at all, to swallow down every
Doctrine which our Teachers shall commend unto our Faith? And must we without
any Examination of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the things enjoined, rest
in the Will of our Superiors, applying our selves, without any more ado, to the
executing of their Commands? May we not oppose Falsehood, and contend for the
Truth, and refuse to do wickedly when we are bid by men in Authority?

An. To this Question, which has been often asked, and as often answered, we
shall here answer only so far, as it seems to reflect upon the Rule here given,
or what has been said of it. We say therefore, let it be far from any
Christian to plead for or countenance an Implicit Faith, and a blind Obedience;
or to dissuade any man from making use of his Eyes or Reason in a sober inquiry
into the Truth of Falsehood of any Doctrine that is Preached; or into the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of any Command which is given by men. All that we
are to be dissuaded from in this place is, that we do not any thing of this out
of Strife, or with a quarrelsome and contentious mind. Do it in meekness and
humility, and with a peaceable frame of Spirit, as men truly zealous for the
Truth, and desirous to do your duty to God and Man, and you shall neither hurt
your selves, nor be obnoxious to the Woe which belongs to them by whom Offenses
come. More particularly,

1. We are commanded to search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39. For tho those words
were spoken to the unbelieving Jews, and not to Christians; yet, by a Parity of
reason, are we equally concerned in the duty there enjoined. If they, having
received of God the Books of Moses and the Prophets, as the Rule of Faith and
Life, were obliged to search those Books for directions in both; and
particularly to convince them of their present duty, now to believe in Jesus as
the promised Messiah to the saving of their Souls: as much cause have we, who
have received the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, as our Rule of
Faith and Holiness, to search them diligently, and to try all things by them,
that we may be sure we obey the Gospel of Christ, without which there is no
salvation to us. That we may be always in a readiness to give an answer to every
man that asks us a reason of the hope that is in us with meekness and fear, 1
Pet. 3. 15. And that we be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4 14. And may not believe
every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God, 1 John 4. 1. Leave we
therefore this Implicit Faith, and taking things on trust on the naked credit
of our Teachers without all Search and Trial of their Doctrine, to the
Disciples of Rome, against whose new Faith were there nothing more to object,
even this alone were enough to render it suspicious, that it is afraid of the
Light, and of a fair Trial by the Written Word. God forbid that we should put
out men's eyes, and bid them stalk after others toward Heaven in the dark, so
long as God himself has both given them Eyes to see withal, and has left them
a plain Rule to walk by, and a strict command to observe it. A judgment of
discretion to discern truth from falsehood, and good from Evil, by such light as
God has given them, must be allowed to all, if we will allow them to be Men
and not Brutes. Only let not this Universal Privilege be abused to Strife. And
that it may not be so, take these Directions.

1. Have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory with respect
of persons, Jam. 2. 1. These words of the Apostle James, whatever
interpretation they admit of as there used, I may thus accommodate to the
present matter. Let not the Enmity or Prejudice you have taken up against any
man or party, nor yet the good opinion you have conceived of, or great
affection for any such, bias or overruled your search after the truth; let
them not corrupt your Judgment, nor be your Motives to embrace some and reject
other Doctrines. But impartially weigh them all in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, and choose them by their own weight. Use men you may and must, as
far as you need them, as helps to your own weakness: but consider their reasons
not their persons, and what help you have by them, not what opinion or
affection you have had for them; left you run into an Error not unlike that you
condemn in the Romish Church, of pinning your Faith upon your Friends sleeve.
For tho you thus may chance to hit upon the truth, yet shall you be found
herein to act through Strife, and that infecteth even your believing of truth
it self with sin.

2. Take heed of doting about Questions and Strifes of words, whereof comes
Envy, Strife, Railings, Evil Surmisings, Perverse Disputings of men of corrupt
minds, 1 Timothy 6. 4. See that they be not things unprofitable and vain, Tit. 3.
9. that you are so earnest about. Were all word-bickerings, and impertinent
disputes laid aside, we should soon see controversial Divinity reduced into a
much narrower compass. Weigh well the matters in debate, and be sure there is
something in them that will quit cost, and pay you well for your pains. Take
heed, if the contention be but about a little straw, and things of very little
or no concernment to men's Souls, or the good of the Church, that your zeal grow
not too hot; lest you set all on fire, and burn down the House over your heads.
Especially beware of that most unreasonable but very common disease of most
wranglers, fighting about words, whilst you are agreed in the things
themselves, and see it not for the much dust that slies in your eyes by your
bustling about nothing.

3. Search for the Truth always, and that purely for the Truths sake, and the
usefulness of it. To find out Gods Will, and not something that may suit with
your own wishes, should be your design. That whereby God may be glorified, the
World benefitted, your Souls saved, not your humors pleased. Some men seem to
take great pains to search for the truth, as beforehand resolved to hold it no
longer, or at least, not much to regard it, when they have found it upon any
other account, then that they see some others hold an Error, whom they may be
able to oppose with it: they value the truth for nothing so much, as for this,
that it is a Warrant for the exercise of their faculty of wrangling and
contradiction.

4. Search the Scriptures sincerely and reverently as the Sacred Oracles of
life, not being partial to any opinion which you have already taken up by
chance, and are fallen in love with. Take heed of wresting and forcing the words
of Scripture to comply with your present Sentiments; or of picking out hete and
there a broken piece of a Sentence to patch up your own thoughts withal; or how
you judge of the sound of the words you hear, by the sound that already rings
in your ears. Go to the Scriptures, as to the Fountain of saving truth,
resolving to fetch both your Opinions and your Practice thence, and to correct
whatsoever is at present amiss in your self by them. This is to give God his
due honor, and to let him be the sole Lord of your Faith.

5. Content your selves with the most plain, easy, and obvious Truths; for
those are also the most necessary and least subject to disputes; and meet with
least opposition on any hand, except it be from men's Lusts, and against those
you have liberty to contend with all your might, so it be in your own Place and
Station, and with Christian Charity. Remember always that in the Scriptures
there be some things hard to be understood which the unlearned are apt to wrest
to their own and others destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. And in the interpreting
whereof the most Learned think it both their Wisdom and Duty to be very modest.
How hard would it be for Christians to disagree, would they rest in plainly
revealed Truths, which all good Protestants are agreed to be all things
necessary to the salvation of sinners. And how unreasonable a thing is it, when
we are are all agreed in these, to strive even to the justling of one another
or our selves out of the Church, about those things whereof men may be safely
ignorant, and it may be ten to one, whether one of ten ever understood.

6. Have you found something, which seems to you to be a truth, whilst yet
the greatest and most Learned part of the Christian World, and particularly of
the Church wherein you live, thinks it an Error? Set not your selves
presently, as some Novices use to do, in the Pope's Chair. Remember you are at
best, but fallible men, and should learn to be wise unto Sobriety. Love not to
be troublesome to the World with your pretended Knowledge, neither be angry
that all men's Judgments will not bow to yours. Have thou Faith? have it to thy
self before God, Romans 4. 22. Think it not a duty in you, to make all the World
know what you think you only know, or the duty of all men to learn of you. A
good and humble Christian will satisfy himself in approving himself faithful
to God and his own Conscience, and will always have the Modesty to think, that
many men in the World are wiser then he: and for this reason he cannot think it
fit for him, either to pride himself in his singular opinions, or to vent them
every where to draw Disciples after him, to the breach of the Churches Peace.
We have a command indeed that our light so shine before men that they may see
our good works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven; but where is the
command, to vent our opinions, that they may see our Wisdom and glorify us
upon Earth? Thus much concerning opinions.

2. Now to that part of the Question relating to the commands of Superiors, we
may say again more generally, That it is a most certain truth, That we must
obey God rather than men, Act. 5. 29. And that we are bound to use all the
means that God has put within our reach to be fully persuaded in our minds,
touching the lawfulness of every Action we go about, be it commanded or
uncommanded by our Superiors, Romans 14. 5. And we are well assured by the
Apostle, That whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23. And therefore no
man ought to be debarred the liberty of securing his own Soul as well as he
can, by examining the lawfulness of the things commanded. Only let this again
be done without Strife. That is to say,

1. Make it manifest by your ready and unforced Obedience in all things, of the
lawfulness whereof you are already satisfied, that your disobedience in other
things, wherein you are not yet satisfied, is purely for Conscience sake, and
not through Strife; but that as you obey cheerfully for the Lords sake, so if
in any thing you disobey, it is purely for the Lords sake too. If this course
had been taken in time by some men, they might, it is probable, at this day
have seen the Wisdom as well as Justice of so doing. He that withholds
obedience upon pretense of unlawfulness only, must needs obey in all things
which he grants to be lawful, or else he utterly voids his own pretense, and
declares himself more a lover of Strife than Conscience. Whereunto then we have
already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing,
Phil. 3. 16.

2. In examining the Commands of Superiors, make it not your business to seek
out something which you may with some color for your disobedience oppose
against them, when you see beforehand no apparent reason, why you should not
obey them. He that seeing no cause why he should not obey, goes to seek for
one, shows plainly his affection to Strife, and that the reason of his
disobedience is not unlawfulness but wilfulness. Take heed therefore how your
enmity to the Government send you a hunting for something to make the Commands
of your Governors seem disputable.

3. Be well contented to be satisfied in your own Consciences, concerning the
unlawfulness of what is enjoined by public Authority, and being so satisfied,
take heed of two things:

1. That you be not too forward to Judge or Condemn those that are otherwise
persuaded, and think it to be their duty to do, in obedience to their
Governors, what you dare not do. It is an uncharitable censure to say, that
others act against their own Consciences as often as they will not be
overruled by your Judgments, or cannot be convinced by your Arguments. Too
much of this Spirit of Strife and rash censuring seems to show it self in
some late Writings, wherein the Authors forgetting what they promised, a bare
Vindication of, or rather Apology for themselves, fall into a downright
Accusation of others, even to that degree, as to deny them all possibility of
satisfying their own Consciences in what they do. I do not see whither such
things as these can tend, whatever was the intention of the Writers, but to the
gendering of Strifes, which I would fain hope them to be better Christians then
to make their design. However let us study that healing Rule the Apostle
gives, Romans 14. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and
let not him that eats not, judge him that eats. Who art thou that judge
another Man's Servant? to his own Master he stands or falls.

2. Do not make it your business to put doubts and scruples into the
Consciences of others, to the disturbance of both their own and the Churches
Peace. The Itch of making Proselytes to every man's private opinion has ever
been as pernicious an evil to the Church of God, as that which is commonly said
of men in the Plague, were it true, would be to the Neighborhood, that a part
of their Disease is a desire to infect the Sound. Think well how you have
enough to do, in a doubtful case, to answer God for your own disobedience to
the Powers, unto which he has commanded to be subject for Conscience sake, and
therefore can have no need to engage your selves in that hard task of answering
for the disobedience of many, which they would never have been guilty of but
through your persuasion.

I shall now only add a few things to conclude this first point. Seeing man is
so very restless a thing in this World, and it is so hard a matter quite to
root out of him this humor of striving, let us endeavor to cut a way for it
into its proper Chanel, where it may run freely, and men may strive to good
purpose. Yet by the way we must be warned to put away all Rancor, and Malice,
and Envy, and Wrath, and Evil speaking, and all must be a Strife of Love. A man
is not crowned, except he strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2. 5.

1. Strive we may then, and even for the Mastery to obtain the incorruptible
Crown, 1 Cor. 9. 25. And show us any thing else, that is truly worth the
striving for. For this, let us all be persuaded to fight with all our might and
courage, yet not with such Enemies as are the creatures of our own imaginations
or opinions; we have Enemies enough to hold us doing, and put us to all our
shifts, besides those; even the same, which we have engaged our selves in our
Baptism to wage a continual War against, Sin, the World, and the Devil. He that
knows what these are, knows he has enough to strive against. If we will
have the Crown we must strive to overcome all these; this is to strive like a
Christian indeed, and this is our encouragement, the Victory is sure, and it is
a Noble Victory. Foolishly therefore do we wast our time, and our strength in
contending with one another about Ceremonies and Formalities, where he that
conquereth shall but like the proud Emperor triumph in Cockle-shells. Surely we
think but little whither we are going, or from what we flee, and what Enemies
watch for our ruin, if we can be at leisure to stand bogling at Straws.
Certainly we shall all have enough to do, without casting such rubs as these
strifes are in our own way, to come to Heaven.

2. Strive together for the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. But if we will do
this indeed, we must as the Apostle there also faith, stand fast in the Spirit,
with one mind. A scattered and divided Army is easily vanquished by piecemeal,
which in a full body might have daunted the Enemy with the very sight of its
number, order and unity. We cannot choose but be sensible that our Faith has
very considerable Enemies at this day, and how can we invent a way to do them
better, or our selves worse service, then by keeping open our divisions, which
has cost them so much pains to make amongst us? O how do they hug themselves
to see us so industrious to save them a labor, and ruin our selves? Let us
but be united amongst our selves, and strive together for the Faith of the
Gospel, and we may confidently promise our selves what the Apostle there
adds, v. 28. We need be nothing terrified by our Adversaries.

3. Let the Ministers strive to preach Christ, warning every man and teaching
every man in all Wisdom, that they may present them perfect in Christ Jesus.
Unto this let them labor, striving according to his working, which works in
them mightily, Col. 1. 28, 29. How much livelier a work would this be, how much
more beseeming the Ministers of Christ set over the Flock, thus to feed and
watch daily over the Sheep and Lambs, and combining together to keep them from
the ravenous Wolves and wily Foxes, then to stand pelting one another with ill
words only to make sport for the Adversary?

4. Let the People strive together with their Ministers in their Prayers to God
for them, Romans 15. 30. to this end, as it there follows, That they may be
delivered from them that do not believe, and that their service may be accepted
of the Saints. This would be a much more Christian and profitable work, then
theirs of whom we read, Hos. 4. 4. The People are as they which strive with the
Priest: whether it were, who should outdo other in wickedness, or to oppose his
Doctrine, obstruct him in Discipline, or revile his Person and Function in all
Companies.

5. Let us all strive to enter in at the strait Gate, Luke 13. 24. And who
should go on fastest in that narrow way that leads unto Life Eternal.
Exhorting one another, and provoking one another to love and good works, Heb.
10, 24. And not strive to anger and vex and revenge our selves on one another
by unchristian and even inhumane affronts and injuries.

6. Strive against sin, Heb. 12. 4. Let our earnestness against this common
Enemy of Mankind be as great as can be. Here exercise all our wrath and
revenge. Let us be very bitter against it, have no pity on it, resolve never on
any terms to be reconciled unto it, or be satisfied with any thing less then
its death. Let us strive to subdue it and mortify it in our selves, and to
correct it as we have opportunity in others. It is a much better work this,
than making sins of those things which are none, of indifferent things, or
casting aspersions of Sin upon others for those very things whereby they labor
all they can to shun all appearance of it in obeying their Superiors.

7. Lastly, let us strive who shall outgo others in love and meekness, and
tenderness of affection, longsuffering, and forbearing one another in love,
Ephesians. 4. 2. Putting always the best and most favorable construction upon all
one another words and actions, and exercising all our severity upon our
selves, our sinful flesh and lusts. Seeking how we may become all things to all
men, that we may by all means gain some, 1 Cor. 9. 20. Not to a Party or
Faction of our own, but to Christ.

Let this suffice to have been said of the former of these two things, which we
are to remove out of the way, in order to the introducing of Peace and Unity.

2. The second thing which we are to remove and put far from us is Vainglory.
And till this be put away, strife will abide, the Vainglorious man will ever
be contending, thinking it the likeliest way to be taken notice of for
somebody. This indeed is more usually the Vice of Teachers, then of Learners.
Yet is there no rank of men which is not troubled with some spice of it: In
speaking whereof we must show, 1. What it is, 2. Why to be avoided, 3. How to
be cast out.

1. This Vainglory is a Disease of Mind, whereby a man swells himself up to
what bigness he can in the sight of the World. Either he has a very high
conceit of his own Excellencies, and Perfections, and is concerned that they
are not as much taken notice of by others, as they are admired by himself; and
that all the World should not be as proud and fond of him, as he is of himself:
or else, it may be, he is conscious enough of his own emptiness, and would make
up what he wants of real worth at home, by the Estimation of others. Praise is
the thing he thirsts for, and so he can get it, he cares not much what there is
in him to deserve it. So he may but have a Name and Reputation of Wife, and
Learned and Pious, and other ways gifted, and qualified above others, and as
few are, and be pointed at by the Vulgar as he goes for a few-such, he is well
enough pleased with himself, whatever he be in truth; he can fall out with
himself for nothing but his obscurity, and too little care to make himself
known abroad, or rather to deceive all men into a good opinion of him by
seeming something that he is not. And therefore all his Studies and Endeavors
are bent upon this one thing, how to be known, and yet unknown; to have his
person had in esteem and admiration; and his real worth unknown, lest the
knowledge thereof should abate any thing of that reputation and fame, which he
so insatiably thirsts after. So he may be had in honor, and advanced to some
hight, he is well enough content; what tho the Statue be but of common Wood or
Stone, and have nothing in it of the life of virtue, or any thing else that is
good, yet it stands in a public place, and is finely painted, and guilt, and
all that pass by look upon it and call it a fine thing, and fools admire it,
and that is enough. This is the thing in short.

2. Now why we must avoid this Vice of Vainglory, we shall see cause enough,
if we may but be brought to see, 1. How odious it is to men. 2. How
dishonorable to God. 3. How contrary to the Gospel Spirit. 4. How destructive
to our endeavors and hopes, and, 5. What a Plague it is to the Church and the
Peace thereof.

1. It is certainly odious to men of what sort or complexion soever they be. It
is a thing which no man can endure in any man but himself, and for which, more
then for any one thing beside, good men are apt to fall out with themselves.
The proud man, tho he can freely indulge himself in it, yet can least of any
man see it with any patience in another, nor can he look upon him as any better
then as a covetous man does upon a Thief or Robber, because all praise and
honor he accounts his own due, and thinks whoever gets it robs him of what
is his. He therefore is sure to condemn it in all men, if for no other reason,
yet for this, that it stands, as Alexander did betwixt the Sun and the Proud
Cynick, too much in his light, and will not let him look so shiningly as he
would do. And the humble hates it because he is humble, and hates every thing
that is sinful. So that all the Vainglorious man can get by his foolish
ambition, is only that, which above all things he abhors and most studiously
endeavors to prevent, that is, when ever he is discovered, to be despised of
all. But this is little.

2. Vainglory is a thing most odious to God. How should any man think
otherwise, that knows what God is, and what is due to him from his Creature?
All Honor and Glory and Praise, because all Goodness is so, are his, and only
his: and hence the Vainglorious man is the most sacrilegious man in the World,
and a greater Robber of God, then they that rob him of Tithes and Offerings,
taking to himself the honor and glory due unto God's name, whereof he has
declared himself to be very jealous. The Vainglorious man may be called an
Idolater without a figure, making an Idol of himself, and desirous that all the
World should worship him. This we are plainly told, and that is enough, God
resists the Proud, but gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

3. How contrary Vainglory is to the Spirit of the Gospel is so visible, as
nothing can be more. Our holy Jesus has more particularly commended his own
example to our imitation herein, Learn of me, says he, for I am meek and lowly
of heart, Matt. 11. 29. He sought not his own glory, but the glory of him that
sent him, Joh. 8. 50. 7. 18. He took especial care to prick this Bladder in his
Disciples as soon as he espied it beginning to rise in any of them, as in the
Sons of Zebedee, Matt. 20. 25, 26. Self-denial was one of the principal Lessons
he taught them, and he has left it upon record for our instruction, that one
great reason why no more believed on him and became true Christians was this,
that they received honor one of another, and sought not that honor that
comes from God only, Joh. 5. 44. And loved the praise of men more then the
praise of God, Joh. 12. 43. Now says St. Paul at the 5th v. of this Chapter,
Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. What that was he tells
us, v. 7. He made himself of no reputation, but took upon him the form of a
Servant, and humbled himself. If we will then be the followers of Christ, and
walk worthy of his Gospel, this is the mind we must be of.

4. It certainly blasteth all our very best performances, and destroys all
the hopes we had of a blessing upon them. Even all those otherwise Pious and
Charitable Acts, which done in love and humble obedience are most highly
acceptable to God, and have his sure promise of an everlasting reward, such as
are Fasting, and Prayer, and Almsgiving, when thus Pharisaically performed for
ostentation and to be seen of men, must all be content to take up with that
poor, airy, pitiful thing, the plaudite and praise of a few sinners, instead
of the approbation and reward of God, that, well done good and faithful
servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Matt. 6.

5. Lastly, how this Vainglory pestereth the Church of Christ, and disturbeth
daily the Peace of it, is a thing needless to show in many words. It has
reigned too long in the World to have the innumerable mischiefs it has done in
the Church of Christ in all Ages, concealed from any observing man. When once
any man is infected with this disease, he grows restless in himself, he
longs to go abroad, and to become popular, to be called Rabbi, and thought a
wise man in his generation, a Master in Israel; and then Conscience must be
laid aside of necessity, as a thing which would mightily disturb him in his way
to glory, tho a pretense to it, and to a very great tenderness of it, must by
no means be made away, for that is the best staff he has to lean upon. Such men
always think themselves too much hid in the Crowd of ordinary Christians; alas,
what reputation and honor can it bring them to do, or speak, or write as other
good Christians do? Or what glory can come of living by the same common rules,
whereby the whole body of Christians are to be governed, tho they be such as
Christ himself has given? They are not only Papists that affect works of
Super-erogation. The man that will be Famous, must resolve to step out boldly
before the rest, and attempt something that others dare not do, venture to be
singular in some new Doctrine or Practice, that men may take particular notice
of him, and admire his Wisdom or his Courage, saying, Show us another man that
could or durst do this. Nor can such an one be long without Company, he that
cannot have the honor of the first invention, will strive for that of the
first approbation, thinking it some praise to be first able to discern the
Wisdom of a wiser then himself. Men will rather be content with a fame at
second hand then want it. And if he cannot maintain the Novelty by dispute; yet
is it possible, he may soon be taught a Catalogue of bad names, and when he
has them once on his Tongue, whether he understand them or not, he can bestow
them as freely as another upon any thing he is bid to show his dislike of;
especially on those dull Souls that can so contentedly go on in those beaten
Roads wherein good Christians have so long walked before them. Should we take a
view of all the Heresies and Schisms, which have troubled and rent the Church
from its first Plantation to this day, it is very probable we might find most
of them coming from this never-failing Spring of Vainglory. I close this with
those words of the Apostle, Gal. 5. 26. Let us not be desirous of Vainglory,
provoking one another, envying one another.

Qu. Some may possibly here ask, Whether we Christians should be wholly
regardless of our Credit and Reputation in the World, and unconcerned whether
we have a good name amongst men or not.

An. To such we say with Solomon, Eccl. 7. 1. A good name is better then
precious Ointment. And rather to be chosen then great Riches, Prove. 22. 1.
Every man ought to be truly tender of his Reputation, even with b^d men if
possible, this affording him many special advantages of doing God better
service among them. Honor and Praise are no despicable things, and they may be
sought and upheld in due place as well as Riches and other Earthly Blessings
without offense to God or Man. Let us only take heed that we take the right
course to do both, and secure to our selves the true honor of really being,
and not seeming only wise and good, and all will be well. To this purpose take
but a few Directions.

1. See that God have his due honor entirely to himself, and let us be content
with ours as it shall fall unto us. Let our principal care be to seek the
honor that comes from God only, and to have his approbation and well done in
every thing, and we shall hardly want so much as is due unto us, or at least is
fit for us, from men. To honor God is our great duty, and our great
encouragement is this, Them that honor him, he will honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Whether and how far we shall be honored of men, whilst we are doing our duty,
the only thing to which it can belong, let us leave it to God, that orders
all things. By humility and the fear of the Lord are riches and honor, and
life, Prove. 22. 4. If he give them, praise him, and return all we receive unto
him: if we want the honor men should give, let this suffice us, that we can
approve our selves unto God, By honor and dishonor, by evil report and good
report, 2 Cor. 6. 8.

2. Having made sure that God have his honor from us, and from all men as far
forth as it is in our power to promote it. Let us use the proper means to gain
and keep up a good reputation among men; yet not so much for our own sakes, as
for Gods and theirs. Let us conscienciously do our duties, every man in his
respective place and calling, by this means we shall be sure either to get a
good name, or not to deserve a bad one. A good name thus gotten is very
valuable, because it may be very serviceable to us to many good purposes, both
in relation to God whom we serve, and to other men with whom we have to do, and
to our selves as an encouragement to greater Alacrity in our duty. But let us
beware of these things.

1. How we make our own reputation the principal motive or end of what we do,
for this is to seek our own honor more than God, and to rob him of the honor
due unto his name.

2. How we seek to raise up to our selves a rame by any sin or wickedness, or
an hypocritical show of Piety, for this were to build our reputation upon God's
dishonor.

3. How we endeavor to build our own reputation upon the ruin of another
man's, for this is a sin against both the Justice and the Charity which we owe
unto all men.

4. How we abuse our reputation amongst men to the countenancing of Faction and
Sedition, or any evil thing whatsoever. In short.

Let our own glory always stoop and veyl to the Glory of God, the Edification
of the Church, the Peace and Tranquillity of State, the subjection which we owe
to our Superiors, and the good of our Neighbors, and it shall be no Vainglory.

How both these, Strife and Vainglory, are to be cast out, we must learn by
the second Rule given us in the Text, of which we are now to speak.

II. In lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better than themselves. Such a
measure of Humility as will make men esteem others better than themselves, will
by rooting out Strife and Vainglory, settle the Church in a blessed Peace.

How this Doctrine will be entertained and practiced in this proud Age, God
alone knows, and to him we must leave it, when we have done our endeayour. Our
Task at this time is, 1. To lay down a brief Description of the Grace
commended, lowliness of mind. 2. To show its great Efficacy for the rooting out
of Strife and Vainglory, the two grand Enemies to Love and Peace. And, 3. To
declare the Practice of it in esteeming each other better than our selves.

1. The Grace or Virtue which is here commended to us is Humility or lowliness
of mind. A Grace which abundantly commends it self, and engages the affections
of all that see it, wherever it is; but as all things of greatest worth
commonly are, almost as rare as it is excellent. One most illustrious Example
of it we have to imitate, which, were its worth unknown, is enough to commend
it unto all Christians, and if it do not so, they are not Christians, whatever
they are pleased to call themselves. Look upon the whole Life and Death of him
who came to be the Savior of the World, Jesus Christ; and you see this Divine
Virtue expressed to the life. How wonderful then must it be, that it should be
so great a stranger in the Christian World, and so few that bear the name of
Christ have any intimate acquaintance with it? Tho all commend it in others,
yet few labor to find it in themselves. This is it. An holy frame and temper
of Spirit whereby a man does most heartily give all honor possible to God, as
much as is due to every man, and is content with a very little for himself. It
wholly emptieth him of all Self-conceit, checketh in him all aspiring thoughts,
makes him truly sensible what he is, and teaches him not to think of himself
above what he finds himself to be, and to be content although others shall
think him to be much less than indeed he is. The humble man is very much in
considering himself to be the Creature of God, and to depend wholly upon him,
and to have nothing at all but only what it had pleased God to bestow upon him.
He considers yet farther that he is a Sinner, and that he offends God
daily, and serves him at best very imperfectly and weakly, that he has often
abused God's Goodness, and is thereupon become less than the least of his
Mercies: he acknowledges that his wants and infirmities are much more than his
Abilities, and that there is hardly any Creature of God, but does now, as he is
a sinner, excel him in something, at least, in innocence; and that in one
respect or other he stands in as much need of them, as any of them do of him.
He remembers how unable he is of himself to help himself to any thing that is
good, either for his Soul or Body, without the assistance and blessing of
another. And now considering all this, and much more to this purpose, his own
Glory vanishes from his sight, he entertaineth low and just thoughts of
himself, as a poor, weak, wicked, and for that, a very contemptible Creature,
that can deserve nothing at the hands of God, not do either God or his
Neighbors, or himself any considerable part of that service which he ought to
do. He looks upon all that he has as another free gift and bounty. He
looks upon all that he does or can do in relation to God, his Neighbor, and
himself, as imperfect at best, and, without God's Blessing, vain if not
hurtful. And hence, he looks upon himself as a very unworthy and useless
thing, but only as he may be an instrument in the hands of the Great and Good
God, and may by the Power and Wisdom of his Manager be directed to something
good. From hence it also comes, that whatsoever this humble man has, he holds
himself, as a debtor to God for it, so also most unworthy of it, and it,
whatever it be, too good for him; and cannot but admire Gods goodness and
bounty to such a thing as he is, in permitting him yet to live. If he suffer
any evil, he accounts it a very light thing in comparison of what he has
deserved to suffer, and therefore repines not at the greatness of his
sufferings, but admireth Gods goodness still in dealing so gently with him, and
blesses him that they are no greater. Whatsoever he does, if it be sinful, he
takes it all to himself, he owns the shame of it, and thinks of himself as a
sinner ought to do: and if it be good, he blesses God that has enabled him to
do it, and calls nothing of it his own besides the imperfections of it, nor
can he think any part of the World beholden to him for doing but a very little
part of his duty in it and very imperfectly. Nothing that he either is, or
has, or does, can swell him up with any proud thoughts of himself, but still
he is less in his own eyes than he can be in any man's else, and accounts
himself a very unworthy thing. This is a man of a lowly mind. And that this is
a right Christian temper sufficiently appears from two things which I need
but only name.

1. Because it has so much of the Image of Jesus Christ visible in it, who
made himself of no reputation, as before we saw.

2. Because it has his Special Blessing resting upon it. Blessed are the Poor
in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 5. 3. Which I shall now
suppose enough to commend this lovely Virtue to the Practice of Christians; and
proceed to the second thing, viz.

2. To show in a few words the Efficacy of this Heavenly Virtue, to drive out
Strife and Vainglory. And the thing is so obvious, that this and this only can
do that work, that it seems even needless to say any thing of it. For if only
or chiefly, as Solomon tells us, by Pride comes Contention, then by what else
but Humility can Peace and Concord come? The proud man knows not how to be
peaceable except it be by the help of some other Vice, such as Laziness,
Covetousness, or especially, Cowardice. And the humble man knows not how to be
contentious, because he is humble. Alas, says the humble hearted Christian,
what am I, that any the least disturbance either in the Church or State should
be made either by or for such a poor Worm as I am, or for a thousand such as I?
He has not such high thoughts of his own Wisdom, as to turn proud fool, and
think that he may not be deceived as well as other men, or ought to be humored
in his mistakes more then they, therefore is it always far from him to commend
his own judgment or opinion unto others as the true Standard whereby he would
have them measure theirs. How great soever such a man's knowledge is, be sure
his modesty is as great, and this will ever restrain him from making his
knowledge a trouble to the World. He will heartily bless God for enabling him
by it to do others any service in seasonable instructions and directions in
their course to Heaven; but he has no temptation at all by it, to obtrude
himself upon all men as their only Judge of right or wrong. He is so far from
an eager desire and hunting after the praise of men, and all affectation of
popularity, that there is hardly any thing he more dreads, then the applause
and admiration of the many; and nothing is apt to humble him more, by making
him grow jealous of himself, knowing well how hard it is for a Multitude to
agree in the approbation of what is good. He thinks every condition that the
Divine Providence allots him in this World so good, and indeed so much too good
for him, as far exceeding his deserts, that he concludes it very misbecoming
him to make any bustle to get up higher: and he is so well satisfied with the
honor of Doorkeeper in the House of God, or of sitting at Jesus feet to hear
his words; that he has no ambition at all to be called of men Rabbi, or to be
esteemed some great one, and admired by the gazing Multitude. His mean and
modest opinion of his own improvements makes him indeed very inquisitive and
industrious to learn of any man that he thinks able to teach him those things
whereof he supposes himself ignorant: and he blesses God for the opportunity,
and both loves and honors his Teachers, and acknowledges by whom he has
profited: and if he attain to that competent stock of knowledge as may fit him
to teach others, he does it freely as the payment of a due debt, and he does it
as humility commands him, not scornfully and disdainfully, not proudly and
imperiously Lording it over men's faith, but as an helper of their joy, 2 Cor.
1. 24. Not Preaching himself, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and himself their
servant for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4. 5. Serving them in love, as the Servant of
him that came not to be ministered unto, but to minister; ministering not to his
own fame, but to the needs of men's Souls. His humble thoughts of his own
merits, make him well content with the honor and respect that is bestowed upon
him be it never so little, and all his care is how to deserve that little
better then he thinks he has yet done; and to pay all that respect, honor and
obedience which he finds owing from himself to others, willing to condescend to
any thing that is not sinful be it never so low, for the good and quiet of that
part of the World wherein he lives. What am I (says he always) that for my
sake or satisfaction, or the gratifying my humor or opinion, the public peace
should suffer, or any the least bustle should be made in the World? Thus it is
impossible for Strife and Vainglory to live where Humility reigns, it will
certainly pull down every high thing that exalts it self against Peace and
Unity.

3. Let us now see how this lowliness of mind is to be put in practice, and set
on work, that it may effect this blessed and most desirable reformation, which
we have all the reason in the World most heartily to pray for, and most
strenuously to endeavor. And this must be its work, to teach us to esteem each
other better then our selves. This is the work of Humility, but where shall we
find Humility enough to do this work? Humility not only makes a man little in
his own eyes, but others great; teaches him to depress himself, that other men
may have the advantage of him. A Work this, of which I fear I may say, as was
said of that, Act. 13. 41. It is a work which men will in no wise believe, tho
a man declare it unto them. O that men would be persuaded to think that such a
thing can be, as this esteeming others better then our selves. Indeed it is
such a work as necessarily requires the help of the mighty Spirit of God; man's
proud heart will not down so low by any less power. But if we see not this
effect of Humility in the practice of such as we take to be humble, let us not
say that Humility cannot do it, but that there is not Humility enough to do it.
Let Humility be Humility indeed, and it will do it. For this being its proper
work, to make a man very vile and bad in his own thoughts, a little thing will
serve if they have any so much as show of goodness at all, to make others seem
better. It needs not much goodness, that is only to be thought better then what
is thought stark naught. It is however a piece of Self-denial which every
Disciple of Christ is bound to learn. And tho every man be a great lover and
admirer of himself upon any very slender account naturally, yet Christianity
will cast the Soul into another mould, and make us new Creatures, and then we
shall be able to do greater matters.

But, say some, how is it possible we should esteem men contrarily to what we
see them to be? And we cannot but be persuaded that we see many men much worse
and wickeder than we our selves are, and to say that we think them otherwise
would be to lie.

Well, suppose you think them, according to appearance, worse than your selves;
have you done enough to assure your selves that it is not the want of Humility
that makes them appear worse? Are you sure that if you saw with the humble
man's eyes, things would not appear to you much otherwise then now they do?
Think not the Apostle here gives a Rule which no man can follow, but learn to
be more humble, and perhaps the matter may prove very easy Let us try
therefore what Humility will do.

1. Consider we then otber men, that they are either really better then we, or
really worse. The one of these two they must be, except we may suppose them
really in all points exactly our Equals, which if they should chance to be, it
is impossible for us to discern it, and therefore humility will be sure to
weigh down the Scale on their side.

1. If others be really better then we, there needs not much Humility to esteem
them better; it is no act of condescension in us to account them as good as
they are. It Is a debt we owe to Justice and Truth, to value them as much as
they are worth, and in doing otherwise we should sin against God and them.
Against God, by not honoring him in his Gifts and Graces, and so much of his
Image as we discern in any one. And against them, in withholding from them
that which God has made their due, the pre-eminence unto which he has exalted
them in any kind; in not honoring them whom God has pleased to honor. We
ought both in obedience to God, and in justice to them, behave our selves
toward them as our Superiors, whom it has pleased God to place above us. The
reasonableness and equity of this I need not to spend time or words to
demonstrate, seeing no man can be so void of reason, as not to think it just,
that all real goodness or excellency should have a proportionable respect and
honor, tho all men have not (I may say, but a few men have) that Humility to
acknowledge those Excellencies which are in other men. Nay such is the
crossness and perverseness of men's spirits, that instead of honoring, too many
have wickedness enough to envy, malign and calumniate all such as they see
above themselves in any gift or Virtue, Place or Office whatsoever. And whence
is all this, but from the want of Humility, (shall I say,) or rather Humanity,
and that confessed piece of Justice of doing to all others as they would have
others do to them.

2. If others be not better, but really worse then we, yet if we could but once
be brought to understand the work of true Humility, we should soon see, that it
would teach us to think much otherwise of them, then yet our Pride will suffer
us to do: and that without doing violence to truth, or undervaluing any Gift
which it has pleased God to give us more then other men. Let us consider but
these few things.

1. Humility will teach us to descend very low into our selves, and to discover
very much evil in our selves which lies hid from other men. It keeps the
thoughts very much at home, and suffers them not to ramble much abroad, to
spy wonders in other men's houses to talk of, and busy themselves with, when
they should be observing the Slut-holes and dirty corners of their own. The
humble man's eye is very much fixed upon his own sins, infirmities and failings.
And when at any time he takes notice of his own good qualities, of what kind
soever they be, as it is his duty to do, it is not his business to make
comparisons with others, to see how much he excels them, but to compare
himself with himself, and observe how much he is improved in Grace and
Knowledge, and how much better these have made him then formerly he was; and
this carries his Meditations up to God in the first place, in praise and
admiration of his infinite goodness who has done so great things for him; and
next, unto the use and end of these qualifications, how they fit him to serve
God and the World. But nothing of this can he consider without exercising his
Humility in reflecting on his own unworthyness, the thoughts of his former
unworthyness serve him to heighten his admiration of, and thankfulness for Gods
bounty to such a sinner, and the thoughts of Gods goodness in thus enriching
him lessen his esteem of himself, and bring him to a deeper degree of Humility,
whilst he thinks with himself, how little he answers the end of so much
goodness, and how little good in the World he does in respect of what God has
fitted him with ability to do. Thus he never wants work enough at home for his
thoughts to busy themselves, so that they have but little leisure to search
into the failings and weaknesses of his Neighbors: and when he unwillingly
sees them, they are apt to seem but Motes to him, because of the Beams in his
Eye, his own sins, which he is apt so much to magnify, that the sins of others
seem small things to him in comparison of his own; or he considers them only
so, as to endeavor their Correction not their Aggravation. The humble man
cannot be vile in any measure, but he will be more vile still in his own eyes.
But this same Grace, and that other, which is never absent from it, Charity,
directs a man's eye most unto the Virtues and Excellencies that are to be seen
in others; which shine so much to him that for them he cannot see their
infirmities. Their Virtues and Goodness of any kind he thinks it of some
concernment to himself to see and learn and imitate, and to praise God for,
admiring his goodness to others as well as to himself. But as for their
infirmities and failings, they mostly concern God and their own Consciences;
and his Humility teaches him to leave them to God, and to take no further
notice of them, then Charity and his place wherein God has set him command:
and these will never command us to think men worse then our selves, but to
endeavor to make them better then they are. Thus Humility rendering our own
faults, yea such as others would count none, very visible to us; and those of
other men, either not at all, or so far only as they are of public cognizance,
reasonably moves us to esteem them better then our selves. Charity covers a
multitude of faults.

2. Suppose we next, that very many evils in other men do visibly appear to us,
yet still many of our own will also appear, if we be humble; and in all
likelihood many more in our selves then in them. And besides those many in our
selves, which we daily observe, we know there be, and Humility makes us think
there are very many secret sins lurking within our hearts, watching an
opportunity to break forth, and many that have privately broken forth and
escaped our notice in the passage, which do not yet appear to us. So that how
many soever the visible sins of other men be, yet still the humble man fears he
goes beyond them in number and weight too. However, when the humble man comes
upon any occasion to compare himself with other men, his wont is, not to
consider other men's failings but his own, neither his own virtues but the
virtues of other men. And as Pride teaches a man to compare his own virtues
with other men's vices, as the proud Pharisee did, that he may find something in
himself to boast of: so Humility teaches a man a quite contrary course, to
compare his own vices with other men's virtues, that he may be yet more humble,
and think himself with the Apostle the chief of Sinners.

3. We will yet go farther, and suppose that other men's Vices and failings may
be much more visible to us then our own, and their apparent virtues by much
fewer then our own; yet the humble man, when he comes to lay the one against
the other, is always ready to cast in all the advantage, and make all the
allowances to others that can be imagined. He can partly know, and as far as he
can know them, he is sure to take into consideration all the numerous
aggravations of his own sins, and is very apt sometimes to lay on too much
weight, even till he press down his Soul almost into despair. But as he knows
he cannot see into all the aggravations of another man's sins, being unable to
see into the heart; so does Charity restrain him always from making any narrow
search into them. And hence it is, that though other men's sins may be as
visible to him as his own, so far as they lie open and obvious to the view of
all men, yet shall his own be made always to outweigh theirs in the
aggravating circumstances which others cannot see. And again, on the other
hand, the humble man considers all the opportunities, advantages and
encouragements himself has had to be virtuous, and then all the good he does,
how much soever others value it, and see great cause to bless God, and love him
for it, shall yet seem little and even nothing to himself, compared with what
he thinks both might and ought to have been done by him. And as much does his
Charity prompt him to excuse the little he sees done by others, by a
supposition of the want in them of all those helps which he has had. Thus
therefore is he always saying to himself, What tho my Neighbors faults seem
more than mine? What tho the good that he has done seem much below what I have
done? His knowledge, it may be is much less then mine; his opportunities of
learning much fewer then I have had; his natural faculties, which is not his
fault, may be much weaker; he wanted, it may be, the wise Instructors and
faithful Monitors which I have never lacked; he met with many and strong
temptations, and lay under many difficulties, which I have been in good measure
free from: Were I under such Circumstances, I should, it may be, sin much more
then he, and do less good then he: and were he in my Circumstances, had he the
same means and motives and opportunities of doing virtuously, and lay under the
same restraints from sin, it is probable he would do and live much better than
I have done. Thus the humble man is very apt to blame himself, but any thing
rather then his Brother. Yea rather then not esteem him better then himself, he
will charge much of his evil upon himself, and say, if he be wicked, it is much
my fault, who have not done what I ought to make him good.

4. If the humble man be put to compare his own Virtues with other men's
Virtues, and his own Vices with other men's Vices, (which it is hard to bring
him to) he will set Virtue against Virtue, and Vice against Vice so long, that
if it be possible by any means to bring it to pass, the Scales of Virtues shall
ascend, and that of Vices descend on his own side. And thus will he argue for
his Brother against himself. I excel him it may be in one thing, but for ought
I know he excels me in many. I may possibly be free from some sins whereof
he is guilty, but it is not unlikely he is free from many more that I find my
self guilty of. If I be more sober, yet may he be more Charitable and liberal,
and I by my sobriety do good to my self, but he by his liberality does good to
many. I may be less prodigal, but he is less covetous; I may be less careful
for the World, but he is more serviceable to the World. I may pray oftener and
longer, but he prays more heartily. I may be more zealous, but he is less
censorious. I may be more chaste, but he may be more peaceable; I may be more
active, but he may be more meek and humble; I may be more wise, but still he is
the better man.

5. If he can none of these ways give his Neighbor the advantage of himself,
yet has he not done, nor can he have done, till if possible, he do it. What,
says he, tho I see little good in him, may there not be much that I cannot
see? He talks not so much of Religion as I do, it is his modesty, he is
afraid of Hypocrisy, he is afraid it may become too vile by being made a common
talk His Humility is too great to let him show himself too openly; he is afraid
to deceive the World into too good an opinion of him, or give occasion to any
man to overvalue him, or lest by admiring his virtues they should be tempted
to imitate his vices. I dare not judge him as bad as he seems, except I could
see as far into his heart, as I can into his outward behavior. Tho this be bad
enough, yet there may be some spark of Grace within, that lying yet raked up in
corruption, and by an easiness of nature to comply with the customs of men, and
an immoderate bashfulness to resist the temptations of company, or a
timorousness of nature to venture on the cross, and the like hindrances; or
for want of good means and helps, is kept from acting and warming the Soul with
true Devotion and Piety; yet it may in due time get life and strength and show
it self. And as I see not what good there is within him, so neither do I see
half that evil that is within my self, the heart is deceitful above all things,
who can know it? Yea every man is apt to be too favorable to himself, and too
severe a censurer of others, and it is safest for me to judge my self, and
leave others to stand or fall to their own Master. There is nothing I have more
cause to fear then a spiritual Pride, Publicanes and Sinners are justified
sooner than a proud Pharisee that despises and croweth over them. Humility
stands more in the way of the sinner then of the conceited Iusticiary. It will
be seen at the last day who is best, he or I. Now it is enough that God knows
it, who will then judge righteously. Be he better, be he worse, I am content he
should take place of me in my own esteem. It is my duty to set Strangers above
me in mine own house. I may lose something on earth by my Humility, but Pride
will certainly keep me out of Heaven. I may safely esteem others better then my
self, till I can know both them and my self better then yet I do.

Thus will Humility teach us to strive who shall give place to the other, and
if the humble man can really think others better then himself, he will; and if
he cannot, yet he will do all that he can toward it, and that will, I suppose,
satisfy the Apostles Exhortation, and will effect what is desired. If we be
impartial in judging our selves, and not forward to censure others; if we be
not more busy in casting out the Mote that is in our Brothers Eye, than the
Beam that is in our own Eye, but more forward every man to reform himself then
to find faults in others; we shall practice according to the Rule here given.

Having thus far seen how the duty is practicable, we may easily perceive how
happy the Church would be were it duly practiced. And indeed, although a truly
humble Christian will hardly satisfy himself in doing less then all that has
been said; and tho it may be, nothing less then all this will serve to
denominate a man truly humble; yet were something less then this well
practiced among us, we should soon taste the blessed fruits of such a practice.
Suppose then that the Apostle by these words, Let each esteem other better then
themselves, meant no more but thus. Either

1. That we should esteem, honor and love them better, whom we really think to
be better. That we should not envy them, nor endeavor any way to lessen them
in the esteem of men, nor strive to get above them, but let them enjoy without
disturbance the respect and honor they deserve. What a happy change in the
face of the World would even this make? Preferment would follow Merit and every
thing would stand in its own place and order; there would be no justling for
pre-eminence, nor any thing else but strength and beauty in the Building of
God. Or suppose

2. That we should every one esteem our Superiors as our Superiors, and think
them better only for this, that they are our Superiors. If this were all the
Apostle meant, it would certainly very much avail to the Establishing of Peace
and Unity. There would be no resisting, but an humble subjection for Conscience
sake. And Humility would teach us either to rest in the Wisdom, or submit at
least to the Authority of our Governors. The same grace that teaches us to
obey God both actively and passively, must teach us also to obey them that have
the rule over us for the Lords sake, actively where we can, and passively only
where we must needs: and tho we could not see in them the Image of God's Wisdom
and Goodness, we would at least see and reverence the Image of his Power.

3. Or suppose the meaning were, that we should do all things with that
quietness and humbleness, as if we had every one a better opinion of the
other's wisdom and Piety than his own, as a very Learned and Pious Annotator
paraphraseth the words, it is too obvious how this practice would conduce to
Peace, to need any farther explication. Or suppose

4. That all were but this, that we should every one look upon others as our
Superiors, thus far at least that we owe them a duty of Love, and this is a
duty that every man owes to every man. Nor will this debt of Love be paid by
any less than humbly condescending to promote their good, especially the
Eternal Good of their Souls by any the lowest and humblest services we can do
them. Were this done indeed and were, your humble servant as much the Language
of the heart, as of the Tongue and Pen, we should soon all write our selves
Loving Friends too.

O that we could all be brought to be more in love with this most charming
grace of Humility, not as it is in others only, but chiefly in our selves! How
happy a thing would it be for the Church of Christ? Where Humility reigns in
men's hearts, (and it reigns not where it commands not a cheerful subjection to
all our Governors) it is impossible there should be any strangers to love and
peace, or that there should not be on all sides a mutual and delightful
administering to one another's comfort and happiness. There could remain no
Strife about any thing, but who should be most humble, and most forward to
serve his Brethren in Love.

I shall now close this discourse with a short Exhortation only, willing to
leave a more particular application of the truths delivered to every man's own
Conscience. Men may possibly be content, or else compelled, to hear those
things from the Monitor in their own breasts, which they are too proud to hear
with patience from another. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels of Mercies: If
we are but so far Christians indeed, as to think any of these things worthy to
be taken into serious consideration, let us fulfill the joy of all Saints and
holy Angels, of the whole Church Militant and Triumphant, by our being
like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. And that
we may be so indeed, let us be persuaded by St. Peter, To be subject one to
another, and be clothed with Humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5. Let us once again think it
the best fashion to wear that long difused Livery of a meek and lowly Savior:
by this will God own us to be of his Household, by this shall we be known to
belong to the Court of the Great King of Kings. Nothing can render us so
beautiful in his eyes as Humility. He gives grace to the humble, Jam. 4. 6.
With the lowly is wisdom, Prove. 11. 2. It is better to be of an humble spirit
with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with the Proud, Prove. 16. 19. It is
the readiest way to that, which the proud man most aims at, but in his too
much have to it over-runneth: before Honor is Humility, Prove. 15. 33. Thorns
and Snares are in the way of the froward, Prove. 22. 5. But God shall save the
humble person, Job. 22. 9. He hears his desire Prove. 10. 17. A man's pride
shall bring him low, but honor shall uphold the humble in spirit, Prove. 29.
23. He that shall humble himself shall be exalted, Matt. 23. 12. For though the
Lord be high yet has he respect to the lowly, but the proud he knows a far
off, Psalm. 138, 6. What would we now have more to encourage us to the practice
of this virtue? We have here the promises of Safety and exaltation, of riches
and honor and life, Prove. 22. 4. Of respect from God, his presence with us,
and his grace to uphold us, and after all, the Kingdom of Heaven assured to the
Poor in Spirit.

How is it possible after all this, that a Gra^e so lovely in the eyes of God
and man, should yet find such cold entertainment amongst us? O let us entertain
it now at least; now I say, when it comes as it were a begging to our doors and
beseeches us for Christ's sake to lodge it in our hearts: let us entertain it,
if it be but on this account, that some by entertaining Strangers have
entertained Angels unawares: if we be not afraid of Gods Company, let us now
open the doors of our hearts to receive it. for God comes along with it: He
will dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, Isai. 57. 15. Let
us be no longer Self-condemned by commending in all men what we will not
practice our selves.

Think but seriously what a World of Mischiefs we daily are haunted with, for
want of this Grace. Heresies and Errors in the Faith, Scnisms and Contentions
of all sorts, both in Church and State. Had we more humble Publicans and fewer
proud Pharisees, our Prayers and our Persons would be more accepted of God. But
whilst so many of us stand bragging and boasting of being godly or Orthodox,
instead of confessing and deprecating our sins and errors; whilst there is so
much pride, scorn and disdain every where, and so little humility,
condescension, meekness and obedience any where; whilst some cry out, we are
the only true Sons of the Church, and others, we are the only dear Children of
God; whilst some are too proud to teach, and others think themselves too good
to be taught; whilst some excommunicate themselves to gratify their own proud
humors, and some as ready to excommunicate others, tho they own their
Authority, for not also humouring their pride, or espousing their private
opinions; whilst men are calling out to one another, stand off, for we are
holier than you; and many to their Governors, Why stand you there? You take too
much upon you, seeing all the Lord's people are holy. Whilst men are
continually calling for fire from Heaven upon one another heads, it is too
sadly visible, that we have too little of the Gospel Spirit amongst us.

And what is it we can hope to gain by this opposing and resisting one another,
but that God should be provoked to resist^ us all, for he resists the proud,
Iam. 4. 6. And it is more than our pride will leave us any encouragement to
hope for, if we be not made a Prey to those that will glory in our ruin.

Let us therefore all labor, instead of censuring and gainsaying one another,
to close at least in this one grace of Humility, in the commendation whereof we
are all unanimous. This will help to cover other men's failings from our eyes,
and not only discover our own failings to our selves, but lay them open in
penitent confession before God to be covered by the righteousness of Jesus
Christ.

Instead of all the numerous Arguments and Motives which might (were it
needful) be here made use of to persuade us, let it suffice to attend to that
earnest exhortation given us by the Apostle. Col. 3. 12. etc. Put on therefore
(as the Elect of God, holy and beloved (bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness
of mind, meekness, long-suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, if any man have a quarrel [or, a complaint] against any: Even as
Christ forgave you, so also do ye. And above all things put on Charity which is
the bond of perfectness; and let the Peace of God rule in your hearts, to the
which ye are also called in one body, and be ye thankful. Would we now be the
Children of God, and beloved of him? then instead of Strife we must put on
bowels of mercies, kindness, long-suffering, mutual forbearance and
forgiveness. And instead of Vainglory, we must put on humbleness of mind and
meekness. Would we be perfect? We must put on Charity. Would we answer our
Vocation or Calling to Christianity? We must be careful to keep in one body,
and let the Peace of God rule in our hearts. Would we assure our selves of Gods
blessing on us all as his Children? Let us not always stand complaining of
what is wanting, or what it may be, our own peevishness only makes us think is
wanting when it is not, but show our selves heartily thankful for what by his
blessing we have. And the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, make us perfect in every good work to do his Will,
working in us that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be Glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
Books Printed for, and sold by John Baker at the Three Pigeons in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
DUport in Psalmos 4to Cant. Gr. Lat. Idem in Psalmos 4to Gr. Idem in Homericum
4to Gr. Lat. Beveridge Gramatica Syriaca 8o. Gore Nomenclator Geogr. 8o.
Alisbury de Decreto Dei 4 to. Dionysius de situ Orbis 8o Gr. Comenii Ianua cum
fig. AEneis. Lat. Confessio fidei 8o. Doughtei Analecta sacra 8o. pars secunda.
Ignoramus 12o Latin. Exaltation of Ale 8o. Comenii vestibulum 8o. Lat. Eng.
Pasoris Lexicon 8o. Gr. Lat. Elegantiae Poeticae 12o. Quintiliani Orationes 8o.
Glanvil of the Sacrament 12o. Buroughs Remedy against grief 12o. Preces
Scholae Pautinae 8o. Glanvil's Essay's on several important Subjects in
Philosophy and Religion 4to. Woodfords Paraphrase on the Psalms 8o. Idem
Paraphrase on the Canticles 8o. A Sermon before the Artillery Company by Dr.
Hicks 4to. A Sermon before the Artillery Company by Dr. Sprat 4to. A Sermon
before the Artillery Company by Dr. Scot 4to. A Sermon before the Artillery
Company by Dr. Pittis 4to. A Sermon before the Scholars of St. Paul's School, by
Dr. Meggot 4o. Two Speeches spoken by Augustus 4to. A Puneral Sermon Preached
on the Interment of the Lady Elizabeth Langham, by Simon Ford 8o. A Funeral
Sermon at the Interment of the Lady Mary Hastings, by Sam. Willis 4to. An
account of Church Government for the first six hundred years, by Sam. Parker,
D. D. Archdeacon of Canterbury 8o. Religion and Loyalty, or a demonstration of
the Power of the Christian Church within it self, etc. by Sam. Parker, D. D.
Archdeacon of Canterbury 8o. The Service Book in Folio, in Welsh. Pools
Critici sacri in New Testament Folio, 2 Vol. Separatim. Caesar's Comentaries
with Edmonds Notes Folio, with Cuts. Godwins and Bacons Annals, Folio.
FINIS.

