The Harmony of the Gospels, IN THE HOLY HISTORY OF THE Humiliation and
Sufferings OF Jesus Christ, FROM HIS INCARNATION TO HIS DEATH and BURIAL.

Published by JOHN ELIOT Teacher of the Church in Roxbury

Act. 3.18. But these things which God before had showed by the mouth of all
his Prophets, that Christ should suffer, he has so fullfilled. BOSTON; Printed
by John Foster, in the Year 1678.

WE having perused this Pious Discourse concerning The Suff^rings of Christ,
and observed the Diligence and Prudence of the gracious and worthy Author in
compiling It having in the reading of it both affected and edified us; We are
persuaded through the Blessing of him that has put it into the heart of the
Reverend Author to lay out himself this way, it will serve to promote the
Honor of Jesus Christ, and the good of Souls, and therefore do affix our
IMPRIMATVR.

THOMAS THACHER. JAMES ALLEN. VRIAN OAKS. INCREASE MATHER.


WHat better and more seasonable Subject can thou (Christian Reader) exercise
thy soul about in these black, and suffering days, then in the sufferings of
our Lords Jesus Christ. Behold here thou art presented with the holy Hystory
thereof, the particular heads whereof see in this Table.

The Contents,
Cap. 1. By way of Preface, p. 1. Cap. 2. The History of the wonderful
Conception of Jesus Christ and the sad afflictions and sufferings that attended
the same. page 5. Cap. 3. The History of the Birth of Jesus Christ, and the
wonderful things that attended it. page 10. Cap. 4. The first bloody
persecution that befell our Lord Jesus when an Infant by the cruelty of Herod,
page 13. Cap. 5. The return of Jesus out of Egypt to Israel the Church of God,
page 17. Cap. 6. The History of the holy life of Jesus while he was a Child,
page 18. Cap. 7. The History of one famous act of wisdom and grace which Jesus
did at twelve years of age, page 25. Cap. 8. The History of the holy
conversation of Jesus Christ all the time of his youth, p. 30. Cap. 9. The
History of some of the sufferings of Jesus Christ in the whole course of his
life, page 34. Sect. 1. The poverty of Jesus Christ, page 35. Sect. 2. The low
despised condition of Jesus Christ, page 39. Sect. 3. The sufferings of Jesus
Christ in the form of a Servant, page 43. Sect. 4. The sufferings of Jesus
Christ in bodily infirmityes, page 46. Sect. 5. The sufferings of Jesus Christ
under reproaches, page 53. Sect. 6. The sufferings of Jesus Christ under
ungrateful disacceptance, p. 56. Sect. 7. The sufferings of Jesus Christ under
Temptations, page 57.
^ap. 10. The sufferings of Jesus Christ in the Garden, page 66. ^ap. 11. The
sufferings of Jesus Christ before the Council of the Jews, page 74. Sect. 2.
The first act of the Council, page 76. Sect. 3. The second act of the Council,
page 77. Sect. 4. The third act of the Council, page 79. Sect. 5. The fourth
act of the Council, page 80. Sect. 6. The fifth act of the Council, page 81.
Sect. 7. The sixth act of the Council, page 82. The History of Judas, page 84.

^^p. 12. The sufferings of Jesus Christ under Pontius Pilate, page 86. The
second act of Pilate, page 88. The third act of Pilate, page 90. The fourth act
of Pilate, page 91. The fifth act of Pilate, page 94. The sixth ac^ of Pilate,
page 96. The seventh act of Pilate, his yielding to condemn Jesus Christ, page
99. Pilates check, page 100.
Cap. 13. The History of their crucifying of Jesus Christ, page 104. Sect. 2.
The gracious deportment of Jesus Christ in going to Golgotha, p. 106 Sect. 3.
Their arriving at Golgotha, and setting up the Cross, page 107. Sect. 4. Their
cruel execution done upon the blessed person of our Lord, p. 109 Sect. 5. What
our Lord Jesus did while he was hanging upon the Cross, p. 111 Sect. 6. The
vile behavior of the Jews, page 114.
Cap. 14. The last part of the suffering of our Lord Jesus upon the Cross, 116.
where the last words of Jesus Christ upon the Cross are opened. 125.
Cap. 15. The wonderful works of God at his death. and his honorable buryal,
page 125 Sect. 2. Of the Reverent Buryal of our Lord Jesus. page 128. Sect. 3.
The Sufferings of Jesus Christ after he was dead and buried, p. 130.

Errata.
Page 31. l. 8. for after, r. often. page 39. l. 16. for pure r. poor. page 74.
l. 31. for successively read successfully. page 83. l. ult. put the Comma at
me. page 87. l. 19. for thereof read therefore. page 92. l. 40. for instructing
read instancing. page 99. l. 15. for refuse read release. page 110. l. 8. for
fast r. fact.

The Harmony of the GOSPELS in the holy History of the Humiliation and
Sufferings of Jesus Christ, From his Incarnation to his Death and Burial.
Cap. 1. By way of Preface.
THE Commemoration of the Humiliation, Sufferings and Death of Jesus Christ, is
a principal part of the Food of Faith, whereby we live in Christ, walk with
him, and worship him: And to the end that we might so live, walk and worship,
he has instituted the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in his Church, to be an
eminent part of his worship, and has said, 1. Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. Take, eat,
this do in remembrance of me; take, drink, this do in remembrance of me; for
so often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death
till he come. And his death is inclusive of all his Su^ferings. This part of
instituted worship is of great account in the eye of Christ; for which cause he
was pleased to institute it himself, and has ordered it to be often
celebrated: and it is the most peculiar worship in the Church, in the holy
communion of Saints on earth, next beneath our communion in heaven. So heavenly
a work it is to commemorate the Su^ferings of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Yet have I observed, both by mine own heart and others, that we are very
incident to be narrow hearted, slite and formal in this service. Faith feeds
but little for want of an enlarged commemoration of the history of the
Humiliation and Sufferings of Jesus Christ, the commemoration whereof, is the
proper, peculiar, and great service that we are commanded to attend in that
Ordinance: for Christ says, do it in remembrance of me, and of my sufferings.
And though the breaking of the bread and pouring out of the wine, do chiefly
signify and represent the death of Jesus Christ, as being the consummation of
all his sufferings; yet they do also comprehend and signify all his sufferings
from his Incarnation to the grave, the History whereof is dispersed in the
Scriptures, and for the help of my faith and the faith of the Church whom the
Lord has committed to my charge, I have (according to my poor measure)
endeavored to gather the parts of the History thereof, and lay them together;
and may my poor labor herein be of any service and help to the faith of the
Saints, I shall rejoice in such a blessed fruit. I know that it is a very
useful point the Lord make it fruitful.

In this work some considerations are necessary to be premised. The sufferings
of Jesus Christ are a wonderful part of the deep counsels of God, touching man.
Gods great design is to glorify himself, chiefly in those great Attributes of
his ustice and mercy, and to glorify Jesus Christ to be the great Agent, to
bring all the glory thereof unto God, according to the holy Covenant and
agreement betwixt the Father and the Son, Joh. 17.6, etc- To that end he
purposed to make the whole mass of mankind to glorify his justice, an high and
honorable service for a creature to perform. And he purposed and chose out a
certain number, a scattering out of mankind in all Ages to be vessels of merc^,
in whom he would glorify his free grace and mercy, and all this, by and
through Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6. according as he has chosen us in him
before the Foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame
before him in love, having predestined us unto the Adoption of children by
Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will to the
praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
beloved. Hence Gods Elect were in Christ before they were in Adam. When God
executed his decrees, he made man in his own image and likeness [a blessed
estate] gave him an holy just and good law, and power to perform it, brought
him under an holy and just covenant, with encouragement and promise of
immutable and eternal glory upon his keeping of it, Gal. 3.12. Do and live,
set him in the highest dignity of his creatures, to be Lord over the works of
Gods own hands in this low world, gave him power to act by free choice of his
will, and thereby to act meritoriously [^n high dignity] fenced him from
offending and miscariage by a just and severe threatening, G^n. 2.17. in the day
thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die: and thus was mankind, made to
glorify justice, and be eternally happy in so doing; in this state, man had
but one thing to do to obtain happiness, viz. to keep Gods law and covenant,
to which he was fully accomplished with sufficient ability, assistance and
encouragement, but he fell short of the glory of God, Romans 3, 23. and by the
Devils temptation, sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7.29. and fell into his
great apostasy: he overthrew Gods great design of glorif^ing Gods rewarding
justice, and fell under the condemnation of the law, and fell into the hands of
Gods vindictive ju^tice: and all this he did before he had performed Gods Law,
covenant and command. He deserved to die, before he had deserved to live; so
that now man has two great works to do before he can attain to happiness,
viz. 1. It is still incumbent on man to keep the holy Law and covenant of God:
and 2dly. Now it is incumbent on man to satisfy Gods vindictive justice by
suffering the penalty of the Law, neither of which is man able to perform, nor
any creature for him, so that his Redemption cease for ever, Psalm. 49.8. he
is eternally condemned under the just sentence of the Law, and vindictive
justice of God, (a dreadful Catastro^he and overthrow.

Now Jesus Christ steppeth in according to the holy covenant and agreement
betwixt the Father and the Son. Jesus Christ undertaketh for Gods Elect, whom
the Father has chosen to b^ vessels of M^rc^, and given unto Jesus Christ for
that end. Joh. 17.6. Thine they were, thou gav^st them to me. Jesus C^ri^t
undertakes to glorify justice for them, and also to show mercy and free grace
in their recovery. Jesus Christ undertakes to perform for them and in their
stead those two great works which they are never able to p^rform for
themselves. Jesus Christ undertakes as their surety to keep and fulfill the
holy Law and covenant of works, to obtain for them the reward of justice, and
also to su^fer for them, and in their stead the penalty of the Law, which is,
to d^e, and thereb^ to satisfy the vindictive justice of God. And here is the
ground of the nece^sit^ of Jesus Christ his active and pa sive obedience, in
the sal^ation of Gods Elect, b^ making them vessels of mercy. Jesus Christ his
p^re, perfect and meritorious Ob^dience to the Law for us, is not enough to
bring us to sal^ation, Heb. 2.10. It b^cometh him in bringing many sons to
glory, to ma^^ the Captain of our Salvation perfe^t through suffering, thereby
to satis ie the vindictive ju^tic^ of God, which is incumbent on us to do; and
because we are not able to do it our selves, it is necessary that our Surety
should do it for us. If Jesus Christ had only k^pt the Law perfectly for us,
and thereby had been the perfecting end of the Law for righteousn^ss, Romans
10.4. he had not been a competent surety for us, because we are also l^able to
the revenging punishing Sentence of the Law, for our violation thereof, and
therefore the Captain of our Salvation must be perfected by su ferings. And if
Jesus Christ had onl^ suffered the penalty of the Law, by dying for us, h^ had
not perfected the Office of a Mediator, because the Law was not yet f^l^illed,
and the perfecting en^ thereof attained. Therefore it is necessary that our
Medi^tor should be perfected in the accomplishment of both these parts of our
Redemption. And h^n^e, when in the Sacrament of the Supper, we commemorate and
celebrate the sufferings and pa^sive obedience of Jesus Christ, it comprehends
also the celebration of the active obedience of Jesus Chri t, even all that the
Captain of our Sal^ation has done for us, for they are inseparable, nor could
Jes^s Christ have been a competent satisfactory Sacrifice, if he h^d not been a
Lamb without spot, Mat. 3.15. it becomes us to full il all righteousness.

Jesus Christ is the second Adam, 1 Cor. 15.45. and he came to redeem the first
Adam, who is an elect Vessel, and saved b^ Jesus Christ, and being his Surety,
he is bound to perform for him all that he was bound unto. Now Adam was bound
unto all active obedience to the Law, which he never performed, he was also
bound to suffer the penalty of the Law which he brake, therefore Jesus Christ
undertaking to bring Adam to Salvation, he must perform for him, both active
and passive obedience. The active and passive obedience of Jesus Christ are so
complicated together, that they are inseparable, every act of Jesus Christ his
su fering, has active obedience in it, he laid down his life when he was
obedient to the death, Joh. 10.18. Phil. 2.8. And every act of Jesus Christ his
activ^ ob^dience had suffering in it, being darkened by his Humiliation under a
po^r low afflicted estate in this world, Phil. 2.6, 7. in the form of a
Servant, and in ma^y other respects, as will appear h^reafter in the History of
his life.

The sufferings of Jesus Christ fully satisfied vindi^tive justice, and the
active obedience of Jesus Christ did fully satisfy rewarding j^stice, every
act of Jesus Christ was pure, perfect and meritorious, G^d says, in him I am
well pleased Mat. 3.17.

Every act of Jesus Christ his obedience either active or passive, was pure and
without sin, Heb. 4.15. and 1 Pet. 2.22. who did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth, when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously, Heb.
7.26. holy, harmless, undefiled.

Every act of Jesus Christ his obedience either active or passive was perfect,
Heb. 2.10. the Captain of our Salvation perfect, Heb. 5.9. and being made
perfect, he became Author of Salvation to all that obey him.

Every act of Jesus Christ his obedience either active or passive was
meritorious, Romans 5.18, 19. as by the offense of one, Judgment came upon all
men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came
upon all men to justification of life, for as by one man's disobedience, many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous,
Ephesians. 1.11, 14. In whom also we have obtained an Inheritance, being
predestined according to the purpose of him, who works all things according
to the counsel of his own will, ver. 14. which is the earnest of our
Inheritance, until the Redemption of the purchased possession unto the praise
of his glory. This meritorious eminency of the obedience of Jesus Christ
springs from the eminency of his person, being God-man. The Law never had
such a person subject unto it, never did, nor could any other perform such
obedience as this glorious person performed, never were, or could be such acts
of obedience both active and passive performed, as were performed by Jesus
Christ, because he is a public person, by Office he is our Mediator and
Surety: every act that he did was acted by virtue of his Office, in which
Office he was from his first Incarnation, as it is testified by the Angel,
Math. 1.21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sin, Luke 2.11. unto you is born this day a Savior in the City of David
which is Christ the Lord, all that Jesus Christ did and suffered were acts of
his Office. If Adam a mere man had performed pure and perfect obedience it
should have been meritorious, how much more eminently meritorious are all the
acts of the obedience of Jesus Christ.

One consideration more I shall add, to illustrate the wonderful sufferings of
Jesus Christ, by showing that they do infinitely exceed all the sufferings of
man, either the sufferings of the Elect in this life, or the sufferings of the
damned in Hell. Jesus Christ suffered as a public person, the punishment of
all our sin was laid upon him, Isa. 57.6. he laid upon him the iniquities of us
all, he had no sin of his own to suffer for, but he was made sin for us, 2 Cor.
5.21. and all our sins were nailed to the cross of Jesus Christ, all the
punishment due unto the sin of all Gods Elect was laid upon him. The sufferings
of Christ were of value sufficient to satisfy justice for all sin: though in
the application thereof unto us by the new Covenant only the Elect do receive
and partake of the benefit thereof. Sufferings of infinite value were necessary
to redeem one Soul, and sufferings of Infinite value are enough to redeem all
the world, yea, many worlds. Our greatest sufferings (alas) are of small
value, we merit nothing but hell by our deepest sufferings: our sufferings at
best are spotted and stained with sin, and our sufferings are but personal, not
public, Ezekiel. 18.4. the Soul that sins it shall dye; we suffer for our
sins, not for the sins of others. The sufferings of Gods people are not penal,
but medicinal, so much as may serve to purge out sin, and no more, Isai. 27.9.
and alas, a little serves the turn through the mercy of Jesus Christ, and
through the operation of the Spirit. The sufferings of Christ are penal, he
suffered the whole weight of the curse till the Infinite vindictive justice of
God was satisfied. O the Infinite weight of the sufferings of Jesus Christ!
yea, the damned in hell suffer the vindictive wrath of God, but alas, they are
finite and can bear but drops at once, they can never satisfy justice, and
besides, they suffer every one only for his own sin. But Jesus Christ suffered
the whole weight of Gods wrath due to all sin, and all this at once, O the
unconceivable depth of the sufferings of Jesus Christ! and O the Infinite value
of them.

Cap, 2.
The History of the wonderful Conception of Jesus Christ, and the sad
afflictions and sufferings that attended the same.
LOrd help me with humble Reverence to handle the holy History of the holy life
sufferings and death of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ.

In the first and last periods of the life of Jesus Christ in the world, his
sufferings and passive obedience were most conspicuous, in the intermediate
periods of his life, his active obedience to the Law of God, was most
conspicuous, as will afterward appear in the History thereof. Though the
conception of Jesus Christ was exceeding glorious, above the dignity of any man
that ever was born of a woman, yet was the morning of his life black and
tempestuous, very dark according to the Prophesy, Isai. 53.2. as a tender
plant, as a Root out of a dry ground, this I shall open in four particulars.

1. His Conception was wonderful and Divine, and this appears in sundry
respects.

1. In respect of the Angel whom God sent to be his Messenger to manage and
transact this glorious and divine work, Luke 26.27. the Angel Gabriel was sent
from God, the time of the coming of this Angelical Messenger from God, is
expressed to be in the sixth Month after John Baptist his conception, which
consideration will be of some use afterward, the place he came to was a City in
Galilee of the Gentiles, named Nazareth, a place of little expectation, Joh.
1.46. Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? this is the place of the first
springing of that glorious branch Jesus Christ, which is marked by Matthew,
Math. 2.23. as the fulfilling of the Prophesies, viz. those Prophesies where
Jesus Christ is called the Branch, from which word that city had its Name. The
person to whom the Angel came was a Virgin, espoused lately unto Joseph both of
them of the house of David, and the next and proper heirs of the crown of
David; this God knew, though the world took no notice of it. The Virgins Name
was Mary.

2. This Conception was wonderful, in respect of the heavenly Salutation, which
the Angel expressed unto Mary, hail thou that art highly favored, the Lord is
with ^hee, blessed art thou among women, all this is true and pertinent, seeing
she was appointed by God, to be the Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ.

3. In respect of the Effect of this vision upon her heart, which was trouble,
fear and ^mazement at this glorious and heavenly Salutation, she cast in her
mind what manner of Salutation this was, and what the meaning thereof should
be; surely it wrought ^own her godly heart to humble thoughts of her self, and
prepared and raised her ^eart unto heavenly expectations.

4. The Angel qualifieth her fear, and informs her of the meaning of his
Salu^ation, and of what God was about to do with her, and for her. Fear not
Mary, for ^hou have found favor with God, and thou shall conceive in thy womb,
and bring forth a ^on, and call his Name Jesus.

5. The Angel informs her of the heavenl^ honor, dignity, and glory of this
^er Son, and of the glorious works that he shall do, he shall be great, and
shall be ^^lled the Son of the highest, and the Lord shall give unto him the
Throne of his Father ^avid, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his Kingdom there ^all be no end.

6. Mary objecteth against the possibility of her conception, seeing she
knows not a man.

7. The Angel answers her Reason, by raising her faith to expect the
performance of the promise, by the divine and Infinite power of God, saying,
the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
over-shadow thee, therefore also that holy thing which shall be borne of thee,
shall be called the Son of God, and behold thy Cousen Elizabeth she has also
conceived (namely by faith as also Sarah did) in her old Age, and this is the
sixth Month with her who was called barren, for with God nothing shall be
unpossible.

8. Mary by faith submits her self to the will of God. She said, behold the
Handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word. And that this was an
act of Faith in Mary, does appear b^ the Te^timony of the Holy Gho^t, who spoke
by Elizabeth, Luke 1.45. and blessed is she that believed, for there shall be a
performance of those things which were told her from the Lord. And the Holy
Gho^t whose Office is to bring to our remembrance the word of God which we have
heard, Joh. 14.26. did (doubtless) bring to her remembrance, and presented to
her humble believing Soul, that word of God, Isai. 7.14. behold a Virgin shall
be with Child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call his Name
Emmanuel, which being interpreted, is, God with us, by Faith in this Word of
God she did conceive, all this may justly be gathered from that Text, Math.
1.22, 23.

The second particular touching the dark morning of the Incarnation of Jesus
Christ. Thus far the morning of the Incarnation of Jesus Chri t was bright and
glorious, but behold presently a dark cloud arises, which involveth both
Joseph and Mary, and the holy conception in her womb in bitter anguish and
distress, Mary must and did of necessity tell Joseph that she was with child,
and that this matter befell her since their Espousals, and opened to him all
the History of it, all that the Angel had said, and that the effect of this
divine vision is, that she is with child. This was amazing tidings to Joseph,
he would ask her what Testimony, Evidence, or proof she could bring, that these
things were so as she had said; alas, there was no Testimony or proof to be
made of these things, only Mary her self in her own cause and defense. To be
begotten with child after Espousals, is by the Law of God a capital offense.
such incredible stories as you tell in your own defense, I have no rule to
believe: I love you dearly, but I cannot, I may not believe you, and much less
will the judges, or any body else give credit to your Apolog^. Joseph took this
matter into deep consideration, Math. 1.20. what an heart wounding
consideration must this needs strike into the heart and Soul of Mary! who knew
her own Innocence yet could by no means clear her self to her Husband. Joseph's
godly heart was rent and distressed, he loved his godly espoused wife, but his
love to God and zeal of his Law obliged him to put away his espoused and
beloved wife, God is to be loved in the first place, and this is the Law of
God, Deuteronomy. 22.20, 21. if this thing be true, ( viz. that she is with child)
then they shall bring out the Damosel to the door of her Fathers house, and the
men of her City shall stone her with stones that she dye: because she has
wrought folly in Israel, to play the whore in her Fathers house, so shall thou
put away evil from among you. How bitterly would the sword of this Law pierce
through the godly heart of Mary? and how would it fill her Soul with such
distress, as would not a little affect the very conception of her womb? to be
so near destruction, his Mother, who had conceived him, to be stoned to death
at her Fathers door, and that b^ the Law of God. But Joseph was a just man,
that is, right godly, holy, and merciful, he was not willing to expose his
Espoused unto the rigor of the Law, to the shame and disgrace of her, and her
Relations. Mean while when these considerations were before them, oh how would
good Mary cry unto God to clear her Innocence. But good Joseph called to mind a
more gentle Law, which left it in his liberty to deal more g^ntly with her, and
he purposed to act toward Mary according to that Law, Deuteronomy. 24.1. when a man
has taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that she find no favor
in his eyes, because he has found some uncleanness in her: then let him write
her a Bill of Divorce, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house,
by this Law, or some other of like importance, Joseph (considering deeply of
the matter) purposed to walk, Math. 1.19. Joseph her Husband being a just man,
and not willing to make her a public Example (viz. by the Law, Deuteronomy. 22.20,
21.) was minded to put her away privily, viz. by that Law. Deuteronomy. 24.1. this I
propose with submission.

But alas, this was but small relief to innocent Mary, though her life, and her
conception was by this means spared, yet the scandal remained, and the reproach
of Incontinency and Whoredom in the Mother, and Illegitimacy on the child, and
all this came upon them, not maliciously by adversaryes, for then it might have
been borne, but regularly by the Law of God, and by Joseph walking regularly,
according to the Law of God, doing what he did in obedience to the Law, this
was a bitter pill to them both.

Oh the distressed cries, prayers, tears, and lamentations would their godly
hearts be involved, drowned in! the distress was such, that no creature could
help them out of it, nor give counsel and advice in the case, only they cry to
God, Lord appear in the Mount. Now the Lord who uses to pity and relieve his
children that cry unto him in their distress, relieved these his dear Children,
as appears, Math. 1.20, 21. while Joseph pondered on these things, behold the
Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, Joseph thou Son of David,
fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is
of the Holy Ghost, and she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his
Name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.

Oh what an ease and lifting up of heart was this to Joseph! and what a fullness
of confirmation of the Faith of Mary, and consolation to her distressed Soul,
when Joseph related the same unto her.

Now Joseph with all speed consummated (according to their public manner)
their marriage, and took her to his house. Yet they now both being divinely
informed of the divinity of her Conception, and well knowing the promise of the
Messiah, and the expectation of all Israel, of his coming about this time, and
believing the Divine Oracle, that this is he, by consent and agreement, out of
holy reverence to the Lord, he knew her not till she had brought forth her
first born Son, and he called his Name Jesus, Math. 1.25.

3. Though the present breaking forth of this Scandal, was now divinely and
wonderfully prevented from coming forth by Joseph, yet they were in danger that
some degree of Scandal might break forth, by an over soon time of her Birth,
and in that case they never want observers of the time of marriages, especially
when there be signal Characters upon the Parents, or concerning the Birth, as
it was eminently in this case. But we shall see in the sequel of the History,
that the Divine Providence of God did draw two Mantles over this danger,
whereby the matter was put out of the reach of all observations of any man, viz.

The first Mantle was, that by occasion of Caesar's Taxation of all the world
under his dominion, Joseph and Mary were called, yea, compelled, though she was
big with child, to go to Bethlehem the City of David, and there the child was
born, far from home, where there was no body had any knowledge of these things,
to make so critical an observation.

The second Mantle was that by reason of Herod's persecution, Joseph and Mary
with the child, were by Divine direction sent away to Egypt, where they stayed
about two years, even till Herod's death, after which the Lord called them home
again, and though they went and lived in their own City, yet now the child was
upward of two years old, and all thoughts of such a curious observation, were
utterly buried in forgetfulness. So that the danger of a seeming Scandal, was
quite covered by these two Mantles, which we shall again touch in the time of
them.

Now the Lord took care for the confirmation of the Faith of Joseph and Mary,
and all the believers in those times, and for the confirmation of our Faith,
and the Faith of all the Churches to the Worlds end. And this the Lord brought
about, by putting it into the heart of Mary to go (with the consent of her
husband) to visit her Cousen Elizabeth, the Mother of John Baptist, of whose
Conception six Months before Maryes, the Angel had informed Mary. Now
therefore this holy couple being agreed, in holy reverence to the Lord, to
abstain from the use of the marriage bed, Mary did speedily upon the
consummation of the marriage, go unto her Cousen Elizabeth, ver. 39. and Mary
arose in those days, and went into the hill Country with haste, into a City of
Judah, and entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elizabeth. And it
came to pass that when Elizabeth heard the Salutation of Mary, the babe leaped
in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost, and she spoke out
with a loud voice, and said, blessed art thou among Women, and blessed is the
fruit of thy Womb. And whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should
come unto me? for lo, so soon as the voice of thy Salutation sounded in mine
Ears, the babe leaped for joy, and blessed is she that believed, for there
shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lo d. Upon
this Divine and Oraculous Speech of this holy Woman Elizabeth, whose holiness
is recorded, Luke 1.6. Zacharias and Elizabeth were both righteous before God,
walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, by the
mouth of this holy Woman did the Holy Ghost now speak, upon which Speech many
great things may he observed, for the confirmation of Maryes Faith and ours.
Mary knew that no humane means had inform d Elizabeth of the great things that
the Angel had said unto her, and of her Conception by the power of the Holy
Ghost, and of the great promises of God, which the Angel uttered touching her
Son, it was the Holy Ghost that had informed her of all these things, and now
the Holy Ghost filled the heart and mouth of this good woman, to utter all
this, for the confirmation of he^ Faith, it was the Holy Ghost that informed
her of Maryes submission of Faith at he^ Conception, it is the Holy Ghost that
now says unto her, blessed is she that believed this must needs raise the
Faith and joy of Mary, to have such a Divine Testimon^ given unto all that had
passed. The power of the Holy Ghost upon the sanctifie^ heart of John, the babe
in the Womb is a great confirmation of Faith, that the bab^ conceived in Maryes
Womb is the Messiah, and that John is his forerunner. It wa^ no small comfort
to Mary, that this holy aged Woman did so bless her, and the fruit of her womb,
about which she had lately been in such bitterness and distres^ The Angels
speech to Joseph had comforted her, and now the Holy Ghost do^ greatly add
confirmation to her comfort and joy. That Elizabeth by the Ho^^ Ghost should
call her the Mother of her Lord, and prove it by the miraculous leaping of the
babe in her Womb for joy. O what heavenly and heart ravishing jo^ did all this
work in the holy heart of Mary! And that it did thus raise and ravi^^ her
heart, appears in Maryes holy and heavenly Answer, by the assistance of t^^
Holy Ghost, who now has filled her heart, as he had done unto Elizabeth, as
appears Luke 1.46. etc. to 56. and Mary said, my soul does magnify the Lord,
and my spirit rejoiced in God my Savior, for he regarded the low estate of his
handmaid, for behold from henceforth all Generations shall call me blessed,
for he that is mighty has done to me great things, and holy is his Name, and
his mercy is on them that fear him from Generation to Generation, he has
showed strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud in the imaginations
of their hearts, etc. to ver. 56. Upon this speech of Maryes, eminent sp^cimens
of her faith and holiness may be remarked: but I shall pass them, and chiefly
attend to the history: yet I cannot pass by this eminent pattern of holy
conference, when Christians meet together, and what a fullness of spirit does
usually attend the Saints, when their meeting together is sanctified by holy
conference and Prayer. I appeal in this case to the experience of all the
Saints, that keep an holy watch. I mean not an extraordinary presence of the
Spirit, but ordinary. We are great losers by being careless and slight in this
great point of christian conversation. The time of Maryes tarriance with her
Cousen Elizabeth, was about three months, Luke 1.56. and Mary abode with her
about three months, and returned to her own house. Maryes conception of our
Lord Jesus, was about six months after the conception of John Baptist, Luke
1.36. this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren. and Mary
tarrying about three months with her, yet returned before the birth of John,
she tarried till Elizabeth was very near her travail; for here are nine months
mentioned. It were curiosity to enquire why she tarried not till the birth of
John. When she came to Joseph, we man justly conceive that she told him what
had passed when she came to her Cousen Elizabeth, for the confirmation of his
Faith and joy. And now having gone three months of her time, it appeared
evident to Joseph, for the help of his Faith, that she was indeed with child,
as she had said unto him, and that all these wonderful things which Mary had
told him were true, though at first they seemed to him incredible. Thus did the
Lord mightily confirm the Faith and joy of these two precious Saints, yea and
of all believers to the worlds end.

4. In this dark morning of the incarnation of our Lord Jesus before he was
born, he was under a suffering that was great in the eyes of the Lord, that the
Lord of Glory with his holy parents should fall under a taxation by the great,
proud Lords of the world, from which the children, and this child especially,
should have been free; but go they must to be taxed. And whether this taxation
was out of pride, that Caesar might see the vast numbers of his Subjects (once
a great failing in good David) or whether it was out of covetousness, to raise
vast sums of money upon every taxed head, or rather out of both these carnal
principles; yet sure enough it was an oppression, a suffering that fell upon
our Lord Jesus before he was born.

Yea further, this matter exposed our Lord Jesus to a very great danger of
Herod, who knowing himself to be a usurper of David's crown, and being extremely
jealous of being outed of his Kingdom, and knowing also that all Israel was in
expectation of the birth of the right Heir, who might out him of his Kingdom.
Consider what an opportunity was put into his hand by this taxation to find out
the right heir, for the manner of numbering Israel, was by numbering the Tribes,
and Families thereof: Now all the royal Family of David were called to be taxed
at Bethlehem; the Register and Genealogyes of David might have been searched,
and there Joseph and Mary, and the babe in her womb, might have been found ut
by Herod: but the wise and merciful providence of God, hid this rom him, and
he rested himself satisfied in the deep plot he had excogitated, by occasion of
the wise men of the east, of which hereafter. Yea God so overruled this
taxation, that he has made it an eminent confirmation of our Faith: for behold
here a most illustrious proof that Jesus Christ is of the house and line of the
royal family of David: Caesar's act has proved it, who thought of no such
thing. And shall I say it is probable that our two Scripture Genealogies in
Matthew and Luke, were taken out of David's Genealogy, kept at Bethlehem the
city of David? Where Herod might readily have found the right heir to David's
crown: But God hid it from his eyes. Again, by means of this taxation, Jesus
Christ was born at Bethlehem, according to the Scriptures Math. 2.5, 6. And
Caesar's act was overruled by God, to make this word to be accomplished. And
lastly, Caesar caused Mary to be far from home, where she was delivered, and
laid aside out of all observation of her observers, touching the time of the
birth of her firstborn. And this is one of the forenamed Mantles, which the
Lord drew over that Danger.

CAP. III.
The History of the birth of Jesus Christ, and the wonderful things that
attended the same
THE admirable providence of God does so overruled all Nations, Persons,
motions and affairs: that every juncture is timed and ordered according to the
good pleasure of his will, and for the accomplishment of his Word and promises
to his Servants. Who could have brought this to pass, that Mary must bring
forth her son Jesus at Bethlehem, so far remote from Nazareth where they dwelt?
But to accomplish this Caesar must make a decree, to tax all the world, this
must be executed in Judea; thither must Joseph and Mary go. This Decree must
comprehend the house of David, therefore all the royal Family of David, must at
the time appointed, meet at Bethlehem: and all this must come to pass, when
Mary was near the time of her travail, Luke 2.3, 4, 5. All went to be taxed,
and every one in his own city, Joseph also went up from Galile, out of the city
of Nazareth, into Judea unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem,
because he was of the house and lineage of David, to be taxed with Mary his
espoused wife, being great with child. When they came there, though they were
all of the same tribe, family and kindred, yet living at such a distance, they
had no private friend or acquaintance, unto whose house ^ey could go for
shelter, and entertainment: but they went to some public Inn, and there took
up their lodging and place of abode: in which Inn, by reason of great resort at
that time, all the rooms within doors were so taken up or engaged, that there
was no room for such a poor couple to be entertained; only there was a vacant
end of an out-house, a Stable where horses use to stand, if he would accept of
that he might. Necessity compelled them to accept it; for Maryes time of
travail was at hand; it concerned them to do the best they could. It is like
Joseph made what provision he could, and there took up his lodging, while he
should tarry in the town. And here was Mary delivered, here was our Lord Jesus
born, Luke 2.6.7. And lo it was that while they were there, the days were
accomplished that she should be delivered, and she brought forth her firstborn
Son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a Manger, because
there was no room for them in the Inn. Jesus Christ emptied himself of glory,
and came into this world in a very mean condition; such was his low condition,
that it was a great trial to Faith; it was an ^vidence of strong Faith, to be
able to look through these dark clouds and believe. To believe him to be the
Lord of Glory, the Savior of the world, the King of Israel, who has no
outward form nor comeliness, nor beauty that we should desire him. The Church
did find this to be a very hard point, a great trial of Faith. For this cause
it pleased the Lord to illustrate this mean birth of Jes^s Christ, with famous
testimonies both from heaven and earth to strengthen the Faith of the Church.
The testimony from heaven was given by Angels. Luke 2.8. ad 21. a famous
History, and a great confirmation of the faith of the Church to the worlds end.
It was a vision unto Shepards by night, wherein a glorious light of the Lord
did shine abo^t the men, which did much affright them, but the Angel did
comfort them against their fears, saying Fear not. He tells them he was a
Messenger of joyful tidings unto all people: he tells them what the tidings
is, viz. Unto you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord, the blessedest tidings that ever in a few words was told unto
men. The Angel sends them to see, and gives them a sign by which they shall
know him, ver. 12. this shall be a sign unto you, ye shall find the babe
wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a Manger. The greatest humility that ever
any king did manifest in this world. For the further confirmation of their
Faith and ours, suddenly there appeared a multitude of the heavenly host with
the Angel, praising God and saying, glory to God in the highest, in earth
peace, and good will toward men. Here be three points in this heavenly
Doxology, of high Instruction and Consolation. and so they departed away to
heaven. Then the Shephards agreed to go see this thing that was come to pass,
The Shepards said one to another, let us now go unto Bethlehem, and see this
thing which is come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us. And they
came with haste, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in a Manger, and
when they had seen they made known abroad the saying which was told them
concerning this child, the effect whereof upon the hearers was, all they that
heard it, wondered at these things that were told them by the Shephards.

The Testimony from earth touching this Child was by the wise Men of the east
who knew that the Jews waited for and expected a king and Savior to be born,
and come into the world, and they were divinely instructed and guided to come
and see him, and worship him, and make their offering of homage and honor unto
him; in which service, they were instructed and conducted by an extraordinary
Star. And seeing they enquired after a king that was born, they went to the
Kings Court to Herod, to enquire after him, Math. 2.2. saying, where is he that
is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his Star in the east, and are come
to worship him. Now King Herod is eminently informed that Jesus Christ is born,
who would, as he doubted, out him of his Kingdom. The effect of this tiding:
is, ver. 3. When Herod the King heard these things, he was extremely troubled,
and all Jerusalem with him, especially such as were of his faction and
apostasy. Herod contrived how he might be sure to find him out, and get him
into his hands, and then resolved what to do with him. For this end, First,
ver. 4. He gathered all the chief Priests and Scribes of the people together,
and demanded of them where Christ should be born? They answered v. 5. In
Bethlehem of Judea; For thus it is written by the Prophet, v. 6. And thou
Bethlehem in the Land of Judah, art not the least among the Princes, for out of
thee shall come a Governor that shall rule my people Israel. Then Herod sent
them to Bethlehem, v. 9. when they had heard the King, they departed, and when
they were departed, lo the Star which they had seen in the east, appeared to
them, again and went before them, till it came and stood over where the young
child was: when they saw the Star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. It
seems they had no sight of the Star all the time they were at the Court, and
whether they had sight of it in their journey to Jerusalem, it is not said. But
now that Star that had appeared to them in the east, appeared to them again,
and conducted them to the very place where the child was, and when they were
come into the house, viz. the Stable, the poor chamber where Mary Lay in, and
where our Lord Jesus was born. They saw the young child, with Mary his Mother,
and fell down and worshipped him, and when they had opened their treasures,
they presented to him gifts, gold, frankincense and mirrhe.

They were men of great Faith, that could believe him to be King and Savior,
whom they found in so poor a Cottage, and in so poor a condition; but divine
faith built upon Divine Testimony, can bear down all Objections of carnal and
humane Reason, this faith of these strangers was a strengthening pattern to all
believers, especially to Joseph and Mary, who were now in great danger. Herod
having such assured notice of the birth of Jesus Christ at Bethlehem. What ever
the danger was, they attended upon the Lord, to obey all his Laws and
Institutions, to fulfill them according to the Word. Therefore, Luke 21 2. when
eight days were accomplished, for circumcising of the child, his Name was
called Jesus, which was so named of the Angel, before he was conceived in the
Womb. Whether this service was performed in the stable, where he was born,
nothing is said of it. but we may justly cenceive that some of the godly
hearing of these eminent and Divine Testimonies, touching this child, had
removed them to some fitter place, before the eight days were accomplished,
and it may be, out of the City, if they were aware of the danger, that the
child and his parents also were in. But where the Scriptu^e is silent, why
should we speak?

There be yet two Laws more to be performed; for, Luke 1.39. they performed all
things according to the Law. The two Laws remaining were the purification of
Mary, and the dedication of the child unto God, which were te be performed
after thirty three days more. Obedience to both these Laws they diligently
performed, both for time and place, Luke 2.22. and when the days of her
purification according to the Law of Moses were accomplished they brought him
to Jerusalem, and presented him to the Lord, as it is written in the Law of the
Lord, every Male that opens the Womb, shall be called holy to the Lord. And
to offer a Sacrifice according to that which is said in the Law of the Lord, a
pair of Turtle doves, or two young pigeons which is the poor woman's offering,
thus did they perform all things according to the Law of the Lord.

In this low condition of our Lord, and in these black dark times, which were
now at the door, the Church did need strong confirmations of Faith, to believe
that this babe is the Messiah, the Savior of the World, the King of Israel.
Therefore the Lord did now provide two eminent and heavenly Testimonies by two
eminent reverend and holy persons, old Simeon, and old Anna, who were wrought
by the Spirit at this time into the Temple, and there did give their public
Testimony touching this babe, that he is the Lord our Redeemer, Luke 2.25, ad
39. The first Testimony is given by old Simeon, whose person is described, ver.
25. behold there was a man in Jerusalem whose Name was Simeon, and the same man
was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Ghost
was upon him. This holy man had a preparatory Revelation by the Holy Ghost,
which is expressed, ver. 26. it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that
he should not see death, before he had seen the Lords Christ. This man his
coming at this time into the Temple, was by an Impulse of the Spirit of God,
which is expressed ver. 27. and he came b^ the Spirit into the Temple, and just
then the Parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of
the Law. Then did this reverend old man, take the babe into his arms and
praised God, ver. 28. then took him up in his arms and blessed God and said,
ver. 29. Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace according to thy
word, namely that particular promise that the Holy Ghost had told him, that he
should not dye till he he had seen the Lords Christ, and now he sees and has
him in his Arms, and says,) ver. 30. for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation,
which thou have prepared before the face of all people: a Light to lighten the
Gentiles, in the glory of thy people Israel This illustrious Prophesy touching
this babe, by this reverend aged man, did put the hearts of Joseph and Mary
into a great wonderment, v. 33. And Joseph and his Mother marvelled at those
things which were spoken of him: whether they expressed their wonderment to
this reverend man, it is not said, but it is probable they did, because he
turns his speech to them, v. 34. And Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary
his mother, behold this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in
Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against (yea a sword shall pierce
through thine own Soul also) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.
Though his mother was happy in bearing him, yet must look to share in the
calamityes that will follow the entrance of the Gospel, and in the sufferings
which Jesus Christ must undergo.

The other reverend and aged witness is old Anna, whose person is described,
ver. 36.37. Anna a Prophetess the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asser,
she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from her
virginity, and she was a Widow of about eighty four years, who departed not
from the temple, but served God with Fastings and Prayer, night and day, and
she coming in that instant, gave thanks likewise to the Lord, and spoke of him
to all that looked for redemption in Israel. Though her words are not
particularly expressed, yet the scope of them may be gathered from these words.
she spoke to all them that looked for redemption in Israel. All these things
are mighty confirmations of Faith, and all very needful, especially for Mary
and Joseph ^onsidering the sad days that are coming upon them.

CAP. IIII.
The first bloody Persecution that befell our Lord Jesus Christ while he was an
Infant, by the cruelty of Herod.
HErod knew himself to be an usurper of the crown of David, and Kingdom of
Judah: He knew that the Jews waited for a Redeemer, a king, a branch of the
stock of David; and now he was eminently informed by the wise men of the east,
that the king of Judah, the right heir of the Kingdom of David was born, and
that he was born at Bethlehem, therefore his politic wicked heart does
presently plot and contrive how he may lay his bloody hands upon him. He could
not tell, nor could they inform him how long he had been born: therefore to
make sure of that, he craftily and privily called the wise men, and asked them
how long it was since the star first appeared to them? supposing he might be
born at the first appearance of that star. Therefore Math. 2.7. he privily
called the Wise men and enquired of them di igently what time the Star
appeared? who answered, that it had appeared to them two years. Math. 2.16.
Thus has he dug deep, and laid his plot so, that he would be sure (as he
thought) to find him out: Which being done, Mat. 2.8. he sent them to Bethlehem
with this Order and appointment, Go search diligently for the young child, and
when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him
also. What worship he intended to do unto him, may justly be interpreted by
his after acting in that matter. he meant to have worshipped him with the
sword. Thus was this bloody Persecution plotted and contrived in the jealous
and bloody heart of Herod. He made no doubt, but that as these wise Men came
first to him to enquire after the child, so they would in good manners have
taken their leave of him at their departure, especially he having ordered them
so to do. It is not said that they did make a promise so to do, or that he
required such a promise of them, in policy he would not so do, lest they
should have smelt something thereby. But they, when they had found the Child,
worshipped him, and made their offerings to him, Mat. 2.12. being warned of God
in a dream that they should not return to Herod, (they being under no
engagement so to do) they departed to their own Country another wa^. How
easily might Herod have found out both the Parents and the child, by searching
David's Genealogy, which Caesar's Taxation had caused to be searched and made
public at Bethlehem. Or how easily might he have apprehended him, by laying
wait for him in the Temple, when the child was publicly dedicated to God? But
God hid these means and opportunityes from him, they came not into his heart,
because he rested and confided, as carnal Politicians use to do, in his own
deep and cunningly contrived Stratagem.

This likewise also was a wonderful wisdom of God, to delay Herod from
stirring in this matter, for about six weeks time, whereby opportunity was
given to Joseph and Mary to perform all that the law required: For it behoved
Jesus Christ to fulfill all righteousness and perfectly to observe the law of
God: and he did so. But this is to be observed also; how the active and passive
obedience of Jesus Christ are complicated together; and though these actions
were the fulfilling of Ceremonial Laws, yet they were acts of moral obedience
to the first and second Commandments.

When our Lord Jesus Christ was publicly dedicated to God in the Temple, it is
like thousands of people were present, and those famous Testimonies touching
this Child by those holy and reverend persons Simeon and Anna rang among the
people and were greatly spoken off, and magnified, which would soon come to
Herod's Ear, either by his spies, which Tyrants use to have abroad, especially
at such public Assemblies, or by the same thereof, that would sound loud among
the people. This News would gaster him. Now he presently lays out to apprehend
that child, but behold and admire how the wisdom of God prevented him, that
night, Math. 2.13, 14. behold an Angel of the Lord appeared in a dream, unto
Joseph saying, arise, take the young child and his Mother and flee into Egypt,
and be thou there, until I bring thee word for Herod will seek the young child
to destroy him, when he arose he took the young child, and his mother by night
and departed into Egypt. Next morning (early no doubt) Herod s^nt to seek for
the child that was yesterday dedicated to God, of whom such divine Oracles were
publicly delivered. But neither Parents nor Child could be found, no doubt he
would send to Bethlehem, and all places thereabout, but they could not be
found. Then would he send for the wise men of the East whom he had sent unto
Bethlehem, and there they sound tidings, that those wise men had found a young
child born in a stable, and laid in a manger, instead of a Cradle, that they
worshipped him, and offered gifts unto him, of gold, Frankincense and Myrrh,
which when they had done, they departed home unto their own Country. When Herod
heard this he swelled with rage extremely, what have they mocked me thus? have
they disappointed me of my design? we may well conceive that all these
disappointments in a matter of so great importance, would blow up the Tyrant
into an horrible rage. Carnal Politicians have seldom patience to bear such
disappointments; now his cruel heart would put him upon his first conceived
plot, when he privily enquired how long the Star had appeared in the East, Mat.
2.16. then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding
wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the Children that were in Bethlehem, and in
all the Coal's thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time
which he had diligently enquired of the wise men, this shows, he stayed not
long before he fell upon this persecution. The lamentation which this cruel
slaughter raised, is best set forth by the Scripture, Matthew showing that it
was a fulfilling of the Prophesy long ago written by Jeremiah. Math, 2.17, 18.
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, saying, in
Ramah was there a voice heard, lamentation and weeping, and great mourning,
Rachel weeping for her Children, and would not be comforted, because they were
not. How many hundreds if not thousands of these Innocent babes were martyred
for the sake of Jesus Christ, in that populous and prolifick Nation, we cannot
tell, but we shall know at the day of Judgment when all these things shall be
opened and judged by our Lord Jesus, who was thus cruelly persecuted by Herod,
it was Jesus Christ that they struck at, though the blow missed him, and fell
upon these innocent babes. This flight of Joseph and Mary, and the Child Jesus
into Egypt, is to be numbered among the great sufferings of Jesus Christ, and
was occasioned by a sore and bloody persecution, he fled for his life, when he
fled from under Herod's Jurisdiction he was forced to fly from the Communion of
the Church, from the Temple and public worship of God, which his Father David
had experienced to be a very black cloud, a bitter distress, he fled to Egypt
the place of Isreal's bondage, sorrow, and affliction. Lo now Israel is in Egypt
again, he is an exile from the Church, and fled into the world to save his
life. in this sad place and case he lived, even so long as Herod lived after
the birth of Jesus Christ which was about two years, all which time Jesus
Christ suffered in his person, and he suffered in his Saints, Isai. 63.9. in
all their afflictions he was afflicted, when the innocent Infants were martyred
for his sake, he suffered with them when their Parents lamented, when Rachel
mourned, and would not be comforted, he suffered with them, when his Parents
Joseph and Mary fled under the terror of Herod's persecution for their lives,
he suffered with them, and not only in their flight, but also in all the
sufferings that followed he suffered with them. Yea, in all these sufferings he
suffered more then any, yea, More then all his Saints suffered, with whom he
was a co-sufferer, for he suffered as our Savior, Luke 2.11. unto you is born
a Savior, he was in that Office from his birth, Isai. 9.6, 7. unto us a Son is
born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be on his shoulders, and
his Name shall be called wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince ^f peace, etc. and behold all this is now in
performing, for the Child is born, the Son of David is given to the Church, and
he is about his great and glorious work for the Redemption of Israel. he is no
sooner born, but he is a sufferer, he is born in the Office of a Savior, all
his works and sufferings are Effects of his Office, when he ^^lfilled the Law,
he did it as a public person, our Savior, our second Adam when ^e suffered,
he suff^red as a public person, fulfilling the penalty of the Law. The ^econd
Adam su^^ering for the first Adam, and for all the Elect of God, who were
^ommitted to his charge to deliver them. All the obedience of this person both
^ctive and passive are pure, perfect, and meritorious. The sufferings of this
Child jesus are not so much to be attended as they proceed from Herod, who was
jea^^us of loosing his Kingdom over Judea, and opposed him only upon that
account. But the suff^rings of Jesus Christ who ever was the Instrument
ther^of, are upon an higher account, viz. to satisfy vindictive justice,
according to the Covenant that pa^sed betwixt the Father and the Son, in the
behalf of Adam, and his Elect Seed. This is the internal and spiritual
Character of all the sufferings of Jesus Christ, even from his first
Incarnarion, and from his birth, his first entrance into the Flesh, into this
World, was attended with great sufferings. And as his life was the precious
life of a public person, so all his sufferings were the sufferings of a
public person, the Redeemer of Gods Elect.

And this is to be noted, that in all his sufferings, he did attend unto,
follow divine Counsel. he did not rashly, or without cause or call, either
expose himself to danger, or engage into any difficulties, always he attended
unto the command, and direction of the Lord, whatever the Lord appointed to
him, that he did, and suffered, in all which he is an holy pattern unto us in
all our sufferings. And when we celebrate in our Sacramenatl worship, the
sufferings of Jesus Christ, we celebrate all his sufferings, even from his
first incarnation: and these sufferings in his Infancy, for all his sufferings
are of the same kind and nature.

In this their flight into Egypt, and tarrying there till the death of Herod,
the wise overruling providence of God did accomplish two eminent fa^ours for
them

1. He completed the Mantle which he drew over the birth of Jesus Christ,
which was (very probably) some days sooner then the time of their completing
the marriage, in the sight of men would be correspondent unto; for after her
Conception, she brought forth her first born, according to the ordinary time of
of the life of man, and that was some distance of time before the strict account
of the time of the consummation of the marriage would allow, in which case,
some observers (no doubt) were busying themselves; but now they being sent away
to Egypt and there abiding till the death of Herod, all memory of such a
critical observation was utterly removed out of the way. 2. It may justly be
here enquired how this poor couple with their babe subsisted, in their long
flight and tarriance from home, and that among strangers in a strange land.
What provision had they for their sustenance? In this matter Gods eminent
providential care over them appeared: for the wise men of the east offered
gold, frankincense and myrrh, which were worth gold in Egypt. And hereby the
Lord made a supply of provision for their subsistence, to bear all their
charges, in this difficult and chargeable flight. O what a sovereign high hand
of God is here magnified, to provide and send men from the East, among other
ends, to bring sustenance and provision for Joseph, Mary and Jesus in their
flight into Egypt! This persecution that Herod raised against Jesus Christ in
his Infancy, was the first entertainment that he had among the Jews, and it was
very sharp, but reached not his life, he had other things to do and accomplish
in this world, before he left it. We read of no more persecutions that he
suffered, until he entered his public Ministry, and then the chief Priests,
Scribes, and Pharisees, hypocrites were his persecutors, and they did so
maliciously, cunningly, and effectually follow the matter, that they persecuted
him to the death; under their hands he finished his sufferings in this life,
which he came into the world to undergo.

CAP. V.
The Return of Jesus Christ out of Egypt into Israel the Church of God.
THough Gods dearest children may be banished out of the Church into the world,
yet they have no quiet and rest to continue there. Godly hearts long for the
enjoyment of Gods presence in his in^tituted worship. They can ^^nd no rest in
their souls, so long as they are at a distance from the visible presence of
God. David is a lively Type of all this, that Jesus the Son of David suffered.
Psalm. 84. per totum. is a very lively description of the frame of David's heart,
in the time of his banishment and flight: and hereby is set forth with what
frame of heart Jesus as Mediator, and his parents were exercised, in the
mournful time of their residence in Egypt, all which time, is a part of the
suffering times of Jesus Christ in this world, whereby he sanctified such a
condition, to his servants, when he shall so try them. O what longing desires
were in their godly hearts to leave that dead world, lying in Egyptian
darkness, and to come into the light of the Lord, in the Land of Israel, Psalm.
84.2. My Soul longs yea even faints for the Courts of my God: my heart and
my flesh cries out for the living God. But they were commanded to tarry till
the Angel should bring them word, and call them to return. Math. 2.13, Be thou
there till I bring thee word. They were commanded to attend to divine direction
in all their motions. It was a great help to their holy hearts, to be and stay
in that dark land, because God sent them thither: it was also a great help to
them in patient waiting for deliverance, because they had a promise that
deliverance should come: For these words [till I come] express a purpose in the
heart of the Lord to come, who never fails to accomplish all his purposes of
love to his children: and it is a promise to tell him when it will be fittin^
and safe for their return.

When the time was come, the Angel came according to his promise, Math.
2.19.20. But when Herod was dead, behold an Angel of the Lord appeared to
Joseph in a Dream, in Egypt, saying, arise and take the young child and his
mother, and go into the Land of Israel; for they are dead that sought the
young child's life. This was done, Mat. 2.15. that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by the Prophet, Hos. 11.2. Out of Egypt have I called my Son. Gods
calling of Israel out of Egypt, was a Type of his calling his Son Jesus out of
Egypt. And this is to be noted, that he sends him out of Egypt into the land of
Israel; out of that dark world, into the Church where Gods presence was, and
where the light of God shined, where the communion of Saints was to be enjoyed.
And when he comes there, he leaves him to act according ^o his prudence. And
hereby the Lord put them into another dark and difficult ^ryal, as will
presently appear.

Joseph obeys (gladly no doubt) this divine Direction, Mat. 2.21. He arose
and ^ook the young child and his mother, aod went into the Land of Israel. Unto
what place ^e went, it is not said, but he soon heard that Archilaus reigned in
his fathers stead. ^oseph understanding him to be ambitious of the Kingdom, as
his father Herod ^ad been, he feared to go into Judea. And now was he in a
great straight. No ^oubt they cried to God for further divine direction,
whether to go. Then did ^he Lord give them a further particular direction,
Mat. 2.22.23. being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of
Galile, and came and dwelt in a city ^alled Nazaret. This place the Lord did
appoint for the place of the education ^f the child. Galile was under another
Jurisdiction: it was a more obscure place where nobody would look to find the
King of Israel, the Messiah. It is called Galile of the Gentiles, Mat. 4 15.
And Nazaret was an obscure place, out of which no body looked for such a Branch
to grow and spring. Ioh. 1.46. Good Nathaniel said, can any good thing come out
of Nazaret? And as this might be an inducement to go thither, because Nazaret
was their own city, Luke 1.26, 27. The place where Joseph and Mary dwelt,
before, and at the time of her Conception, and where they had (no doubt) many
godly friends and acquaintance, who would desire their return thither. And
abo^e all other inducements, Matthew takes notice of the divine Prophes^, Mat.
2.23. that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets, and he shall
be called a Nazarene, that is the BRANCH, so he is called, Isa. 11.1. and other
places; for from this word, the city Nazaret had its name. Thus we see the
tender care the Lord had over this blessed Branch; and how serviceable the
Angels were unto Jesus Christ.

CAP. VI
The History of the holy life of Jesus Christ in the time of his Childhood.
SO much for the History of Jesus Christ in his Infancy, and what sore
Persecution he suffered while he was an Infant; which was prophesied of, Psalm.
22.9, 10. Thou art he that took care of me in the womb, thou did make me hope
when I was upon my mothers breasts, I was cast upon thee from the womb; thou
art my God from my mothers belly.

The life of Jesus Christ may be set forth in four Periods, 1. His Infancy, of
which we have already spoken. 2. His Childhood, the history whereof is
recorded, Luke 2.40. ad 51. 3. His Youth, the history whereof is recorded, Luke
2.51, 52. 4. His Ripe Age, in his public Ministry.


His Childhood is 1. Described. ver. 40. 2. Illustrated, by one particular
history at the finishing of his childhood, and beginning of his Youth, viz.
when he was about twelve years old, Luke 2.41. ad 51.


Although this Instance only is recorded, yet no doubt there were many more
eminent and observable passages in his life. And why the Lord has said so
little of his eminent life, and so much of his sufferings and Death, is a point
worth searching into. This I may say, that in this life we have most need to
feed, meditate upon, and improve the Sufferings and death of Jesus Christ. At
the day of Judgment, and in heaven, we shall be more capable to behold and
improve the history of the holy life of Jesus Christ, and his heavenly Sayings
and Doings.

The Childhood of Jesus Christ is described by four things, 1. He grew. 2. He
waxed strong in Spirit. 3. He was filled with Wisdom. 4. The Grace of God was
upon him.


Here behold the most excellent Child that ever was born of a woman, a most
high and glorious pattern for all good Children to set before them, as an high
mark to make toward. John Baptist was a famous Child, he was conceived by
Faith, as Isaac was a child of Prayer, his birth foretold by the Angel, who
spoke many and great things of him, Luke 1.13. The Angel said, fear not
Zacharias, for thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a
Son, and thou shall call his name John, and thou shall have joy and gladness,
and many shall rejoice at his birth, for he shall be great in the sight of the
Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink, and he s^all be filled
with the Holy Ghost even from his mothers womb, and many of the children of
Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall go before him in the
spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the children,
and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just to make ready a people prepared
for the Lord. Lo what marvelous things are spoken by the Angel touching John.
And when Zacharias objected, and made difficult to believe what the Angel had
said touching his ha^ing a child, he gave Zacharias such a sign, as made this
matter observable to all Istael: for he was struck dumb till John was born. And
what the Angel had said touching his being filled with the Holy Ghost from his
mothers womb, ver. 15. was performed, ver. 41, 44. As soon as Elizabeth heard
the voice of Maryes salutation, the babe Jo^n leaped in her womb for joy. His
birth was very observable. At his Circumcision his fathers dumb tongue was
loosed, and his mouth opened to praise the Lord. And he was filled with the
Holy Gho^t, and prophesied both touching Jesus Christ, and touching John
Baptist, that he should go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his way,
according as the Angel had foretold. Many more things are spoken of him in this
Prophesy: so famous were these things about John, that Luke 1.66. All that
heard these things, laid them up in their hearts saying, what manner of child
s^^^^ this be? and the hand of the Lord was with him. and ver. 80. the child
grew, and waxed strong in spirit. Two of the very same words that are spoken of
Jesus Christ Luke 2.40. are spoken of John. Behold here this child John, was
the most famous child (of a mere man) that ever was brought forth into the
world. But notwithstanding all this, he was not comparable to the child Jesus,
as may be made to appear in many and great respects; yea in those two things
that are said of John in the same words wherein they are said of Jesus, viz.
that he grew and waxed strong in spirit, there is a wonderful difference
betwixt John and Jesus,

1. John was a Son of fallen man, under the stain of Original Sin, though he
was very early sanctified, even in the womb, three months before he was born:
yet by nature he was defiled and stained with Original Sin, by reason of the
just imputation of the guilt of Adams sin unto him: for thus sin is propagated
from Father to child, all the posterity of Adam being in his loins. The Embrio
in the womb is not a Man, till it be quickened with an immortal Soul: though it
has principles of natural growth, yet till it be united and quickened with an
immortal Soul, it is not Man kind, and the Law takes no hold on it. And that
the body is thus prepared in the womb, before the immortal Soul is creatingly
infused into it, and united; does appear, (as I conceive) in that law of God,
Exodus 21.22, 23. If a man strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her
fruit depart from her, and yet no mischi^f follow, he shall be surely punished
according as the woman's husband will lay upon him; and he shall pay as the
Judges determine: but if mischief follow, then thou shall give life for life.
See here, that a woman may be so hurt, as to lose her Conception but it is not
murder, if her Conception was not quickened with an immortal Soul. But if it
were quickened, it is murder, and life must go for life. So soon therefore as
the conception is quickened with an immortal Soul, it is a man, a Son of Adam,
and now the Law takes hold on him, vindictive justice does judge him guilty of
Adams sin, because he was in Adams loins. Thus is sin propagated, and
punishment inflicted, he is punished with Original sin by the justice of the
law.

This was John Baptists case, he was under the vindictive sentence of the Law,
though the Holy Ghost soon took posse^sion of him, b^ the coming of Jesus unto
him, and sanctified him, by uniting him unto Jesus Christ, and brought him into
a state of grace and salvation by Jesus Christ, thus it was with John, but it
was far otherwise with Jesus Christ, for he was without sin, Heb. 4.15. though
in other things he was a man like unto us, yet in this point there was a great
di^ference, he was without sin.

2. John Baptist was begotten after the ordinary way of Generation of all
mankind that were in the loins of Adam, by Zacharias and Elizabeth. But Jesus
was conceived by the Holy Ghost in the womb of a Virgin, and therefore that
holy thing that was born of her is called the Son of God. He was made under the
Law, Gal. 4.4. as a rule of the life of man, but the vindictive justice of the
Law had nothing to say unto him, because he had no sin, vindictive justice had
no more to say to Jesus then it had to say to Adam at his first Creation. Adam
was created under the Law as a rule of life, but vindictive justice had nothing
to say unto him, until he had sinned; but so soon as he had sinned, then the
Law condemned him, and punished him. Jesus was in the state of innocent Adam,
and so under the Law as a rul^ of life. but not in the state of fallen Adam, to
be under sin and vindictive justice.

When Jesus Christ performed the Office of a Mediator, and s^ood as a public
person, by voluntary dispensation, he suffered the guilt of Adams sin, and all
our sins to be imputed to him, as to our Suret^, he voluntarily submitted to
vindictive justice, to punish him in our stead, but in his personal state he
was as pure from any stain of sin, as Adam was at his first Creation, so that
herein was a great difference betwixt Jesus and John.

3. John was but a man, a mere man, as other of mankind be, but Jesus Christ
was God and man in one person. The second person in Trinity did assume this
holy thing, this humane nature, this pure spotless thing, and made it one
person with himself, a Mystery eternally to be admired, and herein Jesus did
infinitely excel John.

4. The humane nature of Jesus had the Image of God in him in all perfection,
whereby he was able to keep the Law of God, under which he was made purely,
perfectly and meritoriously. And that, not only as Adam was able to do at his
first Creation, but infinitely more excellently, because he is God-man. But it
was far otherwise with John, for he had Gods Image but in part, even so much as
Jesus Christ by his Spirit through free grace saw meet to dispense unto him,
which though it was in greater measure then other men, or Prophets, yet
infinitely short of Jesus Christ, and he kept the Law according to the measure
of grace and assistance which he received from Jesus Christ, and he needed a
pardon from Jesus Christ, of his infirmityes and failings in his obedience; and
therefore John does justly diminish himself in respect of Jesus Christ, Math.
3.11. whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, Mark. 1.7. whose shooe-strings I am
not worthy to unty.

1. In the description of this holy child Jesus, the first thing that is said,
is [he grew] he was an Infant young and tender, Math. 2.9, 11. the young child,
from Infancy he grew up to child hood, Isai. 53.2. he shall grow up before him,
in this Jesus was like to all other of mankind; the whole humane nature of
Jesus grew, both body and Soul; he grew as we do. The Soul when first created
is a spiritual creature immediately created out of nothing, created with its
principles in it self, as the heavens and Angels were, and hence it is
immortal, yet it is created a young tender little Soul, fitted for a young
tender little body, and when it is infused into the tender Embrio in the womb,
they grow together (I take boldness thus to express my thoughts with
submission) as the body, which is the receptacle of the Soul, grows in
bigness and capacity. So the Soul grows with it, the matter for supply of
growth for the So^l, is an e^fect of a creating work of God, the infinite power
of God does manage it. Whether it be by the supply of new spiritual matter, or
rather by the extension and acting of the first created matter of the So^l, man
dot^ not k^ow, at least I do not know, nor am I able to resolve it, but I
rather incline to think, that the young Soul grows by extension of the
spiritual matter of the Soul, creat^d at the first infusion of it, and not by
addition of new matter. Much spiritual matter may be admirably contracted and
admirably ext^nded, Air though a gross matter in comparison of spiritual
matter, may be much contracted, and extended, yea, fleshy matter may be
ext^nded and contracted exceedingly, as the womb is; much more is the Soul of
man capable of extention; therefore the growth of young Souls may be by an
orderly extension of the first created matter of them, but it is performed by
the powerful operation of the Spirit of God. The Soul of Jesus grew, as the
Souls of all mankind grow. The Soul of Jesus Christ is a wonderful, great, and
glorious Soul, the greatest that ever was, and most capable of grace and glory.
The body of Jesus grew, the growth of the body is better known to us,
perceptible to sense, and we know that the growth of the Body is by addition of
new matter, which is food, the body of the Infant in the womb is fed by the
navel string, when it is born, it is fed by the mouth, but this matter of food
is altered, digested, carrye d through variety of curious shops of wise and
wonderful operation, and is s^nt into every part of the body for its
nourishment and sustentation, this is a secret and powerful operation of God,
above the reach of man, to turn our food into blood, Flesh, Bones, Sinews,
Veins, Arteryes, etc. it is a wonderful work of God above the skill, knowledge,
or ability of man. Again, to add a proportionable increase to every Limb and
part this is another wonder in the ordinary subsistence and sustenance of the
life of man. Again, to increase every Limb to such a bigness, and there stay,
add no more increase, all this is performed by the divine power of God, Again,
to sustain the bulk of the body by addition of food, without augmentation of
any Limb, or part of the body, this is another of the wonderful works of God in
the sustenance of the body of man. These particular meditations concerning the
growth of the body of man, and in the sam^ manner of the growth of the body of
Jesus Christ should raise our hearts to admiration at the wisdom, power, mercy,
goodness of God, that we have daily experience of, yea hourly, continually. And
hence we see a cogent Argument to oblige us to pray and give thanks always,
when we eat and drink. And so when we eat at the Lords Supper; where our souls
are eminently fed with spiritual food, in a spiritual and wonderful manner, by
outward signs of eating and drinking, such matter of sustenance as the Lord
has pleased by his wisdom and Institution to dispense. In all these
meditations about our bodily estate, sustenance and preservation, it is good to
sing with David, Psalm 139.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. for thou have possessed my Reins,
thou have covered me in my mothers womb, I will praise thee: for I am fearfully
and wonderfully made, mavelous are thy works, and that my Soul knows right
well, my substance was not hid from thee when I was made in secret, and thine
eyes did se^ my substance, yet being unperfect, and in thy book all my members
were written, which i^ continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none
of them, how precious are thy thoughts unto me O God, how great is the sum of
them? It is an addition of wonders, that as the body grows in bigness,
ability and capacity for the Soul to act in, and by; so the Soul grows to its
appointed bigness and capacity for action, and no bigger then God has
appointed; the chief time of the Souls moral growth is after the body has done
growing. There is great difference of Souls, though we see and know the
increase of the Body, but know not the wisdom and power of God how he does
perform it, so we are much more ignorant how the Lord performs the growth of
Souls, and how the Soul is adapted and fitted to the body, and that in every
part, and unto every purpose; It is also wonderful to observe the different
bigness of Souls with the adapting of the body for the Soul, it is better to
say, the body is fitted for the Soul, then to say the Soul is fitted for the
body, though both be true. Gluttons and drunkards, and unclean persons, and
lazy, etc. do spoil their bodies and unfit them for their Souls use, it is a
point of great wisdom to govern and order the body for the use and service of
the Soul. Again, we may observe great likeness and unlikeness of bodies and
Souls, which comes to pass by a wonderful and powerful operation of Gods
wisdom, the foundation whereof is laid in the first matter of the body, and so
in the created matter of the Soul, bodily port, complexion, features,
gestures, dispositions, inclinations, etc. are patronimick gifts and effects.
Esther was a gallant woman, and was of the stock of Saul, who was a gallant
man, none like him among all the people, and ^et there were gallant men at that
time in Israel. Both body and Soul of Jesus Christ were extraordinary,
therefore he grew in a more eminent and excellent manner then any of mankind.
^^s humane nature, both body and soul, were making fit and preparing to be a
sacrifice to God for the sin of man. Heb. 10.5. a body have thou prepared me.
And Isa. 53.10. thou shall make his soul a sacrifice for sin. This was the
greatest and best Sacrifice that ever was offered up to God. Therefore there
was perfect work in the growth, governance and ordering of this child. I might
here digress into the consideration of the admirable wisdom of God in the
preparation of this blessed person to be a spotless Lamb, a fit Sacrifice for
sin, offered to God for the sin of man. The life of this person was more
precious then any other of mankind; yea more precious then all the lives of all
mankind. The Jewish Sacrifices were but Bruits and vegetables: But Jesus Christ
offered this precious Body and Soul, a reasonable Sacrifice. We are commanded
to offer our selves to God a reasonable sacrifice, Romans 12.1. for the
mortification of our sin, and dedecation of our selves to the service of God:
But Jesus Christ offered himself to God, to satisfy vindictive justice for the
offense of sin. Heb, 9.26. he has put away sin by the sacrifice of himself and
has made an end of sin, Dan. 9.24.

The second branch of the description of the glorious person of this holy Child
Jesus, who was preparing to be made a Sacrifice to God for the sin of man, is
expressed in these words, [He waxed strong in spirit] his humane nature was
made under the guidance and governance of the Law, as Adam was in his first
creation; that he might fulfill the law to the full satisfaction of rewarding
justice, and receive the blessed inheritance of life according to the covenant
of works as a reward of his meritorious obedience, and all this as a public
person, a second Adam; in which the first Adam failed and fell short. Which
glorious work, when he had finished he was to offer up himself to God, and dye
for the sin of Adam and all the effects of it. So that this holy child Jesus
was educated and trained up, in, and for a double s^rvice by active obed^ence,
meritoriously to keep the law, and obtain the life promised in the covenant of
works, from the hand of rewarding justice: and by passive obedi^nce,
meritoriously to satisfy vindictive justice for the offense of man. That he
might do and perform all this, as his humane nature, both body and soul gr^w,
and passed from infancy to childhood, from childhood to youth, and from youth
to ripe age; and all this under the Rule of Obedience to the law of God. So in
the second place, it is said, [he waxed strong in spirit] I yet see not but
that I may adventure to call the first of these his natural growth* and the
second his moral growth; it is not a soul growth only, but his body grew also
in fitness to be serviceable to his holy soul and spirit; therefore it is a
growth of the whole man. The same word is said of John, Luke 1.80. but it must
be under^tood with great difference, according as their persons differed in
eminency. Jo^n grew as a son of fallen Adam when regenerated does grow. Jesus
grew as the son of God, that touched not, tasted not of the fall of Adam. But
as Adam in innocence should have grown, and much more eminently, John grew
according to the measure of his capacity. Jesus grew in a wonderful higher
measure of capacity. John had the spirit according to his measure, which was
great in comparison of them that went before him: but Jesus had the spirit
without measure.

Quest. 1. What is meant by Spirit? Job. 32.8. there is a Spirit in man, and it
is called the Spirit of a man, Prove. 18:4. he will hear his infirmity by a
stout and gallant resolution, he will bear any thing from the hand of man, as
we see our Indians will, unto which they are trained up from their Childhood,
and it is infus^d into them as an honorable Character of a man of courage, but
a Spirit wounded by God who can bear? The Spirit of a man is that part of Gods
Image or likeness in a man, that fitteth him for action, his Spirit does exert
and draw him forth to action, and judges of his action, when he has done it,
Job. 32.18. I am full of matter, the Spirit within me con^traineth me, Psalm.
39, 2, 3. my sorrow was stirred; my heart was hot, while I was musing the fire
burned, then spoke I with my tongue, and when he has acted his Spirit judges
of his action by the rule, Prove. 20.27. the Spirit of a man is the Candle of
the Lord, searching to the bottom of the belly. The Spirit of a man naturally
is carnal and unsanctified, 1 These. 5.23. san^tifie you throughout in body,
Soul, and Spirit, that which is called the Spirit of a man is chiefly (as I
conceive) Conscience, because conscience constrains us to action, and judges
of our action when it is done, by carrying it to the Rule, and glass, which is
Gods Candle, a wounded Spirit mentioned. Prove. 18.14. is a wounded Conscience.
Zeal is acted partly in Conscience, which exerteth action, Joh. 2.17. the zeal
of thy house has eaten me up. This zealous Spirit makes a man devout to God
in all duties of the first Table, just, loving, and benificent to man in all
duties of the second Table.

Conscience is called the spirit of a man, because it is one chief seat in a
man, where the ruling spirit of a man, sits, abides and acts. The spirit
dwells in the whole man, in every faculty, especially in the Will,
Conscience, and Understanding. All mankind are secretly acted by a spirit,
either good or bad: the carnal sort are acted by the Devils spirit, Ephesians. 2.2.
the spirit that acts in the Children of Disobedience. Thus it is ordinarily,
though Gods Spirit may sometimes break in. yea effectually in such as shall be
saved. But the Godly are acted by the good Spirit of God, Romans 8.11, 13, 14. if
the Spirit dwell in you, he shall quicken you. And if through the Spirit, ye
mortify the deeds of the flesh. and as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
are the sons of God. One chief seat or residence of the Spirit of God, is the
Conscience, where he sits and overlooketh the understanding the will, the
affections, the passions, and all the figments and imaginations. And hence
Conscience chiefly raises the spiritual War, and sets all grace into action
against all sin. The evil Spirit that rules in the carnal, has his chief seat
in imaginations, figments, affections and Lusts; and the smoke of them blinds
the understanding, yea and conscience too; perverteth the will, and all the
powers o the soul, and inclines them to evil continually: and by those doors
he creeps in, yea, sometimes breaks into the hearts of the godly. Thus we
see why Conscience may be called the Spirit of a man, and so the Spirit of
Jesus, and of John, may be their Conscience in a good part.

Q. 2. What is it to be strong in spirit? A. To be full of Grace, Zeal and
Courage for God: so Jesus Christ was, Joh. 2.17. when he was eaten up with
Zeal, for the purity of Gods house and instituted Worship. Act. 6.10. Steven
was so full of the Spirit of grace and zeal in conscience for the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, that none was able to gainsay or resist him, viz. with Scripture
and reason, but with rage and stones about his ears, they did resist him, till
they had killed this blessed Martyr. Jesus was strong in grace and zeal, and as
he grew in years, and as his humane nature grew in capacity, so this Spirit
grew in him, strong in Spirit, the word which the Holy Ghost uses, signifies
a growing in strength, as the word is used, 1 Cor. 16.13. quit you like men and
be strong, etc. very fully is it expressed in that Text, Ephesians. 3.16. that he
would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inner man, and thus did this blessed child Jesus wax
strong in Spirit, in his Childhood he grew up to be a mighty, powerful,
gracious, zealous child.

3. The third branch of the description of this holy child Jesus, is in these
words, (filled with wisdom) wisdom is that part of Gods Image in man, whereby
he is capable of and furnished with di^ine knowledge and unders^anding, to be
furnished with all the intellectual virtues, and that not onl^ in knowing the
rules of Art, but especially the Rules of Religion in the knowledge of the
Scriptures. 2 Timothy 3.15. from a Child thou have known^th holy Sc^i^tur^s, which
are able to make thee wise unto Salvation through Faith which is in Jesus
Christ, Jesus Christ received his Fullness from God, and out of his Fullness we
all recei e, he is full of grace, Joh, 1.14. when the word dwells richly in
us Col. 3.16. it fills us with wisdom, so it dwelt in Jesus, and enriched him
in all wisdom. as the vessels of nature gr^w greater in capacity, so the
indwelling Spirit of God did fill them unto all fullness. This is as the child
whom Solomon describes, Eccles. 4.13. a poor wise child.

4. The fourth branch of the description of this holy ^h ld Jesus, (the grace
of God was upon him) that word (upon him) shows the meaning partly to be that
visible port and outward carriage, the demeanor of his person in his
conversing with men. This outward grace is that part of Gods Image, which
shines in the gravity and Authority of his port, gestures and actions, which
command acceptance, Deuteronomy 33.24. acceptable to his brethren, so was Jesus
Christ, Math. 7.29. he spoke as one having Authority, Mark. 1.22. and Luke
4.32. his word was with power, Ioh. 7.46. ne^^ man spoke as he speaks, Ioh.
18.6. as soon as he said I am he, they went backward and fell to the Earth,
good gesture, good voice, good speech, gentle, grave, loving behavior, such
things make up this outward grace of God; in which, some persons both men and
women are eminent. So was Jesus Christ, and yet more may be meant by that word.

Object. But here is a great Objection, Isai. 53.2, etc. he has no form nor
comeliness, no beauty, that we should desire him.

Answ. So Jesus Christ was in the worlds eye, Isai. 53.3. despised, rejected of
men, but in the Church s^ye, that looked by faith and love, he was far
otherwise, Joh: 1.14. we beheld his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of
the Father, full of grace and truth. T^is ^^or^ous person thus furnished,
accomplished, beautifyed, even from a child did lead an eminent humane life, in
all humane excellencies and perfections: never any man like him, all his
actions from a child were pure and perfect, in them all he acted as a public
person. He was born a Savior, and was at no time divested of that office. He
perfectly fulfilled the Law in all the duties of childhood: never had the world
such a child in it.

Yet here was passive obedience also in all this, in many respects: all his
glory was veiled from the worlds eye, by a poor, obscure low condition. Here
might be great instruction both to children and parents, to all Believers, yea,
and to all the enemies and dispisers of Jesus Christ: But I will pass on in
attending to the History of his holy life and bitter Sufferings.

CAP. VII.
The History of one famous Act of Wisdom and Grace which Jesus Christ did at
twelve years of age. Luke 2.42. ad 51.
AND when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem, after the custom
of the feast. And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the
child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem, and Joseph and his Mother knew not of
it. But they supposing him to have been in the company, went a days journey,
and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance. And when they found
him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem, seeking him. And it came to pass,
that after three days, they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of
the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them Questions. And all that heard
him, were astonished at his understanding and Answers. And when they saw him;
they were amazed: and his Mother said unto him. Son, why have thou thus dealt
with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee, sorrowing. And he said unto
them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers
business? And they understood not the saying which he spoke unto them.

In this History we may observe diverse weighty things:

1. The time of it; when he was about twelve years old: an admirable specimen
of the grace of God in him. The grace of Christ has eminently shined to many
children, especially in John Baptist in a most remarkable manner. Gods Grace
has shined in sundry of our youth and children, yea, in some of our Indian
children since their praying to God; by which experiences, this history
touching this blessed child Jesus is rendered possible. It is a Scripture
Record, and it were great unbelief to doubt of it. The Lord has given us this
history for the encouragement both of Parents and children, to take pains with
them betimes, to train them up in the knowledge of the Scriptures from a child.
as Timothy was by his godly mother and Grandmother. 2. Tim. 1.5. and 3.15. No
doubt this holy child Jesus did in his childhood utter many gracious words,
and did many gracious actions; but it has pleased God to record only this one,
for the use of the Church in this world, and has covered all the rest with the
mantle of silence. God saw in his holy wisdom, that the luster of this one act
was enough to shine out: the rest are reserved to be opened, and admired at the
day of Judgment, and in heaven to ^ll eternity.

2. We see the religious conversation and practice of the godly in their
perso^al attendance upon the public worship of God, according to his divine
institu^ions. We see also their religious and careful education of their
children and ^outh, to go with them, and attend upon the public worship of
God, to be acquainted with it, and accustomed to attend upon it, even from
their childhood; as Hannah did by Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.24. which greatly condemns
the practice of some in our days, who seldom bring forth their children to
the public worship of God. I have heard of some children of twelve years old,
that never were present at a public Sabbath worship of God; they know not what
it is; such as live in dark places, in the out-skirts of the land, know little
or nothing of Religion, of the service and worship of God.

3. Here is to be noted the time of their returning home, viz. when they had
fulfilled the days, and ^inished the service and worship which God commanded;
none of them stipped out, and got away to run home before the worship of God
was finished, as too many of our people, especially our ^outh are too
frequently wont to do. The Parents of Jesus staid till all was finished, and
the child stayed with them. It was their con^tant custom so to do. O how good
it is to uphold a con^tant, reverent waiting upon the Lord with godly fear; for
our God is a consuming fire. Children must be trained up to serve God with
reverence and fear.

4. See the godly Zeal of this holy child Jesus, for when the public
in^tituted worship was finished, he was not weary and hasty to be gone, glad to
be out of the yoke of the service of God; it was not a weariness to him, as too
often it is to us: yea not only to children, but to elder persons; both men and
women are too full of this infirmity: tired and weary of the service, glad to
be gone. It was not so with Jesus; for when he might have been gone with his
parents, when they went away after the worship was finished, yet he stayed
behind them. And where stayed he? not in any common place or vain company, nor
in any vain sports and pleasures, but he stayed in the temple, he went to the
place of the education of youth, into the Schools of instruction of youth. A
rare example for a child so to do. Too many of our youth will stay behind
their parents, and will not go home in their company: but what stay they
about? for no good, but for sport and pleasure: and where stay they? sometimes
in common places, sometimes in profane places, in taverns, or other places
where profane persons resort, where they may serve their pleasures and lusts,
wherein they take more delight then in the service of God. O youth, youth,
learn of this holy child Jesus, if you stay behind your Parents, or if you go
not home to your Parents, let your tarryance be in the Temple, or in some
service of God, or where you may do or receive some good!

5. Here see his Parents vigilant, diligent, and solicitous care of their Child
when they missed him in their company, they went on the first days journey
hoping that he was in the company of some of their kindred, or neighbors, and
acquaintance, for they knew that he was civil, sociable and courteous; but at
night, at that first days journeys end, they searched for him, inquired of all
the Company, they could hear no tidings of him, none of them had seen him any
where in the way. Now are they filled with sorrow, no quiet rest could they
take that night, up they rise in the morning, back again they go, enquiring of
all they meet, seeking every where for him, but no tidings could they hear of
him. That night they got back to Jerusalem, and still can hear no tidings of
him: the longer they seek, the greater their sorrows, and less rest could they
take that night, a good pattern to all Parents diligently to look after their
Children, when they are missing, and a great blame it is to such Parents as
suffer their Children to go and come, whether and when they will.

6. Here see the time and place of their finding him, on the third day of their
seeking for him, they enquired no doubt, of all their friends and acquaintance
in the City where they used to resort, but could h^ar no tidings of him, which
still augmented their sorrow, at last it came into their minds to go to the
Temple, and seek for him there, it is much that they made that the last place
of their enquiry for him. But God had wise and holy ends in ordering and
overruling their motions to be as they were: when they came to the Temple they
soon found him there, the Temple was his Fathers house, Joh. 2.16. and what
place could they seek to find the Son in, more likely then in his Fathers
house? there they find him. And what employment did they find him about, in his
Fathers house? They found him in the place of Education and Instruction of
youth, in the knowledge of the Scriptures and Religion, a very meet place and
employment for a godly religious wise child, and an eminent example to all
youth, to go of his own accord unto the Schools, where he might learn
Instruction in the knowledge of God and of the Scriptures. It is far otherwise
with too many of our youth, who when they are missing, must be sought for in
Taverns, Ordinaryes, or such like places of sin, vanity, and profaneness.

7. Here we see how the School Exercises were managed, in training up of ^outh.

1. They had Doctors, Tutors, or Teachers of the Scholars, who had seats in the
Schools on each side, higher than the rest.

2. At the bottom or foot of those seats of the Doctors, there were lo^er seats
for the Scholars, hearers, and learners, hence it is said, A t. 22.3. that Paul
was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, where he was taught according to the
perfect manner of the Law of the Fathers, according to which pattern the
meeting places of the Gospel Churches were ordered for Act. 4.37. the place for
the Church Treasury, to be brought unto was at the Apo^tles feet, and there the
Deacons had their place, who gathered the Contributions of the Church, unto the
Lords Treasury in the Church

3. The Doctors taught and examined their Schools, by proposing such questions
to them, as they thought meet, for their In^truction, and unto these questions
of the Doctors, the Scholars were to make answer.

4. In due time and order the Scholars had leave and liberty to propound
questions to the Doctors; unto which they gave answer for the Instruction of
their Scholars.

8. Here we see how Jesus behaved himself, and managed his Fathers business
among them in the Schools.

1. When it was his turn in order to answer to the question proposed, he
answered the question with such understanding as made them to admire, that word
Prove. 24.26. was verified in him, every man shall kiss his lips, that gives a
right answer. and Prove. 20.15. the lips of knowledge are precious jewels, and
Prove. 15.23. a man has joy by the answer of his mouth, and a word spoken in
due season how good is it?

2. When it was his turn to ask and propound questions, he did propound such
questions as did amaze them. How they could, or did answer them, it is not
said, all that is said, is Luke 2.49. all that heard him were astonished at his
under^tanding and answers, it is a good point of understanding to ask a wise
question. In this place, and in this employment his Parents found him.

9. When the Exercise was ended, (for they did not, they might not be so rude
as to interrupt them) his parents took him into their Company, and when the
season was fit, they expostulated with him, for sta^ing behind, and putting
them to so much sorrow, pains, and trouble. To which he humbly with meekness
answered, that he was about his Fathers business, he does with gentle modesty
check their check with an expostulation, why did you give your selves so much
trouble, so sorrowfully to seek me? did you not consider? if you did not, you
might have considered, that I must do my Fathers business, viz. to perform the
office and duty of a Mediator, and this is one part of the work of the Office
of a Prophet, to raise up and train up of the Sons of Israel; to be Prophets
and to be Nazarets, his Parents understood not his discourse, but his mother
did lay up his sayings in her heart; and well she might, for she knew that
Joseph whom he called Father had no business for him to do in the Schools, and
she perfectly knew that he had no earthly Father, God only was his Father, and
therefore it was Gods business that he w^^ about.

I am loath to pass over this famous History, without taking some notice of this
great duty of our Generation work, in training up of youth in Religion and
learning, to fit them for the service of God, and the public benefit of
mankind, both in Families, Church, and commonwealth, all sorts and orders of
men are bound to attend unto this great and necessary Generation work. And we
of New England a^e more obliged to it then any other, in some respects,
especially, because it was one of the chief motives and ends of our design in
leaving of our native soil, Relations, callings, friends, and hopes for
worldly Estates, adventuring our all into the hands of Gods providence, to pass
over the vast C^ean into a wilderness, a land not sown, to enjoy the liberties
of Gods house and Ordinances, and instituted worship for our selves, and our
posterity. And to train up our Generarions under these enjoyments and
improvements, to be holy Churches of Jesus Christ, trained up in his School for
his service, honor, and praise, which cannot be performed by any ordinary
means save by Schools. Though we have great cause to praise God for our
Schools, and the great blessing that all the Land does enjoy thereby. Yea, and
some returns we have made to our mother England, of our Children trained up
here, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Yet we have great cause,
especially of late years to abase our selves before the Lord for our great
neglects and remissness, in the p^rformance of our purposes and vows to God in
this particular; we dote upon our children, and do not endure that due
christian severit^ to be exercised in their Education; as the fallen Estate of
mankind, does necessarily require and call for. Pagan Rome and Greece will, in
some respects, concerning grave and severe Education of youth, rise up in
judgment against our reforming Churches, who are far more advantaged than they
were to the performance of this great generation work. Yet are we much more
failing therein, than they were, we do know that the long duration of their
flourishing state, did spring and grow in this garden of severe Education of
posterity of all sorts of youth, which blessing is founded and promised in the
fifth Commandment.

We do already plainly see, that the degeneracy and ruin of our reformed
Churches springs up, yea comes upon us like a raging flood, out of this
neglected garden, the want of due and prudent severity in the education of our
youth We have all Scripture light strongly ingageing of us to this duty: I
shall only intimate a few Scriptures,

2. Tim. 3.14.15, 16, 17. But continue thou in the things which thou have
learned, knowing of whom thou have learned them. And that from a child thou
have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

Ephesians. 6.4. And ye Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them
up in t^^ (...) ^^d admonition of the Lord.

Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thine
heart^ and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk
of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when t^ou lie down, and when thou risest up. Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in
the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.

Deuteronomy. 29.10.11, to 16. Ye stand this day all of you before the LORD your God:
your Captains of your Tribes;, your elders, and your officers, with all the men
of Israel, your little ones, and your wives, and thy stranger that is in thy
Camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water: that thou
should enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath, which
the Lord thy God makes with thee this day: That he may establish thee to day
for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he has said
unto thee, and as he has sworn unto thy Fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob. Neither with you only do I make this Covenant, and this oath: but with
him that stands here with us this day, before the Lord our God; and also with
him that is not here with us this day.

Nehem. 10.28. And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the
porters, the singers, the Nethinims, and all they that had separated themselves
from the people of the lands, unto the Law of God; their wives, their sons and
their daughters, every one having knowledge and having understanding.

To train up our children to worship God with Reverence and godly fear, is a
powerful curb, restraint and correction of that natural enmity that is in
their heart against God, and against his holy law. It suppresseth the natural
habits, and permits not the irritation of corruption to be stirred up: it
quenches the burning of all such sparks: it chaseth away the foolishness that
is bound up in the heart: it habituates the soul in a principle of hatred
against sin: it inureth them into shame and sorrow for sin, which is so
contrary to the law of God, and all religion, and holy worship of God: it
lays in, yea storeth the soul with principles and habits of virtue, which
will never wear out, nor be forgotten; because he has been so taught and
practiced from a child. Such religious education of Children does greatly
dispose and prepare their hearts for the special work of the Spirit, un^o their
conversion, they being always trained up within the walk of the Spirit; such
religious education does principle them to be ready for any service of God in
their generation. The first impressions that are strongly made upon the tender
souls of children, will never wear out. Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit
odorem Testa diu

It is a very false and pernicious principle, that many people and parents are
tainted with, viz. that youth must be suffered a while to take their swinge,
and sow their wild oats; to travail into the world, to follow the fashions,
company, and manners of the times, hoping they will be wiser hereafter. O false
principle God speaks fully to the contrary. Prove. 19.18. Chasten thy Son while
there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying. Prove. 13.24. He that
spares the rod, hates his son, but he that loves him, chasteneth him
betimes. The gentle rod of the mother, is a very soft and gentle thing, it will
break neither bone nor skin: yet by the blessing of God with it, and upon the
wise application of it: it would break the bond that binds up corruption in
the heart. Prove. 22.15. Yea yet greater is the power of this gentle thing,
Prove, 23.13.14. withold not correction from the child, for if thou beatest him
with the rod, he shall not dye, thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall
deliver his soul from hell. The after welfare of our children de^endeth very
much upon their education. We want not experiences of both ds; some we have can
never get rid of the stains of their youth. David's heart pincheth him upon that
account. Psalm. 25.7. So does Jobs distressed soul lament, Job. 13.26. Thou
writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my
youth. We often find the good effects of holy and severe education, of which
Timothy is a noted example. We have experienced that text Amos. 2.11. I raised
up of your sons to be prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites, is it not
even so O ye children of Israel says the Lord? and is it not so with us, O
New England! but the Reproof that follows v. 12. we have too sadly
experienced, But ye have given them wine to drink, is it not so, O New England!
This is a lamentation, and will be for a lamentation, if it be not reformed.

CAP. VIII.
The History of the Conversation of Jesus Christ all the time of his Youth.
Luke 2.50.51.
AND he went down with them, and came to Nazaret, and was subje^t unto them,
and Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, and favor with God and man.

These few words are an Epitome of an Hi^tory of eighteen ^ears. ^he
abovenamed famous history of what Jesus did when he was about twelve years
old, was the shutting up of the period of his childhood, and the beginning of
his youth: all that is said of this period of his youth, is expressed in these
few words in this text, and we hear no more of him till he was about thirty
years old, and then he began to enter upon his public Ministry, beginning with
Fa^^ing and Prayer, and temptation, Luke 3.23. with 41. etc. and from that time
forward to his death, all the Evangelists do give the history of his doings and
sufferings. The course of his holy life from twelve years old, to thirty, is
wholly covered in silence, save what is said in these two Verses, wherein there
be six things spoken of him,

1. He went down with them, he had come up with them unto the Temple to attend
the public worship of God, and now he returns home again in his parents
company. It is a spiritual comfort to godly parents, when they appear before
God. to say as Isai. 8.18. Behold here am I, and the children which the Lord
has given me. And when the worship is finished, the Parents and the Children
return home together. Good Children will refuse vain company, vanities and
play, to keep company with their godly parents. Godly youth will chiefly prize
and rather choose the desirable company of their good parents, as being
according to the commandment of God, and the holy pattern that our Savior
Jesus Christ has set us. Once we see that he tarried behind them; but we also
see what a good Apology he had for it; because he was about his heavenly
Fathers business. according to this instance was his, and his Parents practice
all his days. From this time forward for eighteen years did they thus walk.
Order is comely in Gods eyes, and becomes Gods House and Worship: in such
order did they constantly walk with God. Hereby Jesus Christ did fulfill
perfectly all the laws of God, touching his orderly attendance unto the
instituted worship of God. Such a divine beauty and luster was upon the
reverent, orderly and religious attendance of Jesus Christ upon the public
worship of God, that it was an high honor to the Temple, for him to appear in
it, and to worship God there. Such an honor and glory, as made this second
Temple to excel the first Temple, though in many other respects it was
inferior to it. Hag. 2.7, 9. The Desire of all Nations shall come, and I will
fill this house with glory, says the Lord of Host: the glory of this latter
house shall be greater then of the former says the Lord of Hosts. The holy
obedience and worship of this glorious person, did beautify and illustrate the
Temple, and all the instituted worship of God, which was there performed. this
Person brought more glory to the Temple then all the Ceremonies, of which he
was the substance, and they were but the shadows. In all this period of the
middle age of his life, the Lord Jesus did fulfill the law of God, with his
pure perfect and meritorious obedience: never was the Law of God so obeyed and
fullfilled, as it was by this glorious Person.

2. He came to Nazaret, the place of his education and Humiliation all his
days, until he entered upon his public Ministry. He is after called the
Branch, in the Old Testament, with reference to his habitation in this city,
which has its name from that word, and in the New Testament, he is called
Jesus of Nazaret. we see how exa^^ly careful the Lord was to fulfill the
Scriptures for the con irmation of our Faith in him, yea, in minute and small
matters, as they man appear unto us, Math. 5.17. think not that I am come to
destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy but to fulfill, Joh.
6.38. I come down from Heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me.

3. He was subject unto his Parents, the Greek is Emphatical in three words,
(he was) that is the habit, bent, way, and set of his heart was to be subject
to his Parents according to the fifth Commandment, he perfectly fulfilled the
fifth Command, it was never so kept and fulfilled as he kept it, his heart was
unto his duty, which he performed without any failure or swerving either in
thought, look, gesture, word or deed. The second word is (subjecting) viz.
always and upon all occasions, he acted subjection in all kinds, and in all
things, he acted the perfect duty of a child, without the least spot or stain.
The third word (to them) to both his Parents Father and mother, according as
order and the rule called for it. In Childhood the child is oftenest in the
mothers bosom, in youth he is oftenest at Fathers hand, in all cases he acted
subjection and obedience perfectly, they never pro^oked him, for he had nothing
in him was capable to be provoked, when the Devil came to t^mpt he found
nothing in him capable to entertain a temptation, Joh. 14.30. much l^ss did his
Parents ever provoke him, nor did he ever provoke them, they had in-dwelling
sin in them, though he had not, and though they had, he never provoked them,
nor drew out their corruption to act, O what a sweet, holy, peaceable Family
was that Family, an heavenly Family? no doubt he often stirred up and provoked
his Parents to holiness, virtue, and all good works that they were capable to
perform, Math. 8.9. the Centurion does rightly describe Family subjection, I
say to one, go, and he goes, and to anoth^r, come, and he comes, to another,
do this, and he does it. So did Jesus always, if his mother called him he
came, if she said go, he goes, when his Father said go with me to work at my
calling for our living, he went with him, he wrought with him, we read that his
dotracters said. Is not this the Carpenters Son? Math. 13.55. others called him
the Carpenter, Mar. 6.3. this witnesses his subjection and obedience to his
Parents. And also that he was not idle, but he labored in his Fathers calling,
and all this was pure and perfect obedience to the Law of God. Reverence to
parents is a part of subjection to them, and therefore that also is
comprehended in this word, he was subject to them.

4. He increased in wisdom, the greek word does signify to profit and
increase in knowlebge and learning, by the use of those means, which God has
appointed for mankind to get wisdom, knowledge and learning, by which are
hearing, reading, conference, meditation, and stud^, and watering them all with
prayer. That hearing is a sanctified means instituted by God to get wisdom,
see Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, that reading is an instituted
sanctified means, see Ioh. 5 39. search the Scriptures, Jesus Christ often
says, have you not read? and how read you? that conference is a sanctified
means, see Luke 24.32. did not our hearts burn witbin us, while he talked by
the way? that meditations and study are sanctified means. 1 Timothy, 4.15. meditate
on these things, and that all these must be watered by prayer, Iam. 1.5. If any
lack wisdom let him ask it of God, who gives to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, Paul says, that he profited in the
Jews Religion above others where the same word in the Original is used, Gal.
1.14. and he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, a very learned Doctor,
Act. 22.3.

The matter of our learning is chiefly the Scriptures, that is the book above
all books, to train up youth in the knowledge thereof, as Timothy was, 2 Timothy
3.15. The next book to that is the book of Gods creatures, the works of God,
where all the liberal Arts are to be found and learned. And the next books are
the books, labors, and works of learned men, and especially of holy men, who
lay open the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge, which are laid up in Jesus
Christ, laid out, displayed, and revealed in the Scriptures, and explained to
our Capacityes in the Books and labors of holy and learned men. That Jesus
according to his humane nature increased in wisdom, is here testified of him,
as his body and Soul grew in capacity to receive more and more addition of
wisdom, so the Hol^ Ghost filled him more and more with wisdom, when he was a
Child he was filled with wisdom, Luke 2.40. according to the measure of his
capacity, and as he grew up, his virtue was more and more exerted, and he was
still more and more filled and increased in wisdom. Jesus was full of grace,
and as the habits were drawn out by new Objects into act, so his wisdom
increased.

The means that Jesus Christ us^d, were those above named, Luke 2.46. he was
among the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions. And no doubt,
such as taught in the Synagogues where he lived, had him to be their frequent,
if not constant hearer. And that Jesus did read the Scriptures, there is no
doubt to be made of it, because he has commanded us to search the Scriptures;
wherein he was so expert, that Luke 24.27. beginning at Moses and all the
Prophets, he expounded to them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning
himself. That Jesus meditated and prayed, which are two exercises of the Soul,
so near of kind, that they are seldom asunder: especially when we meditate on
Religion and the Scriptures And how abundant our Lord Jesus was in prayer, is
greatly witnessed in the Gospels. Thus Jesus Christ has set a pattern to all
scholars and Christians, who all are the Scholars of Jesus, how we may increase
in wisdom. Wisdom enters into the Soul by degrees, so it entered into the
soul of Jesus, because he increased in wisdom. We find two kinds of soul food,
milk for Babes, and strong meat for men, Heb. 5.14. and Jesus Christ made use
of both these kinds of Soul food, the Scriptures are the purest spiritual milk
in the world, 1 Pet, 2.1, 2. the sincere milk of the Word that ye may grow
thereby, such babes as are born of the Spirit by receiving into their Souls the
ingrafted word, they relish no food but such as is grounded upon, and deduced
from the Scriptures, and such was the food that Jesus fed upon, whereby he was
filled with wisdom; we see that Jesus Christ has sanctified Schools of
learning, and all good means of education of youth in knowledge and wisdom,
and did perfectly fulfill the Law of God therein for us.

5. He increased in stature. As his Age and Years came on, so his humane nature
grew, he grew up a comel^ young man, well featured and proportioned in all his
limbs, unto that measure of stature that was appointed to him of God, his body
visibly grew, as his Soul grew invisibly, unto that glorious measure which the
Lord had appointed for it to attain unto. Though the carnal persecuting world,
vexed and incensed by his holiness and faithful ministry, were blinded with the
black smoke of envy, and his person obscured by poverty and a low condition,
and therefore saw no beauty, nor any thing desirable in him; yet in Gods eye
he was his pleasant Child, and in the Churches eye he was a glorious person, we
beheld his glory, the glory of the only begotten of the Father full of grace
and Truth, Joh. 1.14.

6. He increased in favor both wi h God and man, he was a very gracious, holy
youth, a young man eminent in Religion, eminent in Sabbath worship, in
Synagogue worship, in Family worship, in Temple worship, all his converse and
discourse was holy, heavenly, and religious; he behaved himself in all things
as a darling Child of God. And in his converse with men, he was of a civil,
kind, courteous, and affable conversation, so that all Gods people did love
him, honor him, and reverence him in their hearts, though the wicked and
profane contemned him, yet in their consciences they could not but have a
reverent esteem of him. So he grew in favor with God and man.

Thus he lived, and carried himself until he was about thirty years of Age. In
this course of his Earthly pilgrimage, he had opportunity to obey God in all
the Commandments of the Law. The whole System of the obedience of man, in
walking toward God in holiness according to the first Table of the Law, and in
righteousness toward man according to the second Table of the Law, was
performed by him, and he never failed in one jot or Tittle of the Law, but did
perfectly fulfill it. Such particular commands as his Sex or calling, etc. gave
him not opportunity actually to perform, those h^ did virtually and habitually
perform, and that was acceptable to God; for Adam if he had stood in Innocence
should not personally have performed the Commandments peculiar to Children, yet
should acceptably have fulfilled the whole Law. And the times that Jesus lived
in were such trying times, as did put him often upon most eminent acts of
obedience, (...) he came to the Church of the Jews, when they were at the worst
that ^ver they were, and under the deepest degree of Apostasy, which filled all
men with trials and temptations, and rendered it a difficult work, to keep true
and upright in his obedience to God. Yet Jesus kept his integrity without the
least spot, blemish, or stain, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23. he came also at a time when the
Jews were subdued by, and subjected unto the Roman power, which condition did
render the times very difficult to keep a good Conscience, and to walk with God
in truth and sincerity. Yet notwithstanding these and such like difficulties,
Jesus Christ held fast his integrity, and walked in all obedience to God, and
toward all men with perfect Innocence: In this course of his humane life he
perfectly fulfilled the Law of God. And all this he did as our Savior, and
Mediator, and Surety. The first Adam ought to have fulfilled the Law, but he
did not, he fell into sin before he had kept the Law, therefore Jesus Christ
the second Adam, he undertaketh to perform that which he left unperformed; he
has perfectly fulfilled the Law by his active obedience, and this perfect
obedience of Jesus is imputed unto believers, and God does account it unto us,
as if we had performed it, 2 Cor. 5.21. that we may be made the Righteousness
of God in him, and Romans 10.4. Jesus Christ is the perfecting end of the Law for
Righteousness to every one that believes, Phil. 3.9. and be found in him not
having my own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the
Faith of Christ the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.

CAP. IX.
The History of some of the Sufferings of Jesus Christ which he lay under and
endured through all the course of his Humane life in this world, many of them
in this most quiet time of his life before he entered upon his public Ministry
MY scope being to explain and set forth the sufferings of Jesus Christ, I
shall endeavor according to my poor ability, to show what sufferings Jesus
Christ underwent in all this course of his pilgrimage. Jesus Christ having
undertaken to be our Advocate with the Father, and to procure our peace with
God; as it was incumbent on him to purchase for us the Inheritance promised in
the Covenant of works, by fulfilling the Law by his pure, perfect, and
meritorious, active obedience unto the Law of God, which Adam left unperformed.
So it was incumbent upon our Lord Jesus to suffer the punishment due unto us,
for our transgression of the Law. The Captain of our Salvation must be made
perfect by suffering. Hence when in his Infancy he fled for his life, from
Herod's Jurisdiction into Egypt, this suffering of Christ was a part of the
punishment due unto the sin of man, he having taken upon him the imputation of
the guilt of the sin of man. The curse and punishment due to sin did justly
fall upon him, and under that consideration were all the sufferings of Jesus
Christ, he did not suffer affliction as a means of mortification of sin, as we
do, for he had no sin to mortify, but all that he suffered was by virtue of
his office of a Mediator, and he suffered in all things the punishment due to
sin, his sufferings were all of them a branch of the curse, an effect of the
guilt of sin, he suffered in all things as a public person, as a Mediator, and
therefore in every thing that he suffered he underwent the wrath of God, the
curse and punishment of the Law, which was due to sin, never did a man suffer
such sufferings, and so, as Jesus Christ suffered. When he returned from Egypt,
and his Parents by prudent fear were constrained to withdraw into an obscure
corner of the Country, there to hide, and bring up the child, Jesus Christ
suffered this as an effect of the guilt of the sin of man, as a branch of the
curse and wrathful punishment of the sin of man; and this obscurity did run
through his whole life. More particularly, I shall instance some of the
sufferings of Jesus Christ which he suffered all his life long, even in this
most quiet time of his life, when his active obedience did chiefly shine, and
this I do to show the complication of his active obedience and passive
obedience together in his quietest and best times, wherein he did most
illustriously perform his active obedience, he was under clouds of suffering in
them all. And first I shall lay sundry of them together, and then open them
distinctly.

1. Jesus Christ suffered for us the affliction of poverty as it is a fruit of
the curse, the sting of the guilt of sin, wrath and punishment of sin were in
it.

2. Jesus Christ suffered for us the affliction of a low obscure condition in
this world, as a fruit of the curse, the sting of the guilt of sin, and
wrathful punishment for sin was in it.

3. Jesus Christ suffered for us the affliction of a servant-like condition in
this world, as a fruit of the curse, having the sting of the guilt of sin, and
wrathful punishment of sin in it.

These three first kinds of sufferings he underwent all his life through: the
rest that follow, he did chi^fly undergo after he entered upon his public
Ministry.

4. Jesus Christ suffered for us the affliction of grief, infirmities, bodily
pains, as the fruit of the curse, having the sting of guilt, and wrathful
punishment of sin in them.

5. Jesus Christ suffered for us reproaches, slanders, cruel mockings as a
fruit of the curse, having the sting of the guilt and wrathful punishment of
sin in them.

6. Jesus Christ suffered for us Temptations many and great, as a fruit of the
curse, having wrathful punishment of sin in them.

The sting of all these su^ferings of Jesus Christ (and such like; for he
suffered all the sinless punishments of sin) was the imputation of the guilt of
our sin, and the real curse and wrath of God due to our sin, but the evil of
sin he touched not. The most of these su^^erings did fall upon him through the
whole course of his life, before he was persecuted for his faithful Ministry
and Doctrine. But reproaches and cruel mockings are most particularly mentioned
in his last sufferings, where we shall have occasion to make particular mention
of them, all these kinds of sufferings, when they befall us are calls to
repentance, helps and means of mortification; Jesus Christ has taken out the
sting, and turned them into wholesome medicines.

But they fell upon Jesus Christ as punishments of sin, fruits of the curse,
executed upon our Surety to the uttermost of the merit and desert of sin, until
vindictive justice was satisfied, and said, I am well pleased, it is enough.
Though in the time of Jesus Christ his private life, many people favored him,
and it is like none but the vilest mocked and despised him, yet when he
publicly preached and reproved their sins, and fell under the hatred and
persecution of the chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, then the generality of
the people raged against him, and few did adhere to him, and very few believed
in him; and all this he suffered as the punishment and desert of our sin.

I shall more particularly open these several sorts of punishments of sins
which our Lord Jesus suffered for us, to satisfy Divine justice, and to take
away the sting and curse of them from us, and to sanctify them to be wholesome
medicines in his hand to do us good by them.

Sect. 1.
Of the Poverty of Jesus Christ
MAth. 8.20. the Foxes have holes, and the Fowls of the Air have nests, but the
Son of man has not where to lay his head, Luke 2.7. she brought forth her
first born Son, and wrapped him in swaddling Clouts, and laid him in a manger,
because there was no room for them in the Inn; in so poor a condition he was
born, and it appears that he had not advanced or increased his estate all the
time of his life, for now he was in his public Ministry, and yet he had no
place of his own where to lay his head, and take a nights rest, nor any house
to entertain his followers and auditors, but often went out unto Mountains and
wildernesses to preach unto them, or upon the Sea shore. He was the Son of a
Carpenter. Mat. 13.55. and wrought with his Father for his living, Mark. 6.3.
yet had not the means or opportunity to raise any worldly estate, nor to build
for himself an house, nor any shelter where to lay his head, Isai. 33.2. he
grew as a Root out of a dry ground, and men know that such Roots grow but
poorly, Psalm. 40.17. but I am poor and needy, and this is manifestly spoken of
Christ, as appears, ver, 6, 7, 8, etc. the same is said, Psalm. 70.5. Psalm.
69.29. I am poor and sorrowful, and this Psalm speaks abundantly of the
sufferings of Jesus Christ, and this of poverty is one of his sufferings, Psalm.
109.22. I am poor and needy, and this Psalm is a Prophesy of Jesus Christ, his
Parents were poor which appears by their lodging in a Stable, and at his
mothers purification, they offered the poor woman's offering, Luke 2.2^. This
part of the sufferings of Christ is abundantly declared both in the Prophesy
and also in the History. Poverty is not a sin, but an affliction a punishment
of sin, sin has brought poverty upon man, as the desert of our sin, man was a
rich Lord, but sin has made him a poor beggar. The reason why poverty is a
punishment, is, because it cutteth us off, and depriveth us, and takes away
much of our dominion over the Creatures of God. Adam was made Lord over Gods
Creatures, in this low world he had dominion over them, but sin has stripped
us in a great measure of our dominion. God will permit us to have a little, a
few of his creatures to rule over and employ. Though some dominion over, and
use of the creatures God does allow to every one, even to the poorest Lazarus,
viz. the Earth to tred and ly upon, the Air to breath in, and some food to live
upon, though this is a grant of free mercy, for sin has deserved that we
should be stripped of all good.

Poverty is a very dark cloud drawn over sinful man, which vaileth all his
glory and humane excellency. And it was a dark cloud over Jesus Christ, when he
was here on Earth amongst us. There be many vices that attend Poverty, Prove.
30.4. but Jesus Christ touched none of them, he suffered sinless poverty, but
not the sins of poverty which it tempts and exposes men unto; there be also
many virtues that attend and shine in poverty, these virtues did Jesus Christ
shine in, there is sanctified poverty and that Christ suffered, there is also
unsanctified poverty, and that Jesus Christ touched not; he suffered the curse
of poverty, that he might take the curse out of it; this he suffered, to turn
the quality, the effect and the operation of it to be only medicinal, and not
destructive unto us. Consider what be the afflictions of poverty which Jesus
Christ suffered, and then see how Jesus Christ suffered them all, yea, more
then I can utter.

1. Poverty cutteth off, depriveth, bereaveth us of those creatures of God over
which we are to have dominion in this low world, for our comfort and use. God
made man Lord over the works of his hand, gave him wisdom to use and improve
them to the glory and service of God, and for his own honor and comfort. but
sin has stripped us of this our dominion; we have forfeited and lost all, see
a bereaved condition described, Psalm. 89.38, to 46. thou have cast off and
abhorred, thou have been wroth with thy anointed, thou have profaned his
crown, by casting it to the ground thou have broken down all his hedges, thou
have made his glory to cease, and cast his throne to the ground. alas, how poor
has sin left man! Adam suffered the greatest loss and downfall that ever man
suffered! poor Adam! he lost the Lordship of the whole world, both from his own
possession, and his Childrens after him. Only God did of his mere bounty and
goodness restore unto him a little under the government of Christ, so much as
might serve his turn in a poor manner, to pass through the pilgrimage of man in
this world. By this fall of Adam, and loss of his dominion, the Devil has got
it in a great measure by the permission of our Lord, into his hand, and all his
study* and care, is to bring all dominion, riches, and worldly honor into the
hands of the wicked and ungodly world; who will be real and vigorous promoters
of his affairs and Kingdom.

2. The second affliction of poverty is; he has but little, and that but mean
food, little and poor raiment, little, or no house, shelter or harbor of his
own, no beast to ride on, to ease him in his travails, or to bear burdens for
him. So it was with Jesus Christ, poor food, which appears by this, that his
miraculous feeding the people with that food which was provided for themselves,
and that was barley bread and fish, Joh. 6.6.13. there is a lad here that has
five barley loaves, and two small fishes, ve. 13. they gathered and filled
twelve baskets full with the fragments of the five barley loaves, for garments
we read little, but he exhorted his Disciples to have but one Coat, and it is
most probable that he had no more himself. For house and harbor, the Text
says, he had none of his own, though he had built for others. For beasts, he
had not so much as a poor Ass to ride on, and when he came triumphant into the
City, he borrowad an Ass to ride on, Math. 21.2, 3. alas poor Kiing! how would
his unbelieving adversaries deride him! none of the Kings and great ones
regarded him, nor yet the people, only believers had faith to behold him that
was behind this Curtain of poverty.

3. The third affliction of poverty, the poor are neglected, disregarded, yea,
though they be wise; benificent, and do eminent good works, poverty so darkens
them, that they are forgotten and not regarded, Eccl. 9.14, 15, 16. their was a
little City, and few men within it, and there came a great King against it, and
besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it, now there was found in it a
poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the City, yet no man remembered
that poor man, then I said, wisdom is better then strength, nevertheless, the
poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard, So it was with
Jesus, he was very wise, full of wisdom from a child, Luk, 2.40. and in his
course of life, no doubt did give much good counsel unto many, and did many
notable and eminent good works, but by reason of his poverty none regarded him.
And that may be one Reason why so little is recorded of him in the time of his
private life. Yea, he has not only delivered a City, but a world, not from an
earthly King, but from the vindictive justice of God, and not only their
bodies, but their Souls also, and yet who was more neglected then Jesus Christ,
Isai. 53.3. he is despised and rejected of men, though he was employed in the
great work of our Salvation, 1 Samuel 18.23. I am poor and lightly esteemed.

4. The fourth affliction of poverty; if the poor do never so little anger,
vex, or stand in the light of the proud, carnal world, they will despise and
curse them, Joh. 7.48, 49. have any of the Rulers and Pharisees believed in
him? but the people who know not the Law are cursed, Ioh. 9.28.34. they reviled
him, they said, thou were altogether born in sin, and do thou teach us! and
they cast him out, Prove. 14.20. the poor is hated even of his own neighbor,
but the rich has many friends, Prove. 19.4. wealth makes many friends, but the
poor is separated from his Neighbor, Prove. 19.7. all the brethren of the poor
do hate him, how much more do his friends go far from him, he pursues them
with words, yet they are wan^ing to him. Thus it was with Jesus Christ, Joh.
7.5. for neither did his brethren believe in him.

5. The fifth affliction of poverty is, when a man is poor, men think that God
despises them, as they themselves do. Thus they dealt by Jesus Christ, Isai.
53.4. we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted, Ier. 5.4. poor
and foolish, poverty renders a man destitute, forlorn and despicable, poverty
lays a man by like a broken potsheard good for nothing, Prove. 10.15. the
destruction of the poor is his poverty.

6. The sixth affliction of poverty is, every one will be bold to afflict,
wrong, tread upon the poor man, Psalm. 10.2, 8, 6, 14. the wicked in his pride
does persecute the poor. his eyes are fiercely set against the poor, he
catches the poor when he draws him into his net, men are bold to injure the
poor, because they know they are not able to revenge themselves, and they think
no body else will, they think not of God that he has taken the protection of
the poor, and that he will behold their mischief, and spite, Psalm. 10.14. thou
have seen it, for thou beholdest mischief and spite to require it, with thy
hand, the poor commits himself to thee, thou art the helper of the
Fatherless, Am. 2 6. Thus says the Lord for three Transgressions of Israel and
for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they sold the
righteous for si^ver, and the poor for a pair of s oes, t^us they dealt with
Jesus Christ, and most sever^ly has the Lord vi^ited the Jews for such
in^uries done unto our Lord Jesus.

7. The se^enth affliction of poverty is, that it draws a vail or Curtain over
all humane excellencies. it takes away the matter and means whereby he may
excel in the world among men, he cannot do any great and honourabl^ works in
his Generation, he has not wherewith to do them, as rich men have, Isai 3.6,
7. when a man shall take hold of his brother, of the house of his Father,
saying, thou have clothing, be thou our Ruler, and let this ruin be under
thine hand, in that day shall he swear saying, I will not be an healer, for in
my house is neither bread nor clothing, make me not a Ruler of the people;
What ever other virtues or wisdom he has, if h^ want wealth, he is disabled,
darkened, and laid aside from a capacity of doing any great service among his
people. Thus it was with Jesus Christ, his poverty did disable him from
carrying any breadth among men. Yet Jesus Christ by his divine power did many
wonderful and miraculous good works, in healing all manner of diseases, in
feeding the hungry in a time of need, he entertained and fed many thousands at
one time, and that in a wilderness, he filled all their bellies, and no doubt
all their pockets, bags, or baskets, and when all had taken what they would,
they still left many baskets full. No Prince on Earth did, or could make such a
bountiful Feast, his poverty is no hindrance to his divine power from doing
such acts of noble liberality; and so it was with the Apostles afterward,
though they were poor, yet that hindered not them from doing great acts of
beneficence to men, Act. 3.6. silver and gold have I none, but such as I have
give I thee, in the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazaret, rise up and walk. 2 Cor.
6.10. as poor, yet making many rich, and that with the best, and most true
riches in the world. rich in Faith, though poor in this world, Iam. 2.5.

Quest. Why did Jesus Christ undergo poverty, such deep poverty?

Answ. 1. For the satisfaction of the vindictive justice of God for the sin of
man, all sinless punishment which sin had deserved, and justly brought upon
man, this Jesus Christ suffered, of which punishment poverty is a chief part.
Adam was a rich Lord over the world, he had a great dominion, but upon his fall
he was thrust out of Paradise, stripped of all his dominion, dignity, and
glory, he was Lord of the world, but now an outcast, a poor beggar, he has
nothing but what Gods mercy will bestow on him, he hangs upon every creature
for relief, wool, hair, hides, flesh, and many other things he is necessitated
to get from the creatures of God, for his relief, which are drops and branches
of his lost dominion, and notwithstanding this beggarly condition of man, so
foolish many are, to bedeck themselves in pride with these things which should
be for their humbling. This second state of Adam, this poor punished condition
did Jesus Christ take upon him, Phil, 2.7, 8. though equal with God, yet he
became a stripped, bereaved, naked man, and of the poorest sort among them.
This was a chief part of the sufferings of Jesus Christ for the sin of man, he
bore this effect of Gods wrath upon fallen man, to bear it off and away from us.

2. Jesus Christ bore this part of the punishment of sin, for the sake of Gods
elect, to sanctify this state of poverty for them, to take out the sting of
it, and to remove the curse from it that it might become a blessing to them;
for it is Gods design and purpose, that the state of his Church and Saints in
this world should be poor, the most part of them, and therefore he has
prepared poverty for them by taking the curse out of it, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28;
29. ye see your calling Brethren, how that not many wise after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called, but God has ch^s^n the foolish things
of the world to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty, and base things of the world, and things that are
despised has God chosen, yea, and things that are not, to bring to naught the
things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence,

3. Jesus Christ came into the world in this poor condition, to leave an
advantage to Satan to tempt and prevail with the wicked Jews and Romans, to put
him to death, for none of them feared to abuse such a poor man, Herod and his
men of War despised him, the Emperor and other Rulers under him feared him not
but easily condescended and conspired to put him to cruel sufferings and death;
he was so darkened by the cloud of poverty, that he had no thoughts that he was
the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. which none of the Princes of this world knew,
for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory, The
Sacrament of the Lords Supper may seem to be a pure Institution, yet it is an
effectual memorial of all the sufferings of Jesus Christ, from his poor cradle
to his bitter Cross and dark grave. Moreover it is necessary to consider that
the poverty of Jesus was a thousand times, yea, above all comparison, more
bitter then our poverty is, for his poverty had the sting of the curse in it,
it was an effect of the wrath of God. And by his suffering thereof, unto the
full satisfaction of divine justice: he took the sting of the curse out of our
sufferings, and out of our poverty, and made them to be only medicinal to us.
Our poverty and all our sufferings are upon many accounts sweet and easy, yea
Jesus Commands us to rejoice, and be exceeding glad under them. The believing
Jews took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10.34. But Jesus Christ
his sufferings were all bitter, as respecting his humane nature, as being our
Mediator and Surety

He had joy in respect of the Father whose will he obeyed and fulfilled, but
the desert and punishment of their sin lay with its full weight upon him, so
that we see, that the poverty of Jesus Christ was an heavy part of his
sufferings, a part of his passive obedicnce, which did run through the whole
course of his life, from his birrh to his death.

Sect. 2.
Jesus Christ suffered the punishment of a low, obscure, despised condition in
this World.
PSalm. 22.6. I am a worm and no man, despised of the people, a no body, a
nothing, a poor despicable thing, this is an effect of his poverty, and
therefore in the opening of it, sundry things will be coincident, and some, the
same that were expressed in his sufferings of poverty, but it should not be
accounted a needless Tautologie, seeing the Scripture is so plentiful in this
point, both in the Prophesy and in the History, to express, amplify, and
dilate upon the point of the sufferings of our Lord Jesus, as being a point
very remarkable, and much to be insisted upon, and often inculcated.

Wealth is an exercise of the dominion of man, therefore it exalts a man in the
World. poverty strippeth man of his dominion, therefore it lays him low in the
World. And in that condition it pleased Jesus Christ to lay himself. He who is
God humbled himself by his Incarnation, lower then Angels, though he had been
born the greatest of men on Earth, yet he humbled himself to become a man,
Phil. 2 6, 7. he emptied himself to become a man, and laid himself among the
lowermost rank and sort of m^n, which is Rhetorically expressed by a worm, what
is lower then a worm among living creatures, such was Jesus Christ in the
flesh, a no body among men, the lowest of no body, therefore the Text says a
worm and no man, one of no account. But consider that this Text shows of what
esteem and account Jesus Christ was in the worlds eye only, he was not so
accounted in Gods eye, nor in the Churches Eye, for see of what account Jesus
Christ was in Gods Eye, Mat. 3.17. this is my well beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased. See also Math. 12 18. behold my servant whom I have chosen, my
beloved in whom my Soul is well pleased, I will put my Spirit upon him, and he
shall show judgment unto the Gentiles. See what account he was of in the
Angels eye, Luke 2.10, 11. I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall
be to all people, for unto you is born this day in the City of David, a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord. See what account he is of in the estimation
of the Scriptures, Isai. 9.6, 7. unto as a child is born, unto us a Son is
given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder, and his Name shall be
called wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of
Peace, of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon
the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it
with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever; the Zeal of the
Lord of Hosts will perform this. Amen. This glorious person is the low worm we
are speaking of, see also what account he is in the Eye of the Church, Joh.
1.14. we beheld his glory, the glory of the only begotten of the Father. And
this is the person that in the worlds Eve is a worm, and a no body, and
despised of men.

Quest, What renders a man to be a no body, a nothing, a worm?

Answ. Many things, which are in no wise appertaining to Jesus Christ, as for
instance 1. When a man is of low parts and gifts, a simple, sorry, foolish,
creature, but Jesus Christ was not such an one, Luke 2.40. when he was a child
he was full of wisdom, and 52. as he grew up he increased in wisdom.

2. When a man is unfit for any action or service in his generation, like an
Image finely carved, but good for nothing, as Isai. 44.10. But Jesus Christ was
not such an one, he did the greatest good to man thar ever was done, never man
did the like, Psalm. 89.6. who in the heavens can be compared to the Lord, who
among the Sons of the mighty can be likened to the Lord.

3. When men are deboshed and defiled with gross sins, this does debase them,
and make them no bodies, Prove. 14.34. But Jesus Christ was far from any such
stain or spot, he is a Lamb without spot or blemish, 1 Pet. 1.19. he knew no
sin, though he was made sin for us, by the imputation of our sin, and 1 Pet.
2.32, 23, 24. who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, who when he
was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously; who his own self bare our
sins in his own body on the Tree.

4. Men are rendered of no esteem, when they are of an ill disposition, proud,
covetous, selfish, passionate, censorious, contentious, and such like. But no
such thing was ever found in Jesus Christ, he was meek, lowly, lovely Math.
11.29. learn of me for I am meek and lowly, Math 12.17, 18, 20. he shall not
strive nor cry, etc.

5. Lastly, When men are poor in the world, this makes them low and despicable
in the worlds Eye. And this only was the case of Jesus Christ, saving that we
may add, that his holiness of Doctrine and life would be, yea, was an Eyesore
to the Scribes, Pharisees, and hipocrites, and to such as adhered unto them.
This low condition is a part of the spotless punishment of the sin of man, unto
which Jesus Christ does voluntarily submit himself.

Quest. Wherein, or in what respects was Jesus Christ like unto a worm, for he
describes himself?

a worm is 1. Despicable. 2. Useless. 3, None fears it. 4, None cares to
defend it. 5. Every one is bold to tread on it. 6. They will be easily induced
to destroy it. 7. None fears revenge for destroying it.


1. Jesus Christ his poverty did so veil his glory, that in all these and such
like respects he was like a worm, which cloud of obscurity was no small part of
his humiliation, and suffering for our sin, he was despicable, Psalm. 22.5.
despised of the people, Psalm. 119.141. I am small and despised, Eccles. 4.16.
the poor man's wisdom is despised, Isai, 53.3, despised, rejected of men, but
God did dearly accept him, Math. 3.17. and 12.18.

2. He was rendered hereby in the worlds eye useless, they were exceeding
populous, and where it is so, the poor worms are rather a burden then of any
use to their Generation, though they be godly and wise, Joh. 7.49. the poor
people are cursed, Act. 4, 11. the stone set at naught, by the builders. but
God made him the head of the Corner, and desirable to redeem, preserve and
govern the world, and especially the Church,

3. None is afraid of a worm, it cannot hurt us, so none feared Jesus Christ,
Herod and his men of war set him at naught; though there was the greatest cause
in the world for Herod and his men of war to have feared the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, Rev. 5.5. and to kiss the Son, lest he be angry, Psalm 2.12. and
tremble at the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.1^, 16, 17. and the Kings of the
Earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the
mighty men, and the bond man, and every free man hid themselves in the Dens and
in the Rocks of the mountains, and said to the Rocks and mountains fall on us,
and hide us from the face of him that fitteth on the throne, and from the wrath
of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand.

4. None cares to defend such a poor useless creature as a worm is, so no body
cared to defend Jesus Christ, and his cause. Once Nicodemus spoke a good word
for Jesus Christ, which had a present good effect, but he was quipped for it,
Joh. 7, 50.51, 52, 53. Jesus Christ complained, Psalm. 22.11. there is none to
help, but God takes care of this poor worm, Isai. 40.14. fear not thou worm
Jacob.

5. Any one is bold to tread upon a worm to hurt and injure it, so were the
people bold to speak and do against Jesus Christ, sometimes to stone him, Ioh.
8.59. and 10.31. sometime to cast him down the clist of the Rocks, Luk 4.28,
29, 30. but God preserved him from them.

6. Every one is easily induced and persuaded to destroy a worm. So were the
people, who a few days before had cried Hosanna to the Son of David, easily
persuaded by the Priests, Scribes and Pharisees to cry, crucify him, and give
us Barabbas.

7. They fear no body to take vengeance for wrong done to a worm, so were the
Jews fearless of any vengeance to be inflicted upon them for the wrong and
injury done unto Jesus Christ, which made them bold to expose themselves and
their posterity unto any such vengeance, saying, his blood be upon us, and upon
our Children. And never was blood more sharply revenged, and a curse more
severely executed, for they have been under that curse near seventeen hundred
years, and they are still under it to this day.

Quest. But why did Jesus Christ take upon him such a low condition in this
world? why came he not a Prince in the external Royalty of his Father David?

Answ. 1. Because this low, stripped, bereaved condition, under the loss of the
dominion of man in this world is one part of the punishment due to the sin of
man, Genesis 3, 23, 24. and it is such a punishment as may be taken up and born
with Innocence, without any defilement of sin, therefore Jesus Christ did
willingly submit to the deepest stroke of that punishment, for the satisfaction
of Divine justice, Isai. 63.9. in all our sinless afflictions he was afflicted,
and Isai. 53.4. he has born our griefs, was wounded for our transgressions,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him. And this innocent punishment for
our sin he suffered most purely, perfectly, and meritoriously, unto the
Infinite satisfaction of the vindictive Justice of God. And thereby took out
the sting of the curse from the like low condition, that we may fall into, and
he bore it away from us, Isai. 53.5, 6.

2. Jesus Christ came in this low condition to sanctify a low condition in
this world, for his Saints, the elect of God. Seeing it was the purpose of God
to carry the Church in this world through such a low condition, 1 Cor. 1.26,
27, 28.

Yet take this with these cautious, 1. All the Church of Gods Elect are not so,
all are not in such a low condition, though most are, for the Text says, not
many noble, rich, mighty, but some such there always are, for the great
support of the Church, when Kings are nu^sing Fathers, and Queens are nursing
mothers to the Churches, Isai. 49.23.

2, Again, take this caution, that this low condition of the Church shall not
alwa^es be so, for in the latter days Jesus Christ will more plentifully pour
out p^^s ^rity, grace, which though it has been more rarely dispensed
hitherunto, yet it seems to me, that it shall be otherwise in the glorious
times of the Church in this world as may be gathered out of the Prophesies of
Isaiah from the sixty Chapter and so forward: and from many other Scriptures.

3. Jesus Christ came in a low condition in this world, and carries his Elect
(many of them) through this world in a low condition, to exert and exercise
Gods Sovereignty, in defending his poor worms against the proud great world,
and sometimes in advancing his worm, Jacob and David from the Shephards crook
to the Scepter, Luke 1.48. he has regarded the low estate of his handmaid,
this Sovereignty of God is highly celebrated, 1 Samuel 2.4. ad 11. Job. 5.15, 16.
and abundantly in the books both of the Scriptures and of the providence of
God.

4. Jesus Christ came in such a low condition, to set us a pattern of
exercising suffering graces, which must be in this militant world or not at
all, for there will be no occasion in Heaven for the use of suffering grace,
when all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes.

5. Jesus Christ came in such a low condition, to leave an occasion (not a
cause) in the hand of Satan, easily to prevail with the wicked Jews, and Pagan
Romans, to be so bold as to put to death that innocent person Jesus Christ; for
the accomplishing of Gods Counsel, Act. 2.23. for the salvation of man, his low
condition obscured his glory, whom if they had known, they would not have put
to death the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8.

From all this we may see and learn that a poor low condition in this world is
a sinless affliction, which Jesus Christ has sanctified to be wholesome and
good for his Church in this life, and gives us opportunity of exerting and
acting many graces of the Spirit, and Jesus Christ has a most tender care over
all his poor worms.

Sect. 3.
The Sufferings of Jesus Christ in the form of a Servant. Phil. 2.7. and took
upon Him the form of a Servant.
THis is an eminent part or branch of the Humiliation and sufferings of Jesus
Christ, a servant is the lowest order of mankind, a servant is beneath a Son,
Luk 15.14. I am not worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired
Servants, it was a word of humiliation in the penitent prodigal, but an
unexpressible act of humiliation in Jesus Christ, he came to be a Servant to
his Father and that ^e might have been, if he had been an Earthly King. King
David counts it his honor to be a Servant of God, Psalm. 116.16. O Lord truly I
am thy Servant, I am thy Servant. But Jesus Christ took the form of a Servant
among men. There be degrees of a Servant beneath that condition which Jesus
Christ condescended unto, which he could not submit unto; but as low as it was
possible, he condescended, and that was, to take the form of a Servant. Sin
has stripped Adam of his dominion, and brought him into bondage, Jesus Christ
condescended as low as it was possible without sin, to bear as much of the
punishment of sin, as he could with Innocence, and therefore took upon himself
the form of a Servant, to redeem man from his servitude; and to bring us into
the adoption of Sons, a freedom of the Gospel, Math. 20.28. the Son of came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister, Gal. ^ 4, 5. God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law,
that they might receive the Adoption of Sons.

To open this point, we must consider there be sundry kinds or degrees of
Servants, or Service.

1. There is the ingenious Servant, who in love and beneficence does
voluntarily make himself a servant to others, that he might do them good. The
beneficent man is willing to be serviceable, 1 Cor. 9.19. though I be free from
all men yet have I made my self a Servant unto all, that I might gain the more,
not the more money, but the more men, the more Souls, for he fi^hed for Souls.
Paul labored to win and gain Souls, in which Service he is an under-worker to
Jesus Christ, for all the doings and Sufferings of Jesus Chri t were to gain
and save Souls. Such a Servant Jesus Christ made himself, Luke 22.27. I am
among you as one that serves, I take no state upon my self, I only endeavor
to do good. This is a commanded Gospel duty, Gal. 5.13. in love to serve each
other, though we are called to Liberty. Thus walked the famous Thessalonians, 1
These. 1.3. your labor of love. So did Jesus Christ, yea, he purposely did an
act of Service, Ioh. 13.4. the Service of a waiter at the Table, and here
behold Jesus Christ in the form of a Servant, it was a point of civil
entertainment in those days to wash their feet, Luke 7.38, the penitent woman
washed the feet of Jesus Christ with her tears of repentance, and ver. 44. etc,
see Jesus Christ his discourse upon it, and Joh. 13.13, 14, 15, 16. Christ ^is
explication of that example of his does teach, that they that will be the
Disciples of Jesus Christ must be willing Servants of each other, in love, yea,
we must be ready to do good to al, especially to the household of Faith: This is
an honorable noble and generous kind of Service. and in this kind of Service
the more serviceable any be, the more honorable they be, Math. 23.11, 12, He
that humbles himself to be serviceable shall ^e most honorable. Such a
Servant Jesus Christ is, and that in the most eminent way in the world; for he
dyed for his Enemies to do them good.

2. There is the hired Servant, when a Freeman is hired to do work for another,
and receives wages for his work, of such Servants we read, Math, 20.1, etc.
they were hired for a day, and at night the master paid them their wages,
Sometimes such Freemen are hired by the great, and serve long in their work; as
Jacob did with Laban, Genesis 29. and 30. and 31.7. Laban changed his wages ten
times, many kinds of Artificers ar^ such servants, to work for others and
receive wages. The Carpenters Trade is eminently so, they build houses for
others to dwell in, and have their wages to live on. Joseph the reputed Father
of Jesus was a Carpenter, and therefore wrought for his living with other men,
and lived on his wages, Luke 2.51. Jesus was subject to his Parents, therefore
he wrought with his Father at his Trade, for so it is expressed, Math. 13.55.
and Mark. 6.3. Jesus wrought with his Father, if his Father took a bargain by
the great, Jesus would help him, if his Father were hired by the day, Jesus
would help him. And this is evidently the form of a Servant, though he was
free. Thus he would do, unless Synagogue worship, or Temple worship called him
away: in that case, both Father and Son would make use of their freedom, and
also to wait on the Lord in Family worship.

3. There is a s rvice that a Nation may be obliged in by Conquest, so all the
Jews were Servants to the Romans. And in that case, though the children be
free, yet Jesus Christ did ^oluntaril^ submit to pay the Tribute which they
demand d Math. 17.26, 27. and in this respect also Jesus Christ took the form
of a Servant.

4. T^^r^ is a form of a Servant that children are under in their Nonage and
yo^ (...) are under Tutors and Governors, Gal. ^.1. the h^ir so long as he
(...) ^reth nothing from a Servant, though he be Lo^d of all. Apprentices are
such Servants, who are bound to their Masters to serve them for a set time to
learn a Trade, Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in the way he should go, etc. such
a form of a Servant Jesus took not, only he was subject to his Parents. Who was
able or fit to teach Jesus any thing? he was able to teach the Doctors when he
was a child. Jesus Christ was a Tutor, a Master to teach and train up his
Disciples, Joh. 13.13. Ye call me Master and Lord, ye say well, for so I am.

5. There is a bond Servant who is bound for all his life, as captives and
Moors are. To this kind of service Jesus submitted not; unto the three first
forms of a Servant Jesus did submit himself, viz. 1. To be an ingenious
Servant, in love to do good to all, and especially to the Saints. 2. To be a
free Servant to work with other men, and receive wages with his Father. 3. To
serve the conqueror, by paying such Tribute as they demand.

But unto the two last he submitted not, viz. to be bound to serve a man for a
time, and much less to be bound to serve a man for his life. Neither of these
two forms of a Servant did Jesus take up. And I may offer these Reasons for it.

1. To be bound to serve a man would have hindered him from attending unto his
heavenly Fathers business, which he came into the world to do, Joh. 6.38. I
came down from Heaven to do the will of him that sent me, not my own will, and
much less man's will to which a bond Servant is bound, Joh. 5.30. I came to do
the will of the Father that sent me, Ioh. 4.34. my meat is to do the will of
him that sent me. Therefore he might not be such a Servant, as by the Law is
tied to do the will of his Master Under his go^ly parents he had liberty to do
his heavenly Fathers will, and it is a branch of the Fathers will, that he
should be subject to his Parents, whose duty it was to further him in the
Service of his heavenly Father. Once at twelve years old he did that, which by
accident did not a little trouble his Parents for the present, but Mary so laid
up the words of his Apology, as that they did never hinder him from doing his
heavenly Fathers business, but further him therein if they could.

2. He had no need to be a Servant under tuition, to teach him humility and
subjection, he needed not to be taught by any humane yoke. We need it, Lam.
3.27 It is good for us to bear the Yoke of Tuition in our Youth. but it was not
so with Jesus Christ his heavenly Fathers will and command were enough for him,
who had the perfect Image of God, and without the least stain of original sin.

3. Because these three kinds of Service that he did undergo, were enough to
sanctify all kinds and degrees of service, for us who need the tuition of such
a yoke, because our nature is stained with original sin, and needs to be
subdued and tamed, and thereby be made capable of Instruction.

4. Because it was too far beneath the dignity of his blessed person, to be at
the will and command of a frail man, which his godly Parents were considerate
of, knowing his Divine Offspring he was subject to them by his own voluntary
obedience to the fifth command of God, but never needed to put forth any
parental power of command over him.

5. It was Infinite humility in him to condescend to the lowest order of men,
in taking the form of a Servant, though he did not stoop down to the lowest
degree of that order, especially considering that it would have hindered him
from doing the will of the Father that sent him.

Quest. But why did Jesus Christ stoop so low as to take the form of a Servant.

Answ. 1. Jesus Christ took the form of a Servant to satisfy Divine justice in
submitting himself to bear the punishment due to the sin of man. Sin stripped
man of his dignity, dominion, Lordship and Rule, and cast him into a state of
servitude, the sting and curse of this punishment Christ suffered purely
perfectly, and meritoriously, to the full satisfaction of divine justice, and
thereby has took out the sting and curse of servitude, he bore that in his own
person, to bear it off, and heave it away from us. This is one part of his
passive obedience to bear the punishment of servitude, this is one part of his
passive obedience which did run through the whole course of his life, and
especially in the whole course of his private life, for it was otherwise in
some respects in the time of his public Ministry.

2. Because hereby he sanctified the state of Service for us, that it might be
medicinal and wholesome for us, to humble us, sanctify us and do us good. The
curse being removed, it is become a Gospel rod, and a yoke which we have need
of, especially in our youth, and Jesus Christ has fitted it to do us good.

3. Jesus Christ took the form of a servant, that he might perform that active
obedience to the Law of God, which that order does owe unto the Law, and
thereby merit that reward, that part of the Inheritance which was by the
covenant of works, due unto the perfect observation of those Laws. And this
merit of Jesus Christ is imputed to us that believe, by the covenant of grace.
So that by taking the form of a servant Jesus Christ performed both active and
passive obedience to God, the fruit whereof is made ours by the Gospel. Jesus
Christ did fulfill all righteousness. Mat. 3.15. whereof this is no small part,
in his obedience to the fifth commandment.

4. Jesus Christ took the form of a Servant* and did both suffer and do all the
duty that belonged thereunto, to purchase Gospel freedom for us, that through
faith in Jesus Christ we may be freed from the evil of servitude, and be made
free Servants of God through Jesus Christ. But we must remember that Jesus
Christ freeth us from the evil of servitude, not from the state of servitude, 1
Cor. 7.21, 22, 23. art thou called, converted, being a Servant, a bond Servant
for life, care not about that, do the duty of thy place, it shall be but as
medicine to thy Soul, and though thou be a Servant to men, yet thou art a
Freeman of Jesus Christ, and if Christ make you free, you are free indeed in a
supereminent free estate, Onesimus was Philemons Servant, but he was being
converted, a Freeman of Christ. ver. 16.

O what a comfort is this to poor slaves and Servants that believe in Jesus
Christ! that Jesus Christ himself the Lord of glory, took the form of a Servant
for their sakes. Jesus Christ has set Heaven gates open for poor bond slaves,
and Servants to enter in by believing. And at the great day we shall see many
bond slaves, Servants, and underlings; men and women, sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the heavenly Kingdom, but their Masters, Rulers, and such
as made them slaves, cast out into outer darkness.

Sect. 4.
The Sufferings of Jesus Christ in bodily infirmityes, Math. 8.17. himself took
our infirmityes, and bore our sicknesses.
THe forenamed Instances of the Sufferings of Jesus Christ did manifestly run
through the whole course of his life, all the time of his youth, which were so
far as we know, his most serene days that he lived in this world, and wherein
he attended to his active obedience to the Law of God, yet he was always in a
dark, obscure, low, suffering condition.

The Instances of his sufferings which follow, are more conspicuous in the
course of his public Ministry, such was this point, in this Section touched
on, viz. his bodily Infirmityes, mentioned by Matthew, which words are recited
out of Isai. 53.4. surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, and
this Text he brings to prove that Jesus Christ did heal all manner of
diseases, and sicknesses, not as a Physician, but as a Mediator, by divine
power and Authority, as God and man. He did bear all the sinless punishment of
our sins in his body, 1 Pet. 2.21. himself bare our sins in his own body, that
is the punishment of our sins, viz. sinless punishment, whereof our bodily
infirmityes, weaknesses, pains and sicknesses are a great and eminent part. And
by this part of his sufferings he (so far) satisfied divine Justice, and
thereby has taken out the sting and curse out of our bodily infirmityes, and
has rendered them only medicinal to our Souls, and hereby he has obtained
power over all diseases, to send them, and to recall them as he pleases; and
to improve them as he will, for the good of his Church, and believing Servants,
he has such absolute power over all our sicknesses, that he says to one go
and it goes, and to another come, and it comes, etc.

This Text in Math. does hold forth that part of the Humiliation of Jesus
Christ in submitting himself to bodily infirmityes and diseases, which he took,
and bare, he took our griefs and pains for our sakes, and bare them in our
stead. It is an eminent part of his sufferings clearly held forth in the
Prophesies; and testified in the Gospel History of him. it is a point of great
use and comfort to the Church, that this sharp Rod is managed in the hand of a
merciful, tender hearted, yea, and experienced Mediator. Jesus Christ his body
was mortal, which is evident by this, that he dyed, yea, he came into the world
to dye, and therefore took a mortal body, capable to perform that great
service, which he came to do. The body of Adam in Innocence was capable of
Immortality, but by sin he became mortal, Romans 5.12. as by one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin, so death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned. Though the person of Jesus Christ was without sin, yet he took a
mortal body, that it might be a fit sacrifice for our sin, which was laid upon
him by imputation, being our Mediator, his body was made as Adams body was, out
of preexisting matter, and was therefore mortal. After his Resurrection, his
body is Immortal. His mortal has put on Immortality, his glorious immortal
body is set down at the right hand of God. And he will change our vile bodies
after the Resurrection, and make them like to his glorious body, Phil. 3.21.
After the Resurrection the bodies of all mankind shall be Immortal both good
and bad. The power of mercy will preserve the bodies of the Elect, to be
eternal monuments and objects of mercy, and Subjects wherein mercy shall shine
forth unto all Eternity. The bodies of the wicked shall be preserved in
Immortality, to be Vessels of wrath, in which the justice of God will shine
forth to all Eternity. Thus all humane bodies are capable of Immortality, and
shall be made so to be by the power of mercy and justice, which Attributes of
God are to be glorified in mankind for ever. This Immortality of the body of
Jesus Christ, was a great and fundamental infirmity of his humane nature, and a
fruit of our sin imputed to him as our Mediator, and this made him capable of
such other infirmityes as might accomplish his death; So that it was through
the infirmity of a mortal body that he dyed, 2 Cor. 13.4. for though he was
crucified through weakness, yet he lives in the power of God; his humane
nature subject to our infirmityes, made him mortal, Divine power makes him
Immortal. Though Jesus Christ took many infirmityes, sicknesses, weaknesses
incident to a mortal body, yet he dyed not by any sickness, he dyed a violent
death, being in his full strength. Their cruelty and harsh usage of his mortal
body forced (with his voluntary consent, Joh. 10.18.) a separation of his Soul
from his body, by much and cruel whippings, they made deep and long Furrows in
his back, by piercing his head with Crowns of thorns, knocked on with a staff,
by abusing him all night, they gave him no rest. The Rulers had him to do till
after Cocks crowing, then they went to their rest, if their malicious minds
would suffer them to sleep; but they committed our blessed Lord Jesus to
Soldiers and the rude Rabble, who abused him all the night, in the morning
they committed him to Pilate, who finally condemned him, and delivered him to
be crucified. They oppressed his spent mortal body by bearing his cross, they
nailed his hands, and stretched his body, till all his joints were loosed. At
that stretch they nailed his feet, they pierced his side with a Spear, and let
out his life blood All these and sundry more of the last sufferings of our
Lord, shall hereafter (the Lord assisting) in their place and order be opened;
this may suffice at present to show, that the body of Jesus Christ had the
infirmity of mortality, and dyed with grief and pain, a violent death, he dyed
not of any sickness. Furthermore in this state of his mortal body when he was
in the flesh, he took many other infirmityes of a mortal body, which are
sinless punishments of the sin of man, which may be gathered from Genesis 3.17,
18, 19. where the commination, and infliction of them is expressed as the
product of our sin. To eat in sorrow to labor with disappointment, and to
labor with sweat, until these painful labors, sorrows, sweatings and
disappointments have brought us to the dust, out of which we were made.

These infirmityes of humane nature may comprehend all those infirmityes
usually instanced in by Divines, as hunger, thirst, weariness, sleepyness, etc.
The mortal body of Jesus Christ was sustained (as our bodies be) by eating,
drinking, motion, labor and rest, in all which respects our fallen estate
feels much punishment, and the matter of sicknesses is usually contracted, by
eating and drink^^, by heats and colds. As these natural passions and
infirmityes have in them a ^ less punishment of sin, which Jesus Christ
suffered; So why may not we say, at the animal passions and infirmityes have in
them a sinless punishment of sin? as anger, grief, love, Mark 3.5. he looked on
them with anger, but without the least touch of sin, and was grieved, Joh.
12.36. Jesus did hide himself from them, Math. 14.13. when Jesus heard that
John was beheaded he departed thence into a desert place, Ioh. 20.2. the
Disciple whom Jesus loved, Joh. 11, 35.36. Jesus wept, then they said behold
how he loved him, Joh. 11.11. our friend Lazarus sleeps, Ioh, 11.3.5. he whom
thou love is sick, now Jesus loved Martha and her sister, and Lazarus.
Whether Jesus Christ suffered any sinless punishment in these animal passions,
I dare not be bold to affirm. But that Christ has sanctified them by his
experience for us, that I may boldly affirm. There be infirmityes of man's
mortal body instanced in the Gospel, and expressed by the same word, of which
sort Christ took not, as Luke 13.11, 12, 13. a woman bowed with a Spirit of
infirmity eighteen years, and Ioh. 5.5. a man lying with an infirmity thirty
eight years, but Jesus Christ took no such infirmity as corrupted his humane
body, or disabled him from his work and service, from doing the will of the
Father. But such infirmity as made him preach, pray, tra^ail with much pain,
grief and infirmity, in doing and fulfilling his Fathers work and will, that we
have ground to believe; and it is a great comfort unto such ser^ants of God as
do work with much pain, that labor in the service of God with an aching head,
pained limbs, feeble spirits, crazy bodies and lungs, unto such it is an
unspeakable comfort, that Christ did fulfill his Fathers will, and obey his
commands under much infirmity, and by experience knows how to pit such as do
so s rve the Lord. Which is the case of most of Gods dear Children, at
sometimes or other, and some constantly. It is an ancient question among
Di^ines whether Jesus Christ did submit himself to bodily sickness? some are of
apprehension h^ did not, and some are of apprehension he did, among whom I am;
and with submi^^ion I shall be bold to offer my grounds for it.

1. It is expressly affirmed in the Prophesy, Psalm. 41.8, 9. an evil dis^ase (a
thing of Belial) cleaves fast unto him (as the Viper did to the hand of Paul,
Act. ^8 3, 4, 5, 6.) and now that he lies, he shall rise up no more, some such
sharp distemp^r fell upon him as forced him to lie down, and his Enemies hoped
that he should die of it, but they were mistaken; as the Barbarians were about
Paul, when the Viper fastened on his hand, but an evil disease did befall him,
it is not said what it was, but it was dangerous, sharp and threatening. When he
had been hot and spent all day with preaching and travail, and then be all
night on a mountain at prayer, what aguish or feverish fits it might expose
his mortal body unto, or what aches and pains in his limbs, head, jaws, sinews,
or the like discomposure of his health it might bring, we do experience in our
mortal bodies often, and so might he, yea he did expose his body to more labor
and hardship both by night and by day, then we do. That this Prophesy of the
Psalmist is spoken of Christ is most evident; because the ninth verse which is
part of the sentence adds another aggravation unto the affliction. Yea, mine
own familiar friend in whom I trusted (viz. with the bag) who eat of my bread,
has lift up his heel against me, this part of the sentence Christ himself does
apply to himself and Judas, Ioh. 13.18. he that eats bread with me has lift
up his heel against me. So that we cannot doubt that the ninth verse belongs
to Jesus Christ, then why not the eight verse? if the latter part of the
sentence be spoken of Christ, why not the former part? Jesus Christ does most
perfectly know the meaning of the Scriptures, therefore by the sure Testimony
of Christ, that Prophesy in the Psalms belongs unto him, so that some ill
disease befell him, so as that for the present he kept his bed upon it.

2. As it is expressly affirmed in the Prophesy, so it is expressly affirmed by
Matthew, Chap. 8.17. himself took our infirmityes and bare our sicknesses.

3. Because sicknesses are a great part of the sinless punishment that is
inflicted on man for sin, it is not a sin to be sick, but it is a punishment of
sin, and Christ has borne all the sinless punishments of sin, Isai. 53.3. a
man of sorrows, acquainted with griefs, here be two significant words, that
show that it was the general and ordinary frame of his mortal body. the words
do signify such sorrows, and griefs as arise and spring from sickness, and
from a crazy state of body; which notwithstanding he did not abate any labor,
travail, work, or hardship, that lay before him, and that he had a calling to
attend, whereby he might do good to others in Soul or body, Act. 10.38. he went
about doing good, and healing others, yet this he did in much pain, grief, and
infirmity, he was accustomed so to do.

4. It is of great comfort and encouragement to the dear Servants of God, who
are forced so to do, unless they should leave the work and Service of the Lord
undone; they cannot forbear and withdraw themselves from the work, and yet must
perform it with difficulty through pains, aches, weariness hardship, and
sometimes dangerous adventures, in which cases the Servants of God have this
eminent encouragement, that Jesus Christ experienced the same, and he is a
merciful high Priest and Mediator, to pity, help, relieve and comfort such of
his Servants as are faithful to do his Service, though it be upon such hard
Terms.

Such as think Jesus Christ did not submit himself to bodily sickness, do
render this Reason, because he healed all manner of diseases in others, and if
he had been sick himself, they would have said unto him, Physician h^al thy
self, or would have said, it is a sign that he is an Impostor, a deceiver,
because he heals others, but cannot heal himself, therefore his holy wisdom
would not expose himself to such a check, and evil construction of his
miraculous healing of others. But under savor I see not force in this Reason,
because though he was sick, and sometimes so sick as that he was constrained to
ly by it, and so that his Adversaries knew that he was sick, yet it is most
certain that he did heal himself and rise again, which is evident by this that
he dyed not of any sickness or disease, he dyed a violent death, by the cruelty
of his Enemies. Though sometimes they understood that he was sick, yet they
quickly saw him up again, and about his heavenly Fathers business, he did not
tell them of all the pains and aches that he went about withal, it was enough
to him that his Father saw them all, and divine justice saw how holily,
patiently, constantly he suffered those sinless punishments of sin, and was
fully satisfied in his right, pure, perfect, and meritorious su^ferings
therein; yea, it is like that Christ did not tell his dearest friends of what
pains he labored under every day, and that may be one Reason why so little is
written about this part of the su^ferings of Jesus Christ, he gave no such way
to these infirmityes as to take him off from his work, he did his Fathers work
though he labored with great pains and much sense of his infirmityes. Yea, it
is a proof of his infinite goodness, that though he was a man of sorrows and
acquainted with griefs, yet ceased not, he failed not to follow God fully, and
to attend, to perform the work of his Father which he sent him to do, though he
often labored with an aching head, pained limbs, and a crazy, wearied, spent
body, hereby setting before us an admirable Example of patience, diligence,
faithfulness, and self denial, that spared not his own body, though full of
infirmityes to do good to others, and to do and suffer what God called him to
do and suffer, with what difficulty and p^in so ever he performed the same. And
it is an heavenly encouragement to all his Servants so to do, when we are
called to any good Service, do it, though we suffer much pain and grief in
doing of it. This part of the sufferings of Christ may be further illustrated
by three Propositions,

1. Proposition, all bodily diseases, infirmityes, sicknesses, griefs, aches,
and indispositions, are punishments of the sin of Adam, and effects of Gods
wrath and curse inflict^d on man, Genesis 2.17. in dying thou shall die, thou shall
dye by degrees, in this word are all diseases and infirmityes comprehended, and
are threatened, yea, and inflicted, executed, every disease, ache, or pain, is a
drop of the curse inflicted by virtue of this word And this punishment (as well
as many others) is such as may be suffered without sin, by our Lord Jesus, who
is like unto us in such infirmityes yet without sin, Heb. ^.15, what ever Jesus
Christ suffered, he sinned not, 1 Pet. 2.22. he did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth, not one word of impatience or any other evil, what ever he
suffered, either justly as from the hand of God, or unjustly from the hand of
man.

2. Proposition, Jesus Christ drank deep of this cup of sorrows, griefs,
infirmityes, deeper then any man in the world ever did, or can do, because he
is our Mediator, which no other man or creature is able or capable to be; he is
Mediator betwixt God and man, he suffered all that was due to man,
fufficiently, virtually, though effectually he su^^ered all that was due to all
the Elect. The Lord did suffer Divine justice to inflict all that was due, and
he did so, till he was fully satisfied, Math. 3.17. I am well pleased, no man
save Christ ever su^^ered so much, or ever shall, and therefore he drank deep
of this cup of sorrows, to the very bottom, Isai. 53, 3, 4, 5, 6. his deep
drinking of this cup is eminently expressed by two multiplying words.

1. He is called a man of sorrows, as if he were made up of sorrows, as it may
be said of Paul, from that Text, 2 Cor. 11.22, to the end of the Chapter, he
was a man of labors and sorrows. So, and infinitely more may it be said of
Jesus Christ, he is a man of labors and sorrows.

2. A second multiplying word is, [acquainted with griefs] he was habituate to
them, they were his daily familiar acquaintance. See David describing a
familiar acquaintance, Psalm. 55.13, 14. they eat and drank together, they went
to Gods house together; so was sorrow and grief the daily companions of our
Lord Jesus, in all that he did. And how could it be otherwise, when he stood in
the room of all Gods Elect?

3. Proposition, Jesus Christ did voluntarily take up all this burden of
griefs and sorrows, there be two words in that Text, Math. 8.17. that prove the
voluntary submission of Jesus Christ, he took, he bare, as a Porter takes up,
and bears his burden, so Phil. 2.7, 8. he emptied himself of glory, and took
the form of a Servant, Joh. 10.15, 17, 18. I lay down my life for my sheep, I
lay it down of my self.

Quest. Why did Jesus drink so deep of this Cup of sorrows, griefs, and
infirmityes?

Answ. 1. Because Jesus Christ does undertake and undergo that great Office of
a Mediator betwixt God and man, to reconcile them and make peace, and that he
might pacify God toward man, he must pay all the debt that man owes to God,
he must satisfy and pacify Divine justice, by suffering the penaltyes of the
broken Law; he must undergo all the punishment which man is most justly obliged
to suffer, man himself is never able to do this, Jesus Christ, God and man he
only is able, and is willing to do it, and therefore he willingly drinks that
Cup of Sufferings to the very bottom, Joh. 18.11. the Cup which my heavenly
Father has given me to drink, shall I not drink it? this reason is general to
all the sufferings of Christ, and therefore a good reason of this part of his
sufferings.

2. Jesus Christ drank deep of this Cup of sorrows and infirmityes, that he
might in his own person experience the difficultyes of a sickly, crazy, infirm
body, that he might be experimentally moved to pity, succor, bear with, and
relieve such as labor under such a state and condition. And he is the rather
careful in t^is matter, because it is the g^neral and common Rod wherewith he
does chastize all his people, at one time or other; sicknesses are common to
all, and in all Ages, now t^is is a great comfort, that the heart of Christ is
tenderly compassionate over all that are in such a condition, out of his own
experience.

3. Jesus Christ has drank deep of this Cup of crazyn^ss, sorrows and
infirmityes, to take the sting and curse out of them, and to make a Rod and a
medicine of them, which he manag^th with his own hand for the good of his
Children, by this means he has always a Rod ready for a Child that needs it,
and is a purge ready for every sick Child, all sickne^ses and infirmityes are
at his command, he says to this, go and touch that Child, and to another he
says it is enough for this time, let that c ild alone; it was the Centurion
that so describes the power of Christ over sickness, and C^ri^t greatly
commends his Faith for so speaking, Math. 8.9, 13. Jesus Christ has great
power over the life of man by his management of this Rod of sickness, a fit of
sickness is often improved to be a means of Conversion, the Souls of Gods
Children are often great gainers b^ this medicine, before I was afflicted I
went astray, but now I have learned to keep thy Commandments. Psalm. 119.67.

Heb. 12-5-13. is a famous Text to express the government of Christ over his
C^ildren, by the Rod of correction, and the most frequent Rod of corr ction is
sickness, pains, hurts, griefs inflicted upon our bod^es, we have famous
Examples in Scripture how God has managed his Children by the Rod of sickness,
David. Psalm. 6. and 38. Hezekiah, Isai. 38. so Heman, Asaph, and many more.
This great Example of Jesus Christ is of great instruction to such as have
crazy, sickly, weak bodies; take heed how we abate any service unto the Lord,
esp^cially, we Ministers must be careful in this point, because the pattern of
Christ fir^tly respects us. Paul did eminently imitate Jesus Christ in this
point, Gal. 4.13, 14. you know how through infirmity of the flesh I preached
the Gospel to you at the first; and my Temptation which was in my flesh ye
despised not, nor rejected, but received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ
Jesus. And we see that Paul was under some sickly, craz^ infirmity, when he
first preached at Galatia, and yet he favored not his flesh, he spared not his
crazy body, his love and zeal carried him out to preach the Gospel effectually
to them notwithstanding his great bodily weakness that was at that time upon
him, now this humility, love, and self denial in Paul, was so acceptable and
powerful with them, and so prevailed upon their hearts, that they looked at him
as if an Angel had preached to them, yea, as if Christ himself had come unto
them to do them good, and they were so far from despising or rejecting him, as
a poor, crazy, sickly man, as that they would (if possible) have plucked out
their eyes to have done him good, it is honorable and acceptable service to do
good to others, with self denial, hardship and difficulty, to go about in
weariness, weakness, pains, and infirmityes, to do good, such a pattern Jesus
Christ has set us, though he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs,
aches and infirmityes, yet he always went about doing good, Act. 10.38. by
this Rod of sickness Jesus Christ does not only exercise power over the lives
of his Children, but also over the lives of his Enemies. Herod must dye, that
Jesus might return out of Egypt unto Israel, the World is full of Examples how
the Church and Saints have been delivered from persecution, by the death of a
persecutor.

Sect. 5.
The Sufferings of Jesus Christ under Reproaches Psalm. 22.6. a reproach of men,
and despised of the People.
JEsus Christ did voluntarily bear for us the reproaches, cruel mockings,
deririsions, scoffs, and d^spisings of the People, David has abundantly
prophesied of Christ in this Book of Psalms, and in particular he has said
much of this kind of his sufferings, for David was a Type of Jesus Christ, and
eminently he is so in his sufferings therefore I shall lay together some Texts
of Scripture, and especially out of the Book of Psalms, which set forth this
point, and I choose to express these sufferings of Christ in the Scripture
words, which carry a greater fullness of sense and Spirit then any words that I
can speak or write, are capable to do.

Psalm. 22. is expressly spoken of Jesus Christ, and ver. 6, 7, 8. I am a worm
and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the people, all they that see me
la^gh me to scorn, they shoot out the lip, and shake the head, saying, he
trusted in the Lord that he would deliver him, let him deliver him, seeing he
delighted in him, Psalm. 35.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21. false witness did
rise up, and laid to my charge things that I knew not, they rewarded me evil
for good to the spoiling of my Soul, But as so me, when they were sick, my
clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my Soul with Fasting, and my prayer returned
into mine own bosom I behaved my self as though he had been my fri^nd, or
brother: I bowed down heavily as one that mourns for his mother. But in mine
Adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together; yea, the abjects
gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not, they did tear me,
and ceas^d not. With hypocritical mockers in Feasts; they gnashed upon me with
their Teeth. LORD, how long will thou look on? rescue my Soul from their
destruction, my darling from the Lions. Yea, they opened their mouth wide
against me, and said, Aba, aba, our Eyes has seen it.

Object. Why is this reckoned so great a part of his sufferings, they are but
words, and is it so great a suffering to suffer the bad and evil words of
others? if they touch not our body^s nor goods, is it any great matter what
they say?

Answ. The Scriptures show that there is cruel force in words: words are a
weapon that wound the Soul, that is a deeper wound then to wound the body,
Psalm. 42.10. as with a Sword in my bones mine Enemies reproach me, while they
say daily to me, where is thy God? Psalm. 57.3, 4. he shall send from heaven and
save me from the reproach of him that would swallow me up, Selah. My Soul is
among Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even the Sons of
men, whose teeth are Spears and Arrows, and their tongue a sharp Sword, Psalm.
52.^. thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue, his tongue
swallow^d up Nob, the City of Priests, Psalm. 55.21. the words of his mouth were
smoother then butter, but war was in his heart: his words were softer then
oil: yet were they drawn Swords, Psalm. 12.3, 4. The tongue that speaks proud
things, who have said, with our tongues we will prevail, etc. Psalm. 64.3, 4.
who whet their tongues like a Sword, and bend their bows to shoot their Arrows,
even bitter words, that they may shoot in secret at the perfect, suddenly do
they shoot at him, and fear not. Psalm. 10.7. His mouth is full of cursing,
deceit, and fraud, under his tongue is mischief and vanity. Some People have
bloody mout^s, ^he words of a Talebearer wound deep. All the providential
wounds which God inflicted upon Job's estate and body, did not wound him so
deep, as the censorious words and unkind speeches of his friends did.

The Tongue of man is his glory, if it be a good tongue, it is very excellent,
a wholesome tongue is a tree of life, knowing how to use knowledge aright, Prove.
15.2.4 the tongue of the just is as choice silver, very desirable and
delightful.

But if it be a bad tongue, it is very mischievous and pernicious, it wounds
the honor of our Neighbor, and that is a very deep wound, Eccles. 7.1. a good
name is better then precious ointment, Prove. 15.31. a good report makes the
bones fat, Prove. 22.1. a good name is rather to be chosen then great riches,
and loving savor rather then si^ver and gold, a reproachful tongue robs our
Neighbor of this precious Treasury, Reproaches kill love, and that is a bitter
and mischievous slaughter, Prove. 16.28. a whisperer separateth chief friends, a
reproaching tongue destroys the comfort of humane society, which is a great
wound to the heart of man, whom God has made a sociable creature, Je. 9.3, 5,
8. they bend their tongues like their bow for lies, they will deceive every one
their Neighbor, they will not speak the truth, they have taught their tongue
to speak lies,; their tongue is an Arrow shot out, it speaks deceit, one
speaks peaceably to his Neighbor with his mouth, but in his heart he lays
wait for him, Psalm, 12.2. They speak vanity every one with his Neighbor, with
flattering lips do they speak. An evil tongue stirs up hatred, strife and
contention; and kindles hell fire among Neighbors, Jam. 3.5, 6. the tongue is
a little member, and boasts great things, behold how great a matter a little
fire kindles; and the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity, so is the tongue
among our members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the
course of nature, and it is set on fire of Hell: the tongue is a weapon of
revenge, and of cruel malice, Psalm. 52.2, 3, 4. thy tongue devises mischief
like a sharp Rasor, working deceitfully, thou love evil more then good, and
lying rather then to speak Righteousness, Selah. Thou love all devouring
words O thou deceitful tongue. The whole City of Nob was destroyed by Doegs
tongue; Jer. 18.18. come let us devise devices against Jeremy, come let us
smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words; words
will leave some stain, aliquid herebit. Psai. 140.3 They have sharpened their
tongues like a Serpent, Adders poison is under their lips, Selah. Math. 11.16
Glutton, a wine bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners; many such mischiefs
do spring from a reproachful tongue, which kind of bitter Sufferings our Lord
Jesus did undergo.

Quest. Why did Jesus Christ that most innocent Lamb of God undergo this great
and bitter affliction of reproaches and cruel mockings?

1. Because it is one of the punishments which our sin has deserved, Jesus
Christ never deserved to be so spoken of, so reproached, so mocked, all was
falsely and unjustly charged upon him, without any appearance of cause, they
laid to his charge things that he knew not, but we the people of God have
deserved them all, some in one respect, some in another, and therefore Jesus
Christ did bear them for us, Isai. 53, 4, 5, 6. he has born our griefs, and
carried our sorrows, he was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for
our Iniquityes, the chasticement of our peace was upon him, the Lord has laid
on him the Iniquityes of us all.

2. Jesus drank deep of this cup of reproaches, because he could do it
Innocently without any contamination, or participation in sin, 2 Cor. ^.21.
though he was made sin for us, yet he knew no sin, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23. he did no
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, when he was reviled, he reviled not
again, when he suffered, he threatened not.

3. Jesus Christ drank of this cup even to the bottom, to the full satisfaction
of Divine justice, that he might take out the sting of the curse and wrath out
of them, for the sake of his Elect, who are to live in an evil world, where
they are sure to suffer reproaches, and much evil and hard measure by the ill
tongues of People 2 Cor. 6.8. by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good
report, as deceivers and yet true, 1 Cor, 4.12, 13. being reviled we bless,
being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat, we are made the
filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day. But
none of these things can hurt us. Jesus Christ by his Su^ferings has took out
the curse of them, they have much of man's wrath in them, but all Gods wrath is
taken away by Jesus Christ.

4. Jesus Christ suffered reproaches and abuses of men's tongues, to set us a
Copy and pattern of patience, that we might learn of him how to carry our
selves under such injuries, that w^ might learn of him to behave our selves
patientl^, and meekly, as our Lord Jesus did, 1 Pet. 2, 21. Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an Example that ye should follow his steps, Act.
8.32. he was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a Lamb before his
shearers, so opened he not his mouth. Yea, before his Butchers he was silent
and patient, Isai. 53.7. he was o^pressed he was affli ted, yet he opened not
his mouth, but only to say, Father forgive them, even when he was brought as a
Lamb to the Slaughter.

5. Jesus Christ suffered reproaches to sanctify them, that he by his love and
wisdom may make them good medicines for his Church, his Elect, it is a very
sharp Physic, but Jesus Christ by his experience knows how to qualify and
commix them with other Ingredients, and make them very wholesome and operative
for the good of his Elect; it is a powerful Ph^sick to purge away pride, to
hide and subdu^ it, and to teach humility and meekness, which are very n^edful
le^sons for Gods people to learn in this our militant condition, Jesus Christ
by his Example in hearing reproaches does set us sundry ne^df^l lessons to
learn,

1. We must learn to keep a strict watch over our whole con^ersation, that we
may give no just matter or occasion. We must cut off occasion from them that
watch for it, if there be a cause for their reproach we loose the glory of our
suffering, 1 Pet. 2.20. for what glory is it; if when you be buffeted for your
faults, ye take it patiently, you do well to take it patiently, and you may
find inward comfort upon your humiliation, and outward pity, but there is no
Chri ^ian glory upon such deserved sufferings; they may sin in rigor, and we
may do virtuously in exercising patience; but we loose the glory of such
Sufferings, because they are just.

2. This pattern of Christ his patient s^ fering reproaches does minister a
lesson of comfort to such as suffer unjustly, because your Innocent and holy
conversation does confute those false and unjust aspersions, so did Christ
confute those that reproached him, his Innocence so shined, that even Pilate
himself did acquit Jesus Christ from such aspersions as they cast upon him, and
he saw plainly that it was his Adversaryes malice, and not his desert, Math.
27.18. for he knew that it was for envy that they had delivered him; no wise
man will believe such reproaches as the Innocence of the party does
sufficiently confute, without any words of Apology, Innocence it self speaks a
consolation, and makes the Arrows to fall and light on their own pate, Daniel
is a famous Example of an innocent sufferer, Dan. 6.5 Then said these men we
shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him
concerning the Law of his God, and he pleaded his innocence before the King,
ver. 22. my God has sent an Angel, and shut the Lions mouths, that they have
not hurt me, for as much as Innocence is found in me, before him, and also
before thee O King I have done no hurt. Such was the pattern of Jesus Christ
which he has left us, as it is expressed in the Prophesy of David, Psalm.
35.11, 12. false witnesses did rise up, they laid to my charge things that I
knew not, they rewarded me evil for good to the spoiling of my Soul. Again, it
is a matter of great consolation and holy joy, to suffer any thing for the sake
of Jesus Christ, Act. 6.41. they departed from the presence of the Council,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer flame for his Name, Luke
6.22, 23. Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate
you from their Company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your Name as evil
for the Son of man's sake, rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy, for behold
your reward is great in Heaven, blessed are ye when men shall revile you and
persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake,
rejoice ye and be exceeding glad, for so persecuted they the Prophets which
were before you, in this case it is good to say with David if this be to be
vile, I will yet be more vile; grace is incensed, stirred up, and increased by
such Tribulations and abuses, many graces are exercised and increased by such
wrongs, Romans 5.3, 4, 5. we glory in Tribulations, knowing that Tribulation
works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes
not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost which is given to us. The trial of our Faith is more precious then gold,
and when a believer is reproached, Faith will make him wash his hands in
Innocence; when men fly upon us in their wrath, Faith will fly to Christ who
has taken away the sting of them, and will turn them to prayers; and God will
make them wholesome Physic for us. Yea, Faith will make us to imitate our Lord
Jesus, who forgave his Persecutors and prayed for them. And among many benefits
that believers gain by suffering the wounds of evil tongues, this is a chief
one, that he will learn to watch and govern his own tongue, finding by
experience the mischief of evil tongues, he will beware of doing the like to
others* he will teach his tongue to bless when they curse, he will beware of
slaining his Religion, by an unbridled tongue, Jam. 1.26. If any man seems to
be Religious and bridleth not his tongue, that man's Religion is vain.

Sect. 6.
The Sufferings of Jesus Christ under the ungrateful disacceptance of the good
works which he did for them and among them.
NEver did any perform such; and so many good Works for a people, as Jesus
Christ did for the Jews: and yet never was any man so ungratefully disaccepted,
rejected and abused, Act. 10.38. God anointed Jesus of Nazaret with the Holy
Ghost and with power, who went about doing good and healing all that were
oppressed with the Devil, for God was with him. It is unutterable how many good
works Jesus Christ did among them, even visible and bodily good which all men
saw, a child might run and read them: besides these invisible, spiritual and
heavenly works of Redemption and Salvation which he did for them, But what
acceptance did he find among them? see Luke 4.28, 29. All they in the Synagogue
that heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him
out of the city, and led him to the brow of a hill, whereon the city was built,
that they might cast him down headlong. Though he taught them the heavenly
Doctrine of the Gospel, and confirm^d his Doctrine with many Miracles, yet they
believed not. Joh. 12.37. Though he had done so many Miracles before them, yet
they believed not on him, yea they went about to stone him. Joh. 8, 59. Then
took they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the
temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by. Ioh. 10.^1. They
took up stones again to stone him. At another time he saw meet to hide himself
from them. Ioh. 12.36. Jesus departed and did hide himself from them. At
another time he was fain to do the same, (...) him, and the product was, the
Institution of a Gospel Church, a stone hewed by the Axe and Hammer of
Temptations, is fit to be built into a Gospel Church, and to enjoy full
Communion at the Lords Table, and voting in the Church, and one fitted and
humbled by Temptations, is fit to undertake the Gospel Ministry in a Gospel
Church.

Jesus Christ suffered himself to be tempted both by men and Devils, among men
he suffered himself to be tempted both by bad and good men, consider some
Instances of his being tempted by bad men, Math, 22.15, 16, 17, 18. Then went
the Pharisees and took counsel how they might entangle him in his talk, and
they sent out their Disciples with the Herodians saying, Master, we know that
thou art true, and teach the way of God in Truth, neither carest thou for
any man, for thou regardest not the persons of men, tell us therefore what
think thou, is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar or no? but Jesus perceived
their wickedness, and said, why tempt ye me hypocrites. Luke expresses this,
or the like Temptation more fully, Luke 20.20. and they watched him, and sent
forth spies, which should feign themselves just men, that they might take hold
of his words, and so they might deliver him unto the power and Authority of the
Governor. See another Instance, Math. 22.35, 36. then one of them which was a
Lawyer asked him a question, tempting him, saying, Master, which is the great
Commandment in the Law? see another Instance, Luke 10.25. and behold a certain
Lawyer stood up and tempted him saying, Master, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life? see another Instance, Math. 16.1. the Pharisees also with the
Sadduces came, and tempting, desired him that he would show them a sign from
Heaven, unto these he makes a sad Answer, Mark. 8.12. and he sighed deeply in
his Spirit and says, why does this Generation seek after a sign, verily, I say
unto you, there shall be no sign given to this Generation. See another
Instance, Math. 19.3. the Pharisees also came unto him tempting him, is it
lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause, See one Instance more,
Luke 11.53, 54. and as he said these things unto them, the Scribes and
Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many
things, laying wait for him and seeking to catch something out of his mouth,
that they might accuse him, It was an hour of great Temptation that Jesus
Christ was in! He also suffered himself to be tempted by good men, as it
appeared in that famous Instance of Peter. Math. 16, 22, 23. Peter took him,
and began to rebuke him, saying, be it far from thee Lord, that shall not be
unto thee, but he turned, and said unto Peter, get thee behind me Satan, thou
art an offense unto me, for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but
those that be of men.

Jesus Christ suffered himself to be tempted of the Devil, he gave Satan leave
to do his worst against him. The time when he entered upon this horrible
conflict was, so soon as he was baptized by John, and had the Spirit descending
upon him like a Dove, and had that Divine Testimony from Heaven. This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. These things might have terrified and
disanimated Satan from attempting him with his carnal and worldly Temptations,
but his envy and hatred against Christ did rather incense provoke, and embolden
him to assault him, having leave given him to do his worst against him. Jesus
Christ was carried by the Spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted, he was not
carried by a transporting act of the Spirit, but by a spiritual Rule and power
extraordinary, he was now entering upon the great work of his public Ministry,
he saw meet to begin that extraordinary work with an extraordinary Fa^t; to
spend forty days (as Moses did in the Mount with God) with God in prayer. Now
being in the wilderness the Devil had him alone, separated from all humane
communion, or assistance, o^ diversion, he was where no living Creature was,
save Beasts of the wilderness, Mark. 1.13. he was with the wild Beasts, but the
Angels ministered unto him, and how far they were a bridle to Satan, in
assaulting him, it is not said, he began his Ministry with fasting and prayer,
and with suffering Temptation, for this was the season that Satan had his
Commission to tempt him. He was tempted all these forty days and forty nights,
while he was in fasting and prayer, for Mark. 1.13. he was there in the
wilderness forty days tempted of Satan, and Luke 4.2. being forty days
tempted of the Devil. What conflicts and Temptations he underwent all that
time, is not expressed, and therefore not necessary for us to know, nor fit to
enquire, where God is silent; it becomes us to lay our hand upon our mouth,
secret things belong unto the Lord, revealed things belong unto us, and to our
Children, Deuteronomy. 29.29. So much of this part of the sufferings of Christ as is
necessary for us to know is revealed in the Harmony of those three Evangelists
before recited, of which I shall now say but little. Here be three, yea, four
Temptations recorded as an Epitome of all sorts of Temptations, wherewith Satan
does usually assault the Church of Christ Jesus. These are all fleshly and
worldly Temptations, as for Temptations of envy, malice, revenge, and such
like, they are the frequent Temptations of hypocrites, but not so frequently
can Satan fasten them upon sound believers, in whom there is a living principle
of love. These Temptations I shall touch, as they are recorded by Matthew.

1. The first Temptation is to sensual pleasure, to satisfy the natural
appetites of the Flesh, all of them being comprehended under that one, of
eating, which is the strongest and most vehement Appetite in the whole wheel of
nature, and most difficult to govern: govern that, and ye govern all, These
Appetites of the flesh are the dangerous Temptations of this last and best Age
of the Church in this militant world, Luke 21.34. take heed to your selves
least at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness,
and cares of this world, and so that they do come upon you unawares. The
satisfying of these Appetites were the ruin of the old world Math. 24.37, 38,
39. But as the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of men
be, for as in the days that were before the flood, they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage until the day that Noah entered into
the Ark, and knew not until the flood came and took them all away, so shall
also the coming of the Son of man be. Jesus Christ has fought this field for
us, and conquered Satan in all these kinds of Temptations, all Temptations unto
any kind of Sensuality are conquered by Jesus Christ, who has both conquered
them in his combat, and set us an holy and powerful pattern, how we should do
the same.

2. The second sort of Temptations which Jesus Christ did conflict with, and
conquer is fear, which lays Faith prostrate, and raises unbelief to use
carnal wisdom and shifts to help our selves, and stirs up carnal confidence
and presumption in a misapplyed promise, which is a very dangerous Temptation
to a believer. This Temptation of fear gave a great foil to the Faith of
Abraham, both in Egypt and in Gerar, in saying his wife was his sister out of
fear, and in like manner was the Faith of Isaac foiled. But David was a gallant
conqueror in this point, that would not touch Saul, when the Providence of God
delivered him, or exposed him into his hand, no not to gain a Kingdom by an
indirect means: against this Temptation of fear, Jesus Christ has diligently
charged and fenced the Church, Math. 10.26, 28, 31, 33. Luke 12.32. and in many
other places, and by his Conflict with this sort of Temptations he has both
conquered Satan for us, and has set us an heavenly pattern how we should
conquer them also,

A third and fourth sort of Temptations. This Temptation is double, the bait is
Worldly riches and glory, to satisfye those spiritual sins of Covetousness,
Ambition and Pride, which are the filth and offspring of man's lost Dominion.
Satan presented a sense-ravishing, though but an imaginary glimpse of all the
worlds glory. Luke 4.5. it was done in a moment of time: but he endeavored to
set on as ravishing an impression upon his Fancy as he could, to raise in him
a Lust and longing after such another sight, and especially to enjoy that
gallant thing which he had seen. We are apt to be taken and ravished with such
glimpses, that we are ready to run the greatest hazzards in the world to enjoy
that object. Men are sometimes so taken and ravished with a glimpse of an
object of Lust, as David was: but more frequently and violently with objects
(especially if attainable) of Riches, Gain, Profit, Honor, to satisfy
Covetousness Ambition, Pride, Worldly greatness: and upon this account, will be
hired and allured from the Worship and Service of God, and Communion of Gods
people therein: as Lot was, who being ravished with the riches and fertility of
the Plains of Sodom, was content, yea chose to part with Abraham's Family, and
communion in the worship and service of God there exercised, and to go unto
Sodom and to live among them. How often have we seen men enamoured with a good
Farm (as they esteemed and fancied it) for the enjoyment of which, they have
left the Neighborhood, and communion of Saints, and of the Church, and gone to
live alone in a wilderness, where they are compassed about with their own land
and Beasts. Yea such is the power of this Bait, that the hook within will catch
and engage them, not only to part from the true worship of God, but to give
themselves up to Devil-worship. As Demas forsook Paul and the Gospel, and
embraced the present world, to obtain a great Living, to be a Priest in an idol
Temple, as Ecclesiastical History informs us.

And how many in our days, are hired against their light, from the Truth, and
Protestant Religion, unto Popery by a fat Bishopric, a Cardinals cap, a
tripple crown? And thus the Devil thought to hire Jesus Christ to
Devil-worship, by a false pretense, that he had power to make him possessor of
all that glory, whereof he had given him such a ravishing glimpse. But Jesus
Christ has fought this great Battle, and conquered the Devil, and all these
kinds of Temptations for us, and come off Conqueror, and set us a pattern how
we may do so also.

From this admirable History of Jesus Christ his suffering himself to be
tempted by the Devil, even to the uttermost of his power and skill, we may
gather up some General Considerations.

First. See the mavelous power of fictitious Imaginations, and figments of
the mind. What strong conceptions and mental productions of Sin they fill the
Souls of men withal. They prevailed not so far with Jesus Christ as to pollute
him, but to tempt him to the uttermost. Mad men do many times speak out their
mental fictions and conceptions: but sober men have more command over
themselves, than to vent and speak out what is boiling in their hearts. But the
thoughts and figments of the mind are seldom quiet, unless they be overpowered
by a soul-ruling employment and Spirit. The presence and Worship of God should
over-bear them, and often does: Yet vanity of mind, running after these mental
figments, is a mournful complaint of Gods Children, as being a troublesome
vexatious sore, and bitter interruption, even in our best Services: and well if
this be bitter! they do the less hurt, they are most pernicious when they are
sweet, pleasant, delightful. These kind of Temptations has Jesus Christ
experienced and conquered, he was now exercised in an extraordinary duty of
fasting and prayer, at his making entrance upon his public Minis^ry, and lo,
what interruption he met with by these fictitious imaginations and figments
which Satan assaulted him withal. But praised be his grace, he has conquered
them for our great encouragement and advantage.

2. We see the great power Satan has over the minds and phansies of men, by
these fictitious imaginations, and fgments, he can transport us up and down in
the world, as he lists, to suit and to promote his Temptations. Jesus Christ
suffered himself, at this time of his Temptation, to be transported by Satan.
One while he was transported on to the top of one of the Pinnacles of the
Temple, and there was affected and terrified with fear. This was a mental
figment, which Jesus Christ suffered Satan to inject into his holy mind, that
he might experience such Temptations, and conquer them for us. So likewise when
he transported him into an exceeding high mountain, and there showed him all
the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory thereof; this was but a fiction, a
figment and imagination, which Satan (having permission) injected into his holy
mind, for it is most certain, that there is no such mountain in the world,
where such an object is to be seen, much less in a moment of time to be
performed, as Luke says it was, Luke 4.5. therefore these Temptations of
mental figments, and vanity of mind, which were (doubtless) no small
interruption to his holy heart, in that holy service and worship he was about.
But blessed be his Name, as he has experienced our Temptations, which are such
a sad and doleful annoyance to us, so he has conquered them for us, and set us
a pattern how we should do so also.

3 We see the great subtlety and policy of Satan, to watch for, catch, and lay
hold on, and improve the opportunity, when his Temptation may be most
advantaged, to take place and prevail.

1. He had waited forty days, viz. till Jesus was an hungry, before he
assaulted him with that Temptation, to satisfy his Appetite, though by
unlawful means, or not by the ordinary means.

The order of the time of these Temptations, is not strictly to be insisted
upon, as appears by Luke, who places that Temptation second, which Matthew
places third. And besides, this Temptation which they all place first, was not
acted till the end of the forty days fasting: because the Text says, that he
was an hungry, which gave Satan his opportunity, and it may very well be, that
the other Temptations which are recorded, were acted, before this at the end of
the forty days, for the Text says, that he was tempted forty days. Satan
plied him every day, having liberty so to do, he would not stay till the forty
days of his liberty were ended, before he began his Temptations.

2. When he had brought his Phansy into an apprehension of danger then he stirs
up fear, and this urges to approve (in Phansy) some unlawful shift to avoid the
danger, as he dealt with Abraham, to devise a way of escape on, or upon an
imagination that such a danger might befall him. And Satan does sedulously
labor to put us upon false confidence in a misapplyed or misinterpreted
promise, as it was Josiahs case, 2 Chronicles. 34.28. he had this promise, I will
gather thee to thy Fathers, and thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace, a
misinterpretation of this promise, made Josiah over bold to fight against
Pharaoh Netho, 2 Chronicles. 35.20, ad 25. where he was slain.

3. When he had tempted him with the most ravishing sight of the worlds glory,
then he tempts him to get it upon any Terms, even to take it at the usurping
hand and gift of the Devil, and to do homage to the Devil for his preferment,
as if he should say, do but thank me, and acknowledge me so far, and I will
give thee it all. Men will do any thing for a Kingdom, or a Popedom, etc. but
Jesus Christ despised them all, and has conquered this tickling Temptation.

4. The fourth general consideration, see the constant way by which the Lord
Jesus does answer, expel, and conquer every kind of Temptation, viz. by
resisting it by the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God. The Scripture is a
weapon mighty through God, and if we be diligent it is always ready at hand,
for our use and defense, when all our actions and conflicts are regulated by a
command, the promise will ever be ready to assist, and protect us.

5. See the powerful Effect of a pertinent application of a Scripture in our
management of the spiritual War, in repelling and resisting of Temptations,
Jam. 4.7. resist the Devil, and he will fly from you, The Sword of the Spirit
is an holy weapon, that he dares not conflict with, if Satan assault thee, and
find thee well armed and furnished with the Scripture, he will soon depart, and
let his Temptation fall, or ly by at present, watching for a fitter season, for
that or any other Temptation whereby he may do thee a mischief.

Quest. Why did Jesus Christ suffer his holy, pure, humane nature to be so far
under the power of Satan, as to be transported in such an hideous manner, from
the wilderness to the City, to the Temple, to the top of a Pinnacle, to the top
of an high mountain, and there to be deluded with a vain sight? Satan has a
great power over the Fantasies of men, and he can (when leave is given unto
him) transport their Fantasies and imaginations unto such strange notions and
Temptations, and therefore still the question remains, why did our Lord Jesus
suffer his pure mind to be afflicted with such transporting Temptations?

Answ. 1. Because this is a great part of the punishment due unto the sin of
man, to be given up unto, and under the power of Satan, unto his seductions and
Temptations, Ephesians. 2.2. in times past ye walked according to the course of this
world, according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that now
works in the Children of disobedience, etc, Act. 26.18. from the power of
Satan. Mankind are lawful Captives to justice, and we are delivered up unto
Satan to be our jailer, and one part of the power which the Jailer has over
us, is this, to work in our hearts, minds, Fantasies and affections, this is a
deep and dreadful part of the punishment of sin, our mental bondage is a sore
bondage; there is abundantly more sin committed in the minds, thoughts, and
imagination, then in outward actions, There be frequent Murders, Adulteries,
Fornications, Thefts, Blasphemies, and what not. There be many abominations
within, that dare not look out, Prove. 6.16, 18. there be seven abominations,
whereof one is; an heart that devises wicked imaginations, at the day of
Judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be opened and judged, there
will be abundance more work in judging the inward sins of the mind and heart,
then of the outward sins of words and deeds, it is out of the abundance of the
heart that the mouth does speak, our slavedome to Satan is principally in our
minds hearts, and imaginations.

Therefore Jesus Christ suffered this punishment to the full, so far as it
could be suffered with Innocence, he suffered till Justice was satisfied, he
gave Satan leave to do his worst against him in these Temptations, as he did at
his last sufferings, which are called your hour and power of darkness, at this
time of Temptation Satan did saucily domineer over our dear Lord, abusing his
Fantasy and Imagination to the uttermost of his skill, and all this Jesus
Christ suffered in our stead.

2. By his suffering of Temptations Jesus Christ has taken away the sting and
curse, and condemning power out of all our Temptations, so that they cannot
mortally hurt us; because the Law is satisfied by the sufferings of Jesus
Christ, it is the Law that gives strength to sin, to procure punishment, 1 Cor.
15.56. seeing then that the offense of the Law is removed by the sufferings of
Jesus Christ, the mortal power of Temptations is taken away, Temptations they
may sorely afflict, but they cannot kill and damn a Child of God.

3. Jesus Christ suffered himself to be horribly tempted, that he might be an
experienced, able, Faithful and compassionate high Priest, to relieve us in
our Temptations, and to bear with us in our violent and strange extravagancies,
in our vain figments and imaginations. Hebr. 2.17. Wherefore in all things it
behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren that he might be a merciful and
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for
the sins of the People.

4. Our Lord Jesus gave Satan leave thus to assault him, in this part of his
invisible Kingdom, where his power is greatest, that he might procure for us
an absolute and complete Victory over Satan, and all his powers and policyes,
that no force should be left in his hand against Believers in Christ. He has
conquered his inner Kingdom, the power that he has over men's minds and
imaginations. Hereby he has Satan in so straight a chain, that all his
Temptations are at the dispose and ordering of Jesus Christ. Col. 2.15. Having
spoiled Principalityes and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing
over them in it viz. in his cross and Sufferings. And this is a chief part of
this conquest, to conquer Satan's inner Kingdom, in the minds and imaginations
of men.

5. Jesus Christ suffered himself to be tempted, and in that case to conquer
him, that when Satan assaults Believers in their thoughts, minds and
imaginations these may find Satan a conquered and a chained enemy, and that by
a man, our Captain, who is God-man: all which he has done to encourage us to
resist and fight and triumph in Jesus Christ.

6. Jesus Christ suffered himself to be tempted to set us a pattern of the way
of conquering Temptation. Example and experience do effectually teach:
therefore when at any time we are assaulted with Temptations, turn our minds to
the pattern of Christ, Mat. 4. and see what he did, and do we the same.

7. Jesus Christ has undergone this field of Temptations, to let us see by
experience the power of the word over Satan and all his Temptations. The
Spiritual War is a principal part of our Religion; and we see that the Word of
God is a principal weapon in the management of this War. Psalm. 17.4, By the
words of thy lips, I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer.

8. All this Jesus Christ has done, to teach us how necessary it is, that the
word of God should dwell richly in us, Col. 3, 16. It is a great Duty, and a
precious mercy to be ready in the Scriptures, like a ready Scribe, that can
draw out of his Quiver a fitting arrow for every case. Every Scribe which is
instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a man that is an householder,
who brings forth out of his Treasury things new and old.

By this high and glorious example of Jesus Christ his suffering of Temptations
the Saints of God should learn much and most useful instruction, touching
which I shall give some short hints.

A right walking with God in Temptations, is an eminent practical point of
Religion: it renders a man to be a true follower of Jesus Christ, and very
acceptable unto him. His Disciples who continued with him in his Temptations,
he rewards them with a Kingdom; a Kingdom of Grace in this Life, and a
Kingdom of Glory in the life to come. 2 Cor. 4.17.18. Our light and short
afflictions, trials, temptations, do work for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. It is unworthy a Believer, a Disciple of Jesus Christ,
to shrink from, or sink under Temptations. It is the wisdom of a Christian to
arm and prepare for Tribulations in this world, because the appointed way to
heaven is through many tribulations, Act. 14.23. in this point we must be
followers of Christ as dear chi^dren. Jesus Christ has provided for his Saints
complete Arms, even the whole Armor of God, and weapons of war that are mighty
through God, none of our En^mies are able to stand before them, the Devil
himself will fly from that Christian that is expert to use and improve the
Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God. T mptation is Gods School wherein he does
train up his Children to prepare and sit them for Service on Earth, and for
glory in heaven. when Jesus Christ himself was entering upon his public
Ministry, he began in the School of Temptations, he began also with fasting and
prayer, he exercised these preparatories together, and come forth of the School
eminently filled with the Spirit, yea, he was fill^d with the Spirit when he
entered into this School, Luke 4.1. and Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost,
returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wildern ss. The Spirit
of God does attend and assist such as are in Temptations, and does furnish them
unto such Services and sufferings as the Lord shall please to call them unto.
Temptations are Gods usual preparatories of his Children for great services,
when God was about to call up Abraham to be a Father of the faithful, a Corner
stone, (in subordination to Jesus Christ) of that Church in which Jesus Christ
came into the world, and to be a Father in the holy line of the promised Seed,
we may see that God prepared him for these great services, by great Temptations
and trials. When God was about to call up Moses to deliver Israel out of Egypt,
to change the Church polity, to be Gods Instrument to create new heavens, and a
new Earth, to erect the Church and common wealth of Israel, glorious services,
we see that God prepared him for all this by great Temptations and Trials. When
God was about to call up David to make great Reformation in the Church of
Israel to gather up and settle all the scattered parts of Gods instituted
worship, and fix it in a Temple, and to erect a typical Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, and to fix the line of the Incarnation of the promised seed, all of
them very great and eminent services, with sundry more that I name not, only
include them in these generals, I say when God was about to call up David to
these great services, O what a storm of Temptations did he arise through!

When Solomon was called to finish what his Father David had begun in building
the Temple and setting in order the fixed national worship of God; We read
little of his passing through Temptatious to humble and prepare him: But we
read much of his sensuality, whereby he so stained the glory of his high
services, that it should raise thankfulness to God that pleases to call us up
to services of renown, through a field of very great Temptations.

We see in our present subject touching the sufferings of Christ, that when the
Lord was calling him up to that greatest and most honorable of services, that
ever was performed unto the Lord in this world, viz, the Redemption of man, and
the salvation of souls. Jesus Christ entered upon the service through many
tribulations and temptations, it is an experimental saying of holy men, that
prayer, meditation and Temptation make a good Christian, a good Minister, a
good Magistrate, it fitteth a soul for any service that the Lord shall call him
unto.

Temptations are humbling providence, they are rods of correction and
Instruction, that wean us from all kind of self confidence, or self seeking;
they rectify and purge us in our grounds and ends, in all our motions: and
when a Christian is duly sanctified in his grounds and ends, he is a fitted
instrument to glorify God in any service whatsoever. The less of man, the more
of God.

Furthermore, we see that when Christ was about to enter into this difficult
field of Temptation, he first received the Sacrament of Baptism, to fulfill all
righteousness, no other Gospel Sacrament being yet instituted. Federal
Sacram^ntal Communion with God, does greatly strengthen Faith. We see also that
when Jesus Christ was entering into the field of Death, he first exercised
sacramental Communion with God, yea double sacramental communion with God: He
first eat the Passover, and then instituted and celebrated the Lords Supper,
and then entered upon his garden conflict and Agony, and all the suffering that
followed even to his Death. By these Examples of Jesus Christ, when Gods people
are to enter upon any great design, especially when they go upon hazard of
their life, they will, if they can orderly and regularly receive the Sacrament
before they enter upon their design. Get as near to God as you can. True it is
that many do this superstitiously, and regard not the regular receiving the
Sacrament in the Communion of the Church, but minister it in private, or in a
sick man's chamber; but consider, that these errors and abuses cannot frustrate
the effect of Gods institution regularly attended unto: Man's lie does not make
Gods Truth of none effect. Romans 3.3, 4. Jesus Christ his thus arming and
fitting himself, when he was entering upon his greatest Temptation, and upon
his last conflict with Death it self, is ground sufficient for our regular
attending upon the Lord in our great concernments in like manner as he did. Our
co^enant communion with God, sealed with a divine instituted Seal, regularly
admini^tred, is to be numbered among the greatest external means of Grace, for
the confirmation of our Faith. The evidences of our Faith have the broad Seal
of h^aven affixed to them: And that is also set on by the efficacy of the
Spirit, who sits in his Sealing-Office, in the administration of the
Sacrament, and ratifieth the application of the public Instituted Seal, unto
the Soul in particular; unto which act of the Spirit in the administration of
the Sacraments, when a poor doubting trembling Soul does reverently attend, he
shall find such an efficacy of the sealing Spirit in his Soul, as shall enable
him to go away as Hannah did, when she received Ely his blessing, 1 Samuel 1.18.
so the woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.
when we celebrate the death and sufferings of Jesus Christ in our Sacramental
Communion with God, it does revive our damped and discouraged Faith, it seals
our inseparable union to Jesus Christ, inabling us to say what shall separate
me? it does also quicken, animate and encourage Faith to venture upon the
greatest, most difficult and dangerous enterprise, when called thereunto; it
enables the Soul to say, my life is not dear to me, so I may but finish the
Lords work, unto which he has called me, whatever Sufferings, sorrows, Trials,
Temptations I am thereby exposed unto. When Faith is strengthened, all grace is
on the thriving hand, because it is the work of Faith to go forth to Jesus
Christ, and fetch out of his fullness whatever Grace we want; and to fetch
supply to enable us unto any Service in doing or suffering the good pleasure of
the Lord, whatever it be. Jesus Christ has suffered Temptations deeper then
any ever did, and therefore experimentally knows how to relieve us.

CAP. X.
The Sufferings of Jesus Christ in the Garden.
I Contract and pass over many things in the Sufferings of Christ, and come to
his last Sufferings, in the last twenty hours of his life in this world; which
last Sufferings were begun in the Garden, and finished at Golgotha. In the
Garden he suffered a Soul Agony, under the sense of the Curse, and punishment
due to the sin of Man, and under the sense of the bitter cup of death, which he
was now going about to drink. And no sooner was there an Intermission of the
rigor of that Agony, but presently he was betrayed, and fell into the hands of
his Enemies that sought his life. I shall briefly touch some parts of the
History, to show how and when he came into this garden, and how he was there
betrayed.

1. The Covetousness of Judas, and a desire to pilfer, and rob the bag which
Jesus his Master had trusted him with, was the bottom wheel of this Treason,
as appears,

Joh. 12.4, 5, 6. Then said one of his Disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simons son,
which should betray him, why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence
and given to the poor? This he said, not that he cared for the poor, but
because he was a thief and had the bag, and bare what was put therein. It is a
dangerous temptation to a covetous man, to carry another man's Bag. Matthew says
Math. 26.8. the Disciples had indignation, showing that Judas spoke from an
heart filled with anger and disdain against his Master, that had caused him to
lose such a fat gob of gain: and the rest of the Disciples in their innocence
were led to consent to Judas. Mark 14.4. says some of them had indignation:
but John shows, that it was the spirit of Judas that so vented himself, and
why he did so. The rest that consented to him were only such as were misled in
their ignorance of Judas his treachery.

So soon as Judas had thus vented his indignation, the Devil entered into his
Soul, and suggested to him how he might have his gains made up that he had now
lost, he might get a great piece of money, if he would but go to the chief
Priests, and offer to betray his Master to them. And that it was thus, Luke
testifies, Luke 22.3, 4. Then entered Satan into Judas Iscariot being one of
the twelve, and he went his way and communed with the chief Priests and
Captains, how he might betray him unto them. Both Mark and Luke say, they
promised him money: but Matthew tells the Sum they bargained for. Math. 26.15.
for thirty pieces of silver. And now his covetous heart was fatted; but he must
be sure to perform his bargain, else he should not have his wages: therefore
now he studied and watched for an opportunity to do what he had agreed to do.
The love of money may well be said to be the root of all evil. Satan can bring
about a covetous heart to run himself into horrid sins for small gains. Did he
esteem the blood of a man of his Lord and Master, our Savior, at no greater
price? But so it was prophesied, Zach. 11.12, 13. We see also what a dangerous
thing it is, to suffer our hearts to be blown up into indignation, for the loss
of an opportunity of getting gain, especially unjust gain: for the Devil has
an open door thereby to enter into the Soul, and to put them upon some wicked
designs.

2. The execution of this treason, this bloody bargain, was also done in a
devilish Fury, viz. because Jesus Christ discovered his treason, and him to be
the Traitor before all the Disciples to his disgrace. Math. 26.25. Then Judas
which betrayed him said Master is it I? Ah bold wretch, whose Conscience is
s^ared with pieces of silver. That which Jesus answered was, Thou say it,
Yet this was not so full a discovery, he made a shift to bear that: but the
full discovery is recorded by John, who was a Speaker in the matter, Joh. 13.23
ad 28. Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom one of his Disciples whom Jesus
loved: Simon Peter beckned to him that he should ask who it should be of whom
he spoke, he then lying on Jesus breast says unto him, Lord who is it? Jesus
answered, he it is to whom I shall give a Sop when I have dipped it. And when
he had dipped the Sop he gave it to Judas Iscariot, the Son of Simon. And after
the Sop, Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus to him, that thou do, do
quickly. This Sop did so plainly discover Judas, that the Devil entered with
it, and swelled his heart into a resolution of a present execution of his
bloody bargain and treason. O what a Soul did this man eat the Passover withal!

Hypocrites though they love their Sins and designs, yet they cannot abide to
be seen and discovered. The discovery of a bloody Plot, will make an Hypocrite
rage, as it did Judas: but it will make a godly heart very thankful to God that
has prevented his sin: as it was with Da^id, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. when Abigail
did prevent him from murdering Nabal, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who
sent thee this day to meet me, blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou that
have kept me this day from coming to shed blood. When the Spirit of God enters
with preventing Counsel, the effect is gracious. But if Satan enter with the
discovering Sop, he will blow up Hell fire in that bosom, as it was with J^das.

3. When Judas went out in that de^illish Fury, that Satan had blown up his
heart into, it was night, Ioh. 13.30. A fit season for Traitors and Hypocrites
to act their designs and works of darkness in. It was after daylight was shut
in, for then it is said to be night: it might be near eight of the Clock; for
he tarried until the Passover was celebrated. And when Jesus Christ means to
institute the Gospel Sacrament of his Supper, he first hushed and hasted away
Judas: and when he was gone, then he instituted the Lords Supper, and finished
it with a Psalm: and after it he had that gracious Conference recorded by John
in Chapters, 13, 14, 15, 16. And after all this, he uttered that gracious
mediatorial Prayer, Chap. 17. All these were most heavenly Preparatoryes for
his own Sufferings, and the Sufferings of his Disciples, which were not small.
And although that word be recorded Ioh. 14.31. arise, let us go hence, yet they
did not go pr^sently; for they went not till that Prayer Cap. 17. was uttered,
as appears Joh. 18.1. when Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth, though
some of the discourse in these Chapters might be discoursed by the way.

By this pattern of Christ his celebration of the Supper, here is much
instruction how we ought to keep our Sacramental Communion as pure as we can,
and may be capable to do in this our state militant, and to be filled with
holy, spiritual and heavenly conference after it.

4. While Jesus and his Disciples were thus exercised in these holy services,
conferences and Prayers, Judas was among the chief Priests and Pharisees, who
by that time of night were at home, and soon ready to attend the motion of
their traitorous Companion. Yet Judas found difficultyes and delays in getting
all things ready: to get a Company of men, and Officers; their Commission and
arms clubs, staves, and other weapons, lanthorns, torches etc. Judas found that
he had thrust himself into a troublesome employment. And however he intended to
have dispatched quickly, according to that discovering word which Jesus Christ
spoke to him at his going out, what thou do, do quickly, intimating that it
was in the plot and purpose of his heart to surprise him there, in the place
where they kept the passover. But he found so many difficultyes and delays,
that it was near about midnight ere he could get all things ready, as will
appear in the Sequel.

5. After this holy communion, Conference and prayer, Jesus with his Disciples
went forth, and entered into the suffering garden, Ioh. 18.1. When Jesus had
spoken these words, he went forth with his Disciples over the brook Kedron
there was a Garden into which he entered with his Disciples: where first he
placed his Disciples where they might be within sight and hearing of what
should come upon him, but out of the way of Judas and his Company for their
safety. so careful was our Lord of his poor Lambs, when a company of wolves
were to come amongst them. That which he commanded them was, Sit here, till I
go and pray yonder. Luke 22.40. pray that ye enter not into Temptation. Then he
took Peter James and John and went a little further. And now did he enter into
his Soul-agony, with wonderful horror and distress, even to death.

1. His body was not under any immediate suffering, as yet, only as it did
co-suffer, and sympathise with his Soul, in its terrible Agony, so deep and
terrible were the horrors of his Soul, as that his body was ready to faint away
and dye.

Math. 26.^7, 38. he began to be sorrowful and very heavy, then says he unto
them, my soul is ^xceeding sorrowful, even unto the death, tarry here and watch
with me.

Mark. 1^.^3, 34. he began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy, and says
unto them, my Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death, tarry ye here and watch.

Luke 22.43, 44. there appeared an Angel unto him from Heaven strengthening and
being in an Agony he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great
drops of blood, falling down to the ground. The extremity of his Soul sorrow
did wring and torture the whole wheel of nature. And that this Agony was
firstly upon his Soul, is expressly testified by Matthew and Mark, such a load of
sorrow lay upon his Soul, that he could scarce live under it. The same is
evident in the Prophesy, Isai. 53.10. Thou shall make his Soul an offering for
sin, which Text shows that the cause of this sorrow was the load of our sin,
which lay upon him, being our Surety, Luke calls it an Agony, ver. 44.

2. This Soul Agony is expressed by Jesus Christ himself who felt it, in such
significant words as do make it appear to be a very extreme torment that he was
in. Sorrowful, or so beset round with sorrows, and he was ready to faint and die
away, he felt the greatest terror, consternation, and distress of mind, that a
man's Soul was capable to be in, yea, his terror was greater, then any one was
able to bear except himself who is God-man.

3. This distress of Soul was begun five days before the Pasover, as appears
Ioh. 12.27. now is my Soul troubled and what shall I say? Father save me from
this hour, but for this cause came I unto this hour. That this was spoken five
days before the Passover, appears, Ioh. 12.1. six days before the Pasover
Jesus came to Bethany, and v. 12. on the next day much people were come to the
Feast, and then Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and then was this word spoken by
him, so that he had been long in some degrees of this Agony, yea, long before
his Soul was distressed about it, Luke 12.50. but I have a Baptism to be
baptized with, and how am I straightened, pressed, pained till it be
accomplished, so that that Prophesy is herein (in part) accomplished, Isai.
53.3. a man of sorrows, acquainted with griefs, his Soul was in continual
sorrow and distress.

4. This Soul Agony was not inflicted upon him by man, nor by Devils, no
creature was able to put his blessed Soul into such a condition.

Quest. Who was it that put his Soul into this distress? I answer, it was his
Father that gave him this Cup to drink, Joh. 18.11. the Cup which my heavenly
Father has given me shall I not drink it?

Isai. 53.6. the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all, he suffered
the wrath and curse of God, the punishment due to the sin of man, he is our
surety, he stood in our stead, and divine justice inflicted upon him all the
punishment due to our sins. And he spared not to lay upon him till he was fully
satisfied, Romans 8.32. He spared not his own Son, here he drank the first deep
draught of the wrath of God due to our sin, on the Cross, he drank the last
draught, and then he dyed.

5. He turned the Innocent reluctancies of humane nature into prayers unto his
Father, who laid this load upon him, and subdued, and suppressed them with
humble, holy submission to his will, and then drank, and this he did three
times, he made three draughts of this bitter cup which he drank in the garden.
And it pleased the Father to give him interims of some ease, so that after his
first submission he went unto his Disciples, and awaked them, (poor watch men)
and then returned to his dreadful work again, and submitted the second time,
and drank, then went he again to his Disciples and did the same with a check to
Peter by Name, and returned again and prayed, and submitted, and drank the
third draught, and then he had an interim again. And by that time the Traitor
Judas and his Companions were come into the Garden.

6. In all this bitter conflict he had no humane help, for every time he came
to his Disciples he found them sleeping, he fulfilled that Prophesy, Isai.
63.3. I have trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there was none
with me. Yet to inform and convince us of the greatness of this work and bitter
suffering, it pleased God to send an Angel to strengthen him, as Luke
testifies, Luke 22.43 and there appeared an Angel unto him from Heaven
strengthening him. The Cup was so bitter, that it was as much as life could
bear, yet he revived again, and went on in his work, till he drank the last
draught on the Cross, and then it killed him, he drank at several times, that
it might not yet kill him; because all was not yet finished; but when all was
finished, he drank the bottom of the Cup, and then it killed him, he began with
a soul Agony only, without immediate bodily sufferings, save what his body
suffered by simpathy with his distressed soul; but on the Cross he suffered the
extremity of bodily suffering, and Soul sufferings also both together, and then
it killed him

7. What is a Soul Agony? Answ. The wrath and curse of God due to sin by the
Law, inflicted to punish the Soul.

What is that Soul punishment which Jesus Christ suffered, which he began in
the garden, before they touched his body?

Answ. It is so deep, terrible, Infinite, and intolerable, that it is
unutterable, as it is said, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard,
nor have entered into the heart of man, the things that God has prepared for
them that love him. So nor for them that love him not, who are sinners. And
what unconceivable punishment divine justice has prepared for sinners, all
that, Jesus Christ has suffered in our stead, no man can bear the curse of the
Law but it will sink him to hell, and there he can bear it but by drops, and
therefore his punishment is drawn out to Eternity. But Jesus Christ was able to
bear it, and to accomplish his sufferings in a finite time, Isai. 53.4. he has
born our griefs. Souls in hell feel what a Soul Agony under Gods wrath and
curse is, Luke 16.24. I am tormented in this flame, said Dives in Hell. Souls
under the work of conversion, when they are wounded for sin, feel some drops
and sparks of it, and yet that little is intolerable, Pro. 18.14. a wounded
Spirit who can bear? a Negative Interrogative, meaning that none can bear it.
Only Jesus Christ can bear it, yea, we may truly say, never did any wounded
Soul in the work of conversion feel such Soul wounds as Jesus Christ felt, and
never did, shall, or can any Soul in Hell feel such Torments of soul as Jesus
Christ felt.

For 1. In Hell every soul feels the punishment due to his own sin only, he
suffers only for his own sins.

2. In the work of conversion the soul feels the sting of the guilt of his own
sin only. But Jesus Christ stood in the room and stead of all, he is a second
Adam, he suffered the punishment due unto all, and all at once, and this makes
a wonderful difference. The suffering of any one person is but as the drop of a
Bucket in comparison of the sufferings of Jesus Christ. There be sundry parts
and powers of the soul; The understanding is the great light, ruler, commander
of the whole man, in all its actions. The will is the sovereign uncompelled
chooser in the soul of man, that closes with what it likes best. The
Conscience is the sovereign judge of all that is done, doing, or to be done.
The memory is the depository Treasury where all our store, good or bad is laid
up for after use. The imaginations and affections are under Servants to the
Soul. And all these powers of the Soul, the person being in the state of sin
are capable of high torments; as on the contrary, the person being in the state
of grace through Faith in Jesus Christ they are capable of glory and high joys.

Torments enter into the Soul two ways, as also do joys.

Sometimes by way of sense and imagination. Sometimes by the understanding, by
the Word and Spirit.
In all these ways, what ever Torment an Innocent Surety was capable of as the
fruit of sin, all that Jesus Christ suffered, part now in the garden, and fully
upon the Cross, Our Surety stood guilty in the Eye of Justice, of all the sin
of the first Adam, and presents himself to suffer for the same, unto the
satisfaction of the justice of the Law, Romans 3.19. all the world is become
guilty before God, and Jesus Christ takes upon himself all this guilt, all the
mountains of guilt of all the elect world are rolled upon Jesus Christ, he is
made sin for us, and the fiery streams of the wrath of God that burns in
Tophet come running down upon him, Psalm. 88.7. thy wrath lies hard upon me,
thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. The curse due unto sin makes it a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.31. for our God
is a consuming fire. In this fearful, terrible condition was the Soul of Jesus
Christ, now in his garden agony, which suffering of Jesus Christ does save
believers from it, to the enlargement of our Eternal Thanksgiving, praise and
joy.

But Woe be to those unto whom this grace is freely offered, but they rather
choose the pleasures of sin for a season, and by their own choice plunge
themselves into these flames of wrath, out of which Jesus Christ offers to
deliver them, but they refuse to accept his o^fer.

8. In this garden Agony Jesus Christ had but three of his Disciples near him,
viz. Peter, James and John, the rest of his Disciples he had appointed where
they should tarry, further off, and he went so often to these three to keep
them waking, that Judas and his Companions should not find them fast asleep,
and behold the gentleness of Jesus Christ to consider their infirmity, he first
gently checketh them, and Peter by name, could ye not watch with me one hour?
showing that his first conflict had been about an hour, and he knowing that
Judas was coming, set them a little way off, and bid them watch.

But alas they were poor Watchmen, he found them asleep the second time, then
he gives them an holy Item and Admonition, watch and pray lest ye fall into
Temptation: there is more danger near you then you are aware of. Yet himself
does make a tender kind-hearted Apology for them, First accepting their
willingness of Spirit; and then bearing with the infirmity of the flesh: for he
considered that it was near midnight, high sleeping time; and their hearts were
full of sorrow, which made their eyes heavy Luke 22.45. Yet notwithstanding the
care the Lord had to keep them awake, Judas had taken them asleep, had not the
Lord awaked them the third time, for when he came to them the third time he
found them asleep, and now he gives them a sharp awakening, they were ashamed
the second time, but now they were gastered; now sleep if you can. Behold the
hour is come, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners, arise, let
us be going, when the danger is upon us it is time to bestir our selves.

Now the History returns to Judas, whom we left, preparing his Company to
execute his wicked Treason in betraying his Lord and Master, when he had gotten
his Company, a band of men and Officers, furnished with Swords, Staves, Clubs,
Lanthorns, Torches, etc. no doubt he first led them to the house where he had
left Jesus and his Disciples, but he found that they were gone from thence some
hours ago, which might vex them, but Judas encouraging them, he knew the place
whither they were gone, Ioh. 18.2. Judas who betrayed him knew the place, for
Jesus often times resorted thither with his Disciples; unto this place he led
them; how they got into the garden, is not said, but Judas their Leader knew
how to get in, and did so.

And this is greatly to be observed, that by such time as they were come, Jesus
Christ was ready for them, he had ordered and placed his Disciples, he had
finished his Soul Agony, and prayers, and he had no sooner finished that great
work, but the Traitor and his Crew came, he steppeth out of one furnace into
another, he had finished his Soul conflict under the wrath of God, now falls
into the wrathful hand of man, from one suffering into another; the time of his
last sufferings was now come. In the management of this matter there be sundry
particulars.

1. The Company that came to apprehend this Lamb of God to make him a Sacrifice
was a band of armed men, with Officers and Arms, Ioh. 18.3. and Judas was their
Leader, a goodly Crew to follow a Disciple of Jesus Christ, but they are fit
enough for a Traitor; they had objected to Judas that they might miss the right
person, being night, how shall we know the right party? Judas devised this
direction, he told them that he will kiss the man, and whom ye see me kiss,
that is he, lay hold on him, and lead him away safely, so Mark expresses his
direction, Mar. 14.44.

2. According to this agreement, so soon as they came up to Jesus, the first
act that passed was, Judas came up to Jesus with a smooth flattering tongue,
and said, hail Master! and kissed him; The most mischievous and wicked kiss
that ever was given in this world, a fitting behavior of a bloody Traitor.

3. Jesus Christ gives him in a mild manner a most dreadful rebuke. Judas
betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? a terrible Question to all smooth,
flattering, but falshearted Hypocrites, that mean not as they speak, whose
words are smooth as butter and oil, but falsehood and venom is in their hearts,

4. The next act that passed was, Jesus asked them, whom seek ye? they said,
Jesus of Nazaret: he said, I am he: and with that word opened a Crevis of the
Majesty of his person, which made them all to start back and fall to the
ground, and probably tumbled over each other. And Ioh. 18.5.6. Judas that
betrayed him stood among them, and it is like fell also among them, unless his
heart was harder than the rest, and not so ready to be daunted in this wicked
work he was about: he was the most guilty person of them all.

5. But they recovered themselves again and stood up. Nothing will daunt and
divert an hard heart, when the Devil does animate and inspire them. And all
this Company depended upon Judas their Leader and Captain, all the action must
be attributed to him.

6. Then Jesus asked them again, whom seek ye? He was more composed in his mind
then they were, he was in a good work, they were in a wicked work. And by this
second Question, he showed evidently that he would not escape from them though
he could easily have so done, for he knew their design. Then they said again,
Jesus of Nazareth? Jesus answered them, I have told you that I am he, if
therefore ye seek m^, let these (viz. Peter, James and John) that are with me
go their way, that the saying which he had spoken, Ioh. 17.12. might be
fulfilled, Of those that thou have given me I have lost none. And here behold a
right good Shephard, that will expose himself to the Wolves to save his Lambs.

7. The next act that passed, was an act of Peter, who seeing Malchus a forward
bold fellow, a servant of the high Priest, and spirited like his Master, begin
to lay hold on Jesus, peter drew his Sword, and first asked Master shall I
smite? but before he could receive an Answer, Malchus going on, he gave Malchus
one Slash, and cut off his right ear, Luke 22.49.50. upon which act of Peter,
Jesus Christ did three things.

First. He rebuked the sword, and commanded Peter to put it up into its sheath.
He rebuked it by that text of Scripture Genesis 9.6. he that draws the sword
shall perish by the sword. Again, Jesus Christ declares, that if he had need
or desire of rescue, I could ask my Father, and have more then ten legions of
Angels to rescue me. All that Jesus Christ did for us was by voluntary
dispensation. Again Jesus Christ argues, If I should rescue my self from them,
how should the Scripture be fullfilled, which have foretold, that thus it must
be? Mat. 26.50.53, 54. Again he argues, Ioh. 18.11. The cup which my heavenly
Father has given me to drink shall I not drink it? He had already thrice in
Prayer submitted to drink it, and now submits again.

Secondly. Jesus Christ touched Malchus his ear, and healed it. Luke 22.51.
whether it did his soul any good or not, is not said, there is no mention made
of it; only Ioh. 18.26. A Kinsman of Malchus challenged Peter to be one of
Jesus his company. Did I not see thee in the Garden with him? and no doubt he
could have told him, that it was he that cut off Malchus his ear; but because
of the Miracle which Jesus did, in healing it with a touch, the High Priest (it
is like) charged and they all agreed to bury it in as much silence as they
could; for it was a great Conviction of their malice, that could not be
mollified by such a miracle. But poor Peter was too bold (not in Courage, but
Fear) in denying; which how great a stumbling it might be to him that charged
him, we cannot say. But O what a sad Temptation is fear? that caused Peter so
rashly, and so often to deny his Lord But we are yet in the Garden, where
Malchus Ear was rashly cut off by Peter, and miraculously healed by Jesus
Christ.

3. Jesus Christ rebuked the Officers and band of Soldiers for coming against
him in hostile manner, Luke 22.52. and Jesus said unto the chief Priests, and
Captains of the Temple, and the Elders which were come to him (therefore we see
that there were of such sorts of men in Judas his Crew) be ye come out as
against a Thief with Swords and Staves? when I was daily with you in the
Temple, ye stretched forth no hand against me, but this is your hour and power
of darkness.

8. Lastly, They lay hold on Jesus, and bind him, dear Lamb of God! Ioh. 18.12.
then the band of men the Captain and Officers of the Jews took Jesus and bound
him, and led him away.

9. Now all his Disciples left him, fled, and shifted away, Math. 26.56. Mark
relates a brief History of a young man, a follower of Jesus Christ, Mark. 14
51. and there followed him a certain young man having a linen cloth cast about
his naked body, and the young men laid hold on him, and he left the Linen
Cloth, and fled from them naked. This young man was none of the Disciples, for
Jesus Christ had taken care for all their safety, Ioh. 18.8. If ye seek me, let
these go their way. But this History is inserted, to show what a sad
con^ternation fell upon all the follow^rs of Jesus Christ: ah, how were all the
sheep scattered, when the Shephard was smitten, and oh how the hour of darkness
insulted now! that none of the followers of Jesus Christ durst appear, and how
Jesus was deserted of all men. He trod the wine Press alone, and none of the
people were with him. To him be all glory for ever and ever, Amen.

In this sad History of the sufferings of our Lord Jesus in the Gard^n, Divines
do observe how the sufferings of the second Adam do answer to the sins of the
first Adam. The first Adam beg an sin in the garden of Paradise, and the second
Adam began his last sufferings in a garden where Jesus was wont to resort, Ioh.
18.2. a good meditation to season our garden del^ghts withal.

Again, the first Adam fell by the subtle flattering Serpent, acted by the
Devil. And the second Adam entered into the field of his last sufferings, by
the smooth and fallacious kiss of his Disciple Judas, again all the world were
corrupted by the sin and fall of the first Adam, and all sorts of the people of
the world conspired against the second Adam, and brought him to his suffering.

Again, the first Adam by sin has brought shame upon all the world, and
disgrace. And now the world do put upon the second Adam all the shame and
disgrace that they can. Again, the first Adam forsook God and his ways, and
now the second Adam is forsaken of all men, his own Disciples forsake him.
Again, the first Adam was made a Captive, and has captived all his Posterity,
and now the second Adam suffering for our sins is made a Captive unto sinners.
But passing these things I shall touch a few other things.

1. See to what a degree of Impudence the Devil can blow up the heart of an
Apostate, the rebuking question of Jesus daunted not Judas nor any thing else
that was said, or done.

2. All men should beware of rash drawing out of the Sword, it is a dangerous
thing, and not to be done without great counsel and deliberation.

3. When we ask counsel, it is necessary to have patience till we receive an
answer.

4. Jesus Christ healed Malchus Ear. It is a Gospel lesson to do good against
evil, Jesus on the Cross said, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do.

5. It was the wisdom and love of Jesus Christ to draw a speedy cover over
Peter's rash act, etc. etc.

CAP. XI.
The History of the Sufferings of Jesus Christ before the Council of the Jews,
who condemned him to dye, and delivered him to the Roman power to be crucified
Ioh. 18.12, 13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
THen the band, and the Captain, and the Officers of the Jews took Jesus and
bound him, and led him away to Annas first, for he was Father in law to
Caiaphas, who was high Priest that same year, now Caiaphas was he who gave
counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one should dye for the people,
the high Priest then asked Jesus of his Disciples, and of his doctrine. Jesus
answered him, I spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogue and
in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort; and in secret have I said
nothing. Why ask thou me? ask them that heard me, what I have said unto
them, behold they know what I said. And when he had thus spoken, one of the
Officers which stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying,
answerest thou the High Priest so? Jesus answered, if I have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil, but if well, why smitest thou me? new Annas had sent him
bound to Caiaphas

Here John makes mention of the Captain, the Band, and the Officers, now this
Captain was conducted by Judas, Luke 22.47. he that was called Judas one of the
twelve went before them. Why Judas led Jesus first unto Annas, is not said, but
it may be gathered, at least probably, he was the ancientest of the great men,
for he was Father in law to Caiaphas the High Priest, Josephus says of him,
that he was a wise man, and it is most probable that Judas had made his bargain
with him, and sold his Master to him, and that the Band and Officers that Judas
led, were gathered together at his house, and there Judas had his Commission,
and from them marched upon his exploit to apprehend Jesus, and therefore when
they had taken him, thither they brought him, and there Judas was discharged,
for we hear no more of Judas, in what follows.

But when they came there, Annas considered, that though they had successively
acted thus far, and had got him into his hand and power, yet now their
proceedings must be carried on under a fair color of legal proceedings, the
Council must be called together, Caiaphas was high Priest, at his Palace or
Hall the Court must be kept, therefore when he had gloryed over his Prisoner,
and had the honor to apprehend him, he sent him away bound unto Caiaphas, but
we read not that he sent him by, or under the hand of Judas, he had acted his
part sufficiently. Annas sent him to Caiaphas, because he was a vehement
prosecutor of this business of putting Jesus to death. John gives us that
Reason, viz. that it was he that had given the Jews that counsel, that it was
necessary that one man should dye for the people, to be made a piaculum for his
Country, to please the Romans. which was the manner of some Nations in those
days, the record of this politic device of Caiaphas is, Joh. 11.46, ad 54.
But some of them went their ways to the Pharisees, and told them what things
Jesus had done. Then gathered the chief Priests and the Pharisees a counsel,
and said, What do we? for this man does many miracles. If we let him thus
alone, all men will believe on him; and the Romans shall come, and take away
both our place and Nation. And one of them named Caiaphas, being the high
Priest that same year, said, unto them, Ye know nothing at all. Nor consider
that it is expedient for us, that one man should dye for the people, and the
whole Nation perish not. And this spoke he not of himself, but being high
Priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should dye for that Nation, And not
for that Nation only, but that also he should gather together in one, the
Children of God that were scattered abroad. Then from that day forth they took
council together for to put him to death.

In which History we may first see the occasion of this vehement motion and
meeting of the Council, and the taking up that fixed resolution, of putting
Jesus to death, viz. it was that famous miracle which he did, in raising up
Lazarus, from the grave, after he had been dead four days, which should rather
have awed their hearts to believe in him, (as many did) then so to provoke them
to envy against him, upon that groundless pretense that it would provoke the
Romans to overthrow their Nation, if many should believe in him: The Romans
alas, were of Gallio's mind, they cared for none of these things.

We may also see in this story the sovereign wisdom of God in overruling and
ordering the counsels of men to make for his own glory, and for the
accomplishment of his own holy counsel, unknown and unconsidered by them that
act them, that which they act for their own bad ends, God permits them, and
over-ruleth them for his own holy ends. The counsel of Caiaphas was cunning,
but bloody, yet he was proud of it, in his own conceit; ye are a company
(says he) of weak men that know nothing at all (and yet wise Annas his Father
in law was one) I can tell you of a project whereby we shall gratify the
Romans, and render our selves wise Patriots, that seek the Redemption of our
Country, etc. ah poor man that is so sinful an under-worker of so glorious a
part of Gods holy counsel. God meant good to Israel his Church, howbeit he
means not so, neither does his heart think so, Isai. 11.7. for such reasons
as these, Annas sent him bound, (an insulting act over our suffering Lord
Jesus) unto Caiaphas, from post to Pillar. When Annas was come, and had brought
his Prisoner, all the Council were quickly together, though it was about
midnight, men cannot sleep till they have accomplished their wicked designs.
They presently (for they were in haste to make quick dispatch) call a Court,
and sit as a Court of Judgment. But it was a private Court, not public; a
night Court, not open for all that would: they set a Porter that kept the door,
that none but friends to their wicked design (as much as in them lay) should
come in, Joh. 18.16. Peter stood without, then went forth that other Disciple
which was known to the high Priest, and spoke unto her that kept the door, and
brought in Peter. Whether he that brought in Peter did not stretch the line of
Truth too far, it is not said, but she that kept the door was a notable Virago,
and soon challenged Peter, and drew forth his first denial of his Lord. Why the
Court was so private may easily be gathered, they had guilty Consciences, and
were about a black work of darkness, and therefore the dark night was not
security enough to them, but they must have a Porter at the door, and one that
had animosity sufficient, and that they might confide in: they feared that the
people would rescue him out of their hands. It is an ill sign, that the state
of that people, and the actings of those Rulers, are all sick, and near to some
public calamity; when they are in such fears and jealousies of each other. As
for Peter's getting in, and bold carriage like a spy, managing himself as if
were unconcerned, standing to the fire; but overtalking, too busy with his
tongue, etc. though the (...) made a sad use of it to Peter, in lying and
denying his Master, and cursing self or wishing ill to himself if he knew him,
etc. yet Jesus Christ looking over his shoulder upon Peter, Luke 22.6. made
good use of it, for the humbling of Peter, and warning of us, and yet providing
a witness how they handled Jesus Christ in their private Court.

Sect. 2.
Come we now to the first act of the Council, which acts laid in order
together, appear to be six.
FIrst, the high Priest did interrogate, Jesus of his Disciples, and of his
doctrine, Joh. 18.19. what he asked concerning his Disciples is not said, nor
was it worth the answering unto, probably he might enquire what chief men of
mark and danger, might be among them? alas, Jesus Christ had only Fishermen,
and men of inferior rank, Matthew the Publican was one of the chief, and
therefore it is like that the Court insisted not upon this point. But that
question about his doctrine, Jesus Christ saw it wisdom to answer unto. There
question was not to know and learn his doctrine, for had it been so, Jesus
Christ would surely have taught them; the willing and obedient Ear shall be
instructed.

But their Questions were captious, intimating that his doctrine was false, and
crope in secretly, now they are willing to search him out, this is to be
gathered out of Jesus Christ his answer, Ioh. 18.20, 21. Jesus answered him, I
spoke openly to the World, I ever taught in the Synagogue and Temple, whether
the Jews always resort, in secret have I said nothing, why ask thou me, ask
them that heard me what I have said unto them, behold they know what I have
said. Jesus Christ here declares, that his doctrine and manner of publishing
it, both matter and manner had signs of truth, and not of error, which is
expressed in sundry particulars.

1. I spoke openly to the World. I did not pick my Company, I let all that
would, hear me, errors use to be carried secretly, truth is open, seeks no
corners, and so has my preaching always been.

2. I taught, (viz. when I solemnly preached on the Sabbath days, Luke 4.16.
and as his custom was he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood
up for to read) in the Synagogues, allowed places for public meetings, for any
that will come to hear.

3. I ever taught (when opportunity served) in the Temple, whither all the Jews
resort. This is not exclusive of such times, as sometimes he took, to teach in
a Mountain, Math. 5.1. or on the shrouds of a ship, Math. 13.2.

4. In secret I have said nothing, that is nothing contrary to, or differing
from what I taught in public. This is not exclusive of his discourses by the
way, or in private houses, where he expounded to his Disciples that which he
had publicly taught in parables, Mark. 4.34. when they were alone, he
expounded all things to his Disciples. Hence then Jesus infers, that if they
suspected him of false doctrine, ask them that heard me, they can tell it, why
do you ask me? that is not the right way to find out cunning teachers of error,
bu^ the right way is by taking Testimony from such as heard.

The next thing that followed this answer of Jesus Christ, not as an effect or
just consequence thereof, but an abusive, scornful, unworthy misinterpretation
of the words of Jesus Christ, with a most rude and uncivil behavior added
thereunto, Ioh. 18.22. when he had thus spoken one of the Officers or Servants
which stood (...) struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, answerest
thou the high Priest so?

1. He that smote him was an under Officer, or a Servant, as the word
signifies. When the chief Rulers, especially the high Priests are set against
Jesus, to persecute him, it is no marvel that their under Officers and
Servants are as ill minded as their Masters, and then they will be so rude as
this act shows them to be. It was a great suffering of our Lord Jesus that
under Officers and Servants should so insult over him.

2. He smote him with the palm of his hand, as our English Translation renders
the word: we call it a Box or Cuff on the ear or cheek. The word also signifies
to smite with a rod, reed or walking Staff; either way was impudent,
contemptuous and scornful.

3. He backs his smiting him with a Reproach, Answerest thou the high Priest
so? As if he had made a faulty Answer, dishonorable to the high Priest. But he
shows that he put a bad construction on his speech, and imputes it to him as
a Reproach.

4. All this was done in the face of the Court, without any check given him
that we hear of; showing that they were all conspired to abuse our Lord Jesus.
See a like example of this abuse done unto our Lord Jesus. 1 King. 22.24. And
Zedekiah the Son of Chenaanan went near and smote Micaiah on the cheek, and
said, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee?

To this saucy fellow Jesus answered with a convincing and reproving Dilemma,
so clear, and so wisely placed, that he spoke above exception. The first part
or horn of the Dilemma is this, If I have spoken evil, show it, bear witness
of it. The second part or horn is, if I have spoken well, why smitest thou me?
Which answer of our Lord, quite stopped their mouths, and put all to silence.

Out of this small part of the Sufferings of our Lord we may gather up some
Instruction.

1. When Churchmen are Persecutors, the Persecution will be bitter, as Jesus
found it, so did Jeremy: Churchmen are usually more cunning, more bold, more
seared in conscience, more cruel.

2. Carnal Professors will insult and domineer over the Godly when they have
power in their hand.

3. Persecuting Professors will put the handsomest face they can upon the
vilest actions.

4. God can and will overruled the cunningest Counsels and contrivances of
Persecutors, to subserve his Counsel.

5. Guilty consciences love Secresy, and to act behind the curtain.

6. It is dangerous to intrude our selves into a place or way of Temptation, as
Peter did; it may expose us to lie or deny Christ, and curse our selves; as all
these falls and knocks Peter felt.

7. Truth is always serene, open, seeks no corners to hide it self.

8. When Rulers are wicked, such as are under them will be violent.

9. A girt convincing Answer, will stop the mouth of the worst of enemies.

Sect. 3.
The second Act of the Council.
MAth. 26.59. ad 63. Now the chief Priests and Elders and all the Council
sought false witness against Jesus to put him to death. But found none; yea
though many false Witnesses came, yet found they none.

At the last came two false witnesses and said, This fellow said, I am able to
destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three days. And the high Priest
arose and said, Answeredst thou nothing? What is it which these witness against
thee? And Jesus held his peace.

Mark. 14.55. ad 61. And the chief Priests and all the Counsel sought for
witness against Jesus, to put him to death, and found none. For many bare false
Witness against him; but their witness agreed not together. And there arose
certain, and bare false witness against him, saying, We heard him say, I will
destroy this Temple made with hands, and within three days I will build
another made without hands. But neither did their Witness agree together. And
the high Priest stood up in the mids, and asked Jesus saying, Answerest thou
nothing? What is it which these witness against thee? But he held his peace,
and answered nothing.

Here see, 1. That though they so abused our Lord Jesus for his Answer, and for
putting them upon the right way of enquiring, viz to ask his hearers, to s^e if
they could testify any thing against him: for in his Answer he had vindicated
himself and his Doctrine, both for matter and manner; therefore if they would
find any thing against him, it must be by Witnesses that heard him; yet now
they are necessitated to fall to this course, as Jesus had said, though they
had abused him for so saying.

2. All the Counsel there present, were unanimous in what they do: and what do
they? They sought for false Witnesses, that they might find some matter; or at
least appearance of some matter, for which they might put him to death. They
carried themselves, and managed the matter so, that all might easily see their
intent, to find some matter whereof to accuse him. Because they were resolved
to put him to death, they sought not for what was true, just, righteous, but
for something to criminate him, by Witnesses. they cared not though it were
false Witness. They encouraged them to testify any thing. And when they
misrepresented his words and meaning, they took the advantage to wring his
words to the worst sense, as appears in that Instance, when Christ said, They
would ruin and destroy this Temple, his Body, and he would raise it up again
the third day. So John represents his words, Ioh. 2.19. he spoke of the
Temple of his Body. Nor was there any capital crime in it as they represented
his words, yet any thing will, serve their turn, to be a seeming matter of
accusation.

3. They could find nothing wherein two witnesses agreed, among all the false
witnesses, until two witnesses spoke about destroying the Temple and raising
it again in three days. And yet these two witnesses agreed not in all points,
as Mar. 14.59. te^tifieth. Thus they wearied themselves in vain, finding
nothing against him, which left their envy naked, without any pretense of a
covering.

4. Then the high Priest devised another device, viz. to draw out Jesus Christ
to speak; for he kept silence all this while. Could they draw him out to speak,
they might entangle him in his words, which artifice they had formerly used to
catch him by. Mat, 22.15. so now again they attempt that way. The high Priest
stood up (a good civil deportment in public affairs) and put him upon
answering unto what they said; and to sharpen and quicken the matter, he
puts him on in a rebuking way: What? Answerest thou nothing? What is this
that these witness against thee? But this Stratagem prevailed not, Jesus still
held his peace.

Quest. Why did Jesus hold his peace and answer nothing?

Answ. 1. Because there was nothing to answer unto: they proved nothing; their
witnesses agreed not, they confuted themselves, they could fix and fasten
nothing: there was no need of an answer, and in such case it is best to keep
silence.

2. He held his peace to fulfill the Scriptures Isa. 53.7. He was oppressed
and afflicted, yet opened he not his mouth. He is brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth.

3. He held his peace, because though he was perfectly innocent himself, of all
they accused him of, yet some or other of his Elect might be at some time or
other guilty of such evils as they falsely imputed to him, in whose room and
stead he stood and suffered.

4. He held his peace because he was willing to dye for his Elect, to expiate
the sins of Gods Elect.

Sect. 4.
The third Act of the Council.
MAth. 26.63, 64. But Jesus held his peace. And the high Priest answered and
said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou
be the Christ the Son of God. Jesus says unto him, thou have said:
nenevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on
the right hand of Power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.

Mark 14.61, 62. Again the high Priest asked him and said unto him, Art thou
the Christ the son of the Blessed? And Jesus said, I am, and ye shall see the
son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of
heaven.

Here see, 1. The high Priest and Council finding and perceiving plainly, that
they could find no just matter against him, nor any color or appearance
thereof, they invented another way to pick an appearance of matter against him,
which might seem to be of weight in the eyes of the Jews, though it would be of
no consideration among the Romans: and that was by an open and solemn putting
Jesus to answer whether he was the Messiah or no.

For 1. If he denied it, or would not confess it, that would much ease and
advantage them in putting him to Death, because they had found something of
that point against him. 2. If he should confess it, that he is Christ the
Messiah, they were resolved to make that the crime for which they would condemn
him.


Mark relates only the bare question, art thou the Christ, the Son of the
blessed? Matthew relates the question more fervent, for if this device had
failed, they had no appearance of a cause to condemn him. Therefore to make
sure work, the high Priest says, I adjure by the living God, answer plainly,
and catagorically to this question, art thou Christ, or Messiah the Son of the
living God? where

1. See what the Jews says then was, touching the Messiah, whom they then
looked for, viz. that he was to be such a man, as also is the Son of God. God
and man in one person, which is the same Faith that now the Gentile Churches
believe according to the Scriptures, and the same point is manifest by Peter's
answer unto Christ, according to the Faith of the Church of the Jews, Math.
16.16. in that famous Confession of Peter. Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God.

2. Unto this question of the high Priest, and Council, Jesus Christ answers
two things.

1. He makes a plain, clear, and direct answer, Mark. 14.62. I am he, Math. 26
64. Thou have said it, it is as thou have said.

2. He proves it by the consequent, viz. the two next acts and dispensations
of Christ which they shall see, viz.

1. From hence forward, you shall see Christ the Son of man sitting at the
right hand of power, that is, you shall see the mighty power of Gospel grace of
Christ Jesus, in the conversion both of Jews and Gentiles, and so going on
until the last and final conversion of the Jews, which we hope for at this day.

2. The next and last act of Jesus Christ in this world, you shall see him
coming in the Clouds of Heaven, viz. in power and great glory, to judge the
World.

Sect. 5.
The fourth act of the Council.
WHen Jesus Christ had made this clear confession, that he is Christ the
Messiah, then they thus proceeded, Math. 26.65, 66. Then the high Pri^st rent
his clothes, saying, He has spoken blasphemy, what further need have we of
witnesses? behold now ye have heard his blasphemy. What think ye? They answered
and said, He is guilty of death. Mar. 14.63, 64. Then the high Priest rent his
clothes, and said, What need we any further witnesses? Ye have heard the
Blasphemy: what think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death.

1. The high Priest rent his garment, it may be the rest did the same, though
it be not expressed.

2. He says, he has blasphemed, viz. by confessing that he is Christ the
Messiah.

3. You the judges, the whole Court have heard his blasphemy.

4. We need no further witnesses to find matter against him, to condemn him to
die, this that we have heard is matter sufficient.

5. They all expressed themselves to be of the same mind and opinion.

6. The high Priest put it to the Vote, what think you?

7. They all passed their Vote, and so the sentence of condemnation was
pronounced against our Lord Jesus, for confessing that he is Christ, the Son of
the living God. And no other cause, or appearance of a cause could the^ find
against him, saving this only: a blessed cause, wherein Christ himself was the
first Gospel Martyr, John Baptist was martyred for his faithful discharging the
office of a Prophet, in telling Herod of his sins.

But Jesus Christ was condemned to dye merely, purely for this his confession,
and for nothing else, no not so much as pretended.

All this was done in the night, the blackest work of darkness that ever was
done in this world. They began their clandestine night Court about midnight,
they pursued their work in the manner above related, until about the second
crowing of the Cocks, about that time they condemned him.

Sect. 6.
The fifth act of the Council.
When they had done this wicked deed, in condemning our Lord Jesus to dye, it
being deep in the night, They committed their condemned Prisoner unto a company
of men, to keep him fast and safe until the morning, and then adjourned the
Court till the morning. And so this dark Sessions of this Court was ended.

It comes now to be considered how they used him this latter part of the night
until the morning, when the Council met again, if any bowels of mercy had moved
in them, they should have given him some refreshing, and opportunity to take
some rest. but they were mercyless unto him, who is the spring of all mercy to
us, they used him cruelly, which usage is set forth.

1. By the actors, a company of men, that were charged with the safe keeping of
him till the morning, they are called, Luke 22.63. a chosen company fitted for
the purpose, that they could confide in, spirited like their Masters.

2. The time of their commission to keep him, till morning, which was about the
space of three hours.

3. The several acts of horrible abuse, which they did unto him in time of
their charge and commission.

1. They spit upon him, Mark. 14.65. which is an act of the greatest disdain in
the doer, and of the greatest disgrace in the sufferer, a contempt that few
will do to a dog, especially in the Nation of the Jew, it was a very great
contempt, which the Lord himself foretold and described, Luke 18.32. he shall
be mocked, spitefully entreated, and spit upon.

2. They spit in his face, Math. 26.67. this was the highest degree of the
reproach of spitting. God gave a Law about it, Deuteronomy. 25.7, 8, 9, 10. it is the
disgrace of him that is unkind to his brother, a most improper and unsuitable
disgrace unto Jesus Christ, when he was doing the greatest act of love and
kindness not only to his Brother, but to his Enemies.

3. They mocked him, Luke 22.63. and the next word shows that there were
cruel mockings, as it is said, Heb. 11.36. the persecuted Saints were so used,
and Psalm. 25.19. mine Enemies are many, and hate me with cruel hatred. for

4. They smote him and beat him, Luke 22.63. the word which the Holy Ghost
uses, does signify such blows as do break the Skin; and flayed off some part
of the skin, where the blow fell, which was very cruel, according as the
Prophet describes such cruelty, Mic. 3.2, 3. who pluck off their skin from off
them, and their flesh from off their bones, they flayed the skin from off them,
Isai. 53.5. he was bruised for our iniquities, they smote him so hard that they
bruised him with their blows.

5. They blind-folded him, and then boxed him on the face, and with blasphemous
mocking and scorn, said, thou Christ prophesy who smote thee, Math. 26.68. such
blasphemy would affright a modest heart to hear it, but no doubt they made
great sport and laughter at it.

6. It was an aggravation of these abuses, that every base fellow and serva^^
had liberty thus to abuse our Lord Jesus, Mark. 14.65. and the servants did
strike him with the palms of their hands, they devised many ways to put
contempt upon him, and to make sport for themselves.

7. They plucked off his hair, viz. of his face, or head, or both. This abuse
is mentioned in the Prophets, Isai. 50.6. I gave my back to the smiters, and my
cheeks to them that pluck off the hair, I bid not my face from shame and
spitting.

8. They spoke many other blasphemous words against him, which the holy Ghost
abhors to mention, Luke 22.65. and many other things blasphemously spoke
they against him, with which they busied and sported themselves all the night.

9. They were charged to watch and keep him, and therefore they might not
sleep, and they kept themselves thus employed, and thereby did not only hinder
Jesus Christ from taking any rest, but also they did grieve, vex, and provoke
his Spirit most bitterly. It was the saddest night that ever was spent. And
thus they did till morning light; for then the Council met again, Luke 22.66.
and called Jesus before them.

This is the Lamentation, that these that did this vile injury to Jesus Christ,
were of his own to whom he was sent, but they would not own him, but condemned
him to die, which was the work he came to perform: and when they had nailed him
to the cross, he pardoned them and prayed for them.

When visible Professors of Jesus Christ are Persecutors of Christ, they will
be violent and cruel, as now these were against Christ. And no marvail that the
Servants and inferiors were so cruel against Christ, for they knew that they
pleased their Superiors and Masters. When Saul persecuted David, every abject
durst vent his venom against David: and Doeg fears not to be an informer
against him. When Absalom rose up against David, is it any wonder that Shimei
durst show himself to curse David? The horrible crueltyes and indignityes of
these Jewish Watchmen, that had the charge of keeping their condemned Prisoner,
will all, in many respects stand upon the account of the high Priests and
Rulers. They opened their own envy so bare and naked, that every body might see
it. And therefore their creatures were bold to do any thing against the Lord
Jesus.

Sect. 7.
The sixth and last act of the Council of the Jews, as a Council, against
Jesus Christ, as private Persecutors and envious Persons, they pursue Jesus
Christ before Pilate, and before Herod afterward.
LVk. 22.66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71. And as soon as it was day, the Elders of the
people and the chief Priests and the Scribes came together, and led him into
their Council saying, Art thou the Christ? tell us, and he said unto them, if
I tell you, you will not believe, and if I also ask you, you will not answer
me, nor let me go. Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the
power of God. Then said they all, art thou then the Son of God? And he said
unto them, ye say that I am. And they said, what need we any further witness?
for we our selves have heard of his own mouth.

It was about Cocks crowing when Jesus Christ was condemned, committed to safe
custody under a strong guard. The Court adjourned till morning, all the abuses
that these carnal keepers inflicted on Jesus, the remainder of the night, I
refer unto the fifth act of the Council; which for time extended till morning,
and for cruelty it extended to Hell.

Now in preparation for their proceeding in the morning, they held a close and
private consultation how to manage this great business. For seeing they now had
(according as they long desired and contrived to do) apprehended him and
condemned him, they were resolved to put him to death. But they foresaw many
difficultyes in effecting it. The points considered, plotted and agreed in this
private consultation, were sundry: and their agreement may be gathered out of
the answer of Jesus Christ in the morning, who gave them to understand that he
knew their pl^^s, to convince their Consciences that he was Christ the Messiah,
for the asserting whereof they had condemned him. The Points considered of were
such as these,

1. We must be speedy in our motions and progress, before the people know that
we have apprehended him. For it was about midnight that he was apprehended, and
brought to Annas and Caiphas. It was about cocks crowing when he was condemned;
he must be put to death and buried before the Sabbath; for if we slack the
time, the people will surely rescue him.

2. They considered that we must speedily deliver him out of our hand, into the
Roman hand and power, and it must be done early in the morning before the
people gather together and hear of it; for otherwise the people will surely
rescue him out of our hand; but out of the Romans hand, they cannot, they dare
not attempt it.

3. Pilate must be carefully prepared for this matter. Some of us that may be
most acceptable to him and prevailing with him, must undertake that matter.

4. Though Pilate was a Pagan, yet they knew him to be wise, just, and of a
noble Roman spirit, he will strictly examine the case; and we know that we
have no witnesses unto any thing we accuse him of, wherein the witnesses agree,
saving in that Point of destroying the Temple and raising it again in three
days, and in that Point the witnesses do not punctually agree: nor will Pilate
think or judge it a Capital matter if they did agree.

5. These considered that they had but one capital matter against him, viz.
that he confessed openly before our Court that he is Christ the Son of God,
which by our Law is Capital, not by the Roman Law. And this is the only point
that we can plead against him. And this they did plead, Joh. 19.7. We have a
Law, and by our Law he ought to dye, because be made himself the Son of God.
But of this we must speak hereafter.

6. They considered that of this point we have no witnesses, only his own
confession, and what if he should deny it, or not confess it before Pilate;
therefore we must make this point sure.

7. Hereupon they agreed early in the morning, before the people be stirring,
to sit in Council again, and examine Jesus about this point onl^, to bring him
to confess it a second time, and to try if he will stand to it. And if he ask
any question to divert or delay us, answer him not a word to any thing, but
hold him to this point only, to make the matter of our accusation strong
against him, and clear.

8. Care was taken to advise as great a Crew of their own side, as they co ld,
to stand next to the Court, and exclude others as much as handsomely they
could, so they acted.

Very early all the Council ( viz. all that consented and conspired in this
murder) met, Luke 22.66. as soon as it was day the Elders of the people, and
the chief Priests, and the Scribes came together, and led him into their
Council, surely they had taken but little rest, they verified that saying of
Solomon, Prove. 4.16. they sleep not except they have done mischief, and their
sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall. They interrogate him again
about the same point, for which they had condemned him, not out of remorse or
regret of heart, but of crafty design, Luke 22.67. art thou the Christ tell us?

The first part of Jesus his answer is, Luke 22.67, 68. if I tell you, you will
not believe, and if I also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me go.
Wherein Jesus Christ does manifest to them, that he knew their agreement in
their secret counsel. Whereby he proves to their Consciences that he is the
Son of God. Again, he declares to them, that the end and scope of their
question was not to be informed in the point, that they might believe, for they
were resolved not to believe. Again he tells them, if I ask you any thing,
you are agreed that you will not answer me again; whatsoever I say, you will
not let me go: you are resolved to kill me. Thus plainly does he lay open
their design, and resolution in their private Council, and detecteth them in
their open Council, so open as it was.

The 2d. part of the Answer of Jesus Christ is ver. 69. Hereafter shall the Son
of Man sit at the right hand of the power of God. The sense and meaning of
which words they understood, viz. that though they now see him in this low
estate of his Humiliation; yet the next appearance that they shall see him in,
is, at the right hand of the power of God. Then they fully opened their trap,
and say, Art thou then the Son of God? v. 70. And this is to be observed, that
they were so eager upon their design that they spoke all at once, Then they all
said.

Then Jesus clearly answered, You say that I am, and I confess it is as you
say, that is the meaning of that form of speech, and they were ready and
willing so to take it. Now they are satisfied, they have gotten that which they
fished for, ver. 71. And they said, what need we any further witnesses, for we
our selves have heard of his own mouth.

Now with all possible have and speed, they delivered him up to the Roman
power, as a condemned prisoner to be put to death by them, after their manner,
by crucifying, or hanging on a tree. Luke 23.1. And the whole multitude of them
arose and led him unto Pilate: all the Court and all the Creatures about them
combined in this matter, to deliver him up to the Gentiles, as Jesus Christ had
foretold that they will Math. 20.19. and Mar. 10.33.

The company that acted these things, both Rulers and people, are Apostates,
whose day of Grace was past, as appears Math. 23.37, 38, 39. Luke 13.34.35. O
that thou had hearkened, at least in this thy day, but now it is hid from
thine eyes. Such Persons are the Devils fittest instruments to persecute Jesus
Christ and his saints. These Sufferings of Jesus Christ before the Council of
the Jews were aggravated by this, because they were his own people to whom he
came and offered them mercy, and life eternal, and called them to Repentance.

But behold how wickedly they dealt with him: they condemned him, but could
find no other cause but his confessing that he is the Messiah: and not only
condemned him, but committed him into the merciless hands of their Servants and
creatures that did so vilely abuse him all the night, and crastily dealt with
him in the morning, and out of envy delivered him to the Roman power to be put
to death. And all this did the holy innocent Son of God suffer for the sake of
Gods elect, that they might become vessels of mercy; and to show us how vile
sin is in Gods sight, who spared not his own Son when he stood under a just
imputation of our sin unto him. And all these sufferings of Jesus Christ we
celebrate in that high Soul exercise in our Sacramental Commemoration hereof.

The History of Judas.
I shall shut up this Chapter with a touch upon the History of Judas, which in
this place and time comes into consideration, the history thereof is recorded,
Math. 27.3, 4, 5, etc. ad 11. with Act. 1.18, 19, 20. in which Texts (if any
please to read them) we may observe two principal points.

1. A terrible Testimony sharpened against the high Priests, and the rest of
them in their bloody persecution of our Lord Jesus, by Judas his repentance.

2. A strong and clear Testimony that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, by the Jews
fulfilling the Prophesies touching him.

1. In the first see, first, the occasion or cause moving Judas to repentance,
ver. 3. when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, this he saw in
that night about the Cocks crowing, then began his terror, but did he not know
before, that they would so do, as sure if he did not, he might have foreknown
it, for Jesus Christ had foretold it, and he knew that the end of their hiring
him to betray him, was, that they might have him in their hands, to put him to
death, but his eyes were blinded, partly by his envy at the expense of the
sweet ointment upon the body of Jesus Christ, and partly by covetousness, who
missed of such a booty to pilfer, and principally by the Devils twice entering
into him by advantages.

1. The first time of the Devils entering into his heart, was by his envy and
indignation at the expense of that ointment, Mark 14.5, 10. when his heart
raged with indignation, Satan put it into his heart to betray his Master, so
Joh. 13.2.

2. The second time the Devil entered into him, was upon the discovering sop
that Jesus Christ gave him, Joh. 13.27. now the Devil blinded him, for the
Prince of darkness has power to blind men's eyes, 2 Cor. 4.4. Two of the
Disciples did scandalously fall. Judas betrayed Jesus Christ, Peter denied him,
Peter the same night repented sincerely, Judas repented, but not sincerely.

2. The manner of his repentance, the Spirit of terror entered into him, broke
open his blinded eyes of understanding and conscience, to see his sin of blood
guiltiness, Yea innocent blood, yea, the blood of his Lord and Master, yea,
whom he had for a bribe of money most traitorously betrayed; this Spirit of
terror was the Spirit of God, of the Law, that bore down the Spirit of Satan
that blinded him: this brought him to horror and distress. The thirty pieces of
money that before had seared his conscience to hardness, now torment and burn
his conscience, and in this case was his tormented Soul till morning.

3. The progress of his repentance, he knowing the Council had appointed to
meet early in the morning, resolved to go unto them, and restore unto them
their money, and confess his great sin in betraying the innocent blood of his
Master.

Accordingly, so soon as they had confirmed their condemnation of him, and
commanded him to be delivered to Pilate, ver. 2. Then Judas appears before them
in the terror of his Soul, ver. 3. he justifies Jesus Christ to be innocent,
and himself an horrible sinner in betraying him, which confession of his,
accused them also to be horrible sinners in condemning him. He offered them the
money with which they had hired him, it scalded his Conscience, he could not
keep it.

4. See their answer, the wickedest answer that ever Ministers gave to a
distressed soul, but befitting the mouths of wolves in the pursuit of innocent
blood, and fit enough for so vile a Traitor, the worst that ever was in the
world. Their answer was short and snappish. 1. What is that to us? say you so
Caiaphas, Annas and the rest? did not you hire him with that money? 2. They say,
look thou to that: is this your care of a soul in distress? is this your care
of your flock? 3. They refused to take the money, or meddle with it; nor did
they give him one word of comfort or counsel, the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and is this all the relief he had at their mouth?

5. Now Judas is not only distressed but forsaken, there was but one door of
hope for relief left, and that was to go to the Temple, and to the Priests that
were there attending the service in the Temple, thither he came with a ghastly
countenance; there also he confessed his sin, offered them the Soul tormenting
money, but they abhorred to touch so execrable a thing, nor had they one word
of comfort for him, now he fell into utter desperation, which had these effects.

1. He cast down the money in the Temple, that bloody, that soul-tormenting
money, that execrable thing.

2. He went away to a place fitting, that Satan could easily suggest to him.

3. There he hanged himself. But fourthly the rope either broke or slipped, and
he fell, and the place was such, either by height or by Rocks beneath, that by
his fall he burst asunder, and his bowels gushed out. And all this was famously
known in all Jerusalem.

Quest. Why did not Judas go to Jesus Christ as the penitent Thief did?

A. 1. Because he was the child of perdition, as Joh. 17.12. Again Jesus Christ
was now in Pilats Court, Judas his Testimony was terribly sharpened against the
Jewish Court, and thither he went, and has left a dreadful warning what a
dangerous thing it is to envy at others charity and bounty, to covet and
desire, to pilfer another man's, or a public bag, and to rob God. Judas his
confession was not fitting for Pilats Court.

Touching the second part of the History, it was acted afterward, after the
Feast, wherein their own actions do strongly prove that Jesus Christ is the
Messiah, by their fulfilling of the Prophesy. Why Matthew does call Zachariah by
the name of Jeremiah is not yet revealed, that I know off. Their actions were
1. they hold a Council to consider what to do with this execrable money, they
agree that it ought not to be put into the Treasury of the Temple, because it
was the price of blood, they agree to buy the Potters field with it, to be a
place to bury strangers Pagans, that cared not for the Jews Religion, though
they traffiqued to the City.

What this Potters field was, may be gathered from Act. 1.20. with the Prophesy
there cited, viz. it was a dearned little bit of ground where the Potters had
wrought out all the veins of clay, and left it a desolate plat, out of the way,
unfit for habitation, good for nothing, unless it were for such a despicable
use as they now bought it for; and this plot did the execrable wages of Judas
purchase, and for that reason was called the field of blood.

And this is the monument that Judas, that Traitor has left behind him, a fit
monument of such a vile Traitor.

And this is all the portion that this self murderer left to his Children, as
the Prophesy does intimate.

And by the purchase of this field, at that price, the Jews have proved that
Jesus is Christ, the Son of God, and Savior of the World.

CAP XII.
The Sufferings of Jesus Christ before the Roman Court under Pontius Pilate.
MAth. 27.11, 12, 13, 14. And Jesus stood before the Governor, and the
Governor asked him saying, art thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus says unto
him, thou say. And when he was accused of the chief Priests and Elders, he
answered nothing. Then said Pilate unto him, Hear thou how many things they
witness against thee? And he answered him to never a word.

Mar. 15.2, 3, 4, 5. And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And
he answering said unto him, Thou say it. And the chief Priests accused him
of many things, but he answered nothing. And Pilate asked him again and said,
answerest thou nothing? Behold how many things they witness against thee. But
Jesus yet answered nothing, so that Pilate marvelled.

Luk.23.2, 3. And they began to accuse him, saying, we found this fellow
perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying, that
he himself is Christ a King. And Pilate asked him saying, Art thou the King of
the Jews? And be answered him and said, Thou say it.

Joh. 18.28, 29, 30. Then led they Jesus from Caiphas, unto the Hall of
Judgment: and it was early, and they themselves went not into the
judgment-hall, lest they should be defiled: but that they might eat the
Passover. Pilate then went out unto them and said, What accusation bring you
against this man? They answered and said unto him, if he were not a Malefactor,
we would not have delivered him up unto thee.

From what is recorded in these Texts laid together, the following History is
collected.

1. The place where Pilate began this Court, was in the Pretorium, the Roman
judgment Hall, Joh. 18.2. there Jesus Christ was presented before Pilate as a
condemned person in the Court (such as it was) a Council of the Jews, and they
desired Pilate to put him to death after the Roman manner, by crucifying him;
and by the Roman power.

2. Pilate told them that he could not justly condemn him to die, until he had
heard his accusers face to face, and his offenses lawfully proved against him,
and thereof he called for his accusers, and witnesses of his evil deeds.

3. Answer was made that the Jews might not by their Law, come that day into
the Pretorium, because it was the Feast of the Passover, and the morrow was
that Sabbath, which fell to be in their Feast week, and therefore it was an
high day, Ioh. 19.31. The Feast was to be celebrated seven days, Exodus 12 15,
18. in which week one day must of necessity be a Sabbath, and to morrow is that
Sabbath. And therefore they entreated Pilate to put him to death, as one that
they had condemned. It seems that they thought to catch Pilate by this means,
to trust them, and be their Servant to condemn and execute him, because they
had condemned him, without seeing and examining the cause why they did condemn
him.

But Pilate would not do so, a just judge must see the cause, before he condemn
the person to die, a just judge will stand upon his own legs, and see by his
own eyes.

4. Pilate though a Pagan, yet in prudence so far complied with respect to
their Religion, which they proposed and pretended in this case, and
condescended to go out of the Pretorium, into some open pbulick place, where
the Jews might appear before him, all this see Ioh. 18.28, 29. They went not
into the Judgment Hall, least they should be defiled, but that they might eat
the Passover. Pilate then went out unto them, and said, what accusation bring
you against this man? Thus Pilate disappointed them of that device, whereby
they thought to have brought him to have believed and obeyed them. Ioh. 18.30.
They said that if he were not a Malefactor we would not have delivered him to
thee. But Pilate would hear and see the cause himself, before he would condemn
him.

5. Now the chief Priests and Elders, who were his Judges before, and had
condemned him in their Council, were his accusers, and they accused him of many
things, both to vindicate themselves, and their own act in condemning him and
to vent their envy against Jesus Christ. That they did thus accuse him of many
things before Pilate, we have it from Pilates own mouth, Math. 27.13. And Mar.
15.4. Hear thou not how many things they witness against thee?

Luk^ ^^th in^^ance in three particular accusations, Luke 23.2. They began to
accuse him saying, We found this man perverting the Nation, and forbidding to
give tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself is King.

Touching the first of these, his Perverting the Nation, Pilate did strictly
examine it, as appears, Luke 23.14. Pilate says unto them, Ye have brought
this man unto me, as one that perverteth the people, and behold I have examined
him before you, and have found no fault in this man touching those things
whereof ye accuse him.

2. Touching his forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, nothing is said of it in
his examination. It is not unlike, but that the answer of Jesus to that point,
heretofore, was so famous that Pilate had heard of it, viz. that asking for a
Tribute penny, he asked whose Image and superscription is on it, they said
Cesars, then he said, give unto Caesar that which belongs unto Caesar, and to
God that which is Gods.

Touching the third point, his being King of the Jews, Pilate asked him, art
thou the King of the Jews? to whom Jesus answered, thou say it, he denied it
not, nor at this time so fully asserted it, as he did afterward, as shall be
seen in its time and place.

6. Pilate having given full scope and liberty to his accusers to produce what
they would, or could against him, and strictly examined all their allegations;
he now called upon the Prisoner to answer for himself. But Jesus kept silence,
and answered not a word, Math. 27.12. then Pilate urged him to answer, saying,
hear thou not how many things they accuse thee off? ver. 13. but still Jesus
kept silence, and answered not a word.

7. Now Pilate falls to admiring, and that exceedingly, Math. 27.14. for Pilate
saw plainly, first that they had no proof of what they said against him,
Secondly, that many things they said were frivolous, and far from being capital
offenses, if they had been proved. Thirdly, that they persecuted him out of
envy, Mark. 15.10. he knew that the chief Priests had delivered him for envy,
and all this increased his admiration at his silence. What are you willing to
dye? But alas, neither his Pagan judge, nor envious accusers, were aware of
what God the Father, and the Son Jesus Christ were now transacting touching the
great counsel of God, for the Salvation of sinners.

For 1. Now Jesus Christ stood as our sponsor and surety, to bear the
imputation of our sins. Jesus Christ now taught and confirmed the great point
of the imputation of our sins unto him, who was personally innocent as a Lamb,
but as our surety he is guilty of all; some, or other of his Elect were guilty
of whatsoever they laid to his charge, and God laid upon him the guilt of all
our sins, Isai. 5 3, 4, 5, 6. he was in this respect as being our Surety, the
guiltyest person in the world, the guilt of all sin lay upon him, and therefore
he silently bore it.

2. Jesus Christ was willing to bear all this imputation of sin, and to die for
it, Ioh. 10.17. I lay down my life, that I may take it again, no man takes it
from me, but I lay it down of my self.

Pilate saw plainly how easily he might have answered and avoided all their
allegations and accusations brought against him, and that put him into such
admiration at his silence; his Innocence appeared to his Roman Judge, without
any answer of his, though they had condemned him, Pilate saw no cause for it,
but envy.

So much for the first act of Pilate, the second act follows.
There is some difficulty in laying together the harmony of the Evangelists in
this point, touching the order of the acts that passed in Pilates Court. This
second act of Pilate that I am entering upon, is again acted by Pilate
afterward, as we shall see in its time and place, Luke 23.4. then said Pilate
to the chief Priests and to the people, I find no fault in this man, these
words of Pilate are clearly annexed to the first examination, as appears,
ver. 3. when Pilates question, and Jesus his answer were transacted, it was in
the first examination as we saw in its place, and that which Pilate adds,
ver. 4. does presently after follow; and therefore I place them next: And
render them a part of the second act of Pilate; which I am now about to set
down in the order of the History of actions, as they passed in Court, again,
Joh. 18.30.31, 32. they answered and said unto him, if he were not a malefactor
we would not have delivered him up unto thee; then said Pilate take ye him and
judge him according to your Law. The Jews therefore said unto him, it is not
lawful for us to put any man to death, that the saying of Jesus might be
fulfilled which he spoke, signifying what death he should dye. Which saying of
Jesus Christ is recorded Math. 20.18, 19. behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the
Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief Priests, and unto the Scribes, and
they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock,
and to scourge, and to crucify him, and the third day he shall rise again.
This part of the History which John relates, was at, or about the time of the
beginning of Pilates Court, as appears by the immediate foregoing words, ver.
28, 29. Therefore laying Lukes record and John's record together the History
proceeds thus. When Pilate had given the accusers leave to produce what they
would against him, and had diligently examined all that they had said, and
called Jesus to answer for himself, though he was silent and answered nothing,
to Pilates admiration, seeing he might so easily have made void all that they
had said against him. Now Pilate turns his speech to the Priests and Elders
his accusers, and argues with them, you have delivered up this man to be put
to death, but I find no fault in him, for which I should judge him to dye, many
things you say but prove nothing. You produce no Roman capital Law that he has
broken, how then should I judge him to death? To this they answered, we have a
Law (viz. against Blasphemy) and by that Law we have condemned him, and were he
not a malefactor we would not have so done, nor have delivered him to you to
put him to death.

Now Pilate makes them a noble offer, it is a point of eminent consideration,
Pilate says, take ye him, and judge him according to your Law, exercise your
own power and Jurisdiction, according to your own Laws.

The Jews expressly refuse to accept this offer, and say, it is not lawful for
us to put any man to death. Say you so Caiaphas? by whose Law is it not lawful
for you to put any man to death? Surely not by Gods Law, it is only by the
Roman Law that it is not lawful for you. So that by this saying of the Jewish
Council they do testify in open Count, that the SCEPTER is now departed from
Judah, which is a very great evidence that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, and
that the Scepter is departed from them, by their own confession, and that
before public Authority. Yea, and w^e^ Pilate offered them the exercise of
their own Scepter in a particular case, they expressly refused to accept it,
for that very reason, because the Scepter was departed from them.

And though they thus acted out of envy against Jesus Christ, yet it is a
remarkable hand of God, that they themselves should so eminently acknowledge,
that the Scepter was departed from them. John takes notice of the prediction
that Jesus Christ had given to his Disciples, foretelling how the Jews would
condemn him, and deliver him to the Gentiles, to be put to death after the
manner of the Gentiles, all which things were accomplished, just as he had
foretold, which is a great proof of his Divinity. The reason of the Jews thus
acting was because they durst not offer violence against Jesus Christ by their
own power and Laws: for they know that their proceedings were unjust, and that
the people would not have suffered them to do violence against Jesus Christ,
and yet they were so mad to execute their envious resolution to put him to
death, that they rather chose to put away the Scepter from Judah, then not to
execute their wrath against Jesus Christ, they willingly put away the Scepter
from themselves, the Scepter was departed from Judah when Jesus Christ was put
to death. O the depths of divine Wisdom!

So much for the second act of Pilate, the third follows.
Ioh. 18.33. ad. 38.
Then Pilate entered into the Judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said
unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews? Jesus answered him, Say thou this
thing of thy self, or did others tell it thee of me? Pilate answered, Am I a
Jew? thine own nation, and the chief Priests have delivered thee unto me: What
have thou done? Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this world: if my
Kingdom were of this world, then would my Servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews: but now is my Kingdom not from hence. Pilate therefore
said unto him, Art thou a King then? Jesus answered, Thou say that I am a
King. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness unto the Truth: every one that is of the Truth hears my
voice, Pilate says unto him, What is Truth?

Pilate went again into the pretorium or Roman judgment hall, out of which he
had come to comply with the Jews who would not enter into it that day. Now he
goes thither again, and calls Jesus Christ before him there, apart from the
Jews his accusers, who would not come thither, and there are sundry particulars
of great moment.

1. Pilate asked Jesus this question, art thou the King of the Jews? he had
asked him the same question in his first examination, and Jesus made him that
answer, thou say it, it is like that Pilate thought he would be more free to
answer him, apart from his accusers, and Pilate was diligently inquisitive into
this point. The Romans had a great respect unto royal blood, and all men knew
that the Jews were in great expectation of a great King. He therefore examineth
him the second time about this point.

2. Jesus Christ answered him by proposing a question to Pilates heart, which
none but himself could answer unto, and his answer to it would discover the
Spirit of the man. The question was this, say thou this thing of thy self,
or did others tell it thee of me? the divine depth and wisdom of this
question, is too deep for me to dive into. But it seems to be proposed to
instruct Pilate, that if he cordially desired to know that great Truth, it
would be for his eternal good and benefit. but if it were only out of
curiosity, and for humane discourse, and civil ends only, then it would profit
him but little.

3. Pilates heart felt him, and seems to be a little short and snufty at it,
and makes two replies, by retorting two questions.

1. Am I a Jew? intimating that his heart was no whit concerned in that great
question about the Kingly Office of Jesus Christ; it is a matter that concerned
the Jews, not him.

2. He returns a quick and sharp question, with the reason of his question, yet
with so much composure of mind and judgment, that he first expresses the
reason, and then his quick question, thy own Nation, and the chief Priests have
delivered thee to me as a condemned Malefactor, What have thou done?

4. Jesus Christ knowing that Pilate already knew the worst they could say
against him, and that there was no weight in their allegations, only they were
carried with envy and wrath, therefore he declineth to make any answer to his
quick question, and proceeds to answer to his first sober question touching the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, wherein see these three particulars.

1. Jesus Christ delivers a doctrine, my Kingdom is not of, (or from) this
world, as authors or constitutors thereof, (of) signifies from in this place,
it does not signify concerning, for the Kingdom of Christ is (of or)
concerning all the world, and affairs thereof, as the object, or subject about
which it is exercised, but the world does not make or constitute it, it is not
the efficient of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

2. Here is a reason of this assertion, because if his Kingdom were of, or
from this world, then the world would fight for their King, to keep him out of
the hands of his Enemies the Jews, and by world here he may particularly mean
the Romans, who have no hand in constituting his Kingdom.

3. Here is an exegesis or explication of this doctrine in these words, my
Kingdom is not from hence, viz. not from the world, not from the Romans.

5. Pilate is soon calm, and though Jesus answered not to his last quick
question (whereof there was no need) yet seeing he answered to his first
question, which was the point which Pilate desired to enquire into, he
accepts him, and replyeth upon him, and asks, art thou a King then? which
the words of Jesus did imply. And gave Pilate a just occasion to propose that
question.

6. Jesus Christ replyeth to Pilate, and makes a clear confession of, and
bears a full Testimony unto his Kingly Office, and of his Prophetical Office
also, which is that confession which the Apostle makes mention of, 1 Timothy
6.13. Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession, wherein are
these particulars.

1. I will not in modesty express that word concerning my self, but rest in
that which you have expressed, you have implicitly said that I am a King. 2. I
add unto this Truth my Testimony in three things. 1. To this end I was born,
that I might execute my Kingly Office in my Kingdom. 2. that I came into the
world to bear witness unto the Truth, which is my Prophetical Office, and by my
Prophetical Office I bear witness to my Kingly Office. 3. I assert, that
everyone that is of the Truth (viz. new born by the power of Gospel Light)
bears my voice, viz. receives it with love and subjection to it.
7. The Pagan was so overset and confounded with these glorious Truths, which
were so much above him, and no doubt (as the effect proves) convinsingly set
on, that he only propounds this question, What is Truth? assuredly the
question is a wise and pertinent question, but he tarryed not for an answer, he
went out of the pretorium to the Jews.

So much for Pilates third act, his fourth act follows.
Joh. 18.38. Pilate says, What is Truth? And when he had said that he went out
again unto the Jews, and says unto them, I find in him no fault at all.

This is manifestly a second time of Pilates open testifying the Innocence of
Jesus Christ, as the circumstances do make it appear. For his first Testimony
was the product of his first examination, Luke 23.3, 4. This Testimony is the
product of that private discourse, that Pilate had with Jesus in the pretorium,
apart from the Jews his accusers.

When Pilate came forth of the pretorium, from his more private discourse with
Jesus, and bore witness to his innocence so fully, the immediate effect of that
Testimony, upon the Jews is related only by Luke, therefore in laying together
the harmony of the Evangelists. I turn to that Luke 23.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, And they were the more fierce, saying, He stirs up the people, teaching
throughout all Jury, beginning from Galilee to this place. When Pilate heard of
Galilee, he asked whether the man were a Galilean. And as soon as he knew that
he belonged unto Herod's Jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who himself was
also at Jerusalem at that time. And when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding
glad, for he was desirous to see him of a long season, because he had heard
many things of him, and he hoped to have seen some miracle done by him. Then he
questioned with him in many words, but he answered him nothing. And the chief
Priests and Scribes stood and vehemently accused him. And Herod with his men of
war set him at naught, and mocked him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and
sent him again to Pilate. And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends
together; for before they were at enmity between themselves.

In this part of the History see, 1. When the chief priests and Jews heard
Pilate testify to the innocence of Jesus a second time, and that so plump and
fully, they were greatly enraged. Our English Translation renders the word very
well, They were the more fierce. The shining innocence of any, should the more
qualify and pacify our minds, and moderate our spirits. This is the frame of
a good Spirit, that is acted by Gods Spirit. But we see that the notifying of
the innocence of Jesus Christ, did inrage them. Therefore we may see that they
we^e acted by a Devilish spirit. They were resolved to execute their envy
against Jesus Christ by putting him to death; and therefore they were vexed
that the Judge found him innocent, and it made them the more violent in
aggrava^ng his offenses, which they imputed to him.

2. They inflame the matter which they accuse him of, by putting a bad
construction upon his good actions, they say, he stirs up the people by his
teaching; he shakes their hearts like as an Earthquake shakes the Earth, so
the word signifies. The word of the Gospel does indeed shake the hearts of
men, but it is to repentance, and to embrace the offer of grace and mercy in
Jesus Christ, and this is the real and true shaking, and heart stirring, that
the Ministry of Jesus had raised, but they put a bad and false construction
upon it, and say, or intimate at least, that Jesus and his followers did stir
up the people to Sedition, etc. they pervert the powerful effects of the word
that move men to repentance, and say, it moves them to Faction and Rebellion.

3. They aggravate and urge their accusation, from the extent of the effect of
his Ministry, and preaching saying, that it moves and works through all Jury
beginning at Galilee, unto this place, even to Jerusalem, that which is a real
glory and commendation, they turn into an angry and envyous accusation.

4. Their instructing in the extent of the effect of his preaching from Galile
to Jerusalem, gave occasion to Pilate to ask if he were a Galilean. And it is
like that word of theirs, put the notion into Pilates mind, that he now acts.
When he understood that he was a Galilean, he knew that he belonged to Herod's
Jurisdiction, who was Tetrarch of Galile, Luke 3.1. and being willing to shut
his hands of such an ill cause, wherein he saw no justice, but wrath and envy.
The Roman was noble and just, he abhorred injustice, and therefore he was glad
he had found a way to shift off this loathsome matter from himself, knowing
that he should gratify Herod very much, who had a long time a desire to see
Jesus, which it is like that Pilate knew, or had some sentiment of it, that it
would much gratify Herod. The opportunity also was very fit because it so fell
out that Herod was at that time in town. v. 7. an happy juncture for Pilate to
attain his ends: therefore Pilate resolved to send the prisoner to Herod. This
innocent, falsely accused Lamb is sent unto Herod. Pilates reason for this act
may be gathered out of the consequent History. First he should gratify Herod.
Secondly, he hoped to quit his hands of the case. Thirdly, if not, yet he
should gain light and aim to himself, being a Gentile by seeing what Herod a
Jew would do in this case.

5. The Jews passionate aggravation of the extent of the effects of the
preaching of Jesus Christ, from Galilee even to Jerusalem, gave the occasion of
this divertion. But it was very cross unto them and to their design, for they
were resolved to put him to death; yea and it must be done that very day; yea
and by the Roman power, and after the Roman manner. But if Herod should
accept to judge him, that would quite alter the matter: or if he do not, but
remit him to Pilate, it will occasion much loss of time: it was therefore a
very vexatious matter to them, but thank their own passion that gave Pilate the
occasion. But being so, they must bestir themselves, The chief Priests and
Elders must go and appear before Herod, to represent the matter as foul as
they can.

6. When Jesus came before Herod, then the History thus proceeds.

1. See Herod's carnal joy at his coming, and at the sight of him. We must
consider Herod to be a visible Professor of Religion, though a carnal
hypocrite: Pilate was a Pagan, Herod was a Jew; therefore he acts the part of
one that has Religion: therefore he had exceeding great joy to see Jesus: this
his joy is amplified by two reason, 1. Because he had of a long time a desire
to see Jesus, having heard such famous things of him. 2. Because he hoped he
would have been so officious to him, being a King, as to gratify him by doing
some Miracle before him.

2. Herod questioned him in many things, though they were not of such weight,
as to be mentioned by the Holy Ghost, not any one of them.

3. His questions would be promoted and enlarged by the high Priests and
Scribes, who prosecuted him before Herod. 1. They stood up against him. 2. They
vehemently accused him: and this would occasion Herod to ask him many Questions.

4. See the holy wise Lamb-like behavior of Jesus Christ among these
adversaries of whom in the prophesy he complains, Psalm. 22.12, 13, 16. Many
Bulls have compassed me, strong Bulls of Bashan have beset me round. they gaped
upon me with their mouths, like a ravening, and roaring Lion. For dogs have
compassed me, the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me. But in all these
doings, Jesus held his peace he spoke not one word: and some Reasons of his
silence before Herod may be given.

1. There was nothing of moment found against him which needed an answer, as
Pilate afterward argues, Luke 23.15. 2. Because Jesus would make it manifest
before Herod and that great Audience, that he laid down his life willingly. 3.
He totally veiled his glory. Had any part of his glory appeared, they would not
have condemned him. 1. Cor. 2.8. Pilate was very loath to it, because of his
innocence, which he did see. had he seen his glory, he would not have done it.
5. See the unworthy and vile usage they put upon him, though they found no
cause against him.

Where see 1. The parties that abused him, Herod and his men of war, chief
Officers and others that came together unto this spectacle, when they hard that
Pilate had sent Jesus to Herod. 2. The abuses which they did to this innocent
Lamb of God,


Viz. 1 They set him at naught. 2. They mocked him. 3. They arrayed him in a
gorgeous robe to promote their mockeryes. 4. They sent him back to Pilate, when
they had disrobed him.


6. See a notable effect of this act of Pilate in gratifying Herod by sending
Jesus unto him, it removed the enmity that was betwixt them, so that they
became friends afterward. Luke 23.12. And the same day Pilate and Herod were
made friends; together for before they were at enmity between themselves. The
world can agree to persecute Jesus Christ and his Servants.

And as Pilate gratified Herod, so Herod gratified Pilate, by setting him a
patcern of hardness of heart, to abuse Jesus Christ, though he were innocent,
as it will sadly appear in the Sequel.

Many observations of instruction might be raised, but I will pass on, and not
touch them for brevity sake.

So much for Pilates 4th. Act. his 5th. Act follows.
Luke 23.13, 14, 15, 16. And Pilate when he had called together the chief
Priests, and the Rulers, and the people, said unto them, Ye have brought this
man unto me as one that perverteth the people, and behold I having examined him
before you, have found no fault in this man touching those things whereof ye
accuse him. No, nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him, and lo nothing worthy of
death is done unto him. I will therefore chastise him and release him.

1. Herod sent Jesus back unto Pilate, ver. 11. so mocked, derided, abused as
as abovesaid, but withal intimated that he found nothing proved against him,
as Pilate himself anon declares. Therefore Pilate calls his Court again, and
calls the chief Priests and Rulers, his accusers, who were ready enough; and
the people; an open Court, because justice must proceed openly, not
clandestinely, as the chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees did in their Court
when they condemned Jesus. The Roman proceeded openly and honorably in his
Court, and in the management of this matter thus far.

2. Pilate makes recital of what had passed. Ye have brought this man as one
that perverteth the people: You see that I have thoroughly sifted and examined
all that you have accused him of, and all this have I done in your presence.
Now I do solemnly declare unto you, that I find no fault in him, in any matter
which you have accused him of.

3, I am now confirmed in my judgment of the case, because I sent you to Herod
to accuse him before Herod, and he has found no fault in him, but has sent
him back to me, finding nothing in him worthy of death. Luke 23.15. No nor yet
Herod, for I sent you to him, and lo nothing worthy of death is done unto him.

4. Therefore I do now declare unto you that I will chastise him and release
him. But Pilate, with your favor, why will you chastise an innocent person? is
this Justice? If Pilate say, I do it to please and pacify the rage of the
Jews against him: But is this a noble Roman spirit to pervert justice to
please the people? Fiat Justitia, ruat Coelum, is a Latin Proverb. And
further, when you had performed your first word in chastising him, why did you
not perform your second word to release him? But Jesus Christ and his poor
Servants may see what we are to expect from the hands of Man.

Thus far Luke carries on the History of this Act which Pilate is now about to
do. John carries the history of this act of Pilate further.

Joh. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Then Pilate therefore took Jesus and scourged him.
And the Soldiers platted a Crown of thorns and put it on his head, and they
put on him a purple robe, and said, Hail King of the Jews: and they smote him
with their hands. Pilate therefore went forth again, and says unto them,
Behold I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him.
Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe: and
Pilate says unto them, Behold the man. When the chief Priests therefore and
the Officers saw him, they cried saying, crucify him, crucify him. Pilate
says unto them, take ye him and crucify him: for I find no fault in him.

1. Pilate took Jesus, namely into the Pretorium, a Roman judgment Hall
whither the Jews would not go, therefore now the Lamb is among the wolves, the
pagan Judge and Pagan Soldiers have him in their cruel hands, and they did
grievously abuse him.

1. They scourged him, and that (as they did all things else against him)
without mercy, with much cruelty, Christ complains of them in the Prophesy,
Psalm. 129.3. the ploughers ploughed upon my back, they made their furrows long.

2. They platted a crown of thorns and put it on his head. A cruel mockage, as
Hebr. 11.36.

3. They put on him a purple Robe, to make him a mock-King.

4. They said Hail King of the Jews, deriding hereby both his person and his
people.

5. They smote him or gave him blows with their hands, fists, palms, and with
slaves. The word which the holy Ghost uses, signifies any, or all these kinds
of blows, and we may justly conceive that they spared him not in any thing.

And unto all this they are emboldened by the example of Herod, who was a Je^
and a professor of that Religion, and seeing he so mocked and abused this
innocent person, these Pagan Soldiers would not fear to do as had as he did,
yea, outdo him, if they did so bad, these would be before them rather then
behind them, rather exceed then abate in evil, such is the bent of sinful man.
Pilate commanded only his scourging, (so far as appears in the History) but
he permitted and approved all the rest, even all that unjust and cruel usage of
an innocent person. Thus Pilate and his men acted in the pretorium.

2. Pilate went forth again unto the Jews, and thus speaks unto them.

First, Behold I bring him forth to you, viz. uncondemned, that ye might know
that I find no fault in him; but with your favor Pilate, is this a sign that
he is innocent, when you have thus abused him? what means that blood about
his ears and face, on his back and sides, are these marks of an Innocent man?
or if he be Innocent, as you affirm, and that most truly, that he is, are not
these marks of an unjust Judge?

2dly. Then Jesus came forth, wearing the Crown of thorns, and the purple Robe
all bloody, battered and abused, baptized with his own blood.

3dl. Pilate says, behold the man. that is, you see I have punished him, to
pacify you, let that suffice, and so I will release him, though thus much of
the sense of the words is not expressed, yet it is probable, he labored to work
upon their compassion and pity: but we see that no humane policy can quench
the rage of the wicked against innocent Jesus Christ, and his innocent servants.

3. When the chief Priests and Officers saw him, they cried out, crucify him,
crucify him, they made a general outcry, that little quantity of his blood
which Pilate had shed, could not satisfy them, nothing but his heart and life
blood will content them.

4. Then Pilate says again, take ye him, and crucify him, for I find no fault
in him. This is the third time in this 5. act that Pilate has testified to the
innocence of Jesus Christ, and his urging, that Herod found no fault in him;
these three times added to the former two times, do make it evident that Pilate
did make the innocence of Jesus Christ to shine illustriously, but nothing can
make pale blew envy to blush.

Again, this is a second time that Pilate offered to the Jews the exercise of
their own Scepter, as he had formerly, in his second act done; but still they
put it from them, and refuse to accept it. For if the Roman power refuse to
put Jesus Christ to death, the Jews shall not be able to do it, and yet they
were violently resolved to have it done, it was a wicked Temptation they were
by Satan engaged in, so publicly, absolutely, and effectually, to put away the
Scepter from Judah, which was so great an offense to God, that they never had a
Scepter since unto this day; but there is a day of grace coming, when the
Scepter shall be restored, and David (whom now they renounced) shall be their
King. I pass by all instructions.

So much for the fifth act of Pilate, the sixth follows.
Joh. 19.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. pt. The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by
our law he ought to dye, because he made himself the Son of God. When Pilate
therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid. And went again into the
judgement-Hall, and says unto Jesus, Whence art thou? but Jesus gave him no
answer. Then says Pilate unto him. Speak thou not unto me? know thou
not, that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee? Jesus
answered, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given
thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee has the greater sin.
And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: here see

1. The occasion that moved Pilate to enquire into the divinity or divine na-
of Jesus Christ, viz. Pilates frequent urging the innocence of Jesus, and often
saying, when they said crucify him, Pilate often would say, why? what has be
done? what law has he broken? what shall he be condemned for? an innocent
person ought to be released, etc.

2. This forced the Jews again, as formerly they had done, to urge their own
law, which though it be not a Roman Law, yet by the Authority of that law, he
ought to dye. Now whether Pilate asked them what that Law was, or whether they
produced it unasked, it is not very material, seeing the Holy Ghost is silent
in it, but they produce the effect of the law, ver. 7. we have a law, and by
that Law be ought to dye, because he made himself the Son of God. This plea
they formerly used, in the second act of Pilate, and now again more fully, and
this is evidently at another time attended with other circumstances, This law
of blaspemy is the only law that they had to plead against him, for saying he
is the Son of God, which is one of the greatest and most glorious Truths in the
world. For this, they condemned Jesus in their Council, and this they plead
before Pilate, he ought to die for saying he is the Son of God, Jesus Christ was
the first Martyr that dyed for this Truth.

3. When Pilate heard that word, that he said, I am the Son of God, this word
startled the pagans heart, and he was more afraid He clearly saw his innocence,
and that they persecuted him out of envy, now if this innocent person should be
the Son of God, how should I dare to put him to death? The Jews hearts were
hard, their Consciences seared, as hard as Rock stones. But Pilate a pagan was
more afraid, he was afraid before, but now more afraid. what was he afraid of
before? sure he feared the guilt of innocent blood. To condemn an innocent man
to dye is an abomination to God, an horrible sin, and this he was afraid of
before; but now he is more afraid, if this innocent person be the Son of God,
his very heart twittered and shrunk about it.

4. Therefore Pilate takes Jesus again into the Pretorium, being industrious
to find out the matter, and that which passed in the Pretorium, is in these
particulars.

First. Pilate asked Jesus, Whence art thou? viz, not of what Nation or
Country, for he knew him to be a Jew of Galilee, but of what Original art thou?
art thou the Son of God?

2dly. Jesus Christ is silent and answered not, he was not silent in testifying
to his Kingly and Prophetical Offices, before Pontius Pilate, 1 Timothy 6.13. why
then was he silent to testify to his divine nature? the reason is, 1 Cor. 2.8.
had the Princes of of the World known, they would not have crucified the Lord
of glory, now Jesus Christ his purpose was to dye. Neither yet did Jesus Christ
lead Pilate into sin, though in this point he did not stop and prevent him;
enough was said and done to have stopped him, were it but in the clearness of
his innocence. But it was not effectual.

3. Pilate was moved, offended, huffed, because he would not answer him, nor
respect him, but neglect him, therefore he speaks big to him, what? do you not
know who I am? I have power to crucify thee, or to release thee. He thought to
scare him with such vapouring words. But alas, what are his great vaporing
words to Jesus Christ or to his Saints? The world miss their mark, when they
think by such means to prevail against Jesus Christ.

4. Unto this high vapouring of Pilate, Jesus Christ answers two things,

First. Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given
thee from above. viz. Not from Caesar so much, as he might understand it, but
from the God of Israel, whom thou neither know, nor professest to serve.

Secondly. For this cause the Jews who delivered me to thee have the greater
sin, because they know God and profess to serve him, and they know the promises
touching me, and yet they persecute me. Thou sinnest, but they are the greater
sinners.

And herein Jesus Christ testified of his divinity before Pilate, only it was
but subobscurely, so much as in his divine wisdom he saw fitting.

Quest. Why did not Pilate deliver him seeing he vapoured so much of his power
so to do?

Answ. We shall in this history see the Reasons thereof.

So much for what passed between Jesus and Pilate in the Pretorium: Now see
what followed, in the beginning of v. 12. Pilate did not only suppress his
disgust and displeasure at the silence of Jesus, but took patiently his reproof
for his sin in persecuting him. Yea and not only so, but from thenceforth
Pilate sought to release him.

Quest. How did Pilate seek to release him?

Answ. By humane policies and Tricks, he had no better nor higher principles to
act by. And this will be very observable, that all his humane policy and
devices were not only ineffectual to his end, but drew forth the Jews to an
horrible increase of their sins: as we shall see in the particulars. Yea and he
entrapped himself also. Great observations of Instruction lie before us all the
way. But I pass on.

One of Pilates politic devices was, to catch them in a necessity to deliver
Jesus by their own consent, wherein see,

1. Pilate considered that he must (either by public Articles, or by custom)
deliver unto the people one prisoner, whom they should choose, at the Feast of
the Passover, and the people began to call upon him for the performance of it,
Mar. 15.8. The multitude began to cry aloud that he would do as ever he had
done he took therefore that opportunity to offer unto them, to remit unto them
Jesus Mar. 15.9.10. Will you that I release unto you the King of the Jews; for
he knew that for envy the high Priests had delivered him. And Pilate used that
word to the people, the King of the Jews, as an argument persuasive to the
people, as appears by his after arguing upon that point.

2. Pilate contrived to give them their choice of one, but so as that they
should be forced to choose Jesus, and so deliver him by their own act. Pilate
would have done them good, but they would not. The way that he contrived was,
to streighten them in their liberty of choosing among all the prisoners; he
would give them their choice but of two, and they were Jesus and Barrabas. Now
this Barrabas was a Mutineer, a Robber, a Murderer, Mar. 15.7. Luke 23.19. Ioh.
18.40. But Jesus was an innocent person, had done many good works among them:
only the Priests had a spite and envy against him: and all this Pilate knew to
be so. Math. 27.18. Therefore the Jews being a religious people, and willing to
be accounted so to be, will never choose Barrabas before Jesus. He thought
verily to catch them in this Noose. And if they should quarrel him for
streightning their Liberty, he would so delay the matter, that the case should
be forced to stop, until after the Feast was over, and by that time the^r envy
might be cooled. Surely this was a notable Dilemma.

3. But the Jews brake this net, and made nothing of it. They neither regarded
their own Religion, nor the honor of God concerned in it. Nor did they regard
the innocence of Jesus, nor the great good works that he had done among them
and for them. Nor did they regard the vileness of Barrabas, nor his three
horrible offenses that he was guilty of. These Considerations would have moved
a Pagan to a better mind; and Pilate a pagan thought so. But they chose
Barrabas before Jesus, a choice that a pagan would not have made. Yea not only
so, but they urged that Jesus might be crucified. Though Pilate opposed them
saying, Why? what evil has he done? Math. 27.23, Mark. 15.14. Luke 23.22.

Quest. How came it to pass, that the Jews a religious people, should make such
a wicked choice, that a pagan would not have done?

Answ. See the reason of it; Math. 27, 20. The chief Priests and Elders
persuaded the people to ask Barrabas, and destroy Jesus. So Mark. 15.11. They
that led them caused them to err. Isai. 3.9. and 9.16. and 30.28. Ier. 23.13,
33 The world is too full of such sad examples.

Thus we see the effect of the policy of Pilate, it did more hurt then good; it
drew the people into a most odious sin: it lays the Jews under ignominy and
disgrace unto this day, in the eyes of all the world that hear of it.

A 2d. device shall I call it, or rather a prudent means Pilate used to
qualify and divert their minds, viz. upon the point of their Religion, and
though it was not his Religion) as thus he argues, all men know that you Jews
expect a Messiah a Christ, a King, to be your Savior and deliverer, behold he
is come, this is he, and will you crucify and kill him? and would you have me
to crucify your King?

Unto this arguing of Pilate they return a sad answer. 1. They renounce Jesus
Christ to be their King and Savior. 2. They acknowledge no King but Caesar,
Joh. 19.15. the chief Priest answered, we have no King but Caesar, thus they
renounce Jesus Christ, yea, and the government of God, and put themselves under
the government of the world, Act. 3.13, 14, 15, 16. The God of Abraham, the God
of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our Fathers has glorified his Son Jesus,
whom ye delivered up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate, when he was
determined to let him go, but ye denied the holy one, and the just, and
desired a Murderer to be granted unto you, and killed the Prince of life whom
God has raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses.

Yea, further they retort and reflect the Argument upon Pilate, Ioh. 19.12. If
you refuse him you are no friend to Caesar, he that makes himself to be a King,
is against Caesar, he is the only King in the World.

Thus Pilate got a sad blow, which wounded his very heart, and wrought a sad
effect and change in him, for this very Argument brought Pilate about, to
condemn Jesus. They argued, if you dismiss him upon this point, that he is the
King of the Jews, you are a Jew, and an Enemy to Caesar, as we that oppose you
ar^ Romans and friends to Caesar. Thus we see what ill success Pilate had in all
the pains he took to deliver Jesus Christ out of their hands.

So much for the sixth act of Pilate in this sad Court, the seventh act
follows, wherein finally he yields to the chief Priests and Jews to condemn
Jesus.
Ioh. 19.13, 14. part of it, when Pilate therefore heard that saying (if thou
let him go thou art no friend to Caesar) he brought Jesus forth, and sat down
in the Judgment seat, in a place that is called the pavement, but in the
Hebrew Gabatha. And it was the preparation of the Passover, and about the sixth
hour.

First. Here we must first consider the causes that moved Pilate to yield unto
the high Priest and Jews. 1. They struck him on the right vein for their
purpose, and when they pleaded him to be no friend to Caesar, if he released
Jesus, Ioh. 19.12. he could not endure the impeachment of that Argument; he had
rather offend God, and Conscience, or any thing, then to offend Caesar, he must
claw and curry favor with the Emperor, he could not bear with the breath of
that Sentence, he is no friend to Caesar, and therefore when he heard that
saying it turned his wheel, he yielded, ver. 13.

2. He yielded to please and content the people, Mark. 15.15. Pilate willing to
content the people, released Barrabas, and delivered Jesus to them, etc.

3. He yielded to please the high Priest and people too, Luke 23.23. and the
voices of them and of the chief Priests prevailed.

4. He yielded to prevent a tumult, which his delays and their haste hurryed
them unto, Math. 27.24. When Pilate saw he could prevail nothing, but rather a
tumult was made, etc. these are the causes expressed, that brought about
pilate, especially the first.

2. Here is noted the place where he passed that black Sentence, not in the
Roman judgement-Hall, but in the Jews judgement-Hall, a Roman Judge, in the
Jews judgement-Hall, to show their absolute subjection to the Roman Yoke, and
that voluntarily. The SCEPTER was departed from Judah by their own voluntary
choice, and to show the concurrence both of Jews and Gentiles in the condemning
and crucifying of Jesus Christ.

3. The time of this act was about the beginning of the sixth hour, the exact
time of the preparation of the Passover Lamb, that is near noon? Then began the
preparation to kill the pascal lamb. And little did Pilate think, or the Jews
regard, that this person was the pure, innocent, spotless Lamb of God, which
they were preparing to kill and Sacrifice.

Quest. How can this be the day and time of the Passover, seeing Jesus Christ
and his Disciples kept the Passover yesterday, the evening before he suffered?

Answ. Reverend Calvin helps me with an answer. The Elders had made a
Tradition, that when the fourteenth day of the Month falls to be the fifth
day of the week, that it might be lawful for any that would, to defer the
Passover one day, that so the Sabbath day might be the day after the Passover,
that so that Sabbath should be an high day, as the Sabbath after the suffering
of Jesus Christ was accounted to be, Ioh. 19.31. because it was a double holy
convocation, much may be said about this, but I will pass on. Now Jesus would
not keep the day allowed by Tradition, but took the day that was by
institution, he kept the fourteenth day. And it was a divine providence so to
order it, and this gave Judas the opportunity to betray Jesus Christ, to the
Jews the day before their Passover, who followed the Tradition of the Fathers,
and this gave the occasion that Jesus was crucified just at the time of their
Passover, for on the sixth day of the week about the sixth hour, which was
about noon, they began to kill Jesus, for at or about that time he was
condemned by Pilate.

4. Here was a great check given unto Pilate before he had passed the Sentence,
hitherto he had strove with the Jews (the Spirit of God in common grace
assisting him) to stop them from this abominable sin, by behaving himself like
a wise, prudent, diligent, just judge; yet they grew the worse by all his
pains. But at last they lighted on an Argument that touched him, and overcame
him to do unjustice for the sake of man, now God strives with Pilate, that he
might still be valiant in doing justly, and not condemn the innocent, and the
striving of Gods Spirit was by his wives terrible message sent unto him, Math.
27.19. When he was set down on the Judgment Seat, his wife sent unto him
saying, have thou nothing to do with that just man for I have suffered many
things this day in a dream because of him. where see 1. The time when the
message came, when he was set down on the Judgment Seat, and making ready to
pronounce the Sentence. 2. The matter of the message in sundry things

1. She eminently asserts the innocence of the person of Jesus that just man.

2. She warns and exhorts Pilate her husband to have nothing to do with, or
to do nothing against that just man, in judging or condemning of him to die.

3. Her reason, because she had suffered much in a dream that day about him,
which had terrified her, stirred up her heart to send this sad warning unto
him, a faithful part of a wise good wife.

Quest. what suffering could she have?

Answ. Sad apprehensions of the guilt of innocent blood, the blood of an holy,
innocent, beneficent person, looks terribly in the face of a discreet, wise
person, as she seems to be.

Quest. How did she suffer?

Answ. By Terrors in a divine dream, it was not a diabolical dream, Satan's
chief design was to kill Jesus Christ, to bruise the heel of his humanity.
Satan had much ado to bring about Pilate to do it, and now that he was come
about, he was hardly put to it to keep him too, to do the deed; and this check
from his wife, whom he knew to be a wise woman, did almost shake him quite off
again, there was but one Hinge that turned him, and still held him, viz. that
generous principle what? shall I not be firm and true to my Sovereign, Satan
would not have thus acted; but it was a divine dream, and the Spirit of God by
common grace in the wife, strove with her husband.

Quest. How came she thus to have a day dream? that morning before she rose
which many times is not early with Gentlewomen, she might have her dream which
gastered her, and caused her to rise and send to hear how things went at the
Court: and being informed, that though Pilate had with much prudence and
diligence carried himself right, a great while, yet they had brought him about
to yield to them, whereupon she presently wrote that message, or delivered it
to some fit instrument to deliver to Pilate.

Whether this message was openly delivered to Pilate, or whether his prudence
did cause it to be published, it is not said, but he was no doubt, willing it
should be published, that he might make use of it, if possible to stop them in
their violence.

Why may we not conjecture that seeing, Pilate condemned Jesus Christ for fear
of the Emperors displeasure. She might dream, that it should be punished, with
his falling into the Emperors displeasure, and his banishment into Swetia in
Germany (then a barbarous Nation) where there is a Lake near Lucerna called
Pilates Lake unto this day?

So much touching this divine check unto Pilate, the probable effects of this
message.
NOthing is expressly said to be the Effect of this message, yet upon a serious
weighing all the Circumstances, we shall find that it so wrought upon him, that
after he was set down in the Judgment Seat, and had this message, he does
again attempt to persuade them by the same Arguments that he had used before.

1. He argues with them again, that he is their King, and will ye crucify him?
Joh. 19.14, 15. this point he did the more urge. First, because the Gentiles
knew that the Jews looked for a King and Savior. And secondly, because Jesus
Christ had fully asserted his kingly Office before Pilate, and so effectually
as that he did believe it, viz. with an historical Faith, which appears by
the Title he set upon the Cross of Jesus Christ, and his resolution to assert
it. That Pilate had used this point of reasoning with them, before he yielded
to them, is manifest, because one part of their answer to this point put them
upon that plea, that overcame Pilate. Now after he is set in the judgment Seat
he uses the same plea again. And it puts the Jews upon the same dreadful
answer, viz. again to disclaim Jesus Christ from being their King, and to
profess that they had no King but Caesar, wherein they renounced the government
of God and Christ, and subjected themselves to the World and worldly Rulers;
who have kicked them about the world in every place, ever since, and they put
away the SCEPTER from Judah, and never had it since restored to this day. And
Pilate by this their answer, lay open to the same snare that had taken him, and
still holds him, he cannot bear that word to be imputed to him, no friend to
Caesar. What? not true and constant to my Sovereign? let God and Christ, and
Conscience, and all go, rather then unndergo that imputation.

Again, Pilate does now again after the message received from his wife, put
them upon that Dilemma, to necessitate them to choose Jesus, or to prefer
Barrabas before him, which he thought the vilest of Pagans would not do; for
though they had so spoken before, yet he had not as yet granted their choice.
Barrabas was not delivered to them, till at the last, as we shall see; for in
such order Matthew does relate them. And it app^areth that Pilate urged his
Arguments over and over, for so he does inculcate that point sundry times, when
they cried out, crucify him, crucify him, Pilate answered, why? what evil
has he done? and thus Pilate argued to the last. When the Priests persuaded
the people to ask Barrabas, Pilate answered, what shall I do with Jesus, they
say crucify him? Pilate says again, why? what evil has he done? which they
had nothing to reply unto him but will and violence, the reurging of those
points, seem to be the Effect of the message that Pilates wise had sent unto
him.

Yet again before he would do the wicked Fact, he had one device more, whereby
he hoped either to appease their minds, or if not to assert his own innocence,
and to testify against them. He calls for water in their sight, and washes
his hands with a protestation of his innocence, in this horrid fact of shedding
the blood of such an innocent person. But alas Pilate, why then did you do the
deed? This is but a poor excuse to you, though a convinsing Argument to them,
that the Judge should so steadfastly protest the innocence of Jesus Christ, whom
they out of envy persecuted to the death.

They still are in fear that Pilate would shrink from the work, and not finish
that which they hoped they had entangled him to do. And because they saw that
he was so deeply affected with the guilt of the innocent blood of Jesus, they
endavoured to ease his mind as much as in them lay of that terror and fear.
Therefore they do in a most dreadful manner take the guilt of his blood upon
themselves, and thereby, as much as in them lay, to acquit Pilate, to uphold
his recoiling heart to the work, till he had done it, and to show their
confidence in the case, and harden Pilates heart, they involve their Children
in the guilt of his blood. Why did they so? did not their Fathers cavil
against God, for setting their childrens teeth on edge, when their Fathers had
eaten sower grapes? Ezekiel. 18.2, 3, 4. But mad envy, pride and passion, are
cruel, bloody, confident, though shut up in blindness and violent ignorance.

It is the saddest curse, that ever parents, since the fall of Adam, brought
upon their Children: it lies upon them to this day. Thus all the politic
devices that this witty ingenious man could devise, did them no good, but much
hurt, putting them upon horrid sins, and violence, almost to Rebellion and Arms.

Lastly. Pilate shuts up and finisheth this sad Court with four Acts, not of
justice, but of foul injustice and cruelty.

1. He delivers to them Barrabas, not acted till now, an act abominable to
God, to justify the wicked, as Prove. 17.15.

2. He passes Sentence of Condemnation to the Cross upon Jesus Christ; another
most abominable act. Prove. 17.15.

3. He scourges Jesus Christ the second time: for this scourging was at and
upon his condemnation. Math. 27.26. and Mar. 15.15. His former scourging was
when Herod sent him back to Pilate. Pilate told the Jews, he would scourge him
and release him. Luke 23.16, 22. And he did so. Ioh. 19.1. but did not release
him. And now again upon his Condemnation, he scourges him upon his sore wounded
back. Psalm. 129.3. Now the plowers made deep and long their furrows on his back.

4. He delivered him into their hands to crucify him. Ioh. 19.16. Math. 27.26
Mar. 15.15. Yea, (which is to be marvelled at) he delivered him (not to
justice) but to their will. Luke 23.25. whose wills how evil they were, Pilate
saw.

So ends the sadest Court that ever was held in this World many sons of glory
have been condemned in many Courts in this world. But the Lord of glory was
never condemned in any Court save in this Court of Pilate, and in the Council
of the Jews. Great and many instructions are h re, but I pass them all this
only note, the many and admirable evid^nces of the innocence of this blessed
Lamb of God do shine in the faces both of Jews and Gentiles, and all the world.
Never was there such an innocent person condemned.

Before I finish this sad Chapter, here remains another cruel act, to
increase the sufferings of our Lord Jesus, which I cannot fully say was an act
of Pilate, yet it was done by his permission, and by his Soldiers, and he
committed them to their will, and therefore he must give an account of it
before Jesus Christ, his judge and ours, at the last day.

1. It is the fourth act of mockery done unto our Lord Jesus. The first act of
mockery was done unto him by the Jews, after the Council had condemned him, and
committed him to a guard, to be kept till morning, they spent the remainder of
the night in mocking of him, Luke 22.63, 64, 65. Math. 26.67, 68. Mark. 14.65.
2. The second act of mockery done unto our Lord Jesus, was by Herod and his men
of war, Luke 27.11. 3. The third act of mockery was done unto him by Pilate and
his guard in the pretorium, where he scourged him, and his people mocked him
more cruelly then before, Ioh. 19.1.2, 3, 4, 5. 4. The fourth act of mockery is
now done unto him, after Pilate had condemned him before they led them away to
be crucified
Math. 27.28, 29, 30, 31. Then the Soldiers of the Governor, took Jesus into
the common Hall: and gathered unto him the whole band of Soldiers. And they
stripped him, and put on him a scarlet Robe. And when they had platted a Crown
of Thorns, they put it upon his head, and a Reed in his right hand: and they
bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail King of the Jews. And
they spit upon him, and took the Reed, and smote him on the head. And after
they had mocked him, they took the Robe off from him, and put his own raiment
on him, and led him away and crucified him. where see

1. The persons by whom this was done the Soldiers of the Governor, or the
Governors Guard, and they called unto them the whole band, Jesus is now in the
rude pagan Soldiers hands, according as himself had foretold it would be, Mat.
21.61.

2. The place where it was done, in the common Hall, where all sorts of
spectators resorted, they made him a public spectacle, 1 Cor. 4.9.

3. the time when this was, after his condemnation, before they led him away,
Math. 27.31. there was an interim to get the Cross, and all things ready, and
they filled the interim with cruel mockings, and thus the time was delayed
until the beginning of the sixth hour. The very time of killing the Passover,
which is fitly accomplished, with admirable conjunctures, of which anon.

4. The particular acts of mockery which they did unto him are these.

1. They stripped him, and put on him a scarlet Robe, to mock his kingly
Office, and this the third time of this kind of mocking.

1. Herod and his men of war thus mocked him, Luke 23.11. this was done by
Jews, a King of the Jews. 2. This Example of Herod animated Pilate to do the
like, Ioh. 19.2. a purple Robe, ver. 5. wearing the Robe. 4. These Examples of
Rulers, animated the rabble of Soldiers to do the like, Math. 27.28.
The second act which these mockers did, they wreath, or plat a Crown of
Thorns, in mockage of his kingly office, this Crown they forced on, upon his
head, sore and wounded b^ his former so crowning by Pilate, this was the second
time of his being crowned with Thorns. The first time was Ioh. 19.2, 5. and now
again after his condemnation, Math 27.29.

3. They put a Reed in his right hand, instead of a SCEPTER.

4. They smote him on the head with a Reed, viz. to force on the Crown, to
cause the thorn to pierce deep.

5. When they had set him as a mock-King: 1. They mockingly bowed the knee to
him. 2. They mockingly said, Hail King of the Jews 3. They spit upon him, and
all this no doubt with huge laughter


All these usages and the like, they did every time they set him up as a
mock-King.

CHAP. XIII.
The History of their crucifying of our Lord Jesus Christ.
When they had got all things ready, they finished their mockery, put off his
Robes, put on his own garments, and led him away, as a condemned Malefactor to
his execution, where we may see what was done by the way 1. Their rigor to the
utmost they could. 2. The Lord Jesus his gracious deportment.


1. They made him to carry his own Cross, upon which he was to be put to death,
which was as much disgrace and rigor as they were in a capacity to exercise
against him. They had but little time, and were in great haste, which shortened
their rigorous dealings. Herein Jesus Christ did superabundantly answer the
Type in Isaac, Genesis 22.6. who carried on his back the wood wherewith he himself
was to be sacrificed, but that was without any rigor. Jesus Christ carried the
Tree on his back, with all rigor they could inflict, on which he was
crucified, Joh. 19.17. he meekly took up his Cross, according to his doctrine
which he taught the Church, he now teaches by his Example, added to his
precept.

2. They led him betwixt two thieves, Malefactors justly condemned, to add
disgrace unto him, as if he were a Malefactor like them. Luke 23.32. As they
placed them in the execution, so did they in leading them. Jesus was placed in
the middle, and the thieves, one at his right hand, and the other at his left,
he in the middle, as the worst of them all.

3. They compel Simon to carry the hinder end of the cross after him; in which
history consider.

1. The place where they do this, Math. 27.32. As they came out: Out of what,
or whence? Either out of the Judgement-Hall, where they mocked him, and from
whence they led him: Or when they came out of the city to go to Golgotha. It is
most probable it was as they came out of the city, because Simon was coming out
of the country on his way, Luke 23.26. And they had made our Lord Jesus to
carry his cross until he was out of the city; so long as he was able to do
it. His body was macerated by the loss of blood, in his two whippings, and
twice crowning with Thorns, with want of rest and sustenance for so long a
time. His straining under an heavy burden, would rend and tear his wounded back
and head, with great pain and torment, which would disable him from going so
fast as they (being in have) would have him go: It is like also, that they had
made his cross longer then others, that they might advance him higher, and more
visible to all. Haman had a Gibbet very high to hang Mordecai, and these were
acted with the like spirit of envy. The length would add weight, and a
necessity for somebody to bear the hinder end after him, as Luke speaks. And
they were in have, they may not go so softly for many reasons, 1. It was the
Jews Passover night, Ioh. 19.14. 2. The morrow was the Sabbath, the day after
the Passover, and therefore an high day. Joh. 19.31. 3. Envy is impetuous till
revenge be executed.


2. Consider the Person, Simon a Cyrenian who was coming out of the Country
about his affairs.

Quest. Why did they apprehend such a man, and compel him to this work? Were
there not enough among their Crew that were ready enough to have done it? whose
envy would prompt them to say and do, if need were. according to our proverb
If they want a Hangman, I Will be the man rather then the work should not be
done. Doubtless there were many in the Crew, so ill-minded against Jesus
Christ. But it is most probable they took this man, to add affliction to Jesus
Christ: he was a godly man, one of Jesus Christ his followers, a man of note,
him they force to join with them in this wicked execution.

But here we may consider three things, which I propose under submission to
better judgments.

1. Simon did valiantly refuse, and oppose to join with them, he would have no
hand in so cruel and unjust a murder, and so far refused as to give sufficient
evidence, that he did disclaim and condemn their fact which they were about to
execute.

2. He so far refused, as to put them upon compulsion; they by force compeled
him to it.

3. No doubt he saw that it was a work of pity, mercy and love to Jesus Christ
to ease, relieve and help him in undergoing their rigor (it may be Jesus said
to him, Help me) with that heart and mind he set to his shoulder, hitched it on
upon his own shoulder, to give unto Jesus Christ all the ease he could.

3. Consider, that these acts of grace in Simon were highly accepted of God,
and well pleasing to Jesus Christ, which may appear by these things recorded in
Scripture.

1. That this act is recorded in Scripture, by three evangelical Witnesses,
Mat. Mar. Luke As Jesus said of that good woman that ointed his feet, Math. 26
13. Wherever the Gospel shall be preached, her act shall be preached; so it is
with this act of Simon.

2. Simon is named as the doer of this act, whereas that woman is not named,
though her act is honorably mentioned, the love of her action smelling more
sweet then the perfume of her unction did

3. This Simon is further described and notified, First, by his country; a
Cyrenian, yet a known man at Jerusalem. Secondly. By his two sons, Alexander
and Rufus, famous in the Gospel by this noted act of their father, if not by
their own virtues also, Mar. 15.21.

4. Simon does practice a Gospel rule in this act, Gal. 6.2. Bear one another
burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Heb. 13.13. Let us go forth unto him
without the Camp, bearing his reproach.

Sect. 2.
SO much for their Rigor: now follows the gracious deportment of Jesus Christ
in his going to Golgotha. Luke 23.27, 28, 29, 30, 31. And there followed him a
great Company of people and of women, which also bewailed and lamented him. But
Jesus turning to them said. Ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but
weep for your selves, and for your children. For behold, the days are coming
in which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the womb that never bare,
and the paps that never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to the
mountains fall on us, and to the hills, cover us: for if they do these things
in a green tree, what shall be done in a dry?

So soon as ever he was eased of that cruel and heavy burden of his cross, by
the assistance of Simon, he pres^ntly falls into holy discourse, expressing the
tender Compassions of his heart over Jerusalem, and the falling, dying,
perishing Church and Church State of the Jews. In which discourse,

1. See the occasion of his discourse, There were a great multitude following
him among them there were mourning women, who lamented for him, and over him
for his death approaching, v. 27. As it was the manner of the Jews. Ier. 9, 17,
18, 19. Call for mourning women, skillfull in mourning, that our eyes may run
down with tears. etc. Though Jesus did not call for any mourners to follow him,
yet there were such as followed him, as dangerous as the times were, to app^ar
to be a lover, and a believer in him. By this mourning of these, Jesus took
occasion to discourse.

2. See the manner of his entrance upon his discourse, v. 28. Jesus turned to
them and said, Daughters of Jerusalem. Where we see what a kind look Jesus gave
unto these mourners that followed him. We see also what an holy compellation he
gives them, Ye Daughters of Jerusalem, that is ye children of the Church.

3. See the matter of his speech unto them and to all the Auditory in four
Particulars.

1. Weep not for me, that is not only for me: it is a [not] comparative, viz.
not so much, or not only for me; for I shall tell you of another object of your
weeping and lamentation. He does not forbid them weeping for him, much less
does he check or blame them for it, but he informs them of another object to
weep for, besides him. You now weep because of my death this day, but I tell
you of that which shall be the effect and punishment of that which is done this
day in putting me to death. Jerusalem shall smart for what they do this day,
and when that day of vengeance is come, there will be other matter of weeping
then yet you see.

2. Weep for your selves and for your children: weep both for the present
Generation, and for the rising Generations. Look not only on present things,
but consider what your present actions do portend and threaten to bring upon
you. And did you but consider what punishment, Calamityes and miseryes this
days act will bring upon Jerusalem, you would then see that there is great
cause to weep for your selves, and for your children, as well as for me.

3. Jesus Christ gives them a Reason why they should weep for themselves and
for their Children; viz. because of those terrible days that are coming upon
them, which are described, First. By that usual note of attention, Behold,
showing the certainty of such calamityes coming on them, and the terribleness
thereof, in both these respects, those days will be remarkable, Behold. 2dly.
Those days are described by the terrible effects thereof, which prove them to
be a just matter of mourning and weeping for your selves and for your children.
Those terrible effects of the calamity of those days are two. v. 29, 30.

1. They shall bless the barr^n woman, womb, and dry breasts, it was a reproach
in Israel to be barren, Genesis 30.23. Luke 1.25. but now they shall count them
happy that have no children to see and feel these bitter calamityes, the words
imply that it is a curse and misery to have Children to be sufferers of these
calamityes, which is an Argument to prove that these calamityes will be great,
yea, exceeding great; the consideration whereof does show that you have cause
to weep for your selves, and for your Children, as well as for me.

2. The second Effect will be, that they shall be in such desperation, that
they shall wish the mountains to fall on them, and the hills to cover them,
which is a Scripture expression of desperation, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. desperation
is one of hell Torments. Such terrible days are coming on you and your
Children, which should cause you to weep for your selves and for your Children,
as well as for me.

And all this Jesus Christ does foretell them, with an heart more bleeding with
compassion, over them his dying Church, then over his own dying body, now
bleeding with Furrows on his back, and thorny wounds on his head, and therefore
exhorts them to add this ditty unto their present mournings for him.

4. He gives a demonstrative reason, that such at least, if not far worse
calamityes shall surely come upon them, viz. because they add unto all their
wrath provoking sins, this last and greatest, in putting to death so unjustly,
so cruelly the Lord of glory, the Son of God mightily proved so to be, by many
miracles done among them, and their own King Savior, and Messiah. Which sins
do ripen them for wrath, as dry wood is fitted and prepared for the fire. This
reason is communicated with deep and elegant wisdom, so as that the Enemies
could not easily interpret it, or apply it, so as to stop them in their way, or
hinder them from putting him to death; because that was the work which Jesus
Christ did willingly expose himself unto, being that, upon which the salvation
of Gods Elect depends. Thus Jesus Christ expresses this reasoning, if they
execute these crueltyes upon me an innocent person, as unmeet for such
punishments, as green wood for the fire. Then what shall befall them? who are by
this sin, added to their many other sins, fully ripe for wrath, as dry wood is
fitted for the fire. He does not say how hot the fire shall be, but he says,
what shall be done to the dry? to show that their misery shall be
unexpressible, yea, unconceivable

Sect. 3.
Their arriving at Golgotha, and setting up the Cross.
JOh. 19.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. And he bearing his Cross, went forth into a
place called the place of a scull, which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha.
Where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and Jesus
in the midst. And Pilate wrote a Title, and put it on the Cross: and the
writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. This Title then read many
of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the City, and
it was written in Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin. Then said the chief Priests of
the Jews to Pilate, Write not, the King of the Jews, but that be said, I am
King of the Jews. Pilate answered, What I have written, I have written.

The place out of which they lead him was the City, that he might fulfill the
Types of Scriptures, that he might be a sin offering, to cleanse away the sins
of the people.

The manner of his going was bearing his Cross, bearing the imputation, the
guilt, and the reproach of sin, and the curse of God for it, signified by his
hanging on a Tree.

The place whither they carry him is Golgotha, the place of a scull, where many
dead men's bones weresome heaped up, some scattered about, and that made the
place ceremonially unclean, and that gave name to the place. And as it was
ceremonially a filthy place, so civilly it was no better, a place of reproach,
disgrace, dishonor, a place where the worst and vilest malefactors were
punished, and executed, the filthiest place in the world. There our Lord Jesus
suffered the punishment of our sin, showing us the just desert of our sin.

When they were come to Golgotha, before they laid hands on the blessed person
of our Lord Jesus, they made preparation.

1. They set up the Crosses, the Cross of Jesus they set in the midst, and the
Malefactors, one on the right hand, the other on the left, yet set his Cross in
the chief place, as the greatest Malefactor: which though they did it out of
envy to disgrace him in the vilest manner they could, yet God permitted it so
to be done out of infinite wisdom and justice. For by imputation he was the
greatest of sinners, seeing all sin met in him, was laid upon him, and laid to
his charge, Isai. 53. Their Crosses were set so near together that they could
all speak to each other, as appears in the sequel.

2. They affixed a Title at the top of Jesus Christ his Cross, to show the
cause for which he dyed, Math. 27.37. and Mark. 15.26. whether they did so to
the other it it is not said, but so they did to Jesus Christ, and this matter
Pilate ordered and overruled. And it being an eminent part of the History,
noted by all the Evangelists, and notified all the world over, I shall
therefore distinctly set down the History of it in seven particulars.

1. The author, actor and doer of it, was Pilate, had it been in the power of
the Priests it should have been other then it was, as we shall see in the
History of it.

2. He positively asserts and proclaims him to be the King of the Jews, that
is Christ the Messiah, and Savior of the World.

3. He does make this proclamation to all the World, in these three most
general known languages. Hebrew, Greek, Latin; one or other of which most men
knew.

4. The nearness of that populous and frequented City Jerusalem, gave
opportunity to many of all Nations to read this Title. So that the same thereof
was notified to all the World, and by this it appears that it was inscribed
with great and legible Letters, which might be seen and read at a distance.

5. This inscription was a sharp and sore rebuke to the Jews, to the high
Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, that they should crucify their own Lord,
Savior, and King, whom they looked for to redeem Israel, but they looked with
a misguided Eye, and therefore knew him not.

6. They felt the sting of this rebuke, and winched at it, they were
displeased, and requested Pilate that it might be altered, which might easily
be done by adding a word or two, viz. he says I am King of the Jews, but that
word would have quite altered the sense and the truth.

7. Pilate was resolute and unmovable, What I have written, I have written,
and this resolution of his seems to be well grounded.

1. Because he was convinced of the Truth of it, for Jesus Christ had fully
asserted to him his kingly Office and Pilate with an historical Faith believed
it. 2. He saw that the Jews needed such a check, who had forced him to do that
which he had no heart to have done, only by his respect to Caesar, they
intrapped him.
Thus we see Christ made a Sin-offering, carried out of the city, and sets
up the banner of Salvation in Golgotha: and Golgotha was the first place where
the Grace and Kingdom of Jesus Christ was most solemnly published to all
nations, in the most general known languages: Ye Pilate is a resolute publisher
of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. In Golgotha Jesus Christ suffered, and laid
the foundation of the Gospel Church. In our sacramental celebrations of the
sufferings of Jesus Christ, we converse with Jesus Christ in Golgotha. And to
do that well and effectually, is an eminent work of Christianity.

Sect. 4.
Their cruel Execution done upon the blessed Person of Jesus Christ,
MAth. 27.34, 35, 36. They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with Gall: and
when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink. And they crucified him and
parted his Garments, casting Lots, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
by the Prophet, They parted my garment among them, and upon my vesture did they
cast lots. And sitting down, they watched him there.

When they had made all things ready, they laid hands on his blessed Person,
and the first thing they did was, they gave him the cup of death to drink,
which he tasted, says Matthew, but refused to drink, viz. a draught of it,
says Mark. A taste of that cup was enough. That he should taste death, this was
a significant act, which respects all that followed. This is the Preface of
death, put for the whole. This is that Cup of which Jesus Christ spoke before,
Mat. 20.22, 23. Can ye drink of the Cup that I shall drink? namely this cup of
death, and be baptized with the baptism that I shall be baptized with? viz.
with mine own blood running down my face from the wounds which my thorny crowns
caused. This is the cup that John speaks of, Ioh. 18.11. The Cup which my
Father gives me to drink, shall I not drink it? And this he speaks to quiet
Peter, when he would have fought for him. This is the cup that he had prayed
thrice a little before, that it might pass from him. Math. 26, 39.40. but he
submitted to his fathers will, and now behold he tastes of it. It is the
preface, and first act of his death. The matter of this cup, says Matthew, was
vinegar and gall. Math. 27.34. Mar. 15.23. says Wine mixed with mirrhe, all is
one, for vinegar is sower wine, and that mixed with gall or mirrhe, or with
both. It seems it was the Roman manner of executing Malefactors, for Job.
19.29. There was a vessel of such liquor ready. Whether it was in favor, or
rigor and terror, it is not said, but sure they did nothing in favor to Jesus
Christ, and Christ does bitterly complain of it, Psalm. 69.21. as we shall
afterward see.

2. The time that this act of death was done unto our Lord Jesus, in giving him
the cup of death, was at the beginning of the sixth hour, Mark. 15.25 says it
was the third hour, but that makes no difficulty, it is easily reconciled, for
at the end of the third hour, the sixth hour began, and that lasted till the
ninth hour; so the Jews, they divided the time of the day. And that Mark so
intended, appears, because at this very instant when they give the cup of
death unto Jesus Christ, the Sun blushed, and hid his face under a black veil
of darkness, as being ashamed to look upon this abominable act, that these
wicked men were about; and the exact time of the beginning of this darkness is
expressly said to be at the beginning of the sixth hour, Math. 27, 45. Mark
15.33. This darkening of the Sun was a divine and miraculous Testimony from God
against this wicked fast, which one would think might have terrified them from
proceeding, but seared Consciences feel nothing. This darkness was not an
Eclipse of the Sun, by the interposition of the Moon, because it was the
middle of the Month, and the Moon was about the Full. Again, it was not a
natural Eclipse, because this darkness lasted three hours, which never any
natural Eclipse did, or can do. Besides, Ecclipses are unperceivable at the
beginning and end, but this darkness began as it seems to me in its height
and so continued at the same height, from the beginning to the end. When they
began, and gave Jesus Christ the Cup of death, it grew suddenly dark, and about
the time that Jesus Christ dyed it was light again, both the periods of the
darkness were eminently observable. It was not a total darkness as night is, by
the absence of the Sun, for it is said, Joh. 29.20. many did read the
supersciption upon the Cross of Jesus Christ. Also Jesus saw his mother and the
Disciple whom Jesus loved standing by her, Joh. 19.26. and Jesus saw the
Soldiers dividing his garments, and casting lots on his vesture, as the
Prophesy intimates, Psalm. 22.18. It was an extraordinary and amazing darkness,
to reprehend their violent, cruel, and bloody act, which they were doing, in
laying hands upon the spotless Lamb of God; it was the hour and power of
darkness wherein the Prince of darkness had got down the Lord of glory under
his mercyless hands. It was an universal darkness; for if the body of the Sun
be darkened, the Moon and Stars that receive their light therefrom, must needs
be also in a like proportion darkened and obscured. Some holy Divines say that
this darkning of the sun, was a visible sign of Gods desertion, and hiding his
face from Jesus Christ all the time of his suffering upon the Cross.

3. The wicked Murderers are undaunted, they go on with their work they had in
hand, they strip off his garments, and crucify him naked, (unless they had so
much modesty as to cover shame) for all the Evangelists put the parting of his
garments, at or about the beginning of the time of his hanging o^ the Cross: If
they had his garments, he was naked, putting upon him as much indignity and
shame as they could.

4. They lifted him up on high, that they might fasten him to the cross. This
was typified by lifting up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, as Jesus
Christ himself testifies, Ioh. 3.14. As Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up. Ioh. 8.28. When ye have
lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he. Ioh. 12.32, 33. I,
when I am lifted up from the earth will draw all men unto me. This he said
signifiing what death he should die. By his so dying, he was made conspicuous
to all the world, and he draws all his Elect effectually, and a great part of
the world visibly to follow him. Isai. 45.22. Look unto me all ends of the
earth and be saved.

5. They first nailed his two hands upon the stretch, unto the two wings of the
^ross, Psalm. 22.6. His hands are said to be pierced first before his feet.

6. When his hands were nailed, they let him drop, and hang with the whole
weight of his body upon his pierced hands nailed to the tree. Yea not only so,
but they pulled and stretched him, they struck all his bones and joints out of
joint viz. his Wrists, Elbows, shoulder-blad^s, Hips, Knees, Ancles, Psalm.
22.14, 17. All my bones are out of joint. I may tell all my bones, they look
and stare upon me. They start out of place, upon the wrack. These things are
said in the Prophesy, and done in the history, and so are many thing more
besides these now named.

7. When they had wracked his body into that stretch, then they nailed his
feet, Psalm. 22.6. His feet are said to be pierced and nailed after his hands,
in that wracking and tormenting stretch.

8. Thus he is nailed unto and hanged upon a tree, that is the wood of a tree,
1. Pet. 2.24. And so he was made a curse for us. Gal. 3.12. For it is written,
cursed is every one that hangs on a tree.

9. They set a Watch and Guard about him, Mat. 27.36. Sitting down, they
watched him there. He that had the charge of that, was a Centurion, with his
band of Soldiers; whose Charge was to keep peace and order. It was a prudent
point of the Roman Government, and might be done by such as were not accessory
to the sin, in putting Jesus Christ to death. And we shall hear further of this
Centurion hereafter.

Sect. 5.
Where we shall consider what our Lord Jesus Christ did as he was hanging on
the Cross, viz.
1. He forgave his Persecutors. 2. He took loving and tender care for his
widow mother. 3. He took tender care for the Salvation of the penitent Thief.
4. The rest of the 3. hours, from the 6t. to the 9th. hour, he spent silently
in his most bitter agonies, and at the 9th. hour he spoke four words and then
dyed.
We shall also take notice of the behavior of the Jews all this time; which to
see and hear, was no small part of the sufferings of Jesus Christ.

Luke 23.34. And Jesus said, Father forgive them, they know not what they do.
This is recorded as the first word that Jesus Christ spoke upon the Cross. All
the time they were abusing, wracking and tormenting him, he was silent as a
Lamb: And when he spoke, these were his words, when they had done the worst
they could against him, he forgave them, and prayed his father to forgive them.
Where we have to consider,

1. His own act of forgiving them is employed in an eminency, in his applying
himself to his Father to pardon them. As Jesus Christ has taught us to forgive
our Brother, yea our enemies; so he himself does practice at this eminent time.

2. He prays the Father to forgive them, which he could not have done, unless
he himself ^ad forgiven them: for their offense was against both Father and
son, and therefore both must concur in the pardon.

3. He urges the Father with a charitable and compassionate reason, because
alas, they are in a Temptation, and know not what they do.

4. The Lord does herein with divine wisdom distinguish, viz, that there be
two sorts among his persecutors. Some, we have cause to fear, did know what
they did, as appears, Math. 21.38, this is the heir come let us kill him, and
the inheritance shall be ours. Such as so acted are not within the compass of
Jesus Christ his pardon and prayer.

But the generality of the people acted even as they were led, 1 Cor. 12.2. and
they did like those that followed Absalom, in the simplicity of their hearts,
now such as those Jesus Christ does pity, pardon, and pray for. The chief
Priests and Council did know, or might have known that he was Christ the Son of
the living God; for besides all the proofs that he gave of it, in his life and
Ministry, by doctrine and fulfilling Prophesies, and abundance of miracles, yet
they raged against him, and resolved to kill him, and when they could find no
cause against him, they put him upon it to confess whether he was the Son of
God, or no, he did plainly witness a good confession, that he is the Messiah,
and for that confession only, and for no other cause, saving their own envy
they did condemn him to dye, and rested not till they had accomplished it.
These things being so, it is hard for us to say, that these are of the number
of those that knew not what they did. But the people for the most part were
over persuaded by them, and in their ignorance acted. Pilate also was ignorant
of his Diety, though he believed with an historical faith that he was the King
of the Jews, and had he known his Deity, he would not have crucified him, 1
Cor. 2.8. So that Jesus Christ has opened a door of pardon to his persecutors.
The Centurion that had the command of the watch that day, and how many more God
knows, did that very day receive benefit of this pardon and prayer of Jesus
Christ.

The second act of Jesus Christ upon the Cross, he does with tender love and
care provide for his widow mother, Joh. 19.25, 26, 27. Now there stood by the
Cross of Jesus, his mother, and his mothers sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas,
and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the Disciple
standing by, whom he loved, he says unto his mother, Woman, behold thy Son.
Then says he to the Disciple, Behold thy mother. And from that hour that
Disciple took her unto his own home.

Where see, 1. The title he gives his mother, [woman] which he was wont to do
upon occasion formerly Ioh. 2.4. which he does, not showing any strangeness or
disregard of her grief, whose heart was now pierced as with a sword, but he did
it.

1. To take her heart off from all carnal confidence, in her fleshly interest
in Jesus Christ: to put her to consider that her paps are more blessed by her
interest of says in Jesus Christ, then in giving him suck. Luke 11.27.28.

2. To instruct her and us, that though there be use of natural Relations in
this life, yet it is not so in heaven. Math. 22.30. We shall there be as the
Angels are. Spiritual weanings from creature confidences, are no hurt unto, or
hindrances of right natural affections.

2. He directs his mother to choose an adopted son in his room who is now
departing that he may be unto her in the stead of her natural Son, to do all
offices of a Son unto her. He says to her, Behold thy son, intimating to her
John that was standing by her.

3. He instructs and charge John to do all offices of a good Son unto her
saying to him, Behold thy mother.

4. This charge is set on, because Jesus Christ did thus dignifie him out of
special favor and love. The Disciple whom be loved. And therefore he might
confide in him in committing such a trust and charge unto him.

5. The effect of this act of Jesus Christ was, from that hour he took her into
his own Family, which proves that she was a widow, and had not a family of
her own, now her Son was gone. When Joseph died, or what became of her after
this, nothing is said

The third act of Jesus Christ upon the Cross, he takes a merciful care of
the penitent Thief. Luke 23.39, 40, 41, 42, 43. And one of the Malefactors
which were hanged, railed on him, saying, if thou be Christ, save thy self and
us. But the other answering rebuked him, saying, do thou not fear God, seeing
thou art in the same condemnaion? And we indeed justly; for we receive the due
reward of our deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto
Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said unto
him, verily I say unto thee, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Where see, among the Mockers, Revilers, Railers against Jesus Christ on the
cross, one of the Thieves did as he heard others do, though he was hanging on
his cross under the hand of justice and Execution. Matthew and Mark impute this
to both the Melefactors, because what one in a company does, is in usual
custom imputed to all, unless they bear witness against it. And whether at
first or by the way, both of them might be accessory, we cannot say; but Luke
is particular in this history, showing that one of them was a true penitent:

Where 1. we see what his ill words are that are recorded, viz. if thou be the
Christ, save thy self and us. wherein he vents his unbelief and hardness of
heart, in way of reproach. This he does when he was dying, yea a shameful
death, and that justly, yet so ill minded is he against Jesus Christ.

2. His fellow thief rebuked him, whereby he cleared himself from participation
with him in his sin, which silence in such a case does involve men in. In which
Rebuke see,

1. Do thou not fear God? The words of thy mouth show that the fear of God is
not in thine heart, therefore speak not so wickedly.

2. He gives a reason of this Rebuke and exhortation, because we are condemned
to dye as he is, we are in the same condemnation. They are executing death upon
us, and do thou now vent the vileness of thine heart against him that is
dying with us?

3. Here is the aggravation of this Reason, 1. We are justly put to death, our
sin deserves it. 2. This man whom you revile has done nothing amiss, he is
unjustly condemned, and will you add Revilings?


3. This penitent thief makes his believing address and petition to Jesus
Christ as they hung together on their crosses, where see, 1. The holy divine
title he gives him by Faith, Lord. Great Faith! 2. His Petition, Remember me
when thou come into thy Kingdom, hereby asserting three things, 1. Jesus
Christ is a King. 2. He is going to take possession of it. 3. He beggeth to be
favorably remembered there.



4. The gracious promise of Jesus Christ to him, 1. The thing promised, to be
with me in Paradise. 2. The confirmation of it to strengthen Faith, Verily I
say unto thee. 3. The time when, This day: the day was ended, therefore a dying
Soul is quickly with God.


We see that their crosses stood near, that they could discourse together, as
they hung dying. We see Jesus Christ looses no opportunity to do good to
souls, and converts this man at the last period of his life. Who by rebuking
faithfully his fellows sin, had faith and Repentance quickened, wrought and
raised in his own heart, and prayed for mercy, and was eminently heard in what
he prayed for. He that faithfully rebukes his neighbor, is himself a penitent,
or in the ready way unto it. A clear faith can see through the blackest worldly
clouds.

Sect. 6.
The vile behavior of the Jews, and others, all the time that Jesus Christ was
suffering upon the Cross
THE first act to be observed is, the Executioners parting his Garments before
his face, in his sight casting Lots upon his vesture, Ioh. 19.23, 24 Then the
soldiers when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments (and made four
parts, to every soldier a part) and also his coat: Now the coat was without
seam, woven from the top throughout. They said therefore among themselves, Let
us not rent it, but cast lots for it whose it shall be: that the Scripture
might be fullfilled which says, They parted my raiment among them, and for my
vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the Soldiers did.

All the Evangelists do mention this fact, John does a little amplify it,
therefore I take his words. The actors were those soldiers that were his
executioners. It was done in his s^ght, and may well be numbered among the acts
of their contempt which they did to grieve and afflict him. It is an eminent
accompl^shment of a Prophecy, Psalm. 22.18. which is no small confirmation of
the says of the Church, that ^e is the Messiah of whom David prophes^ed. And
to make evident to our faith, the sovereign Government of God over all men, and
the signal care the Lord ^ad over Jesus Christ, and how ^e ordered every thing
that was done unto him; and that all things came to pass according to the holy
and wise council of God.

But the principal History in this Section, is to show the wicked behavior of
the Jews, all this dark time of Jesus Christ, his hanging on the Cross. The
miracudarkness should have terrified and calmed them, but it was not so. All
sorts of them did mock, flout, insult, blaspheme, Matthew, Mark and Luke do
record it, and show what every sort said, and did.

1. The common people that passed by, and walked about, and stood beholders,
Math. 27.39, 40. and they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads, and
saying, thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it again in three days,
save thy self, if thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross. The manner
of their upbraiding, shows us much unbelief and contempt, as in a few words
and gestures can be expressed. The matter of their upbraiding was an ignorant
reflection upon a false supposition. If they had understood that the body of
Jesus was typified by the Temples, and that though they now destroy that body
of his, yet on the third day it shall rise again, had they I say, understood
this, or had patience to suppress this flout till the third day, they would
have seen the empty folly of it, or might have seen it. The other flout, if
thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross. They tempt the Lord as the
Devil did, Math. 4.3. they would have him prove himself to be the Son of God,
by such an act as they would prescribe. He had sufficiently, yea, abundantly
pro^ed himself to be the Son of God, by such proofs as the wisdom of God saw
fit, but all that would not serve their turn, they believed not, therefore they
would prescribe a sign, and that was to come down off the Cross, and not
suffer death, a devilish motion and ignorant, had Jesus come down from the
cross and not suffered death, the whole work of the salvation of man had been
overthrown. So vain, carnal, ignorant, and devilish were they in their mockings
of our Lord Jesus upon the Cross.

2. The second sort of mockers were the chief Priests, Scribes, and Chieftains
among them, their mockeries are recorded also, Math. 27.41, 42, 43. likewise
also the chief Priests mocking him, with the Scribes and Elders, said, he saved
others, himself he cannot save, if he be the King of the Jews let him now come
down from the Cross, and we will believe him. he trusted in God, let him
deliver him now if he will have him, for he said, I am the Son of God. These
upbraidings are deeper, and more blasphemous, yet ignorant and over hasty
gloryings over him.

1. It is a great boast, that though he had saved others many ways, out of
many perils, and out of the hands of Devils, yet he was not able to save
himself out of their hands, O who are you great Grandees! out of whos^ han^s
Jesus Christ cannot deliver himself? alas for you, had you suppressed this
boast but till the morning after your Sabbath, you might have seen the vanity
thereof, and that he was able to deliver himself out of your hands, and greater
then yours also, even out of the hands of death and Devils too.

2. Jesus had manifested himself to be the Messiah, the King of Israel, by
divine and infallible proofs, but you would not believe, but you can prescribe
to Jesus Christ a better way to prove himself to be the King and Savior of
Israel, and that is by coming down of the Cross, and by that proof you would
believe. Proud man will not be directed by God, unless man may prescribe to God
the way, they will not believe; in their own way they will. Ah weak and proud
dust! Romans 11. 34, 35. who has known the mind of the Lord, who has been his
Counselor? who has first given unto him, and it shall be recompensed to him?
Faith is the operation of God not of man, Faith is not in man's power to create,
nor are the means of begetting it in the hands of man. These men show what
utter strangers they were to says.

3. They say, he trusted in God, and said, I am the Son of God, let God take
him, now if he will have him. This is to blaspheme not only the Son of God, but
also the Father. Do you think that you have him so fast in your hands, that God
cannot deliver him out of your hands, had you patience to have suppressed this
blasphemy but till the morning of the first day, you might have been prevented
of this sin, for you might have seen him mightily proved to be the Son of God
by his Resurrection, and that God has power to deliver him out of your hands,
and greater then yours too.

3. The third sort of mockers were the Soldiers, Luke 23.36, 37. the Soldiers
also mocked him, coming to him, and offering him vinegar, and saying, if thou
be the King of Israel save thy self. Touching their giving him vinegar, we see
by this, it was no act of favor, but such as was accompanied with mocks, of
this more hereafter. Little did these men know that his dying upon the Cross
was the way appointed by God for the salvation both of Jew and Gentile.

4. The fourth and last sort of mockers instanced in the Text, were the Thieves,
Math. 27.44. but of this part of the History we have already spoken.

CAP. XIV.
The last part of the Sufferings of Jesus Christ upon the Cross.
THe whole life of Jesus Christ was a suffering life, the first and the last
parts of his time in this world were fullest of sufferings. the last and
greatest of his sufferings were on the Cross, Phil. 2.8. obedient to the death,
even death upon the Cross, here all his bitter sufferings met upon him, upon
the Cross he fulfilled to answer and satisfy all that was to be said by the
Law against us, Col. 2.14, 15. blotting out the hand writing of Ordinances that
was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing
it to his Cross, and having spoiled Principalities and powers, he made a show
of them openly, tryumphing over them in it, viz, in the work that he did
accomplish on the Cross, in giving full satisfaction to the Law. The full
stream of his sufferings fell on him, on the Cross. Jesus Christ did both
suffer and agonize before the Cross, as appears, Luke 12.50. I have a
Baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished,
Joh. 12.20. now is my Soul troubled, in the garden he had a great Soul Agony,
Luke 22. 44. his body was not yet in a suffering condition, only by way of
simpathy with his agonizing Soul, which so wrought on him as that he swet drops
like blood. But on the Cross all kind of sufferings met together; the whole
stream of wrath against sin fell upon him, and he was under it altogether.

1 His body suffered all those cruel torments and wrackings before mentioned.
2. His mind suffered all the grief they could afflict him withal, by mocks,
reproaches, blasphemies. 3. His Soul suffered the full cup of the Justice of
the Law, and desert of sin,
His great sufferings upon the Cross, he underwent in his near three hours
silence, for after he had forgiven his persecu ors, and provided for the
comfort of his widow mother, and took care of the penitent Thief, he did with
holy patience and silence suffer all that fell upon him until the ninth hour,
and then spoke such words as expressed what he was doing and suffering all this
while.

The sense of cruel pain that his body was in all this while may in a small
measure be apprehended by what has been said in the particular Tortures.

The sufferings of his mind by the reproaches, mocks, blasphemies, taunts,
which he heard and saw all this while of his silence, these were a bitter part
of his suffering as it is expressed in the Prophesy, Psalm. 69.20. reproach has
broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness, and I lookod for some to take
pity, but there was none, and comforters but found none, vinegar and gall was
all that the creatures afford him, ver. 21. The causes of this affliction of
his mind are expressed, ver. 19. by three words, reproach, shame and dishonor,
which are said to have this effect upon him, reproach has broken my heart, an
heart wound is deeper and more terrible then a bodily wound, ungrateful men
pierced and wounded his heart, when he was dying for them. Ovile ingratitude, O
infinite patience and pity! the tongues of men did pierce Jesus Christ to the
heart, as he hung upon the Cross, they so filled his heart with heaviness, that
there was no room for comfort. When he looked for some to pity, and bemoan
him, or help him, but there was none that had power to help him, his mother and
John stood by, and many more no doubt, but alas they could not help him, be
trade the wine press alone, Isai. 63.3.

There is a threefold wounding of the heart by words. 1. A penitential piercing
of the heart by words of conviction. Act. 2.2.37. this is a blessed gospel
wound.

2. There is a wrathful cutting of the heart when reproofs are applied, as
Act. 7. 54. this is a sinful wound. But 3. There is a sorrowful piercing of
the heart by words of reproach, and this was the heartbreaking sorrow that
Jesus Christ suffered upon the Cross.

Object. But can the words of a man so pierce the innocent heart of Jesus
Christ?

Answ. Jesus Christ stood in the stead of those that were guilty, and therefore
divine justice set them home to his heart to the uttermost. None can tell the
force of words till he have experienced the same. Words are the means whereby
Souls have converse and communion. Words carry the mind, heart, judgment,
notion, affection, passion of one party to another. If we use Gods words, and
apply them right, they both wound and heal, and are most wholesome. But they
were men's words that broke the heart of Jesus Christ. When words flow from
anger, envy, hatred wrath, revenge, such words are full of the breath and
spirit of Satan and make cruel wounds upon the heart: and such wounds were made
in the heart of Jesus Christ. Some sorts of wounding words did especially
pierce the heart of Jesus Christ,

1. When they upbraided him, Where is thy God? Psalm. 42.3, 4. Mat. 27.45 Psalm.
22.7.

2. When they forge a Lie against him, and impose it upon him, Psalm. 119.69.

3. Ungrateful saucy words against him that is beneficent, Ioh. 10.32. Many
good works have I done, for which of them do you stone me? So Psalm. 35.3, 4,
11, 12.

Among ungrateful men, abusers of Jesus Christ, two men are to be wondered at,
and they are Judas and Malchus.

Sect. 2.
The last part of the Sufferings of Jesus Christ when he dyed for our
Redemption is recorded by all the four Evangelists
I desire the Reader to turn to all these Scriptures, and first read them. Mat.
27.45. ad 55. Mark. 15.33. ad 40. Luke 23.44. ad 49. Joh. 19.28. ad 38.


OVT of all these texts together, we may gather these two particulars.

1. The history of the three hours darkness, which was the time, most of it of
Jesus Christ his silence, wherein his soul did agonize under the punishment of
our sin, which punishment was extended to the uttermost, even until justice
was fully satistied.

2. What was said and done and acted, at the end of the 6t: hour, at the
beginning of the ninth hour, viz.

1. The first word which Jesus Christ spoke in terrible manner was, Eli, Eli,
lamasabachtani.

2. The second word which Jesus Christ spoke was, I thirst. Both these words
were spoken by him soon after each other, both were uttered before they gave
him vinegar and gall: which act Matthew and Mark relate to be done upon his
speaking the first word. John relates it to be done upon his speaking the
second word. Therefore both those words were spoken before that act was done.

The effect of both these words upon the bystanders was, Some ran, took a
spung, gave him galled vinegar, of which he tasted. Others mistook him; and
said, he calls to Elias to deliver him.


3. The third word Jesus Christ spoke when he had tasted the vinegar, was, It
is finished.

4. The fourth and last dying word which Jesus Christ spoke, was, Into thy
hands I commit my Spirit, and with that word breathed out his Soul.

Sundry remarkable effects of his death, of which in their place.

In this silent agony of Jesus Christ upon the cross, he suffered all the
punishment and curse which sin has brought upon man, Gal. 3.13. he was made a
curse for us, viz. by suffering all the punishment of the curse, 2 Cor. 5.21.
He was made sin for us, viz. an Offering to bear the guilt and punishment of
sin, though he knew not sin, so as to do it. Isai. 53. This whole famous
Prophecy, declares this great point, Psalm. 69.26. whom thou have smitten.
Col. 1.2. Having made peace by the blood of his cross. 1. Cor. 15.3, 4. Christ
dyed for our sins occording to the Scriptures Dan 9.24. He has made an end of
sin, viz. He has satisfied justice for the first sin of Adam, and for all sin
that has followed from the same. He has taken away the condemning power of
sin, by the authority of the Law, and brought it under another law or Covenant,
viz. of Grace. The first Covenant of works does not overruled sin, in its
condemning power; but Jesus Christ does overruled it by the New Covenant, under
which he does rule all the Elect of God. And that he might accomplish all this,
he has suffered all the essential punishment of the curse, viz. all sinless
punishment, all that the justice of the law requires, and with his sufferings
justice was fully satisfied, and all this he suffered for us. Isai. 53.3, 4, 5,
6. etc.

There be some accidental parts and points of punishment, which fall upon man
but cannot fall upon Jesus Christ, which I will touch in a few instances.

Instance 1. Eternity of punishment befalls man, Math. 25.41, 46. Everlasting
fire, Everlasting punishment, Mark. 9.44, 45, 46, 48. the worm dies not, nor
is the fire quenched. But this is so, because of the inability of a finite
Creature to satisfy infinite justice. But Jesus Christ is God-man, and
therefore he is able to satisfy infinite justice in a finite time, because he
is an infinite person, and therefore his sufferings are of infinite value, his
sufferings make up in value, what they be short in time of duration. He
su^fered infinite punishment, wrath and curse, in a finite short time. As the
first Adam if he had stood, though a finite person, should have finished
perfect active obedience to the Law, in a finite time, because he was a person
fitly qualified by God, for such a service, being furnished with the perfect
image of God. So the second Adam did in a finite time finish all obedience to
the Law, both active and pa^sive, and fulfilled our Covenant of works, being an
infinite person, and infinitely qualified for that work, having the Spirit
without measure, an infinite person suffered and obeyed satisfactorily, in a
finite time, he had Gods image perfectly, and therefore perfectly fitted and
qualified for that great work. Thirty three years and an half were requisite,
wherein Jesus Christ might perform and fulfill perfect obedience to the Law,
both active and passive; and perform all that which Justice did require at the
hand of man.

The middle part of his pilgrimage had less of passive, and more exercised in
active obedience, the beginning and end of his life were more filled with
sufferings; though every act of Jesus Christ had both active and passive
obedience in it, yet one, sometimes more illustrious then the other. From his
entrance into the garden, till he dyed, was about twenty hours, or near so
much, and that was the chiefest time of his suffering Torment; but his
humiliation continued his whole life through. And when Jesus Christ did dye, if
he had dyed eternally, then d ath had overcome him. But he has overcome death,
and saw not corruption though he dyed, because he rose again the third day.

Instance 2. The place of man's suffering Torment is Hell, Luke 16.23. and in
Hell he lift up his eyes, being in Torment. But Jesus Christ suffered all his
sufferings on Earth, how then did he suffer all the punishment due to man?

Answ. There is a penal Hell, and local Hell, penal hell has two branche
separation from God, sense of Torment.
Math. 25.41. depart from me ye cursed* that is the punishment of loss, into
Everlasting fire, that is punishment o^ sense.

And wheresoever these two are inflicted, there is penal hell, though it be not
in local Hell. These two kinds of punishment are chiefly inflicted on the
damned, in local Hell, sometimes a good measure of it in this life. But on
Jesus Christ all was inflicted on Earth, where sin is committed. And great
reasons might be offered why it must be so.

2. The place of punishment is not of the Essence, or an Essential part of the
punishment of sin; the judge may choose and appoint the place, where the
punishment shall be inflicted and executed. It was an act of Gods infinite
wisdom to appoint and order that Jesus Christ should suffer the punishment of
sin in this world among men, it is most agreeable to the Covenant of works that
it should be so; it is great love to his Elect that it is so, it is not yet
revealed where the place of Hell is, or shall be. Some great divines have
thought, that after the day of Judgment, the Earth shall be the place of Hell,
that the place of committing sin, shall be the place of punishing of it. Sure
it was so with Jesus Christ, he suffered the punishment of sin on Earth, where
sin was committed.

Instance 3. It is a great part of the punishment of sin, inflicted on man,
that he is dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1, 5. and Genesis 2.17. one part of this dying, is
to be dead in sin. But this death Jesus Christ suffered not, how then did he
suffer all the punishment of sin?

Answ. 1. To be dead in sin is personal defilement, by the loss of Gods image,
this could not befall Jesus Christ, God has excepted sin, Heb. 4.15. Jesus
Christ his humane nature was like unto us in all things, except sin, he could
not sin, therefore he could not be dead in sin, he was every way fitted to be a
sacrifice for sin, and he did dye for sin without any defilement by it. He dyed
for s^n to satisfy justice, if he had dyed in sin, he should have offended
Justice thereby, and then how should he have satisfied Justice. The Lamb of
God, that was to be a sacrifice for sin, was to be spotless and without
blemish, had he dyed in sin, he should have been a spotted sacrifice, and
unaccepted.

2. That which Jesus Christ could neither be, do, nor suffer without sin, that
he neither was, did, nor suffered. The Lamb that suffered for sin, to take it
away, must himself be without sin, and must suffer only that which he is
capable to suffer without sin. To satisfy justice for sin, by dying for sin,
that was the work which Jesus Christ performed, and Justice was satisfied with
it.

3. To be dead in sin, final separation from God, desperation, etc. neither the
excellency of his person, nor his glorious production, nor the quality of his
Office, nor the work which he had undertaken, could admit any such thing to
befall him. But all the Essential punishment due to the sin of man, he was
willing to suffer to the utmost, Heb. 10.5. and did so, to the full
satisfaction of Justice. Justice required that he should dye; but did not
require that he should sin, nor did Justice require that he should dye
eternally; if he have once paid the debt of death, Justice was satisfied, and
gave him a discharge, that he might rise a Conqueror.

4. There have been four ways of the production of man. 1. Adam was created by
God, out of the dust, and he was made spotless. 2dly. Eve was created by God
out of the rib of man, and she was made spotless, though the weaker vessel.

3. All the stock of mankind are produced by the conjunction of man and woman,
and all defiled with sin.

4. Jesus Christ was produced of a woman without man, by the power of the Holy
Ghost, and he is spotless, full of grace and truth, and hereby was a capable
subject to have sin imputed to him, and to be made a sacrifice to God for sin.
Jesus Christ suffered all sinless punishment. But when sin is punished with
sin, that punishment Jesus Christ is incapable to suffer, nor is it a necessary
kind of punishment, to be suffered in way of satisfaction for sin. Because it
is secondary, a consequent of sin.

Instance 4. Man is punished with total and final separation from God, and
despair. Jesus Christ was not so punished.

Answ. Jesus Christ suffered dereliction, and separation from God, (as we shall
anon see) to the utmost that was possible and necessary, for the satisfaction
of Justice, but total and final was neither necessary nor possible; and had it
been so, then sin and death had overcome him. But he has overcome sin and
death, and satisfied justice, which could not have been, if he had totally and
finally sunk under it.

Sect. 3.
Touching the first word Jesus Christ spoke about the ninth hour.
THe Essential parts of the sinless punishment of sin, which Jesus Christ
sufffered, are two, the punishment of loss, and the punishment of sense, which
appears, Math. 25.41, 46. depart ye cursed into Everlasting fire.

The punishment of loss firstly, chiefly falls upon the Soul, which nextly
has communion with God, and the body herein suffers secondarily, by
participation, and sympathy with the Soul, as it was in the garden, where the
body was under no sense of punishment saving by participation with the Soul,
and that was so deep, that it made him sweat drops like blood abundantly. So
that the punishment of loss is a Soul Agony.

The punishment of sense does firstly, nextly fall upon the body, and reaches
to the Soul secondarily, by its participation with the body. The efficacy of
both these together met upon Jesus Christ, when he was upon the Cross, to the
uttermost extremity.

First, the punishment of loss, desertion, and dereliction of God fell upon
him, and he conflicted with it in his three hours silence. The issue, up-shot,
last stroke, and finishing whereof, Jesus Christ uttered and expressed in that
exclamatory, roaring, expostulation, Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani.

I call it exclamatory, because the Evangelists so express it, he cried out
with a great voice, I call it roaring, because the Prophesy so calls it,
Psalm. 22.1. the voice of my roaring, when he spoke these very words. The
original words are more full

I call it expostulation, because the words are expostulatory, why have thou
forsaken me? for opening this, here be four considerations.

1. The question springs not out of doubting, or not knowing the cause of his
sufferings, and of Gods dereliction and forsaking of him, as if some strange
and unlooked for matter had befallen him. Far be it from us to think so! Jesus
Christ knew that he was now under the curse of the Law, under the execution of
Justice, under the wrath of God as our Surety. There be diverse kinds of
Rhetorical questions, in all discourses and writings, and many in the
Scriptures, see a taste, if any please to turn to, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. Romans 8.35. 1
Cor. 12.29, 30. Psalm. 2.1. and a thousand more. These are Rhetorical questions
to express in a word some great matter, that would require many words to
express it at large, nay, more then can be expressed or conceived. Such is this
expostulatory question of Jesus Christ, when he was in the depths of misery,
why have thou forsaken me? to express the extreme dolor and bitter sense that
he had of the Fathers dereliction of him, his Fathers forsaking him was the
bitterest cup that ever he tasted. He tasted the vinegar cup of death, but one
drop of this is more bitter then all their gall and vinegar; to teach man what
a dreadful thing it is to be separated from God and to assure us that he did
bitterly experience what it is: it is penal Hell. This question is to express
the uttermost and deepest degree of desertion, next unto desperation, Psalm.
22.11. trouble and anguish, and none to help. It is to express, that it is
infinitely more deep then humane nature could have born, had it not been
supported by the divine nature, unto which he was p^rsonally and inseparably
united, he hung over, and looked down into the bottomless gulf of separation
from God. This desertion was not total, nor final, neither could it be so, nor
did it need to be so, because Justice was infinitely satisfied with that
measure that it was. But it was to the uttermost degree next unto total, so
much as it could be, or needed to be.

2. The second consideration, he doubles his outcry with a claiming and
catching hold on his Interest in God, saying, Eli, Eli, my God, my God, like a
man sinking into the bottomless deeps of loss and desparation. The words hold
forth such a frame of heart, which is so expressed in the Prophecy, Psalm.
69.2. I sink in deep mire where there is no standing, I am come into deep
waters, where the floods overflow me, O m^ God help me. A sinking man will
catch hold on a thread or line of interest to hold by: For his interest in God,
neither did, nor could fail his humane nature, to a total sinking. The means he
used to claim and hold his interest was, strong cries and Prayers; My God, My
God, Heb. 5.7. who in the days of his flesh when he had offered up Prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him
from death, and was heard in that he feared. The full streams of vindictive
justice were so inflicted upon him, that it almost quenched and drowned the
sight and sense of his interest in God, therefore he so earnestly catches at
it.

3. The third consideration is that the interrogation is partly supplicatory
unto his God; to whom he speaks as if he should have said, will thou not help
me, O my God? Why have thou forsaken? O my God, help me! So it is expressed in
the Prophecy Psalm. 69.1, 14, 15. Save me O God for the waters are come in unto
my soul: deliver me out of the mire and let me not sink, let me be delivered
out of the deep waters. Let not the water floods overflow me, neither let the
deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. Distress and
suffering will teach Rhetoric to utter pathetical expressions to express the
passion of the sufferer, and to move the compassion of the Spectators. God
suffered his humane nature to sink to the uttermost, even to the next step and
degree unto perdition. And this makes him to cry out, Why d^st thou delay to
help me? O I am almost gone. Psalm. 40.13. Be pleased O Lord to deliver me, O
Lord make have to help me. Psalm. 22.19. Be not thou far from me O Lord, O my
Strength have to help me.

4. Consider, this was the last act, and lowest step of his desertion; for now
Justice was satisfied as to this part of the punishment of sin, Heb. 5.7. He
was heard in that he feared. Justice now turned the soul, and released the
rigor of his execution. The divine nature upheld him: the father heard and
relieved him. He finished his soul Agony, as himself who felt it does express.
Ioh. 19.28. Jesus knowing that all things were accomplished, viz. in this point
or part of the punishment of loss: as in the garden agony he had interims, that
humane nature might not be oppressed all at once: so was it on the cross, he
had an intermission, a cessation of this part of the punishment of sin, which
indeed was the greatest, that he might attend unto the punishment of sense,
which lay upon his body; which though it ceased not till it had killed him (as
will anon appear) yet he dyed in a more calm and sedate frame of Spirit,
seeing his Fathers face smiled on him again. Wonderful instructions do here
offer themselves, but I pass on.

Sect. 4.
The second word which Jesus Christ spoke about the ninth hour.
JOh. 19.28. Jesus knowing that all things were accomplished, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst. This is the second word which
Jesus Christ spoke after his three hours silent Agony, here be two motives that
moved our Lord to speak this word.

1. Knowing that all things were accomplished, in that which was the first and
chief part of his suffering, in the punishment of loss, in his Soul Agony;
therefore now he gave chief attendance to his suffering of the punishment of
sense, which firstly was inflicted, and lay upon his body, and is aptly,
eminently expressed in this word of sense, I thirst.

2. The second motive to this expression is, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, viz. Psalm. 69.21. where he does complain of the bitterness of the
punishment of sense, under those two natural instances of hunger and thirst,
and the bitterness of all the relief that man afforded him, it was nothing but
gall and vinegar.

In this word I thirst, he speaks like a Conqueror, that comes off a
Conqueror from a sore battle with a wonderful victory, yet his nature so
spent with thirst, which is caused by the violence and extremity of the
battle, and by wounds deep and great received in the battle, that he is ready
to dye with the sense of his fainting nature; which deadly and extreme sense of
dying pain, makes him cry out I thirst. A like example of this painful issue
of a glorious victory and conquest, we see in Sampson, Judge. 16.18, 19.

1. The Conqueror slew a thousand of his Enemies with the jaw bone of an^ Ass,
never man had the like victory.

2. He was so spent in the fight that he was ready to dye for thirst.

3. Here was the difference betwixt Jesus Christ and Sampson, Sampson was
relieved by God, and revived. Jesus Christ had no relief, save what his Enemies
gave him, and that was nothing but gall and vinegar, and so he dyed.

The first word Jesus spoke, held forth and expressed the bitterness of the
punishment of loss, which is the first and chief part of the punishment of sin.

The second word does hold forth and express the bitterness of the punishment
of sense, which is the second part of the punishment of sin. Jesus Christ felt
such extremity of pain and grief in this last Agony, that his humane nature was
ready to sink and dye, for want of some relief, and therefore cried out I
thirst, Isai. 53.5. he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. By this one word, I thirst, Jesus Christ shows that he
suffered the punishment of sense, unto the uttermo^t extremity, even the full
desert of sin: in explication of it I shall propose six propositions.

Prop. 1. The punishment of loss fell firstly on his Soul, on his body
secondarily, by participation, because so is our Communion with God, firstly,
the Soul has communion with him, the body secondarily, and as Communion with
God is acted, so separation from God in way of punishment is inflicted and
felt, by a spiritual sense. The punishment of sense falls firstly on the
body, and reaches the Soul secondarily by participation, therefore the torment
of sense, and the sense of his torment is fitly expressed by this word of
craving relief for his fainting body.

Prop. 2. Water, moisture is the chief and greatest part of aliment and
sustenance of the body, and therefore thirst is first and chiefly felt and
complained of, a^ we see in Sampson, and Dives in Hell cried for a drop of
water; thirst is a sinless punishment, which Jesus Christ suffered to the
utmost extremity, even till it killed him.

Prop. 3. Bread is the staff of life, it is the most solid sustenance,
therefore nature spent with pain, grief, and torment, and such like
punishments, does also greedily hunger, and vehemently desire, and crave for
solid sustenance, as well as for moisture, to cool and moisten, so did Jesus
Christ in this his last Agony, express his hunger, as well as his thirst, and
both together do express the fullness of his extreme sense of torment, which he
felt in this last finishing Agony, hunger is a sinless punishment, which Jesus
Christ suffered to the uttermost extremity; until it killed him.

His expression of his sense of hunger is not recorded in the History, but it
is in the Prophesy, Psalm. 69.21. they also gave me gall for meat, and in my
thirst they gave me vinegar for drink. He cried for, and needed both kinds of
relief, in the sense of the want whereof he was ready to dye, and quickly did
dye; extremity of hunger and thirst are among the greatest of torments: when he
had no other relief to spent nature, then gall and vinegar, he presently dyed.

Prop. 4. It would set forth his extreme sense of pain and torment which his
body felt for the space of about twenty hours, to gather up a few Instances of
the su^fering of Soul, mind and body, that he passed through, from his entrance
into the garden, until he dyed on the Cross; they were tormenting him both in
body and mind all that time, without ministering unto him, that we know off,
either food or rest. He suffered both loss of blood, and great pain by their
twice cruel whippings, and twice crowning him with thorns, and being withal
parched and burnt with heat, which made him complain, Psalm. 69.3. my throat is
dried, he sweat in the garden, but now his moisture is turned into the drought
of Summer, Psalm. 22.15. my strength is dried up lik^ a potsheard, and my tongue
cleaves to my jaws, And thou have brought me to the dust of death. All these
and such like expressions se^ forth his extreme sense of misery, through want
of relief, especially his want of supply of moisture, as being a chief
sustenance, he is therefore pleased in the history to express all by that one
word I thirst; all these pains are sinless punishments, which he suffered unto
the uttermost extremity, until they killed him. A painful violent death he
suffered.

Prop. 5, Grief is exceedingly drying, and expensive to nature, Psalm. 31 9, 10.
Isa^, 6.7. and 73.21. Job. 30.25. Grief wastes the body, pierces the heart,
wounds the soul; and many such effects there be of grief: and now Jesus
Christ had a juncture of the greatest griefs in the world, all met together
upon him like mountains of sorrow, and terror. All these are sinless
punishments of sin, which he suffered to the uttermost extremity, until they
killed him.

Prop. 6. All this pain, grief, horror which his humane adversaryes did inflict
upon him, were infinitely sharpened by the power of vindictive justice, and laid
upon him as our Surety; so that his punishment of sense, was to the uttermost
extremity, until they killed him.

The effect of these two words upon the bystanders was twofold, First, they
gave him gall and vinegar in the extremity of his pain, to add unto his
torment, not to relieve him, which act is thus expressed.

1. One run to do it, that he might be sure to make him taste it before he was
quite dead.

2. He took a Sponge, there ready for that purpose, after the Roman manner of
tormenting Malefactors.

3. He bound the sponge upon a reed with a branch of hysope, which were all
ready for that purpose.

4. He dipped it in the vessel of galled vinegar that was ready there.

5. He lifted it to his mouth, and caused him to taste, and he tasted it.

The second effect was, a mistake in some of his word Eli, Eli, saying he
calls for Elias to come and deliver him. Whether this were a real mistake of
ignorance, or whether it was done in mockery as some think, I say not: but this
is sure, Luke 23.36, 37. The Soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and
offering him vinegar, and saying, if thou be the King of the Jews save thy
self. The end and intent of this giving him gall and vinegar was to afflict
him, because Jesus Christ so complained of it, Psalm. 69.21. The complaint was
in the Prophecy, but the thing was done in the History.

Sect. 5.
The third word which Jesus Christ spoke upon the Cross about the 9th. hour.
JOh. 19.30. When Jesus had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished.

Quest. What is finished? his Sufferings were not yet finished, for he had yet
to dye: the great sacrifice was not yet fully offered, the Lamb of God was not
yet quite slain. But the bitter punishment of loss was finished; vindictive
justice is satisfied in that part of his Sufferings; Gods desertion of him,
which he so bitterly roared out under, was released. His bitter cry Eli Eli
lamasabachtani, was the last distressing act of that suffering. upon this last
and most bitter exclamation, he felt a cessation of the rigor of justice: God
turned his face with favor toward him; he felt a cessation of his Soul agony
under the punishment of loss. But the punishment of sense continued upon him,
and did so till he dyed: that part of the punishment of sin did finally kill
him. His death was more quiet and Lamb-like, because the punishment of loss was
finished, the great test brunt of the suffering for sin was finished. And that
this is the true and right interpretation of the word, [It is finished]
appears by John who records this Speech, v. 30. does also say v. 28. Jesus
knowing that all things were accomplished, viz. In his soul agony under divine
desertion, that the Scripture might be fullfilled, said, I thirst: showing us
that Jesus Christ (who felt the punishment, and therefore best knew) he felt the
punishment of Loss finished, before he expressed his sense of the continuance
of the punishment of sense: and when he had expressed his the continuance of
the punishment of sense, by that word, I thirst, now that Scripture was
fullfilled, Psalm. 69 21. viz. that the sense of pain, hunger and thirst were
still upon him: and when the only relief that man did afford him was gall and
vinegar, then he uttered that word, [It is finished.] viz. the punishment of
loss is finished, and that Scripture is fullfilled that says, the punishment
of sense does still lie upon him, and will do so until it kill him. Mortal
pains were upon him under the punishment of sense, when he spoke that word: and
those pains quickly after the fullfilling the Scripture about the gall and
vinegar, did kill him.

Sect. 6.
The last Words which our dear Lord Jesus spoke in this World, his dying words.
LVk. 23.46. And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father, into
thy hands I commend my Spirit; and having said thus, he gave up the Ghost.

1. He cried with a loud voice, because though the punishment of loss was
finished, yet the ^^nishment of sense was still upon him; to his death he cried
out under the weig^^ o^ it, and it killed him.

2. He beheld his Fathers face returned in favor to him, who erst while had
hid his face from him, which drew out that doleful complaint, Lamasabachtbani;
but now his father smiled on him again.

3. He does breathe out his soul into his fathers bosom in that word, Father
into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and so he obediently dyed, Phil. 2.8.
Obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross.

The Lamb of God is slain, the Sacrifice for sin is offered and accepted; Isaac
is sacrificed, not only in Voto but Facto; not only in will and purpose, as
Abraham, and Isaac did, but in real performance. This has God the Father, and
God the Son performed for our sakes, to redeem and save us. Admire! Admire!
Admire! unto all eternity admire!

CAP. XV.
Of the admirable works of God which accompanied the Death of Jesus and his
reverent burial, and of his sufferings after he was dead and buried
If the Reader please to turn to, and read these Texts of Scripture, he shall
find many admirable works of God, that accompanied the death of Jesus Christ.
Math 27.51. ad finem. Mark 15.38. ad finem. Luke 23.47. ad finem. John 19.31.
ad finem.


The admirable works of God that accompanied the Death of our Lord Jesus
Christ, are these, 1. An Earthquake, mentioned only by Matthew. 2. The Vail of
the Temple rent from top to bottom. Math. Mark. 3. The rocks rent. Math. 4.
The Graves, viz. that were in the rocks, broken open; many Bodies of Saints
which slept, arose and came out of the graves after the resurrection of Christ,
and went into the holy city and appeared to many. Math. 5. The Sun brightned
suddenly at the ninth hour, about the time when Jesus Christ dyed. Math. Mar.
Luke 6. The death of Jesus Christ being sooner then Pilate and the Jews looked
for, and before the Thieves, it prevented that part of the Romish and Jewish
cruelty, which was intended, in breaking his legs: yet they pierced his side
with a spear, and there came forth blood and water. Ioh. 19.31. ad 38. 7. The
Centurion that had charge of the watch that day, was converted. Mat. Mar. Luke.
8. Many more of those upon the Watch, and of the Spectators, were convinced, if
not converted. Math. Luke.


1. Touching the Earthquake; God has made two great changes of Ecclesiastical
Polity, since the beginning of the world, and both of them have been expressly
accompanied with Earthquakes. When the Lord laid by the ancient Paternal
Government, and erected the Polity of Moses, in the national Church of Israel,
God appeared with terrible Earthquakes. Exodus 19.

And now the Lord being about to lay aside the Mosaical Polity, and erect the
Gospel Polity of the Ecclesiastical Kingdom of Jesus Christ, it is accompanied
with Earthquakes.

2. The vail of the Temple was rent from top to bottom, probably it was
effected by he Earthquake, and the accomplishment of the Prophesy which the
Apostle makes mention of, Heb. 12.26, 27, 28, 29. whose voice then shook the
Earth, but now he ^ath promised saying, yet once more I shake not Earth only,
but also Heaven. And this word yet once more, signifies the removing of those
things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which
cannot be shaken, may remain, etc. The Prophecy which the Apostle quoteth is
Hag. 2.6, 7. which is eminently fulfilled by God, lay^ng aside the Tabernacle
and Temple worship, which were the works of men's ^ands, by the Commandment of
the Lord, and in their stead instituting the Souls of believers to be his
Temple, and his visible Church to be built of such materials, who are living
stones laid and built upon the Rock of Ages, even Jesus Christ, by ^ith, and in
the Communion of such a spiritual Temple, has the Lord erected ^is Gospel
polity. By this rending of the Vail, Christ has opened Heaven for ^ll that
will come unto him, Gentiles as well as Jews, Ephesians. 2.14. he is our peace, ^ho
has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of Partition between
us, ^iz. the wall of Partition between the Court of Gentiles and of the Jews.
The ^postle probably would not say, he has rent the vail, because he would not
pro^oke the Jews, but it is the same thing that he here speaks.

3. The Rocks rent

4. the graves were opened.

These works of God do ascribe unto Christ the power of the Resurrection, and
the removing ^l impediments either of his own Resurrection, or of the
Resurrection of all mankind Joh. 5.25, 28, 29. verily, verily, the hour is
coming, and now is, that the dead shall ^ear the voice of the Son of God, and
they that hear shall live, ver. 28. marvail not at this, for the hour is
coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth, they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil to the Resurrection of damnation.

5. The Sun did suddenly, perceptibly brighten about the ninth hour, which was
the time of the death of our Lord Jesus; which manifests, that this darkness
was not an effect of any natural causes, but of the divine power of God. And
tends much to the confirmation of the apprehension of such Reverend Divines,
as think, that the darkening of the Sun, was a sign of Gods hiding his face
from Jesus Christ in his spiritual desertion, through his Agony upon the Cross,
which Agony being finished, the Sun brightned, and Gods face of favorable
acceptance turned unto him, and then he breathed out his Soul into his Fathers
bosom.

6. The timous and speedy death of Jesus, by the wonderful and merciful
providence of God prevented that Roman and Jewish cruelty in breaking his legs.
That he dyed sooner then they looked for, or then malefactors were wont to die,
or then the Thieves did, appears evidently, because Pilate marvailed, and
would not believe Joseph, who begged his dead body, until he called the
Centurion that had charge of the watch, and he affirmed that he was dead. We
see that the Romans used cruelty in putting malefactors to death by long
tortures, Math. 18.34. executors are called tormentors, and when they desire to
dispatch them, they broke their legs, to torture them to death, by torturing
their Limbs furthest from their heart, when as a touch upon the head, would
presently finish their life, but Christ escaped this, by a divine hand.

The occasion that moved Pilate to command, that they should be so killed, and
hastened to their death, was, the Jews request that their legs might be broken,
the reason which they proposed was, because of the approach of the Sabbath, and
it was the time of their Passover feast.

God commanded in the institution of the Passover, that a bone thereof should
not be broken, Exodus 12.46. Numb. 9.12. which the Jews religiously observed in
a^l ages and generations, but never knew the reason of this branch of the
divine Institution. The infinite prescience of God had respect unto this
history of the sufferings of Christ, which we are now treating off. These Jews
possibly might see the reason of this branch of this Institution; I dare not
say they did see it because the Text does not say so. But if they had any such
intent to get his legs broke to blemish him, who is the true Paschal Lamb? Then
I say

1. Their wickedness was the greater, because it was against light.

2. The infinite wise and merciful providence of God, is so much the more to be
adored and admired in their disappointment.

3. The disappointing and preventing of the breaking of his bones, is a mighty
striving of God to convince the Jews that Jesus is the Paschal Lamb.

4. The fulfilling of the Scriptures in preserving his bones from being broken,
is a powerful confirmation of the says of the Church to the Worlds end, that
Jesus Christ is our Paschal Lamb, in whom we believe for salvation. When the
Soldiers came to break their legs, and did break the legs of the two Thieves,
Jesus Christ being already dead, they did not break his legs, yet one of them,
without cause, neither knowing nor caring what he did, only to insult over his
dead body, took a Spear, and pierced his left side. It appears to be so, by
that which issued out of the wounds viz. blood from the wound in his flesh, and
water out of the pericardium, which he pierced with his Spear, here we are to
admire the all-ruling wisdom of God, who by this act has provided a wonderful
confirmation of the faith of the Church, that both our Sacraments are founded
in the death of Christ, the water in Baptism, and blood celebrated in the
Supper, confirm the faith of the Church to the worlds end, 1 John 5.6, 8.
Again, by this act they did in part fulfill that Prophesy, Zech. 12.10. they
pierced his side, O Lord Jesus make haste to accomplish the other part of this
gracious Prophesy, which says, And I will pour upon the house of David, and
upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of supplications,
and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for
him as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as
one that is in bitterness for his first born. In that day there shall be a
great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddo, etc.

7. Another memorable work of God that attended the death of Jesus Christ, was
the conversion of the Centurion, who had the charge of the watch that day,
where see, first, The means of his conversion, viz. the dying words of Jesus,
the Earthquake, and other things, as the darkening of the Sun, and the
brightning of the same, the rending of the Rocks, etc.

2. We see the signs of his conversion, 1. He feared greatly. 2. He made
confession of his faith, first, in the Deity of Christ, surely he is the Son of
God, 2dly, in the innocence and justness of his person, Surely he was a just
man.

8. Many more of those upon the watch, and of the spectators were convinced, if
not converted, when they saw what was done, they returned, smiting on their
breasts.

Sect. 2.
Of the Reverent Buryal of the Body of our Lord Jesus.
THe buryal of Jesus Christ is a great point in Religion, both in the Prophesy,
and in the History, and in the application. In the History of this act of
Christian love, see first the persons that did with due reverence perform this
service to the dead body of our Lord. Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, they
would not leave his blessed Corpse to the rude disposal and usage of Hangmen,
and Executioners. But with their own hands they did reverently lay him into a
Tomb. These two men were honorable men, for they were both of them of the
Council, but consented not with them in their condemning of Jesus, Luke 23.51.
the same did not consent to the Council, and deed of them, it is like that
neither Joseph nor Nicodemus were sent unto, or called unto their Clandestine
night Court, wherein Jesus was condemned, they knew that they would oppose,
they had experience of Nicodemus his opposing them; how many more of the
Council might be absent from that night Court, is not said, it is like that it
was carried on by a Faction, that adhered to that violent young man Caiaphas,
and his Father in law Annas. For in the History we find all the Council
present, to be of one mind, therefore neither of these two worthy men were with
them. These were both holy men, and true Disciples of Jesus Christ, yet
formerly they both of them had been timorous professors, Joh. 19.38, 39. Joseph
a Disciple of Jesus Christ, but secretly for fear of the Jews. And Nicodemus
who at first came to Jesus by night, see a little what the Scripture says of
these, first of Nicodemus, John. 3.1, 2, 3. etc. he came to Jesus by night, he
was a well minded man, but weak in knowledge, Joh. 7.51, 52, 53. Nicodemus
says unto them, (he that came to Jesus by night being one of them) does our
law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he does? they answered and
said unto him, art thou also of Galilee? search and look, for out of Galilee
arises no Prophet, and every man went into his own house. Here we see
Nicodemus was grown more valiant, and appeared openly in the Council, on the
behalf of Jesus Christ, and though he suffered a ch^ck for his labor, yet what
he said, saved the cause of Jesus Christ for that time. And now when Jesus
Christ was persecuted to the death, and crucified, his courage still arose, and
his love abounded, for he joined with good Joseph, and brought an hundred pound
weight of Myrrh and Aloes, for the embalming of the Corpse.

Joseph was a very eminent, holy, and good man, all the Evangelists do enlarge
in his commendation, and though he had been (as John says) timorous, yet now
he takes boldness, Mark. 14.43. and so did Nicodemus: if the Reader please to
turn to these Texts, he shall see how amply the holy Ghost has spoken of
Joseph, Math. 27.57, ad 61. Mark. 15.43, ad 47. Luke 23.50, ad 54. Joh. 19.38.

Pilate granted to Joseph at his request the dead body of Jesus Christ, these
two honorable men took it down from the Cross, they prepared a fine linen
burying Sheet, newly bought for this purpose, they wrapped up the body with the
aromaticks in decent manner, carefully laying Aromaticks upon all his wounds,
in hands, feet, side, back, head, or else where. They carried the body into a
garden hard by, which was Joseph's, where was a new Sepulcher, hewn out of a
Rock, which Joseph had prepared for his own buryal, in which never yet had any
man been buried; there they did at present lay up the body, the approaching of
the Sabbath permitting them to do no more: they rolled a great stone to the
door of the Vault, which shut it close up. And so they departed.

Lo here we find the dead body of Jesus Christ separated from his Soul, laid up
among those that are gone down to the pit, under the power of death, and the
grave, in the very bottom of his humiliation.

His Soul was in his Fathers bosom, in Paradise, far out of the reach of the
Enemy, though in a suffering condition, because in a state of separation from
his body, there was he pleading and interceding for the Church. The good women
observed diligently where he was buried, purposing after the Sabbath to perfect
his embalming, for which purpose they brought and prepared sweet Spices, Luke
2^.56. and 24.1. Mark. 16.1.

Surely they meant to have emboweled the Corpse, and to have filled the body
with sweet Spices, etc. for so was the manner of embalming of dead bodies; they
did not understand nor believe, nor expect his Resurrection, though he had
often foretold it.

But here behold the wonderful Providence of God, for ever to be admired, that
by reason of the shortness of the time to the beginning of the Sabbath, which
prohibited them from doing any more at present, unto the body, and the
interposition of the Sabbath, prevented them all that day. But they intended
after the Sabbath to have perfected his embalming, for which purpose the godly
women came very early, and brought their Spices. And when they came there, he
was risen before they came.

Here also we may behold and admire at the power of the Cross of Christ,
according to that word of Ioh. 12.32. and I when I am lifted up will draw all
men unto me, one would have thought in reason that these timorous noble
Professors would now have been more timorous then ever they had been; But
behold the contrary, for now they are more bold then ever they were. Again, one
in reason would have thought that the Centurion and all that were on the guard
with him, and all the spectators would now have no regard or good persuasion
toward Jesus Christ whom they had conquered and kissed, But behold the
contrary, the sovereign grace of Jesus Christ, is poured forth from the Cross,
and draws hearts to believe, and this power of grace is exercised by the
sweet savor of the Cross of Christ, unto this day, yea, and will be so to the
worlds end.

Sect. 3.
The sufferings of Christ after he was dead and buried.
AS the first part of the sufferings of Christ was before he was born, so the
last part of his sufferings was after he was dead and buried, he lay in the
grave, as Jonas in the whales belly, in a suffering condition until his
Resurrection. After the Incarnation and birth of Jesus Christ, the whole
conspiracy of Devils and wicked men was, to kill him and to conquer him by
death: to remove him out of their way, after they had conquered and killed him
by death, all their conspiracy was to keep him dead, to seal him up in his
grave, that he should not rise again, we may see what the Jews (by Satan's
instigation no doubt) did this way, Math. 27.62, ad 67. where see the time of
this act, the morning after the preparation, or celebration of the Passover,
which was upon the very Sabbath day, yea, though it was an high day, Ioh.
19.31. being the morrow after the Passover. They pretended to be very zealous
for the Sabbrth, to pick up matter against Christ, when he did good works of
charity upon the Sabbath day. But now they can go to Pilate and transact their
envyous business against Christ upon this high Sabbath day. The actors of this
business were the chief Priests and Pharis^es, who pretended to be most zealous
for the Sabbath, but here we may see their hypocrisy. What did they upon this
Sabbath? they came to Pilate, and first see the term they give to Christ, that
deceiver or impostor, we see here that his blood and death could not quench
their rancor of heart against him. They inform Pilate that he had said that he
would rise again the third day, which they desired to prevent, using this
Argument to persuade Pilate to assist them, least his Disciples should come in
the night and steal away his body, and then tell the people that he was risen
again, according as he has said he would do. And the Effect of that would be
worst of all, our last error would be worse then the first, if we let him rise
again, it will make us more odious to the people, then our putting him to death
has done.

Pilate impowereth them to make his grave as fast and sure as they can, or
desire to do, by a watch, or any other means. Whereupon they went upon the same
Sabbath day, they set a watch (strong enough you may be sure) at the grave, and
sealed up the great stone that lay upon the graves mouth, and now let him rise
if he can.

But herein we may behold the admirable wisdom of God, and folly of man, that
the very way which they took to prevent his Resurrection, was a means to make
his Resurrection most evident and manifest unto all; the Watchmen were
witnesses of it. Though they did afterward corrupt them with large money to
make a foolish lie, which is current among the Jews unto this day; and hereby
their last error is indeed as bad, if not worse then the first.

When Jesus Christ breathed out his blessed Soul into his Fathers bosom, it
wa^ in a state of separation from his body, and that was a state of suffering.
He went into Heaven, into Paradise, into his Fathers bosom, in a separate, in
a suffering Estate. O how welcome was that blessed suffering Soul,
hypostatically united to the Deity, when he came in Heaven! This blessed Soul
was not long in this separate state, about forty hours, though part of three
days and three nights. God suffered not his holy body, hypostatically united
to the Deity* that lay dead in the grave to see the least touch of corruption.
Yet hereby he sanctified this separate state of the Soul from the body unto,
and for his Elect, whose bodies do see corruption, and whose duration and
abiding in that seperat^ estate, is of a far longer continuance, even until the
day of Resurrection, and last Judgment. But Jesus Christ has made it to be
unto us an entrance into glory.

The Soul of Jesus Christ presented himself before the holy Tribunal of divine
Justice, where he pleaded his full satisfaction that he had made unto all the
demands of the holy Law, both by his active and passive obedience. He says, I
have fulfilled all Righteousness, I have suffered and finished the sufferings
of the punishment of loss. I have suffered the punishment of sense unto the
uttermost, ever until it forced a separation betwixt my body and Soul, and
brought me into the state of death; and behold here I stand before the Tribunal
of Justice, in a state of separation of Soul from my body: and thus have I
answered the Law, and finished the work of Redemption. I have purchased a
pardon, I have purchased the Inheritance, the Kingdom; that by the right hand
of divine power I may gather in all Gods Elect, whose salvation I have
undertaken, that I may manage the world for the glory of God, and that I may
subdue all their Enemies. And now O Father glorify me with thy self, and these
thine Elect with me for my sake, that they may behold my glory, for which I
appeal unto mercy. Likewise also our appearance in Heaven when we dye, must be
before the Tribunal of Justice, but we appear in the Name of Jesus Christ, we
are converted, united unto him, we are members of his mystical body, clothed
with his Righteousness, and for his sake we are accepted, pardoned, and
welcomed to glory, so far as we are capable in that separate estate. And for
this we appeal unto mercy.

Now Jesus Christ took out a pardon; now he took possession of his purchased
Inheritance according to the capacity of his separate estate. Now he took the
keys of hell and death, now was he ready to tread down all Enemies, Hell,
Devil, Sin, Death, and Grave, by his triumphant Resurrection. But these
meditations do appertain unto the Exaltation of Jesus Christ, him God has
exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
Repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins, Amen.

FINIS.

