Imprimatur,

August 14. 1691. Geo. Royse, R. R. in Christo Patri, ac Domino Domino Iohanni
Archiepisc. Cant. a Sac. Dom.

THE FOLLY OF ATHEISM, DEMONSTRATED, TO THE CAPACITY OF THE Most Unlearned
Reader. By CLEMENT ELIS, Rector of Kirkby, A M. and Author of the Gentile
Sinner.

Psalm. XIV. 1. LIII. 1. The Fool has said in his heart, There is no God.
Quocunque te flexeris, ibi Deum videbis occurrentem tibi. Sen. de Benef.
LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by William Rogers at the Sun over against
St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, and Thomas Elis in Mansfield. 1692.

THE PREFACE.
WHAT the design of this plain Discourse is, I need not tell any one that reads
and understands the Title of it; for by that he may see, that my business
therein, is to make it plain to every one that can understand Reason, That it
is a very foolish thing for one to persuade himself, that there is no GOD.
Whether I have done this or no, is a question which I am not concerned to
answer any otherwise, than by desiring him that asks it, seriously to read and
consider the whole Discourse; and when he has done so, laying aside all
Prejudice and Partiality, to answer it to himself. If he will not be at this
pains, I cannot help it; but as I heartily Bless Almighty GOD, who has enabled
me to do it to my own full satisfaction, so I most humbly beseech his Divine
Majesty, that all who are not satisfied with what is here done, may not fail to
find all that satisfaction elsewhere, which they do not meet with here.

If any one shall slight this Discourse, as a thing wholly needless; although
he grant it to be convincing, and to prove the thing which I have undertaken to
prove: I say in the First place, That I could heartily wish, that it were
indeed as needless, as he thinks it to be. Nothing should make me more glad,
than to be well assured, that I have lost my Labor, upon no other account but
this, That no man is in danger of losing his GOD through Unbelief. But in the
Next place, I must say also, That I fear he is mistaken. For if this Discourse
be Needless, supposing withal that it be Convincing, it must be for one of
these Two Reasons: Either First, because all men do already Believe that there
is a GOD; and therefore all Discourses on this Subject are needless. Or,
Secondly, Because there is enough already written by others to persuade men
into this Belief, and therefore this Discourse is needless.

He that for the former of these Two Reasons, thinks not only this, but all
Discourses tending to persuade men to believe there is a GOD, to be needless;
seems to me too little to consider how most men Live in the World. It is a very
sad and uncomfortable thing to be thought on; but alas! a thing every where too
visible, That very many persons both high and low, behave themselves in all
their ways so irreligiously and regardlesly of GOD, and of his Holy Laws, that
one can hardly imagine how they could, did they on purpose ^^t themselves to do
it, give the World any clearer proof that they have not any sense of GOD, than
now they do. The abounding of all sorts of Wickedness and Profaneness; and the
great indulgence people give every where to themselves in all manner of vice
and vanity; their deriding of serious Piety, mocking at a
conscienciousstrictness and regularity of life, and even glorying in their own
sins, which they know to be against the plainest laws of GOD, and threatened by
him, with no less than Eternal Damnation; seem to me a most evident sign, That
men do not really believe that there is a GOD. The transgression of the wicked
(says the Psalmist, (Psalm. 36. 1.) says within my heart, that there is no
fear of GOD before his eyes. And whence should it proceed that men fear not
GOD, but hence; That either they are not thoroughly convinced, that there is a
GOD to be feared: Or they understand so little of GOD, or what GOD is, that
they know not for what he is to be feared; and therefore (as it is said, Psalm.
10. 13.) they contemn GOD?

It Is true indeed, that there are not many among us who do openly deny that
there is a GOD; or who will not say, that they believe there is one. But it is
as true also, that of many of these who make this Profession, we may use the
words of St. Paul, Tit. 1. 16. They profess that they know GOD, but in works
they deny him; being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work
reprobate. In rehearsing the Articles of the Christian Faith, every one of us
says for himself -- I believe in GOD. But how many of us unsay it again in our
unchristian and ungodly Conversation? Our Works do much trulier speak the sense
of our hearts, than our Words are wont to do. Show me thy Faith without thy
Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works. So St. James challenges him,
that would needs be thought to have a Christian Faith, whilst he observed not
the Laws of GOD. We may well say the same to every one that professes to
believe there is a GOD, and yet leads an ungodly Life. If our hearts and
tongues do well agree, when we say we believe there is a GOD, it seems one of
the hardest things in the World to conceive, how our Lives should so much
disagree with them both. If we did really believe what we say we believe, one
would think, we should be more afraid, than we are, of living so unanswerably
to our Belief; and more ashamed, than we are of living so unagreeably to our
Profession.

If a man would demonstrate to the world, That he does but Dissemble and Lie,
when he says he believes, That there is a GOD; by what other way could he do
this, than by living a Wicked Life? And why then should we not be convinced of
it, that this Profession of his is indeed a Lie, when he proves it to us, as
well as such a thing can be proved? He lives and acts in all things, as
pleases his own Humor and Lust; he behaves himself as one that owns no
Superior Power to restrain him from doing wickedly; be breaks all the Laws of
GOD and Man as far as he has a Mind and Strength enough to do it; he seems
impatient of living any longer than he may be his own Master, or have the
liberty to serve the Flesh; He takes all liberty that he can get, and does as
wickedly as he dare, for fear of men; he regards nothing (besides his temporal
safety) but his own Will and Pleasure: And after all this, what clearer
Demonstration can he give us, That he does not believe there is a GOD, whom he
is bound to serve?

And now if this be true, I am sure there is much need of Discourses against
Atheism. Wickedness of all sorts did never more abound nor Triumph in the
World, than now it does: And therefore there never was more need of a
Reformation of men's Lives and Manners, than now there is: But in vain are all
Endeavors to that purpose, so long as men do not believe that there is a GOD
over them, to whom they owe a Duty, and are accountable for their whole
behavior. Till men be convinced of this, tho they may possibly by force be
kept from doing some sorts of Evil, they can never be Reformed, or persuaded to
be good. But if they may once be thoroughly convinced of this, it may also be
hoped, That they may be persuaded to account it both their Duty and their
Interest to live a godly life; and (as St. Paul speaks, Col. I. 10.) To walk
worthy of GOD unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work.

But supposing such Discourses needful, ye (will some say) what need was there
of this, sceing there are already so many both larger and learneder on the same
subject? In answer to this, I have no more to say, but these things. First, I
do very readily, and with all due thankfulness, both to GOD, and the learned
Authors, acknowledge, That there be many both larger and learneder Discourses on
this subject than this is. But Secondly, even for this very Reason, that they
are so large and learned, they are the less serviceable to that sort of People,
for whose use this is principally designed. As men of strong Reason and good
Learning, can make good use of long and learned Discourses; and receive much
benefit by them; So men of weak Understandings, and of little or no Learning,
stand in need of short and plain Discourses, such as they can from their
necessary Business get time to read; and such, as reading, they are able to
Understand: For their sake it is, that I publish this; and therefore have I
used as great plainness of Expression in it as possibly I could; and yet I am
very sure of it, no more than is needful to make them understand it. No man can
deny but such people ought to live Religiously, as well as others; and
therefore ought to be well grounded in the first Principles of Religion. And
they must be taught in such a way as they are able to learn, is we design to
teach them any thing; and therefore in teaching them, we must use both such
Arguments, and such Language, as are not too hard for them; or we lose our
labor, and they all the benefit they should reap by it.

If this be not enough to excuse me, at least, for Publishing this Discourse,
and for Writing it too, with so much plainness, as, if I be not deceived, I
have done: I will only add this, That I had rather be blamed for being
impertinent by them, who either need it not themselves, or see not the need
that others have of it; than bear the rebuke of my own Conscience, for not
doing, what I am verily persuaded to be very needful, in the best manner I
could do it; tho not half so well as another might have done it.

THE FOLLY OF ATHEISM.
WE find Wicked men, or such as have no Religion, by the Holy Ghost himself, in
Scripture, frequently called Fools: And how hard soever it may be to make such
a fool understand or acknowledge his own Name, we are very sure he deserves it;
because the Spirit of Truth (as the Holy Ghost is called, Ioh. 16. 13.) has
given it him. The Man of a wicked Life, if he have any thoughts at all of GOD,
must think either That there is a GOD, or That there is none. If he thinks That
there is a GOD, he must needs be a fool for living wickedly, and wilfully
provoking GOD's Wrath and indignation against himself, which he knows himself
unable either to withstand or endure. If he thinks That thire is no GOD; the
Holy Ghost, by the mouth of David, has told us twice over for our better
assurance, That he is a fool for that. The fool (says he) has said in his
heart, There is no GOD, Psalm. 14. 1. 53. 1 And indeed, the truth of what He
has told us, is as clear to every one who has Reason, and will use it to any
good purpose, as the Light it self can be to him, who has and will make use of
his sight.

To make this plain to the meanest capacity, is my present business; and to
this end, in the first place, I desire that these three things may be
considered in the words of the Holy Ghost, which, I say, contain so clear a
Truth:

1. What is said; There is no GOD. 2. How it is said; In his heart. 3. Who has
said it; The fool has said.
1. That which is said is this; There is no GOD. Does he who says this,
understand what he says? If he do not, he is a fool for saying he knows not
what. Does he know what the word [GOD] signifies? If he do not, he says he
knows not what. GOD, is He that made the World and all things therein; the LORD
of Heaven and Earth; who gives to all life, and breath, and all things; in
whom we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17. 24, 25, 28. This is that
which all the World has ever meant by this word [GOD]: The First of all
Beings, who is of himself from all Eternity, without beginning; which gave
being to all things that ever were, and in which, as in the first Fountain, is
all Being, and Life, and Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness: Of whom, and through
whom, and to whom are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen. Romans 11. 36.

This then is it which is said: Tho there be a World, yet it had no Maker. As
much as to say, Though there be a stately, a useful, a richly furnished, and
wisely contrived House, yet it had no Builder. Though there be many things, yet
was there no first Cause of their Being; Though all things are disposed in a very
wonderful wise order, yet was there no wise Orderer of them. We Men, who were
not always, came into this World, no body knows how; We are provided for here,
no body knows by whom; We are daily going hence, no body knows whither; We have
no Maker to whom we owe our being; no Owner whose we are; no Preserver whom we
are to thank for any thing; no LORD, or Governor, whom we are to obey; to whom
we must be accountable; whose favor or displeasure we need to regard: We may
do what we will with our selves, and all we can to any other, whether it be
good or hurt. We may get whatever we can, by any means, for our selves, and
from others; we may do what we will with it, when we have got it. All Religion
is a vain thing; and Civil Government is but a crafty contrivance of Men. We
are under no Laws, but such as we please to make to our selves. Who is Lord
over us? Psalm. 12. 4. This is it that is said, in saying, There is no GOD. And
surely there does not appear any wisdom in all this.

2. He that says this, says it in his heart. He is not so ignorant of GOD, as
one who never heard of any such thing. If any one be so ignorant, it is certain
he is a fool, and greatly to be pitied for his folly: But in what part of the
World he should be found, I know not. He that says in his heart, there is no
GOD, talks of him within himself, and therefore has heard of him. Yet some who
have heard of GOD, are wholly careless and regardless of him, and very
indifferent whether he be or no; their hearts are at rest within them, and seem
unconcerned about this matter: This is great folly, and it is well if there be
not many such Fools, of whom it may be said, GOD is not in all their thoughts,
Psalm. 10. 4. Some there may be also, who wish with all their hearts, and could
heartily desire that there were no GOD, that so, without all fear of him, they
might live as they list. All these are Fools; but he that says in his heart
there is no GOD, seems to outgo all these: He is come to a conclusion about it,
and makes himself confident of it. It Is true, indeed, he seems not yet so
foolhardy, as openly to say it with his Tongue: Though some Men are grown so
impudent, as to boast of their folly, and to call it Wit to talk profanely;
and some parts of the World are so overrun with bruitishness as to suffer
this: Yet most men, if they be not more modest, are however, more cunning than
to speak out all that they think. Though therefore they think there is no GOD,
yet are they sensible how much it concerns them, that others should not be
taught to think so too, or so much as know that they think so. If they should
bring others to think as they do, they might soon be made to pay dearly for
teaching them this lesson; for then would all those others take to themselves
the same liberty of doing what they list, as they desire to have, and the World
would become a very unsafe place for them to live in. He therefore that says
there is no GOD, is content to say it in his heart only; and can be very well
content too, that all but himself should think otherwise for his own safety;
yea, lest all they who think there is a GOD, should begin to stand upon their
guard against him, as an Enemy to Mankind (as they have good reason to account
him): Though he be so foolish, as to say in his heart, there is no GOD; yet is he
so cunning, as to say with his mouth among others, I believe in GOD.

3. He that says in his heart there is no God, is the fool: No wise Man ever
said it. The fear of the LORD, that is wisdom, Job 28. 28. The knowledge of the
HOLY is understanding, Prove. 9. 10. The fear of the LORD, is the beginning of
knowledge, Prove. 1. 7. and of wisdom; And a good understanding have they that
keep his commandments, Ps. 111. 10. But fools despise wisdom and instruction,
Prove. 1. 7. And the heart of fools proclaims foolishness, Prove. 1^. 23. But
what fool is he that says this? In the language of the Holy Ghost, the fool is
he that goes on in a course of sinning. Of him and his Fellows, David gives us
this account in those two Psalms, the 14th, and 51st, They are corrupt, they
have done abominable works, there is none that does good. The LORD looked down
from Heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did
understand and seek GOD: They are all gone aside, they are altogether become
filthy, there is none that does good, no not one. The fool then, is the
habitual sinner, who being deeply in love with his sin, cannot endure to think
of parting with it. If there be a GOD, he knows he must very dearly pay for
sinning against him; and therefore so long as he believes there is a GOD, he
cannot enjoy his sins in quietness. He has therefore no way left him but one to
sin without a continual disturbance of mind from the checks of his own
Conscience, and that is, As much as he can, to banish the belief, and even all
thoughts of GOD far from him. This then for the love of his sins he is resolved
upon; and though it be very hard for him who has his eyesight, to open his
eyes, and not see the Light; yet he makes a shift so long to wink against the
light, till at last he quite loses his sight: So long he strives aagainst the
belief of a GOD, that at length no Arguments can persuade him to believe.
Resisting the Truth, GOD justly punishes him with his own desire, and hides
the Truth from him for ever: Because they received not the love of the truth,
etc. GOD (says St. Paul) shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie: That they might be damned who believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. As they did not like to
retain GOD in their knowledge, GOD gives them over to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.
28. And it is most just with GOD thus to deal with such obstinate Fools; I mean,
to hide himself for ever from them, who have a long time done all that ever
they could, not to see him. Hence the Sinner grows more and more a Fool, and at
last arrives at the Fool's confidence, to believe whatever he has a mind to; He
says in his heart there is no GOD: And he that trusts in his own heart, is a
fool, Prove. 28. 26.

Now, having seen these Three things, What is said, How it is said, and Who has
said it; We are to consider how well he deserves the name of Fool for saying
it: That is, for persuading himself to believe, or for making himself
confident, That there is no GOD. And this his Folly will undeniably appear very
great, to every one that takes notice but of Three things, which are all very
visible:

1. He is Confident, where he cannot have any, even the least ground of
Assurance. 2. He is Confident, where his Confidence can do no good, but will do
much hurt. 3. He is Confident, where all the reason in the world is against his
Confidence.
If then there be such a thing in the world as a fool, he that says in his
heart, or is confident that there is no GOD, must needs be a Fool. For,

1. He that is confident there is no GOD, is confident where he cannot have any
the least ground of assurance; that is, he is confident of that which he cannot
pretend to know. And is not he a fool that pleases himself with such a
groundless confidence as this, and ventures his soul on that whereof he cannot
say, that he is in any measure sure? No man was ever yet so vain as to
undertake to prove that there is no GOD. Some have been either so dull that
they could not, or so stubborn that they would not see or confess they saw
reason enough to convince them that there is a GOD. And some have been so
daring as to do their utmost endeavor to prove, that it is not altogether
necessary that there must be one, or that it is possible there may be none. But
either that it is impossible that there should be a GOD, or that of a certainty
there is no such thing, none has ever attempted to prove, with what confidence
so ever he talks of this matter. Sum up all that all the Atheists in the world
have at any time been able to say against the being of a GOD, it amounts to no
more but this, It may be there is a GOD, and it may be there is not. Which is
all one as to say, They know not whether there be a GOD or no. So that even
whilst the Atheist most confidently denies that there is a GOD, he is forced to
confess, that for any thing he knows to the contrary, there is one. Only he
imagines there may be no GOD; and as he imagines it to be, so he would fain
have it to be, and therefore he is confident it is just as he imagins it may
be, and would gladly have it be. And would not any of us laugh at that man, who
talks with all confidence imaginable of a thing, as if he were sure of it; and
yet when he is asked, how he came to know it, can give no wiser an answer than
this, I fain would have it so, and I conceive it may possibly be so, and I am
not yet satisfied it is not as I think it may be, and therefore I am very
confident it is just as I say? Would we not, I say, laugh at this as the answer
of a Fool?

II. It is folly enough for one to be Confident without a reason or ground of
Assurance; yet is it a much greater folly on no good ground to be confident,
where it is exceedingly dangerous to be confident, and where the confidence
does certainly much hurt, and can do no good. And yet such is his confidence,
who is confident there is no GOD.

Where there are two Opinions, whereof one knows not which is truest; and there
is danger in following the one, and none in following the other; it must needs
be acknowledged to be a great folly, to choose to follow that opinion wherein
there is danger, rather than that wherein there is none. If then there be no
danger at all in believing there is a GOD, and a great deal of danger in
thinking there is none: He must needs be a fool that thinks there is no GOD.
Now these two things will quickly appear to be true.

1. To believe there is a GOD, (even tho there were none) does much good, and
no hurt. 2. To think there is no GOD (tho it were true) does much hurt and no
good.
1. To believe there is a GOD, (even tho there were none) does much good and no
hurt. It will easily be granted by the Atheist himself, that if there be a GOD
(as we certainly believe there is) to believe it, is not only our duty, but our
highest concern. If we have a Maker, Preserver, and Governor, it is very fit
and necessary, and can no way be hurtful, but exceeding good and profitable for
us to own him, and by all means to endeavor to please him, and to keep in his
favor; seeing that both we and all things are in his hand and power, and so
totally depend upon him, that we can neither be happy, nor indeed be at all,
but by his Blessing, Protection, and Providence: For in him we live, and move,
and have our being, Act. 17. 28. We are his people, and the sheep of his
pasture, Psalm. 100. 3. But I say, that tho there were no GOD (which yet cannot
be) to believe that there is one, would do much good and no hurt at all.

It would do much good, because it is plain, that this belief (which nothing
else could do) keeps the world in good order, and makes men sociable,
governable, and serviceable to one another. This belief of a God, is that which
keeps us from destroying our selves by Lasciviousness, Intemperance, and
Luxury; and from devouring and ruining one another by malice, envy, pride,
covetousness, and oppression. So that the world owes its happiness to this
belief. In short then, this belief helps us to live soberly, and righteously,
and godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 12. and to die comfortably in hope of
better things than this world affords, when we go out of it. And this certainly
is all very good.

But now this belief of a GOD can do no hurt at all. For seeing it naturally
inclines men to do good, and restrains men from doing hurt, it self can no way
be hurtful. If it can, let the Atheist himself show us what the hurt of it is,
even supposing there were no GOD.

Is this the hurt it does us, That it keeps us from using that liberty which
were there no GOD, and we believed it, we might freelyuse? Indeed, as I know
not, if there were no GOD, what should make it unlawful for any one to use all
the liberty he could get; so I doubt as little, but if men thought there were
none, they would use a great deal more liberty than they do; but then it is only
because they are fools, and consider not their own good. A wise man, who is
governed, not by passion, but by reason, as every man should be, would use no
more liberty of that kind which wicked men most covet, than GOD now allows us,
were he sure that there were no GOD. For GOD allows us all things that are for
the good of our selves and mankind, and he forbids us nothing but what visibly
tends to the hurt of our selves or others. It can be therefore no other liberty
but that of doing hurt, which the belief of a GOD restrains us from; and to
restrain us from doing hurt, cannot be hurtful. A wise man, I say, would not
use this liberty tho he might. For he wisely considers, that all men would have
the same right as he to use that liberty; and if they should do so, as there
could be no reason why they should not as well as he, there could be no
Society, no Government, no safe living by one another in the world.

Or in the next place, is this the hurt which the belief of a GOD would do,
supposing there were none, that in some cases we must suffer evils, which we
should not need to suffer, were there no GOD? We are poor, it may be, and yet
for fear of GOD we dare not steal nor rob, nor cheat, to relieve our selves. We
suffer wrong, and for fear of GOD we dar^ not revenge our selves, and such
like. It Is true indeed, the belief of a GOD obliges us to suffer rather than
to do evil; But it will be found to do us no hurt but good in this. Which that
we may discern, we are to think upon these following things.

1. Remember, that some of the evils we suffer, are unavoidable by us, whether
there be a GOD or no. That is, they are such as if there be a GOD, none but he
can prevent or remove; and if there be no GOD, it is not in our power to do
either. Now in such cases it is a man's wisdom to suffer them with as little
trouble to himself as he can, seeing he must bear them, do what he can:
Impatience, fretting and rage, do not lessen, but double the suffering,
whatever it be. And then the belief of a GOD binds us in such cases to no more,
but to suffer patiently, and in humble submission to his will, and in hope that
doing so, All things work together for good to us, Romans 8. 28. And that the
light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Seeing then such evils
must be born, all the hurt the belief of GOD does us, is to enable us to bear
them more easily, even as much as he that suffers in hope, may suffer more
cheerfully than he that has no hope.

2. Observe, that some of these evils are such, as we suffer through the
wickedness of men. And here we should remember, first, That were there no
belief or fear of GOD among men, where we now suffer one such evil, we should
suffer a thousand. I hope then the belief of a GOD does us no hurt in this,
that it makes our sufferings fewer than otherwise they would be. Secondly,
Remember, it is for want of this belief, that men are so forward to hurt one
another; for GOD forbids it: and if men believed to the purpose that there is a
GOD, forbidding all Injuries on pain of damnation, they would not dare to do
wrong. Who then will say, that the belief of a GOD can be hurtful, when it is
only the want of it whence all such hurts arise?

Well, But it will be yet said, That were it not for fear of GOD, we might some
way or other prevent, or remove such Evils as these. For a fuller answer to
this,

3. Take notice, That of this kind of Evils, some are very slight, small, and
easily tolerable; others are very grievous, and not easily supportable. If the
Evils we suffer one from another be very small, and easy to be born; will not
a wise man, whether there be a GOD, or no, rather be content to bear them
patiently, even for the sake of his own ease and quiet, much more for the peace
and quiet of the Neighborhood; than disturb both himself and his Neighbors,
by beginning, and continuing a quarrel about little things; and that when the
issue is doubtful, and he cannot be sure he shall be a gainer in the end? If
one have a mind to end quarrels speedily, and to live in pe^ce and quietness,
which certainly is a thing very desirable; to put up in patience and silence
light and trivial wrongs, is both the shortest, and easiest; the cheapest, and
most obliging way. And this is it that in such cases the belief of a GOD does
bind us to. If the Evils we suffer from others be very grievous, and not easily
supportable; the Laws of GOD do not forbid us fairly and legally to right and
relieve our selves; much less do they command us to lay our selves open to such
Evils, or not to guard our selves as well as we can against them; or to suffer
Evildoers to pass unpunished. All that GOD forbids in such cases, is spiteful,
and unnecessary private revenge. Now a wise man again, whether there were a GOD
or no, would take this very course that GOD now commands, and not that which he
forbids. If he be in want or poverty, he would use no illegal means of relief;
if he be wronged, he would use no illegal ways of righting himself. Why?
because he considers he thus makes himself his own Judge, and his own Carver,
and so might every one do as well as he, and at this rate there could be no
Civil Society or Government; but all men would be let loose, like so many wild
beasts, to prey upon, and devour one another. What hurt then does the belief of
a GOD do us, when it binds us to suffer no otherwise than any wise man would of
himself do, were he sure there is no GOD?

Is this the hurt it does, that it binds us to die, rather than any way to
dishonor GOD; which we need not do, were there no GOD? It is true again, that
it binds us to this; and if there were no GOD, we should not be bound to it.
Well then, (says the Atheist) can any one pretend, that this is no hurt, for a
man to lose his life, and all that is dear to him, at once irrecoverably, for
the sake of GOD, if yet there be no GOD? To this I say, If there be any hurt at
all in this, yet is it much less than that which will necessarily follow the
denying of a GOD, yea tho he were not. And this must be granted when these few
things have been duly considered.

First, We must all die, whether there be a GOD or no. I cannot think that any
one of those who doubt whether there be a GOD, doubts too whether or no he
shall die; he is, he thinks, too sure of that. And further yet, we none of us
know either when or how we shall die. It may be, tomorrow, or before; and it
may be too in the most painful Agony and Torment.

Therefore, Secondly, the worst that can be in our dying for GOD, is this, That
we may so be made to die, a little, and we know not how little a while, for
ought we know, not one hour or minute before the time when otherwise we should
have died. Or we may be made to die in torment; and yet, for ought we know, in
far less torment than otherwise we should have died, and it may be, at the same
time.

Thirdly, It cannot be any great hurt to lose a few days of an uncertain and
troublesome lifo; and such days, as for ought we know, would have brought so
many evils along with them, as would have made us wish a thousand times over,
that we had died sooner, and had never seen so much as one of them.

Fourthly, If all men were persuaded that there is no GOD, the wickedness of
men would soon make the world so uneasy a place to us, that he would think
himself the happiest man, that could soonest find his way out of it.

All this considered, it is evident, That even the faintest hope that any one
could conceive, of enjoying a Blessed Eternity with GOD, must be enough to make
him set light by the loss of a few days more of life in this world. He that
cannot be sure that there is no God, (as no man can be) and much more he that
but thinks there is a GOD, must needs be a Fool, if he had rather live a while
to dishonor GOD, and fall under his Wrath, than dye a little before his time,
if he thinks it pleasing to GOD, and rewardable by him. For supposing it
uncertain to him, whether there be a GOD or no, this were plainly to choose a
worse uncertain thing before a better. It were to choose a few short days of
life, which he knows not whether he shall have or no, or whether they will be
worth having or no, yea, whether or no they will give him cause to repent that
even he had one of them; rather than a life of Eternal Blessedness with GOD,
which, if there be a GOD, he is sure to have; or rather than to secure himself
from an endless state of intolerable Torments, which, if the^ be a GOD, he is
sure to fall into, who lives to GOD's Dishonor. And now where is the hurt of
dying for GOD, even tho there were none?

Is it this, in the last place, That such an one shall be disappointed in his
Hope? Is it not (says the Atheist) a very miserable thing, to suffer and dye
in hope of good things, and after he has paid so dear for his hope, find it
defeated in a moment? Well; but let me tell the Atheist, he will find it a much
more miserable thing, to have been confident all his life long that there is no
GOD, and then in a moment to find there is one, to his everlasting sorrow.
However, in answer to what he here objects; First, It is certain, That if there
be a GOD, his hope who died for GOD, is not defeated; and if there be no GOD,
then the defeating of his hope can be no misery or hurt to him. He that denies
a GOD, denies a future state after death, and so according to him, the whole
Man, Soul and Body, dies at once, as beasts do; and has no more sense of any
thing after death, than they have. Now that can be no misery or hurt, which
cannot be felt: And the frustration of his hope, cannot be felt by him who has
no sense of any thing. If the man that is once dead, feels nothing, whatever he
has lost, his loss is nothing at all to him. Whilst such an one lived, his hope
made his Life pleasant, and his Sufferings tolerable; it heightened his Joys,
and it mitigated his Sorrows; it was his comfort both in life and death; and
now he is dead, if there be a GOD, he enjoys all he hoped for, and is glad he
took the rough way to Heaven, and thinks himself well paid for his pains and
sufferings; and if there be no GOD, he is in as good a condition as all others
are, neither better nor worse; and as they are not sensible of their past
Pleasures, no more is he of his past Sorrows. His belief whilst he lived, did
both himself and others much good, and could never hurt either himself or
others, living or dead.

2. To think there is no GOD, (even if there be none) does much hurt and no
good at all.

If there be a GOD, (as we cannot doubt but there is) the Atheist will not
deny, That his opinion is the most pernicious and mischievous thing in the
world. To deprive ones self for ever of his Favor, and to expose ones self to
his unsupportable Wrath, who alone can save or destroy as he pleases; To lose
Eternal Joys, and run into Eternal Torments, and merely for the enjoyment of a
few days of fruitless sin and vanity, and for the humouring of a lump of flesh,
which must within a few days corrupt, and rot in dirt; can a man possibly do
himself greater hurt than this?

And suppose the Atheist were in the right, what good could his opinion do him?
Nay, what hurt would it not do both him and all the world, were it generally
received? Whilst he is of this opinion, he enjoys a few beastly Pleasures, and
is delighted to live as beasts do, and to think that he shall dye as they do
too. O excellent Privilege! What is it else, that he can make much of this
opinion for, but only that he thinks himself at liberty to do as he lists?
Well; but whilst he is so fond of a brutish and licentious life, that he cannot
endure to hear of GOD, because of his love to it; I would desire to know of
him, First, If this be no troub^ to him, That he knows this voluptuous Life
shall so quickly be at an end, and that in so short a time, yea he knows not
how soon, all that he now thinks himself happy in, shall be gone for ever?
Next, If it be no trouble to him to restrain himself from what he most loves,
for fear of bringing Sicknesses, Pains, and Death upon himself; or that he has
at any time so brought these and other like evils upon himself, whereby he is
become unable to find any relish or pleasure in the things he loves, and has
nothing left him to ease his troubl^* Again; What he has to administer any
comfort or refreshment to him, if he fall into any kind of affliction or
distress, when he can taste nothing but bitterness in this life, and yet has
not the least hopes of any other? And lastly, If it do not trouble him, when
ever he thinks of it, that he cannot be sure that his Opinion is true, and
that, for ought he knows to the contrary, there may be a God, and he may the
next moment cast him into Hell for the life he now leads? I cannot but think,
but when the Atheist is at any time awakened to the exercise of his reason, and
thinks of these things, he cannot much boast of the good his Opinion does
himself; nay, that he cannot deny, but it is hurtful to him.

And should it be once embraced generally by others, what would become of him
and all the world? There would be nothing in a short time visible, but disorder
and confusion, and all manner of mischief and misery, were men once persuaded,
That there is no GOD, no rewarder of the good, no punisher of the wicked; and
that there is nothing either to be hoped for, or feared, but in this life only.
Had men none over them to keep them in awe, but weak men like themselves, what
could be expected, but that they should fall a tearing and eating up one
another? Would not every one think it his concern, and his right too, to make
the best he could of this present life to himself, as well as he, if he thought
there were nothing either better or worse to be expected, than what this life*
affords? Would not every one who is persuaded that this world is all that ever
he must enjoy, use his utmost cunning and endeavor, without respect to any
other person, or any regard to Right or Wrong, to pick and choose, and carve out
for himself as great a share of it as he possibly could; yea, tho he must dig
through the very bowels of all other men, to come at the things he desired to
have? Might not any one challenge as much Right to every thing that lay within
his reach, as any other whatsoever? And would not every one catch that could,
yea and kill too, or do any thing else he could, that he might catch? If it be
true, that there is no GOD, to whom all are bound to submit, what Law can any
one think himself bound to obey, but his own Will? And would not every one be
as free as he could make himself, and strive to have his own will, rather than
to be subject to another's? Would not every one endeavor to make himself
Master of as much, and as many as he could? And would not this striving for the
Mastery, and scrambling who should get most, bring all things to confusion?
Could any thing but mere force and violence bring or keep men under Government?
And would men any longer bear so uneasy a yoke, whenever they could find out
any way to break or shake it off? All the world thus would be turned into a
Field of War and Blood, and no man could think himself safe from his Neighbor.
He that is strongest, or could make his Party the strongest for a time, could
not promise himself that he should long continue so, and not be undermined by
the wiles of the weaker, or by the treacheries or revolts of his own men. And
they who are weakest, must be sure, whilst they are so, to endure the
insolences, and lie at the mercy of the stronger. No man could call either his
goods or his life his own, seeing there could be nothing to hinder any one that
had strength and malice enough, from invading them, or endeavoring to advance
himself upon the ruins of any one whom he found standing in his way to what he
covets.

All men may plainly see, That Religion, were it generally practiced throughout
the world, would soon make it happy; and that the good order that is in the
world, is wholly owing to the sense men have of a GOD; and that therefore there
is so little good order in the world at this day, because there is so little
sincere Religion, or true sense of GOD in it. And if there were no sense of GOD
in it, there would be no good order at all. Tho it were true then, That there
is no GOD, I dare say, the whole world would soon begin to wish it false; yea,
and rather than all men should think there is none, the Atheist himself would
wish it false too. All men would quickly find reason enough to curse the man
that first discovered so mischievous a Truth. But now seeing no man can
possibly be assured, That it is true; what a Fool is he that persuades himself
it is, to no other end, but that he may be more free to do mischief, and by
doing so, teach others to do the like; thus putting himself, and the rest of
mankind into a posture of War, and into the most deplorable condition
imaginable? I mean, into that of enjoying no quiet or safety in this world, no
comfort or satisfaction in going out of it, and the danger of suffering more
intolerable evils, than any one can now conceive, whenever death shall call him
hence.

III. The third Argument to prove him a fool, who is confident there is no GOD,
is this: He is Confident, where all the Reason in the World is against his
Confidence. And to make this good, I lay this down as a certain principle: It
is a sufficient reason to believe that a thing is, when it is being is
discovered unto us, all those ways, whereby we can conceive that such a thing
can be discovered unto us, if indeed it be, and may be known. If then GOD has
made himself known unto us all those ways, whereby we can conceive he can be
made known, if he be; we have all the Reason in the World to believe him to be,
and so all the Reason in the World is against his Confidence that denies GOD to
be. He is a fool that desires or calls for more than this; for that is all one
as if he should say, I will not believe that there is a GOD, 'till he be made
known to me more ways than h^ can be made known to me, though there be one.

Now let any one say, what Evidence he would have to convince him that there is
a GOD, and I will show him that he has it; unless he would have such Evidence
as cannot be given, though there be a GOD. All things cannot be discovered by
every kind of Evidence, though they really are, and may be known. A Voice or
Sound cannot be known by Seeing; yet we are sure it is, because we hear it. A
Color cannot be known by Hearing; but we are sure it is, because we see it.
Sweet and Bitter cannot be known by seeing or hearing; yet we know them by
Tasting. He Is a Fool then that will not believe any of these to be, unless he
have such an evidence of it as cannot be given, whilst he has that which can;
or, Who will not believe there is a Color, because he cannot hear or smell it,
whilst he Sees it? or thinks there is no Voice, because he cannot see, touch,
or taste it, though he Hears it? And so of the rest.

What evidence then would a Man have to assure him that there is a GOD? GOD is
by Nature a Spirit, Joh. 4. 24. and so Invisible, 1 Timothy 1. 17. whom no man
has seen, nor can see, vid. 1 Timothy 6. 16. Ioh. 1. 18. 1 Ioh. 4. 12. He Is a
fool then that will not believe that there is a GOD unless he see him: And as
much a Fool is he, that will not believe him to be, unless he can hear him
speak, or feel him: For GOD being a pure Spirit, without a Body, or bodily
qualities, has neither a Voice, such as bodily things have, whereby he may be
heard with our Ears; nor other quality whereby he may be felt with our Hands,
any more than he has Color or Shape to be seen with our Eyes.

We must, if we will be reasonable, be satisfied with such Evidences of an
Invisible Spirit, as an Invisible Spirit can give us of its self: And such
evidences of himself GOD has given unto us; and by all such ways, as we can
think on, has revealed himself unto us, as one of infinite Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, our Maker, Preserver, and Governor. And how can we conceive, that He,
who is in himself Invisible, should make this manifest unto us, but by some or
all of these ways?

I. By some such audible and visible significations and tokens of his Being and
Will, as we are capable of understanding. II. By imprinting a sense of himself
in our minds, making us not only capable of perceiving, but inclined to
acknowledge him. III. By doing such works as are the visible effects of such a
Being, Power, Wisdom and Goodness.
If there be a GOD, some of these ways he may, and otherwise we cannot conceive
how he should be known unto men. And therefore if he have all these ways
manifested himself unto us, he is a Fool that does not own him.

I. It must be granted very reasonable to expect, That if there be a GOD who is
our LORD and GOVERNOR, he should give us such significations and tokens of his
Being and Will, as we may know him, and how to behave our selves toward him.
And if it be such an evidence of him, that the Atheist would have for his
satisfaction, I say he has it in that which we call GOD's WORD in the Holy
SCRIPTURE.

If he say, He would believe there is a GOD, because of his WORD, if he were
sure that it is GOD's Word; I ask, What he means by saying so? Is it this, That
he would believe there is a GOD, because of his Word, were he first sure that
there is a GOD whose Word it may be? This is all one, as to say, That what he
calls for as an evidence of a GOD, can be no evidence; for he cannot be
persuaded it is his Word, till he be first sure that He is: This is to play the
Fool downright; He will not believe there is a GOD, till GOD has revealed
himself by his Word; GOD reveals himself by his Word, and he will not believe
it to be his Word, because he is not sure there is a GOD. If he say, he means
no more but this, That what you show him for the Word of GOD, is not such as
may be thought worthy of GOD, or has not enough in it to convince one, that it
is not a Forgery of man? If this be his meaning, then I ask him, What is
wanting to it to make it appear worthy of GOD, and not to be a Forgery of man?
If he cannot show this, and yet excepts against it, he is a Fool; for either
that evidence wherein no defect can be discovered, must be a sufficient
evidence; or there can be no such thing as a sufficient evidence in the world.

Well then; We say, GOD has revealed Himself and his Will by clear
significations of both, in his Word. And this Word we have now written in a
Book, which we call the Bible and the Scripture. If this Scripture or Writing
be true, then is it the Word of GOD, for so much it affirms of it self. The
Truth of it therefore is the only thing we are to inquire into. And to make
this Enquiry as short as may be, let it be considered, That this Book is made
up of diverse smaller Books, whereof some are called, The Books of the Old
Testament; others of them, The Books of the New one: And we need do no more but
inquire into the Truth of the latter of these at present; for if what is
written in these, be true; then is that so too, which is written in the former:
For these bear witness to the Truth of those. Our Savior in the New Testament
approves of the Law of Moses, and of the Prophets, and of the Psalms, which
make up the Old Testament, Luke 24. 44. And of the same, St. Paul says, All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16. And St. Peter, That the
prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost, ^ Pet. 1. 12. And the Apostle to the Hebrews
says, That God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past
un^o the fathers by the prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his
Son, Heb. 1. 1, 2. If then the Writings of the New Testament be true, the Books
of the Old Testament contain the Word of GOD. And to satisfy our selves that
they are true, we need but to understand Three Things:

1. That there were such men as are said to have written these Books; and that
these are their Writings. 2. That they were sufficiently qualified for writing
these Books. 3. That what they have written, has all the Characters of Divine
Truth.
1. There were once such men as are said to have written these Books; and these
Books were written by them. If any one doubts whether there were once such men
as St Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Paul, Peter, James, and Jude; or that the
Books which bear their Names, were written by them; how would he have it
proved? These men died about Sixteen hundred Years ago, and therefore he will
not surely be so unreasonable as to say, Show me the Men, or I will not believe
that ever they were. But look what reason he has to believe any thing that was
before he was was born, and now he sees not; the same he has to believe that
these men once were, and that they wrote these Books. Histories make express
mention of them, one Generation to another, from their time to this, has
preserved their Memory; and the Books we have, are their lasting Monuments. We
have the Testimony of all Christians, of all Ages since their time, who have
owned these Books as theirs, who have commented on them, and written in defense
of the Doctrine contained in them; recorded their Travels, and the Churches
which they planted: And these Witnesses are no inconsiderable Persons, but the
most learned of their times, and such as made the most diligent search into the
truth; and were so well satisfied, as to shed their blood in vindication of it,
and ventured their Salvation upon it. Neither is this all, but we have the
testimony of their Enemies, of those who persecuted them unto death, and wrote
against the Truth which they delivered. Now what can any one desire more than
this to satisfy him, That there were such men, and that they wrote these Books?
We have the Books in our hands, and all sorts of Historians, Friends and
Enemies, making mention of them; and all Christian Churches, being the best,
most learned, and most civilized part of the World, acknowledging, receiving,
and even unto death maintaining them. Have we not the faith to believe, that
there were once such men as Cyrus, Darius, Alexander, or Julius Caesar? Do not
we believe that Cicero, Demosthenes, Homer and Virgil, once were, and that we
have their Books? Believe we not that we have had Kings of this Realm in former
days, and that we have now Laws which they enacted? Nor yet that we had
Grandfathers, and Great-Grandfathers, and Inheritances derived from them? And
what better Reasons can we have to believe any of these things, than such as we
have to believe that these men were, and wrote these Books? Truly he that will
not believe that once a thing was, when all the evidence of its having been is
given him, which can be given of any thing past; must needs be a very
unreasonable Fool, and not to be discoursed withal, but laughed at. For at this
rate, nothing that ever was, and is not now, can be believed, without better
evidence of it, than can be given if it was, which is impossible.

2. These men were sufficiently qualified for writing these Books. For all that
can be thought necessary to qualify them for writing these Books, is, First,
Sufficient knowledge of the things whereof they wrote; and Secondly, Honesty, to
write no other things than what they certainly knew.

1. We cannot in any reason suspect them to have wanted sufficient knowledge,
because they had all opportunities of well informing themselves. They write
either of the Life and Deeds of JESUS CHRIST, whereof they were Eyewitnesses;
or of his Doctrine and Preaching, which they were Ear-witnesses of: Or else of
the Deeds and Sufferings of themselves, and their Fellows, whereof they were
either Actors and Sufferers, or Spectators. That which they had seen and heard,
declared they unto us; and that in writing, as St. John says, 1. Ioh. I. 1, 2,
3. They have delivered these things to us, which from the beginning were
eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the word. And it seemed good unto them, having
had perfect understanding of all things from the beginning, to write unto
others, that they also might know the certainty of these things, as we gather
from St. Luke, chap. I. v. 2, 3, 4. Now that there was such a Person as JESUS
CHRIST, that he was born in the Reign of Augustus Caesar, and was Crucified in
the Regn of Tiberius Caesar, being sentenced to death by Pontius Pilate; and
that he had such Disciples and Followers, not only the Testimony of Christians,
but that of Jews and Heathens, bitter Enemies to Christianity, assures us. And
what should hinder these men to have sufficient knowledge of what they write?

2. We have no less reason to believe they were honest men, who had no design
to deceive the World. For

First, It is to be seen in their Writings by all who read them, that they
professed and taught Sincerity, Truth, Simplicity, plain and upright Dealing;
condemning all Hypocrisy, Lying and Guile, as odious to GOD, and damnable in
men; denouncing the heavy wrath and indignation of GOD against the Practicers
of these Vices. And as they taught, so they lived; and for this they durst
appeal to all who knew them. Ye are witnesses (says St. Paul) and God also,
how holily, and justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves among you, 1 Thessalonians. II. 10. We have renounced (says he again) the hidden things of
dishonestry, not walking in craftiness, not handling the word of God
deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth commending our selves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. IV. 2.

Secondly, For the truth of the chief matters of fact, which they relate; they
were bold to appeal to the knowledge of great multitudes then living, who might
easily have disproved them, had they told any falsehood. They told them of the
wonderful Birth and Life of JESUS, mentioning the very time of his Birth, the
place, the manner; his manifestation to the Shepherds, to the Wisemen of the
East, his Persecution by Herod, with all the remarkable Circumstances thereto
belonging: His Doctrine and Preaching, his Miracles, some whereof thousands at
once tasted of; his Death without Jerusalem, notorious to all; his
Resurrection, witnessed by his appearing to hundreds; his visible Ascension
into Heaven: his sending the Holy Ghost on the Day of Pentecost, to the
astonishment of many who heard the Apostles by him enabled to speak to every
one in his own Language; and many more things of this kind, concerning some of
which St. Paul was not afraid to tell Festus the Governor, in the presence of
King Agrippa, The king knows of these things, before whom also I speak
freely; for I am persuaded that none of these things are hidden from him, for
this thing was not done in a corner, Acts XXVI. 26. How easy now had it been
for the Jews to have proved these men Liars, had they been so? And would they
not have done it, if they could?

Thirdly, They were men but of a very mean Education, most of them, and of no
le^^ning; and cannot reasonably be thought able to contrive, and invent what
they write, of their own heads; and when they had done, to defend it so bravely
as they did, for real truth. It must needs be supposed, they were instructed
well in their business; and had a Teacher wiser, and more powerful too, than
themselves; or indeed (as it will appear) than all the World besides. And this
was well known to be JESUS CHRIST the Eternal Wisdom of GOD; and his Holy
Spirit of Truth, which He, according to his Promise, sent upon them (Acts II.)
to guide them into all truth, Joh. XVI. 13. 'Twas He alone who could, as he had
promised, give them a mouth and wisdom, which all their adversaries were not
able to gainsay, or resist, Luke XXI. 15. Indeed it appears, whatever their
Education had been, they were, when they preached to the World, and wrote, men
of good sense and understanding; who could teach a Religion, which now for
above Sixteen hundred years has prevailed over the most learned part of
Mankind: who could dispute with the Learned Grecians, Acts IX. 29. And though
the Scribes and Pharisees, the most Learned Jews; Though they of the Synagogue
of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, of Cicilia and Asia,
disputed with them; Acts VI. 9. Tho the Philosophers of the Gentiles, the
Stoics and Epicureans, encountered them, Acts XVII. 18. yet were none of these
able to resist the Wisdom, and the Spirit whereby they spoke, Acts VI. 10.

Fourthly, Supposing them men of Wit enough for such a Contrivance, yet can
they not at the same time be thought such Fools too, as to contrive such things
without any rational motive or inducement to it; surely, they must have some
great things to propound unto themselves, as the end for which they did this.
They well foresaw, that what they did, would expose them to all the Evils of
this World. And therefore when they first undertook it, they voluntarily left
all they had in this World, to follow CHRIST. They were taught by him to deny
themselves, and to take up the cross, Matthew. XVI. 24. And told, that they must
be sent as Sheep in the midst of Wolves; be delivered up to Councils, and
scourged in the Synagogues, and hated of all men for his name's sake, Matthew. X.
16, 17, 22. That in this world they should have tribulation, John XVI. 33. and
be persecuted, Joh. XV. 20. Put out of the Synagogues, and killed, Joh. XVI. 2.
All this they knew, and expected. They went forth to preach a Doctrine, which
by the Wisemen of the World would be accounted foolishness, 1 Cor. I. 23. And
looked on themselves, as men set forth of God, as it were, appointed to death,
and made a spectacle to the world, 1 Cor. IV. 9. They hungered and thirsted,
were naked, and had no certain dewlling place. Being reviled, they blessed;
being persecuted, they suffered it; being defamed, they entreated; they were
made the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. IV. 11.
2 Cor. IV. 8. They constantly and stoutly endured all that befell them;
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of JESUS,
Acts V. 41. Certain then it is, that (as they prosessed) Their exhortation was
not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile; neither did they at any time
use flattering words, nor a cloak of covetousness (as they called God to
witness) neither of men sought they glory, 1 Thessalonians. II. 3, 5. No, it is plain,
they could not propound to themselves any worldly advantage. Well then, either
they did believe what they preached, and wrote, to be true, or they did not. If
not, then did they, for the sake of a known and unprofitable Lie, forsake all
that seems good in this World, even whilst they hoped for nothing in another;
and then they must be no longer thought cunning and crafty men, but the sillest
fools that ever were, and very madmen. If they did believe themselves, and
cheerfully endured all these things for persuading others to believe, what more
can we desire to show us, that they were honest and plain-dealing men?

Fifthly, If it be said, That tho they were men of good sense and competent
understanding, yet as honest well-meaning men are easily deceived, so might
they be by his cunning whom they followed; and being seduced by him, might in
simplicity of mind endeavor to deceive others. This will appear a vain
Conceit, when it is considered, that he whom they followed, was JESUS, a Person
well known, whilst on Earth, for his Life and Conversation among men. He taught
openly; and what he taught, notwithstanding his Divine Authority to command
belief upon his bare word, he did not bid them simply believe, but try and
examine. The Jews, to whom he preached, had all along received the Scriptures
of the Old Testament as the Word of God; and for what he taught of himself, he
appeals to those Scriptures. Search the Scriptures (says he) for in them ye
think ye have eternal life; and they are they which testify of me, John V. 39.
And this is not all, but he appeals for the truth of his Doctrine, to the Works
which he wrought before their eyes. The works (says he) which my Father has
given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the
Father has sent me, John V. 36. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me
not; but if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works; that ye may know
and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him, John X. 37, 38. He was
then a man approved of God among them, by miracles, and wonders, and signs,
which God did by him in the midst of them, as they themselves also knew, Acts
II. 22. And after all, he himself suffered death for the confirmation of his
Doctrine, and therefore could have no worldly end in deceiving his Disciples.
But what greater evidence could they, or the World desire, that he did not
deceive them, than this, That as he taught them to understand his Doctrine; so
he gave them power to do the same kind of works, as he had done, for the
confirmation of it: according to his promise, John XIV. 12. He that believes
in me, the works that I do, shall he do also; and greater works than these
shall he do, because I go to my Father. They saw then what he did, and they
felt in themselves what he had enabled them to do in his Name. Yea, many others
saw, and felt in themselves the power and virtue of those works which they did.
These works were done in the Streets and Marketplaces; in the Temple, and in
the Synagogues; at their solemn Feasts, and in their most full Assemblies. So
that the people hearing Christ, were astonished, saying, Whence has this man
these things? And what wisdom is this which is given unto him, that even such
mighty works are wrought by his hands? Mark VI. 2. And the Priests and Rulers
of the Jews, when they heard Peter and John, and perceived that they were
unlearned, and ignorant men, they marvelled, and they took knowledge of them,
that they had been with JESUS. And seeing a Miracle done by them, they
confessed it, saying, That indeed a notable miracle has been done by them, is
manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it, Acts IV.
13, 16.

Lastly, Seeing it is said, these men might be deceived by JESUS, and so deceive
others; let it be farther considered, What hopes either He or They could have,
that such a Delusion should prevail. Had they such hope, or had they not? If
not, would they suffer as they did, and as beforehand they knew they must,
merely to promote, and carry on a Delusion which they had no hope would ever
succeed? Will any one lose all he has, endure all pains and miseries, and a
cruel death too, only to have the satisfaction of attempting, what he thinks it
in vain to attempt? Had they such hope? And whence had they it? Could they hope
that the mighty Princes, and the great Scholars and Wisemen of the World could
be deluded by them? Could they hope that all, or many, would give so much
Credit to a few mean and unlearned Men, as for their sakes to change their
Opinions which they had sucked in with their Mother's milk, wherein their
Ancestors had lived and died; yea, and cast away their Gods too, whom they had
so long worshipped, and by whom they thought themselves protected and made
prosperous? They could never dream of such a thing, and it is plain that they
built not their hope on their own Credit or Reputation: If they had done so,
they would have set themselves out to the eye of the World in their best
colors; they would have carefully concealed and hid their own Infirmities, and
every thing which might lessen their Reputation among men. But they were very
free in laying open to public view their own Blemishes and Failings, their
Ignorances and their Sins. And certainly, this is not the custom of Deceivers,
or of men that would be believed on the stock of their own Reputation. It is
therefore plain, That the hope they had of having their Doctrine received, was
wholly founded on the Excellence of the Doctrine it self, and on the Power of
him from whom they had it. They doubted not therefore to leave it to shift for
it self, and to be tried by its own apparent goodness. They feared not, but he
who sent them to preach it, would own it, and give it acceptance where it
pleased him it should be embraced; and finally recompense them abundantly for
all their Sufferings.

These things all considered, no man can have reason to doubt of their honesty.
And they being found both knowing and honest, they wanted nothing to qualify
them for writing these things. And therefore we can have no cause to distrust
them, telling us that they wrote the word of GOD.

3. And now if after all this, we find that these men's writings are such, as
have all the Characters of Divine Truth, what more can we desire?

1. The Matters revealed in them, are truly worthy of GOD to reveal, and
necessary for Man to know. 2. The Manner of their Revelation is such, that the
hand of GOD does visibly appear in it. 3. The Success which the Doctrine of
these Writings has had, is such, as none but GOD could give it.
In sum, They are such things, as if there be a GOD, we would judge it most fit
for him to make known; and such as are made known in such a manner, as we would
think it most proper for him to reveal them in; and such as have had such
success, as we would think it well becoming him to give them.

1. The Matters contained in the Holy Scriptures, are such things as are truly
worthy of GOD, if there be one, to reveal; and necessary for us men to know.

1. The History of the Creation of the World, and of all things in it, and of
Man especially; of God's Universal Providence, and Government, and of his
Special Providence over those that serve him; Of his Judgments executed on the
Wicked, and his special Mercies to, and Deliverances wrought for the Righteous;
this is certainly apt to beget in us the most high thoughts and esteem of GOD;
the greatest Reverence, and most humble Adoration of the Divine Majesty; the
most free submission, and cheerful Resignation to him, and an entire Dependence
on him, as our Maker, Owner, Preserver and Governor; on whose Goodness and
Favor depends our Life and Happiness, and whose Displeasure and Wrath must
needs be our Destruction. And can we think it unbecoming GOD to acquaint us
with this? or needless for us to know it?

2. To have a true Information of the Special Goodness of GOD to us Men, even
from first to last: Of his Making Man at first in his own Image, with an
Immortal Soul, and a Beautiful Body, and his providing all things needful for
the good and welfare of both; and his giving him the Dominion over, and the
free use of most other Creatures. How Man fell from this good and honorable
State, into all manner of Misery, by disobeying GOD. How the World, the good
Work of GOD, became both so wicked, and so full of Troubles and Sorrows. What
wise and gracious Methods GOD has used to preserve in all Ages, and in the
midst of a world of wickedness, an holy Generation of People for himself; and
what wonderful means he has of his Infinite Goodness through JESUS CHRIST
provided for us; whereby, notwithstanding our natural Corruption and Guilt, we
may yet again be restored to his Favor, and our Blessedness.

3. To afford us such a sight of GOD's Nature and Attributes as we are capable
of in this life; his Majesty, Immensity, Power, Wisdom and Goodness, and all
things necessary to be understood of him, in order to our Duty toward him, and
Happiness in him. To open unto us those unfathomable Mysteries, of the
Incomprehensible TRINITY in UNITY, One undivided GOD in the Three distinct
Persons of FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST; of the wonderful INCARNATION of the
Eternal SON of GOD for the Redemption of Sinners; of his Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, Intercession, and coming again to Judgment. Of the Miraculous
sending of the HOLY GHOST, his Inspiring of the Apostles with Gifts and Graces
befitting their Office. These, and the like, are such things as men could never
attain to the knowledge of, but by Divine Revelation.

4. To give us Laws whereby we are to govern our selves, and such Laws as our
own Reason being made judge, are most Holy, and Just, and Good; all visibly
tending to advance among us the Honor and Glory of GOD who gave them, and
promote the Happiness of Men to whom they are given; binding us to nothing but
to pay unto GOD such a Homage and Duty, as we must confess we naturally owe
him, and are by our Nature fitted to pay him; to do our selves and others all
the good we can, and no hurt at all; and to do every one of us what lies in
our-power to make this world, whilst we live in it, a pleasant, peaceable, and
comfortable place of habitation to us.

5. To certify us, What shall become of us, when by Death we shall go out of
this world; what Rewards there are for the Good, and what Punishments for the
Wicked: To show us the twofold Eternal Future State of Happiness and Misery;
and that our present Life is our Time of Trial and of Discipline; and as we
behave our selves, does certainly bring us to one of these two. To assure us,
That our Souls do never dye, and that our Bodies after Corruption, shall be
raised again Incorruptible: And that we must in Soul and Body be brought to
Judgment, and by the Laws under which we have lived, be either finally
condemned or acquitted.

Let any one say, what things he can suppose, if there be a GOD, more worthy of
Him to reveal, or more needful for us to know, than such as these. Could we be
better instructed in the Knowledge of either GOD or our selves? Could we be
better directed how to Honor GOD, or to do good to our selves? Could we have
had any greater Encouragements to Goodness, or any greater Discouragements to
live wickedly? Could we desire a fairer or more satisfactory account of things
not otherwise knowable, and yet fit to be known by us? Had we not been at an
utter loss, and in a lamentable confusion about these things, had they not been
thus revealed to us? Have any of the wisest men in the world been able to give
us any rational account, or but indifferent satisfaction about the Original of
the World, or of us Men, or of what shall be after Death; what we may either
fear or hope for? In what a confounded state had we been, and what very Beasts
must we have lived and died, without some knowledge of these things? And who
could ever have made us know these things, but GOD? And can we then any longer
think, that these things are not most worthy of GOD to make known unto men?

2. The manner of Revelation is such, that the Hand of GOD does visibly appear
in it. GOD has spoken unto us in his Word, in in as Visible and Audible, and
every way convincing a manner, as we can conceive how, if there be a GOD, he
should do. GOD, as was said, is in his Nature Invisible; nor has he a Voice,
as Bodies have, to be heard by; yet has he been seen and heard speaking unto
men, so as an Invisible and Incorporal Being or Spirit can be seen or heard:
and so as men may know it is He that speaks unto them. For his Word was delivered

1. With many visible and audible significations and tokens of his Presence. 2.
With Prophecy, foretelling things within the compass of His knowledge only. 3
With Miracles, which are the proper works of Divine Power.
1. The Atheist would, for his satisfaction, see and hear GOD speak. If it will
satisfy him, That GOD has been seen and heard speaking, he has been seen and
heard both, so as any one can conceive that he could be seen and heard; that
is, in visible and audible significations and tokens of his Divine Presence.
Thus did GOD call upon, and talk with Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, both
before and after they had sinned, Genesis II. 15, etc. III. 9, etc. Thus he
appeared and spoke unto Abraham; as Genesis XV. 1, etc. XVII. 1, etc. XVIII. 1,
23, etc. Thus did he appear and speak unto Moses, in a Flame of Fire in a Bush,
Exodus III. 2. And so he did to the Israelites from the Mount, in fire and
smoke, the noise of a trumpet, with thundrings and lightnings, Exodus XIX. 18,
19, 20. I need not say how often, and how many ways GOD has so manifested
himself speaking unto men.

But it may be the Atheist will say, If he himself could see or hear GOD
speaking, he would believe it to be His Word which he heard. And truly if he be
of this mind, that he will believe nothing but what he himself sees and hears,
he is too great a fool to be reasoned into any thing, and therefore not to be
discoursed with at all. It has been already showed, what reason we have to
believe that these men speak Truth, who tell us all this of GOD. And if he will
not believe upon the best evidence that can be given of a thing, tho it was, he
cannot believe at all. However, suppose he should himself see or hear what
Abraham and Moses heard and saw: Or suppose he should see the Church filled, as
the Tabernacle and Temple of old, with a Cloud or Smoke; or hear a Voice from
the Altar, as that from between the Cherubims over the Mercy-Seat; or suppose
he should hear and see such a Voice and Glory as those at the Baptism of
CHRIST, Luke III. 22. Or at the Conversion of St. Paul, Acts IX. 3, 4. Or at
the Transfiguration of our Blessed Savior on the Mount* Matt. 17. 5. Or
suppose he should hear GOD calling upon him, as he did upon Samuel, by his
name, 1 Samuel 3, 4. Would he not (as that Child did before Eli better instructed
him), think it the voice of some other, or account of it but as a Dream or a
Fancy? If he say again, He would be satisfied thus, and otherwise he cannot;
then I answer, That it is not in the power of man to say any thing that may
satisfy him; and it is much to be feared, that GOD will not give him any other
satisfaction. For is it reasonable to expect that GOD should, merely to humor
every obstinate Fool, show himself every day, or as often as a wicked man
pleases, and just in such a manner as he would have him; and for no other
cause, but because he is sullen and unreasonable, and will not believe any
thing that GOD has formerly said or done, to satisfy him? Why should GOD have
such hard measure from him, above all others? Will he not believe he has his
Father's Will and Testament, unless his Father himself, whenever he requires
it, come from the dead to tell him so? And why must GOD, who has given him his
Will in writing, sufficiently attested, appear as he pleases, to confirm it
anew unto him?

2. Much of the Word of GOD has been given unto us by way of Prophecy,
foretelling things to come, which are within the compass of His Knowledge only:
And the Prophecies in the Scripture have been notoriously and undeniably
fulfilled; I mean, so many of them as were to be fulfilled before the days
wherein we now live; and if these have been so fulfilled, we can have no cause
to doubt, but all the rest will be so too, when the time shall come. Now things
to come, are acknowledged not to be within the compass of man's knowledge,
especially such as depend not necessarily on Natural Causes, or are not wont to
follow one another in the ordinary course and order of Nature. We are all of us
very sure, That we know not what shall be on the morrow, James IV. 14. We
cannot tell what a day, (no, not what the next hour or minute) may bring forth,
Prove. XXVII. 1. Nay, we know not certainly, whether or no there shall be
another day, or who shall live to see it, or in what condition it will find us.
We are not only ignorant of such future things as are of least concernment to
us, which we have little desire to know, or see no reason to enquire after; but
of the things which we most long to know, and would account it a very great
satisfaction to be assured of. We know not whether we shall be at ease or in
pain, sick or in health, alive or dead, the very next day or hour: We know not
whether we shall be rich or poor, or have any meat to eat, or be able to eat
it, if we have it; so uncertain are all future things to us. Yet we are sure,
there have been Prophecies of things to come, and very true ones too: Men have
foretold things many hundreds of years beforehand, which came to pass in all
Circumstances of Time, Place, and Manner, as they had been foretold. Some
indeed have been bold enough to foretell things by human Art and Skill, but have
only befooled thereby both themselves, and all that trusted to them. If any of
them have sometimes guessed right, 'twas either, First, By Chance; as he that
guesseth a Thousand times, has ill luck if he guess not right once or twice;
tho he knows no more when he does so, than when he guesseth wrong. Or he saves
his credit by Craft and Cunning, as most of the old Oracles, and our
Astrologers, who utter their Predictions in ambiguous Expressions, which are
capable of a double Sense and Construction: If things happen as you understood
their words, they have got Credit without any reason for it; and if things fall
out otherwise than you understood them, they can tell you, You were mistaken in
their meaning, and they meant as it has happened. It Is true also, That when men
will not hearken to the Truth of GOD, he may give them up to Delusion, and may
suffer a Deceiver to hit on a Truth, to make way for the belief of a Lie, as a
very just Punishment of an unreasonable Infidelity. But they only, whose
Knowledge of Things Future, they themselves confessed to be of GOD, and not
acquired by Human Art, and whose design it was, to draw men off from Idolatry,
and every evil thing, to the Worship and Service of the True and Living God;
have constantly, and without failing, foretold things truly; and the Event has
always verified their Predictions. And who but GOD alone, who governs and
disposes of all things according to his own Eternal Decree and Council, could
make them so knowing? In the Holy Scriptures we have many such Prophecies; As
concerning the Carrying of the Jews Captive into Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar;
their Restoration to their own Country by Cyrus: The Succession of the Four
Famous Monarchies in Daniel: The Coming of our Lord JESUS, and his Sufferings:
The Final Destruction of the Temple, and of the whole Jewish Nation: And these
things, with many more there foretold, have been undeniably fulfilled. And is
not this a demonstration, that these men's Prophecies were GOD's own Word? Let
them bring forth their strong reasons (says GOD by his Prophet) and show us
what shall happen: Let them show the former things what they be, that we may
consider them; or declare us things for to come. Show us the things that are to
come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods, Isa. XLI. 22, 23. Tell ye,
and bring them near, let them take counsel together. Who has told it from that
time? Have not I the LORD? And there is no GOD else besides me, Isa. XLV. 21. I
am GOD, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, and
from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My Counsel shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure, Isa. XLVI. 10, 11.

3. This Word has been delivered with Miracles to confirm it, which are the
Works of Divine Power only. We know that it is not in the Power of Man, or of
any thing else, but of the Great GOD of Nature, and LORD of the World, to alter
any thing in the Course of Nature; to do things which exceed the Power of
Natural Causes, or to make things act quite contrary to their Natures. When
therefore we see such things done, we must acknowledge a Power above all Natural
Power whereby they are done. Yet is it as certain as History and Observation
can make it, that such things have been done, and by those very men from whom
we have what we call the Word of GOD.

Indeed, all things in the World, from the greatest to the least, are truly
wonderful to us; as being far above, not only our Skill to imitate, but also
our Reason thoroughly to understand; yet we call not all things Miracles, Only
such things as rarely happen, and not according to the ordinary course of
Nature, are accounted Miracles. As when the Fire refuses to burn those that
are cast into it; when the Water divides it self, and stands up like two walls
on each hand, to let men pass through it on dry ground; when the Sun stands
still in Heaven, and doubles the length of the day; When men without any
Medicinal Art or help, by a touch or a word only, either take away, or restore
sight, hearing, health and strength; dispossess Devils, command Winds and Seas,
take life from the living, and give life to the dead. These things above the
power, and contrary to the course of Nature, are Miracles. And these, with
others many, have been done. Not indeed every day, and ordinarily; for then
would they have been disregarded as common things, and cease to be Wonders. Not
secretly neither, nor in some close corners only; for then few could have
witnessed, and fewer would have believed them. Neither yet were they done upon
any slight or trivial occasion; for then would they have been looked on only as
Casualties and odd Chances. But they were done rarely, to increase the wonder;
yet openly, to gain belief; and upon special and weighty Occasions, that the
Cause might be more noted. They who did them, owned that it was GOD who
extraordinarily enabled them, and that not for their sakes; but for his own
Glory, and in confirmation of the truth of what he had sent them to teach. In a
word, all was to make GOD known unto men, and to persuade men to seek their
happiness in him. By such Works did GOD bear witness to his own Word. And every
one but a Fool will say, Blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel, who only does
wondrous things, Psalm. LXXII. 18. Thou art great, and do wondrous things;
thou art GOD alone, Psalm. LXXXVI. 10. Understand ye brutish among the people,
and ye fools, when will ye be wise? Psalm. XCIV. 8. Whosoever is wise, and will
observe these things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the
LORD, Psalm. CVII. 43.

3. The Success which the Doctrine contained in the holy SCRIPTURE has had,
has been such, as none but GOD alone could give it. If the Men, who wrote these
Books we speak of, had not given great satisfaction to the World, that they
spoke from GOD; how came the Doctrine which they taught, to gain belief? How
came it so to take root, and grow, and spread, as it has undeniably done? Why
have not its Enemies, the Wisemen of this World, after so much straining of
their Wits, and using all their Art and Policy to that end, been yet able to
convince men of its solly, vanity or falsehood? Why have not all the Mighty
Powers on Earth, bending their whole force against it, been able to suppress
and stifle it? Whatever Stratagems the Devil or Man could invent, have been
made use of to this purpose. Jews and Gentiles conspired together to crush it
in the Egg. The Heathen raged, and the people imagined a vain thing. The Kings
of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers took counsel together, against the
LORD, and against his Anointed; saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and
cast away their cords from us. As David prophesied of them, Psalm. II. 1, 2, 3.
The Kings of the Earth have persecuted this Religion with Fire and Sword. The
Lusts of men's hearts rise up in open war against it continually. Yet has it
taken root and flourished; it has conquered, and made the most wonderful change
imaginable in men's hearts and lives. This success it has had, not among a few
simple ones, easily deceived; but among the most learned, and understanding,
and judicious. And what can this be imputed to, but to the light and power of
Divine Truth? Indeed by its own light men may easily see all things in it,
which can be proper to commend it to all who think fit to be governed by
Reason, as all but Fools do.

If it be said, That Idolatry is yet reigning over the greatest part of the
World; and the foolish Religion of Mahomet has had very wonderful Success, and
has triumphed over, and quite extinguished Christianity in many places; so
that the least part of the World is at this day Christian; And therefore the
Christian Doctrine gains little credit by its success in the World. In answer
to this, we say these things.

First, Whichsoever of these Religions, Heathenism, Mahometism, or
Christianity, prevail most, or be thought truest; yet is it true still, That
all the World is of some Religion, and owns a GOD. And therefore this is
noObjection against what we at first undertook to prove, That there is a GOD;
Only it may seem to weaken one of our Arguments, whereby we would prove this.
But indeed it does not weaken it at all.

For secondly, We are now only proving, that our Scripture is the Word of GOD;
and this is but one of the many Arguments we use to that end; and the rest are
convincive enough without it. So that should this Argument fail us, yet our
whole Argument, whereby we would, from our having the Word of GOD, prove that
there is a GOD, stands good. But nether does our argument fail us, but proves
what we would prove by it.

For thirdly, We say not, that the Christian Doctrine is received by all men,
or by most men, or by more than they who are of other Religions. All we say is
this, It was in a very short time received in most parts of the then known
World; though for the sins of them who professed it, GOD has suffered it in
many places to be rooted out again. Nor does this lessen its Credit, but rather
confirms its truth. For this is the same which it self foretold, and shows the
care that GOD takes of it; who as he will not suffer it to be quite lost, so
neither will he always afford it them who abuse it. Thus was it foretold to the
Church of Ephesus, Rev. II. 5. I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy
Candlestick out of its place, except thou repent. And thus it happened to that
and other Churches. Accordingly as our Blessed JESUS had told the Jews, Matthew.
XXI. 43. The Kingdom of GOD shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation
bringing forth the fruit thereof. Though therefore Heathenism or Mahometism
fill more of the World than Christianity, yet has the Christian Doctrine had
the success which we speak of.

Fourthly, Though at this day it prevails not over most of the World, yet it
flourishes in the most Civilized and Learned parts of it. Whereas Idolatry and
Mahometism prevail only among the more rude, illiterate, barbarous and brutish
sort of People.

Beside this, Fifthly, it has had the success we speak of, by fair, rational
and indearing Methods, by gentle Persuasions, and convincing Reasons; by its
own visible purity and goodness; by the power of Miracles; without any use of
force or violence: But other Religions prevail only upon the account of
Education, and Custom, and an Affectation of treading in the steps of
Forefathers; or else by Violence and Compulsion, Fire and Sword.

Again Sixthly, Other Religions are upheld, by keeping men in ignorance, and
depriving them of the means of knowledge. And it is no wonder that the greatest
part of the World is still in error, when the light of truth is shut out from
it. They can choose no better, who are suffered to know no better. But the
Christian Religion seeks not for the advantage of men's blindness, and being in
the dark. 'Twas sent To open men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto GOD, Acts XXVI. 18. It charge all it
meets with, to Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. V.
21. If it prevail among men, it is by reason, and light, and knowledge. Men
choose other Religions as blind-men do beauties, by chance. And so the most
deformed is all one with the most handsome. But Christians choose by sight and
judgment.

Lastly, Other Religions do favor and flatter men's Corruptions, and humor
flesh and blood. But the Christian Religion proclaims open war against these;
crosses men's corrupt Inclinations, contradicts their natural Humors, commands
them to deny themselves, and their own Wills, mortifies their darling Lusts,
crucifies the Flesh, destroys Selfishness, commen is patience, lays the Cross
in their way and injoins them to bear it in hope of things not yet seen, and
far off. That other Religions prevail, what wonder is it? Neither can it be any
argument that they are of GOD. Men can easily invent, and are ready to embrace,
and will be very fond of, and not easily change a Religion that indulgeth their
Lusts. But that Christianity, commanding men to offer violence to themselves,
and to part freely with what they love best, should be received by any
considerable number of men, is very wonderful indeed, and shows it to be of
GOD. The power of Lust and Corruption is enough to make men embrace other
Religions; but the Power of GOD only, and of supernatural Grace, could prevail
with men to accept of this.

I have now done with the first Argument, to prove it reasonable to believe,
that there is a GOD; and have shown, that if the Atheist would have GOD show
himself to be, by some such visible and audible significations and tokens of
his being, as we are capable of perceiving him by, he has all the reason that
can be to believe that he has done so. And I have insisted the longer upon
this Point, that in showing the folly of the Atheist, I might at once show the
folly of the Antiscripturist; and that he is as well a Foo^ who denies the
Scripture to be the Word of GOD, as he that says, There is no GOD.

II. If this kind of manifestation of himself, which GOD has given us in his
Word, will not suffice; how else would the Atheist have him to manifest himself
for his satisfaction? Will he be satisfied, if it be showed him, That GOD has
imprinted such a sense of his being in men's minds, that they are not only
capable of perceiving, but generally inclined to acknowledge this truth? I am
now to show him, that GOD has done this, and that Mankind has generally been
very sensible that there is a GOD.

Indeed we have the Testimony of An^els and Men to a^^ure us of this; and one
would think this should be enough; for when every thing that has reason, bears
witness of a thing, he that yet disbelieves it, must confess that he does so
against all the Reason in the World; and he that contradicts all Reason, must
needs be a Fool.

As for the Testimony of Angels, it is in vain to trouble the Atheist with it;
for Angels are invisible Spirits; and for the same reason that he denies there
is a GOD, he will also deny that there are any invisible Spirits; seeing these
can no otherwise appear, or manifest themselves unto men, than we have already
showed that GOD has done. ^ho therefore it be as evident, as it can be made,
that there are such Spirits, both good and bad, and that they have frequently
born witness of GOD; yet seeing it is but the same kind of Evidence, with what
we have spoken of already, I shall not at all insist upon it now, but only on
that which we have from the general consent of Mankind.

Now this Testimony of men for the being of a GOD, is not to be slightly
regarded; it having all the Advantage that Humane Testimony can have. It is not
the Testimony of some few men, but of Mankind generally. It is not the witness
of all men in some one or two Ages of the World, or of some whole Nations only;
but of all Nations, and of all A^es and Generations, since there have been any
men, whom we could hear of, in the World.

Must it not be a very foolish thing in any man, to make himself confident of a
thing, whereof first he can have no degree of assurance; and secondly, whereof
the generality of men think themselves very sure? There can hardly be a clearer
evidence of one's being a Fool, than this, That he takes himself to be wiser
than all the World besides; and that too in holding an Opinion, wherein he
cannot pretend to any evidence at all to ground it upon. Let us therefore here
consider these things.

1. There has not been, at any time, in any place, any People, discovered upon
the face of the whole Earth, that has not owned a GOD. The most barbarous,
wild, and even brutish People, without any kind of Learning, or common
Civility, in their Manners hardly distinguishable from the Beasts of the Field
by any thing else but this, have been found to have some sort of Religious
Worship among them. Though many of them have had no knowledge of the true and
living GOD, for want of instruction; yet would they rather fall down, and
worship any thing, either in Heaven, or upon Earth, yea the very Devils
themselves, than nothing at all. So deeply is this truth, that there is a GOD,
engraven, as it were in the very Nature of Mankind, that nothing could ever yet
eraze, or wear it quite out. Even that gross Idolatry which reigns over so
great a part of the World, is enough to shame the Atheist; for thereby is it
manifest, that the World has never counted any thing more absurd and foolish,
than to think that there is no GOD. Men not knowing who is the true GOD, were
yet so fully convinced that there must be some GOD; that they would worship any
thing, that they thought could do them either good or hurt, rather than nothing
at all.

And as this was the belief of all in general; so look by how much any Nation
was more civilized and cultivated by good Literature; o much the more care
there was taken about Religion, as among the Egyptians, Greeks and Romans. And
such Persons as had the best opportunities, and greatest abilities, for the
search and discovery of Truth, were abundantly satisfied themselves, and took
pains to satisfy others in the reasonableness of this belief. And lastly, they
above others, who with good reason were esteem d the best of men; I mean such
as endeavored to do the World most good; who lived virtuously, and justly, and
did what they could to make men the better, and the happier for them; were
always the most zealous and earnest Promoters and Maintainers of this belief.
When therefore it is apparent, that Mankind generally, and more especiall^, the
Learned, the Wisest, and the Best of men have always believed this; does not
the Atheist show himself a Fool in contradicting all men; having no better
Reason for his Opinion, than only his own Imagination?

If any shall object, That it is upon Record, that there have been some
Atheists in the World, and therefore it is not true, that we have the Universal
Consent of Mankind. The Answer to this Objection is very easy.

1. Many of them who were called Atheists, were not so indeed; but the most
Religious Persons of their time. It was not because they denied that there is a
GOD, but because they denied those Idols, which the Heathens worshipped, to be
Gods indeed, that those blinded Idolaters called them Atheists. And upon this
account it was, that the Primitive Christians of old were by those Idolaters
charged with Atheism.

2. Suppose some few have denied that there is a GOD; yet were they so few, and
inconsiderable, in comparison of the rest who owned a GOD, that they ought not
to be once named in opposition to a general Consent. If, I say, The generality
of Mankind have Eyes and Sight, is it reasonable to say, it is not true,
because an odd man here or there is born blind? If, I say, Men are Rational
Creatures; will any think it a sufficient confutation of this, that he can show
me now and then a natural Fool? With as little reason, when I say, Men
generally own a GOD, can any one object, it is not true; because he can name
one or two odd men, in so many Millions, that have been so blind and foolish,
as not to see and know, what all others see and know.

3. These few that have denied a GOD, had not been taken so much notice of, had
they not been very few indeed; and for their rarity it is, that they were then
wondered at, and since are recorded in History. But as they were noted for the
singularity of their Opinion, so were they hated for their wickedness, branded
as infamous, and as Enemies of Mankind. The World was weary of them; and as
soon as any one began to be suspected to be of this Opinion, his Citizens
banished him out of their Society, as one unfit to live among Mankind. Which is
an Argument, that it is so natural to men to own a GOD, that he who do h not
so, has ever been looked on as a M^nster or s mething that deserves not to be
reckoned among men.

4. These very few, how confident soever, could never produce any considerable
reasons for their opinion; and to talk confidently without reason, is but to
rave like one in a high Fever, and not worthy to be heeded. Now the Athiest
has so little to say for himself, that he has not been able to make many
believe, That ever he believed himself in this point; insomuch that it is at
this day a great Question disputed among Learned Men, whether there can be such
a thing as an Atheist in Judgment. It can hardly be said in propriety of
speech, that a man believes what he can show no reason for believing: And
therefore whilst the Atheist can give no reason for what he says, saying,
There is no GOD; we may say, He does not believe there is a GOD; but it seems
we cannot say, He believes there is none. And the main Reason of his Unbelief,
(for it is no more) when well searched into, will be found no other, but that
very same upon which there are too many Unbelievers now. The love of Wickedness
makes the thoughts of a GOD very uneasy to men, and they are very unwilling to
entertain a Belief that will not suffer them to fulfill their Lusts with Peace
of Mind.

5. Lastly, Remember, That as we have read and heard of some Atheists; so also
have we read or heard this also of them; That for all the shifts they could
make, they could not so fully satisfy themselves, as to quiet their own
Consciences. Bluster indeed they would, and make a noise in the daytime, as if
they feared nothing: Business and Company diverted them from talking much with
themselves, or entering upon serious thoughts: But when night came, and silence
was made; when they were alone and at leisure, and had nothing to do but to
think; whenever their thoughts were fixed on this subject, their fears also came
along with them, and they could not so easily as they desired, get quit of that
GOD, whom they used so confidently to defy. Indeed there are too many who take
a too effectual course to prevent this trouble; they are very careful to keep
their heads day and night so full of the world, and of their Lusts and
Vanities, that the thoughts of GOD can find no room: And thus they constantly
busy their minds, till sleep arrests them. But take any thinking man, that
concerns himself at all about GOD, and a future State, who is willing sometimes
to think what he is, whence he came, and whither he shall go when he dies; and
he shall never be able to satisfy himself so fully, that there is no GOD, but
he will find himself sometimes afraid that there is; and more especially, when
he thinks himself near dying, or in any great danger. The Bloody Emperor, that
would own no GOD but himself, would, when it Thundered, run under his bed to
hide himself. And one that denied a GOD all his life long, grew very sad upon
his deathbed; and being asked by them who heard his sighs, If he believed there
is a GOD, and if it was that which made him sigh? No, (says he) I do not
believe it, only I am thinking in what a sad condition I shall presently be, if
there be one, as I know not but there is. And possibly we may have heard of
one, too well known of many, of whom it is said, that notwithstanding his many
boasts and great confidence, he durst never be alone in the dark, or go to
sleep without a candle lighted up by him.

Lay this together, and then say, if he be not a Fool, who contrary to the
general Sense and Reason of Mankind, will needs be confident that there is no
GOD? Is not he a Fool, who dares conclude, That (except himself, and it may be
two or three more just like himself whom the world, of all others, could best
spare, and whom it could heartily wish to be rid of), all men in the world have
been either Knaves in making, or Fools in believing a Lie?

2. But this Argument from the general sense of Mankind; is yet capable of a
farther improvement. For it is to be considered How, and upon what account, the
whole World should in this one point come to be of the same belief.

It is not an ordinary thing, to find great multitudes of people, all of One
mind, about matters of great and near concernment, if they be not very obvious
and plain either to Sense or Reason. Men stand divided into contrary Opinions
about many things, and especially about matters of Religion, and the several
ways of Religious Worship; and are as contrary to one another, as Light and
Darkness, even in their choice of the gods whom they worship. How is it then,
that they all so unanimously consent in this First Principle of Religion, That
there is a GOD to be worshipped? This is not a thing obvious to Sense. It is
not strange, that all should agree, That there is a Sun in the Heavens, giving
light to the world, because they see it. But they see not GOD. How then are
they all agreed in this too, That there is a GOD, unless this be as obvious to
Reason, as the other is to Sense? And if it be so, he that denies it, must be a
Fool, for denying what is obvious to the Reason of Mankind.

I can think of no more but two ways, whereby men should be brought universally
to consent in a thing of so weighty concernment, which is not obvious to their
senses: Either, First, The Being of a GOD is a thing so imprinted in Nature,
that the Reason of man cannot be awake, and consider things, but it must needs
perceive it. Or, Secondly, Men have been taught it at first, and have
successively taught it to one another, from the beginning. And take which we
will of these, and it will be found a most reasonable thing to believe it.

First, If this be a Truth imprinted in Nature, so that it cannot be worn out
by time, and become invisible, but so soon as men arrive at the use of Reason,
and make use of it as they ought, they cannot but see it; Then whosoever says,
That there is no GOD, must needs be a Fool. For he must needs be a Fool, who
persuades, or endeavors to persuade himself, a thing is not, which it is
Natural to him to discern, and which he can no sooner open, and use as he
ought, the Eye of his Soul to look after, but he must needs see it. If then it
be Natural to men, by the use of Reason to discern the Being of a GOD; and if
this be the reason why men generally (notwithstanding all their other
disagreements) are agreed in this Belief; then is it both Reasonable and
Natural for men to believe it; and if any one believes it not, it is because he
is not a Perfect Man, but is defective in some Faculty essential to Mankind: It
must be either because he wants the use of Reason, or because he will not use
it; and whichsoever it be, no man can deny him to be a Fool: For what is it
else to be a Fool, but either to want the common use of Reason, or to make no
good use of it?

Secondly, If men have been at first taught this, and so have taught it one
another successively throughout all generations, to this day; and thus it has
been universally received as a Truth by Instruction, and uninterrupted
Tradition, throughout all Ages and Parts of the World; This must also be
accounted a very good reason to believe it true, and that it could come
originally from no other but GOD himself.

Yet here the Atheist will needs imagine, that he has gained a considerable
advantage. Some cunning men, (says he) for ends of their own which they would
serve by it, set abroach this Opinion; and most men, seeing how useful it
proved for the preservation of Order and good Government, easily entertained
it; and Rulers, finding the advantage of it to themselves, have done all they
could to countenance it, and have punished all that questioned it: And thus,
tho but a Politic Invention at first, it has prevailed at length, as a
certain Truth.

Now if we had no other Reasons but mere Tradition for the Belief of a GOD, I
confess what is here said, might seem more plausible; and yet, when well
considered, not very credible. However, it is no more, but one of the Fools
May-be's, on which he is content to venture his Soul, and all his Happiness,
and I think him no less a Fool for that: He imagines, it may be thus; but dare
he say, He knows it is thus indeed? No; but he is so afraid of all thoughts of
a GOD, that he is willing to have any thing thought true, rather than that it
should be thought that there is a GOD, to whom he must give an account of
himself. It is certain, that the world generally has believed, there is a GOD,
the Atheist cannot deny that: And we all know by experience, That all men are
not very apt, in matters of so weighty concernment, to be of one opinion, where
the thing is not very obvious to Sense or Reason. The Atheist knows this too:
And yet rather than it shall be thought, that it is so agreeable to Reason,
that men cannot but generally consent in it, without seeming enemies to Reason;
the Atheist will again set his Fancy a-work, to imagine what else may be. And
what has he now hit upon? Why, It may be the whole World has been always
deceiv^d by somebody, he knows not by whom, into the belief of a GOD. It is an
endless thing to answer Dreams, a Sick-man's Ravings, or a Fool's Fancies.
However, let it be considered,

1. What is already said, That the Atheist cannot pretend to know what he
says, to be true; but says only, It may be so for ought he knows. And then
for us to say, It may not be so, for ought he knows, is answer enough to all he
has said, and to prove him a Fool too for saying it: For if it either may be,
or may not be so for ought he knows, he is a Fool for venturing his Soul upon
its being so. The World is now some Hundreds above Five Thousand Years old, and
no man in this long tract of time could ever yet discover this Forgery here
imagined: No man could ever find out who it was that first set abroach this
Opinion; or in what Age or Part of the World it first began; or indeed where at
any time it was not, or that ever there was a time when it was not the
Universal Opinion of Mankind. It is as old, as is the memory of Man upon the
Earth; for the very first Man that has been heard of in the World, was of this
opinion. And whatever History gives us any account of Men, since the appearance
of the First man, assures us withal, That those men did own a GOD. Yea, we find
not only that it was ever the opinion of the anciently-known Parts of the
World, but also of those very lately-discover'd parts of it, which have had for
many Thousands of Years, (as far as we can understand) no manner of
Correspondence with the rest of Mankind. So that if this Opinion was propagated
both to them and us by Tradition, then This Tradition can hardly have any later
date, than that of the Universal Flood in the days of Noah, about Four thousand
Years ago.

2. Think therefore, if it be not much more likely, That this Belief was at
first taught the World by GOD himself, than by any such Cunning man as the
Atheist dreams of. It began in the very first man that we have had any notice
of; it has continued ever since, through all Generations of men that we have
heard of in all parts of the world: And is it not then most likely, that it was
taught the First man by GOD himself? There is no difficulty in conceiving this,
and we have as good evidence as we can desire, that it was so indeed. But we
have no manner of Evidence at all, that it was an Invention of some later man,
nor is it easily conceivable how it should be so. For,

3. It is not easy to imagine, how that man (whoever the Ath^ist would have
him to be) should persuade all those who had always lived without any thoughts
of a GOD, so generally to believe him. He, or a few more with him, could not be
of Power enough to compel all men by force into this belief. Force indeed may
compel men to make a show of believing what they believe not; but to believe
indeed, what men can see no reason for believing, no Force in the world can
compel men: But that men should universally be compelled, so much as to make a
show of believing what they believed not, by the power of some one, or a few
men, is a thing altogether incredible. If then (as the Atheist would have it)
any one, or some few men, did at first persua^e the world into this belief,
which it had not before, and which, considering the corruption of men, we may
be sure it had no mind to entertain; he must needs do it by making the thing
propounded to their belief; appear to them very reasonable. For,

First, Tho some silly and unconsidering people might easily be deceived by men
of ^raft and Subtilt, yet we cannot suppose all men to have been so simple and
inconsiderate. And it is well known, that the most K^owing, Learned, and Wise,
have ever been of this belief, and therefore it must be Reason that could
persuade them to it.

Secondly, Tho the men of some one Age had been so simple, as to be imposed
upon by a Fallacy or Deceit, yet had no age after it the Wit to find it out?
Why could no Witty Atheist, with all his stock of Reason and Learning, which he
is wont to brag on, discover the Fallacy, and undeceive the world again?
Certainly there have been in some Ages of the world, since this Opinion first
came in, men of good Sense, and a competent Understanding to know Reason when
they hear it: Why then has no Atheist all this while, by his better Reasons,
convinced at least the more Understanding part of mankind, of this Error which
he supposes them to have been led into?

Thirdly, Men are generally so much in love with wickedness, that, First, They
must have been very Weighty Reasons that could persuade any considerable number
to believe a GOD: And Secondly, Very Weak Reasons, could they but find any at
all, may seem enough to persuade them, There is no GOD.

There is nothing in the world more unwelcome to a wicked man, than any talk of
a GOD. To be bid to believe that there is one by whose holy and strict Laws he
is to be ruled in all his thoughts, words, and deeds; one who is every where
present with him, observing his whole behavior, and keeping an exact Register
of all his sins; one who will call him to an account, and will punish him for
all his wickedness; this goes exceedingly against the hair: It Is this that
fills his Soul with fears; and troubles his mind with sad thoughts; and marrs
his frothy mirth, and spoils his sinful pleasures, and afrights him from his
wicked designs, and will not let him quierly have his own will, nor allow him
to humor himself, and make much of his flesh. This bridles his appetite,
restrains his lusts, crosses his natural inclinations, lays a bar in the way of
his worldly interests, cuts him short in his desired liberties: And because of
all this, he would be glad in his heart that any one could assure him, That
there is no GOD. Hence it appears, That the Atheist has all the advantages on
his side, that he can desire, to enable him to convince men of this Error, if
it be one. By reason of their corruption, men are very ready to hearken to him,
and desire nothing more, than to hear him prove what he says; yea, they would
reward him at any rate for his pains. It Is a very easy thing to persuade men
unto what they love; and a weak argument is strong enough to make men believe
what they would fain believe: Why then is the wicked man's good friend the
Atheist so sparing of his Reasons, when he may so fairly hope to convince men
by them? The truth is, by all this it plainly appears, both that they are very
strong Reasons, that prevail with men against their own corrupt inclinations,
to believe a GOD; and that the Atheist has no Reason at all on his side, seeing
he is not able to convince men, who fain would have it so, That there is no GOD.

Fourthly, What end had this Imaginary man, which the Atheist talks of, in
putting this Opinion of a GOD, into men's heads? It was (says he) to make men
more tame, and to bring them under Government and Laws. And it is very true,
that men may easily be made sensible, that without Government and Laws, we
should all be like so many wild beasts of prey, tearing and devouring one
another; and that nothing can make men more governable, than the belief of a
GOD. But after all this, what does that which the Atheist says, amount to?
This we will readily grant him,

1. That considering the general wickedness of mankind, Government and severe
Laws are very necessary things.

2. That the belief of a GOD, is that which, above all other things, will
soonest bring men to submit to Government.

3. That if the belief of a GOD, were an invention of man, it were a very
proper invention for the making men more governable.

But now the thing which we would hear proved, is, That the belief of a GOD is
but an invention of man for that end. Government, indeed, will never be upheld
in the world, without this belief, and therefore this belief is necessary to
uphold Government: But will it now follow from hence, That this belief is only
a device of man, to uphold Government? No certainly; but this follows (which
the Atheist has no mind to hear of), That he who thinks there is no GOD, is an
Enemy to Government, and ought not to have the Protection of Government, nor to
enjoy the Privileges of a Subject; but ought to be banished from all Societies
of men, as the greatest enemy to them in the world.

And now, seeing it is granted by the Atheist, That this belief is so necessary
for the maintaining of Civil Government in the world; I will be bold hence to
infer a Conclusion quite contrary to his, viz. That it is the more likely for
that to be true, and to come from GOD, and not to be an invention of man. And
the reasonableness of this Inference will thus appear:

1. Government and Laws are on purpose to tie men up to live by Rule, to
restrain them within the bounds of Justice and Sobriety; to keep them from
taking the liberty they would otherwise take, and from having their own wills
in every thing that they may have a longing mind unto. Now that which could
persuade men to be thus tied up and restrained, must needs appear to them very
reasonable in it self, otherwise they would never be brought to thrust their
Necks into a Yoke for the sake of something, which they saw not beforehand
good reason to believe. If the Atheist say, That though they saw no reason
beforehand to believe that there is a GOD, yet the benefit of good Government,
and the desire of safety, which they could not have without Government, was
enough to make them content, whether they believed it or no, that it should
pass for a truth. In saying this, he confutes himself; for if the desire of
safety, not to be had without Government, was it that persuaded them to admit
this opinion of a GOD, true or false; and merely for the sake of Government,
because without it they could not be safe: Then did their own safety
sufficiently convince them of the necessity of Government, and was enough to
persuade them to admit of it without the belief of a GOD. And so the Atheist's
Politician was only a Politic Would-be, and would seem wise in inventing a
thing there was no need of; for it is plain, that the belief of a GOD was not
necessary in order to Government, if the desire of safety was enough to
persuade men to it. But this very pretense of the Atheist, That the Opinion of
a GOD was set on foot to uphold Government, is a confession, that all other
motives to subjection without this belief, are insufficient; and seeing this
belief is the principal motive to admit of Government, men must needs
beforehand see good reason for it, for otherwise it could be no motive at all.

2. If the belief of a GOD be the principal thing that holds men in subjection
to Civil Government, and within the bounds of Justice and Sobriety, then if it
be not a true belief, it must be granted, That a Lie is the very foundation of
all Virtue and Goodness, Peace and Order, Justice and Honesty, Fidelity and
Safety among men; and it is for the great good of the whole World, and so the
duty of all men to believe a Lie; And that there is nothing so wicked, because
nothing can be so dangerous, mischievous and pernicious to Mankind, as to
believe the Truth. It is a truth (says the Atheist) that there is no GOD. Then
is truth, and the belief of it, the fountain of all evil and mischief, disorder
and confusion. It Is a Lie (says he again) to say, there is a GOD. Then a Lie,
and the belief of it, is the fountain of all Goodness and Virtue, and of all
the happiness too in the World. Can any one but a Fool believe this? And yet he
must believe it, that believes the Atheist saying, That the belief of a GOD is
only an invention of man to keep the World in good order.

This is enough to be said of our Second Argument to demonstrate the Atheist's
folly, taken from the general Consent of Mankind. And surely, he can hardly be
thought a Wiseman himself, who ventures to call that man wise, whom the whole
World, as we have seen, calls a Fool.

III. I come to the Third Argument grounded on the Works of GOD: And this I may
call the Testimony of the whole Creation, of all things animate and inanimate.
If there are such Works, as are the visible Effects of an Eternal Being, of
Infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, there must needs be a GOD; and he must be
a Fool that says, there is none. And here again we have a far more likely
cause of the Universal Consent of Mankind in this belief, than that which the
Atheist imagined as possible only. By the Effect the Cause is known. If we see
things made, we know they had a Maker. Men generally have seen such things in
the World, as they could not conceive to be the Effects of any less Power than
GODs, and therefore they very rationally concluded, that there is a GOD. And
this is the Argument which St. Paul has taught us, Romans I. 19, 20. That which
may be known of GOD is manifest in them, for GOD has showed it unto them. For
the invisible things of him from the Creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and
Godhead: so that they are without excuse. That is, so much of GOD, as may be
known by the Light of Nature (for with GOD is terrible Majesty; touching the
Almighty, we cannot find him out, Job XXXVII. 22, 23. How little a portion is
heard of him? Job XXVI. 14.) But so much as may be known of GOD without Divine
and Supernatural Revelation, was manifest in, or among, the very Heathen
People, for of them St. Paul there speaks. And how was it manifest in them?
Thus, GOD himself had showed it to them. And which way had he done so, but by
his Works? For though GOD is a Being in his own nature invisible, and his
essential Power and Godhead cannot be seen in themselves; yet are they, and
ever have been from the Creation of the World clearly seen in his Works. How
are they seen in his Works? By the Eye of the Soul, or the Understanding, they
are understood. And by what, but by the things that are made? All the visible
Creatures, from the highest to the lowest, are as so many Books, wherein all
men have been able to read the Eternal Being and Power of GOD. In short, GOD
has left such legible Characters of his Infinite Power and Godhead imprinted
on the World, and all things therein; and has endued man with such a Faculty
of discerning them, that whosoever makes not this good use of his Understanding, to
read and learn this from the Creatures, is without excuse, and a wilfully blind
Fool. And this is it (whatever the Atheist is pleased to fancy to himself, as
Fools are wont to be very Fanciful) that has in all Ages brought men
universally to agree in this belief; even as all men who see the clear day
light, are agreed that the Sun is up, although they see it not. And this will
always be a sufficient proof of a GOD to every one that uses his Reason to
consider things; and to him that does not so, there can be no rational proof of
any thing.

Now the Works of GOD are either the common Works of Creation and Universal
Providence; or the rarer Works of Special and Extraordinary Providence; and
Wisemen have ever been wont by both these to reason themselves into the belief
of a GOD. We will at present consider but some few of them.

1. Observe the whole and entire frame and Fabric of the visible World. What
less can we gather from it, but that there is some Infinite Power and Wisdom,
that contrived this vast Building, and set all things thus together in that
beautiful, curious, and useful order wherein we behold them? If one see but a
House strongly and magnificently built, wisely and usefully contrived,
gloriously and sumptuously adorned and furnished, though he as yet see no man
appear in it, or about it, will he be such a Fool as to say, it had no Builder?
For every House is builded by some man; but he that built all things is GOD,
Heb. III. 4. If one see a Watch or a Clock, and observe how artificially all
the several parts of it are fashioned, and put together; and farther, how all
the little Wheels, though diverse of them have several motions of their own, do
all concur to one constant and regular motion of the Hand or Index; though he
neither saw it made, nor know who made it, will he be so foolish as to say it
had no maker? How much more a Fool must he be, who daily beholds the admirable
frame of Heaven, Earth, Sea and Air, and all things therein; and observes the
glorious beauty and splendour, the unexpressible variety, the wonderful
contrivance, the vast compass and capacity, the regular and constant courses,
motion and order of them all; the ample provision made for every thing
agreeable to its nature, the mutual service and usefulness of one thing to
another, and innumerable other tokens of Power, Wisdom and Goodness,
everywhere visible; and yet after all, talks at this rate, Though I know not
which way these things should come to be as they are, yet surely there needed
neither Power, nor Wisdom, nor Goodness, to make, contrive, and order them
thus. And though I have a very fair and rational account given me in that which
we call the Scripture, how they come to be thus, yet I will not believe it. It
may be they were always thus of themselves, or they happened to be thus by
chance, but surely they had no powerful Maker, or wise Contriver. He that
talked thus of a House, or a Watch, you would think he were mad; and shall not
he that talks thus of the World, and all things therein, be a Fool? Yet this is
it, and this is all that the Atheist has to say.

2. Let us come to some particulars, and take but a slight view of some of
those several sorts of things which we see, and daily reap the benefit of; and
see if we can find any one thing whereof any reasonable account can be given,
without the belief of a GOD.

Let us first lift up our eyes to the Heavens above, and observe How the
heavens declare the glory of GOD, and the firmament shows his handy work,
Psalm XIX. 1. Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who has created these
things, that brings out their host by number, Isa. XL. 26. I, even my hand
have stretched out the Heavens, and all their host have I commanded, Isa. XLV.
12. What a vast Round do we there see encompassing this world of Creatures? Of
what a wonderful greatness are those bright Globes of Light which move within
it, The Sun, the Moon and Stars; some whereof are certainly known to be many
and many times bigger than this whole Globe of Earth and Water, whereon we
live. How fitly are all those glorious and sparkling Lights placed in the
Firmament for our advantage, to afford us both light, and warmth, and
nourishment here below? How orderly and constantly do they move to shed abroad
their Influences the more equally upon all the Earth, and for the right
proportioning of our Seasons? Were they nearer us, they would dazzle and blind
us, instead of enlightening us; scorch and burn up, instead of warming and
cherishing the Earth. Were they farther off, the Earth would be always frozen
and barren, and we should die with hunger and cold. Did they not move round the
lower World, their influences could not in any equal proportion be distributed
to the several parts of the Earth; there would be no certain vicissitudes, and
orderly returns of Night and Day, Spring and Summer, Autumn and Winter. Much of
the World would be useless through too much cold and darkness, or excess of
heat. How regular, even and constant are their motions, always finished exactly
in the same space of time, and returning to the same points? They have never in
the least varied them for so many Ages, whether it be their yearly, monthly, or
daily courses. Nor is one year, or one day in any year, ever one minute either
longer or shorter, than another year, or another day at the same time of
another year. From such Observations as these, even the wise Heathens, such us
Cicero, Plutarch, and the rest, rationally concluded, that there must needs be
a GOD. Yea, says Cicero, Who would call him a Man, who when he sees the Motions
of Heaven so certain, the Orders of the Stars so settled, and all things so
connected among themselves, etc. should yet deny that there is reason in them,
or say, this were done by chance, when by no understanding we are able to
conceive, with how great wisdom these things are governed. Yea, What can be so
plain and clear (says he) when we look up to Heaven, and view the Celestial
Bodies, as that there is some GOD of most excellent understanding, whereby
these things are ordered?

Let us now look down upon this great body of Earth and Water below, and
observe how it hangs like a little round Ball in the midst of the thin Air
incompassing it round about, notwithstanding its prodigious bulk and weight,
and all that huge load of things continually upon it. Yet, as the Psalmist
says, Psalm. LXXVIII. 69 GOD has established it for ever. And Psalm. CIV. 5. He
has laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be moved for ever.
See it incircled about with Water as with a Girdle, the Seas, as it were,
continually roaring against it, and threatening to overflow, and swallow it up.
And who but GOD, can we think, has set a bound that they may not pass over,
that they turn not again to cover the earth? Psalm. CIV. 9. He rules the raging
of the Sea; when the waves thereof arise, he stilleth them, Psalm. LXXXIX. 9. He
has said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no farther; and here shall thy proud
waves be stayed, Job XXXVIII. 11. Observe, how both Earth and Water are
stocked, and plentifully furnished with all sorts of things which are useful
for the service of men. With Stones, Metals, and Minerals of all sorts, for
building, fire, and many other necessary uses; with Herbs and Plants, and
Fruits, Fishes, Fowls and Cattle; and all things needful for the labor and
service of man, for his Food and Raiment, for his Physic, and Delight, and
Recreation; and all in the greatest plenty and variety. How many thousand sorts
of Herbs, Shrubs, Trees and Flowers find we on the Earth? How many learned
Volumes are filled with the virtues of them? How admirably is every one of
these formed and contrived, with Roots whereby they are fastened in the Earth,
and suck in proper nourishment from it; with Veins to convey that nourishment
into all the many Branches, Leaves and Fruit; with Bark and Rind to guard from
the violence of both heat and cold; with Husks and Shells to cherish the Fruit
and Seed, and Leaves to defend the same unto perfect ripeness; and with Seed
for a new propagation? How does the same kind of Seed always produce the very
same kind of Plant, and often with a most wonderful increase of its Fruit;
especially in such of them, as are most necessary, as in Corn for Bread, and
Fruits for food of all sorts? How do the same kind of Plants come up in the
same Season of the year, of the same virtue, of the same form and figure, both
in the Branches, Leaves, Fruits and Flowers? What abundance of various Living
Creatures breed daily, and feed in the Earth and Water, and fly in the open
Air? And how are they all fitted for their several Elements; Fishes with fins
to swim, Birds with wings to fly, and other things with feet to walk? How aptly
are all things furnished with Instruments of sense and motion, nourishment,
generation and defense? What one part about them, or within them, is
superfluous or useless, or could be well spared? And how conveniently are they
all set, and placed, and united together for their several uses? The curious
and wise contrivance of the meanest Creature* the fine contexture of the little
body of any small Insect; as of a Fly, or a Spider, has been enough to
exercise the greatest Wits, and to fill whole Books with the wonders of them,
and yet one half of them is not discovered. Each Animal, great and small, is
endued with such Powers and Faculties, as are necessary for its own sustenance
and preservation whilst it lives, and for the propagation of its kind after it;
has a care of its Young-ones, and provides for them; teaches them to shift for
themselves, and then leaves them to do so. Every thing carefully shuns what is
hurtful to it, and picks and chooses what is proper for it. Whence now comes all
this? From blind chance? It may be some blind Fool may think so, but it is
certain he is a Fool for thinking so. Did Stones and Timber, and all other
materials, ever jump by Chance, into a stately House? Did the Letter-stamps in
the Printer's boxes, ever yet save both the Writer and Printer their labor,
and hit so together by Chance, as to make a Learned Book, or a Wise Discourse?
Could things in the world have been contrived wiselier or more fitly, to all
ends and purposes, than they are? And could things be wisely contrived, without
a Wise Contriver? If Chance (which is indeed nothing at all) could produce a
thing once or twice, which yet is impossible, can any be so foolish as to think
it could be the mother of constant Order? To say, That all things are produced,
and preserved constantly in one regular Course and Order, by Chance, is a
Contradiction that can fit the mouth of a Fool only.

Observe we next, how all things in the world do visibly serve and work
together for some wise end and purpose; and then consider what should guide and
direct them all in working to that end? It Is easy for any one to see, That
most of the Creatures are such, as are exceeding useful and necessary; and the
world would be an inconvenient place without them, and a very confused and
dangerous place too, if things in it did not act as they do. And tho, it may
be, some few things we may be able to name, the necessity, use, and goodness
whereof, we cannot yet discern; yet have we reason to impute this to our
Ignorance, or it may be, more to our Negligence, and Sloth, and Inadvertency.
It is certain there be many things which people are apt to think vain, yea,
hurtful, which yet Industrious and Learned men, who study Nature, have found to
be of special Use and Virtue. Not a Toad or a Spider, or any poisonous and
venomous thing, but the Skilful know how to make good use of it, and find that
it could not well be wanting: And we may well presume as much of other things,
the use whereof we are not yet acquainted with. They may serve to suck out and
carry away some of those malignant humors and qualities, which might infect
the Food we feed on, or Air we breathe in; or to set off the Worth, the Beauty,
and the Usefulness of other things, with the greater advantage; that we may
take the more notice of them, and be more thankful for them: Or they may be, if
not immediately useful to us, yet very needful to some or other of those many
creatures which are immediately serviceable to us: However, they serve to
exercise our Industry and Care, and to let us see GOD's Providence over us, in
keeping us from the hurt they might do us. But that which we should more
especially observe, is, That a very great many things which are without Reason
and Understanding, or so much as Sense in themselves, do yet work together for
the good and preservation of one another, and of the whole World, in as good
Order, as tho they had a Rule to go by, and Understanding to be guided by it,
and sat in Consultation how to do the best for the common good. So that what
Man does in this kind by the help of Reason, They all do much more constantly
and unerringly without it. The Heavens very orderly and duly shed abroad their
influence of Light and Heat, to make the Earth both fruitful and pleasant; to
direct, sustain, and cherish both man and beast upon it. In them has GOD set a
tabernacle for the sun, which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and
rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race: His going forth is from the end of the
heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from the
heat thereof, Psalm. XIX. 4, 5, 6. The earth yields its fruits of every sort, in
their due seasons, and brings forth a proper sort of food for every thing that
live upon it. He causes the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the
service of man, that he may bring forth food out of the earth; and wine that
makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread
which strengthens man's heart, Psalm. CIV. 14, 15. The Waters contentedly keep
their Channels and Bounds, both that there may be a sufficient quantity of them
together, to make a fit habitation for all the living things which can live no
where else; and to leave dry land enough for other creatures to live upon. And
because the creatures of the earth cannot subsist without a sufficiency of
Moisture, therefore the waters go up by the mountains, they go down by the
valleys, unto the place which GOD has founded for them; he sends the springs
into the valleys which run among the hills; they give drink to every beast of
the field, the wild asses quench their thirst, Psalm. CIV. 8, 10, 11. And that
all the earth may be refreshed, and have moisture enough to give juice to Herbs
and Trees, these Waters, not only send forth Springs and Rivers, but abundance
of Vapors; which in the Air thicken into Clouds, and are dissolved again into
seasonable showers scattered over the face of the earth. He binds up the
waters in his thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent under them, Job XXVI. 8.
He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, Psalm CXXXV. 7. He
makes small the drops of waters, they pour down rain according to the vapor
thereof, which the clouds do drop and distill upon man abundantly, Job XXXVI.
27, 28. He makes the earth soft with showers, his paths drop fatness; they drop
upon the pastures of the wilderness, Psalm. LXV. 10, 11, 12. We cannot but
observe several sorts of Earth fitted for several sorts of Plants and Grain;
and several sorts of Plants and Grain suited to the Natures and Palates of
several sorts of Living Creatures, and several sorts of Natures and Palates in
living creatures, whereby it comes to pass, that one sort delights in, and is
nourished with that which another sort takes no delight in, and cannot be
nourished with, but perfectly hates and shuns as poisonous or hurtful to it.
And hence it is, that nothing is lost, or is in vain; but what one refuses,
another chooses; and hence there is enough for all; and there needs be no
strife or contention about any thing; for as there is enough for all, so is
there Variety for each one. We see yet farther, what provision is made in
Nature for the safety and defense of everything: And how every thing naturally,
without teaching, endeavors to preserve and defend it self: One has Horns,
another Hoofs, another has Fangs or long Teeth; and none of these needs be
taught how to use his natural Weapons: And such as have no such Natural
weapons, have either Reason to invent artificial ones, as men; or some other
way of saving themselves, as Birds have Wings to fly for it; other things have
swiftness of foot to run for it; even Moles and Worms have a wonderful faculty
of speeding into the earth to hide themselves: In the cedars the birds make
their nests; the firtrees are a house for the stork. The high hills are a
refuge for the wild goats, and the rocks for the conies, Psalm. CIV. 17, 18.
Young things no sooner fall from their dams, but they seek for milk, and find
it without a guide. The little Lamb runs to the pap immediately, which the
little Infant cannot do. Why? The Ewe wants wit to direct the Lamb, but the
Mother knows how to direct her Child. Birds choose out the most secret places
for their nests, and make them with so much curiosity, as man's art cannot
imitate. The curious works of the little Be or Silkworm, is a very amazing
thing to consider: The industry and providence of the Ant, and the wonders that
the Spider works, are matters of admiration to us. 'Twould be endless to
mention, and indeed impossible for man to discover one half of the wonderful
things in nature. And he that can yet imagine that all these things are by
Chance, and that there is no Superior Power and Wisdom that governs all things,
and directs them in their several Operations, must needs be more foolish than
any beast.

Once again, Let us consider of what kind of Ingredients this World, and the
things therein do consist, or are compounded: The Elements of it, Fire, Air,
Earth, and Water, are of contrary and mutually destructive Natures: Their chief
Qualities are Heat and Cold, Moisture and Dryness, and what things can be more
opposite to one another? All things consist of these things, and how come they
to be be so evenly tempered, and blended in such a just proportion, as to agree
peaceably together in the same body? Again, most things that we know in the
world, last but for a while; Plants, Trees, Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Men,
after a short time dye, and are no more; but others of the same kind spring up,
and are brought forth to supply their room. And thus the world is in a
continual Change and is continued by a constant course of Generation and
Corruption; and one thing always arises from the corruption of another. The
Seed is sown, and corrupts in the earth, and loses its form, and thence
springs up a manifold increase. Now for any one to think with himself, how this
is brought to pass, will be but for ever to bafflle and confound himself,
unless he have recourse to an Infinite Power and Wisdom, that orders all
things. That which thou sowest, is not quickened except it dye; and that which
thou sowest, thou sowest not that body which shall be, but bare grain, it may
chance of wheat or of some other grain. Now what can follow hence, but, That
GOD gives it a body, as it has pleased him, and to every seed his own body? 1
Cor. XV. 36, 37, 38. Who but GOD, could so evenly temper, blend, and balance,
contrary and mutually-destroying Natures, into one; so as the Life, and Health,
Strength, and Vigor of the body so compounded, consists in the right
Temperament of these Enemies? Who but GOD can raise one thing from the
corruption of another; make Life spring out of Death, and constantly provide
for a new Generation of things, from the Ruins and Rottenness of those that
were before?

Lastly; It is now time that we look a little upon, and into our selves; and
see what cause we can find every one of himself, to say unto GOD with the
Psalmist, Psalm. CXXXIX. 14. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and
wonderfully made; mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

First, Should we only look upon our Bodies, which are no more but the
corruptible Cottages wherein our immortal Souls are for a while to lodge; tho
we find they are made of Flesh, and Blood, and Bones, covered with Skin, as the
bodies of some other Creatures are; yet very wonderful is the Frame and
Contexture of these materials in them. How fitly is every Part and Member
fashioned and placed, and connected to the rest, to make it a proper Instrument
of Life or Sense, Strength or Motion? What one of those Instruments of
Nourishment, whereby our Food is received, chewed, swallowed, and digested; the
finest parts of it conveyed through the whole body, for its necessary growth or
repair, and the grosser parts and dregs cast forth as useless: What instrument
of Breathing, what Vein or Artery for the carrying about of the Blood and
Spirits; what Bone, Nerve, Sinew, Muscle, Joint, Ligament, or Gristle, for
Strength or Action, could we either well spare, or wish better formed or set
for its use? What one Sense of Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, Smelling, and
Touching, could we be content to want? Or how can we imagine, that the
Instruments of any of these Senses, could have been wiselier framed and placed?
Nay, there is not a Hair or Nail about us, but when considered, is found to be
of use for Fence or Beauty. Whosoever considers those two little seats and springs
of Life, Sense, and Motion, the Heart, and the Brain; how wonderfully formd,
how strongly guarded, how well supplied with a variety of instruments,
conveying to them, and carrying from them, as it is necessary for keeping
themselves in right Order and Temper, and for the Life, Health, Strength, and
Direction of the whole body: Whosoever but well observes the curious workmanship of
the Eye or Ear, the two Intelligencers of the Soul; or thinks on the wonderful
ways of Seeing and Hearing: Or he that considers the Instruments of Speech, and
the Use, as well as Propriety of that excellent Faculty to Mankind; cannot
choose but fall into the highest admiration of that Infinite Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, to which he owes all these things!

And yet what are all these to the Wonders of our Souls? Could we think it
worth our while to come acquainted a little better with our selves, and to this
end sometimes to enter in as far as we can into the several Mysteries within
us, and enquire after that Soul or Spirit which is served and waited on by all
these Bodily Instruments, and makes what use of them it thinks good; we should
be sure the more we know of our own Souls the more also to know of God, whose
Image they bear. Some such thing every one of us feels within himself; which is
the life of his Body, and does all by it, whatsoever it does. When the Body
lies dead, it has for a short time all its Parts and Instruments entire; but
they are altogether useless. It Is Life, sense, motion, grace and beauty, all is
gone, and nothing left but a Cold heavy lump, like to a Frozen clod of Clay.
And why is it thus, but that the Soul is fled? O then! What, and how admirable
are the powers of that Spirit in Man, which actuates his body, directs and
commands it, and every member of it as it self pleases; at whose will it moves
or rests, and by whose presence it lives? Yea, what is that, without which we
are no longer men? It Is the Soul which sees and hears by these bodily
instruments; it is the Soul that discerns and judges of all the numerous figures
and colors, magnitudes and proportions, measures and distances, motions,
sounds and voices, harmonies and discords; that distinguishes between one
thing and another, chooses and refuses, and orders all our doings. Think well
of it, What is it within us, that thinks, and considers, and reasons, and
discourses about all things without words or noise? What is it in us, which
whilst with these bodies we neither see, nor hear, nor taste, nor smell, nor
feel, can yet represent the several objects of all these senses to it self,
whenever it has a mind to it, and has as fresh and lively perceptions of them
all in it self, as if all these bodily senses were actually exercised by them?
What is the strange power of that within us, which can make present to it self
things long since past, and things which are yet to come, as well as those that
now are; yea, and things which neither are, nor ever have been, as though they
were? What Is that in us, which whilst we sit still, is traveling over the
World, and taking a view of all Times, and can imagine thousands of Worlds like
unto This, and frame new Notions, and lay Plots within it self; Model
Governments, Martial Armies, and consider, dispute, and reason about such
Things as tho they were real? What is that in us, which is awake, whilst our
Bodies are laid to sleep; and sometimes runs over in our sleep, all things that
passed the day before; discourses of them, and contrives, and designs for the
future too? Alas! we understand but a very little of our selves, and far less
than we might do, if we would a little more study our selves; we know not how
we are nourished, nor how we grow, nor how we see and hear, how we think or
dream; nor the strange operations of our Imagination and Fancy. But however, we
feel that there is something in us that does such things; we find that
something in us does remember, and understand, and dispute, and consult, and
deliberate, and resolve, and forecast, and choose, and refuse: Yea, that often
reflects upon our selves; and accuses or excuses, condemns or acquits us,
applauds or reproves us, is vexed and grieved, or pleased and delighted with
our behavior. We find that we are able in a numberless variety of Words, to
make our Thoughts known to others, and by the same means to understand the
thoughts of others. We can mutually give and take advice and counsel, teach,
comfort and reprove one another. We find something in us, that can discern the
use and benefit, the hurt or danger of things about us, and provide for or
against them. And now when such things as these, which every one may feel in
himself, are well thought on; can we really remember what we our selves are,
and yet be such fools as to say or think there is no GOD? If any man be
doubtful, whether there be a GOD or no, he must needs be ignorant of himself.
For certainly he that ever considers, either his own nature, or the many things
which he every day sees, must needs even naturally, sometimes at least, ask
himself this Question, Whence can I imagine all these things to come? what
great Power and Wisdom is it that does in all things display it self? Let me
consider it well.

1. Where all things visibly are in a most wise order, there must needs be
Wisdom; and where all things do constantly continue in the same wise order of
VVorking, there must be Power. And where such ample and excellent provision is
made for the preservation of all things, and for our welfare especially; there
must needs be Goodness: Where then is all this Power and Wisdom, and Goodness
lodged? Things are, things act, things are exceeding useful and good; things
have for some Thousands of Years continued, or succeeded one another in a
constant order and usefulness one to another. Have they then all this
originally in and of themselves? Or is there some Almighty, most Wise, and
good Being over them; which at first made, and put them into this order, and
still upholds them in it?

2. Where there appears nothing at all of Understanding and Reason, it cannot
be imagined, what either Power, Wisdom or Goodness there can be, to make,
order, and govern things, and uphold them all, in that regular and useful way
of working wherein we see them. And it is undeniable that there are abundance of
things, which thus work very regularly and constantly, wherein there does not
appear any thing at all of Reason or Understanding. Only Mankind, of all the
things that we are acquainted with, has Reason. He therefore only can be
thought capable of Wisdom, and Wisdom is absolutely necessary for the making
and ordering of such a World of things. Yet, alas, how far does such a Work as
that exceed the wisdom of Men? And if it exceeds the wisdom of Men, how much
more does it exceed the Power of all other things which want Wisdom? For such
a work, there must be some Wisdom and Power, Infinitely exceeding those of
Man, or of any other thing that we are here acquainted with. And therefore we
must seek these in some superior Being.

3. Either there must be something unmade, and which made other things; or some
of these things which now are, and are well known not to have bee^ always, but
to have had a beginning, beg^^ to be of themselves without a Maker; or were
made by a Maker, which was also made, and had a beginning. That nothing could
begin to be of it self without a Maker, is very plain; for before it began to
be, it was not; and what was not, could have no power; and therefore could not
begin to be of it self. Whatever therefore had a beginning, had it from
another, which could make it to be. And if that other had a beginning too, the
same may be said of it, that it had it from another, and so we must go on of
necessity, till we find something which had no beginning; but was unmade, and
gave beginning to the first thing that ever begun to be. If then, it was any of
these visible things, which was unmade, and without be^inning; in all reason,
we must think it to be that which appears the most noble and excellent, which
has Reason and Wisdom; and this, as far as we can judge of things, must be
Man, for whose use and benefit, all things visible seem to be made. If
therefore Man, excelling all visible things in perfection of Nature, be not of
himself, without beginning, neither made any one thing in Nature serving to his
use; how can we imagine this of any other visible thing? It cannot be thought,
without the greatest folly imaginable, that Man was made by any of these
visible things, which are so much inferior to him in Perfection of Nature; and
which seem to be of no use at all, if not made for him. But we Men are very
sure, that we are so far from being able to make any of these things, that with
all our search and study, we cannot understand the Natures of them.

4. And we are altogether as sure, that we are not of our selves without
beginning, as we are, that we made not one thing in Nature. It is but a very
little while since any of us now living came into this World, and it will be
but a very little while more, before we must go out of it again. We knew not
how we came hither when we came, and we know as little how we shall go hence;
and we have but a little power over our selves whilst we stay here. There was a
time, not long since, when we had not one of the powers and faculties which now
we have, and when we were nothing at all of that which we now perceive our
selves to be. We are therefore as sure, as that we are at all, that we had both
our being, and all that is now in us, from some other; who must needs therefore
be of far greater power and wisdom than we are of. Our Parents were indeed the
Instruments of our being; but it is as true, that they were no more but
Instruments of it. For they, and their Parents before them, and all Parents
that ever were, could but say of themselves; and their coming into the World,
the very same things that we now say of our selves. It was never in the power
of any Parents yet, to make their Children what they pleased; no more than it
is in the power of a Pencil in the hand of a Painter, to choose what kind of
Picture it shall make; or indeed whether it shall make any Picture at all. No
Parents could ever assure themselves that they should have Children. Neither
knew they how they were formed in the Womb; the fashioning and setting together
of the Parts, and putting life into them, being things infinitely exceeding
their power and skill, were therefore no part of their care. They knew not
whether any thing should be conceived; or being conceived, should ever be
brought forth; or what it should be, Male or Female, perfect or imperfect* a
Man or a Monster, wise or foolish, alive or dead: no more than the Husbandman
that casts his Corn into the Furrows, takes care how to form its Roots or
Blade, or knows how it grows, or what it will prove at last. And now that we
are, and live, we find our selves in the power, and at the desposal of another.
We cannot bring to pass what we will; we cannot accomplish our own Designs and
Purposes as we would. We cannot preserve to our selves our present Possessions.
We cannot get what we would have, nor rid our selves of what we would not have.
We cannot make the Sun to shine on us, nor the Wind to blow upon us, nor the
Rain to fall, where and when we would have it; nor our Corn and Grass to grow,
nor our Cattle to inceease, nor our Food, when we have it, to nourish us. We
cannot keep our Bodies from sickness, lameness, pains and decays; or make that
part of them straight which is crooked, or beautiful which is deformed. We
cannot keep out our fears, nor quiet our thoughts, nor prevent casualties, nor
prolong life, nor keep away death and corruption. What then can we rationally
think of our selves, but that we are the work, and in the Power, and under the
Government of One who is infinite in Wisdom, Power and Goodness, who made,
preserves, and disposes of us, and of all things, as it pleases him. And who
is that, but God? He that created the Heavens, and stretched them out; He that
spread forth the Earth, and that which comes out of it; He that gives breath
unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein, Isa. XLII. V.

5. It is certainly known, How we men come into the World by generation
successively one after another. One generation passes away, and another
generation comes, but the earth abides for ever, Eccl. I. 4. Is it now
possible for any one to conceive, that among all the Generations of men that
have been, there was no first Man or Men, at whom these Generations of men
first began? If there was any first man, as no man can conceive but there was;
had he a beginning? or had he no beginning? If he had a beginning, whence had
he it? He could not give it himself, as we have before seen. No other man could
give it him, for he was the first. Did he then spring as a Plant out of the
Earth? '^is too ridiculous a Conceit to come into a rational man's head. How
then should he have his beginning, but from GOD? Will any say, he had no
beginning? Then he must say he was eternal, and had eternally his being, and
all his powers, in, and of himself; and if so, how came he to die, and be no
more? He who had eternally being and life in himself, would he, nay, could he
choose not to be, or to die, and to leave behind him Children of so little
power, and of so short a life, and not so much as the least notice among them,
that they had such a Father? Will any think it reasonable to say, That there
was no first man? This only remains to be said by him, who would not have a
GOD. But this is that which none but a fool can think reasonable Men of sense
and reason have ever accounted it most absurd to talk of an infinite succession
of things one after another, without beginning; of a number of things, wherein
there is no first thing; or which had no beginning. At this rate, an infinite
number of Generations are long ago past, and an infinite number is the greatest
number; if there can be such a thing. And yet there have been more Generations
since that infinite number of them was past, and there may be more still, and
so there is something greater than, infinite, and a number greater than the
greatest. No wise man did ever pretend to understand how such a thing could
possibly be, and so it must pass among the ravings of a doting fool. Men who
are wont to talk so, as that they would be understood, or can understand
themselves, will say, That of that great number, or those many Generations of
men, which have been in the World, there must necessarily have been some first
man, or men, and that he or they that were first, could never have been at all,
or had any power to propagate others, without a Maker. And the very same must
we say of the whole world of things which are within our view. What use can we
think the World serves for, but for the use of those living Creatures which are
in it, and more especially of Man? For what use is a House, but for that of the
Inhabitants? And it were no less absurd to think that the Heavens and the Earth
made Men, and other living Creatures; than it is to think, that the House made
the Inhabitants that dwell in it. And then if the Inhabitants know and confess
that they made not the House, as no body but a Fool will think that the House
made them: so any but a Fool will say, some other made the House. As then every
House is built by some man, so he that built all things, is GOD, Heb. III. 4.

Thus all things, both without us, and within us, do naturally lead us to the
acknowledgment of a GOD, if we will but make use of our Reason; and if we will
not, that is it which makes us fools. GOD has not left himself without witness,
in that he does good, and gives us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling our hearts with food and gladness, Acts XIV. 17. And we may easily
perceive, if we will think of any thing, that He is not far from every one of
us, for in him we live, and move, and have our being: for we are his
offspring, as the Heathen Poets could tell us, Acts XVII. 27, 28. But if any
one continue so foolish as not to confess this, it is fit he should be sent to
School to the Beasts: as Job XII. 7, 8, etc. Ask the beasts and they shall
teach thee; and the foul of the air, and they shall tell thee; the fishes of
the sea shall declare unto thee; who knows not all those, that the hand of
the LORD has wrought this, in whose hand is the soul of every living thing,
and the breath of mankind?

2. And yet besides the works of Creation, and of ordinary Providence, it
cannot be denied, but there are works of an extraordinary Providence to be
observed, whereby GOD does yet further discover himself unto us.

It Is certain, that things do ordinarily keep one natural constant course and
order, and vary not from it. As GOD commanded, and they were created; so he
has established them for ever and ever; he has made a decree which shall not
pass, Psalm. CXLVIII. 5, 6. They continue this day according to his ordinance,
Psalm. CXIX. 91. Now as the constant orderly, course of all things in nature,
shows that there is an Infinite Wisdom and Power, that put them into this
order, and fixed them in this course, keeping and continuing them ordinarily in
it: So when sometimes, and upon very remarkable occasions, this ordinary course
of Nature is changed, and things are done above the power, and quite contrary
to the course of Nature: and moreover, when the wisest counsels, and most
hopeful endeavors, and the most likely means, such as rarely fail, and in all
appearance and reason should succeed well; are all on a sudden blasted, and
quite disappointed; and not only so, but produce the quite contrary to that for
which they were designed; and all this by reason of some invisible power which
no ^an can discern, or by such weak opposition, as none could imagine likely to
prevail: What can we think less, but that there is an overruling Providence of
GOD, who always holds the Rains in his own hands, and does whatsoever he will
both in Heaven and in Earth?

It is easy to observe, that when Wickedness is grown up to a very
extraordinary height in a Nation or Kingdom; though that Nation abounds in
Policy, and Strength, and in all things that seem to promise success, and
persuade to security; yet all on a sudden, when there seems least cause of
fear, by some extraordinary unlooked for Judgment, it is brought to utter ruin
and destruction. And on the other hand, When a good and religious People are
oppressed by Tyrants, and assaulted by most potent Enemies, and hemmed in on
all sides with seemingly inevitable dangers, so as they sink into despair, and
look for nothing but being swallowed up of those who hate them: all on a
sudden, when they could see no reason to hope for any such thing, the
threatening Cloud flies over them, and rains down vengeance on their Enemies;
and the Sun shines forth on them brighter than ever. Who can conclude less,
than that the hand of GOD is in all this? Now both Histories and Experience
have furnished us with Examples of such things as these: and he must be of a
very obstinate humor that is not convinced by them. How easy especially is it
to observe in the sacred History of the Bible, GOD's wonderful and
extraordinary both Judgments and Mercies, both toward whole Nations, and also
private Persons and Families? Enough there is of this kind to assure us, That
it is GOD that changes the times and the seasons, who removes Kings, and
sets up Kings, Dan. II. 21. That against him there is no wisdom, nor
understanding, nor counsel, Prove. XXI. 30. That he turns rivers into a
wilderness, and water-springs into a dry ground; a fruitful land into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. He turns the
wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into water-springs, and there
he makes the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a City for habitation,
Psalm. CVII. 33, etc.

He brought in a flood upon the world of the ungodly and saved Noah the
preacher of righteousness. He turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into
ashes, and delivered just Lot, 2 Pet. II. 5, 6, 7. He showed his signs and his
wonders in the land of Egypt, and brought forth his people, Psalm. CV. 27. He
led them through the depths of the sea, and drowned their enemies. The earth
opened and swallowed Dathan, and covered the Congregation of Abiram. A fire was
kindled in their company, the flame burnt up the wicked. Psalm. CVI. 9, etc. The
Sun stood still, and the Moon staid, until the people had avenged themselves
upon their enemies. The Sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not
to go down about a whole day, Josh. X. 13. The Walls of the City Ierico fell
down when at Ioshuah's command the People shouted, Josh. VI. 20. The Angel of
the LORD went out, and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians an hundred, fourscore
and five thousand, 2 Kings 19. 35. What should I say more, but as the Apostle,
Heb. XI. 32. The time would fail me, to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of
Sampson, and of Iephtha, of David also, and Samuel, and of the Prophets. Who
through faith subdued kingdoms, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of Lions,
quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword; out of weakness
were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies of the
Aliens. In a word, The LORD is known by the judgment which he executes; the
wicked is snared in the work of his own hands, Psalm. IX. 16. So that a man
shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a GOD that
judges in the earth, Psalm. LVIII. 11.

And now after all this, I hope, it is abundantly manifest, that the Atheist,
being confident that there is no GOD, makes himself confident in a matter
wherein all the reason in the world is against him, and against all the
Evidences that can be given of what he denies, how true soever it be.

It cannot therefore be thought needful any otherwise than thus, to show that
he has no reason at all for his confidence. For when all reason appears
against one's Opinion, it is most certain there can be no reason for it. All
that he can say for himself is but this, That there appear to him some
Difficulties in the Belief of a GOD, which he cannot conquer. And does he not
meet with as many, and as unconquerable difficulties in the denying of a GOD?
If he do not, it is only because he has no mind to see them; for I am sure all
the wisest men have met with such. But if it be (as the Atheist pretends) more
difficult to believe that there is a GOD, than to believe there is none, or
than barely not to believe there is; how comes it to pass, that the generality
of mankind has always believed it? How is it, that nothing seems more natural
and easy to most men, than to believe it; and nothing more hard and against
Nature, than to conceive how it should be otherwise? Why has no Atheist, by
propounding and demonstrating these Difficulties, been able hitherto to
dissuade any considerable number of men from believing this? Can the Atheist
give any rational account how this world could be as it is, or how he himself
came to be what he is, if there be no GOD? If he can, why has he not, in so
many Ages of the world, let men see that he can? Why have so few received any
satisfaction from what he has said to that purpose? Surely it must be, because
men find many more Difficulties in believing that he speaks reason, or in
perceiving that he gives any reasonable account of things without a GOD, than
they d^ in believing that there is a GOD. He has sometimes one thing to say,
and sometimes another, as his Invention serves him. Sometimes the World may
have been Eternally, without any Beginning; and sometimes there may have been
Eternal Matter, which formed it self he knows not how, into that variety of
things, which we now see. Sometimes there may have been eternally an infinite
multitude of small Atoms or Motes, dancing to and fro, till at last they hit
and jumble by chance, into so many Bodies as the World now contains. And with
such like Imaginations, as these, he labors to confound men's Thoughts, and to
divert them from listening to that rational and satisfactory account, which the
Holy Scripture has given us, of the Original of all things. But as these
Atheistical Wits, have never been able to satisfy one another, so as that they
could come to agree in the same Principles; but have been at an irreconcilable
difference, and an endless dispute amongst themselves; not so much about what
certainly was, as about what possibly might have been: So neither have any of
them been able to convince any considerable numbers of men, no not of those who
know nothing of the Scripture, to think that the World could have been any of
those ways they dream of, without a GOD. And why so? But because men have ever
thought it more difficult, to be of any of their opinions, than to believe that
there is a GOD. If the Atheist could but persuade men that he had reason on his
side, it would be very easy for him to draw them all over to his opinion; for
their lusts are all on his side already. But till Lust have so totally
prevailed over men, as quite to unman them, and put out the eye of Reason; the
Atheist's folly is so visible, that the ^alfblind eye of the natural man cannot
but see it.

It Is very hard (says the Atheist) for a man to comprehend in his mind an
etern^l infinite Being, such as GOD is said to be; and how should a man believe
what he cannot comprehend by his Understanding? And indeed most true it is,
that what is eternal and infinite, no humane Understanding can fully and
perfectly comprehend. To understand a thing fully and perfectly in all things
belonging to it, is to suppose it to have certain Bounds or Limits of essence
and perfection, which if it had, it were not Eternal and Infinite. And true it
is, That GOD is a Being of an unlimited and boundless Nature and Excellency,
and therefore cannot be fully, or in all things, understood by man. But this is
so far from making it uneasy to believe that there is a GOD, that we cannot,
when we consider things well, but believe it. We therefore believe that there
is a GOD, because, when we consider how many things there be in the World, and
how many, and even unsearchable by us, are the excellencies and perfections of
every thing in its kind, we cannot fee how these things could be without a
Being incomprehensible and infinitely excellent and perfect, whence all Being
and Perfection must be derived. Though therefore man, who is of a finite and
limited Understanding, cannot fully comprehend the Eternity and Infiniteness of
GOD, or thoroughly understand the infinite Nature and Perfection of GOD; yet may
he understand and believe, that there is a Being which is eternal and infinite;
that is to say, a GOD. And it is so easy to conceive that there is such a
Being, that it is not possible to conceive how there should be none such. We
are very sure, that we our selves, and other things, have a being; and yet we
cannot fully comprehend, or thoroughly understand the excellencies and
perfections of our own Nature, or of the nature of any thing else, how small
and inconsiderable soever it be. It cannot therefore be hard for us to believe
that there is something incomprehensible by us, or which we cannot thoroughly in
all things understand. And so easy is it for us to apprehend that there is
some eternal Being, that we cannot conceive how there could be any thing at all
without it. We cannot with any satisfaction to our selves, suppose, that once
there was nothing at all. For were it so, that once there had been nothing at
all; it must needs follow, That there never could have been any thing at all:
If there once was nothing, whence should any thing have come? There was in
nothing no power, nor disposition to any thing: Nothing of which any thing
should spring, Nothing to make, or give a being to any thing: Nothing is
nothing, and nothing can do nothing: But now there are many things. Had they a
beginning, or had they none? If they had no beginning, we have found many
Eternal Beings, whilst we think it hard to believe there should be one. If they
had a beginning, then (as has been said), they had it of themselves, or from
some other. They had it not of themselves, for before they began to be, they
were not; and what is not, can do nothing. They must have it therefore from
some other, and that other must be before them; and must be Eternal without
beginning.

The Sum of all that has been said, is this: The Atheist being confident that
there is no GOD, is confident in a matter whereof he can have no reason to be
confident, and whereof he cannot pretend to have the least measure of
Assurance. He is confident without any reason or degree of Assurance, where his
confidence is the most dangerous thing that can be to himself, and the most
mischievous thing that can be to the whole World. He chooses to follow a
groundless Opinion wherein there is no safety to himself, and whence there can
arise no good, but very much hurt to the World, rather than a probable Opinion
at least, which it is certainly safe for him to follow; and which can do no
hurt, but much good to all Mankind. In denying that there is a GOD, he must
grant that all the happiness of the World depends upon a Lie, and that the
World would be undone by the knowledge of the Truth. He is confident, where all
the reason of the World is against his confidence. He is confident there is no
GOD, tho he have all the evidences of a GOD that can be given of him, if there
be one. GOD has spoken unto men, so as GOD can be supposed to speak unto them,
if h^ be; GOD has appeared and showed himself to men, so, as if there be a
GOD, any one can conceive that he should show himself. The Atheist finds the
whole World of Mankind consenting that there is a GOD; and he finds the tokens
of Infinite Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, in all the works of Creation and
Providence, both common and extraordinary: He cannot give any rational account
at all of any of these things, without the belief of a GOD; and finally, he
finds no such difficulties in believing there is a GOD, but he finds many more,
and greater, in conceiving how things should be, as they are, without a GOD.
Seeing, as has been shown, this is plainly the case; let all men of common
sense now judge, whether he who makes himself confident that there is no GOD,
be not past all dispute, a very Fool.

But now in vain, have we all this while been considering the Atheists Folly,
if we our selves resolve to be as much or greater Fools than he. And certainly,
if it be (as it has been proved) a very foolish thing to think that there is
no GOD; it cannot be less foolish to live without any regard of GOD, as too
many amongst us seem to do; who behave themselves so in the World, as if GOD
had nothing to do with them, or they with him; or as tho it were all one to
them, whether there be a GOD or no. If there be a GOD, and if none but Fools
deny this, then are we to consider that these things do necessarily follow.

1. Every one that is wise, does take all possible care to confirm himself in
so steadfast a belief of GOD, that nothing may be able to make him doubt of it.
Take heed, therefore, Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living GOD, Heb. III. 12. The fear of the LORD
that is Wisdom, Job XXVIII. 28. If there be a GOD, it must needs be the
greatest piece of Wisdom that man is capable of, to behave himself Religiously
toward GOD; but this he can never do without firmly believing that there is a
GOD; this belief being the first and fundamental point in Religion. He that
comes to GOD, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, Heb. XI. 6. Therefore

In the first place, let no one think himself excusable if he be not thoroughly
convinced that there is a GOD. For no man living that has the right use of
Reason, can be ignorant of this, and be held Guiltless. GOD has so many ways
manifested himself unto us, that the blindest Heathen cannot say, that he has
not had means enough of knowing that He is. And if a Heathen can have no excuse
for his being ignorant of this, who has but at most one half of the means of
Knowledge which every the most unlearned Christian has, how should any ignorant
Christian be excused! Tho it be therefore too common a thing to hear both Men
and Women among us, who both are of considerable Age, and also Understanding,
and wise enough for the business of their worldly Callings, excusing their
ignorance of GOD, by their want of Learning; yet in truth they can have no
excuse at all for this ignorance. It is their negligence, and sloth, and
unwillingness to learn, that keeps them ignorant; and for these, there can be
no excuse. Can any one live in a Christian Church, and not have heard enough,
if he would have minded it, (tho he cannot read) to convince him That there is
a GOD whom he is bound to serve? Nay, can any one live in the World, and not
see enough every where to teach him this first and fundamental Truth? He that
cannot read GOD's word, may yet (if he live in a Christian Church), hear it,
and GOD himself speaking to him in it. And he that lives abroad in the World,
tho he cannot see GOD himself, yet he may every where see his Works; and in
them, all the Being, the Power, the Wisdom, and the Goodness of GOD. Nay, if he
can but eat and drink, he may know there is a GOD that feeds him; for he knows
very well, that it is not in his own power, nor of any other creature, to
provide his food for him, or to enable him to receive good by his food. Yet
more; No man, how unlearned so ever he be, can think seriously of himself, and
consider what he is, or how he lives, but he may easily discover a GOD that
made him to be what he is, and preserves him in being and life. How inexcusable
then must every one be, for not learning that which every thing teaches him;
and which he cannot but learn, when he does but consider, that he himself is
something!

In the next place, Let none of us think it a needless thing, very often, and
seriously to consider that there is a GOD. If we do not much consider it, it
will be but a vain thing for us to know it. We should so lose the benefit of
GOD's manifesting himself so fully and so variously to us. Consideration must
make our knowledge useful to us. If there be a GOD, it is certain that we depend
wholly upon him, and must needs owe a duty to him. Yet tho we may know there is
a GOD, if we keep it not in mind, and think but little of it, our Knowledge can
have little influence on our life and behavior; but we shall demean our selves
as carelessly, and be every whit as secure and unconcerned how we live, as tho
we had never heard, or thought of any such thing as a GOD. Yea, not to
consider, and have this much in our thoughts, seems to be more inexcusable in
us, than not to know it at all. As he who knows his LORD's Will, and does it
not, deserves to be beaten with more stripes, than he that does not his Will,
merely because he knows it not, Luke XII. 47. So he that considers not much,
that there is a GOD, when he knows it; seems more blameworthy, than he who does
not know it, and therefore cannot consider it. Both are faulty, and can have
nothing at all to plead for themselves; but he that knows, and considers not,
seems to be more faulty; and a great deal more may be pleaded against him. The
one is ignorant of GOD, when he might know him; the other sets light by GOD,
when he knows him. The one not knowing GOD, knows not how much he deserves his
Thoughts; the other tho he knows him, yet carries himself so toward him, as if
he thought him not worthy to be thought upon. He likes not to retain GOD in his
knowledge, as it is said of some, Romans I. 28.

As then, if there be a GOD, it is altogether necessary that we should know and
believe it; that so we understand how much it concerns us not to live as we
list, having one over us to whom we must be accountable, even for every idle
word, Mat. XII. 36. So when we know this, it is altogether as necessary we
should much consider and think of it, that we may walk worthy of GOD unto all
pleasing, Col. I. 10. and not wilfully or giddily run upon our own destruction,
by disregarding him. It will be a very terrible thing to the ignorant person at
the last day, to meet with a GOD of whom he never knew; and then to reflect
thus upon himself, Had I been any thing but a Fool, I might have known this GOD
to my eternal Comfort, whom now I find to my everlasting Confusion! And it will
be more terrible at that day, for the unconsidering person to find a GOD armed
with vengeance against all that contemned, him: And then to reflect on his own
folly, saying, What a Madman was I, who knew there was a GOD, and did not
think him worth a few serious Thoughts, when by little serious consideration, I
might have prevented this confounding sight, and my own eternal destruction now
come upon me through my heedlesness! As we therefore desire that we may never
feel the wrath of GOD, let us now entertain often and serious thoughts of him.

To this purpose, lastly, Let us be very constant in the use of all the means
which GOD has given us, to confirm and establish us in this belief, and lively
sense of GOD; and take heed (as we love our Souls) how we give ear to any thing
which may weaken this belief, or make us doubt of the being of a GOD. We have
all the reason in the World to be very careful of this, Because (as we have
seen, If it be a truth that there is a GOD, nothing can be more necessary,
either to prevent our Misery, or to promote our Happiness, than a firm belief
of it; and tho it were false (as it cannot be) yet would it do a great deal of
good, and no hurt at all. Let us labor then to be well grounded and settled in
this belief; and to this end, let us well weigh, and consider all those many
reasons, which we have above taken notice of, to persuade us to it. Especially,
let us diligently attend to GOD's word, and observe his works. The reason why
many men, either so weakly believe that there is a GOD, or so little and
slightly think of it; is, because either their Lusts, or their worldly
Business, or else Vanities, hold their thoughts so continually employed about
them, that they will not allow themselves time, nor be at the pains to consider
those notable evidences which GOD has given of himself. He that shuts his
Eyes, and stops his Ears; when he should read or hear GOD speaking to him; or
when he should observe the wonderful works of Creation and Providence; it is
not strange if he never come to have a rational and firm belief of GOD.
Therefore if we would (as it highly concerns us) be unmovably rooted in this
Belief, we must observe these Rules.

1. Let us be sure to keep our Reason and Understanding, which GOD has given
us, as we are Men, constantly awake. Let the Eye of the Soul be kept open, that
it may be ready to see GOD, whenever, and howsoever, he shows himself. What Is
the most rational Discourse to a sleeping man! He neither hears it, nor
considers it, and therefore is he no wiser for it. What Is Light and Beauty to a
man that always winks? He sees them not, and so knows no more of them, than it
they were not to be seen. This Truth, That there is a GOD, is as visible to the
Understanding, as Colors are to the Eye, but neither are visible to one that
is not awake. Let us consider, that the best things must certainly be the best
worth our seeing and knowing; and nothing can be better than GOD, who is the
Fountain of all Goodness. Nothing is so carefully to be regarded as that,
without the knowledge whereof, we eternally perish, and such is GOD. Has man
Understanding and Reason for no use? Or is he to use them about every thing of
least concernment; and not about that which above all things in the World, he
is mostly concerned to Understand? If there be a GOD, we must all of us be
either Happy or Miserable for ever, accordingly as we Regard and Honor him, or
Neglect and Dishonor him: And can there be any thing, the Knowledge whereof
does more concern us? And yet is it thus with too many of us, that whilst our
Understanding and Reason are very intent upon other things, and never grow
weary of considering them, and inquiring after them, they are wholly asleep as
to GOD, and never employed about him, as if to think of Him were not any part
of our business. O why should we be any longer such Fools, as to suffer the
Business and Vanities of this World, which passes away, and the lusts thereof,
or the Pleasures of sin which are but for a moment, so to bewitch us, that we
can never be awake to GOD! Seeing that about Him we are most of all concerned,
that our Souls attain to the most rational and full satisfaction, let our
Reason be busied about him, above all things, that so we may be able both to
live and die like men.

2. Let us exercise our Reason in considering those things, especially, which
are most proper and apt to beget in us the most clear and lively sense of GOD.
For as GOD has appointed proper means and helps for the attaining to all those
ends which he would have us to pursue: So has it pleased him to ordain certain
means, by the use whereof we may soonest and most perfectly come to the
knowledge and belief of Himself. Such are his Word and his Works, both of
Creation and Providence* which are therefore to be very diligently studied and
meditated upon. We must very frequently read and hear his Word; and when we
read or hear it, we must be very attentive to it, and take heed how we do it in
a regardless and formal manner, or as a customary Task only, which we have set
our selves to do; as tho the reading or the hearing of it, were our only or
principal Business. Our work is to think and consider well of all that we read
and hear, that we may be perfectly informed, and thoroughly convinced, and
heartily affected with the matters which are therein commended, either to our
Belief or Practice. In vain shall we either read or hear GOD's word, if we do
not labor to see and hear GOD himself speaking to us, and discovering Himself
and his Will unto us therein. To read in the Bible so many Chapters a Day, or
to hear so many Sermons a Week, is an Employment to as little purpose as the
reading or hearing any common History, if we make it not our end to come better
acquainted with GOD, and to be instructed in our Duty of Honoring and Serving
him. And thus is it also in our seeing, and observing and making use of the
many and wonderful works of GOD: Whilst we endeavor only to serve our selves
of them, and not to discern GOD in them, we improve nothing in our Knowledge of
GOD by them. How many of us busy our selves daily abroad in the Field, or at
Home in the Garden, and what wonders of GOD's Power and Wisdom and Goodness
have we there constantly before our Eyes! and yet we profit no more in the
knowledge of GOD by what we see, than the Beasts themselves. How many of us are
very busy in studying and observing the courses of the Stars, and in searching
in the secrets of Nature; and yet never have it once in their Thoughts to learn
any thing of GOD by all his wondrous Works! If we would strengthen our belief
of GOD, and make any proficiency in the knowledge of him, we must design this,
and exercise our Reason in every thing to that end; and labor to taste and see
how good and gracious, how wise and powerful GOD shows himself in every thing
we meet with. There is not the most unlearned person in the World, but if he
will give diligent heed to what he hears of GOD, though he connot read, and to
what he sees of GOD, though he cannot see GOD himself; he may find enough to
confirm him in the belief of GOD, and instruct him very far in the Nature of
GOD, even past all doubting. Especially,

3. If in the next place, he by serious Prayer call upon GOD to open his Eyes
that they may see, and his Ears that they may hear, and his Heart that it may
understand the things which he has made necessary for him to believe and know.
Let us therefore in good earnest beg of GOD himself, that he would show and
declare himself more clearly and convincingly to us in all the means of
Knowledge and Understanding. No man can have a hearty desire to find GOD, but he
may assure himself that GOD upon his hearty request will show himself unto him.
If thou seek the LORD thy GOD, thou shall find him; if thou seek him with all
thy Heart, and and with all thy Soul, Deuteronomy. IV. 29. God looks down from
Heaven to see if there be any that understand and seek after GOD, Psalm. XIV.

2. But alas! The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek
after GOD; GOD is not in all his thoughts Psalm. X. 4. If men had rather be
without a GOD, than have one; if men be unwilling and afraid to find GOD, lest
they should (as certainly they must) find in GOD a LORD and Master, whom they
are bound to serve and obey; what wonder is it if GOD withdraw and hide himself
from them that love him not? Why should he not depart out of sight, when he is
but an eyesore to them? Why should he not leave all those to the Tyranny of
their own Lusts, who desire not to have him reign over them? What reason can be
given, why GOD should afford them any longer eyes to see withal, who above all
things cannot endure to see him? Or why should he not suffer Satan to blind
their Minds, that they may never again be able to see that Light which they
cannot love? If we would know GOD, let us show by our earnest Prayers, that we
long to know him.

Let us never have an Ear open to any one, whatsoever he be, that calls in
question the being of GOD, or would bring us to doubt of it. But on the
contrary, let us resolutely stop our Ears, and refuse to hearken to the
Atheistical Discourses of profane and wicked Persons, of what Rank, Note, or
Esteem soever they may be in the World. Let no one persuade us to think it
either unreasonable or unmannerly, thus to behave our selves toward men of
this temper. They may call us obstinate and sullen in refusing to hear Reason,
and uncivil and clownish in turning away from our Betters. But how eminent
soever, either for Learning or Honor any one may be, who would entertain us
with such discourses, as tend to draw us off from believing a GOD; it cannot be
neither Obstinacy nor Incivility, not so much as to take notice of what he
says.

It cannot be thought unreasonable, or an obstinate Stubbornness, not at all to
hearken to any man's Discourse, which we are well assured beforehand can have
no Reason in it. And we are sure beforehand, that whatever Reason may be
pretended, (as none brags more of his being a Master of Reason, than the proud
Atheist); yet no Reason at all can be given us, by any one for this opinion,
That there is no GOD, or against our believing that there is one. And this is
very plain, because as has been said, no man can be in any degree sure that
there is no GOD; and the belief that there is one, is at least probable, and
certainly does much good and no hurt. What Reason can there possibly be in a
Discourse, persuading not to believe what can never be proved to be false; what
it is very safe to believe, and the belief whereof does the greatest good
imaginable? Or again, What Reason can that Discourse have in it, which tends to
persuade us to believe what no man can show to be true; which it is so
dangerous to believe, that a man hazards his Soul by it, and the belief whereof
will certainly make the wide World too uneasy a place to live in? It cannot
therefore be obstinacy or unreasonableness, never to hearken to any Discourse
of which we know all this beforehand.

Neither can it be uncivil, or unmannerly, how great or eminent soever the
person be that would entertain us with such Discourses, to turn away our ears
from him. What incivility can it be, to seem rude to him, who is so rude to the
whole World, as in effect to call all men Fools but himself? Yea, how can one
be uncivil to that man, who declares himself the common Enemy of Mankind, and
of all Civil Society and Government? How can one be unmannerly to him, whose
Discourse tends to no better end, than to corrupt all good Manners, and to
banish Virtue from among men? He that tells us there is no GOD; by telling us
so, absolves and discharges us from all manner of duty, honor, or civil
respect to himself as our better, or superior. For if there be no GOD, who made
us to differ from one another, Who made him our superior, or us inferior to
him? GOD did not, if he must be believed; for he tells us there is none. And
Man could not without our consent, for who gave any man that Right over his
Fellows? If he have got to be higher than any one else by Might or Cunning;
nothing can hinder any one to climb, ^^^never he can, as he has done; or to
trample him under foot, instead of bowing the knee to him. Whoever then tempts
us to Atheism, is soon answered if we please. We need do no more, but despise
him. Or if we will be at any farther trouble with him, we need but ask him two
or three Questions, and leave him to answer them to himself when he can.

1. When he tells us there is no GOD, and would have us believe it: before we
do so, he cannot think it unreasonable we should ask him, How he knows it? If
he can tell us this, and will not, he is too unkind to be thought a friendly
Counselor: and if he cannot, we have little cause to be fond of such a
Teacher. Is it reason to believe one upon his word, that knows not that to be
true which he teaches? Is it wisdom to follow a Guide, who confesses himself
to be blind?

2. When he persuades us to believe there is no GOD, it cannot but be very fit
to ask again, Is it safe so to do? Or, Is it unsafe to do otherwise? He cannot
assure us, it is safe to believe there is no GOD, because he cannot make us know
that there is none. And he must needs confess, it is not unsafe to believe there
is a GOD, because it can do no hurt. Is it reasonable then to leave the safe
way we are already in, that we may follow him into another, wherein he cannot
promise us any safety at all?

3. If he would have us to believe there is no GOD, it is not unreasonable to
ask him, Why would he have us to believe it? Or, What good will it do either
him or us? If it will do neither any good, Why should he persuade us, or we be
persuaded to an unprofitable thing? There is danger in it; and what reason is
there to do what we know it is dangerous to do, till we see what good may come
of it?

4. If he say, it is fit to believe it, merely because it is a truth; We must
needs ask again, How does he know it is a truth? But yet it is in vain to ask him
this, because it is impossible for him to tell us how he knows it, or to know
it. And therefore we have yet no reason to believe it is a truth, because he
only calls it so, who does not know that it is so. But suppose it were, I hope
it may be fit to ask him again, Is he in good earnest, and would he indeed have
us to belive it for a truth? If he be not willing we should believe it, why
does he tempt us to believe it? If he would indeed have us believe it, would he
not also have us behave our selves as men of that belief? If not, to what
purpose are we to believe it? If he would have us behave our selves as men that
believe not a GOD, then may we do what we will, and can; we may rob his House,
take his Money, defile his Wife, and cut his Throat. If he deny this, let us
ask him, What is it that can make it unlawful for us to do any of these things?
What should restrain men from doing any thing they can for their own advantage?
This is all that the Atheist can gain by persuading men to be of his Opinion,
That he lays himself at every man's mercy to deal as he will with him; and
cannot say, That man sins, that knocks him on the head for his good advice.

2. If there be a GOD, every one that is Wise will not only think himself
highly concerned to believe it, but so to live and behave himself in the world,
as may be most pleasing and acceptable to GOD. To what purpose can it be
tobelieve that there is a GOD? or what good can this belief do us, if it do not
engage us to live as men who are sensible that they have a GOD over them, whom
they are concerned to please in all things? Certainly if there be a GOD who
made us and all things, He must needs be concerned with us, and we with Him.
And as we can expect no good thing but from Him, who is the Author and Disposer
of all things; so neither can we hope to receive any good thing from him, if we
do not our endeavor to please Him. Why should we thinkHe will bless us
according to our desire, if we be not careful to serve and honor him according
to his Will? That therefore we may reap the good and benefit of this so
necessary a Belief, we are to consider well, what it is that we believe, and
what duty that belief must needs bind upon us. That which we believe, is, That
there is a GOD; and to be GOD, is to be the first Cause and Author, the Maker,
Preserver, Lord, and Governor of the whole World, and all things therein; the
Fountain of all Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness; and therefore the highest
Power, the greatest Wisdom, and the chief Good. Now if GOD be all this, then it
is very easy for every one to see certain duties lying upon us, as we are the
creatures of GOD, which naturally arise from what we believe, even from this
one point, That there is a GOD.

1. GOD being the first Cause, Author, and Maker of all things, He is the very
Fountain and Original of all Being, and Life, Power, Wisdom and Goodness. All
these are in him originally, as in the inexhaustible Spring and Fountain; and
there can be nothing at all of any of these things in the World, but what is
derived from him; neither can any of these be any longer in the world, than it
pleases him. All this must needs be very plain to every Understanding. If then
we will live as men who are sensible that there is a GOD by whom we live, and
without whom nothing can have either life or being;

We must needs, First, have the highest and most honorable Thoughts of GOD,
the greatest reverence and esteem for him, that can possibly be in the heart of
man. We are not to conceive of him, as of one whose excellencies and virtues,
though they exceed those of any other Being whatsoever, are yet contained within
such or such bounds or limits, or are at such a degree, and no higher; but we
are to think of him, as of one who in the Perfectictions of the Divine Nature,
is infinitely above all the thoughts of Men and Angels; of incomprehensible
Glory and Majesty, of boundless Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; such as is to be
always admired and adored, but never to be fully seen or understood. We are
however to labor every day to know more and more of him, that the more we
know, the more we may admire, and love, and rejoice, and even be ravished with
those unconceivable excellencies, which to discern more clearly, will be our
eternal happiness in Heaven. Our hearts therefore should be always filled with,
and our mouths should sound forth the praises of GOD, every one singing with
the holy Psalmist, Bless the LORD, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless
his holy name, Psalm. CIII. 1. Bless the LORD, O my soul. O LORD my GOD thou are
very great, thou art clothed with honor and majesty, Psalm. CIV. 1. While I
live will I praise the LORD; I will sing praise unto my GOD, while I have any
being, Psalm. CXLVI. 2. Let every thing that has breath, praise the LORD, Psalm.
CL. 6. Be thou exalted, O GOD, above the heavens, and thy glory above all the
earth,. Psalm. CVIII. 5. Blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above
all blessing and praise, Neh. IX. 5.

Secondly, It must needs be our Duty to walk humbly before GOD, and to abase
our selves in his Presence, whose eyes are continually open upon us. We must
always bear in mind, that he is our GOD and Maker, and we are at best but the
work of his Hands, and had never been any thing, had he not been pleased to
give us a being. How wise, how rich, how great soever we now are, or seem to
the eyes of men; we have it all, even as far as our very Being, of GOD's free
gift; and he can whenever he pleases, deprive us of all again. He made all
things of nothing, and therefore all things are nothing in comparison of him.
What is the clay in the hand of the Potter, who can do with it what he will?
And how much less than that is man in the hand of GOD? The Potter can form the
clay into a new shape, or cast it away and trample on it; but he neither gave
it a being, nor can take away it is being from it. But GOD gave us, and all
things, our very being; look therefore how much nothing is less than all
things, so much are the best of men less than GOD; we being all originally
nothing. Say then with the Psalmist. LORD, what is man, that thou take
knowledge of him? Or the son of man, that thou make account of him? Man is
like to vanity, his days are as a shadow that passes away, Psalm. CXLIV. 3, 4.
Behold even to the moon, and it shines not; yea the stars are not pure in his
sight. How much less man that is a worm, and the son of man which is a worm?
Job XXV. 5, 6. All nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to
him, less than nothing, and vanity, Isa. XL. 17. Verily every man at his best
state is altogether vanity, Psalm. XXXIX. 5. And when ever GOD rebukes him, he
makes his beauty to consume away like a moth, v. 11. Surely men of low degree
are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; to be laid in the balance, they
are altogether lighter than vanity, Psalm LXII. 9. And shall such a thing as
man be proud? Can man seem any thing in his own eyes, when he thinks upon GOD?
Alas! what cannot he do with us, who with a word made all things of nothing?
What can we do, either against him, or without him, without whom we cannot one
moment continue in being?

2. If GOD be the Maker of us and of all things, then is it past all dispute,
that both we, and all things, are His; and that we cannot have the least right
to our selves, and therefore none to any thing else, but what he is pleased to
allow us. Nothing could make him so absolute a right in and over us, to use and
dispose us at pleasure, as this, That he made us of nothing. We therefore and
all things are absolutely his own; and being so, it is his indisputable right,
to order and dispose of every thing as it shall seem good to him, to place us
where he will, give us what allowance he will, assign us what Condition he
will, and put us to what Use and Service it pleases him. Know ye that the LORD
he is GOD, it is he that bath made us, and not we our selves; we are his
people, and the sheep of his pasture, Psalm. C. 3.

Therefore, first, It must needs be our Duty most humbly to acknowledge GOD's
absolute right in and to us, and all things, and in a due acknowledgment of the
same, to yield up our selves, and all things most freely, and without any
grudging, to be disposed of by him, according to his own Will and Pleasure. We
must leave it wholly to GOD, to use his right as he pleases, and to do what he
will with his own; knowing assuredly, that whatsoever he does with us, or any
other thing, he does but what he may do, and can do us no wrong: Yea, he always
does what is best and fittest to be done, because he is of infinite Wisdom and
Goodness. Whatever therefore is come to pass, or shall come to pass in the
world; whatever has befallen, or shall befall us, it is our duty to submit to
it, and to set our hearts at rest about it; remembering that GOD is always
doing, what best becomes him to do; and permitting to be done, what is most
proper to be done. He does according to his will in the army of heaven, and
among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto
him, What do thou? Dan. IV. 35. What are we, that we should concern our
selves any farther with GOD's Doings, whatever they be, than to admire his
Wisdom in them? The posture of Soul wherein we should always be, as best
becoming us, is that of a most humble and willing Resignation of our selves,
and all our concerns unto his ordering; every one saying after our most blessed
JESUS, Not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. XXVI. 39. and v. 42. Thy will be
done.

Secondly, We are to account it our duty in all that we have or do, so to
behave our selves, as becomes those who have nothing of their own, neither are
their own, but must own both themselves, and all they have to be his, who made
them. We must not therefore take to our selves any other Liberty in any thing,
than what GOD gives us. We must not make so bold with his right, as to do what
we have a mind to do with our selves or any thing else; but enquire first, what
he gives us leave to do. GOD is pleased to allow us as much liberty in all
things, as may do us good; and has freely bestowed his good Creatures upon us,
so far as they may be serviceable to us in our serving of him. But as we have
them of his gift, so has he given them upon such terms and conditions as
pleased him; and upon no other terms we are to aceount them ours. Together with
them, he has given us Laws and Rules to be careful ly observed by us in the use
of them. It were very absurd for us to think any thing so ours, that we may use
it to GOD's Dishonor, or to hurt our selves or others with what we have. Our
Meat we have for Nourishment, not for Gluttony; our Drink for Refreshment, not
for Drunkenness; our Clothes for a Decent and Warm covering, not for Pride: Our
Wit, our Strength, our Wealth, and all things, to do good with, but not to help
or encourage us to hurt any one. All things we possess are our Master's goods,
and we our selves are his Servants. No man ought to say, I may do what I will
with mine own; for nothing is so our own, as that we are sole or absolute
Owners of it. As GOD is to be thanked for the use and benefit of all, so is he
also to be consulted and obeyed in the use of all. For the earth is the LORD's,
and the fullness thereof; the world and they that dwell therein. Psalm XXIV. 1.

Thirdly, it must needs be our duty, not to repine or murmur, not to be fretful
and impatient; but to be content and satisfied whatever comes to pass.

Do evil doers, and such as we think deserve worst at the hands of GOD,
flourish and prosper; What Is that to us? GOD is but doing his pleasure with his
own. Have we not all, and more than is our due? And has not he, whose own are
all things, a right to distribute them as he pleases? Has GOD given others
any thing that was ours? And is it not of his free and undeserved Gift, that
any thing is ours? Fret not thy self because of evil doers, neither be thou
envious against the workers of iniquity, Psalm. XXXVII. 1. Rest in the LORD, and
wait patiently for him: fret not thy self because of him who prospers in his
way because of the man that brings wicked devices to pass, v. 7. But wait on
the LORD, and keep his way, v. 34. What have we to do to murmur at GOD's
disposing of his own?

Do we suffer evil things? Why should we not, if it seem good unto GOD? Are we
not his? And may he not use his own as he will? What ever the evils be, or by
whomsoever they are brought upon us, we are to submit with patience. No
instrument could hurt us, if he did not permit it; and may he not permit what
he will to be done to his own? Are we robbed or spoiled, let us say, The LORD
gave, and the LORD has taken away, blessed be the name of the LORD, Job I. 21.
It is the LORD, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel III. 18. Whatever
befalls us, let us say, Behold here I am, let him do to me as seems good unto
him, 2 Samuel XV. 26. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou did it,
Psalm XXXIX. 9.

Is our present Condition scanty, uneasy, unpleasant, unsuitable to our minds?
What are we, that we should think to choose for our selves, this or that
condition of life, which we think best; who are not our own, neither can choose,
whether we shall live or die? Is not our Condition, whatever it be, better than
we deserve? And is it not of GOD's choosing for us? And is it not fit he should
place his own Goods in his own House, where, and how, he pleases? Have we not
all that we have right to have, when we have what it pleases GOD to give us?
And are we not in the condition we should be in, when we are as it has pleased
GOD to dispose of us? Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, what make
thou? Isa. XLV. 9. Shall the thing formed, say unto him that formed it, Why
have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same
lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor? Romans IX. 20,
21. Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content, 1 Timothy VI. 8. Yea,
this is our duty, to learn, in whatsoever state we are, therewith to be
content, Phil. IV. 10.

3. If there be a GOD, who made both us and all the world, then is he our LORD,
and the Governor of all the world. As he alone by reason of his infinite
Power, Wisdom and Goodness can be thought fit to rule the world, so can he not
have a more absolute Sovereignty over it, or Right to govern it, than that
which is founded in Propriety; nor any Propriety more sure and unquestionable,
than that which arises from Creation or his making all things of nothing.
Therefore The LORD has prepared his throne in the heavens, and his kingdom
rules over all, Psalm. CIII. 19.

It is then our duty, to be subject to his Laws and Government in all things.
To submit to his Providence, in ordering all the Affairs of the world; and to
approve of all his wise Dispensations, whatever changes or alterations he makes
in States or Kingdoms. To obey all his Laws, and apply our selves diligently to
the learning of them, that we may frame our whole lives by them. It must needs
concern us, to be in the fear of the LORD all the day long, Prove. XXIII. 17. To
stand in awe, and not sin. Psalm. IV. 4.

Again; If GOD, be our Governor, it must be our duty to trust to his
Government, and rejoice therein. For how can we be safer, or happier, than to
be under the Government and Protection of infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness?
The LORD reigns, let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of the Isles be
glad thereof, Psalm. XCVII. 1. Let us be careful for nothing, Phil. IV. 6.
Neither take thought for the morrow, Mat. VI. 34. but trust in the LORD and do
good: so shall we dwell in the land, and verily we shall be fed, Psalm. XXXVII.
3. The LORD will bless the righteous, with favor will he compass him as with
ashield, Isa. V. 12.

4. If there be a GOD, who is the first Cause of all things, he must needs be
the Fountain of all Blessedness, and the chief good; no good thing can be
expected but from him alone, and all our happiness must consist in his favor
and love. And therefore,

The whole desire of our Souls should be to continue in his favor, and to have
his love. Nothing should be so much our study and endeavor, even all the days
of our life, as how in all things to please him, and to do such things only as
we know to be most acceptable to him.

Next, It must certainly be our duty to love GOD above all things; for it is
most unnatural not to love that best, which is best in it self, and does us
most good. It is therefore our duty to love nothing more than GOD, nothing so
much as GOD; nothing but in Subordination, or in Relation to him. That is,
nothing but what GOD allows us to love, and so as for the love of GOD, we can
any time be willing to part with it; nothing but what may help us the better to
love GOD, and nothing that abates our love to GOD. We are to love GOD in all
the things we love, because nothing has any loveliness, but what is from GOD.

And because GOD is the chief good, we are to be content with GOD, whatever
else we want; and whatever else we have, never to be satisfied with it, or to
make account that we have any thing at all, whilst we can find no good ground
to hope that GOD is our GOD, and that we are in his favor.

And Finally, Seeing GOD is the Author of all Goodness, we are on all occasions
most humbly to address our selves to him in Prayer, for a supply of all our
wants of what sort soever; and to return him our daily Praise and Thanks for
every good thing we enjoy.

He that does not thus behave himself toward GOD, is no better for believing
that there is a GOD; neither, whatever he may pretend, shall he easily persuade
any considering man, that he believes any such thing.

FINIS.
Books Published by the Reverend Mr. Elis.
A Letter to a Friend, Reflecting on some Passages in a Letter to the D. of P.
in Answer to the Arguing Part of his first letter to Mr. G. 4to.

The Reflecters Defense of his Letter to a Friend, against the furious Assaults
of Mr. I. S. in his Second Catholic Letter, in four Dialogues 4 to.

The Protestant Resolved: Or, A Discourse, showing the unreasonableness of his
turning Roman Catholic for Salvation, 4 to.

Religion and Loyalty inseparable: A Sermon Preached at the Assizes held at
Nottingham, September. 5. 1690. 4 to.

The Necessity of Serious Consideration, and Speedy Repentance, as the only way
to be safe both Living and Dying, 8 vo.

The Lambs of Christ sed with the Sincere Milk of of the Word. In a short
Scripture-Catechism. 12 s

A Practical Discourse concerning Death. 8 vo. The Fifth Edition.

A Practical Discourse concerning a Future Judge meant. 8 vo.

Both by William Sherlock, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

The True Effigies of his Grace, John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; Engraven
(from an Original lately Painted by Mrs Mary Beal) by Robert White, on a large
Sheet of Paper. Price 12 d.

All Printed for William Rogers.


