A DEFENSE OF THE Thirty Nine Articles OF THE Church of England.

Written in Latin by J. Ellis, S. T. D. Now done into English.

To which are added the Lambeth Articles:

Together with the Judgment of Bishop Andrews, Dr. Overall, and other Eminent
and Learned Men upon Them.

London, Printed for H. Bonwicke, T. Goodwin, M. Wotton, S. Manship, and B.
Took, 1700.

Advertisement to the READER.
THE Credit and favorable Reception that this Book of Dr. Ellis's has met with
amongst Men of Letters, is a sufficient Apology for giving it a new Birth, and
making its Use of a larger Extent. It was Published in Latin in the Year 1660.
Reprinted in 1694. And because both Impressions are now quite sold off, it
became necessary either to give it a new Edition, or a new Language: The latter
(as being of more general Use) was chosen: And therefore I have endeavored to
make the Author speak as good English, as a Sententious and Argumentative Style
would easily bear, without too much wresting and wandering from the Sense.

It is something wonderful to observe, how ignorant many People are of the very
Articles of that Religion, which they have all along professed themselves to be
Members of: As if it were enough to be of the Church of England, without having
any tolerable System of its Doctrine, much less knowing how to defend them
against the Cavils of ou^ Enemies: Whereas we are not afraid to encourage Men
to have re^urse to those Articles of our Religion, (...) we own) we must stand
or fall. The bold and during Attempts of Men of res^ss Spirits in this Age,
make it highly necessary for every Christian to consider well, and examine what
it is he believes, and what Foundation his Faith stands upon: that he may be
ready always to give an Answer to them that ask him a Reason of the Hope that
is in him, and may be able by sound Doctrine to convince the Gainsayers.

To which purpose this short Defense of the Articles of the Church of England
is presented in an English Dress, for the greater Advantage, and more general
use of all Readers: Wherein may be found (though short and succinct, yet) very
clear and strong Arguments; and such, I am persuaded, as will not fail to work
upon all well-disposed and ingenuous Minds. I have not thought fit to
interpose, except in One or Two Places, where the Obscurity of the Subject, or
the Author's Sense, seemed to require it; and there too I have set a
distinguishing Mark. And now, if the Whole shall in any Measure contribute to
remove Men's Doubts, or instruct their Minds; to confirm their Faith, or reform
their Manners, here is a glorious End, and there needs no further Apology to be
made.

Sutton-Court,

Nov. 11. 1699.

J. L.

A DEFENSE OF THE Thirty Nine Articles OF THE Church of England.
ARTIC. I. Of Faith in the Holy Trinity.
THERE is but One Living and True God everlasting, without Body, Parts, or
Passions; Of infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; the Maker and Preserver of
all things, both visible and invisible: And in the Unity of this Godhead there
are Three Persons of One Substance, Power and Eternity; The Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 1. Against which it is objected, 1. That there are Gods many; aceording
to the Apostie, 1 Cor. 8. 5.

Ans^. 1. The Apostle says not, that there are many Gods with respect to their
Essence; but either with Relation to the Error of some that say the Planets are
Gods, or else according to some certain Similitude; as Magistrates are
sometimes called so.

Obj. 2. The Phrases of [Time past] and [Time to come] are spoken of God, and
therefore he is not Eternal.

Answ. Such Words are spoken of God, not as though he had any Variation through
them, but because his Eternity does comprehend all Times.

Obj. 3. The Scriptures testify, that God has Hands and Eyes, etc. and
therefore he is not Incorporcal.

Answ. Such Parts are not attributed to God, as really such; but by way of
Similitude, and upon the account of his Actings, as the Action of the Eye is to
see; from whence it is that the Eye, when it is spoken of God, means his Power
of Seeing, not after a sensible, but intellectual manner; and the like is to be
said of all other Parts of the Body.

Obj. 4. It is said, Genesis 6. 6. that God repented; and elsewhere, that he was
subject to ^other Passions.

Answ. Repentance is indeed attributed to God, as if he were affected as Men
are, because he acts sometimes after the manner of one that repents; but this
is spoken not as to any Affection in God, but as to the Effect of the thing:
And the like is to be said of other Passions.

Obj. 5. The Angels are not reckoned up by Moses among the Works of the
Creation.

Answ. We do not read in Genesis the very Words of the Creation of Angels, yet
this is to be understood there, both Chap. 1.. ver. 1. and Chap. 2. ver. 1.
They are the heavenly Host; and the Apostle to the Colossians (Chap. 1. 16,
17.) expressly affirms, That God is the Creator of all things Visible and
Invisible.

Obj. 6. (...). It is objected, That the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity is not
true, but rather contradicts it self; because there is but One God, therefore
not Three; but there would be Three Gods, if the Father was God, the Son God,
and the Holy Ghost God. Now when we speak of a Person, we mean these Two things
the Essence, and the manner of Subsisting.

Answ. From a Trinity of Persons in created Beings is rightly inferred a
threefold Essence; but not so in Divine Beings. If we name a Person of the Holy
Trinity, we mean a Nature or Essence that is common to more Persons than One:
But created things, because they are finite, their Substances or Persons must
be separate. So Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, although by a common Nature and
Reason they are called Men, yet are not One but Three Men: And because in
Divine Persons, the Being or Essence is infinite, therefore Three Persons
subsisting in it, although they they be truly Three, yet are but One God.

Obj. 7. The Doctrine of a Trinity of Persons does infer a Composition in God.
Where there is Essence and Person, there is a Composition either from a general
or a particular Nature: And where there are these Two, there there is a
Compos^n: But in God there is both, because his Essence is one thing, and his
Person another.

Answ. There is not in God a Conjunction of an universal and particular Nature,
since God is the most simple Essence. Nature, and Suppositum (though two things)
do not make a Composition in God, as it does in created Beings, in which Nature
is one absolute thing, and the Suppositum another: whereas in God the
Suppositum has a relative Nature, and a Relation does not compound, but
distinguish; more especially in God, where the Relation does not really differ
from its Foundation. Where there is an Union between Two absolute Things, there
ind^ed there is a Composition: But in God, his Essence is absolute, and the
Person relative: And Persons do not differ from one another really and
essentially, but really and personally, i. e. by relative Personalities.

Obj. 8. Where there are One and Three Beings, there there are Four: Buut in
God there are One and Three Beings; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are Three,
and yet Essence it self is none of these.

Answ. We are not to imagine here, that the Author meant to favor the
Sabellian Heresy: For though to say, that Three Persons are Three Modes of
Subsistence, be Sabelliani^, yet as an Answer to the foregoing Objection, the
fa^rest Interpretation is, That though there be Three distinct Persons in the
Godhead or Divine Nature, the Divine Nature is not to be reckoned as a thing
distinct and separate from them: And this will give likewise an Orthodox Sense
to the Comparison of Light.
There is one only Essence in God, and Three Persons are only the Three Modes
of his Subsistence: Now Modes do not number a thing, but they are numbered and
included in it; so that it cannot be said to be different from them. So, for
Example, if there be Three Degrees of Light, the Morning, Noon, and Evening
Light, Light it self will not be any fourth thing in respect of these Degrees,
which are to be reckoned up and included under Light singly and simply
considered.

Obj. 9. If there be Three Persons in the Divine Essence, then there will be
first and second, before and after, and so it will not be perfectly simple.

Answ. [Before and after] do not relate to the Essence, but to the Modes of
subsisting: And though they generally suppose a priority of Time and Essence,
yet there is a priority of Order, that does not exclude a Co-aeternity: And
Eternity has relation to the Essence of God.

Obj. 10. The Doctrine of the Trinity is contrary to Reason, because it asserts
the same numerical Essence to be wholly in One and wholly in Three, which seems
impossible.

Answ. The Divine Essence is One and Infinite, and so is wholly in One Person,
and wholly in Three: This cannot be said to be impossible, since the Essence of
a reasonable Soul is totally in the whole, and wholly in every Part. Now the
true Image of this thing is this, That many Men are One Man only by a
Participation of the Species or Humane Nature.

Obj. 11. This Doctrine introduces Three Infinites, when it is impossible thsre
should be any more than One.

Answ. There is One Infinite, viz. the Divine Essence; however that Infinity is
not a personal Property, but an essential one: There are not indeed Three
infinite Gods; but Three Persons make up One infinite Nature.

Obj. 12. The Father is said to be the only true God, Joh. 17. 3.

Answ. Hereby are excluded all fictitious Deities or Creatures, but not the Son
or the Holy Ghost: Even the Father alone is God, who has an Omnipotent Son.

Obj. 13. The Scripture does not make use of these Words and Phrases: Trinity,
Person and to proceed.

Answ. Although these Terms are not to be met with in the Scriptures: yet the
Sense and Meaning of them are plainly to be fetched from thence.

ART. II. Of the Word or Son of God which was made very Man.
THE Son, which is the Word of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the
Father, the very and eternal God, of one Substance with the Father, took Man's
Nature in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin of her Substance: So that Two whole
and perfect Natures; that is to say, the Godhead and Manhood were joined
together in One Person never to be divided; whereof is One Christ, very God,
and very Man; who truly suff^red, was cru^fied, dead, and buried, to reconc^le
his Father to us, and to be a Sa^fice, not only for O^nal Guilt, but also for
the Actual Sins of Men.

Obj. 1. That it does by no means agree to a Spiritual N^e to ^eget; therefore
Christ is not (...) of God.

Answ. This is true, Physically speaking, in the manner that corporeal
Substances be, et their Likeness and Substance; but it very well agrees in a Me
a physical Sense, as an Angelical or Human Mind begets Reason, which is the
proper Fruit of the Mind, and in the most Spiritual Sense of all, we may
suppose one Person to beget another, from and in himself, as the Father begat
the Son.

Obj. 2. That Christ has not all the Divine Perfections, because he wants
Paternity, which is a Perfection of the Father; therefore he is not God.

Answ. Christ has all the absolute Perfections that are common to the Three
Persons, which is sufficient, although he has not the Chracteristical Ones,
which are proper only to One.

Obj. 3. That if the Father and the Son are of the same Essence, then if the
Son be incarnate and made Flesh, the Father is so too.

Answ. The whole Divine Essence is incarnate, not absolutely, but relatively;
inasmuch as it is wholly in the Son, the whole Divinity originally undertook
the Work of Incarnation. This may be illustrated by a Similitude: Three Sisters
weave one Garment, and the second wears it.

Obj. 4. If the eternal Son of God be incarnated, it follows that he had a
Being, and was a Person before he was incarnate: If this be so, What is that
which was conceived in the Virgin's Womb, and bo^n? Not a Person; for then
there would be Two Persons, and Two Sons of God. If the Person is not born of
the Virgin, how does that deserve to be called a Man which is born of her,
since no body can be called a Man, that is not a Humane Person? For a Man is
distinguished to be such by his Person, and nothing else.

Answ. There is one sort of Individual which subsists of it self, and is
rightly called Person; and another, which does not subsist of it self, but in
another, as the Hand in the Body: But because it does not subsist of it self,
is therefore not to be called a Person. So the Humane Nature of Christ never
did subsist by it self, but always in the Divine Logos; and for that Reason was
never of it self a Person.

Obj. 5. God sent his Son, not in true Flesh, but (as the Apostle says, Romans 8.
3.) in the Similitude of sinful Flesh: And so Christ was not a true Man.

Answ. The true Flesh of Christ is called the Similitude of Flesh, not simply
so, but as obnoxious to the Sin of the Flesh; not that Christ did assume the
Likeness of Flesh, and as it were the Image of a Body, and not a real one, but
only the Similitude of sinning Flesh: This could not be; for Christ was not a
Sinner, though he was like to Sinners.

Obj. 6. Christ and Melchisedeck are compared together, because both of them
were without Father and without Mother, Heb. 7. 3. And therefore Christ was not
born of a Virgin.

Answ. Christ is said to be without Father and Mother, in respect to different
Natures, not simply so: For he was without Father in respect of his Humane
Nature, and in respect of his Divine, without Mother.

Obj. 7 God was not angry with M^nkind, but abundantly loved it, and therefore
out of mere Charity sent his Son; for which Reason there was no necessity that
the Father should be reconciled to us.

Answ. God was certainly angry with us, although he sent his Son: He loved us
as Creatures, and hated us as Transgressors. God's Wrath excludes the special
and particular, though not that general Love of God, wherewith, as such, he
loves his Creatures.

ART. III. Of the going down of Christ into Hell.
AS Christ died for us, and was buried, so also it is to be believed that he
went down into Hell.

Obj. 1. The Evangelists that have mentioned the most minute Circumstances in
the History of Christ, do not speak one Word of this Descent into Hell.

Answ. The Evangelists desired only to relate those things of Christ, whereof
either they themselves were Eyewitnesses, or else had it from others that were
so; but no Mortal could see Christ descend.

Obj. 2. Christ did not go down into Hell in his Deity, which is every where;
nor in his Body, which was laid in a Sepulcher; nor in his Soul, which was in
Paradise, Luke 23. 43.

Answ. The Soul of Christ might be upon one and the same Day in Hell and in
Paradise: For why may we not say, that Christ, after his Death, and the Union
of his Soul and Body restored, might in a Moment descend into Hell, and in a
Moment return from thence? We ought to believe many things, the Manner and
Circumstances whereof we are not able to define.

Obj. 3. Christ did not descend, that he might, show his Victory, because his
Resu^rection was but the beginning of his Triumph; nor that he might further
suffer, because he said upon the ^ss, It is finished: nor finally, that he
might free the Fathers from Limbo, since Limbo is a mere Tale.

Answ. The Opinion ^f Bishop Pea^on, and other emment Men of our Church in this
Matter, seems to be safer, and l^ss liable to Exceptions. That by He^ or Hades
is meant rather ^he Place and State of the Dead, after the Separation of Soul
and Body; when Christ (as to his Humanity) was willing to be detained ^ill his
Resur^.
His Resurrection was the beginning of his Triumph manifested to us, but
perhaps not absolutely so; for his Descent into the Lower Parts mentioned Ep^.
4. 9.) was before his Resurrection: And this Place seems very strongly to prove
the real Descent of Christ into Hell. Nor by our Adversaries Confession is
there any Impiety in this Opinion, if it be said, that Christ went to manifest
his Victory to the infernal Spirits, and then presently entered into Paradise,
as he promised the Thief.

Obj. 4. It did not become Christ to honor those with his Presence, who had
been unworthy of his Favor, and were eternally damned.

Ans. It did become Christ; and for the Demonstration of his Justice and Glory,
it was fitting that he should present himself a Conqueror to infernal Spirits,
that he might bring a Terror upon the Devils, and reproach the damned with
their Folly and Wickedness. However it be, let us believe that Christ went down
into Hell, although we are not fully and plainly satisfied of the Sense and
Manner of it.

ART. IV. Of the Resurrection of Christ.
CHRIST did truly rise again from Death, and took again his Body, with Flesh,
Bones, and all things appertaining to the Perfection of Man's Nature, wherewith
he ascended into Heaven, and there sits, until he return to judge all Men at
the last Day.

Yet it should seem that Christ could not raise himself from the Dead. For,
(Obj. 1.) It appears very unaccountable, that any one should die, and yet raise
himself to Life again.

Answ. It is indeed very unaccountable that mere Man should rise again by his
own Power; but Christ is God as well as Man.

Obj. 2. The Scriptures generally ascribe the Resurrection of Christ to God the
Father, as Romans 6. 4.

Answ. His Resurrection is indeed ascribed to the Father, but not to him alone:
It is attributed to both, because of the perfect Unity of their Essence.
Whatsoever the Father does, that does the Son do likewise.

Obj. 3. It Is objected, That Bodies, after Resurrection, are not Flesh and
Bones, but of a Spiritual Nature, 1 Cor. 15. 44. how could Christ then reassume
his Body with Flesh and Bones?

Answ. Bodies after their Resurrection are said to be Spiritual, not as to
their Substance and Essence; but as to their Qualities and Endowments, they
will be like to Spirits, immortal, and wanting neither Meat nor Drink.

Obj. 4. Bodies of Flesh are not immortal, because, as the Praphet Esa. 4. 6.
says, All Flesh is Grass.

Ans. All Flesh of pure Man is corruptible, and as Grass; but the Flesh of
Christ is not such: The Prophet there speaks of the common and ordinary
Condition of Mortals, and not of a most glorious Savior, who is very God,

Obj. 5. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 15. 50. That Flesh and Blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God; how then could Christ with both these ascend up
into Heaven?

Answ. The Apostle speaks of Man as corrupted, and not washed from his Sins by
Christ, or else of Flesh not yet freed from Corruption, That such shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God; for the Body cannot enter into Heaven till it be
freed from Corruption.

Obj. 6. Christ will not forsake us even to the last Judgment; for he told his
Disciples, Mat. 28. 20. Lo I am with you, even to the end of the World. And in
the way to Damascus he appeared to St. Paul. Acts 9. 17. And again in the
Castle, he stood by him in the Night, Acts 23. 11.

Answ. Christ speaks of a Spiritual Presence by his Grace, and not of a Bodily
one by Nature: And then what if Christ did promise his Disciples that he would
be with them by a Substantial Presence, if need so required? We are not to fix
Christ so to the Heavens, as if he could not appear upon Earth, as perhaps in
an extraordinary manner he did appear to St. Paul; although many understand
that place of a mental Vision: However Heaven is the ordinary place of his
Residence.

Obj. 7. It is apparent that Christ will not judge all Men; for he that
believes shall not come into Judgment, John 5. 24. The Prince of this World,
the Devil, is already judged, John 16. 11. And also he that believes not, John
3. 18. is condemned already.

Answ. He that believes shall not come into the Judgment of Condemnation, but
of Absolution: But the Devils and all Infidels are already judged in God's
Decree, or in his revealed Word, or by their own Consciences, which is the
beginning of their Punishment; but hereafter they will be condemned accordding
to the Revelation and Manifestation of Judgment already made, to the Acuteness
of Punishment, and to the Consummation of Torments both of Body and Soul.

ART. V. Of the Holy Ghost.
THE Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son, is of one Substance,
Majesty, and Glory with the, Father and the Son, very and eternal God.

Obj. 1. Although the Spirit of Truth be said to proceed from the Father, John
15. 16. yet it does not seem to proceed from the Son, because it is no where
said so in Scripture.

Answ. Although it be not said in the very Words, that the Spirit proceeds from
the Son, yet it is plainly called the Spirit of the Son, Gal. 4. 6. And the
Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9. And then Christ says, John 15. 26. that he would
send them the Spirit from the Father: In which Words he seems to mean, that it
would proceed from him likewise: Though, speaking as a Man, by way of Respect,
he attributes it to the Father. There is no need to dispute too nicely about
this Matter; if it be but granted, that the Holy Ghost has an eternal
Dependence on the Son, it is to no purpose to strive about Words and Terms.

Obj. 2. The Holy Ghost was not from Eternity, John 7. 39.

Answ. This Place does not speak concerning the Being or Person, but of the
Gifts and Operations of the Holy Ghost.

Obj 3. The Holy Ghost is not every where, because he changes place: The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, says the Angel to Mary, Luke 1. 35. And in the same
place; the Virtue of the most High shall over-shadow thee; therefore neither is
he the most High.

Answ. The Words [come upon thee] do not signify any change of Place, but a
particular Manifestation in some certain Place: And then the Holy Ghost is
essentially the most High, though not personally so, if by the Name of [most
High] the Father be understood.

Obj. 4. The Holy Ghost does not know all things; because none knows the Father
but the Son, Mat. 11. 27. therefore he is not God.

Answ. The Word [none] excludes only Creatures, and not the Holy Ghost, who
perfectly knows the Father, 1 Cor. 2. 10.

Obj. 5. All things are made by Christ; and so is the Holy Ghost: Therefore he
is not God Joh. 1. 3.

Answ. All things are said to be made by Christ which are made; but then only
Creatures are made.

Obj. 6. He that prays to God, is not God; but the Holy Ghost supplicates God
for us.

Answ. It is not said what the Holy Ghost acts immediately and of it self, but
what it stirs up and effects in us.

Obj. 7. He that is sent is inferior to him that sends; but the Holy Ghost is
sent by the Father, and then he is not of the same Mijesty and Glory.

Answ. Mission and Obedience do not always take away an Equality of Power; for
an Equal may sometimes be sent by his Equal.

ART. VI. Of the Sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures for Salvation.
HOly Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation, so that whatsoever
is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any
Man, that it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or be thought
requisite or necessary to Salvation. In the name of the Holy Scripture, we do
understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose
Authority was never any doubt in the Church.

Of the Names and Number of the Canonical Books.

Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomium, Jeshua, Judges, Ruth, the
First Book of Samuel, the Second Book of Samuel, the First Book of Kings, the
Second Book of Kings, the First Book of Chronicles, the Second Book of
Chronicles, the First Book of Esdras, the Second Book of Esdras, the Book of
Hester, the Book of Job, the Psalms, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes or Preacher,
Cantica or Songs of Solomon, Four Prophets the greater, Twelve Prophets the
Less.

And the other Books (as Hierom says) the Church does read for Example of
Life, and Instruction of Manners; But yet does it not apply them to establish
any Doctrine; such are these following.

The third Book of Esdras. The fourth Book of Esdras. The Book of Tobias. The
Book of Judith. The rest of the Book of Hester. The Book of Wisdom. Jesus the
Son of Sirach. Baruch the Prophet. The Song of the Three Children. The Story of
Susanna. Of Bell and the Dragon. The Prayer of Manasses. The first Book of
Maccabees. The second Book of Maccabees.

All the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do
receive and account them Canonical.

It may be thought, that the Scriptures do not contain all things necessary to
Salvation; for (Obj. 1.) It is necessary to Salvation, that we should know
what, and how many Books are Canonical.

Answ. This is not so absolutely necessary, for we only enforce it, that the
Faithful may be Baptized, may Believe and Live well.

Obj. 2. It is likewise necessary to know, that these Books came to us
uncorrupted.

Answ. The Goodness of God is such, that he would not suffer those Books to be
corrupted, which contain the business of Salvation: There was a Promise made to
Esaias, that his Prophetical Writings should remain for ever, (Esaias 30. 8.) and
Christ has promised (Mat. 5. 18.) That not one^ Iota or Tittle should pass from
the Law.

Obj. 3. We ought to know how many Articles of Faith are to be believed by
every one, under the hazard of forfeiting his Salvation; but neither ^is
revealed in the Sacred Writings.

Answ. We have a Creed, that is collected from the Scriptures; but yet it is
not necessary to Salvation to have a distinct knowledge of the number of our
Mysteries. One thing is needful (as Christ answered Martha (Luke 10. 42.) One
thing is absolutely necessary, namely, that in comparison of Christ we should
look upon all things as Loss. I determined not to know any thing among you,
save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 2.

Obj. 4. We no where meet with the Means that God made use of, to purify
Females from Original Sin, or Males that died before the Eighth day, or indeed
concerning the Gentiles, how they were to be saved under the Old Testament.

Ans. By the circumcision of the Men, the Females were consecrated; the Married
Women belonged to their Husbands, the Unmarried to their Parents: The purging
of Females from Sin was done chiefly by Faith; they and the Children of Jews
that died before the Eighth Day, were saved by virtue of the Promise made to
Abram. I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed. God was not bound to any
external Sacrament; even without that he could conferr his Grace: So also the
Gentiles were justified by Faith, Genesis 12. 3. All the Families of the Earth
shall be blessed in Abram.

Obj. 5. If the Scripture be perfect, either the single Books of the Canon are
perfect, or the whole Canon: It is granted, that the single Books of it are not
so: And then the whole Canon is not, because many Books are lost, as the
Writings of Nathan and Gad, with others, 1 Chronicles. 29. 29. as also the Epistle
of St. Paul to the Laodiceans, Col. 4. 16.

Answ. The single Books have an essential Perfection, because they have the
Matter and Form of the Word of God; the whole Canon has a proportionate one:
The one has the perfection of the part, the other of the whole: But we have all
the Books that are Canonical; those Books that are lost, were Historical
Narrations; and some others too, that were not Canonical.

Obj. 6. All that Christ said and did are not comprehended in the Scriptures.

Answ. All that Christ did and said, necessary for our Salvation, are in the
Scriptures.

Obj. 7. St. Paul bids us, 2 Thessalonians. 2 15. to hold or keep the Traditions.

Answ. Either the Apostle there speaks of those free and indifferent
Constitutions that concern the Government of the Church, or concerning the
Doctrine which he himself in Person had preached to them, and then even that
was contained in his Writings, and other Canonical Books; for Tradition is wont
to be taken in that Sense: Now he had delivered nothing contrary to the
Scriptures, as some others had done.

Obj. 8. But besides, Those Books (which we call Apocrypha) should seem to be
truly Canonical, because not only many Councils, but many Fathers have called
and accounted them Canonical.

Answ. We are to give credit to Councils, as far as they follow the guidance of
Scripture, and no further; and if at any time General Councils call these Books
Canonical, this is only in a comprehensive Sense, and has no other meaning, but
that they were wont to be read in the Church for the ed^fication of the People;
not that they had the same assurance of them, as of those that are truly
Canonical, because these were never received into the Hebrew Canon; and from
hence they were called Deutero-Canonici, or, Canonical in a second Form: And
then as to some of the Fathers, that they called them Canonical; that will not
prove them such: Neither is it very likely, that the more Ingenuous of them
would call them so, unless in the foregoing Sense.

Obj. 9. The Church is wont to cite many things from thence.

Answ. The Apostles cited some things from the Writings of the Heathens, but we
must not gather from thence, that their Writings are Canonical.

Obj. 10. There are many things in the Books of the Apocrypha, which mig^ly
encourage Faith and Piety: There you have ^ittle Morals, Oec^mics, and
P^liticks; in short, a Compendium of Scripture.

Answ. All the Books that contain good Precepts, are not Canonical.

ART. VII. Of the Old Testament.
THE Old Testament is not contrary to the New; for both in the Old and New
Testament, everlasting Life is offered to Mankind by Christ, who is the only
Mediator between God and Man, being both God and Man: Wherefore they are not to
be heard, which feign, that the Old Fathers did look only for transitory
Promises: Although the Law given from God by Moses, as touching Ceremonies and
Rites, do not bind Christian Men, nor the Civil Precepts thereof ought of
necessity to be received in any Commonwealth; yet notwithstanding no Christian
Man whatsoever is free from the Obedience of the Commandments, which are called
Moral.

Against the aforesaid Article it is Objected,

Obj. 1. That in the Old Testament things were obscure, but in the New they are
clear. In the Old, Christ was shadowed out under Ceremonies; in the New,
himself is present; from whence may be inferred, an Opposition between the Two
Testaments.

Answ. There may be inferred some difference between the Old and the New
Testament, in respect to the manner of Administration, to the clearness and
circumstances of Things; but no contrariety in respect to the Substance.

Obj. 2. Christ (as a Man) had not yet suffered; and for that reason, Grace
through him was not yet offered.

Answ. Grace was effectually offered through Christ, that was to come.

Obj 3. The Mystery of the Incarnation was unknown to the Sons of Men, Ephesians. 3.
5.

Answ. It was unknown to the Gentiles, before their Conversion: Or, This
Mystery was unknown to the Fathers, i. e. It was not so plainly and distinctly
known as now it is; as you have it in that Text.

Obj. 4. The ancient Church was in its Infancy, and its Knowledge was
accordingly, Gal. 4. 3, So in bodily things, it could not discern Spiritual
ones.

Answ. The ancient Church is called childish, not because it knew nothing of
Christ, but because its Knowledge was very weak in respect of the Church of the
New Testament, which saw those things brought to pass, which were before
prophesied of.

Obj. 5. Christ was the Mediator of a better Covenant, because it was
established by better Promises, Heb. 8. 6.

Answ. Christ is the Mediator of a better Covenant than that of Moses; for that
promised only Blessing, upon condition they kept the Law: But the ancient
Covenant, that was freely made with the Patriarchs, has the same Promises with
the New Testament, in which Life is promised by Faith.

Obj. 6. Circumcision is called an everlasting Covenant, Genesis 17. 13. The
Passover is called an everlasting Worship; and the whole Levitical Service is
called an eternal Precept, a perpetual Ordinance, and therefore it does bind
all Christians, Exodus 12. 14.

Answ. The Levitical Ordinances are called everlasting, i. e. so long as the
Old Law should last; so that such a duration is spoken of, as the nature of the
thing will bear. And the Word [Olam] in the Original signifies an Age or long
time, but does not always denote an absolute Eternity.

Obj. 7. The Law of not cating Blood, does bind Christians, Acts 15. 29.

Answ. The eating of Blood was forbidden to the Gentiles; not for ever, but for
a time, to avoid giving Offense to the weak Jews, who were not yet fully
confirmed in the Faith of Christ, and did still believe, that this Ordinance
was not quite abolished: But then you will say, that abstaining from Blood and
Fornication, are both joined together in the Apostle's Edict, Acts 15. 29.
therefore by the same necessity that Christians are obliged to abstain from
Fornication, by the same likewise are they bound as to the eating of Blood; I
answer, that the eating of Blood and Fornication were joined together by the
Apostles, not that they really were, but only were accounted equal. For by most
Heathens, Fornication was accounted no Sin, and Christians began to be wondered
at by the Gentiles, that they were so much in love with Chastity: Neither is it
any new thing in the Law of Moses, to have moral, judicial, and ceremonial
Precepts mixed together.

Obj. 8. None can make wiser Laws than God: Now the civil Precepts of the Law:
Of not defrauding the Hirelings, of care for the Poor, and several others, do
highly oblige every Christian.

Answ. It Is true, no body makes Laws wiser than God; but among the Laws which
He has made, some are only proper for the Jewish Commonwealth, and these do not
bind Christians; but there are others which have the nature of common Justice,
and a natural Law, and are the Explications and Determinations of the moral
one, and the observation of them is likewise enjoined in the New Testament: But
these do bind every one to observe them.

Obj. 9. The moral Law is not made for a Righteous Man, 1 Timothy 1. 9.

Answ. The Law as to its Punishments (whereof it threatens a great many) is not
made for a Righteous Man to Condemnation, although it be made (as to its Rules)
for Observation. A just Man, even for the love of Justice, conforms himself to
that Law, and then the threatenings of the Law signify nothing to him.
Consequently then, this can be nothing to wilful Libertines, that the Just are
not bound by any Christian Laws.

ART. VIII. Of the Three Creeds.
THE Three Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius's Creed, and that which is commonly
called the Apostle's Creed, ought thoroughly to be received and believed; for
they may be proved by most certain Warrants of Holy Scripture.

Obj. 1. This Article seems to be imperfect, because it makes no mention of the
Ephesian, Chalcedonian, and Constantinopolitan Creeds, which were wont to be
approved of by the Church.

Answ. This Article mentions the chief Creeds, not exclusively to others, as if
they might not be true likewise; and it was not necessary to mention All.

Obj. 2. The Inventions of Men are not to be obtruded upon the Church, nor to
be received as necessary to be believed; but the foregoing Creeds as such; and
are proposed to our Faith, as if they were the W^d of God.

Answ. The aforesaid Creeds were indeed composed and methodized by Men; but yet
they are not the mere Fancies of Men contrary to the Holy Scriptures, which the
Argument supposes; but the Doctrine contained in them is conformable to the
Word of God. Neither do we receive them with an equal degree of Faith with the
Holy Scripture, but we give them the next place to That, and reverence them, as
the chief Monuments of Faith.

Obj. 3. To omit others; that Sentence in Athanasius's Creed seems to be too
severe, where he speaks of the Confession of Faith; That except every one do
keep it whole and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly: What
shall we then say of those that labor under an invincible Ignorance? How shall
they believe on him, of whom they have not heard? says St. Paul, Romans 10. 14,
If then Men want the Means of Knowledge, and the Tidings of this Doctrine has
in no sort come to them, it is plain they are not to be blamed, and that they
are free from Damnation; for God obliges no one to Impossibilities.

Answ. Athanasius means chiefly those to whom the Catholic Faith has been
propounded and explained, who have all the means requisite for the knowledge of
the Truth. As to others, who of them will be saved, God himself will, in an
extraordinary manner enlighten their Understandings, that they may perceive
what things are necessary to Salvation.

ART. IX. Of Original Sin.
ORiginal Sin stands not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly
talk; but it is the Fault and Corruption of the Nature of every Man, that
naturally is ingendered of the Offspring of Adam, whereby Man is very far gone
from Original Righteousness, and is of his own Nature inclined to Evil; so that
the Fleth lusts always contrary to the Spirit; And therefore in every Person
born into this World, it deserves God's Wrath and Damnation: And this Infection
of Nature does remain; yea, in them that are Regenerated, whereby the Lust of
the Flesh, called in Greek (...), which some do expound the Wisdom, some
Sensuality, some the Affection, some the Desire of the Flesh, is not subject to
the Law of God. And although there is no Condemnation for them that believe, and
are Baptized, yet the Apostle does confess, that Concupiscence and Lust has of
it self the nature of Sin.

Against which it is Objected,

Obj. 1. That God does not punish the same Sin twice; but he has ^ready
punished Adam's Sin in Adam, and therefore will not punish it in us.

Ans. Adam's Sin was not Numerically, but Specifically, One; and that inclusive
of the whole Species: As he sinned, so have we likewise sinned in him, and we
are justly punished in our selves.

Obj. 2. It is plain, there is no such thing as Original Sin, because the Son
shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father, says the Prophet, Ezekiel. 18. 20.

Answ. The Son does not bear the Personal Sins of his Father; but the Sin of
the first Man was a stain of the whole Nature; when therefore any one is
punished for the Sin of Adam, he is punished for his own.

Obj. 3. Sin is a voluntary thing; but Original Sin is not so in Infants.

Ans. Original Sin is voluntary in All, nay, even in Infants too: for our Wills
were in the Will of Adam, as in the Principle of Mankind; in him we willed and
desired Evil.

Obj. 4. An Accident of one Individual is not transferred to the whole Species,
but the Sin of Adam was only an Accident of one Individual.

Ans. Adam, inasmuch as he was the Principle of Human Nature, was to be looked
upon here as an universal Cause.

Obj. 5. The Children of Holy Men are Holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. therefore they are
not born in Sin.

Ans. The Children of Holy Men are not so Holy as to be free from Original Sin;
but they are called so in regard of a Communion with the Church, by reason of
that Covenant, Genesis 17. 7. I will be a God to Thee, and to thy Seed. They are
therefore Holy, with a relative, and not with any inherent Holiness; so also
they are Innocent, in respect to those Sins which are committed against
Knowledge.

Obj. 6. In Baptism we receive a perfect Remission of Sins, therefore Original
Sin is wholly taken away, and so remains not in the Regenerate.

Ans. Remission of Sin takes away Sin, as to its Imputation, not as to its
Being; for Mortification is but imperfect in this Life: so in Baptism Sin is
taken away; but not so much the Sin it self, as the Sting of it, that it may
not hurt us.

Obj. 7. Things absolutely disagreeing do not meet in the same Subject; but Sin
and Righteousness are of that sort; therefore since there is Righteousness in
the Regenerate, there can be no Sin there.

Answ. Sin and Righteousness cannot be in the same Subject in the highest; but
yet easily in lower degrees.

Obj. 8. Concupiscence, or a proneness to Evil, is distinguished from Sin, as
the Cause is from the Effect, Jam. 1. 15. and therefore is not of it self to be
accounted Sin.

Answ. Concupiscence is distinguished from Actual Sin, and from an external Act
already completed; but in the mean time, it has of it self the nature of a
Sin, because of it self it is not subjected to the Law of God: And it is this
Rebellion of the Powers of our Souls that disposes us to all manner of Sins.

ART. X. Of Free Will.
THE Condition of Man, after the Fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural Strength, and Good Works to Faith, and
calling upon God: Wherefore we have no Power to do Good Works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a Good Will, and working with us, when we have that Good Will.

Against this Doctrine it is Objected,

Obj. 1. That God commands Men to turn to him, and to believe in him, Zach. 1.
3. Mark 1. 15. and in many other places to perform all Works of Piety:
Therefore this they can do, otherwise it would be commanded to no purpose.

Answ. From a Precept, to an Ability to perform it, we can draw no Argument: We
can indeed, do Offices of Piety, and that only when we are acted and excited to
them. God gives what he Commands, and helps what he has given; without Him we
cannot be good, and without our selves he will not make us so.

Obj. 2. It is tyrannical to punish any one for not doing what he could not so
much as Will or Desire.

Answ. He would be indeed a Tyrant, that should command such things to be done
as are not in Men's Power: But God made Man with Abilities to fulfill his
Commands; And then God requires of Man Obedience to his I aw, not by setting
himself upon the exact fulfilling of it by his own feeble Strength; but, upon
considering the impossibility of the thing, with respect to the Powers of
Nature, to betake himself to Christ, through whom the Faithful are able to do
all things.

Obj. 3. If Man had not a Free Will, he would Sin necessarily, and then ought
not to be punished, and so all Use of Exhortations, Reproofs, and all endeavor
after Good Works would be taken away.

Answ. A Man without the help of Grace sins necessarily; whosoever is under
this necessity, it is his Fault; for he has drawn this necessity of sinning
upon himself, and therefore is justly punished by God: And then as for the Use
of Exhortations, that is not taken away with those that have the sufficient
Assistance of God. The Precepts which cannot be performed by the strength of
Nature, are useful in this respect, that they put us in mind of our Weakness,
invite us to an earnest endeavor to pray, and so lead us to Christ, who is
wont to assist the weak: And these are the efficacious means that God (together
with his Grace) makes use of in Man's Conversion; that what is impossible to
Nature, may in this way become very easy.

Obj. 4. Men are called Laborers, Mat. 20. 8. and Laborers together with God
in the business of Salvation, 1 Cor. 3. 9.

Answ. Men do indeed cooperate with God by Grace, not by their own Strength;
and therefore they are said to cooperate in respect of assisting, and not of
preventing Grace.

ART. XI. Of the Justification of Man by Faith.
WE are accounted Righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own Works or Deservings;
wherefore, that we are justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine,
and very full of Comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of
Justification.

Obj. 1. In this Article there seems to be a Contradiction, when it is said we
are accounted Righteous only for the Merit of Christ; but afterward it is said,
this is done by Faith.

Answ. Here is no Contradiction at all: We are only accounted Righteous by the
Merit of Christ, as by an impellent Cause; yet this is done likewise by Faith,
as by an instrumental Cause, whereby we obtain that Merit.

Obj. 2. By Justification we are restored to that State, from which, by the Sin
of Adam, we were fallen, Romans 5. 19. Since therefore we lost inherent
Righteousness by Adam's Fall, we recover it again by Justification.

Answ. We are restored by the Righteousness of Christ, and partly by inherent
Righteousness too: The one as the most perfect, is imputed for perfect
Righteousness, Romans 4. But the other is too weak for us to be able to stand
before God, Esa. 64. 6. In the aforecited place, Romans 5. the Word [as] does not
determine the manner or the quality, but the original Author of Righteousness.

Obj. 3. It is said, Romans 8. 24. By Hope we are saved.

Answ. By Hope is there meant Trust, and so it falls in with Faith: Even by
Hope we are said to be saved, because we are not actually possessed of
Salvation, but by Hope, not that we are justified by any peculiar Virtue of
Hope.

Obj. 4. Many Sins were forgiven Mary Magdalen, because she loved much, says
the Text, Luke 7. 47. therefore by Love she was Justified.

Answ. The Particle [because] does not denote any forcible cause of
Justification, but only a significative one; for Love is a sign of
Justification, and is the fruit and companion of Faith; but yet it has not an
equal share with it in the Act of Justification. Here is no Consequence, her
Sins were forgiven, because she loved, therefore Love is the cause of
Forgiveness: So neither does this follow: A Man lives, because he walks,
therefore walking is the cause of Life.

ART. XII. Of Good Works.
ALbeit that Good Works, which are the fruits of Faith, and follow after
Justification, cannot put away our Sins, and endure the severity of God's
Judgments; yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring
out necessarily of a true and lively Faith, insomuch that by them a lively
Faith may be as evidently known as a Tree discerned by the Fruit.

Obj. 1. Many Men believe the Articles of Faith to be true, that do yet lead
wicked Lives; therefore Good Works are not always the Fruit of Faith.

Answ. Such Men as always live wickedly, have not justifying Faith; but only
the empty Profession of it.

Obj. 2. The Integrity of Job is described, Chap. 1. 2. David asks to be judged
according to his Righteousness, n^y, and boasts of it too, Psalm. 7. 8. And then
we read of Zachartah and Elizabeth, that they were both Righteous before God,
Luke 1. 6. It seems then, that their Works would bear the Judgment of God.

Answ. A partial Perfection, which is Sincerity, is attributed to the Godly,
but not an absolute one, such as is called a gradual Perfection; as if they
could be able to stand the severe Trial of Divine Judgment. Job says he could
not do so, Chap. 9. 2, 3. It is one thing to speak of the Righteousness of a
Cause, and another of a Personal Rightcousness; in respect of which latter,
David himself confesses, that he could not bear the Judgment of God, Psalm. 130.
3. 143. 2.

Obj. 3. St. James concludes, Chap. 2. 24. That a Man is justified by Works,
and not by Faith only.

Answ. St. James speaks of Justification, or the proof of Justification before
Men, as is plain from Verse 18. Show me thy Faith by thy Works, and Ver. 21.
Abram was justified by the Work of Offering up his Son, i. e. he was declared
Righteous, whereas before, by the righteousness of Faith he had been pronounced
Just before God, Genesis 15. 6. Romans 4.

Obj. 4. Evil Works condemn, therefore Good Ones justify; for the same reason
holds in things that are opposite.

Answ. These Opposites here are not equal, which that Axiom supposes; for Evil
Works are perfectly Evil, but Good Ones are imperfectly Good.

Obj. 5. We are justified by Faith, as appears by the foreg^ing Article; but
Faith is a Good Work; for he that believes does well, therefore we are
justified by Faith, which is a Good Work.

Answ. The major of that Argument is in one sense true, and in another false;
for Faith, properly speaking, is not our Righteousness, nor is it so imputed to
us: but it is the object of our Faith that is so; to wit, the Merit of Christ.

ART. XIII. Of Works before Justification.
WOrks done before the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God; forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ,
neither do they make Men meet to receive Grace, or (as the School Authors say)
deserve Grace of Congruity: Yea rather, for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but that they have the
nature of Sin.

It is Objected,

Obj. 1. That God has rewarded some Works of Unbelievers; as for Example, the
Egyptian Midwives, Exodus 1. 21. and therefore they seemed to be acceptable to
him.

Answ. From any Temporal Reward we are not to gather, that the Work was in it
self pleasing to God.

Obj. 2. The Gentiles do by Nature the things of the Law, Romans 2. 14. Now with
such God is well pleased.

Answ. The Gentiles do indeed by Nature the things of the Law, in some external
Duties: But not as to all other requisite Circumstances. because they do them
not in Faith, nor to the Glory of the true God.

Obj. 3. Cornelius was a Gentile: But before his Conversion to Christ, his
Alms-deeds were praised, as good and acceptable, Acts 10. 1. So that his Good
Works seem to have disposed him to Grace, or to have deserved (as the
Schoolmen say) the Grace of Congruity.

Answ. Cornelius was endued with the extraordinary Grace of God, and God
rewarded him accordingly: And he seems to have had a knowledge of Christ to
come; for his Prayers had not been heard, but by Christ our Mediator, and upon
that account he is thought to have been Regenerate.

Obj. 4. If the Works of the Unregenerate have the nature of Sin (as the
Article expresses t) it were better not to do, than to do them, because by
doing them they sin, and by not doing them, the Sin would not possibly be so
great: And therefore it were better, if such Men neither relieved the Poor, nor
taught the Ignorant.

Answ. Unbelievers would sin in omitting what they ought to do, and the Sin of
Omission is sometimes greater than the Sin of Commission. However, Works are
not to be forbid for any accidental Fault of the Man; but the Gentiles and the
Unconverted are to be persuaded to do all Good Things, which they are even
obliged to by Precept. The Works of an unregenerate Man have the Nature of Sin
only accidentally as to the Manner and the End of Acting, and not as to the
Substance of the Works.

ART. XIV. Of Works of Supererogation.
VOluntary Works besides, over and above God's Commandments, which they call
Works of Supere^ogation, cannot be taught without Arrogance and Impiety: For by
them Men do declare, that they do not only render unto God as much as they are
bound to do, but that they do more for his Sake, than of bounden Duty is
required. Whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done all that are commanded
to you, say, We are unprofitable Servants.

Obj. 1. Christ said to a certain young Man, Mat. 19. 21. I^ ^hou wilt be
perfect, sell all that thou have, and give to the Poor: This was Counsel that
did not indeed oblige all Men; but if it were put in practice, 'twould procure
a (...) exc^llent deg^ ^f Glory.

Answ. This was a particular Precept given to this young Man; and what is here
commanded, that every one is obliged to perform, if the Necessity of his
Brethren require it, which also was practiced by the Primitive Christians.
Affirmative Precepts, although they always oblige, yet not in all Conditions
simply considered; but on Supposition there be found requisite Circumstances.

Obj. 2. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 7. 25. Concerning Virgins, I have no
command; yet I give my Advice, which whosoever follows, will do more than is
absolutely necessary.

Answ. We cannot gather from hence, that there is any thing more perfect than
the Observation of God's Commands, or indeed conducing to eternal Life. Neither
does this Opinion of St. Paul respect all times, but only that present
Necessity, whilst the Church was under Persecution: And then, be it the
Apostle's Council, that Virginity is to be preferred to Matrimony; this is
directed to none but those to whom God has given the Gift; in which Case this
Counsel becomes a Precept to those who have the peculiar Gift of Continence.
There are indeed many Counsels concerning indifferent things; but we reject
such as ascribe a meritorious and greater Power to things purely arbitrary,
than to the Commands of God.

Obj. 3. St. Paul, 1 Cor. 9 15. boasts of his Works of Supererogation, because
be had preached the Gospel freely, which was not necessary for him to do.

Answ. St. Paul preached the Gospel freely, that he might give no occasion of
Reproach to false Apostles, as if he took upon him that Office for the sake of
Gain. The avoiding of Scandal is not then a Work of Supererogation, but every
ones Duty; for woe to him by whom an Offense comes, Mat. 18. 7.

ART. XV. Of Christ alone without Sin.
CHRIST in the Truth of our Nature was made like unto us in all things, (Sin
only excepted) from which he was clearly void, both in his Flesh, and in
Spirit. He came to be a Lamb without Spot; who by Sacrifice of himself once
made, should take away the Sins of the World, and Sin (as St. John says) was
not in him. But all we, the rest (although baptized and born again in Christ)
yet offend in many things; and if we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves,
and the Truth is not in us.

Obj. 1. It is said, That God made Christ to be Sin for us, who knew no Sin, 2
Cor. 5. 21.

Answ. God is said to have made Christ to be Sin for us, because he gave him as
a Sacrifice for Sin, and no otherwise.

Obj. 2. Every one that abides in God sins not, 1 John 3. 6. Therefore the
Regenerate that so abid^, do not offend in many things.

Answ. By this we are to understand, that a regenerate Man can very hardly be
brought to sin, at least to habitual ones: Or else, that a regenerate Man, as
such, or as far as he abides in God, sins not: But so far as he has a
Propension to sin, so far he departs from Grace and Regeneration.

Obj. 3. Eternal Life is promised to none but him that overcomes, Re. 3. 5.
Now only they can be said to overcome, that have absolutely subdued Sin.

Answ. As we are not rewarded with the Crown of Glory, till our Race is run, so
neither can we poor Mortals expect wholly to overcome Sin.

Obj. 4. We ought to be perfect, as our Father which is in Heaven is perfect
(says our Savior, Mat. 5. 48.) But this could not be, if we be sullied with
the least Spot of Sin.

Answ. We must not argue for what we are, from what we ought to be; neither is
there here supposed any Equality of Holiness with God the Father, which is
absolutely impossible; but we are exhorted to some kind of Likeness with God,
which (Sin notwitstanding) may be consistent enough with some Duties of Piety.

Obj. 5. Christ said, John 9. 3. That neither the blind Man, nor his Parents
did Sin.

Answ. Sin is taken either generally, in which Sense all Men sin; or else
particularly for some horrid and enormous Impiety; which is often the Cause of
a remarkable Judgment of God upon the Person of the Sinner, or upon his
Children and Family: And in this Sense Christ spoke concerning the blind Man.

ART. XVI. Of Sin after Baptism.
NOT every deadly Sin willingly committed after Baptism is Sin against the Holy
Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore the Grant of Repentance is not to be denied
to such as fall into Sin after Baptism. After we have received the Holy Ghost,
we may depart from Grace given, and fall into Sin; and by the Grace of God (we
may) arise again, and amend our Lives. And therefore they are to be condemned
which say, They can no more sin as long as they live here, or deny the place of
Forgiveness to such as truly repent.

Obj. 1. Every Sin is a Sin in or against the Holy Ghost; and therefore every
voluntary Sin after Baptism is such.

Answ. A blasphemous, obstinate, and malicious denying of, and opposition to a
known Truth, is called the Sin against the Holy Ghost. Not that other Sins may
not likewise be committed against the Holy Ghost; or that this very Sin is not
likewise a Sin against the Father and the Son; but that it is committed against
the proper and immediate Operation of the Holy Spirit. And thus every one sins,
when the Truth of the Gospel (though clearly and sufficiently avowed) is
denied, is obstinately, and by voluntary Malice rejected, and violently
opposed. And when in this denial of an avowed Truth, and hostile Resistance,
Men obstinately persist to the last Day of their Lives: This is the Sin against
the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 2. It is said, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. That if Men who have tasted of the Grace
of God, fall away, they cannot be renewed again to Repentance.

Answ. The Apostle does not here speak of any particular Fall or Lapse, but of
an universal Defection and Falling of, whereby ungodly Men ruin themselves, and
tread under Foot all the Means of Salvation.

ART. XVII. Of Predestination and Election.
PRedestination to Life is the everlasting Purpose of God, whereby (before the
Foundations of the World were laid) he has constantly decreed by his Council,
secret to us, to deliver from Curse and Damnation, those whom he has chosen in
Christ out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as
Vessels made to Honor. Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a
Benefit of God, be called according to God's Purpose by his Spirit working in
due Season: They through Grace obey the Calling: They be justified freely: They
be made Sons of God by Adoption: They be made like the Image of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ: they walk religiously in good Works, and at length,
by God's Mercy, they attain to everlasting Felicity.

As the Godly Consideration of Predestination and our Election in Christ, is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable Comfort to godly Persons, and such as
feel in themselves the Working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the Works of
the Flesh, and their earthly Members, and drawing up their Mind to high and
heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
Faith of eternal Salvation to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
servently kindle their Love toward God. So for curious and carnal Persons,
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their Eyes the
Sentence of God's Predestination is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the Devil
does thrust them either into Desperation, or into Wretchlesness of most unclean
Living, no less perilous than Desperation. Furthermore we must receive God's
Promises in such wise as they be generally set forth to us in Holy Scripture:
And in our Doings that Will of God is to be followed, which we have expressly
declared unto us in the Word of God.

Obj. Against the foregoing Article it is objected, 1. That Men are not
predestined, because no other Creatures are said to be predestined; whereas
there is the same Reason for all God's Creatures, which are ordained to some
End by his Providence.

Answ. There is not the same Reason for all Creatures; for irrational Creatures
are not capable of this Supernatural End. Predestination therefore is
wrongfully called an Ordainment to any End whatsoever.

Obj. 2. He that predestinates Men, ought to prae-determine whatsoever relates
to their Merits or Demerits: But God does not prae-determine any of our Powers;
for then we should be necessarily forced either to Salvation or Destruction.
But God thus compels no body.

Answ. God has not prae-determined Men's Merits or Demerits, so as to impose any
Necessity upon them; but has given to Man before the Fall a most free Will.

Obj. 3. That it is not agreeable to the Nature of Angels to be predestined
to Life; and therefore neither is it to Men: The Antecedent is thus proved;
because Predestination to Life is a Purpose of Compassion; but the Angels never
were in Misery: The Consequence is true, because Angels are capable of
Happiness as well as Man.

Answ. Why may we not say of good Angels, that they were predestined to Life?
Since Pity is not only a Releasement from Misery; but every Reward above what
is due is such: And the Nature of the Mercy is not to be taken from any Prior
State, but from the present Condition; and therefore it is not material whether
any one be predestined from a State of Misery or not.

Obj. 4. If God should reprobate any one, the Man that is reprobated is not to
be charged with his own Ruin: For no Man must be charged with what he could not
avoid: But if God should reprobate, Man could not help it; for no Man can
withstand God.

Answ. This Argument would hold, if God should damn a Man inevitably without
any Cause; but because Man's falling into Sin proceeds from his own Degeneracy;
therefore his Destruction is deservedly imputed to himself.

Obj. 5. God has accepted a sufficient Ransom for all Men, that is, the
Satisfaction of Christ; therefore he ought to receive all Men into his Favor;
and by consequence none are to be damned.

Answ. The Ransom that Christ made was sufficient, but 'twas upon the Condition
of our applying it to our selves; otherwise it would not be so: But all Men do
not rightly apply Christ's Merits.

Obj. 6. They, whose Salvation depends upon the secret Determinations of God,
can have no true Comfort or Support; therefore the Doctrine of Predestination
is not so full of Comfort as we speak of.

Answ. The Counsel of God is a Secret to us, and brings no Comfort unless it be
revealed by the Holy Spirit, and by the Signs of Election, which are Faith,
Repentance, Charity, and other Virtues.

ART. XVIII. Of obtaining Eternal Salvation only by the Name of Christ.
THey also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, that every Man shall be
saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his Life according to that Law and the Light of Nature; for Holy Scripture does
set out unto us only the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby Men must be saved.

Obj. 1. Not only the Gentiles may be saved by the Law of Nature, but the Jews
also by the Law of Moles, Romans 2.

Answ. It is asserted, Romans 3. 28. That no Man can be saved by the Law of
Nature or of M^ses. Although Gentiles and Jews did perform some Works, yet they
were imperfect without Christ.

Obj. 2. It is said, That the whole of the Law and the Prophets is comprehended
in that known Law of Nature: All things that ye would that Men should do unto
you, do ye also to them, Mat. 7. 12. Whence we may easily gather, that it
appears to all Men what is absolutely necessary to Salvation.

Answ. The Love that we are to show to our Neighbor is comprehended in that
Principle; but that alone is not sufficient: for the Doctrine of the Gospel,
which is unknown to Nature, is likewise requisite to Salvation.

Obj. 3. God does not require at our Hands things impossible; but it is
impossible that they who have never heard of Christ, should rely upon or
believe in him.

Answ. Either, according to the Apostle, Romans 10. 18. All Men have heard of the
Gospel of Christ: Or, All may hear of him in the utmost Parts of the World,
where the Gospel is daily preached: Or if there have been, and are some, who
have never heard of it, we must think, that this was and is for some very
grievous Impieties, which make them unworthy of such a Knowledge.

Obj. 4. Christ told the Pharisees, John 9. 41. If ye were blind, ye would not
have Sin: And then told his Disciples concerning the Jews, John 15. 22. If I
had not come and spoke unto them, they had not had Sin: So that in these places
he gives us sufficiently to understand, that simple Ignorance ought not to be
im^uted to any one: Of which see more in Article VIII.

Answ. This is Christ's meaning; either that if he had not come to the
Pharisees at all, if they had not read the Scriptures, and seen his Miracles,
which confirmed him to be the Mesfiah. Or if they had been blind in their
Opinion, and had sought for further Light from him, they had not had the Sin of
Infidelity: But notwithstanding this, because of their other Impieties, without
a Savior, they could not escape Damnation.

ART. XIX. Of the Church.
THE visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful Men, in the which
the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered
according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred, so also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their Living and manner of Ceremonies
but also in Matters of Faith.

Obj. 1. That the Church is compared to a Fold, wherein are Sheep and Goats, i.
e. good and bad: Therefore the Church is not only the Congregation of the
Faithful.

Answ. Wicked Men may be said to be in the Church, but not of the Church.

Obj. 2. Very many Sects have boasted, that with them was to be sound wholesome
Doctrine, and a right use of the Sacraments; and therefore these Marks do not
always distinguish the true visible Church.

Answ. It is one thing falsely to boast, and another really to have; the
infallible Word of God, well considered, will show to what Assembly Men ought
to join themselves. We find that the Beraeans (though not of the Priestly Order)
could know how to value St. Paul's New Doctrine, with Profit to themselves.

Obj. 3. That these Marks are later and more obscure than the Church; later
because the Doctors or Teachers are before the Doctrine; more obscure, because
it is the part of the Church to explain its own Doctrine.

Answ. The Word of God, though not as the written Word, yet as to its Substance,
was before the Church, because by that the Church was formed: But though it were
after the Church, yet it might be a mark of it, as the Effect may be a mark of
the Cause. Even the written Doctrine was before its Teachers, who have lived in
these last Ages: And then, to an Unbeliever, the Church is more plain and
remarkable than the Scripture, as to its external Form; but to a Believer, the
Scripture is plainer than the Church, as to its internal Form, because the Holy
Spirit enlightens the Minds of the Faithful. Now the Church explains the
Scripture, but then it is by Scripture, because it lays down Scripture in its
own simple native Light: And so far we ought to give credit to the Decisions of
the Church, as far as its Determinations are agreeable to the Scriptures.

Obj. 4. We can assign no time wherein the Church of Rome has failed.

Answ. As to the time wherein the Church of Rome has begun to fail, the Apostle
witnesses, That in his time the foundations of that Mystery of Iniquity were
already laid, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. And Christ tells us, Mat. 13. 25. That the Enemy
the Devil came and sowed Tares among the Wheat, while Men slept, that is,
before they were aware: And who (I pray you) will be able to show us, when
Religion began so to be corrupted by the Pharisees as it was? It is sufficient
to us, that the Doctrine of the Romanists (as we now find it) is not
conformable to the Word of God.

Obj. 5. We can name no visible Assembly or Church that has had a Being, since
the Defection of the Church of Rome.

Answ. It is no strange thing, that the true Church should be so oppressed by
the violence of Persecutions, and Errors so far prevail, as that no Public
Assembly, either very numerous or very remarkable, can be found to worship God
rightly: As in the time of Elijah, 1 Kings 19. 14. The Prophet complains, that
he alone was left, not only of the Prophets, but of all the Sons of Israel,
with whom the public and ordinary Worship of God was yet observed; and that
these Words of the Prophet are to be taken in the largest Sense, and not of the
Kingdom of Samaria alone, the Apostle gives us to understand, Romans 11. And then
the Kings of Judah at that time revolted, and grew cold in their Worship, and
the service of God: Now those Seven thousand that had not bowed the Knee to the
Image of Baal, did not constitute any visible Church, because they lay
concealed in the midst of Idolaters, and not so much as the Prophets were
known. Let us withal consider, how small a Church it was, while Christ was
alive, and almost all Men opposed him and his Doctrine; and when the Son of Man
shall come the second time, he will hardly find Faith in the Earth, Luke 18. 8.
All this is not said, as if there were not visible Assemblies to be found
agreeing with us in Doctrine; for the Eastern Churches have retained the
Fundamentals of Religion uncorrupted, and would never be Subject to the Sea of
Rome: So in other Countries, there have been always Assemblies of the Faithful,
that have maintained our Cause, as very many have demonstrated.

ART. XX. Of the Authority of the Church.
THE Church has Power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and Authority in
Controversies of Faith: And yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing that is contrary to God's Word written; neither may it so expound one
place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore, although the
Church be a witness and keeper of Holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any
thing against the same; so besides the same ought it not to enforce any thing
to be believed for necessity of Salvation.

Against which it is Objected:

Obj. 1. The Lord has said, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Ye shall not add any thing to the Word
which I command you; and therefore it seems the Church has no Power of adding
Rites and Ceremonies.

Ans. These Words are not to be understood of every Addition that is made, but
of That only, which is contrary and repugnant to Scripture; or which is a
Corruption of what God had commanded by Moses.

Obj. 2. The Apostle would not have the Christians to be subject to the
Ordinances of Men, Col. 2. 20. but Ecclesiastical Ceremonies are such.

Answ. The Apostle forbids the Colossians to be subject to the Decrees of the
Ceremonial Law of Moses; such as, The not touching dead Bodies, lest they
should be defiled; The not eating of this or that Meat, as if it were unclean;
but he does not speak against such Rites and Ceremonies which tend to preserve
the external Worship of God and the State of the Church.

Obj. 3. Those Doctrines which are the Commandments of Men, ought not to be
taught, otherwise it were in vain to worship God, Mat. 15. 4.

Answ. Men would indeed worship Christ in vain, if they neglected his Commands
to obey the Commandments of Men: But Christ does not blame such Precepts of the
Church, as are not contrary to the Divine Laws; but only such Commandments of
Men, as are purely human Conceits, invented by Men, contrary to the Will of
God, Of which there are some vain and trifling; as the Superstitious Washings,
ver. 2. others Erroneous as that the Soul is polluted with Meats, ver. 11. and
others again absolutely contrary to the Word of God, as the defrauding of
Parents, ver. 6.

Obj. 4. Scripture is the Judge of Controversies, and therefore the Church has
no Authority in them.

Answ. In the deciding of Controversies of Faith, the Church has not the
supreme and principal Authority; but a ministerial and limited one, as far as
it follows the judgment of Scripture, and declares that to others.

ART. XXI. Of the Authority of General Councils.
GEneral Councils may not be gathered together without the Commandment and Will
of Princes; and when they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an
Assembly of Men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and Word of God)
they may Err, and sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining unto God.
Wherefore things ordained by them, as necessary to Salvation, have neither
Strength nor Authority; unless it may be declared, that they be taken out of
Holy Scripture.

Obj. 1. The Church is sometimes des^itute of a Christian Prince; and yet even
then Councils are to be called.

Answ. This Article is to be understood of that time, when the Church is not
destitute of such a Prince.

Obj. 2. Princes have only Authority in Political Matters, and Christian
Princes are not set over Christians, as they are Christians, but as they are
Men: For Princes themselves, as they are Christians, are the Sheep, and for
that reason must be Subject to the Shepherds.

Answ. Princes have Authority in Ecclesiastical Matters, not to officiate in
Holy Things, but to take care that they be done. Christian Princes are set over
Christians as such: because although Princes are the Sheep in respect of such
Actions which relate to an inward Ecclesiastical Government; such as the
Preaching of the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments; yet in respect of
the outward Government of the Church, Princes are the Pastors of all their
People. Kings are under Ministers in some Ecclesiastical Matters, but Ministers
are subject to Kings in all Civil Concerns.

Obj. 3. It is said, that where two or three are gathered together in the Name
of Christ, they shall always obtain what they desire: Much more then shall
Bishops, praying in a Council, obtain all things necessary to determine
whatsoever relates to the Church.

Answ. The Faithful do not always obtain what they desire, and if they did
obtain it, they do not always use it with the best Wisdom and Discretion,
therefore they often Err: And although Christ be with us, yet in this Life we
know but in part.

Obj. 4. The whole Church cannot err in Faith, Mat. 16. 18. but a Council does
represent the Church, and the whole Authority of the Church is form^ly in the
Bishops, as the Sight is in the Eye.

Answ. Though a Council do represent the Church, yet its Legates and Ministers
may err, whilst the whole Body of the Church does not. Councils are but a part
of the Church, and the same Privileges do not belong to the Part as to the
Whole. They that are not in Councils, have sometimes particular Gifts, by which
Councils themselves might be mended: Neither are all the Eyes of the Church in
those Bishops that are met in Council, whereas there are many Bishops out of
the Council that see as well as the other: Nay, all single Christians do in
some measure see; And their Gifts are not to be despised neither.

Obj. 5. If the Judgment of Councils was not Infallible, we might deservedly
call in question, whether all the ancient H^esies ^ave been rightly condemned
or not.

Answ. Heresies were not such, because Councils declared them so; but because
they were declared so from the Word of God: From whence (...) may be (...) and
unquestionable, which Heresies have been righ^y condemned.

ART. XXII. Of Purgatery.
THE Romish Doctrine, concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping, and
Adorations, as well of Images as of Relics, and also Invocation of Saints is a
fond thing, vainly invented and grounded upon no Warranty of Scripture, but
rather repugnant to the Word of God.

Obj. 1. It is alm^st the universal Consent of all Nations, that the Soul is
not immediately admitted into Heaven, but is purged and purified in Hell, and
therefore the Opinion of Pu^gatory is not so va^n.

Answ. The consent of Nations may take place in Natural Things, but not in
Spiritual.

Obj. 2. There is mention made of the Fire of Purgatory, 1 Cor. 3. 10, etc.

Answ. Either the Fire of Tribulation and Trial is there understood, and so it
means not a real, but imaginary Fire: Or else [The Fire shall try,] that is,
the Spirit of God shall search and examine every ones Work, as a Sanctifier.
Others understand this place of the Condagration of the World, and the severe
Judgment of God.

Obj. 3. There is in the Church an infinite treasure of Satisfactions from the
Sufferings of Christ, that can never be exhausted: To this Treasure belong
likewise the Passions of the Bl^ssed Virgin, and other Saints, w^o have
suffered more than their Sins required. Now the Pastors of the Church, out of
this inexhaustible. Treasure, have Authority to dispense, and grant
Indulgencies to those who are guilty of suffering Temporal Punishment.

Answ. The Satisfaction of Christ is not applied by Parts, but wholly to all
and every of the Faithful, neither is there any thing here superfluous. And
then as for the Blessed Virgin, and other Saints, they have not done any good
thing, or suffered any thing, which was not before a Debt. A Creature ought
both to do and suffer the greatest things for God's Glory; because whatever
they do and suffer, they will be abundantly rewarded for it, and therefore it
cannot be satisfactory for others: Besides this Authority of dispensing any
thing at Will, was never granted to the Pastors of the Church.

Obj. 4. Images are capable of Injury and Contempt; and so consequently of
Honor and Worship.

Answ. This Argument may be allowed to have a sound and wholesome meaning,
provided we do not understand it of a Religious Worship.

Obj. 5. The Bodies of the Saints are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and for
that reason are to be worshipped.

Answ. The Bodies of the Saints are to be honored with a lawful Honor, but
are not to be worshipped with Religious Worship.

Obj. 6. There are Intercesso^s usually appointed for these that would ask ^y
thing of a King; and therefore much more ought those who come to God to make
use of such; since he is at a greater distance in his Nature from Men, and
superior to them.

Answ. The similitude betwixt God and Earthly Princes is ill applied; for
either they will not hear and answer, or they neglect to do it, or else they
cannot; but nothing of this can we suppose in God, because he invites all Men
to himself, and is not as Man is, Hos. 11. 9. And then too we have an
Intercessor with God, Christ Jesus.

ART. XXIII. Of Ministering in the Congregation.
IT is not lawful for any Man to take upon him the Office of public Preaching
or Ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be lawfully called
and sent to execute the same: And those we ought to judge lawfully called and
sent, which be chosen and called to this Work by Men who have public Authority
given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send Ministers into the Lord's
Vineyard.

Obj. 1. There were in the Primitive Church, not a few that taught and preached
the Word, who were never called, as appears by the Example of th^se that were
dispersed upon the Persecution of the Church, after the Death of St. Stephen,
Acts 8. 4.

Answ. Among those that were dispersed, some perhaps were called; If not, we
grant it to be lawful in an extraordinary time of Persecution, publicly to
teach, without an ordinary Vocation; and not otherwise.

Obj. 2. He may be ^uly said to be called, who is furnished with proper Gifts
for teaching and instructing others.

Answ. Although the foundation of a true Calling, be such Gifts as enable a Man
to teach others; yet there is likewise required a Trial and Approbation of his
Gifts, to be made by others, before he be admitted into Holy Orders.

Obj. 3. St. Paul, when he is describing a Bishop, does not mention any
necessity of a Vocation, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. 4.

Answ. Although in those places he does not expressly mention a Vocation; yet in
others he does; as Romans 10. 15.

Obj. 4. To teach others is a Work of Charity, Jam. 5. 19, 20. and for that
reason should not require a special Vocation.

Answ. We do not deny that to teach others is a Work of Charity, yet it does
not from hence follow, that any one may take upon him to teach and preach
publicly in the Church; not only because the Scripture very often urges the
necessity of a Vocation, but likewise because upon this Account too great a
liberty would be given, and even Women would ^each in the Church, contrary to
the Judgment of the Apostle 1 Cor. 14. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 12. Besides that, a great
many who were really unfit to teach in the Church, would yet take upon them to
do it, which the Apostle forbids, 1 Timothy 5. 12.

ART. XXIV. Of Speaking in the Congregation in such a Tongue as the People
understand.
IT is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the Custom of the
Primitive Church, to have Public Prayers in the Church, or to minister the
Sacraments in a Tongue not understood of the People.

Obj. 1. We are told, Lev. 16. 17. that the People, according to the
Commandment, were to stay without, and the Priest was to enter into the
Sanctuary: Of which likewise we have an Example, Luke 1. 20. And therefore it
is not necessary, that the People should understand the Priest.

Answ. The Priests entering into the Sanctuary was a Type of Christ, who alone
by his own Virtue is entered into Heaven, there to pray for us: Besides, when
the Priest spoke to the People, he spoke so as to be understood by All.

Obj. 2. If the People ought to pray for those things only which they
understand, then they must never repeat the Psalms and other Scriptures, in
which they cannot be supposed to understand every thing.

Answ. Though all things out of the Psalms and other Books cannot be perfectly
understood, yet very many may: But there is nothing at all understood by the
unlearned in the Latin Versions. Prayer is our Conference with God, and this
ought to spring from our own Sen^e: And therefore, as far as we are able, we
ought to know those things we speak, whilst we are praying.

Obj. 3. It is (...), that Piety is much diminished, ever (...) the Mother
Tongue began to be in Use in the Church.

Answ. True Piety is not diminished; instead of a senseless Superstition, which
did formerly prevail, there is now (...) many, sincere Piety, although the Church
was never without many prosane Persons: And if Piety was diminished in many,
this would be only accidentally so, by the default of some wicked Men; As the
Gospel, when it is preached is to very many a savor of Death unto Death: But
Prayers in a known Tongue cannot be the cause of this Impiety.

Obj. 4. The (...) of the Lesser Asia m^de use of the Greek Tongue in their
Worship: But all the People did not understand it; (...) when the Lame Man was
^ealed, they spoke in the Lycaonian Language, Acts 14. 11. And so again, Acts
2. there are reckoned up various Tongues, that were t^n in Asia, and which the
Apostles made use of.

Answ. The Lycaonian Tongue was a Dialect of the Greek, as well as many others
were, and the Apostles preached in Greek to these People; so that without doubt
they understood them.

Obj. 5. If there was one Tongue used in all Churches, it would much tend to
the Unity of the Church.

Answ. The Unity of the Church does not depend upon the Un^y of Tongues, but
upon the Unity of Doctrine.

Obj. 6. The end (...) Divine Service is not the Instruc^n of the People, but
the Worship of God. Now God (...) our Prayers, when they are utte^ed in an
un^own Tongue; and it is enough, that the People (...) d^nt Minds.

Answ. The principal ^d of Divine Service is the Wor^ip of God; but in
Subordination to this, the Edification of the People is to be considered
likewise. Now the People cannot be (...), unless they understa^ 1 C^. 14. And
then the End of a Publi^k Meeting is not, that God may understand, (...) that
he may approve of the whole Assembly: Neither is it enough for the People to
understand, that something is done to the Praise of God, and to have a devout
Mind in general; but they ought likewise distinctly to understand what it is
that is done to the Praise of God.

ART. XXV. Of the Sacraments.
SAcraments ordained of Christ be not only. Badges or Tokens of Christian Men's
Profession; but rather they be certain sure Witnesses and effectual Signs of
Grace and God's good Will toward us; by the which he does work invisibly in
us, and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our Faith in
him. There are Two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that
is to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Those Five, commonly called
Sacraments; that is to say, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and
Extreme Un^ion, are not to be counted for Sacraments of the Gospel; being such
as are grown, partly of the corrup following of the Apostles; partly are States
of L^fe allowed by the Scriptures: But yet have not like Nature of Sacraments
with Baptisin and the Lord's Supper; for that they have not any visible Sign or
Ceremony ordained of God.

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them: And in such only as worthily receive
the same, they have a wholesome Effect or Operation; but they that receive them
unworthily, purchase to themselves Damnation, as St. Paul says.

Obj. 1. The Sacraments are often made use ^s by Hypocrites; and therefore they
are not certain Signs of Grace.

Answ. Out of a charitable Opinion the Sacraments are distributed to All; but
they are certain Signs of Grace, only to them that beheve, and receive them
worthily.

Obj. 2. Neither this Word [Sacrament] nor the number of only Two Sacraments,
is to be met with in Scripture.

Answ. Although we do not find the Word [Sacrament] in Scripture, yet the thing
that is meant by that Word is to be found there: And the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.
reckons up only these Two Sacraments; neither in the Sacred Writings the Word
[Sacrament] being strictly taken) can we find any more. Some have thought that
these Two were signified by the Water and Blood which came out of Christ's
Side, John. 19.

Obj. 3. The external Sign of Confirmation, is, Imposition of Hands, Acts 8. 17.

Answ. That Confirmation there spoken of) by Imposition of Hands, was
extraordinary and peculiar to the Apostles.

Obj. 4. The Judicial Sign of Repentance, is, Absolution, John 20. 23.

Answ. There is no outward Sign there prescribed, not so much as the Matter or
Form of a Sacrament. because there is nothing that is distinct from the Word
spoken. Christ himself made use of no other outward Sign besides Breathing on
them.

Obj. 5. The Ceremony of Extreme Unction is to be met with Jam. 5. 14. together
with a Promise annexed to it.

Answ. The Command concerning Extreme Unction, took place only, whilst there
was miraculous Gifts in the Church; and relate only to the miraculous curing of
sick People.

Obj. 6. The outward Sign of Orders, is Imposition of Hands, 1 Timothy 4. 14.

Answ. Imposition of Hands is not essential to Holy Orders, because it was not
always practiced. Matthias was chosen into the Place of Judas without it, Acts
1. The Apostles were chosen and con^ecrated without it, Mat. 10. Mark 3. And it
is strange that the Romanists should make Imposition of Hands a Sacramental
Ri^e, as well in Orders as Confirmation; whereas we no where find in S^ripture,
that one and the same Sign should be in Two different Sacraments.

Obj. 7. Concerning (...) are told, Ephesians. 5. 32. That it is a Mystery or
Sacrament.

Answ. The Apostle does not mean that Matrimony is properly a Sacrament, but
only a Mystery; whereof there are many that are not Sacraments.

ART. XXVI. Of the Unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the Effects
of the Sacraments.
Although in the visible Church the Evil be ever mingled with the Good, and
^ometimes the Evil have chief Authority in the Ministration of the Word and
Sacraments; yet sorasmuch as they do not the same in their own Name, but in
Christ's, and do minister by his Commission and Authority, we may use their
Ministry, both in hearing the Word of God, and in receiving of the Sacraments:
Neither is the Effect of Christ's Ordinance taken away by their Wickedness, nor
the Grace of God's Gifts diminished from such as by Faith, and rightly, do
receive the Sacraments ministered unto them, which be effectual because of
Christ's Institution and Promise although they be ministered by Evil Men.

Nevertheless it appertains to the Discipline of the Church, that Enquiry be
made of Evil Ministers, and that they be accused by those that have Knowledge
of their Offenses: And finally, being found guilty, by just Judgment be deposed.

Obj. 1. No body can give what he has not: But wicked Ministers have not Grace
and Forgiveness of Sins; and therefore they can^t effectually administer the
Sacraments, whereby they are obtained.

Answ. A minister does not give Heav^y Gifts effectually as the principal
efficient Cause, but as the instrumental one: Now the Effect ought not to be
like the Instrument, but the first Cause. Besides he does not properly give the
same Gifts, but only the external Signs of them. Hence God is said t^
circumcise the Heart, Deuteronomy. 3. 6. And Christ b^ptized with the Holy G^st; but
Jo^n with Water, Mat. 3. 11.

Obj. 2. God said to ^e Wicked or Ungodly M^n, What have thou to do to declare
my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy Mouth, seeing th^n
hate Instruction, and cas^est my Words behind thee? Psalm. 50, 16, 17, And
since God would not have wicked M^n administer Holy Things, methinks (...)
Ministry s^uld be unprofitable.

Answ. This 50th Psalm does not speak peculiarly of Ministers, but of the
People of the Jews, whom God chastised, because they had his Law always in
their Mouths, and were very frequent in their Sacrifices, and yet lead wicked
Lives; and this sort of Worship it is that is there spoken against. But if the
Place be applied to Ministers, it may be said, that the Ministry of one that
leads a wicked Life, is not acceptable to God in respect to the Person that
administers, but yet it may be efficacious and profitable in respect to the
Hearers.

Obj. 3. A Man that is overtaken in a Fault is to be res^ored by the Spirit of
Meekness, Gal. 6. 1. Much more then ought a Minister in respect to his Person;
therefore he ought not to be chastised and deposed.

Answ. Wicked Ministers are to be often warned; but if they will not at all
obey these Admonitions, they may, and ought then to be deposed.

ART. XXVII. Of Baptism.
BAptism is not only a Sign of Profession, and Mark of Difference, whereby
Christian Men are discerned from others that be not Christened; but it is also
a Sign of Regeneration or New Birth, whereby, as by an Instrument, they that
receive Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church: The Promises o^ the
Forgiveness of Sin, and of our Adoption to be the Sons of God, by the Holy
Ghost are visibly signed and sealed^ Faith is confirmed, and Grace increased by
Virtue of Prayer unto God. The Baptism of young Children is in any wise to be
retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the Institution of Christ.

Obj. 1. God confers Grace, whereby Men are grafted into the Church, and there
were some that were Members of the Church before their Baptism; namely, The
Treasurer to Queen Candace, Acts 8. Cornelins the Centurien, Acts 10. (...)
even by their good Works showed that they were regenerate; and for this Reason,
Baptism is not the only Sign of Regeneration; nor is it o^ing solely to that,
that Men are grafted into the Church.

Answ. Although God be the principal Cause of Salvation; yet this does not
hinder but that Baptism may be the Means that God may make use of in bestowing
Salvation. And then Baptism, in Infants, is their first Entrance into the
Church, though it be not so in Persons grown up; as in the Examples that are
alleged: But ye^ Baptism is not without its Benefit, even in Persons grown up,
inasmuch as it confirms their Faith. It is true, Good Works did testify, that
there were many Believers; but they did not so (...) do it, as public Baptism
in the Church.

Obj. 2. The Promises of God are most sure in themselves, and do not need any
Confirmation by the Sacraments.

Answ. The Promises of God are indeed most sure in themselves; but in respect
to us they do want Confirmation.

Obj. 3. It is the Holy Ghost that fixes in our Minds the Certainty of the
Divine Promises.

Answ. The Holy Ghost gives us Assurance; but it is by the Mediation of the
Word and Sacraments.

Obj 4. The Faith of the Gospel, which is preached to us, does exclude all
manner of doubtting; and therefore does not need any Confirmation by the
Sacraments.

Answ. The Faith which we preach does exclude all doubt in respect of the
Object, but not in respect of the Subject. We know that Christ is Omnipotent,
and Faithful, although we our selves be weak: We know that a weak Faith may be
true: but yet that which is less liable to doubting is more perfect: And then
we cannot doubt, that Men by Baptism and other Means, may still obtain a
greater measure of Faith.

Obj. 5. Infants are not to be baptized, because Christ commands us first to
teach, and then baptize, Mat. 28. 19. But Infants cannot be taught.

Ans. That place is to be understood of such Persons as are grown up, that are
capable of Learning, and no^ of Infants. Besides, the Word in the Original
[(...)] does not properly signify [to teach] but to make Disciples; and this
may be spoken of Infants. The Children of the Jews were, without any
appointment, circumcised; and the same Reason holds for baptizing Christian
Infants.

Obj 6. T^se who believe not, are to be withheld from Baptism; but Infants do
not believe, because they have no Knowledge of Good or Evil, Deuteronomy. 1. 39.

Answ. All these places relate to Persons grown up: And then besides, the Faith
of Parents is though^ sufficient for their Children: why may not the Faith of
another as well be sufficient to them, as the Sin of another be imputed to them?

ART. XXVIII. Of the Lord's Supper.
THE Supper of the Lord is not only a Sign of the Love that Christians ought to
have among themselves one to another: But rather it is a Sacrament of our
Redemption by Christ's Death: Insomuch that to such as rightly, worthily, and
wi^h Faith receive the same, the Bread which we break is a partaking of the
Body of Christ And likewise the Cup of Blessing is a partak^ of the Blood of
Christ. Transubstantiation ^r ^he Change of the Substance of Bread and W^e in
the Supper of the Lord, cannot b^ proved by Holy Writ: but it is r^pugnant to
the plain Words of Scripture, ^verthroweth the Nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many Superstitions. The Body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the Supper only, after a Heavenly and Spiritual manner: And the Mean,
whereby the Body of Christ i^ received and eaten in the Supper is Faith. The
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was not by Christ's Ordinance reserved, carried
about, li^ted up, or worshipped.

Obj. 1. Transubstantiation is f^unded on the very Wo^ds of the Institution,
Mat. 26. 26. and these must signify a true c^ange of the Bread and Wine.

Answ. In the Holy Supper there is not a Substantial, but a Sacramental Change.

Obj. 2. The same thing which was exhibited by Christ to his Disciples to be
eaten and drank, was given and s^ed for us for the Remissi^n of our Sins: But
i^ was not Bread, but the Body of Christ which was given: It was no^ Wine, but
the Blood of Christ which was shed; and therefore the true Body and the true
Blood of Christ was exhibited, which could not be without a Substantial Change
of the Bread into his Body, and of the Wine into his Blood.

Answ. It is called the true Body and true Blood of Christ; but only
secondarily and represented as such. So we say of Caesar's Picture: This is
Caesar that overcame Pompey.

Obj. 3. The Words of the Institution are to be understood in their proper
Sense, because they are the Words of a Will or Testament, and Christ uttered
them, when he was about to die, to his illiterate Disciples.

Answ. The Words of a Will may be clear, though figurative. Every Trope is not
obscure; it is sometimes the Light and Beauty of Speech. We m^et with this
Figure also, L^k 22. 20. where the Cup is called the New T^ment. And then the
Ignorance of the D^sciples ought not to hinder a c^mmon way of speaking in all
Sacraments; because something they must signify to us.

Obj. 4. Christ is Omnipotent; and therefore his Body may be (...) in the
Euc^st under the Species of (...) and Wine.

Answ. We must not argue from what may b^ to what is. We are not inquiring what
Christ can do, but what he will do: Christ can do all things which do not imply
a Contradiction; but it is a Contradiction to ^ay, that one and the same Body
should be both in Heaven and in the Sacrament at the same time.

Obj. 5. The Ancients kept and laid up the Sacramental Elements.

Answ. We do not inquire what the Ancients did, but what Christ and his
Apostles did: The Ancients, perhaps, kept up the Sacrament for the Communion of
sick Men, that were absent, and not for Adoration

Obj. 6. The Body and Blood of Christ are corporeally in the Sacrament;
otherwise the thing figured, viz. The Supper, would not be better than the
Figures themselves, viz. the Paschal Lamb, the Manna, and the Blood whereon the
Old Testament was established; all which were bodily exhibited.

Answ. The Paschal Lamb and the Manna, were chiefly the Figures of Christ (who
is the thing signified in the Supper) and not of the Supper it self.

Obj. The Eucharist is to be religiously carried about in public Processions,
because the A^k of the Covenant, which was the Type of this, was so c^rryed
about, 2 Samuel 6. 8.

Answ. There was a Command or Permission for the carrying about or transferring
of the Ark; which also was ho^oured with a Civil but not adored with a Divine
Worth p. There is nothing there like the Pompous and Idolatrous Elevation of
the Host.

Obj. 8. W^ve the (...) of some Fathers for the Elev^tion of the Host.

Answ. It is not mater^l what some Fathers, and especially the more Modern have
done; but we are to mind what our Lord did and said.

Obj. 9. The Body and Blood of Christ are to be ado^ed: Now the Eucha^ist
consists of the Body and Blood of Christ, and for that reason it is to be
W^shiped.

Answ. The Body and Blood of Christ are without doubt to be wo^staped, provided
they were joined in the Eucharist with the Godhead; But that is begging the
Question.

ART. XXIX. Of the Wicked, which eat not the Body of Christ in the Use of the
Lord's ^upper.
THE Wicked, and such as be void of a lively Faith, although they do carnally and
visibly press with their Teeth, as St. Augustine says, the Sacrament of the Body
and Blood of Christ; yet in no wise are they Partakers of Christ; but rather to
th^r Condemnation do eat and drink the Sign or Sacrament of so great a Thing.

Obj. 1. The Intireness of a Sacrament does not depend upon the Faith of the
Receiver, but upon the Authority of the Institution; and therefore by the
Incredulity of the Man, it cannot be changed or made v^id.

Answ. The Intireness of a Sacrament, taken in its largest Sense, does depend
upon Both.

Obj. 2. Judas eat the B^y of the Lord, and drank his Blood; And St. Mark
witness^ (...), that they all d^ank of the Cons^crated Cup, Mark 14. 23. And
then St. Luke writes, that after Supper Christ uttered these words, Behold the
Hand of h^n that betrayeth me, is with me on the Table, Luke 22. 21.

Answ. Some deny that Judas was present at the Holy Supper, much less that he
did partake of it: However it be, if he was present, he received only the Sign,
and the Bread of the Lord, (as other Hypocrites do) and not the thing
signified, i. e. the Spiritual Bread and Body of Christ.

Obj. 3. St. Paul teaches us, 1 Cor. 11. 27. That the Unworthy are guilty of
the Body and Blood of Christ; as if they had received them, though irreligiously.

Answ. The Apostle tells us, that the Ungodly become guilty of the Body of
Christ; not that they do truly receive it; but because they do not discern, i.
e. not considering the Dignity of the Meat, they come to this Table without
Reverence or Fear.

ART. XXX. Of Both Kinds.
THE Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the ^ay-People; for both the Parts
of the Lord's Sacrament, by Christ's Ordinance and Commandment ought to be
ministered to all Christian Men alike.

Obj. 1. There is no Precept which obliges M^n to both Par^s of the Sacrament,
Christ only told his Disciples, Take Eat, Drink.

Answ. There is a Precept in the Institution of Christ, that does oblige
^ay-Men, although it is not expressed, yet it is imp^ed: And that by the Apostle,
1 Cor. 11. 26. and (...). 28. his meaning is explained and cleared: for what
Christ told h^s Disciples, that must be meant by the Apostle of the whole
Church, and is injoyaed to the whole Assembly of the Corinthians.

Obj. 2. Christ himself proves in words, the use of only one Species, where he
promises eternal Life to them that eat his Flesh, making no mention at all of
drinking.

Answ. The Sixth of John treats properly of a Spiritual Eating; and the
mentioning of Bread alone was done with relation to the Manna, which the Jews
boasted of as if it were Bread from Heaven, ver. 31. In the same Chapter, and
in explaining the same thing, Flesh and Blood are joined together four times by
our Lord, as the necessary Meat and drink, ver. 53, 54, 55, 56.

Obj. 3. Christ, by what he did himself, approves of the Use of only one
Species, Luke 24. 30. For there he gave the Sacrament to Two Disciples at
Emaus, under the single Species of Bread.

Answ. Either St. Luke there speaks of an ordinary Supper, and not of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, or else Bread by a Synecdoche is taken for the
whole Repast.

Obj. 4. Those that can drink no Wine, must be excluded from the Sacrament, and
those People likewise who have no Wine, if the Communion may not be performed
under one Species.

Answ. Particular Cases do not affect an universal Rule; such therefore who can
drink no Wine, C^d such as can get none, are excepted: A^o there is scarce any
Country in the World, in which there is so great a scarcity of Wine, that it
cannot be got for so sacred an Use. Christ foresaw those things, that are said
to be Inconveniences, and yet he has not permitted us to administer the
Sacraments lame and imperfect.

ART. XXXI. Of the one Oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross.
THE Offering of Christ once made, is that perfect Redemption, Propitiation,
and Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole World, both Original and Actual;
and there is no other Satisfaction for Sin, but that alone. Wherefore the
Sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said, that the Priest did
offer Christ for the Quick and the Dead, to have remission of Pain or Guilt,
were blasphemous Fables, and dangerous Conceits.

Obj. 1. The Offering of Christ was made only for many, Mat. 20. 28. and for
the Sheep, i. e. for the Elect, John 10. 15.

Answ. That Christ died for many, and for the Sheep or Elect, we must not deny;
but from hence to imagine, that the Death of Christ was not a Price sufficient
for All, is a vain Conclusion: not only because the Word [many] is very often
equivalent to the word [All] D^n. 12. 2. R^m. 5. 19. but because the Dignity of
Christ's Death was so great in it self, that not only Mankind by God created,
but though God had created ^any more World's, it would have been a f^ and
sufficient Satisfaction for them All: Although the World only of Believers can
obtain Salvation th^o his Death.

Obj. 2. Praying, Fasting, Alms, and Temporal Punishments, are Satisfactions
for Sin.

Answ. Whatever Good Works we are able to perform, or whatsoever we may suffer
for God's Glory, even all that we are obliged to do and suffer by the right of
Creation, Redemption, and Divine Precept, Luke 17. 19. Ephesians. 2. 10. Tit. 3. 1.
But it would be an extreme rash thing to think of paying a Debt with a Debt.
And then as for Temporal Punishments, they are not Satisfactions, but the
Divine Corrections and Chastisements, even which God does often avert, when Men
repent; not that they Satisfy; but only because he regards their true Faith.

Obj. 3. The Offering that Christ made upon the Cross, is to be represented in
the Supper.

Answ. The Offering of Christ is to be represented bloody; and not by any other
unbloody Offering, but by the Breaking of Bread, and the pouring out of Wine.

Obj. 4. The Mass is the Application of the Sacrifice of Christ.

Answ. The Sacrifice of Christ is applied only by Faith.

Obj. 5. The Prophets foretold, that there should be a perpetual Sacrifice in
the Church, Mal. 1. 11. Esa. 66 23.

Answ. The Sacrifices of the Church of the New Testament, are Eucharistical and
Spiritual, and these are Perpetual.

Obj. 6. Christ said to his Disciples, Do this in remembrance of me, i. e.
Sacrifice this; for the Word [facere or do] is often taken in this sense; as
Virgil has it, Cum faciam Vitula: When I off^ Sacrifice with a Heifer. So Lev.
15. 15. 1 Kings 18. 23. Ho^. 2. 8. And in other places in the vulgar
Translation.

Answ. The Latins use a concise way of speaking; and sometimes make the word
[facere to do] signify, facere rem d^inam, to do a Religious or Sacred thing:
But the [facere to do] cannot signify in this place [to Sacrifice] because it
relates to the Actions of Christ, of which we cannot properly say, that they
are to be Sacrificed: And then this is not only spoken to Ministers, but to
other Lay-Communicants likewise; as appears by the Apostle's Exposition, 3 Cor.
11. 26. And They have no Power or Authority to Consecrate.

ART. XXXII. Of the Marriage of Priests.
BIshops, Priests, and Deacons are not commanded by God's Law, either to vow
the estate of Single Life, or to abstain from Marriage: Therefore it is lawful
for Them, as for all other Christian Men, to marry at their own discretion, as
they shall judge the same to serve better to Godliness.

Obj. 1. Marriage hinders Holy Duties; and therefore in the Old Testament, the
High Priest, and Priests were commanded to abstain from the Conjugal Bed, so
often as they were obliged to attend upon Holy Things, Exo. 19. 15. and 28. 4.

Answ. It is the abuse of Marriage, and not Marriage it self, that hinders Holy
Duties. David, whilst he was married, prayed seven times in a Day; and did
meditate upon the Law of God, Day and Night. That Abstinence which was
commanded the Priests under the Old Testament, is said to be Ceremonial, and
was required even in Lay-Persons, for a certain time; to which belongs likewise
the abstaining from Wine and Strong Drinks, which was commanded the Priests,
when they were upon Holy Duty. However it be, it is, without doubt, convenient
for all Christians, as well as Pastors, to abstain from such conjugal Commerce,
as may hinder their Worship of God.

Obj. 2. St. Paul commands married People, that they should abstain from one
another by consent for a time, that they might give themselves the more
ardently to Prayer, 1 Cor. 7. 5. Wherefore since Priests must daily attend upon
Prayer and Sacrifices, it is plain that they are enjoined to a perpetu^l
Continence.

Answ. The Apostle there speaks concerning extraordinary Prayer, such as is
joined with Fasting; but Clergymen are not every Day obliged to such
Devotions: Nay, and by this Rule all Christians must abstain for ever from
Marriage; for it is said to All In general, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing.

Obj 3. They that are unmarried do care for the Things of the Lord, better than
those that are married, 1 Cor. 7. 32.

Answ. The Apostle here does not dispute concerning Men of the Holy Order
alone, but of all Christians in general, who should also, by the same reason,
live a single Life. But alcho' Marriage has its Troubles, it has its
Conveniences too; And a pious Wife is given not for an Impediment, but for a
Help, as well in Spiritual as in Family Concerns. Celibacy is therefore to be
preferred to Marriage, when the Church is under various Persecutions, and upon
condition the Person has the Gift of Continence. But from hence no general Rule
can be made that Celibacy is to be observed by any particular Order of Men.
Wherefore also the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7. 28. That if thou marry, thou have
not sinned. So that the place before cited, proves nothing against this Article.

ART. XXXIII. Of Excommunicated Persons; how they are to be avoided.
THat Person which by open denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from
the Unity of the Church and Excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole
multitude of the Faithful, as an Heathen and Publican, until he be openly
reconciled by Penance, and received in the Church by a Judge, that has
authority thereunto.

Obj. 1. Christ has said, Mat. 13. 39. Let both grow together until the
Harvest; which is to be understood of the Good and the Bad: Therefore the
Wicked ought not to be Excommunicated.

Answ. Christ speaks there concerning Hypocrites, that cannot be discerned from
those that are sincerely Good: Or else he is distinguishing the Duty of
Ministers from that of a Magistrate: Let them grow, i. e. do not kill them.

Obj. 2. In the Old Testament God commanded that All should keep the Pass^ver,
Number (...). 10.

Answ. God commanded all that were M^mbers of his People to keep the Passover,
Exodus 12. 43. The was a C^mand (...) the Presump^ous, the (...) should be (...)
off from among his Peop^ (...). 15. 30. and those the were desiled w^ kept
back, Nu. 9. 6. Now under the Cere^l Uncleanness the Moral was typified and
sigured.

Obj. 3. John Baptized a Generation of Vipers, Luke 3. 7.

Answ. Although they were a Generation of Vipers, whom John Baptized; yet they
were no longer Vipers, when they were once Baptized, at least not so in
Profession.

Obj. 4. It seems not to be in the Power of Men to exclude any One from the
Kingdom of God, and to thrust Others down to Hell.

Answ. The Church condemns no Man, but agrees with, and executes the Judgment
of God, by declaring it according to express Command; and it delivers Men over
to Satan, not by its own Authority, but in the Name of Christ, 1 Cor. 5. 4.

Obj. 5. St. Paul says of him that would by no means obey his Word, that such
an one should be esteemed, not as an Enemy, but admonished as a Brother, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. 15. Whereas a Brother is not to be looked upon as a Heathen or a
Publican.

Answ. The Excommunicated are called Brethren, partly by Profession, and
because they were Brethren, 1 Cor. 5. 11. partly by Hope; because upon
Repentance, he may become a Brother again; and partly by Love, and a Desire and
Study to save him, which ought to be the End of Excommunication: Besides, the
Apostle did not say, Account him as a Brother, but admonish him as such.

ART. XXXIV. Of the Traditions of the Church.
IT is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one or
utterly like; for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the Diversity of Countries, Times, and Men's Manners, so that
nothing be Ordained against God's Word. Whosoever, through his private Judgment,
willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the
Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained and approved
by common Authority, ought to be rebuked openly (that others may fear to do the
like) as he that offends against the common Order of the Church, and hurts
the Authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the Consciences of the weak
Brethren. Every particular or National Church has Authority to Ordain, change
and abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by Man's
Authority; so that all things be done to Edifying.

Obj. 1. Christians ought to walk according to the same Rule, and to have the
highest Agreement amongst themselves; as may be gathered from Gal. 6. 16. 1
Pet. 3. 8. and therefore the same Ceremonies are alike necessary in all places.

Answ. The variety of Ceremonies does not destroy the Unity of the Church,
provided the Faithful do but walk according to the same Rule of Doctrine.

Obj. 2. Christ has said, Reprove a Sinner betwixt him and thy self alone, Mat.
18. 15. therefore he is not publicly to be reproved by any One.

Answ. This Place treats of the Duty of private Men for private Offenses
committed against private Persons; and not of the Duty of Pastors in reproving
scandalous and notorious Sins, publicly committed: Such as these must be
publicly reproved.

Obj. 3. The Apostle advises Titus to avoid Strifes and Contentions, Chap. 3.
9. and therefore they are not to be reproved, who oppose the Traditions of the
Church.

Answ. Unprofitable Disputations and noisy Talk without Edification, are to be
avoided; because such vain Contentions do not convert the Froward and
Obstinate, but rather confirm them in their Errors: In the mean time Ministers
may reprove Gainsayers with much Prudence, Patience, and Sobriety, and all this
be done to the Good and Profit of others

Obj. 4. The same Apostles commanded the Thessalonians to hold the Traditions,
2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. And therefore that Church had not Authority to change or
disannul the Traditions of it.

Answ. The Traditions which the Apostle speaks of, were either Doctrinal, and
such as were already set down in the Scriptures; or if not, they were
Instituted by the Apostle, who received from the Lord what he del^vered to
them. But the Article speaks of such Traditions as were originally Instituted
by the sole and ordinary Authority of Men.

ART. XXXV. Of Homilies.
THE Second Book of Homilies, the several Titles whereo^ we have se^ down under
this Article, does (...) a Godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for these
Times, as does the former Book of Homilies, which were set forth in Time of
Edward ^he Sixth: And therefore we judge them to be read in Churches by the
Ministers, diligently and distinctly, that they may be understood of the People.

Of the Names of the Homilies.
1. Of the right Use of the Church. 2. Against Peril of Idolatry. 3. Of
repairing and keeping clean of Churches. 4. Of Good Works, first of Fasting. 5.
Against Gluttony and Drunkenness. 6. Against Excess of Apparel. 7. Of Prayer.
8. Of the Place and Time of Prayer. 9. That Common Prayers, and Sacraments,
ought to be ministered in a known Tongue. 10. Of the Reverend Estimation of
God's Word. 11. Of Alms-doing 12. Of the Nativity of Christ. 13. Of the Passion
of Christ. 14. Of the Resurrection of Christ. 15. Of the Worthy Receiving of
the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. 16. Of the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost. 17. For the R^gation-Days. 18. Of the State of Matrimony. 19. Of
Repentance. 20. Against Idleness. 21. Against Rebellion.
Obj. 1. The (...) contained in the Homilies is not in these Times so
necessary, because there is plenty of Minist^rs, (...) can and do, viva voce
preach the Word of God.

Answ. This Article was intended chiefly for the Beginning of the Reformation,
when there was a much greater want of M^n, that were fit for the Ministry: And
then, if even of these Times we would suppose it to speak, there are very many
Churches (for want of sufficient Encouragement, or other Reasons) which are
destitute of a Learned Preacher, and which indeed is to be lamented: And
besides, such is the carelessness of some in their Preachings, that it would be
more profitable to hear a Homily, than their Sermons.

Obj. 2. It seems to be an Office unworthy of a Minister of the Gospel to
repeat Word for Word, Exhortations from the Copy of another, for a Child can do
that.

Answ. It would be unworthy of a Minister of the Gospel to do this from the
Copy of any private Man; but it is not so to do it from the Copy and Direction
of the Church: And it is not unworthy of a Minister to do some things that
Children can do, viz. to read Prayers or Chapters within Book.

Obj. 3. No body can execute the Office of an Advocate, or a Physician, by
repeating any prescribed Forms: Now a Minister is a Spiritual Advocate and
Physician, who ought to apply his Doctrine, according. to the different
Circumstances of Time and Persons, which is not to be done, nor can be done,
(...) the prescribed Words of a Homily, composed by other Men, are read to the
People.

Answ. If a Physician or an Advocate repeat any thing out of their Books, the
hearer may procure Health, and receive whol^ome Advice for himself or for
others: So it is in Divine Things likewise: Notwithstanding the Ministry of
those may be more effectual, who know how to apply the Word of God according to
the variety of Circumstances: Besides, those things that are contained in the
Homilies, for the most part are suited to all times: And some things may be so
applied to any time, that there is almost no body but may easily understand
them when they are read. So that Readers may be of great use, where better
instructed Ministers are not to be had.

ART. XXXVI. Of Consecration of Bishops and Ministers.
THE Book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering of Priests
and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of Edward the Sixth, and confirmed at
the same time by Authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary to
such Consecration and Ordering: Neither has it any thing, that of it self is
Superstitious and Ungodly. And therefore whosoever are consecrated and ordered
according to the Rites of that Book, since the the second Year of the
asorenamed King Edward, unto this time, or hereafter, shall be consecrated and
ordered according to the same Rites; we decree all such to be rightly, orderly,
and lawfully consecrated and ordered.

Obj. 1 We do not any where in Scripture read of (...).

Answ. An Archbishop is no other than the highest of the Bishops, who is as a
Head, set over other Bishops: And although we do not meet with this Word in the
Scriptures, yet it agrees thereunto for the preserving of Order in the Church;
that it is prudent and useful to constitute Degrees in the Church of different
Dignity and Authority. In the Old Testament; there was a High Priest and
Priests of a second and Inferior Order: In the New, there were Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelis^s. Pastors, and Teachers: And it is not contrary to the
Word of God, that One should be above Another in the Church for Government's
sake.

Obj. 2. It is an impious thing, that the Bishop should say to every one of
those that are Ordained, Receive the Holy Ghost; as if he had the Power of
conferring the Holy Ghost, which is peculiar to Christ himself, and was the
miralous Token of his Divine Power: But no mortal Man can assume this to
himself, or ought to imitate it.

Answ. The Bishop does not mean, when he says, Receive the Holy Ghost, as if he
could bestow upon them the inward Gifts of the Holy Ghost in an extraordinary
manner; but he says it, because he confers upon them the external and ordinary
Ministry, whereof the Holy Ghost is the Author: In which Sense also he says,
Receive thou Authority to preach the Gospel, etc.

Obj. 3. Those first Bishops and Ministers after the Reformation were not
rightly ordained, because they were not Ordained by such other Bishops, who had
a continued Succession from preceding Bishops lawfully called, and because in
the Solemnity of Consecration and Ordination, the accustomed Rites and
Ceremonies were wanting.

Answ. Our first Bishops were Ordained by Romish Priests; who although they had
not amongst them a Purity of Doctrine, yet they lost not the Power of
Ordination. It is agreed, that those who are baptized by Heretics, are truly
baptized: And there is the same Reason for those who are Ordained by them. The
Pharisees sat in (...)'s Chair; and Judas executed his Apostolic Office: And
why not, since a wholesome and good Effect does not depend upon the Sincerity of
him that administers, but upon the Authority of the Institution. The Ceremonies
and Rites were likewise agreeable to the Holy Scriptures; as may be easily made
to appear from the Records and Writings of our own Countrymen. If any one
should now say, that the R^mish Priests were not lawfully called, and therefore
Ours could not be rightly Ordained by them, we have this to say; That their
Vo^ion as o^he very Being and Essence of it, was Legi^mate: because even they
were called to teach the Truth, although the Accidents were Illegitimate:
Neither could they deprive our Bishops of their Vocation, though they did not
teach according to the Taste and Reli^ of the Church of Rome. We ought to obey
God rather than Men. There are some too that make answer; That a Magistrate and
a faithful People may constitute and choose Bishops and Pastors, especially in
a Case of necessity. Moreover, a Succession from the Apostles is indeed
required; but this ought to be rather a Doctrinal than a Personal Succession.

ART. XXXVII. Of the Civil Magistrates.
THE Queen's Majesty has the chief Power in this Realm of England, and other
her Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes does appertain, and is
not, nor ought to be, subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction. Where we attribute
to the Queen's Majesty the chief Government: By which Titles we understand the
Minds of some slanderous Folks to be offended; we give Pr^nces to our Princes
the Ministering either of God's Word, or of the Sacraments: The which hing the
Injunctions also la^ely set forth by Elizabeth our Queen, do most plainly
testify, but that only Prerogative which we see to have been given always to
all Godly Princes in Holy Scripture by God himself; that is, that they should
rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their Charge by God, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Temporal; and restrain with the Civil Sword the Stubborn and
Evildoers.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian Men with Death for heinous and
grievous Offenses.

It is lawful for Christian Men, at the Commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
Weapons and serve in the Wars.

Obj. 1. King (...) ingenuously conf^ed, that the Priests, and not he, ^ad the
chief Power in the Church, 2 Chronicles. 19. 11. A^arian the C^ef Priest is over you
in all Matters of the Lord.

Answ. In interpreting and administering of Divine Things, the High Priest was
chief and principal; but as to the Temporal Government, he was subject to the
King.

Obj. 2. The Holy Scriptures inform us, that the Government of the Church is in
the Hands of the Bishops and Priests, Act. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 13. 17.

Answ. The Government was then in the Hands of the Bishops and Priests, because
at that time the Church had no other Watchmen and Conducters of Souls; but the
Word of God does not exclude other Supporters of the Gospel, such as pious
Princes are, whom the Church has sometimes accounted Guides to promote Piety.

Obj. 3. We find that the Apostles governed the Church, Acts 20. 28. Passed
Sentence concerning Religious Controversies, Acts 15. 6. and inflicted j^st
Punishments upon Offenders, Acts 5. 3. And therefore the Government of the
Church in this Kingdom of England does of Right belong to the Ministers, and
not to the King's Majesty.

Answ. The Apostles were Ministers extraordinary: And that ancient State of the
Church, wherein there were no Christian Princes, must not be made use of for a
constant and standing Rule.

Obj. 4. To Christ was given all Power both in Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28. 18.
By which is signified (...) Spiritual and an E^rthly Kingdom: But C^ist gave
the Keys of both to Peter, Mat. 16. 19. Now Peter has given his Authority to
the Bishop of Rome, And therefore to this Bishop, as in others, so also in this
Kingdom of England d^s this (...) belong.

Answ. Some understand the (...) Place of a Spiritual Power: As if Christ had
said; As in Heaven I am the King of Angels and blessed Spirits, so by Faith I
reign in the Hearts of Men. Others interpret this exalted Power to be given to
Christ the Mediator over all Creatures, which could not be communicated to mere
Man. But now in neither of these Senses did Christ give an absolute Power to
Peter; he only gave him a Share in the Ecclesiastical Ministry; and in the same
Sense the Keys were given to the rest of the Apostles, Mat. 18. 18. Besides,
could you suppose that Peter had such a Power given him above the rest of the
Apostles, it could not yet be proved, that the Pope, as being his Successor, is
possessed of the same Authority.

Obj. 5 King John made this Country tributary to the Pope.

Answ. King John unwillingly and out of Fear made England tributary to the
Pope, and because it was to the Prejudice of the Kingdom, and his Successors,
Henry his Son, with the chief Estates of the Realm, protested against this
Donation; nay, and threatened that they would defend themselves by Arms against
the Temporal Jurisdiction of the Pope, as appears by our English Annals.

Obj. 6. Against the latter part of this Article it is objected, that Theft is a
grievous Crime, and yet the hanging of Thieves is against the Law of God, which
thinks it sufficient to punish it with a Four, or a Five-fold Restitution, Ex.
22. 1, 2.

Answ. Some answer to this, that That Law of not inflicting a Capital
Punishment upon Thieves was parely Political, and did belong only to the Jews:
Neither was it ever repeated or confirmed under the New Testament: And then
they say, that when Faults were multiplied, the Punishment was to be more
severe, and prove from P^v. 6. 31. That the Punishment of Theft was heightened
to a Sevenfold Restitution; and then they all^dge, 2 Samuel 12. 5. that of a
Thief that was condemned to Death by King David. They say besides, that the Law
of Moses does not at all hinder but that Thieves may suffer Death, especially
supposing that Capital Punishments for such Cr^mes be (...) by a public Law,
and a general Consent of All: For Laws of this sort in things not contrary to
Piety, do approach very near the Nature of Divine Laws. Romans 13. 1, 2. And
again, supposing that the Thieves are not weak and sickly Men, unsit for
working, or not taken care of by the Overseers of the Poor; for there is a
regard to be had to such as are compelled, by extreme Want, to steal: Besides
too, supposing Thefts cannot be corrected by gentler and l^ghter Punishments:
Or, lastly, supposing that which is taken away by stealth be a considerable
Injury and Loss to the Owner.

Obj. 7. Capital Punishment of ^einous Offenses seems to be contrary to the Law
of Charity so peculiar to the Gospel; for the New Testament, as it is a gracious
(...), does not admit of Revenge, or Punishments too severe.

Answ. Under the Old Testament heinous Offenses were punished with Death,
notwithstanding the Law of Charity, which was as much in force then as it is
now: But Grace in the New Testament, as to the Matter of Salvation, is opposed
to a slavish Fear, and rigorous Observance of the Law of Moses; but nor to any
Capital Punishments inflicted by the (...) upon Offenders.

Obj. 8. To the last part of the Article it is objected, That it is the express
Command of God, that Man's Blood be not shed, Genesis 9. 6. But Wars cannot be
waged without shedding of Blood.

Answ. It is a private. and not a public Slaughter, that is there forbidden.

Obj. 9. It is the Command of Christ, that we resist not Evil; but whosoever
shall smite thee on thy Right Cheek, turn to him the other also, Mat. 5. 39.

Answ. Christ here teaches us the utmost Patience, that we should not repel
Injuries in any violent manner; but rather to bear them patiently, than to
strive with self-willed Men or study any private Revenge; especially when the
Love of our Neighbor, the Conversion of Insidels, or the Glory of God require
this Submission from us. This Duty seems chiesly to belong to Christians in the
time of a public Persecution; such as was almost continual in the Primitive
Church: Yet we are not hereby forbid to avoid an Injury by such Rules of
Defense as are unblameable. Neither are Magistrates forbidden to execute
public Revenge; otherwise the Malice of wicked Men would be sharpened, and the
Commonwealth would never be in quietness.

Obj. (...). It is said, Mat. 26. 52. All they that take the Sword, shall
perith with the Sword.

Answ. Our Savior here speak^ of him that shall take up the Sword by a (...)
Authority, and not of a Magistrate. (...) God's Minister, that bearet^ not t^
(...) in ^ain, Rom, 13. 1, 2.

Obj. (...). The Arm^ ^ians are not Carnal, but Spiritual, says St. Paul, 2
Cor. 10. 4.

Answ. The Means, which the Apostles were wont to make use of in planting and
promoting the Gospel, is there spoken of: Such they were not, (says he) as Men
of Carnal Minds are wont to use, to gain Authority to their Doctrine; such as
Humane Skill, Flattery, and outward Force: But they were the inward Truth and
Efficacy of the Doctrine it self. Now it cannot be gathered from all this, that
it is not lawful to wage War upon just Reasons.

ART. XXXVIII. Of Christian Men's Goods, which are not common.
THE Riches and Goods of Christians are not common, as touching the Right,
Title, and Possession of the same: as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast:
Notwithstanding every Man ought, of such things as he possesses, liberally to
give Alms to the Poor, according to his Ability.

Obj. 1. The more common any Good is, the better it is; and therefore it were
better if the Goods of Christians were common.

Answ. It were better indeed for others, if Goods were common, but not for him
whose Goods they are, and who cannot conveniently part with them. Every one, in
the Order of Charity, is obliged to take care of himself first; and if after
that he gives Alms according to his Ability, he is in a fair way of Salvation.

Obj. 3. All things are common among Friends.

Answ. That is a true Maxim, as to such things as may be communicated with
Honesty, and without the Prejudice of another; by a voluntary, not by a civil
and necessary Imparting: and then again, as to a Temporal Use, and not a
perpetual Possession.

Obj. 3. The Apostles and Primitive Christians had all things common, Acts 2.
44.

Answ. That mutual imparting of Goods among the first Christians, was not
commanded by the Apostle, but was voluntarily undertaken by the richer sort;
neither was the Propriety there taken away: only the Affection of the Mind is
expressed, inasmuch as in Will and Desire they had all things common: And all
did not sell their Good: for there are Examples of some that kept their own to
themselves; and St. Peter tells us, That it was lawful, and in their Power to
do it, Acts 5. 4. Of another who, even after his Calling, had a House of his
own, wherein Christ entered, Mat. 8. 14. Nay and Zacheus, even after his
Conversion, kept part of his Riches to himself, after he had made Restitution,
and given bountiful Alms to the Poor, Luke 19. 8. Every one therefore d^d
according to his own Freewill, and as much as the common Necessity required. So
that the afore-cited place does not make for those, who confusedly have all
things common.

ART. XXXIX. Of a Christian Man's Oath.
AS we confess that vain and rash Swearing is forbidden Christian Men by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle; so we judge, that Christian Religion
does not prohibit, but that a Man may Swear when the Magistrate requires, in a
Cause of Faith and Charity; so it be done according to the Prophets teaching,
in Justice, Judgment, and Truth.

Obj. 1. It is the express Admonition of Christ, Mat. 5. 34. Swear not at all.
And it is the Exhortation of St. James, Chap. 5. 12. Above all things my
Brethren swear not, neiby Heaven, nor by ^he Earth, nor by any other Oath,

Answ. Christ and St. James condemn only rash, not necessary Oaths, such as the
Article means. And then the Prohibition of Christ is to be strictly understood
of all those Oaths, which the Pharisees allowed, and thereby seduced the
People: For they taught, that it was lawful, upon any Account, to swear,
provided their Oath was but true. Nay, and they added, that it was lawful for
them to swear by Heaven, the Earth, Jerusalem, or any other Creature: And that
they were never guilty of Perjury, but where there was mention made of the
express Name of God, or of the Gifts that were consecrated to God: For that by
these Interpretations the Pharisees did corrupt the Law of God concerning
Oaths, no Man will deny that will but diligently consider what Christ has said
against such Oaths as were allowed by the Pharisees, M^t. 23. 16, 17, etc.

Obj. 2. In the Law of Moses it was lawful upon any Account whatsoever, to
swear, provided there was no Lie in it. And this is plain from the Hebrew Word
[(...) Shav which signifies as much as [untruly, falsly] to sw^r, and not to
swear without Cause, Ex. 25. 1. Deuteronomy. 5. 20. And for this Reason, Christ, when
he said, Swear not at all, did perfect and complete the Law.

Answ. God by Moses's Commands, Ex. 20. 7. Thou shall not take the Name of God
in vain: From whence we may gather, that they are the vain, light, and rash
Oaths, that are there forbidden. It will not strengthen the Objection to oppose
to us the Sense of the Hebrew Word [Shav] because that does not only signify
whatever is false and deceitful; but whatsoever also is vain and light, as you
may see, Mal. 3. 14. Jer. 4. 30. and Psalm. 127. 2.

Now to the Only Wise God, be Praise and Glory for ever. Amen.

THE Lambeth Articles, Containing,
I. A History of the Articles, that were presented at Lambeth. II. The Articles
of Predestination, and the adjoining Heads proposed by Dr. Whitaker at Lambeth.
III. The Same; as they were drawn up, and approved of by Bishops and other
Divines. IV. The Judgment of the Celebrated Dr. L. Andrews, Bishop of
Winchester, concerning the Articles that were offered to the Assembly; together
with his Review of the Censure passed upon Dr. Barret, concerning Certainty of
Salvation. To which is added, V. The Opinion of D. Overal, formerly
Regius-Professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridge, concerning
Predestination, and the Consequences thereof.
Newly Translated from the Latin.

The HISTORY of the Lambeth Articles.
IN the University of Cambridge there are Two famous Professorships in
Divinity; the One called Regius, having Henry the Eighth for its Founder; the
Other was Founded by Marga^et; the Mother of Henry the Seventh, and is called
after her Name. It happened that W^itaker and Peter Bar^n were Contemporaries;
the one Regius, the other Margaret's Professor in Divinity Whitaker was a Man
of extraordinary Learning, and therefore his Judgment was of great weight,
which way soever he took; He had studied long in reading the Fathers; and at
length, whether for that he was related by Marriage to a His first Wife was
Daughter to D. Culverw^l, a Bourdeaux Merchant; but an English Man and a
Londoner. His second was Dr. Fenner's Widow: That Fenner that did so violently
opp^se the (...) Polity of England, and for that reason quitted the Ministry.
Family that was more than ordinary zealous for the Geneva Principles, or for
whatever Cause it was, he became a Professed Defender of that Party.

Amongst other Opinions, that are built chiefly upon the Authority of Calvin
and Beza, he began to dwell much upon that of absolute Predestination; which
indeed is such, as quite excludes the greater part of Men, by the Design of God
and Christ, from sufficient Grace and Christ's Redemption: And as if this
Opinion were not perfect, if it related only to the corrupted Mass or Body of
Men, he was resolved to advance and carry it further, to an uncorrupted Mass:
And upon this account blamed St. Austin because he said, That the Reason of
Predestination was sought for and not found; but the Reason of Reprobation was
sought for and found too. But Whitaker maintained, that the Reprobation which
was passed upon the Mass not yet corrupted, was not purely negative, but did
include an Affirmation; for, says he, this is the Decree and Will of God,
whereby so many Men run into eternal Miseries.

But Peter Baron having perhaps before considered this Matter, and was now,
without doubt, moved by these Paradoxes of Whitaker, to search more diligently
into all the Parts of this Argument, did at last, amongst the great variety of
Opinions, conclude, that none was more probable, than that which Melancthon
defended in Germany, Hemmingius in Denmark, and Snecanus. in Friseland, viz.
They placed a foreknowledge of Faith, in order before Predestination; as the
ancient Fathers, before St. Austin, did understand and teach; as also did St.
Austin himself, before he contended with Pelagius; and for this they bring the
Testimony of the Fathers themselves, and Beza consessing the same thing.

After the Controversy of Predestination, followed two others (if yet we may
call those Two, where one is the necessary consequence of the other,) 1.
Concerning a Falling-off from Grace. 2. Of the Certainty and Security of
Salvation. Baron maintained that Faith and justifying Grace may sometimes be
lost; This Whitaker denied: The one allowed a Certainty of Hope, the other a
Certainty of Faith, and that an absolute, and not a conditional Certainty: This
Opinion Baron particularly maintained in his Lectures upon the Prophet Jonas.

When the Dispute of the Two Professors had for a long time, as is usual,
divided the Young Men into Parties, Whitaker at length takes a Journey to
London, and goes strait to the Archbishop of Canterbury, giving him notice,
that the University was corrupted with the Pelagian Doctrine; and unless some
stop was put to it in time, this would come to an open Quarrel: Neither could
he see any better Remedy at present, than that the Nine Positions which he had
drawn up, after the perusal and approbation of some eminent and learned Men,
should be sent immediately to Cambridge.

Now the Positions were wrote in such a manner, that one may easily discern the
skilfulness of the Man, in that nice and exquisite turn of the Words, which for
Peace sake would not be disapproved of even by such as did not a little dissent
from him. A meeting of Prelates and Divines was then appointed (not a great
number) in Nov. 1595. And because in such a perplexed Argument as this was, the
same Words and Things did not please every body there were Disputations for
some time. On the last Day, it happened that one or two who disagreed most from
Whitaker's Opinion, were absent, and so the others prevailed. Now Archbishop
(...), that was the Head of that Meeting, although he did not at all approve of
W^itaker's Articles; yet through easu ess and a sear of Disagreement, since he
could not make good his own Opinion, himself became the Surety and Patron of
Another's. However, the (...) of W^itaker were not approved of in the same
Words wherein he had proposed them, but some of the Words and Phrases were so
altered, that one may easily dis^rn their Judgment did not altogether agree
with his.

These Positions were sent to Cambridge, and W^itaker, in the mean time,
boasting of the Victory that he had so easily gained without an Adversary,
meets with a Burl^gh (...) of the University.
Man that had the chief Authority in the Kingdom, one of the Queen's Pr^vy
Council, to whom also belonged a pecul^r Care and Regard for the University;
and to him he declares all that had been done in the last Meeting, and shows
him the very Articles, as they were approved of by the Bishops: But that Great
Man (such was his Wisdom) easily understanding that Determinations in such
Controverted Points were dangerous, extremely disapproved of the whole Ma^er
and said that he would make the Authors thereof repe^ of what they had done:
And he was as good as his Word; for he went to the Queen, and took occasion to
lay before Her, in a grave Oration; How that in such things as did appertain to
the State of Religion no body could by the Laws of England determine any thing,
but by the Authority of the Queen, and that too with the Consent of Parliament.
And this was a wise Institution; for there is generally a furious Zeal of
Religion in Meus Minds, which, when it is once raised, makes them easily run
into Parties and Factions: But now here are a few Divines, that have dared to
make Decrees and Determinations concerning the most important Questions, which
Learned Men for many Ages since could never yet agree about. But it is easy to
see what these Men aimed at; whilst they think and teach, That whatsoever is
done in human Affairs, be it good or bad, it is all bound up by the Law of an
unalterable Decree; and that even the Wills of Men has this necessity imposed
upon them, that they are not able to Will and Desire any otherwise than as they
do always Will and Desire. Which, says he, is it be true (most Gracious
Sovereign) to what purpose is it, that I and the rest of Your Majesty's
Faithful Ministers do busy our selves about any thing, or take any measures
that may be of use to You, and the Kingdom's Good; whereas all Consultations
about such thing as necessarily come to pass, were absolutely foolish and
ridiculous. The Queen, being very much moved at this, commands the Archbishop
to be sent for, and (with a smiling Countenance, mixed with Majesty) told him,
I hear, says she, you are reaping up great Wealth, and I suppose you have a
mind to make me rich. The Archbishop, not knowing what the Queen meant by such
an unexpected Speech, answered, My Riches are not over great, but such as they
are, Madam, they are yours. But, says the Queen, you now think you make me a
Complement; whereas what you now offer me is mine already by the Laws of the
Land, for you are fallen into a A (...) is an ancient Law of England,
established, as it is thought, by Richard II, which forbi^s Ecclesiastics to
assume to themselves m^rc Auth^rity than is due to them by the Laws of this
Land, with this Punishment, that whosoever Offends shall be sent to Prison
during the King's Pleasure, and his Cio^ds Consiscated.
Pr^munire: and then she began to debate about the Assertions at Lambeth. The
Archbishop at length discerning what the Queen meant. It was, says he, neither
mine nor the Assembly's Intention to determine any thing without Public
Authority, or of our selves to make Canons; but it was only to interpose, for
Peace sake, between the two Prosessors, that no private Quarrels might break
out into public Mischief. There were then p^ent some of the Queen's
Counselors, that did lay this Matter very hard upon Archbishop Whitgift, and
told him, That the very Assembly was illegal, inasmuch as it was called without
the Queen's Knowledge; and that they might have consulted the Peace of the
Church much better, if they had kept their Opinions to themselves. But to what
purpose were the Assertions of the Bishops sent to Cambridge, but that they
might have some resemblance of a Canon? And had it been such a troublesome
thing once to have gone and acquainted the Queen with a Business that was
disputed of for so many Days? And then they fell upon the Question concerning
Fate, and vehemently debated it as a Position, that neither countenanced
Virtue, nor the Commonwealth. The thing at last ended thus, That the
Archbishop should beg Pardon for what had been done so unadvisedly, and ^ould
promise to write to Cambridge to hinder these (...) Ar^ from being any further
published or sprea^ ^road; which also he did: But a long while after, as it
seems, there was a Copy found a^ongst W^itaker's Papers, whereby at length this
Work was made public against the consent of the Authors.

After these Articles were made, Baron continued both in his Professorship, and
in his Opinion; but Whitaker died a few days after the Assembly at Lambeth. At
length, Baron (his Three Years being out; for, by the way, according to the
ancient Insti^ution, the Professors were to continue in that Lecture but Three
Years) quitted his Office, and retired to his private Studies.

After these two, between whom the Contention arose, Dr. Jo^ Ove^ a most I
earned Man, was made (...): He sollow^d that way of ^aking, which determ^nes,
That sufficient Grace is offered to every Man, and that Christ died (...) All.
In every good th^g, Grace does opera^e first, and then in the next ^lace,
Free Will informed and a^tuated by Grace; Grace that Grace does operate in an
(...) manner, and that not by binding up Men after a natural way, to particular
Actions (...). Tha^ justisying Grace is not consistent with deadly Sins before
actual Repent^.

As to that ob^ure Controversy about Predestination, he behaved himself so, as
to condemn neither the former, nor the latter Opinion of St. Austin; as
thinking there was no great matter of difference between them; especially since
St. Austin himself has said, (after the Dispute arose betwixt him and Pel^ins)
that he had the same Thoughts then, as he formerly had when he opposed the
Manici^s; and that now he had not so much changed his O^ion, as his way of
Speaking.

What happened afterward, under the Reign of King J^mes the First, First,
(...). 1603. may be seen in Dr. (...) Book (...) about that Matter. For there
Dr. Reynolds, with the rest that opposed the Bishops, amongst other things,
which they thought did mightily tend to the puri^y of the Church of England,
they requested this also, that the Lambeth Articles might be put into the
Confession. But King James would not grant their Request, thinking that such
sort of Desinitions did not tend to the Peace of the Church.

The Articles of Predestination, and the Heads adjoining proposed at Lambeth,
by Dr. Whitaker.
I. GOD has from all Eternity predestined s^e to Life, and reprobated some to
De^h. II. The effi^ient Cause of Predestination is not a Fore^ght of Faith, or
Perseverance, or good Works, or of an, other thing that is in ^he Person
predestined; but it is the sole, absolute, and simple Will of God. III. Of
those that are Predestined, there is a determinate and certain Number, which
can neither be increased nor (...). IV. Those who are not predestined to
Salvation, shall of necessity be condemned for their Sins. V. A true, lively,
and justifying Faith, and the sanctifying Spirit of God is neither extinguished
nor lost, nor does it depart from those that have been once partakers of it,
either totally or finally. VI. A truly faithful Man; that is, one that is
endued with justifying Faith, is certain with a certainty of Faith, of the
forgiveness of his Sins, and of his eternal Salvation by Christ. VII. Grace
sufficient to Salvation is not afforded, communicated, or granted to ail Men,
whereby they may be saved if they will. VIII. No Man can come to Christ, unless
it be given him, and unless the Father draw him; and all Men are not so drawn
by the Father, that they may come to the Son. IX. It is not put in the Will or
Power of every Man to be saved.
All these Propositions are either plainly inserted in the Book of Articles,
and were always approved of in our Church; or else they may by a necessary
Consequence be drawn and collected from the Articles.

The Articles proposed at Lambeth, as they were drawn up by the Reverend Dr.
Whitaker, in his own Hand writing, and presented to the Bishops, and other
Divines, at Lambeth. The Articles proposed at Lambeth, as they were drawn up by
the Bishops, and other Divines, and of the sense wherein they were admitted and
approved of. I. GOD has from all Eternity predestined some to Life, and
reprobated some to Death. I. THis Article was admitted in the same words; for
if by the first [some] be meant Believers, and by the second [some]
Unbelievers; Here is no occasion of Contention, but it is a very true Article.
II. The efficient Cause of Predestination is not a foresight of (...), or
(...), or good Works, or of any other thing that is in the Persons
predestined; But it is the sole, absolute, and simple Will of God. II. The
moving or ef^ Cause of Pred^tion to Life is not a foresight of F^h, or (...),
or Good Works, or of any other thing that is in the Persons Predestined; but
it is the sole Will of God that is well pleased.

In this second Article there was added by the Lambeth Divines, 1. [moving,] 2.
[to Life,] 3. The sole, absolute, and simple Will of God, is changed into, The
sole Will of God that is wellpleased, and that not without good reason: For the
moving Cause of Predestination to Life is not Faith, but the Merit of Christ;
since God designed Salvation for those that are to be saved, not for their
Faith, but for the sake of Christ. The word [moving] agrees properly to Merit,
and Merit is in the Obedience of Christ, and not in our Faith. These words [to
Life] are added; because although a foresight of Infidelity and Impenitency be the
Cause of Predestination to Death, and so likewise of any thing else which is in
the Persons predestined to Death; yet there is no Cause of Predestination to
Life, but the sole Good Will and Pleasure of God, according to that of St.
Austin. The Cause of Predestination is sought for and not found, but the Cause
of Reprobation is sought for and sound too. [The absolute and simple Will of
God] signifies something more than the sole Will of God that is well-pleased:
For the Will of God well-pleased is Conditional: God would have us to do well,
if we would not be wanting to his Grace; and it has pleased God to sa^ all Men,
if they would believe.

III. Of those that are Predestined, there is a determinate and certain
number, which can neither be increased nor (...). III. In this Article there is
nothing changed; for it is most (...), (...) be understood (...) Foreknowledge
(...) which is never (...); for neither (...) nor sewer can be sav^, than those
whom G^ did foreknow.

IV. Those who are not predestined to Salvation, shall of necessity be
condemned for their Sins.

In this Article there is nothing changed, for it is most true, God having
determined not to forgive Sins, but to such as believe: But if you would so
interpret this and the former Article, as by a necessary Consequence to deduce
from Predestination it self, both the Sin and the Damnation, and imagine that
it proceeds from thence, you would plainly contradict St. Austin, St. Prosper,
and (...); and, with the Manichaeans, unavoidably make God to be the Author of
Sin.

V. A true, lively, and justifying Faith, and the sanctifying Spirit of God, is
neither extinguished nor lost, nor does it depart from those that have been
once Partakers of it, either totally or finally. V. A true, lively, and
justifying Faith, and the fanctifying Spirit of God, is neither extinguished
nor lost, nor does it depart from the Elect, either totally or finally.

In Whitaker's own Manuscript, the words are, [those that have been once
Partakers of it] instead of which, the Lambeth Divines put [the (...)] quite in
another Sense, and according to St. Austin's Sentiments; whereas in the
Manuscript they are according to Calvin's Opinion. For St. Austin was of (...),
That a true Faith, which (...) by (...), ^d through which did proceed ^ion,
(...), and Sanctification, might fail and be lost too. Now Faith was a Gift
that was common both to the Elect and Reprobate; but Perseverance was peculiar
only to the Elect. But Calvin's Opinion was, That a true and justifying Faith
is to be found no where but in the Elect, and those that are to be saved. The
eminent Dr. Overal likewise defended both in the University, and at the Meeting
at Hampton Court; That a Justified Person, if he fall into grievous Sins,
before actual Repentance, is in a State of Damnation: And those likewise the
contrary Opinion, which would bear us in Hand; That a Justified Person, though he
fall into grievous Sins, does yet remain Justified, was condemned by the King's
Majesty. So in this Article Whitaker's Opinion is wholly approved of.

VI. A true faithful Man, that is, one that is indu^d with justifying Faith, is
certain with a certainty of Faith, of the Forgiveness of his Sins, and of
eternal Salvation by Christ. VI. A true, faithful Man, that is, one that is
endued with justifying Faith, is certain with a Pleroph^ry, or full Assurance
of Faith, of the Forgiveness of his Sins, and of his eternal Salvation by
Christ.

There is nothing here changed; except that for [Certainty] the Gr^k word
[Plerophory] is put: Now some of the Divines would have had [Plerophory, or
full Assurance of Hope] ^ut in the place of [Plerophory of F^ith]; but the
absence of some of them, whilst the (...) was transacting, caused the wo^
[(...)] to remain as (...) had wrote it. Now they (...) use of the word
[Plerophory] because it (...) not denote a full and absolute C^tainty; s^h as
(...) that of Science, or the Principles of ^ith, (since Faith relates to such
things as have Evidence and certain Knowledge on their side); but only a less
degree of Certainty, such as is admitted in Judicial and Court-Proofs.

This Article is very true, if you understand it of the Certainty of the
present State, nay, or of a future State, provided it be a Conditional
Certainty. For the Faithful believes, that he has Faith, and he believes, that
a Believer shall be saved; He believes also, that he shall persevere; but this,
not altogether with one and the same Certainty: Because this Certainty depends
partly upon the Promises of God, who does not suffer us to be tempted above our
Strength; and partly, upon the sincerity of a a pious Resolution of obeying the
Commandments of God in Holiness, for the time to come.

Otherwise if the Article should bear this sen^; That a Man ought to believe,
That he shall be saved, or is saved, with the same Cer^ as he believes, that
Christ died, and is the ^iour of the World, this Assertion would plainly (...)
the (...) of King Edward; in which may be read, (...) the (...) of (...) is
(...): And that of St. (...); Pr^tion with us, (...) Civ. D^i. (...) C^p. 12.
^st we are in the present Dangers of Life, is uncertain: And in another plac^.
The J^st, although they are certain of the Reward of their (...), yet must own
themselves uncertain of Pers^rance it self.

VII. Grace sufficient to Sal^ion is (...) assorded, communicated, or granted
to all M^n, whereby they may be saved if they will. VII. Saving Grace is not
sa^ed, communicated, or granted to all Men, whereby they may be saved if they
will.

The Assembly have altered [Grace sufficient to Salvation] which was in
Whitaker's own Manuscript, and put [saving Grace] in the room; that it might
plainly appear, that they spoke of that Grace, which is finally saving, or
actually efficacious, or such as of it self, without the addition of any new
Grace, works Salvation. Now this is not assorded, nor so much as offered to
All Men, since there are v^ry many, such as Pagans, etc. to whom the Gospel has
not been preached, either by an inward or an outward Call. Therefore those
words, [whereby they may be saved if they will] are to be understood of the
next and immediate Power; for if they be understood of a remoter Power; the
words [sufficient Grace] were brought in to no purpose; and that is wont to be
called Sufficient, (not which is efficacious, and does of it self actually work
Salvation) but which is sufficient to lead a Man to Salvation, provided he do
not himself put a stop to it: And this was the Opinion both of St. Austin and
Prosper, who say, That Grace was at least more sparingly, and more secretly
given to All, though there be sufficient for a Remedy: Whence Fulgentius, That
some are not assisted by the Grace of God, must be attributed to themselves,
and not to God.

VIII. No Man can come to Christ, unless it be given him, and unless the Father
draw him; And all Men are not so drawn by the Father, that they may come to the
Son.

In this Article there is nothing changed; for all Men are not drawn by the
utmost degree of Force and Persuasion: But he that deni^s, that all Men are
drawn by a remoter force, takes away that general Assistance, or common Aid,
which, as St. Prosp^r says, rouses the H^arts and Affections of all Men. Now
this force or drawing, the Lamb^th Divines did not, with W^ker, understand to
be a physical, irres^lible Determination; but a Divine Operation, such as is
commonly wrought in the Conversion of Men, which does not take away the free
Nature of the will; but first makes it sit for a S^itual Good, in order to its
being made Good it self.

IX. It is not put in the Will or Power of every Man to be saved.

In this also there is nothing changed; for it is most true, that our Salvation
is primarily (not in our selves, but) from a preventing, moving, co-oper^ting,
and encouraging Grace in every Good Work; and (...), from the Judgment and Will
of Man ^senting and agreeing thereto. There can be no power of the Will toward
a spiritual Good, unless Grace not only take away the Impediments, but furnish
it with str^th too. It is not therefore placed in the Will chi^fly and first of
all; nay, in no sort is it placed in the Will, that any Man, when^oever he
pleases, may attain Salvation: But that there is someti^s a sort of Power in
the Will subordin^te and agreeable to Grace, no body will d^ny (...) has any
regard to St. Austin, Whilst we have (...), says he, whilst it is in our Power
to do (...); And in another place, sp^king of the (...) she of Hell, There is a
gr^ter (...) says (...), wh^h yo^ o^ght ^o f^ar, and which y^u have in your own
power to prev^nt coming upon you.

The Judgment of the most R^verend, and Learned Father in God, Lancelot Bishop
of Winchester (who himself had a great part in the Affair) concerning the
Articles that were offered to the Assembly at Lambeth by Dr. Whitaker.

THE Four first Articles are about Predestination and Reprobation: The one is
called by the Apostle. (...)! The Depth of the Riches of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God! Romans 11. 33. the other by the Prophet, A great Deep, Psalm.
36. 6.

I in truth ingenuously confess, that I have followed St. Austin's Advice, Such
Mysteries as I cannot unfold to admire them as they are concealed: And
therefore for these Sixteen Years, ever since I was made Priest, I have neither
publicly nor privately dispu^ed about them, or meddled with them in my Sermons:
And even now I had much rather hear than speak of them my self. And indeed,
since the Place it self is doubtful, and has on both sides dangerous
Precipices: Since some of the Texts of St. Paul (from whence commonly these
Opinions are drawn) are to be reckoned (as St. P^ter ^serves) amongst the
(...), (...) to be understood: And since there (...) many amongst the Clergy,
who are ab^ (...) such Matters with that (...) as they ought, and few a^g (...)
^ople, (...) ^re (...) proper (...) things, I should advis^ (if it were (...))
(...) nothing might be said on either side (...) might not every wh^ be so
(...) ^lly managed, as it is w^t to be. (...) better Purpo^e to teach (...)
^nly the way to Salvation in things manifestly relating to a Holy and a
well-governed Life, than to trouble their Heads with the Secrets of Providence,
and the hidden things of God; whereas an overcurious Inquiry into these things
does but turn Peoples Heads, and make them break out into Enthusiastic
Frensies, and scarce ever tend to the Edification of strait and narrow
Dispositions. However, being asked to give my Opinion concerning these
Articles, (and that by your Lordship too; whom it is my Duty to obey) I answer
thus in short.

To the First, wherein Pred^stination is ass^ted.
That God in his Eternal (whether you will call it ^ore-knowledge or)
Knowledge, whereby he sees things which are not, as though they were, has
predestined some, and reprobated others, is (I think) without all manner of
doubt. The Words of Scripture are [(...)] before the Foundation of the World; i
e. God has chosen us from all l^ternity; and when he had chosen, did
predestinate (...), (...). 1 4, 5. Now it was out of the World that ^e has
chosen us, John 15. 19. And therefore he has not chosen All Men in the World,
but only Some; otherwise it could not ^e called Election; But then those whom
he has not chosen, supposing him to approve of his Choice (as the Nature of
Election bears) he has reprobated: And for this the Scripture use, the Word,
[(...)] to c^t away, Romans 11. 2. and [(...)] to reject, or reprobate, Heb. 12.
15. There ^ms to be almost the same Reason for Reprobation as for Election, for
one as for the other: And if this do not appear plain enough, I would add, That
some are predestined one way, namely by Christ; and others ^e reprobated
another, namely for their Sins.

To the Second Article, wherein the Cause of Predestination is explained.
The Word of God by the Prophet is most true, That in me only is thy Help; i.
e. Help is to be had from none but me; and from me you can have nothing else
but Help: As also that of the Apostle: Who is it, that makes thee to differ
from another? i. e. from God alone we have whatsoever makes us to differ from
others. But yet concerning that Expression [the sole good will and Pleasure of
God] it may be asked, 1. Whether it includes, or excludes Christ; i. e. whether
the Act of Predestinating be an absolute or a relative Act. As to my self, I
think it to be relative; and that there is no good Pleasure of God toward Men,
but by his Son, in whom he is well pleased; nor that any one is predestined,
either before, or without the Direction and Approbation of Christ. But (as the
Scripture has it) Christ was first fore-known, 1 Pet. 1. 2. and then we in him,
Romans 8. 29, Christ was first predestined, Romans 1. 4. and then we by him, Ephesians.
1. 5. Now we are not (as some imagine) in the first place elected, and Christ
afterward, and for our Sakes: For it were impossible for us to be
predestined into the Adoption of Sons, but by a natural Son, neither could we
be (...) to be ^formable to the Image of his Son (as the Scripture speaks)
unless the Son were first appointed, to whose Image we are to be conformed.
Wherefore to this Article likewise I would choose to add [The good Pleasure of
God in Christ]

And then in the second Place, it may be asked likewise, whether [this sole
Will and good Pleasure] includes or excludes the Foreknowledge of God? I can
by no means think that these Two things, [viz. to sore-know, and to
pred^stinate] are to be separated, but we should rather (as the Aposties do)
join them together: But in this neither dare I give my Opinion rashly, or
condemn the Fathers, who almost All do assert, that we are both elected and
predestined according to a Faith foreseen; which also Beza himself confesses,
saying, That the Fathers are by no Upon (...) of Romans ver, 2, Edit. 2.
m^ns in this Matter to ^e regarded who refer it all to a (...). In which
notwithstanding, I should think, that they spoke rather concerning the Series
and Order that God made use of in the Act of Predestination, than of the real
Cause of it: Which Order some dispose one way, and some another, according to
their different Apprehensions. But the Fathers seem to me to have thought thus;
That there was no Election but what was disposed in this following manner. 1.
That God loves Christ, and then loves us in Christ; as also the Apostle says,
Ephesians. 1. 6 That God has accepted us in the Beloved. 2. Those that are thus
accepted, he does endue with Grace and Faith, 3. Those that are so endued, and
thereby distinguished from the rest he does elect: And, 4. The Elect he does
predestinate.

Most certainly the Nature of Election supposes, that there is some Difference
betwixt him that is elected, and him that is rejected. So Occum^nias has it
from the Opinion of the Greek Fathers, (...) E^tion, (...), that (...) ^om one
Page (...).
(...): for no body (...) from (...), ^pt the (...) di^rence b^n (...). So
likewise St. A^ia [(...) Simpl. 1. 2] E^on does no^ pr^de Justification (namely
foreseen) but (...) ^des Election: For no body is elected, unless he be already
at some distance from him that is (...); whence is that Saying, That God has
(...) before the Foundation of the World: But I do not see how that can be
said, but by a Foreknowledge.

And thus also the Schoolmen. Predestination
(says Tho. A^u.) pre-s^pposes Election, and El^ction Love: Namely, Thom.
(...), Q. 23. Art. 4.
first God made them sit to be chosen, and then he chose them; he loved them,
that he might give, and he loved what he gave. And this likewise seems to be
the Opinion of the most Reverend Archbishop of York, whose Words are these:
What was it that God loved in Jacob from all Eternity, when he had as yet done
no Good? without doubt it was something of his own, that he wa^ about to give
him. It is plain the Apostle does not sear to join together in this Business
[his own Purpose] and 2 Timothy, 1. 9.
[Grace given] and that from all Eternity; whereas that Grace given could not
be but in Foreknowledge; that is, with the Eternal Purpose of God, who foresaw
that very Grace, which he would give before the beginning of the World.

Nor do I think there is any Inconvenience sollows from hence, That God should
so choose to bestow his Gifts in us, as to crown us with what he gives; Namely,
What by first loving us he gave, with the same, after it was so given, he did
elect us: So that Love, which is an Act of Grace, whereby God makes a
difference, as well as Election, which is an Act of Judgment, whereby he
chooses those that are so distinguished, are both (...) And thus Election will
remain.

For that Order which the M^derns make use of, perfectly takes away all
Election, whereby God is made to de^l with Men, considered under no (...), nor
any way distinguished by his Gifts, but by a first and absolute Act, at one and
the same time to predestinate some to Salvation, and others to everlasting
Destruction: After such a Decree as this. I do not understand what room there
can be for Election, or how that Decree it self can be called Election.

But this whole Question (as I have said) is rather concerning the Order, in
which God proceeds according to our Capacity, who know only in part, than of
the Cause of it, as to the Act it self, which is one, and that most simple, in
God. Or if it be about the Cause, it must not be understood, of the Cause of a
first and absolute Act, but of the Cause in respect to its entire Effect (as
they speak) in Predestination.

It is asked again, Whether this be an integral Act (according to our
Conception) consisting of various Actions, or whether it be that one single Act
only? And if there be many and various ones, What is the Order and Series of
them? Predestination (which must be joined with Foreknowledge) supposes
likewise good Works (St. Austin of Predestination of the Saints, chap 10.) The
Elect, before the Foundation of the World, are under that Pred^stination,
whereby God fore-knows his own Facts that ar^ to come, chap. 17. Again, Dare
any one say, that God do^ not foreknow (...) to whom he will grant Faith to
(...)? (Of Perseverance 14.) Again, (...) on (...) Go^ (...) ^is Gif^, without
(...) ^t he should bestow them, and in hi^ ^e-knowledge (...) accordingly,
chap. 17. and fol. 23. If there be no such (...) as we d^fend, M^n are not
fore-known by God, but they are foreknown, etc. These [Gifts] therefore which
the Church does, and always did, ask of God, thos^ God foreknow that he should
give to those that are c^lled, as in Predestination it self he had already
given them.

To the Third, concerning a certain Number.
They are St. Austin's very Words: Chapter 8. de Cor. and Gra.
The Number of those who are predestined, is so certain, that none can be
added to, or taken away from them And so says St Ambrose De Voc. lib. 2. cap.
ult. The Foreknowledge of God, which cannot be deceived, has lost nothing of
the fullness of the Members of the Body of Christ; neither by any Loss can the
great Things fore-known and preelected from all Eternity in Christ, be
diminished: For there is nothing so certain, as that the Knowledge of God is
most sure, and cannot be deceived; for the Lord knows those that are his.

To the Fourth.
He that is not found written in the Book of Life, (i. e. Predestined) shall
be cast into the Lake of Fire, says St. John, Rev. 20. Verse the last, i. e.
shall be damned. And that he will be damned for his Sins, no body will deny;
and that necessarily (if you will give me leave to say so) not by an absolute,
but a conditional Necessity: That is, as the Article it self explains it,
because of their Sins: It is because they have sinned, and not because they are
not predestined. Though at the same time I think we ought to avoid making use
of the Terms [Necessity] and [Necessarily, which the Fathers and Schoolmen have
carefully done, and to substitute in their room [Certainly] or [without doubt]
for we must avoid, as much as may be, all new Terms and Phrases.

To the Fifth, Concerning the losing of Faith and the Spirit.
I suppose no body ever said, That Faith may finally fail in those that are
elected; for that to be sure it does not. But that it does not fail, is not, I
think, from its own, but from the Nature of its Subject; from the Privilege of
the Person, and not of the Thing: And this by reason of Apostates, who ought
not to be blamed for falling from that Faith, which was never true and lively.
But now whether the Holy Ghost may not for a time be taken away, I think it is
not yet decided, and I confess I am in some doubt my self.

Concerning Faith, the Apostle says, Thou stand by Faith; (...) not
h^h-minded, but fear; otherwise thou also shall be cut off: Would not this be
an ironical Precept, if he could not fall off? Therefore consider these
following Texts. 1. Beware ^rst ye also being led away with the Error of the
(...), f^ll from your o^n (...), 2 Pet. 3. 17. 2. Take heed that ye sail not of
the Grace of God: ^or you that are under the Law, are fallen from Grace. Gal.
5. 4. 3. Ta^e not thy Holy Spirit from me, Psalm. ^1. 13. 4. (...). Would not
all these be Ironical Precepts and Speeches, if we could in no sort fall off
from the stedfastness of Faith, or from Grace, if the Holy Spirit could no way
be quenched or taken from us? Though at the same time I am aware of this t^,
that [Faith cam^ be totally lost] may be so explained, as that wholly may
relate to time, and the Sense will be this: Faith may be wholly lost now, and
yet be recoverable hereafter.

To the Sixth, Concerning Certainty of Salvation,
I am of Opinion, that with what Certainty any one is certain that he is truly
faithful, or endued with Justifying Faith, with the same is he certain of his
Salvation by Christ. Now I think this should be rather said to be a full
Assurance of Hope (as the Apostle has, Heb. 6. 11. than of Faith: And if you
will have it in one Word, I would call it Persuasion rather than Faith. For we
cannot have the same Certainty of those Propositions which are conditional, and
require something on our Part to make them true; such as these, [He that
believes calls upon God:] Or thus [If you believe you will call upon God;] as
we have of those which are not conditional, but are purely positive and
dogmatical, as that [God is (...)] C^ncerning the former, the Degree of
Certainty is much less; and yet this sort of Faith does not hasit^te in
determ^ning its Assent to one or other side of the Question.

To the Seventh, Concerning Communication of Grace.
I do not think that Saving-Grace is bestowed upon All; but to All it is
offered, inasmuch as certain previous Dispositions ^oward, it are not only
offered, but even conferred upon All: And if Men were not wanting to these
themselves, even Saving Grace it self would follow. The Words [(...)
Communica^ed, Gram^] if they be relative, and imply Reception, it is true that
Grace is not so bestowed: But if they do not include any Relation, but that it
is only offered on God's part, (...) that God is ready at hand to grant and
communicate it: In this Sense I think it is communicated to All. It is
therefore offered, and God is ready at Hand to bestow it: But it lies at Men's
Doors that this Grace so offered is not conferred: For Grace is not wanting to
us, but we are wanting to it. St. Austin's Words are: That Divine Light De genesis
Contra. Manich. lib. 3.
does not affect the Eyes of irrational Creatures, but the purified Hearts of
such as believe in God, and from the Love of Temporal and Sensible Things,
converts them to the Obedience of God, which all Men are capable of receiving,
if they will; because that Light is common to All, etc.

To the Eighth.
It is truly said, that no Man comes to the Son, unless he be drawn: And All
are not drawn that they may come to the Son; i. e. So drawn that they shall
come: but then we must add this too, That the Cause why All, either are not
drawn, or so drawn as to come to God, is the corrupted Will of Men themselves,
and not the Absolute Will of God.

To the Ninth.
It is not placed either in the Free Will of any One, unless redeemed by the
Son; or is it in the Power of any one, unless it be given him from above, to be
saved. The Subject of this Dispute is of something to come; and every one as he
stands affected, or has a Mind, wrests a Word to his own Opinion; and, if that
be wanting, will supply it out of his own Sense. But I, as I have all along
said, so even now would advise, that a saithful Silence might be enjoined on
both sides.

Let thus much suffice to have been said concerning Predestination and
Reprobation; but let it be so understood, that I am willing, both in this
Matter, and what relates to the Articles themselves, to submit my self and my
Opinion to a Superior Authority.

A Review of the Censure passed upon Dr. Barrett's Opinion concerning Certainty
of Salvation.
NO Man can entertain such an Assurance, etc. as that he ought to be secure of
his Salvation: So Dr. Barret has it: He is commanded to correct it thus: Those
that are justified by Faith. etc. ought to be certain and secure of their
Salvation.

1. The Word [certain] ought not to have been added; for he had not denied it,
and I believe no body in their Wits ever did. He could not retract what he had
never asserted; nor ought such a Word to be put in, which was not to be found
in the Article.

2. That any ought to be secure of his Salvation, is not very justisiable. One
would think the Words of the Preacher might have escaped Censure: for L^o's
Words are inconsiderably changed: ^or (says he, upon those Words of Paul) let
him that stands take heed lest he ta^l) No Man can arrive ^o so Sermon. (...).
de Q^d.
great a (...), as that he ought to be secure of his Stability. Methinks, if
Barret was not to be spared, at least Leo might have escaped Censure.

But I have these following Reasons why I cannot approve of this Opinion, 1.
The asoresaid place in the Censure is nothing to the Purpose, viz. Those that
are justified ought to be s^ure. Whereas this is built upon Romans 5. 1. Being
justified by Faith, we have Peace with God. Without doubt! And therefore we may
have peaceful, but not secure Thoughts; because Peace it self is not secure.
For we are to take care in the first place, that this Peace be true; for as the
Prophet says, They have healed the Hurt of the Daughter of my People slightly,
saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace, Jer. 6. 14. Ezekiel. 13. 10. And
then if that be true, we are to take care in the second place, that the
Conditions of this Peace be not violated and broken by us, and so it be taken
away from us again. For thus says the Lord Jer. 16. 5. I have taken away my
Peace from this People, even Loving Kindness and Mercy. And as we ought not to
be secure, because we have Peace; so neither ought we to be so, because we
stand in Grace, or by Faith; for such ought to consider what the Apostle says:
Take heed lest any of you sail of Heb. 12. 15.
the Grace of God. And then he that stands by Faith ought to take heed of what
the same Apostle says: Thou stand in, or by Faith, be not high-minded, but
fear: As also what Romans 11. 10.
he says in another place: Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall. Which Words of the Apostle are made use of by S. Austin and Bernard
against Security. August de Bono persever. Cap. 8. Betn. Ser. 1. de Septuag.


2. The Holy Scriptures no where recommend Security, but rather seem to take
offense at the Word: We ought to avoid it, since such are reproved by the
Apostle, who would trust to it: For when Men shall say, Peace and Safety, then
sudden Destruction comes upon them, 1 These. 5. 3. Wherefore I think it ought
to be avoided, as a thing of an ill Omen.

Nor, 3. does the Reason and Meaning of the Word give any Countenance to this:
For he that is secure, does not only banish all Doubtfulness, but even Care
too: For Security is directly opposed to Care. But we are commanded by the Holy
Ghost to make use of all our Care and Watchfulness: And the Apostle, Heb. 6.
11. desires, That every one should show the same Diligence, even unto the end.
4. But the thing it self, [viz. Security] seems to be repugnant to the
Condition of a Christian Life, which is a Warfare; nay and to human Life too,
which is a Trial upon Earth; so that neither of these will admit of Security,
but rather call for our utmost Care and Diligence, both to pray that we be not
led into Temptation, and also to look to our selves that we be not tempted; And
St. Paul gives this Advice even to those that are Spiritual, Gal. 6. 1.

5. Those Words so often made use of by Christ and his Apostles [Watch,
consider, take heed, try your selves, prove your selves] ought to shake off,
and not to create Security: For what can these Words signify, but a Command
not to be secure. We have several other Expressions besides to this Purpose.
Work out your own Salvation with Fear and trembling, says 2 Phil. 14
St. Paul: Pass the time of your sojourning here in Fear, says Peter, 1 Pet.
1. 17. And again, St. John; Hold that fast which thou have, that no Man take
thy Crown. All Rev. 3. 1^.
which Places gives us to understand that Fear must accompany our Faith, least
Certainty degenerate into Security. St. Peter, when he commands us to give all
diligence to make our Election sure, ^means, without doubt, that we should
onstrive for this Certainty; that every one should be so solicitous and careful
about his own Concerns, as that he may at length arrive thereto. As much as to
say, that an Endeavor after Certainty is all we are capable of in this Life;
and a great Virtue in them who have it.

But, 7. The degree of Certainty, which we have in this Life, must not stand in
competition with what we shall have in a future State; some difference there
must be allowed, and there can be nothing further or greater than Security:
From whence it is, that [to enjoy a Security] is peculiar to those who are
already dead, and can sing that Triumph of the Apostle, Death is swallowed up
in Victory. But we that still sojourn here upon ^arth, and are content with
moral Certainty, must forego that highest deg^e of Security, and leave that to
the Church triumphant in Heaven, which alone is secure.

8. It has always proved fatal to such as have s^ncied themselves to be so
certain as to run into Security. As David for instance, I shall never be moved,
Psalm. 30. 6. And Peter, when he said, Though Ail shall be offended, yet will not
I. It has succeeded much better with those who have been so certain, as yet to
be careful; as with Job; I know, says he, that my Rede^mer lives, etc. Chap.
19. 25. And if I should comfort my self, yet I am afraid of all my Sorrows. Job
9. 28. And so St. Paul; I am persuaded, that neither Death, etc. Romans 8. 38.
and yet I ^eep under my body, says he, ^ast when I have preached to others, I
my self should be a Castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 27.

9. Although what is alleged concerning Carnal and Spiritual Security be of no
great weight, since by equal reason it may be spoken of Presumption or Pride;
namely, improperly by a Figure; yet though we may soften the matter thus, it is
easy to be seen daily, what the Humor of our Age and People requires to be
taught about this thing; and whether it would be expedient, (as Men's Manners
and the Times are) by such sort of Notions as these, to chill the alreadyfrozen
Zeal, and lazy Endeavors of Men to do any Good: And as if a certainty of
Salvation was so small a Matter, to fill their Heads with a lazy Security:
Since (as Gregory rightly observes) Security is the Mother of Carelessness; and
since Despair proceeds not only from too great Fearfulness, (as in Cain; but
very often likewise (as in Saul) it takes its rise from too great a degree of
Hope.

10. Lastly, I do not think that we ought to recede from the common and usual
way of speaking in the Church, whose Thoughts are much the same with those of
Leo afore-cited, That we neither can nor ought to be secure of (...).

St. Austin says, Consil. 10. chapter 32. That no body ought to be secure in this
Life, which is a state of Temptation, inasmuch as he that can rise from worse
to better, may also ^ll from better to worse. Again (De bono P^. ch 8. God has
wisely determined to mix some that shall not persev^e amongst the certain
number of the Saints, that those who have no pr^tensions to Security in this
Life, may not be secure,

So likewise, Chap. 22. Because no body can be secure of et^nal Life, which
God, that cannot Lie, has promised before the World began, to the Sons of his
Promise, until the consummation of this ^fe, which is a Temptation upon Earth;
but makes us even to the end of (...) to (...) in him, to whom we daily prav,
that he would not l^d us into Temptation.

Again, Ep. 12. ad. P^ Whence it may seem wonderful, that you who, as to (...)
World, are noble, rich, and the Mother of so great a Family, and consequently
not d^solate, though a Widow, should yet have such an earn^ and unwearied Zeal
for Prayer: But that you prudently understand, that in this World, and this
Life, no Soul can be secure. And a little after: For although every one knows
himself, and no Man knows another; yet no one is so well acquainted with
himself, as that he can be secure of his future Behavior.

St. C^sostom, upon those words of the Aposile: If ^y any means I may
apprel^nd: I have said, that I have believed Christ, and the power of his
(...); that I was made a Partaker of his Sufferings, and conformable to his
Death, nevertheless, after all, I am not yet secure. And a little after, (Hom.
7. in Ep. ad Phil) If therefore he that has suffered so great things, that has
endured Persecutions and Mortification was not yet secure, what shall we say?

St. Ambrose, upon Psalm. 37. says, We are to understand it so, That although any
one be innocent, yet he cannot be secure, inasmuch as he has daily Combats with
the most powerful Enemies.

Thus also St. Hilary, upon Psalm. 137. No good Man poss^s a Day without fear.
Nor does that Faith, which is always anxiously careful of it self, venture to
rely upon a lazy Security; for he knows that every Day has its Snares laid
ready for him.

Gregory likewise (in Epist. 186. ad Gregoriam) says, You have made an
unprofitable Request, because you ought not to become secure concerning Sins,
but at the last Day of your Life, when you shall not be able to lament and
bewail them.

Lastly, Bernard (Epist. 107. ad Thom. Beverl.) says, After a Man is once come
to a knowledge of himself in part, let him boast in Hope, but not yet in
Security. Security and Fear are with Bernard two Extremes; the one is the
Excess, and the other the Defect. See Sermon. in Cantio. 11.

That the Faithful are through their whole Lives uncertain of their
Predestination and Perseverance, St. Austin is very full and clear. De Corrept.
and Gratia Cap. 13. almost at the Beginning. Contra Ar^iculos sibi falso
impositos, Artic. 12. In Epist. 107. De bono Perseverantiae, Cap. 13. near the
beginning; And then in his Book, De Civitate Dei. Book 11. Chap. 12.

THE OPINION OF THE Church of England, CONCERNING Predestination, And the
consequent Doctrines of it, Explained by Dr. Overal, Divinity-Professor at
Cambridge.
CHAP. I. Concerning Predestination.
THE Opinion that the Church of England holds in this Matter, is plain in its
XVII. Article: That the eternal purpose of Predestination, concerning the
Elect's being saved in Christ, is so to be taught, that in the mean time we
must receive God's Promises in such wise, as they are generally set forth to us
in the Holy Scriptures: And in our Doings that Will of God is to be followed,
which we have expressly declared unto us in the Word of God. In all which we
must suppose, that the necessary and effectual means both of inward Grace, and
the outward Word toward (...) receiving the Promises of God, and doing hi^
Will, are to be understood to be by ver^ of (...) Gospel Covenant, which is the
(...) of the Spirit, and not of the naked Letter, according to that of Leo. He
that looks only on the Duty goes without his Guide. Wherefore under a general
Promise and Precept, every one may safely repose himself by a steadfast Faith,
and by a certain Hope and Trust, may come boldly to the Throne of Grace; at the
same time assuring himself, that if he does not trust in God's Promises, nor
obey his Commands, he must blame himself, and not God; And own too, that it is
through his own Negligence, and not for want of Divine Grace; lest he fall into
that of Solomon, Prove. 19. 3. The foolishness of Man (...) his Way, and his
Heart sretteth against the Lord; which St. Austin has frequently repeated
against that Opinion. Our Article therefore has thought sit so to join that
eternal purpose of God, concerning those whom he has chosen in Christ to be
saved, with the Divine Precepts and Promises, as they are generally laid down,
together with the Means and Assistances annexed to them; that ^so we may fetch
the original Ground of our Salvation, from the eternal steadfast Purpose of
Divine Election, and not from any temporal unconstant variety of Man's Will:
That Grace may not be thought to be the necessary Consequence of Freewill, but
that all our Virtue and Strength, in pious Affections and good Works, of Faith
as well as Perseverance, is owing, not to the uncertain cooperation of Man's
Free Will, but to the efficacy of Divine Grace: That in the End all may be
ascribed to God, and that he that Glories, may glory in the Lord. These things
being thus adjusted on both sides, this seems to be the Order of God's
Predestinating of us, set forth in the XVII. Article, viz. That God foreknowing
the Fall of Mankind, did, for a Remedy of the same, determine to send his Son,
out of his mere Mercy and Compassion, and so in him placed the condition of our
Salvation: For the performance of which he did appoint necessary Helps, and
sufficient Means, more or less, to all in general. But to those whom he has
chosen in Christ, out of the rest of Mankind, he has, out of his good Pleasure
bestowed and granted a greater and more abundant provision of Grace; whereby
they are most certainly led on to Faith, Perseverance, and eternal Salvation.
As for the rest, they have nothing to complain of; for hereby is shown, both
what the Free Will of Man left to it self, can do under the Aid of a common,
yet sufficient Grace; and also the singular Benesit of a special and prevailing
Grace in those, to whom God shall please to bestow it: So that St. Austin's
Opinion is true, not only of the first Man, but likewise of all his Posterity.
The God and Lord of all things has so disposed the Life of Men and Angels, as
first to show therein what their Free Will could do; and then how far the
Advantage of his Grace, and the Love of Justice would prevail. Thus God is the
Savior of all Men, but especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. which
words of the Apostle, as Prosper thought, ought to determine this whole Cause.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Death of Christ.
THE Opinion of our Church concerning the Death of Christ is so plain, and
every where so consistent with it self; That Christ died for All Men, or for
all the Sins of all Men; that it is to be wondered, that any of us should ever
have ventured to call it in Question. It is said in the II. Article, that
Christ truly Suffered, was Crucified, Dead, and Buried, to reconcile his Father
to us, and to be a Sacrifice, not only for Original Guilt, but also for all the
actual Sins of Men.

Article VII. As well in the Old as New Testament, everlasting Life is offered
to Mankind by Christ, who is the only Mediator between God and Man, being both
God and Man.

Article XV. Christ came to be a Lamb without Spot, who by Sacrifice of himself
once made, should take away the Sins of the World. And again, Article XXXI. The
Offering of Christ once made, is that perfect Redemption, Propitiation, and
Satisfaction for All the Sins of the whole World, both Original and Actual.

And the same is to be met with in the common Catechism, as the most plain
sense of the second part of the Creed, wherein it is proposed to every one to
believe in God the Son, who has redeemed him and all Mankind; according to the
Nicene Creed, who for us Men and for our Salvation, descended, etc. And in many
other places of our public Liturgy; as in the Prayer of Consecration in the
Sacrament: O God! who did give thine only Son jesus Christ to suffer death
upon the Cross for o^ Redemption, who made there, by his o^e Oblation of
himself once offered, a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation, and
Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World. And to every single Person to
whom the Sacrament is administered, it is said, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ
which was given for thee. And again, His Blood which was shed for thee,
preserve thy Soul, etc. The Death of Christ therefore considered in it self
must be a Price sufficient for All Men, if it was given for All. But the
Scripture says plainly, That God gave his Son for the World, and lays a
Condition thereon, not the Death of Christ, but the Faith of Man; and from
thence Salvation is to follow conditionally: That the Son was so given, that,
whosoever believes in him shall be saved: But whether Men believe or not, God
gave his Son for them, and through him offered Salvation on the Condition of
Faith. Now that Men should perform this Condition, God does both command in his
Word, and by the Grace of his Holy Spirit does actually excite and cooperate:
So that if they do not believe, the Fault may be in Men, and not in God: As on
the contrary, if they do believe, that must be attributed to Divine Grace, and
not to any Humane Virtue. Whence it is pla^, that it was God's Will and Design
that Christ should die for All; though All, through their own Unbelief and
Impenitency, do not from thence receive the Fruits of Salvation. But then there
are some Effects of this that do redound to All; as the Common Vocation; The
Warnings and Encouragements, not only of the External Word, but of Internal
Grace too: And lastly, the General Resurrection of All. For because Christ by
his Death and Resurrection did overcome Death, and rose again, therefore shall
all Men likewise rise again from the Dead; as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. 22.
As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. For the same Reason
has Christ obtained to himself a Dominion over all Men, because he dyed for
All; As St. Paul has abundantly shown. Which Romans 14. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
Places, as they sufficiently prove that Christ died singly for All, so they
signify to us, that both the general Promises of Salvation to all Believers,
with whatsoever is sufficient for common Grace, and also the Purpose of
particular Election, and Grace effectually persevering; nay, and the
Preparation and Foreknowledge of these, are all founded in the same Christ, and
in his Death, foreseen from all Eternity. So that out of the side of Christ's
dying upon the Cross, not only the Sacraments of the Church, but likewise all
saving Goods and Graces must be understood to flow. And this Opinion is so
manifest in the Scriptures, that Calvin (who was otherwise sufficiently rigid
about Predestination) in explaining those very places, which others brought to
take away the Universality of Christ's Death (as in some it is said that he dyed
for Many) has every where interpreted them of All. Thus upon Heb. 9. 20. he
says, that [Many] is taken for [All.] So again upon Romans 5. 18, 19. It is
certain, says he, that all Men do not receive Advantage from the Death of
Christ, but then this is owing to their own Infidelity that hinders them.
Which Words do plainly enough favor the common Opinion. Therefore it must
not be said, that this which is so clear in it self [that Christ dyed for All]
ought to be explained from an extravagant and rigid Conception of Secret
Predestination; but we are rather to interpret that Secret by a thing which is
plain in it self; that so it may be truly consistent with what was rightly
enough delivered in a common Saying of the Schools, That Christ dyed for All
sufficiently; For the^ Elect and Believers effectually: Had they not corrupted
their meaning by the following Hypothesis: The Death of Christ had been
sufficient for All, if God and Christ had so intended.

CHAP. III. and IV. Concerning Free Will, and the Cooperation of Grace.
THE Desinition of our Church concerning Free Will and Grace is short, being
set down in the Tenth Article in these Words: The Condition of Man after the
Fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and prepare himself, etc. In which
Words both Merit and Strength toward any Spiritual Good are denied to Man in
a fallen or sinful State, i. e. He cannot turn and prepare himself for Faith
and Calling upon God, etc. Where notwithstanding it is supposed in the first
place, that Man in Natural and Civil Matters has a Free Will, and does
exercise his own Natural Strength, and even Good Works in that kind; with
which yet he cannot turn and prepare himself to Faith and a Spiritual Good. 2.
The necessity of Grace for the doing Works of Piety is shown; because without
(the Grace of God, we are not at all able to do such Works: Where also we may
learn by the way, that the Grace of God being supposed) we can, and are able to
do something toward Works of Piety. 3. From thence we understand how this
Grace is given, and whence it is to be had; i. e. By the Grace of God which is
by Christ. 4. We may learn likewise how Grace operates, viz. By preventing us
that we may will, and by cooperating with us when we do will. Now Grace
prevents us that we may will, by enlightening the Mind, inspiring the Will,
injecting pious Thoughts and good Desires, and by seasoning the Heart with
Zeal, and the Affections of Faith: Therefore of our selves we do not do a good
Work, either because we do not know what is Good, or the Good does not delight
us. So St. Austin explains this Matter: Ignorance and Infirmity, says he, are
Vices which hinder the Will from moving toward any good Work, or abstaining
from an ill one. Now that we may come to know what we were ignorant of, and
that that may be made sweet, which before did not delight, the Grace of God is
necessary to help and assist the Wills of Men; and if they be not helped
hereby, the Fault is in themselves, and not in God. And then Grace co-operates
with us, not only by concurring, but also by directing and protecting, by
strengthening and helping of us; for our Endeavors to Good are nothing, if they
be not excited by preventing Grace; and they are vain, if they be not assisted
by cooperating Grace; as Bernard says, De Gratia and lib. Arb. Nevertheless
in both these Acts of Grace, Free Will is not taken away, but perfected. For,
as the same Bernard says, Ep. 46. ad Valentinum. If there be no Free Will,
there is nothing to be saved; and if there be no Grace, there is no Salvation
And so St. Austin: If there be no Free Will, how shall God judge the World; and
if there be no Grace how shall he save it? Add to this that of St. Prosper: If
the Will be taken away, where is Lib. 1. ca. 1. De Vocatione Gentium.
the very Original of true Virtues? If Grace be taken away, where is the very
Cause of Good Works? In all which, there is not one Word of the Operation of
irresistible Grace: For although Grace may very often work certainly and
infallibly, where it operates according to the purpose of eternal Election, and
though it be certain, that the Decree of attaining the End proposed stands
good, supposing the Divine Preparation and Foreknowledge: Yet herein it does
not operate by any irresistible Force, the Liberty of the Will being preserved,
even under the Aids of Grace: So likewise in many other things (preventing
Grace being supposed) it has an Event suitable to its Liberty. Finally; in our
Articles, and in many places of the public Liturgy, the necessity of Grace is
so laid down, that the Will notwithstanding is left free under Grace. Without
which, all Laws, Precepts, Consultations, Conditions, Exhortations,
Admonitions, Promises, Threatenings, Praises and Dispraises, Rewards and
Punishments would be offered and propounded to no purpose, and all reason and
regard for Care, Diligence, Industry, Counsel, and Labor would be taken away:
So that neither nothing, nor too-much ought to be attributed to Free Will. And
then on the one side, Free Will, both before and under Grace, will not (with
the Defenders of irresistible Grace) be denied, or made of no Effect; nor, on
the other side, will the Efficacy of Saving-Grace be destroyed by the Strength
and Liberty of the Will. But so long as the Prerogative is granted to Divine
Grace, the Will of Man, as a Handmaid (though a free one) will join it self to
Grace, whilst it freely obeys its Dictates. Thus whilst it is awakened by the
Admonitions of preventing Grace, prepared in its Affections, fortified and
assisted with Strength, a Man may cooperate both freely and willingly with
God, that he may not receive the Grace of God n vain.

CHAP. V. Of the Perseverance of Believers.
OUR Church's Opinion concerning Perseverance is set forth in the Sixteenth
Article: That Men, after they have received the Holy Ghost, may depart from
Grace given, and fall into Sin, and by the Grace of God they may rise again,
and amend their Lives: And therefore they are to be condemned, which say, they
can no more sin as long as they live here, or deny the Place of Forgiveness to
such as truly repent.

Where we may observe first, that Sin which is there spoken of, and by which
Men fall from Grace given, is in the beginning of the Article, called a deadly
Sin willingly committed: For the preceding Fifteenth Article treats of common
and daily Sins, such as are common to all the Regenerate; and in which we
offend All, though we have the Grace of God, and do not fall from it. Now this
Sixteenth Article is about deadly Sin; by which, after Baptism and the Holy
Ghost received, Men depart from Grace given, until they be restored by
Repentance: Where also All those are condemned, who say that this Sin cannot be
committed after the receiving the Holy Ghost; such as Jovinian: and those
likewise who deny Forgiveness in the Church to such as truly repent, as
N^vatian. But here is nothing at all said concerning a total and final Falling
off from Grace.

But in the Homilies concerning the Danger of departing from God (which were
set forth at the same time in our Churches in the Book of Homilies) it is
sufficiently intimated; That after Grace received, Men may fall from it, and
perish; and therefore they are there diligently warned and armed against this
Defection: And again in the Administration of Baptism, it is affirmed for
certain, That Original Sin is remitted to Infants baptized, and likewise that
they are truly regenerate; amongst which a great many notwithstanding do
afterward fall off and perish.

But then the next Article (Seventeenth) frees those that are elected and
predestined from this Danger; teaching us that God has constantly decreed to
free and to save them, but withal tells us, That Predestination is the Purpose
of Divine Counsel secret to us, until it be made plain by the Fruits which in a
due and natural Order arise and spring from it; which does not presently happen
in All that believe, and therefore we ought not easily to presume upon
Election; whereas Predestination regards only the Godly, those only who are
truly such; and (as St. Austin and Prosper teach) such who feel in themselves
the Power of the Holy Ghost mortifying the Deeds of the Flesh. Those that are
rooted and confirmed in Charity, may with true Consolation think of the Divine
Election, and have a steadfast Faith of obtaining Salvation through Christ;
according to that Desinition in Gratian and Lumbard, gathered out of the
Fathers; Charity b^gun, is such as may be lost, but not a rooted and a perfect
Love; according to that of the Apostle, Perfect Love casts out Fear.
Therefore, as on one side, All Believers, and even such as are truly
Regenerate, are not under a Certainty of Salvation: So neither on the other are
All (whatsoever Advances they have made in Faith and Piety) to be left to an
uncertain Salvation: But to those who are solidly rooted in Faith and Charity
(as to those that are elected and predestined) we may allow a sure Confidence
of Perseverance, and a firm Hope of Salvation.

Without doubt that Opinion, so much debated; of the certain Perseverance of
All those, who did once believe and were regenerated, was never approved of by
any of the Fathers of the Primitive Church; but was rejected by all Antiquity;
and has been too much confuted by the constant Experience of all Times. It had
its Birth but in this last Age, and was then brought into the Church from a
Quarrel that Zuinglius and his Associates had with Luther.

Dr. OVERALL.

FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by M. Gillyflower, F. Freeman, H. Bonwicke, T. Goodwin, J. Walthoe,
M. Wotton, S. Manship, R. Parker, and (...). Took.
THE Roman History, from the Building of the City, to the perfect Settlement of
the Empire, by Augustus C^esar, to the Removal of the Imperial Seat, by
Constantine the Great. By Laurence Echard, A. M.

A New Voyage to Italy, with a Description of the Chief Towns, Churches, Tombs,
Libraries, Palaces, Statues, and Antiquities of that Country. Together with
useful In^ctions for those who shall travel thither. By Maximilian M^sson,
Gent. Done into English, and adorned with Figures. In Two Volumes.

A Complete Body of Chyrurgical Operations, containing the whole Practice of
Surgery; with Observations and Remarks on each Case. Amongst which are inserted
the several Ways of Delivering Women in Natural and Unnatural Labors. The
whole Illustrated with Copper Plates, explaining the several Bandages, Sutures,
and diverse useful Instruments. By M. de l^ Vaugaion, M. D. and Intendent of the
Royal Hospitals about Paris.

A Compendium of Universal History from the Beginning of the World, to the
Reign of the Emper^r Charles the Great. Written Originally in Latin, by Mon^eur
L^ (...). Done into English.


