Mr HOBBS'S State of Nature Considered, In a Dialogue BETWEEN Philautus and
Timothy.

To which are Added FIVE LETTERS From the AUTHOR of the GROUNDS, and OCCASIONS
of the CONTEMPT OF THE CLERGY.

London, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel
in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1672.

To the most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT by Divine Providence Lord
Archbishop of CANTERBURY, PRIMATE of all England and METROPOLITAN: and one of
His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Grace,
ALthough for several reasons I ought in duty to lay all my endeavors at your
Graces feet, and beg your acceptance of them; yet I was the more encouraged to
make this address, because the subject seems naturally to have recourse to
your Graces Protection. For the same Divine Providence that has made your Grace
Father of the Church, has made you also Guardian of Humane Nature. Which (as
your Grace well knows) has been so vilely aspersed and persecuted by our
Adversarie's malicious suggestions, that he is willing indeed to suffer such a
word as man still to remain amongst us, but what was always meant, and
designed thereby, he has endeavored to chase quite out of the world. The
vindication therefore of Humane Nature could not but seek for protection from
that great example of humanity; whose constant practice does alone abundantly
confute all the slanderers of mankind.

If Mr. Hobbs had been pleased to have given only a History or Roll of the
unjust or unfaithful; there would not then have been such occasion to
importune your Graces favoring such attempts as this. But when he teaches that
cheating is not only according to reason, but that it is the first principle
and dictate thereof; for the very credit of being on reason's side, people
shall count themselves engaged to be Knaves. And therefore I have persumed to
offer to your Graces Patronage this small discourse: wherein I have endeavored
to show that those that are wicked and unrighteous are not such by Reason, or
any advice of Humane Nature, but only because they have a mind to be so. And I
am not altogether discouraged from thinking, that by this consideration of Mr.
Hobbs's State of Nature, and my Introduction thereunto it may appear to your
Grace, that it would not have been an impossible thing to have said somewhat to
the rest of his writings, wherein he differs from what is generally believed.
But for me to go about to inform your Grace of the folly or inconveniences of
Mr Hobbs's principles; would be next unto his undertaking to read lectures to
all mankind.

Your Grace cannot but understand, that the matters insisted on in this
Dialogue, have been often recommended to the protection of great Persons, and
by those of eminent worth and Learning: and if there be any reason demanded why
this comes so late from me; I have nothing to offer in excuse, either to your
Grace, or those that writ before me. But yet however from some experience of
your Graces favors toward me, what I have performed, I hope may not be
altogether rejected: notwithstanding the manner of it, being to appearance not
so grave and solid, does a little dishearten me. But, since Mr. Hobbs by
affected garbs of speech, by a starched Mathematical method, by counterfeit
appearances of novelty and singularity, by magisterial haughtiness, confidence
and the like had cheated some people into a vast opinion of himself, and into a
belief of things very dangerous and false; I did presume, with your Graces
pardon, to think his writings so fond and extravagant, as not to merit being
opposed in good earnest: and thereupon I was very loath to give them too much
respect, and add undue weight to them by a solemn and serious confutation. And
I hope my Dialogue will not find the less acceptance with your Grace for those
Letters which follow after: for although some are loath to believe the first
Letters to be innocent and useful (being a little troublesome and uneasy to
their own humor) yet your Grace, I hope, is satisfied that the Author of them,
did heartily therein study the credit and advantage of the Church, and that our
Clergy would certainly be better reputed and more serviceable, were it possible
they all could be, as learned and as bountiful as your Grace. What I have now
performed, I humbly submit to your Graces favorable judgment; desiring that
it may be accepted of, as an expression of most dutyfull and grateful
observance from

Your Graces in all Duty and Service most devoted. I. E.
December. 20. 1671.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THe design of this Preface is not to advise, or encourage thee to read what
follows; for I should not take it well my self to be so drawn in: but if thou
chancest to look into it, and be not already acquainted with Mr. Hobbs's state
of nature this is to let thee know, that thereby is to be understood a certain
supposed time, in which it was just and lawful for every man to hang, draw, and
quarter, whom he pleased, when he pleased, and after what manner he pleased;
and to get, possess, use and enjoy whatever he had a mind to: And the reason of
this so large a Charter, was because it was supposed that these people had not
as yet any ways abridged themselves of their utmost liberty, by any voluntary
bargains, or agreements amongst themselves; neither could they be restrained by
any Humane Laws, because the Magistrate was not as yet chosen.

In this Dialogue therefore (because Mr. Hobbs shall not say that I am stingy)
thou will find, Reader, that with him I have allowed (though there is very small
reason for it) such a time or state, wherein people came into the World (after
his own humor) without being obliged either to God, Parents, Friends,
Midwifes, or Public Magistrate, and yet notwithstanding I have endeavored to
make out (how far or how well that is no matter) that those that are feigned to
be in this condition, have all such a natural right to their own lives, and
what is thereunto convenient, that it is perfectly unjust and unreasonable for
any one of them to take his utmost advantage, and to do whatever he thinks he
is able, or pleases him best.

Thou might possibly expect, after I had given each of the four Inhabitants
of the Isle of Pines a right to the fourth part (which thou do not deserve to
understand unless thou read the Book) that I should have proceeded, and set
out every man's share: and so have answered to Mr. Hobbs's sixth Article, Cap.
1. de Cive. Wherein he says, that a great and necessary occasion of
quarrelling and war is, that several men oftimes have a desire to the same
thing; which thing if it happens not to be capable of being divided, or enjoyed
in Common, they must needs draw and fight for it: Instead of which, he should
have said; if these men chance to be mad, or void of reason, it is possible
they may fight for it: For being that every one of them have an equal right to
this same, that is in controversy, they may either compound for it as to its
value, or decide it by Lot, or some other way that reason may direct (which is
a Law of reason and humane Nature, and not merely positive, because it is in
Law Books.)

Neither did I proceed to show what kind of Government they fixed upon; or how
long they continned in that even condition; or how every one of them thrived.
For perhaps before the year ran round, Roger might fuddle, or game away all his
Estate; or his Cattle might all die, and he forced to sell Land to get more
Stock. Neither have I told you what was Tumbler's first Complement to Towser,
nor what was Towser's reparty; nor whether they bowed only half way, or down to
the ground; nor which leg the one and the other drew back. Which, had I intended
an absolute discourse, should not have been omitted. All that I shall venture
to say is this, that I hope it may appear to three or four, (for I durst not
presume to convert many) that Mr. Hobbs is not such a great discoverer and
afforder of new things as his own Prefaces and his Titles to Books would make
thee believe: Neither is he so great a dispeller of clouds, but that thou may
buy an ell of them under a Mark. Neither is Humane Nature (or reason) so very
vile and raskally, as he writes his own to be, nor his account of it altogether
so demonstrative, as Euclid.

There Is nothing now wanting, Reader, but only to give thee a hundred and fifty
reasons why I writ this; and tell thee of most wonderful things that happened,
or else it had been much better. Thou may read on, if thou please: if thou will not, thou may let it alone; however thou art heartily welcome thus far.

A Dialogue BETWEEN Timothy and Philautus.
Tim. WELL met Philautus, how does your best self this morning: What, stout and
hearty?


Phi. I take care of my self, Sir, my body is pretty well, I thank you.


Tim. Then all is well, I suppose.


Phi. Yes truly in my opinion, all is well, when that is so.


Tim. In your opinion? Why: do not all count that well which you count well:
or are you a man by your self?


Phi. I am just what you see me to be. But some people I find, have two men to
take care of; an outward man, and an inward man: for my part. I am able to
maintain but one; and if I can shift it, that shall take no hurt, for want of
looking after. But I beg your pardon, Sir, for I know you not.


Tim. No matter for that: come, shall we take a turn or two in the Walks?


Phi. No, I thank you, unless I knew your tricks better: you may chance to get
behind me, and bite me by the Legs. Let them take a turn with you that have not
searched into the fundamental Laws of humane nature, and the first rise of
Cities and Societies. I know better things than to trust my self with one that
I never saw before. I have but one body, and I desire to carry it home all to
my chamber.


Tim. You had better I profess, have no body at all; or compound to be kicked
and beaten twice a day; than to be thus dismally tortured, and solicitous about
an old rotten carcass.


Phi. Come, come: you talk like a young man. Let me tell you the body is a very
precious thing: and when you can make me believe otherwise, who have poised
Kingdoms, counted up all the advantages of bodily strength, and am thoroughly
acquainted with all the humors and passions of mankind, then will I stay with
you, and venture a kicking. And so farewell.


Tim. I beseech you, Sir, stay a little: upon my honor I intend nothing but a
walk, and civil discourse.


Phi. I know no honor any man has but an acknowledgement of his power and
greatness: So that all the security that I have that you will not injure me is,
that you can certainly do it, if you have a mind to it. And therefore, I pray,
do so much as take your honor along with you into that other walk, or else I
shall cry out murder. I don't care for trusting my self with unknown honor.


Tim. Then as I am a Gentleman, and my name is Timothy, I do not intend you
the least mischief.


Phi. What, Sir, do you take me for a fool? do not I know that a Gentleman is
one that keeps a man to quarrel, fight, beat and abuse? You must not think to
catch old Birds with Chafe. And therefore once more farewell Mr Timothy, if
your name be so.


Tim. I pray, Sir, be not gone yet; upon my honesty and as I am a Christian you
shall suffer no hurt.


Phi. Now indeed you have mended the business much: what, is there ever an Act
of Parliament against your beating me particularly? and if there be, where is
the Constable, to put it in execution?


Tim. Well: I see I must discover my self, or nothing is to be done: I am, Sir,
to put you out of all doubt then, a relation of a great friend of yours. Do
you know this Picture, Sir^


Phi. Indeed I think I did once almost see some such thing or something a
little like it, in his study, a great while ago, if my eyes, memory, and the
rest of my faculties do not ^ail me.


Tim. So then, now I hope you are past all fears. Therefore if you will, we will
walk toward Lambs Conduit: there is better air.


Phi. I profess, Sir, you make m^ shake most horribly. There Is a word indeed
next one's heart! I much question whether I shall eat again these two days. If
you will forbear all such language, and keep close to your own side, and not look
behind you, I Will venture to take two or three turns with you: otherwise I
shall leave your company forthwith.


Tim. Most certainly, Philautus, you are the most wary, mistrustful and
suspicious creature, now living upon the face of the whole earth.


Phi. I thank my Stars, I have had some time to look into Histories: and I have
made some observations of my own: and I find they very much tend to my good and
welfare. In short, I think I know as well as another, what man can do, and
what is his full value.


Tim. Surely you are not made of the ordinary mortal mould, but of some
peculiar thin and brittle stuff; or else you would never talk thus.


Phi. Your pleasure for that. I only say what I said before; I think, I know
what is that which all wise men ought to cherish, refresh, make much of, love
and regard.


Tim. Still, Philautus, I understand you not. What, have you been often
affronted, abused, choused, ^repann'd, flung down stairs, tossed in a blanket
--


Phi. No, I Will assure thee, Tim, I have always kept (as they say) out of
harme's way, as much as could be: especially since I studied morals, and
understood the true price of a whole man.


Tim. What should be the business then? is it that you are descended of some
very timorous family; or was your mother buried alive, with two sucking
children? Come, Sir, be free: for I am confident there must be some occasion or
other of this so very great jealousy, and mistrustfullness of yours.


Phi. Then as a secret, Tim, I must tell thee, that men nuturally are all
^^venous and currish, of a very snarling and biting nature; to be short, they
are in themselves mere Wolves, Tigers and Centaures.


Tim. Heavens forbid! what are you and I Wolves, Tigers and Centaures.


Phi. You may start at it for the present, but when you have read as much,
observed as much, and considered as much, as I, you will find it to be as true, as
that I have a pair of boots.


Tim. Methinks honest Tim has no mind at all to be a Centaure; he had much
rather be a sheep, a Pigeon, a Lark or any such pretty tame thing, if you can
afford it. And now in the name of all that is good, I hope you do not mistake
and call that humane nature in general, which is only your own; measuring all
moral actions thereby, and pronouncing that all men's teeth are very long and
sharp, because you find your own to be so.


Phi. Why should you suspect me to be more peevish, surly, and worse natured
than other men, and so recommend or impose my own temper and inclinations upon
the world as a general standard?


Tim. I am very loath, Philautus, to accuse any man of bad nature: it being
such a great bundle of mischief in it self, and so very troublesome to the
Comon-wealth. But when I find one so very tender and studious of his own
welfare and pleasure, so little concerned for any man's good but his own, so
great an admirer of his own humor and opinions, so ready to call things
demonstrations that do not at all, or very weakly prove, and so apt to vilify
and under-value, to hate and rail at three quarters of the Cr^ation, (if they
stand in his way and give him not due honor and respect) I am very much afraid
that such a^one when he comes to talk of the general disposition of mankind, of
the best and most fundamental laws of life, government and Religion, will
consult a little too much his own sweet Elephants tooth, and the wamblings of
his own dear bowels.


Phi. I shall not now stand to vindicate, much less boost of my own temper. It
is well known that I have kept company with Gentlemen, and Persons of Honor;
and they are able to judge what humor and carriage is decent and allowable
better than all the Timothies in the Nation. I prithee, Tim, What Is the
difference between a Bustard and a Chevin?


Tim. I love our Nation, and all men in it so well, that I wish they had given
you less entertainment; it had been more for their honor and credit; and the
good of this Realm.


Phi. That is somewhat enviously said. I hope you will give people leave to keep
the best and most improving Company: Would you have them die in mistakes, and
not listen to those that lay down the plainest Truths, give best proof of them,
and in the purest English.


Tim. Nay, hold you there; be not proud of your company, Proselytes and
discoveries: for I ^carce know one person of sobriety and parts in the whole
Nation, that is hea^titly of your opinion, in any thing wherein you differ from
what is commonly taught and received: for most of those that talk over those
places of your Books, wherein you are singular, do it either out of humor, or
because they are already debauched, or intend to be so, as soon as they can
shake off all modesty and good nature, and can furnish themselves with some of
your little slender Philosophical pretenses to be wicked.


Phil. Then indeed I have spent my time finely, and studied to much purpose.
But methinks, Tim, thou art very peremptory for one of thy years. It becomes
gray hairs, and a staff to lean on, to be thus dogmatical.


Tim. I care not for that; for if need be, I can be peremptory and do^matical
without a staff; especially when I meet with one that is so incurably immodest.


Phi. What then, will you maintain that I have discovered nothing at all? Is
nothing true that I have said in my several Books? I am sure my Works have sold
very well, and have been generally read and admired. And I know what Mersennus
and Gassendus have said concerning my Book de Cive; but I shall not speak of
that now.


Tim. And, to say nothing now of Mersennus: I know what people have said of
Gassendus; but I shall let that go also now.


Phi. But surely you cannot deny but there is somewhat true and considerable in
my Writings.


Tim. O doubtless a great deal of them is true; but that which is so, is none
of yours; but common acknowledged things new phrased, and trimmed up with the
words power, fear, City, transferring of right, and the like; and such is most
of that part of your Book, called Dominion; which chiefly consists of such
things as have been said these thousand years, and would follow from any other
Principles, as well as yours.


Phi. You may talk what you will, and if I were sure you would not beat me, I Would
tell you right down that you lie.


Tim. Do so; that is as good for me as your humble servant: but I go on, and
say, that Monarchy is the best Government; that it is the duty of Princes to
respect the common benefit of many, not the peculiar interest of this or that
man; that Eloquence without discretion is troublesome in a Commonwealth; that
he that has power to make Laws, should take care to have them known; that to
have Soldiers, Arms, Garrisons, and money in readiness in times of Peace is
necessary for the peoples defense, and a thousand such things I might repeat
out of the forementioned place, which were true many Ages before Philautus was
born, and will be, let a man be (...) or not (...), Mouse or Lion. But it is an
easy matter to scatter up and down some little insinuations of the state of
nature, self preservation, and such like fundamental phrases, which to those
that do but little attend, shall seem to make all hang close together.


Phi. Why do you only say seem, etc? I perceive now that you are not only very
confident, but spightful too, and have a mind to lessen my credit.


Tim. No indeed; I do not envy you in the least; but I very much wonder at
those that will disparage themselves so much, as to be led away with any such
small and manifest cheats: and if you will promise me not to be dejected (which I
think I need not much fear; for I never knew a man so much beyond all
humiliation in my life;) I Will briefly show you the chief of those things, by
which you became famous. But hold, Sir, we forgot to look underneath the bench;
there may lie a Wolf that may quite spoil us.


Phi. Say you so?


Tim. Come, come, Sir, no hurt at all: I pray sit down again: I had only a mind
to see how nimble you were; I perceive you jump very well for an old man; and
therefore I proceed, and say in the first place, that one way by which you got
a kind of a name amongst some easy sort of people, was by crowding into your
Book all that you could pick out of Civil Law, Politics, and Morals: and then
jumbling altogether (as was before hinted) with frequent mention of power,
fear, self defense, and the like; as if it had been all your own.


Phi. This is very pertly said, if you could make it good.


Tim. It Is so very plain, as I need not: however if any body doubts of it, let
him but read over your eighth and ninth Chapters of Dominion, which contain the
Rights of Lords over their servants, and of Parents over their children; and if
he find any thing considerable more than what is commonly delivered in the
ordinary Civil Law Books upon that occasion, viz. de potestate Parent^m and
Dominoru^^ (except it be that a great Family is a Kingdom, and a little Kingdom
a Family) I Will become an earnest spreader of your fame, and have you recorded
for a great discoverer. And so in like manner it might be easily shown, how all
the rest (so much of it as is true) is the very same with the old plain
Dunstable stuff that commonly occurrs in those that have treated of Policy and
Morality: in so much, that I do not question, but that poor despicable
Eustachius may come in for a good share. Now, Philautus, because it has so
happened that some young Gentlemen have not been at leisure to look much into
Machiavel, Justinian, and such like Books; but yet, for no good reasons have
been tempted to read yours; these presently are ready to pronounce you the
prodigy of the Age, and as very a deviser, as if you had found out gunpowder,
or printing.


Phi. If thou have a mind to rail, Tim, I advise thee to stay till thou have
discretion to do it. What would thou expect in a discourse of Government, a
trap to catch Sunbeams, or a purse-net for the Moon? I grant, that the chief
heads I insist on, have been largely treated on by others: but the method,
contrivance and phrase is all my own; do so much as consider of that poor Tim.


Tim. I need not consider of it now, because I have done it oftimes heretofore;
and it puts me in mind of another thing, by which you have cheated some into an
opinion of you, viz. You take old common things, and call them by new affected
names, and then put them off for discoveries.


Phi. I profess, Tim, I expect to see thee hanged some time or other for thy
crossness: Where is it that I do any such thing?


Tim. If I were at leisure, I could show you an hundred several places: What
think you, Philautus, of the Scriptures being the word of God?


Phi. I think, as others do, that they are.


Tim. What need then was there of that, in your Third Chapter de Cive; the
Sacred Scripture is the Speech of God commanding over all things by greatest
right? It sounds, I must confess, somewhat statelily: So does that in your
Leviathan, p. 1^.) the general use of speech is to transfer our mental
discourse into verbal; or the train of our thought into a train of words: And
also that; Religion conteins the Laws of the Kingdom of God: It had been
nothing to have said that Religion teaches how God will be served; but the
Kingdom of God is a new Notion, if the word Law does but lie near at hand: So
to have said that somnia sunt phantasmata dormientium, or that Tempus was
Phantasma corporis, etc. had been old: but go thus; Phantasmata dormientium
appello somnia, and Phantasma corporis, etc. appello tempus: and then by virtue
of the word appello, and the stately placing of it, it becomes all your own.


Phi. And is not appello a good word, you Timothy sause-box? I cannot forbea^.


Tim. Yes, may it please your worship, it is almost as good as pronuncio; but it
is never a whit the better for standing at the latter end of a sentence (which
I find an hundred times over in your Books) only to disguise a little what
every body has said.


Phi. I do very much wonder, Tim, where thou did pick up all this impudence,
being so young.


Tim. My Grandam, Sir, I thank her, gave me a little, and wished me to use it
upon occasion; but most of it I got by keeping company with some of your
admirers.


Phi. Surely thou will go to the Devil, if any such thing there be.


Tim. But before I go, Sir, I must desire those that are not satisfied
concerning the truth of what I just now mentioned, to look a little into your
Logic; and if they do not there find a whole Book full of nothing but new
words; I Will promise you to be very towardly for the future, and as modest as
the meekest of your disciples: and therefore, in the first place, I do, in your
name, decree, that in all following Ages Logic shall not be called Logic, but
Computation; because that ratiocinor signifies not only to reason, but to count
or reckon; and rations the same with computa: and therefore let the art of
reasoning be called the art of computation or counting: of which there be two
parts; addition and substraction; to add being all one as to affirm, and to
substract all one as to deny from whence also I do establish a Syllogism to be
nothing else but the collection of a Sum, or aggregate: the major and minor
Propositions being the particulars, and the Conclusion the sum or aggregate of
those particulars.


Phi. And what fault can you find with all this? is it not all new? did ever
any of the Philosophers say so before?


Tim. No truly; nor was there ever any need that they should say so: for let
people call the two first Propositions either plainly Propositions, or
Ingredients or Elements, or Premises, or Principles, or Preambles, or
Prologues, or go befores, or particulars, or any thing else, so that I do but
understand their meaning, and Timothy is as well contented as any man alive.


Phi. Why then do you snear, as if you disliked my Logic?


Tim. It Is a most excellent computation as ever was written: There Is a
definition of causa (which in the second Page we are learnt to call generation)
that is alone worth a pound at least; viz. Causaest summa sive aggregatum
accidentium omnium tam in agentibus, quam in patiente, ad propositum effectum
concurrentium, quibus omnibus existentibus effectum non existere, vel quolibet
eorum uno absente existere, intelligi non potest. A Cause is a certain pack or
aggregate of trangams, which being all packed up and chorded close together,
they may then truly be said in Law to constitute a complete and essential pack:
but if any one trangam be taken out or missing, the pack then presently loses
its packishness, and cannot any longer be said to be a pack.


Phi. And now what aile you with this definition? Is not the true notion and
perfect Idaea of a cause very necessary? and is not this, that I have laid
down, full, exact, and complete?


Tim. So very full, Sir, that if you had gone on but a little further, it would
have served for a Catalogue of the great Turk's Dominions: but I hope you will
not take it ill, if I forget it: because I promised my self long ago to that
little short Gentleman -- cujus vi res est. You have also, Sir, another very
magnificent one of a Proposition; which I care not much if I bestow upon the
Emperor: viz. Propositio est oration constans ex duobus nominibus copulatis,
qua significat is qui loquitur, concipere se, nomen posterius ejusdem rei nomen
esse, cujus est nomen prius; which agrees very well with what Zacutus says in
his Treatise of a Spoon, which he thus defines. Instrumentum quoddam
concavo-convexum, quo posito in atiquod, in quo aliud quo ddam diversum a
posito, ante positum fuit, and retro posito in os ponentis, concipitur is, qui
posuit primum positum in secundum, ex his positis aliquid concludere. These and
the like are only for huge Potentates: but if any private Gentleman has a mind
to be informed in the just, adaequate and perfect conception of an
interrogation and a request, let him take them thus: Interrogationes sunt
orationes quae desiderium significant cognoscendi; as, what is a clock?
Precationes sunt orationes quae desideriu^ significant aliquid habendi; as,
give me an apple.


Phi. Surely thou art broken loose out of Hell, to quarrel thus upon no
grounds. What is it that thou would have in a Logic?


Tim. Those that have nothing else to do but to put in a few new phrases (under
pretense of notions and discoveries) and to alter perhaps the place of two or
three Chapters, I would not have them trouble the world with Logic, or any
thing else. For as my Lord Bacon wisely observes, nothing has more hindered the
growth of Learning than peoples studying of new words, and spending their time
in chaptring, modelling, and marshalling of Sciences.


Phi. Then it seems I must learn of you how to spend my time. What, Tim,
would thou have me go to School again?


Tim. You may do as you will for that; but you know Doctor Wallis thought you
had sufficient need of it long ago.


Phi. Come, Tim, I prithee tell me one thing, and tell me true: have not thou
been lately amongst some of my Scholars, and lamentably baffled and run down by
them? and does not this make thee fret and fume, and dislike all that I have
written? I am confident, so it is: for otherwise thou could not but be of
their opinion, who discern and declare, that they never perceived such
connection of things, and such close argning, as I have in all things given the
world an instance of.


Tim. You have now said that which I wished and watched for: Because it gives
me opportunity of mentioning another device you make use of to deceive people,
and get applause; viz. you get together a company of words, such as power,
fear, and the like (as was said before) and thrust these into every page upon
one pretense or other; and then you call this connection, and boast (as you do
in your Preface de Cive) that there is but one thing in all your Book, which
you have not demonstrated.


Phi. I hope you will not betray your judgment so much, as to find fault with
my language, which all the world admire: Are there any words more truly English
and natural than power, fear, etc.


Tim. Questionless they are very good words, when rightly made use of: but to
hale them in where there is no need at all, merely to carry on the great work
of power and fear, and by a forced repetition thereof, to make thence a seeming
connection (with reverence be it spoken) is very idle and impertinent. It seems
to me to savor very much of their humors, who fall woefully in love with some
certain numbers. One he is sorely smitten with the complexion and features of
the number four. And so he calls presently for his four Inns of Courts, his
four Terms, his four seasons of the year, and abundance of fours besides. Nay,
the senses are also his; for smelling is only a gentiler way of feeding.
Another tears his hair, and is raving mad for the number three: and then the
Inner Temple and Middle are the same, for they are both Temples; Easter Term
and Trinity Term differ but a few days; Spring and Autumn are all one, and
rather than he will acknowledge above three senses, he will split his mouth up to his
ears.


Phi. what do think, Tim, that I have nothing else to do, but to hear thee
tattle over a company of foppish Similitudes? if thou have a mind to talk,
child, speak sense, if thou can; and learn of me to reason closely.


Tim. You are a most special pattern for reasoning indeed: one may plainly see
that, by what you say in the tenth Chapter of your Leviathan, and in the eighth
of your Humane nature; where you fall into a great rapture of the excellencies
of power; making every thing in the whole world that is good, worthy and
honorable, to be power: and nothing is to be valued or respected but upon the
account of power.


Phi. And is not power a very good thing?


Tim. A most excellent thing! I know nothing like it but the Philophers stone:
for it does all things, and is all things, either at present, or heretofore, or
afterward. Thus Beauty is honorable, as a precedent sign of power generative:
and actions proceeding from strength are honorable, as signs consequent of
power motive. Now if faculty had come in there instead of power, it would not
have done so well. Again, riches are honorable as signs of the power that
acquired them; and gifts, cost, and magnificence of houses are honorable, etc.
as signs of riches. A Mathematician is honorable because if he brings his
knowledge into practice, he is able to raise powerful fortifications, and to
make powerful engines and instruments of war. A prudent man is honorable,
because he is powerful in advice: and a person of good natural wit, and
judgment is honorable, because it signifies strong parts and powers. In short,
Sir, I perceive there is nothing either in actions or speeches, in Arts or
Sciences, in wit or judgment, in man, woman or child that is good and valuable,
but it is all upon the account of power.


Phi. I defy thee, if thou go about to make any thing that I have said
ridiculous.


Tim. No: I need not: because you have already done it to my hand; for with
such tricks and devices as these, I Will undertake to make a flageolet the most
dreadful and powerful thing upon the face of the whole earth. For it either
shall be powerful in it self, or recommend me to the favor of those that have
power, or be a defense against power, or it shall hire and purchase power, or
be in the road to power, or be in the road to power, or a sign of power or a
sign of somewhat that is a sign of power. And such things as these, Philautus,
you call close connection, and demonstration, which are nothing else but a
company of small cheats, and jingling fetches.


Phi. Before I go any further, Tim, I do pronounce thee to be the most saucy
of all that belong to the whole race of mankind. For thou railest at a venture;
and do only skip up and down my writings, as if thou did intend to pick my
pocket. If thou resolvest to continue in this Humor, and to think thy self
worthy to speak in my ancient and Philosophical presence, let us pitch upon some
fundamental point, such as, Status naturae est status belli; and thou shall see
that thou art ten times more an Owl, than I am a cheat and Iingler.


Tim. And I pray, Sir, may I be so bold, which side do you intend to hold?


Phi. Which side? that is a question very fit indeed for a Timothy to ask. I
hold that side that all Wise, Sage, Learned and Discreet men in the whole world
do hold.


Tim. I am sorry, Sir, that I have disturbed you: but I must pray once again to
know which that is.


Phi. I am ashamed to tell thee: It is such a very silly question. I do hold
then, that all men naturally are Bears, Dragons, Lions, Wolves, Rogues,
Raskalls --


Tim. I beseech you, Sir, hold no more: there is enough for any one man to hold.
I remember, Philautus, you told me a while ago that all men by nature were
doggish, spightfull and treacherous. But I thought you had only said it,
because you found your self so inclined, or in jest to scare me.


Phi. What do think that I studied forty or fifty years; only to find out
and maintain a jest? do think that the happiness and security of all the
Kingdoms of the Earth depend upon a jest? Thou art a very pretty fellow to
discourse withal indeed!


Tim. I pray, Sir, by your favor, how came it about that it was not found out
by former Philosophers that all men as well as your self, are naturally
brutish, and ravenous?


Phi. I wonder, you will come over so often with as well as your self, when I have
so plainly told you, that it is naturally so with all men.


Tim. Nay, Sir, be not angry; I have so often heard an old story of (...), and
of the great worth of Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Epictetus, and Tully, that
I much wonder at your Doctrine.


Phi. Then, upon my word, you have heard a very story of a tub, and of a
company of children, fools, sotts, and dunces.


Tim. Enough, enough.


Phi. But I say, not enough: And if you will hold your prating, I Will show you how
it came about, that the morals and politics that have been written since the
creation (as they call it) of the world, were not all worth a rush, till I set
forth mine.


Tim. I Will not speak again this half hour, if you will but make out this handsomely.


Phi. It was thus then: they went in a wrong method, they took things for
granted that were lies, and did not so much as consult common History and
experience.


Tim. I profess, Philautus, this seems to go to the v^ry bottom of the
business. I long to hear this as much as ever poor child did for the teat: in
the first place, you say, they did not use a right method: wherein, I pray, did
they fail?


Phi. They should have done as I did; they should have searched into the
humors, dispositions, passions, and heart of mankind.


Tim. And did you, Sir, find there written Status naturae est status belli: as
it is said Calis was upon Queen Marie's?


Phi. I perceive thou beginnest to prate again. Have thou seen a little Book of
mine called Humane Nature.


Tim. Yes, I think so.


Phi. You may easily know it; it is called Humane Nature, or the fundamental
Elements of Policy.


Tim. It Is so: and you might have called it as well Tu qu^que, or the jealous
Lovers, or the fundamental Laws of catching of Quails, as of Policy.


Phi. Did you not promise me to be modest, and (...) to prate? does this become
you? go home and look in the glass.


Tim. Why? have you discoursed me into a Bear? I tell you, Sir, I have read
over that same little Book called Humane Nature; and whereas you would make the
Reader believe, by the title, that he should find such strange fundamentals of
Policy, and (as you there add) according to philosophical principles not
commonly known or asserted; there is not a word of any more fundamentals, than
is to be found in Jack Seton, Stierius or Magirus; besides some small matter
that was shirk'd up in France from some of Cartes's acquaintance, and spoiled
in the telling. I say, as for all the rest, Philautus, it is as common, as the
Kings high way; only according to you usual manner, you labor much to disguise
it with your own phrases, and to displace words to cheat children.


Phi. Why do you talk thus?


Tim. For no reason at all but only because it is true. Thus we know that old
Arstotle, and his dull soakers understood no further of the great mysteries of
the senses, and their several objects; but only bluntly to say, that sense was
a kind of knowledge occas^oned by some outward thing, etc. and that an object
is a thing that causes that knowledge: and that color is the object of the
eye, and that sound is the object of the ear. But when Philautus comes to Town,
he brings us news to purpose: informing us, that all conception proceeds from
the action of the thing it self, whereof it is the conception; and when the
action is present, the conception it produces is called sense: (there called
stands in the right place) and the thing by whose action the same is produced,
is Called the object of the sense. (That Is well placed again:) And that by
sight we have a conception of color, which is all the notice and knowledge the
object imparteth to us of its nature by the eye. This ravishes! and by hearing
we have a conception called sound, which is all the knowledge we have of the
quality of the object from the ear. Now who would not immediately spurr forth
as far as Dover to meet a Philosopher that should bring home such rarities as
these.


Phi. if thou should set out, Tim, thou would be set in the stocks, before
thou gettest to Rochester bridge for undervaluing worth.


Tim. You talk, Philautus, of your Humane Nature containing the Elements of
Policy; there is one cunning reflection (p. 5.) concerning imagination, which is
so full of novelty and subtilty, that it is enough alone to set up a man for
chief Minister of State, viz. that the absence or destruction of things once
imagined, does not cause the absence or destruction of the imagination it self.


Phi. Why, does it?


Tim. No: For suppose I have a House in Cheapside, which I have sometimes seen,
and sometimes imagined; according as I was best at leisure; and this house,
upon a day, either runs away from me or I from that; yet still I may phansy my
self trading in my own shop, and eating in my own House: nay though it should
be burnt down to the very ground; yet for a need I can make shift once or twice
a year to fancy it still standing, or at least to wish that it were. And
surely upon this is founded that old friendly saying, viz. though absent in
body, yet present in mind.


Phi. And is it not a good saying?


Tim. Yes, it is pretty good, but nothing near so enlightening as your
enlargement thereupon. For by that you make out the whole business to be as
plain as can be: and so you do another thing, which I have often wondered at. I
have seen sometimes a man set up his staff in the middle of a great field, and
a while after, he has gone back, and put up a Hare. I had a kind of a ghessing
how this might possibly be; but durst never be confident, till I was made happy
by that ample and satisfactory definition you give of a mark p. 44. A mark (say
you) is a sensible object which a man erecteth volutarily to himself, to the
end to remember thereby somewhat past, when the same is objected to his sense
again.


Phi. Why do you laugh, Tim? there is nothing left out, is there?


Tim. Not in the least: it will do, I Will undertake, for the tallest May Pole
in the whole Nation.


Phi. But for all that I am confident, Tim, that thou do not approve of it
thoroughly.


Tim. I must not, Sir, lay out all my approbation hereupon; because there is
abundance more of such fine things (were I at leisure to look them out) that
do also highly deserve to be approved of. Who would not save a good large
corner of his heart, for such an accurate account as you give (p. 35.) of an
experiment, viz. the remembrance of succession of one thing to another, that
is, of what antecedent has been followed by what Consequent, is Called an
experiment. As if I put my finger into a Pike's mouth, to see if he can bite;
my finger is the Antecedent, and if he bites, there is a Consequent for my
Antecedent: which, I suppose, Philautus, I should remember, and according to
your directions call it an experiment. I hope also that I shall never forget
what you tell me p. 80. where speaking of Music and sounds you lay down this
^dmirable and standing de^inition of an air, viz. an air is a pleasure of
sounds, which consists in consequence of one note after another, diversified
both by accent and measure.


Phi. Surely, Tim, thou beginnest to be mad: is it not very just, and very
punctual?


Tim. Truly, Sir, I know nothing comparable to it, and what you said before
about an experiment, for absolute exactness, except it be what the above
mentioned Zacutus says concerning a teame of Links in his sixth Chapter of
minced meats: a Teame of Linkes (says he) is a certain train of oblong terms,
where the consequent of the first is concatenated to the antecedent of the
second, and the consequent of the second to the antecedent of the third, etc.
So that every term, in the whole train, is both antecedent and consequent.


Phi. You don't seem to like these same antecedents and consequents, Tim.


Tim. A little of them, Sir, now and then I like very well, especially when
they are brought in so naturally as they are by Zacutus. But when any such
words are needlessly forced upon me, I have enough of them for I know not how
long after. I once, Sir, got such an horrible surfeit with a long story of
Consequences, in a Scheme of yours concerning the Sciences (Lev. p. 40.) that
my stomach has scarce stood right toward Consequences ever since.


Phi. What, do you find fault to see all kind of knowledge lie fairly before
your eyes?


Tim. I have seen it Sir, several times, but all the art is in the catching:
and I count my self never a whit the nearer, for being told, as I am there by
you; that Science is the knowledge of all kind of Consequences: which is also
called Philosophy. And Consequences from the accidents of bodies natural is
called natural philosophy. And Consequences from accidents of politic bodies,
is called Politics or civil philosophy. And Consequences from the stars,
Astronomy: Consequences from the Earth, Geography: Consequences from vision,
Optics: Consequences from sounds, Music. And so Consequences from the rest
are to be called the rest. I profess Philautus, These same Consequences did so
terribly stick in my head, that for a long while after, I was ready to call
every body that I met, Consequence.


Phi. And now, as nice as you are, Mr. Timothy, I pray let me hear you define
any of those things better: come, hold up your head, and like a Philosopher
tell me, what is Geography.


Tim. Alas! Sir, I know nothing of it, but only I have heard people say, it is
about the earth.


Phi. About the earth! What do mean, round about the earth?


Tim. Yes, Sir, if you please, round about, and quite through, and about and
about again; any thing will serve my turn.


Phi. So I thought, by that little knowledge which I perceive will satisfy
thee. But I prithee, Tim, how came we to ramble thus from the state of war?


Tim. We have been alll this while close at it, Sir: for if you remember, I was
to show you (which I think I have done) that the old Philosophers might have
written as well concerning Politics, as your self; notwithstanding you call
your humane nature the fundamental Elements of Policy; in which there is nothing
at all toward any such purpose, except it be in the title, and at the end of
the Book, where there stands these words (Conclusion being written over them)
viz. Thus have we considered the nature of man, so far as was requisite for the
finding out the first and most simple Elements wherein the composition of
Politic Rules and Laws are lastly resolved; which conclusion honest Will.
Lilly might even as well have set to the end of his Grammar, as you have done
to your Humane nature.


Phi. It is no matter, Tim, what is written on the outside of Books, be it at
beginning or ending; so that that which is within be excellent, and serviceable.


Tim. I am very nigh of your mind, Philautus; but yet I would not have all the
Philosophers, before you, be counted Dunces and Loggerheads, only because it
did not come into their mind to write a Book, concerning the five Senses,
Imagination, Dreams, Praedicables, Propositions, etc. and call it the
fundamental Elements of Policy.


Phi. And is not the knowledge of the five Senses, and the rest that you
mention very useful?


Tim. So is the knowledge of the Eight Parts of Speech. But I must confess that
I can scarce think, that supposing the people of England had generally believed
with you, that Vision was not made by species intentionales, that the image of
any thing by reflection in a glass is not any thing in or behind the glass,
that the interior coat of the eye is nothing else but a piece of the optic
nerve, that Vniversals do not exist in return natura; I say, I cannot think,
notwithstanding all this, but possibly we might have had wars in this Nation;
no more than I can believe, that a false opinion of Echoes, and Hypothetical
Syllogismes took off the King's head.


Phi. I perceive you are resolved to make the worst of every thing.


Tim. I make it neither better, nor worse; for in your Epistle Dedicatory to
the Duke of Newcastle, you tell him, that all that have written before you of
Justice and Policy, have invaded each other and themselves with contradiction,
that they have altogether built in the air, and that for want of such
infallible and inexpugnable Principles as you have Mathematically laid down, in
your Hamane nature; Government and Peace have been nothing else to this day but
mutual fears: And when one comes to look for these same infallibles, and
inexpugnables, there is nothing but about conception, and phantasmes, and a long
race amongst the passions; where to endeavor is appetite, to turn back is
repentance, to be in breath is hope, to be weary despair, and to forsake the
course is to dye, and the like; so that the only way to make a Mathematical
Governor, is for himself to be a good Iockey, and for his Subjects rightly to
understand the several heats, and courses of the Passions.


Phi. Thou gettest away all the talk, Tim. I prithee listen to me, and learn. I
tell thee that I have by my great skill in Mathematics, and great wariness so
ordered the business, that most of my Books depend closely one upon another.


Tim. So I find it said by the Publisher of your Hamane Nature, in his Epistle
to the Reader. Our Author (says he) has written a body of Philosophy upon
such Principles, and in such order as is used by men conversant in
demonstration: which being distinguished into three Parts, de Corpore, de
Homine, de Cive, each of the Consequents begin at the end of the Antecedent
(like Zacutu^'s linkes) and insist thereupon as the latter Books of Euclid upon
the former.


Phi. And whoever he was, he spoke like a man of understanding; it was my
design that they should, and by great industry I brought it to pass.


Tim. And I pray, Sir, how many pounds of candle did it cost you, to tie de
Corpore, and de Homine together? Methinks you need not be long about that; for
Body is either taken in general or in particular; in general, that is de
Corpore: and man being a particular sort of body, de Homine must needs follow
close at the heels; and so they are taken care of: but indeed to fasten de
Homine, and de Cive cleverly together requires a little more knocking and
hammering; and therefore to do that exactly, we must scratch and rub our heads
very well, and warily call to mind, that a man is to be considered in two
respects; either as he is a body natural, consisting of flesh, blood, and
bones; or as he is a member of the Body Politic: that is, as he is leg, arm,
finger or toe of the Commonwealth; and therefore let us have one Book de
Homine, as he is a natural Body, and another de Cive, as he is a limb of the
huge Giant, the Commonwealth; and so there is an Euclidean trap laid, that de
Cive shall follow de Homine; and so it does, but not bluntly: for though one
would have thought that this had jointed them so close together, that
Archimedes himself could never have pulled them asunder; yet to put all out of
danger, it is best to rivet them a little faster, by putting in a most obliging
transition; in the last Chapter, entitled de Homine fictitio; where we are
learnt further to consider, that a man is either by, or for himself a man,
called a real man; or he is a man for another, called a fictitious man. Such a
one is he that acts another, is deputed for another, engages for another, or
the like. Now because in all well governed Commonwealths (now any one by that
word may perceive, that de Cive is just at Towns end) for better trading,
bargaining, commerce, etc. there is great use of Deputies, Proxies, Factors,
Sponsors, Ambassadors and the like; therefore let the chief of this Chapter be
spent in the employments of such fictious men in a Commonwealth; and then turn
over the leaf, and behold, there stands to the honor of Euclid, and the
admiration of all Philautians, the Book de Cive.


Phi. What, would you have Arts and Sciences tumbled down together, like coals
into a Cellat? Would you not have men make use of their Parts, and Reason; and
for smoothness, and memory sake, put somewhat before, that should relate to,
and occasion what follows?


Tim. I am, Sir, a great friend to the very least pretenses of connection, where
it is not fantastical, or manifestly inconvenient: but to have Books tailed
together by far fetched contrivances; and to swagger them off for
demonstrations, and thereupon to defy all former Ages, is so very idle, that I
had rather people would speak Proverbs, or only say, these four leafes I intend
to speak of a Horse, the next two shall be concerning Mackrel, and what is to
be spared, shall be concerning Caterpillars.


Phi. And do you, Tim, approve of this illogical, unphilosophical, and
unmathematical way of writing?


Tim. No; but I had ten times rather do so, than as the natural Philosopher,
who being employed to write the History of a Crow, Iackdaw, and Pie, after many
Months spent in dressing, ranking, stringing, and hanging them together, at
last entered upon the business after this elegant and digested manner. Being
about to treat of the natural rights and powers of Crows, Iack-daws, and Pyes;
subjects often handled by weak and heedless observers: we shall be forced so to
write, as if none had been before us in this kind: all which must be performed
with such prudence and consideration, as justly become so very great an affair;
seeing that hereupon depend not only the knowledge of the chiefest and best of
Birds; but also of all beasts in general: Nay, even of man himself, and the
great Trojane horse the Commonwealth. And that we may be sure to lay a solid
foundation, and neither to repent, nor recall, it will be necessary in the
beginning exactly to state the true conception or Idaea of a Bird, for as much
as the particular conceptions of Crow, Iack-daw, and Pie are comprehended under
that common one of Bird: And therefore that we may avoid-all equivocation,
which is the original of Errors, and that there may be no quarrelling or
disputing in following Ages, we do ram down for the future Peace and Government
of all Nations, that the phantasme or conception of a Bird is a flying
phantasme or conception. Having thus warily and fundamentally determined what
is a Bird in general; we proceed now to the three Birds themselves: and that we
may do nothing without method, the blackest and largest of them we call a Crow;
and seeing that likeness of color begets likeness of conception, we go on to
the next, whose conception is full out as black as a Crow, but not altogether
so large, and this we call a Iack-daw; and because that black strictly taken
only for black, is a more simple conception than black and white together,
therefore we thought fit to speak of a Pie in the last place, which partakes of
the two former conceptions as to black, but differs from both as to white.


Phi. I prithee, Tim, what was the name of this Philosopher?


Tim. It Is no matter for his name, Sir: You must needs acknowledge him to be a
Philosopher of worth; and very little inferior to your self, both as to
reason, and circumspection.


Phi. But where is the state of war all this while? That Is the thing I long to
be at, Tim; and to show thee for a Fish.


Tim. Let me but consider a little, how that same Book de homine (I don't mean
your little English Humane nature) came to be filled with such a heap of
Optics, and then the Fish shall begin as soon as you will.


Phi. To make out that is as needless, as to show how a Coach goes down
Holborn-hill.


Tim. I think I remember how it is, viz. a man is a creature, that has body and
mind: his mind has several faculties; and amongst the rest there be five
Senses; and the most excellent of all these is Seeing; and then presently pull
away with Perspective, Dioptricks, Catoptricks, Telescopes, Microscopes, and
all the rest for fifty Pages together, as long as there is a Star to be seen in
the Sky.


Phi. And why, is it not proper to put in Optics into a Treatise de Homine?


Tim. Not after the manner as you have done; because we have an art by it self
for that purpose. You might as well have put in fifty Pages about Music, as
about Optics: for man you know has as many ears, as eyes. But here is the
business, Philautus, you take very great pains in all things to be singular.
Where you should use Mathematics, there you will scarce let us have any at
all; and when there is not the least need, then you pour them forth as if you
were bottomless: And thus many a Reader comes, suppose, to one of your Books
that has an ordinary title; and there finding a company of strange Mathematical
Schemes; and not understanding them, he presently cries out, What a brave man
is this Philautus? What wonders and rarities does he afford upon such a common
subject? Surely he has gone the deepest that ever searched into Nature. I tell
you, Philautus, he that has a mind to take advantage of this humor of yours,
and to run things together by force that have no relation, he may easily thrust
the fifteen Books of Euclid into the London Dispensatory, or Iustinian's
Institutes into a Common Almanac. I shall not now stand to tell you after what
pills, and under what month they might come in, because I am loath to hinder the
show.


Phi. Be not too secure and presumptuous, Tim: for if I don't show thee for a
fish, I Will show thee to be a Beast, and all mankind besides.


Tim. Nay, if I have so much good company, I had much rather turn out to grass,
than stand in alone, and be melancholy; come, Sir, flourish then, and let us
begin.


Phi. You know Tim, that I have laid a foundation for this in my Humane Nature,
and it is an easy matter now to finish the business.


Tim. Yes truly I have (as I told you before) looked over that same foundation
of yours, called Humane Nature, and I think it much more fit for the bottom of
minced pyes, than of any Policy or government. Be pleased to go on, Sir, and
show some other reasons why the ancient Philosophers did not think, as you do,
that all men are naturally beasts. You told me, as I remember, somewhat else,
wherein they miscarried; besides that they went in a wrong method, and did not
first design a Treatise of Humane Nature.


Phi. I did so: and it was thus: viz. they all blindly running one after
another, and taking several things for granted that were perfectly false; they
laid down that for a fundamental truth, which is no otherwise than a
fundamental lie.


Tim. That was a great oversight indeed; a fundamental truth, and a fundamental
lie! I profess, Sir, they dwell a great way asunder. But I pray what was that
fundamental lie.


Phi. That man was a sociable creature.


Tim. Lack a day! how easy a matter is it for old folks to dote and slaver,
and for young ones to be deceived, and lick up the spittle? I Would have laid three
cakes to a farthing, that my old Masters had been in the right. But are you
very, very certain that they are not? perhaps you may have taken yours upon
trust, as well as they did theirs: and if so then courage cakes, for I don't
intend to be a Centaure.


Phi. That Is a good one indeed: as if they who had all their Philosophy from
the tap-droppings of their predccessors, and the moral tradition of the
Barber's Chair, were not much more subject to take thing upon trust, than one,
who supecting all kind of opinions, have turned over the whole History of the
world, and Nature her self.


Tim. And there belike you found, that man is not a sociable creature. I wish
there were some way to compound this business: for you know, Sir, the world is
full of trade, acquaintace, neighbors and relations: and for the most part man
has had the crack and fame, for five or six thousand years, of being tolerably
tame; and methinks it is a great pity now at last to be sent to the Tower
amongst the Lions, or to be driven to Smithfield, with a mastiffe and a great
cudgel. I pray, Sir, what do you mean by those words, when you say that man
is not a sociable creature?


Phi. What, can not construe two words of Greek (...)* I mean as all people
mean, that man is not born fit for society.


Tim. He is usually born with two Legs, to go about his business; with a pair
of hands to tell money, with a couple of eyes to see if there be any Brass; and
with a tongue to discourse, when he has nothing else to do. And therefore I
must be troublesome once more, and desire you to explain, what you mean by a
man's being not born fit for society.


Phi. Thou ask questions, Tim, as if thou did intend to send me to market:
When I say, that a man is not born fit for society, I mean that men naturally
do not seek society for its own sake.


Tim. I must desire of you, that you would let own sake alone for the present;
and let us first see, whether men do naturally seek society: and I Will promise
you, not to forget to have it considered, for whose sake, or upon what acompt
they do it. And therefore, I pray, Sir, answer me punctually whether naturally
men do seek society or not.


Phi. To be punctual, Tim, and please thee, I answer, they do not.


Tim. You know, Philautus, that men are apt to sort, to herd; they love to
enquire, to confer, and discourse: and when people get into corners, and covet
to be alone; we usually count such to be sick, distempered, melancholy or
toward mad. And I suppose the question is not concerning such, but concerning
healthful and sober men.


Phi. There you are quite out, Tim: for when I say that men naturally do not
seek society, or are not born fit for society; I don't mean full grown men,
such as are able to carry or eat a quarter of beef, but I mean children: which
is plain in the very phrase it self, Tim, if thou would mind any thing: it
being there said, not born fit; so that to say, a man is not born fit for
society, is all one as to say, that a man newly born is not fit for society, or
does not seek society.


Tim. Well let it go so; we will see what will become of this business; it begins
to drive bravely: we are got thus far that children do not desire or seek
society. But if so, Philautus, how comes it about that they desire or seek
after company. I don't mean, that when the Nurses back is turned, they skip out
of the cradle, and with a huge ashen Plant run away to the next fair,
Bull-bayting, or football match; but they do not care for being in the dark:
they are discontented, and cry when they are left alone, and love to see now
and then a humane face, if it does not look, as if it would bite.


Phi. All this is only for victuals.


Tim. Some of it, I grant you, may be for victuals. But they cannot eat, from
one end of the Nation to the other. And one child oftimes takes delight in the
company of another, to whom it has never a load of corn to fell: neither does
it intend to eat, or suck up that other child.


Phi. Thou art quite beside the saddle again, Tim: for when I say a child does
not seek or desire society: by society I don't mean crying for the pap or
sucking bottle, or to be daunc'd by Dad, or to giggle it amongst its Camrades:
But I mean by society, bonds, contracts, covenants, leagues, transferring of
rights, and such like things which are proper to Cities, Communities and
Societies: Do hear me, Tim, I mean by society these sort of commonwealth
affairs: which thou know children do neither understand, nor are able to
manage. And now I suppose thy thick skull begins to open a little, and to be
enlightened: one had as good have half score to inform, as one heavy Tim.


Tim. Indeed, Sir, it must be acknowledged that you have taken great pains. But
for all that, I pray may not I make bold to say, that children desire society
in your sense? for they seek it so soon as they are able, and do perceive the
intentions thereof.


Phi. Thou will never leave this dull trick of not understanding. I must
therefore condescend, and let thee know, that by seeking society, I mean actual
entering into society: that is, being engaged in conveyances, bargains, public
offices, and such things as I before mentioned. This and only this is truly to
be said sociable.


Tim. And is this all that you have now to say? have you nothing more to add.


Phi. What need is there of any more?


Tim. Then do I very much pity the poor distressed creatures, that have been
thus long gulled with same and phrases.


Phi. How so?


Tim. How so, do you say? what would you have a Child come out of the womb,
saying over Noverint Vniversi with a pen in one hand, and wax in the other, and
fall presently to signing, sealing and delivering: or before it be dressed;
shreek aloud, and cry faggots, faggots five for sixpence? is this the principle
that you were so many years finding out? is this the fruits of Mathematics,
long observation, fundamental casting about, and bottoming of things? did you
go into the bowels and heart blood of Nature to bring up nothing else but this?


Phi. I prithee, Tim, don't make such long sentences: for thou will have nothing
to say by and by. I tell thee that this principle that I have now revealed to
thee, is the most weighty principle that belongs to all Humane Nature.


Tim. It Is very weighty indeed: and it is great pity but that you should be
entombed at Westminster and statued up at Gresham College for the great moral
discoverer of the Age.


Phi. Why? for all your jeering, Tim, I hope you do not imagine that a child
can trade, and covenant, or bear any public office for the good of the
Commonwealth.


Tim. No indeed: I do not think it can: unless you would have it jump off the
Nurses lap, and run away to the Exchange, and there ask for the Spanish, or
Virginia walk; or have a woman brought to bed of a Justice of peace, or a Mayor
with his Macebearer and tipped staves before him.


Phi. Very good, very good: then it seems at last, you are willing to
acknowledge that I said true.


Tim. And so did all men before you.


Phi. Nay, pardon me there: for they say quite contrary.


Tim. Which of them ever said that any man was actually born a Constable or
silk weaver?


Phi. But they say he is born fit.


Tim. So do you, or else I cannot read your own Annotations upon the second
Article of your first Chapter de Cive: wherein you say that to man, by nature,
as man, as soon as he is born solitude is an enemy. And that all men are
desirous of congress and mutual correspondence, and do enter into society as
soon as they understand it.


Phi. But this is not pure insant nature, but education.


Tim. I should laugh indeed to see a Merchant to ship away a Baby in blankets
to be his Factor beyond sea: or to see a child of half a year old with its
whistle and rattle set swaggering in Commission upon the bench with my Lord. A
child I suppose may be admitted to be born apt to walk; speak, reason and
discourse; although it be above a week before it leaps up the table, and cry
Nego (...). The short of your opinion is this, Philautus, that children, fools
and madmen, are not very ambitious of being of the Privy Council; and if they
were invited thereunto, would do themselves and the Nation but little service.
So that if right reason (which, Philautus, you so much talk of, and pretend to)
does determine that the Cradle, Bedlam, and a Gentleman's kitchen shall be the
only standard and measure of Humane Nature, then truly Philautus must be
acknowledged by all for a most mighty Philosopher: but if otherwise, he must
even be content to sit down with his neighbors. And if you remember,
Philautus, I gave you an hint of this at first, viz. That if your opinions were
thoroughly searched into, and that all disguise of phrase was laid aside, they
would either be found to be absolutely false, or else to be the same, that
every mortal believes. And this gave me hopes of compounding the business.


Phi. Nay, hold you there: for I am against sharing or dividing of truth. I
don't like that cowardly trick of compounding for an assertion, or having my
opinions insured. Sink, or swim, I love to run the whole venture, and to get
all or lose all. And certain I am that I say somewhat quite different from what
is commonly known, or asserted.


Tim. So you know you promised us in the title of your Humane Nature: where I
looked till my eyes asked; and I could find nothing but ancient venerable stuf^
new cased and daubed over. And I perceive you are of the same mind still, and
think that you hold and maintain such things as were never held or maintained
before. I pray, Sir, let us hear one of those same things, that you thus
swagger of.


Phi. Then let me tell you, Tim, that I do hold, maintain and positively say
that the state of nature is a state of war: which is a truth so great, bold,
and generous, that all the Ancients. wanted parts, wit and courage to find it
out, or defend it.


Tim. I am confident that this will prove just such another story, as that of
the sociable creature: and I must needs say that it was done like a wit, and
Hec. besides, to find out and hold that which every child may hold.


Phi. That Is as good, as I heard this fortnight: Thou speak like one that is
versed in business, and the world. What, shall a child be able to defend that
which lay hid for so many Ages, and took me such pains to discover?


Tim. You shall hear the Child hold it, and demonstrate it too, that is more,
viz. thus: the state of War (you know) is a state wherein people have not
engaged or obliged themselves to one another by any covenants, bargains, or
transferring of rights. So far is true: is it not?


Phi. Well, go on.


Tim. And you know that children or infants, which are in the true state of
nature, cannot covenant or bargain, release or transfer; and therefore you
cannot but know, that that dreadful business called the state of war must needs
follow.


Phi. Thou art Tim, certainly the worthiest of thy kind. This is my very
proof: you make use of my very way.


Tim. I do so; because no body but a child would ever have made such a noise
and rattle with a company of words, and to mean so little by them.


Phi. Why, what is the matter now? what is it that you would have had meant?


Tim. Alas! Sir, when you told me (as you do in your Epistle Dedicatory de
Cive) That man to man is an arrant Wolf, except it be for his interest to be
otherwise; That there is no living amongst strangers but by the two daughters of
War, deceit and violence; That naturally men are all brutall, ravenous and
rapacious; I say when I heard this, I expected the whole world naturally to be
all in arms and an uproare; tearing and worrying one another like mad: and to
hear nothing but down with him there, hang him with his own gutts, give him a
pound of melted lead for a julip to cool his pluck, split him down the chine,
or flea him alive and roast him with a couple of awles in his eyes: when I,
Philautus, heard of a state of war, I profess, I could think of little less
than all this and so did most people besides: and when all comes to all,
Philautus has found out a great moral secret, viz. That Whelps cannot see till
they be nine days old, nor a child cannot speak unless it has a spoon, nor go
to market before it can go alone.


Phi. Is this all that I say?


Tim. It Is all: and every bit and scrap of all. For like a great searcher into
Nature, you only observe that we are children before we are men, and children
cannot speak; and where no speech, there can be no bargain or engagement, or
treaty for terms of peace, and where no bargain, etc. there must needs be the
Devil, and war.


Phi. I profess, Tim, this confidence of thine does almost anger me, to utter
some vast sense beyond thy worth.


Tim. If I thought that were the way to make you speak wiser, I Would carry on the
design, and endeavor to improve my self for that very purpose; and I Would not
only be very confident, but I Would be as saucy, as I could contrive.


Phi. Then know, Tim, that I have reserved a reason for such sauciness, as
thine: and therefore I do pronounce that children may not only be said to be in
a state of war merely because they cannot enter into Leagues, and offer and
receive terms of peace; but that we oftimes see that they actually gripe and
demand things to which they have not the least right or title; which if denied,
they presently out of fury cry, quarrel, fight, and scratch poor Nurse, or
Parent it self: now this, Tim, does not only demonstrate their natural
dispositions to war; but that without any affront, reason or pretense of
justice, they actually fall on, and have no respect at all to our meums and
tuums.


Tim. Thus have I seen a spanish-leather shoe kicked into the fire, and
perished in the involving flames: and (which would make a heart to bleed) a
whole poringer of sweetened milk, with its topling white bread, rouling up and
down upon the uncertain floor: and the little state of Nature as hard worrying
the righteous and inoffensive Nurse, as ever poor Dog was worryed by Hare. And
inquiring into the quarrel, and occasion of the war, I found, that the wicked
and ravenous young Centaure against all Conscience and the established laws of
the Realm, had most unjustly and feloniously sat upon a whole yard of red inkle.


Phi. And did it not affect thee, Tim, and make thee sigh again? and were thou
not converted thereby, and fully convinced that the State of Nature was a state
of war? this methinks was a very Providentiall instance.


Tim. I was fully persuaded, Sir, by that and some other instances, that
children do not know the exact difference between freehold and copyhold. And
when they take a frolic to scratch and quarrel, they do not always consult
the law of Nations; giving convenient warning, and printing a proclamation of
war with a long history of the justice thereof. But, Sir, there is another thing
to be taken notice of in children (which I wonder such an observer as you
should miss) that intimates a settled resolution to quarrel, and seems to
design absolute battle: for, what you mentioned before, may possibly be by
chance. And that is, many children are observed to come into the world with all
their fingers close bent over their thumbs; and they of times continue in this
(...) condition a long while after: and if anyone goes about to order the hand
into more peaceful posture and circumstances, it is presently snatched away with
great fury and violence, and by a natural kind of (...), returns to the (...)


Phi. I profess, Tim. I did not think that thou had had so much stuf^ in
thee. I am confident that if thou had not been spoiled in thy education, and
tained with some foppish and squeamish Principles, thou might in time have
come to some tolerable degree of moral prudence.


Tim. Why, Sir, do you like what I now said?


Phi. Like it? Why, who does not?


Tim. Nay, if you like that, surely (in your opinion) I may be Professor in
time: for it was one of the silliest things that ever said in my whole life. I
did it only, Sir, to (...) it with your reason which you quoted just before out
of your Preface, about Childrens clawing for a flower, or bit of ribhand.


Phi. What then, art thou resolved not to stir? Must I go on further to
convince thee? I prithee, Tim, tell me, how much conviction will serve thy
turn; and I Will undertake thee by the lump, that I may know when I shall make
thee a man? I am confident, I fully understand why thou stickest, and art so
difficulty to be brought to my opinion: thou perceivest that most people are
born in Families and Towns, and whilst they are children they are kept from
doing mischief by their Parents and Nurses; and when are they grown up, they
are restrained by Law: and were it not for this pitiful prejudice, thou
would believe as fully as I, that the state of Nature is a mere state of war.


Tim. I know now as well as can be whereabouts you are: this is to wheedle me
into your Mushroom state of men suddenly springing out of the earth, without
any kind of engagement to each other.


Phi. O that I could but get thee to grant any such thing, then I should fly
thee home presently.


Tim. I don't care much for men springing out of the earth; lest fitting upon
the ground, some fellow or other should leeringly put up his head between my
legs: but, which is as well, I Will grant you a shower of pure natural men; and
the rather, because Pliny has a little scoured the roads, with a rain of calfes
long ago.


Phi. And will thou not flinch, but be ingenuous, and suffer me to suppose
freely?


Tim. Suffer you, Sir? Don't question that: if you please, Sir, I Will suppose it
for you.


Phi. And will not you put in a little of Moses's tale, of the World being
inhabited first by Adam; to whom God transferred the right of all things, and
he to his Posterity?


Tim. Not a word; it does not become a Philosopher, and an Inquirer into
Principles to tell Stories.


Phi. Now thou speak like a child of some hopes. I don't question now but I
shall get thy heart, and soul too, before it be long. I prithee then begin; and
be sure Tim, to be very just and exact in thy supposition.


Tim. Thus then; Upon the tenth of March --


Phi. How? not a word further: thou must begin all again: the tenth of March,
Tim? that is not natural: but a mere humane institution of the Almanack-men: an
absolute contrivance of State, to find out Fairs and Markets, and other public
places of transferring of rights.


Tim. Then let it be thus; Once upon a time, the wind being full East --


Phi. Out again; we shall have a shower of nothing but Judges, Doct^^rs, and
Philosophers: Do not know that the wise men come out of the East?


Tim. That Is only Scripture, Sir: and you know if the Supreme Magistrate does
but so interpret it, there shall come as wise ones out of the West: but however
to content you, we will have no wind at all: but only we will have it rain a good
lusty shower; and amongst the rest of the great drops, there shall come down
four well complexioned, upright Gentlemen: about fifteen hands high: which
shall all happen to fall upon an Island of four hundred acres, viz. the Isle of
Pines; and that we may be better acquainted with them, their names shall be
Dick, Roger, Tumbler and Towser.


Phi. Here Is at least half a load of contradiction, in what thou have now said.
First of all you say they shall be upright: I pray whose Rights or Laws can
they keep or break; they having not as yet taken any oath of Allegiance or
Supremacy? Next of all you say they are Gentlemen: Perhaps so; but if they be,
you must needs go back again, and speak for a small dagger-cloud for their
foot-boys: and then besides all this, I see no great necessity that you should
make them so very tall and large, when less Mounsiers would serve as well for a
supposition.


Tim. Truly, Sir, when I said that they were upright Gentlemen, I only meant
that they were straight limbed and right up ones: and by Gentlemen, I only
meant ordinary men: But as to their stature I think I was discreet enough:
because if you remember, Sir, in the eighth Chapter of your dominion; those
same mushroom-men which you ordered to spring out of the earth, were suddenly
to come to full maturity; and if mature perfect men may come up, I saw no
reason but as perfect ones might come down. And when we had once appointed it
to rain men; I thought we had better have a shower to some purpose, and have it
rain good, stout, speaking, understanding men, than only a Scottish mist of
Babies, which would have entagled us agai in the old story of children not
being sociable.


Phi. But how comes in about that you suppose these people to speak? Speech is
so very an antificial thing, that we are forced to have Masters and Mistresses
for that very purpose; and all the world perceives that children do not speak
naturally.


Tim. But you know, Philautus, that the very same man (...) that had a
Plantation of armed men, not far from the Isle of Pine^, is said to have had
also a small nursery of Letters; and we may properly enough say that there is
some hopes that children may speak, although they do not immediately after nine
or ten Months close imprisonment, call for their boots and horse, to take fresh
air. And besides you promised to talk no more of children, but substantial
men; and you need not be afraid at all, that it shall rain any absurdi^ies so
long as we do not suppose it to rain Watchmen, Bell-men, Lant^rns and Psalms:
for we intend only an ordinary civil shower of perfect men.


Phi. I am likely to do thee much good indeed! We are inquiring what is the
pure candid condition of nature, and thou come in with thy Civil shower;
which supposes Government, society, and all the absurdities imaginable, and
begs the whole question that is in controversy: Is this you that promised to
suppose so fairly? thou shall even be called Tim the fair supposer.


Tim. This it is to be so much for self preservation! it makes people as curious
and fearful of their reputation, as of their limbs. I speak, Philautus, only of
an ordinary shower of men, and you snort and boggle, as if I had laid a
thousand fox-traps, and barrels of gun-power in the road; you may put out the
word Civil, if you please, I intended no advantage by it.


Phi. Well then, if you will leave out your tricks, and keep to your pure, plain,
ordinary men; I do not at all question, but the (...) will go on my side.


Tim. What are you resolved then that they must needs have a brush at boxes
before they set on the old hen and bacon? Must they needs upon first sight set
up their tayls, and bristles, and fall a sna^ling, and swearing, and tearing
one another throat^ out?


Phi. You do not hear me say so: but you must be forced to (...) me, that they
are as yet in most absolute state of war.


Tim. Why so?


Phi. Because they have not as yet entered into any League, nor concluded any
Treaty, nor so much as made any overt^^es for Alli^need


Tim. That Is right: unless they happened (as they came tumbling down) to call
in at old Io^es of upper Enfield, two miles beyond Cancasus, and there cracked
(...) and shak'd hands.


Phi. But if they did so, they did not come down inpur^^ naturalibus.


Tim. And is this all the reason you have that these men are in a state of war,
viz. because they have not as yet discoursed, made overtures, covenanted?


Phi. Yes truly; and it is a most able one upon my reputation.


Tim. Now could I be tempted to go home, and spend a little time in laughing,
and not to talk one word more: for this proves just such another discovery as
we had before: For after much wrangling and dispute, we found out (I remember)
at last, that a sucking Child was not fit to command an Army, or to make a
speech at the head of it; and now we have found out, that these same dropped men
cannot enter into a league, till they have spoken with one another, neither can
they speak, till they open their mouths; and therefore they are in a most
dismal state of war; because when they do meet, it is possible for them to
fight, having sworn not any thing at all to the contrary. What, Philautus,
would you have Roger speak to the next tree to run away in all have, and out of
pure natural kindness, and sweet sincere humanity invite Dick and the rest of
the Pineyards to a Wesphalia Ham and Pigeons? Whereas Roger never saw any of
them as yet, nor knows any thing of their being come to Pines: Or would you
have Dick to testify his inward disposition to pure society it self, grasp a
whole armful of air, and fall to treating and covenanting, and at last enter
into a close league therewith? The sum of all, Philautus, amounts only to
this; that there are four honest Rogues come to Town, from the four several
quarters of the world, and falling either upon several places of the Island, or
being a great mist, or coming before day light, they have not as yet seen one
another, and having not seen one another, they have not as yet discoursed,
treated or compounded; and therefore they are actually in a state of ^ar, i. e.
they having not spoken at all, it is impossible that they should have spoken to
each other. Now if you take delight in the phrase, you may if you please call
this a state of war, a state of Devils, or what state you will; but for my
part, I think there is nothing in it, only a small trick of words. There Is the
huge King of China, and another great man that dwells the other way: I never made
any overtures, treaty or composition with them; and yet for all that I don't
find any grumblings or cursings of humane nature within me, or any prickings,
and pushings forth toward any war. Indeed I have found my self sometimes at
some small variance with the Turk; but that is, because his Rogues use to droll
a little too severely upon my Merchant men. Neither, Philautus, would I have
you think (supposing it were worth the while to insist upon a phrase) that you
have justified this kind of supposed state of nature to be a state of war, by
saying, as you somewhere do, that the state of war is not only actual fighting,
but it is the whole time that the variance or quarrel last. For I grant that
war consists not in the number or length of battles, but in a readiness and
resolution to contend. But withal we may easily conceive much more reason to
call the intervals between battle and battle, war; or the whole time from
proclamation thereof to the concluding of peace; than to call that a state of
war, which has no pretense for any such name from any quarrel that ever was
yet, but from one that unreasonably may be. I say, I think, there ought to be
some difference made between these two states; and you your self, Philautus,
must not be too backward to acknowledge it; because of your very own definition
of war, cap. 1. Art. 12. Where you say, that war is that same time in which the
will of contesting by force, is fully declared by words or deeds. Now if Roger
had challenged Dick to play with him to morrow, three first hits for the
Kingdom; or that Dick had come behind Roger, and struck up his heels, here had
been Declaration enough to signify and justify war: But to say that they are
at war without either words or deeds (only because they have not bargained) is
not agreeable to what you say your self.


Phi. You have talked, and talked I know not what, Tim. But for all that, will
you venture to say that these four strangers are actually a body politic?


Tim. I Will say no such thing at all: But I say that this same state of war
which you make such a clatter with, is only a war of mere words: and therefore
to lay aside this same blind man's buff, and decide the controversy; let us see
a little what these same Pineyards will do when they first meet. And so, if you
please, Sir, about Sunrising we will give them a view, unmuzzle, and let them
off the slip. And now hola Roger! over with him there Dick; collar him close
Towser; gripe him under the small ribs, and pluck out his speen Tumbler. O
bravely recovered! Now hold it out for the credit of the state of nature, and
the family of the Dicks. Now fall upon his chest, and strike his heart out of
his mouth, and dash that Rogues eye out of the Island.


Phi. I prithee, Tim, what art thou doing of? What an uproar and noise thou
make? Thou did talk just now of four honest Rogues that were come to Town,
and thou have sent for four Furies, I think.


Tim. I did it only, Sir, to give you a small sample of the state of nature.
They must have a brush I suppose, Sir, before they go to breakfast.


Phi. I pray, Tim, do so much as part them; and let us go on softly and soberly,
and then see what will follow.


Tim. I can exactly tell you, Sir, what will follow, viz. if humane nature upon
first view, pricks up its ears, and sets up its skut, and falls presently to
tearing, slicing and slashing; then the battle goes on your side: but if reason
and humane nature directs these people to treat, and live peaceably together,
then I count the day is mine.


Phil. Nay, Tim, the field is not so easily gained: You think of your tropies a
little too soon.


Tim. However methinks at present I am a little apt to value my hopes: For
here is nothing of prejudice, education, custom, Father or Mother, League or
Covenant; but only pure terse humane nature, newly drawn out of the clouds.


Phi. Let me consider a little: You say if they fall to quarrelling and
fighting, when ever they first meet, then and not else it is to be judged that
humane nature inclines to war; or that the state of nature is a state of war.
Now I thought thou did go on too quick: For let me tell thee, Tim, that that
is as much false, as I am older than thou art. For actual fighting and
destroying is not that alone which is to be termed (...)* For whether these
Pineyards fight or not, so long as they have not treated and bargained, they
cannot properly be said to be sociable.


Tim. This we have had over so often, that I am quite tired, viz. they cannot
properly be said actually to have made Covenants, Leagues, and Bonds, till they
have actually made Covenants, Leagues, and Bonds. Do but resolve to hold to
that, and you may easily defend your self against all the forces in the world,
by sea or by land.


Phi. But for all you are so brisk, Tim: How do you certainly know that they
will not fall to breaking of heads and legs? Did you stand behind a tree and
hear the parley? Or had you word sent you by the Pinaean packet boat?


Tim. I need not go so far for my Intelligence, Philautus. I had it nearer
home: For (to save Iourneys and charges of Foreign Letters) I always love to
keep a little right reason in the house; with which your Book of Politics is
so crawlingly full; and from which alone (not from general agreement of the
most wise men and learned Nations, or the common consent of mankind which you
there despise) you lay down for the first and fundamental law of Nature, that
peace is to be sought, where it may be found. Now in this same little land of
Pines, we do suppose there grows abundance of peace, if the late come guests
will but seek for it: because being never inhabited, there was never so much as
a cut finger dropped upon it.


Phi. Now I have caught thee bravely, Tim. Now I do not question but to make
abundance of money of thee. I do say indeed, that right reason tells us, that
the first and fundamental law of Nature is to seek peace where it may be had;
and that the first special law of Nature derived from that fundamental one is
this, that the right of all men to all things ought not to be retained, but
that some certain rights ought to be transferred or relinquished. But you must
consider, Tim, that I establish these laws upon quite different grounds from
those which are generally given by old Moralists. For they flatter you, and
feed you with a fiddle faddle of men's seeking society, for its own sake; and
dividing or compounding the common right by natural equity and justice. Whereas
it is plain to me and all right Reasoners, that men merely lie upon the lu^ch
for society, and seek it only for pleasure or profit: (or in one word out of
mutual fear.) and they are willing to share or divide the common right, not
because there is any inward reason they should do so, but because it is much
safer than to be engaged in War perpetually. Take this along with thee, Tim,
there is Doctrine enough for this fortnight.


Tim. There Is a little too much for once, Sir; and therefore I must desire you
to cast it into two parts. You say in the first place that we have held for
many ages that men seek society for its own sake. I pray why may we not hold it
one summer more.


Phi. Why? If by Nature one man should love another, that is as man, every man
would equally love every man, as being equally man; and not pick here and
there, according as profit, honor, or other things do direct him.


Tim. Now, upon my Conscience, Philautus, you mean by a man only a thing
standing right up (like a Heron) with a head and a few eyes thereunto
belonging: For if he chance to speak or listen, to buy or sell, give or
receive; if he be peaceful, faithful, modest, affable, temperate, prudent,
ingenious, or be of any worth or use imaginable; then we seek after such, and
fort with such, not for society* but out of mutual fear. So that to enter into
society for its own simple single sake, were only to enter into it, for the
sake of a good word, that must not signify any thing. For if it does, it must
not be called society, but plot, profit, design, or the like.


Phi. And do thou think, Tim, that I will not believe my own eyes and ears,
before this nothing that thou say? Is there any better way to understand by
what advice and upon what account people me*, and enter into society, than by
observing what they do when they are met? For suppose, Tim, they meet for
traffic, is it not plain that every man minds his business, and endeavors to
dispatch what he designed? If to discharge some offi^^, is it not to carry on a
kind of a market friendship, which has more of jealousy than true love? And
lastly if (for diversion and recreation of mind) to discourse; is not here
visibly at the bottom either advantage or vain glory?


Tim. This must needs be right: and I wonder how I came to mistrust it. For
suppose I go to market to buy corn and meat for my family: and when I come
(...) the length and color of his eyebrowes; and also an exact account (...)
and complexion of the (...) that stood (...) the sacks mouth; and affect them
both most dea^ly and return home most vehemently in love; and next day bid my
servant set on the pot and fill it full of (...), stature, complexion,
friendship and society, and let them be very well boiled: I am afraid, for all
my (...) love, some of the family may chance to be hungry before next market
day. And so in like manner if upon the road my horse casts a shoe, and
thereupon I call in upon the next Sm^th: I may pretend indeed that I came only
to render him a sociable visit, to look upon his (...), him, and to be sweet
upon his humanity: but, for all that; it is (...) to one before we parts If I
don't (...) plot and fetch things about, as to treat concerning Oton, and so by
degrees cunningly draw him in to set me a shoe*


Phi. But why so many instances?


Tim. Because you have two whole pages upon the same occasion: and beside^ I
have a mind to convince my self thoroughly that people do not enter into society
purely for its own sake. And therefore I cannot but think again, if I should
call a coach, and when I have done so, speak to bay and brown to set me down at
Charing Cross: for, as for their Master; he should ride along with me in the
coach, because I did intend to love him, and hugg him a whole shillings worth.
I believe the Coachman may go to bed supperless for all this* and that I might
have been sooner at my journeys end, if I had gone on foot. Or lastly suppose I
should be lost upon the road at midnight, and call a man out of his bed only to
ask him whether he be in health, how he slept, and how all his family does: and
not say one word concerning my being ignorant of the way; (for there is design)
this would be pure love indeed, and a most unexceptionable argument of (...) to
society. and therefore, (...) you well observe, people may (...) and talk of
entering into society for its own sake, and of going to market out of mere good
will, but when you dive into the business, it is very great odds, if there be
not some timber to sell, some corn to buy, a shoe to set, a question to ask, or
some such politic and inveigling (...).


Phi. I am very glad, Tim, to hear thee give such apt instance: it is a sign
that thou beginnest to understand my Doctrine, and to be satisfied therewith.


Tim. O, Sir, I am so wonderfully satisfied, that I am even ready to split
again with satisfaction. For now I plainly perceive what it is which justly and
morally ought to be called seeking society for it self; to wit, if the
Inhabitants of every Town, once or twice in a week* instead of going to Church,
or market, without either bell or trumpet, would naturally meet together, and
like a company of Turkies get sidelong upon a pole, and sometimes plume and
gently chafe one another, and now and then put about a true love jogg to the
whole company: or like a brood of ducklings for mutual consolation sake get
close into a corner with head under wing, and make not the least noise, for
fear of waking Original sin, and the quarrelsome state of Nature; this possibly
might pass for unfeigned freindship, and society without design. But if men do
either give or receive, counsel (...) take advice, discourse o^ jest, if they
speak but the least word, then presently a reason is to be tickled up, that
this was not society, but plo^ and design. Nay, if a man does but look
earnestly upon another, and ask, what is a clock, it spoils the whole integrity
and sincerrity of the business, and can be nothing less than a very fetch and
stratagem, if it be at all considered of by one that knows the world.


Phi. I perceive, Tim, that thou have profited but very little, by the late
instances I gave thee, of peoples entering into society merely upon design. How
ever surely thou can not deny, that there is great safety and convenience in
seeking of peace: and many a mischief there would be if it should be neglected.
And therefore, why ought not I, foreseeing those mischiefs, be said to
endeavor to avoid them only out of fear, and thereupon choose society as the
safest ^ondition?


Tim. I Will give you free leave, Philautus, to say that peace is better than
war, in English, Latin, or any other Language, upon that very account your
self mention; but I would not have you say that that is the only or chief
reason. For there is great difference, Philautus, in saying that I do this or
that, merely and only because I am afraid of a bloody nose, or broken shins:
and in saying that I do it for a better reason; and that a leg or an arm may
chance to go of, if I neglect to do it.


Phi. Upon better reason, do thou say? what can a man spend his time better
than to suspect, take heed, be watchful and afraid? and do thou think that
thou can ever find out any other reason to make the four men of Pines
compound, besides fear?


Tim. Yes, I have one worth ten of that, (which I shall give you by and by:)
and moreover not only show you that in all justice and equity they ought to
compound, but also what terms they ought to offer toward an accommodation?


Phi. I prithee, Tim, which will certainly beat, the French or Dutch? which
sinkes the first Ship, and where will the wind be upon the fifteenth of May?
poor creature! that thou should thus cut out work for thy own disparagement,
and engage before hand to be silly! and yet because it shall never be said,
that Tim wanted means of growing wiser, I care not much if I fling away one
demonstration more upon thee, to prevent if possibly, this great plot thou have
laid to discredit thy self: whereby it will experimentally appear, that men at
first were not only in a state of war, and did as it were lay down their
weapons, and combine out of mere fear: but that the state of war really is not
yet ended, nor ever will be. For that every man is still to this very day
afraid of every man; and (now observe me Tim,) that this is a natural taint
and infection that runs through the whole humane blood: and is so deeply seated
therein, that it will never be utterly washed out till Doomes-day.


Tim. Always provided, that you had excepted your servant Timothy from being
afraid of every body. For as fierce as you look, Sir, he is not in the least
afraid of you.


Phi. what? I hope (whilst I am endeavoring to cure thee of thy errors) thou
do not intend to huff* quarrel and challeng me. I don't much like the very
phrases that belong to ^ighting.


Tim. I intended no affront at all to you, Sir, for there is abundance more that
I am not afraid of.


Phi. Then upon my word, it is for want of judgment and common observation. I
confess now and then, Tim, I have met some rash inconsiderate youngsters (like
thy self) who would try to be of thy opinion, and pertly to contradict me would
gainsay themselves. And to such I use to say thus. What mean you Gentlemen to
approve of that in your discourses, which your actions perfectly disavow? Do
you not see all countries, though they be at peace with their neighbors, yet
guarding their frontiers with armed men, their Towns with walls and ports, and
keeping constant watches? Do you not see even in well governed States, where
there are Laws and punishments appointed for offenders, yet particular men
travel not without their sword by their sides for their defenses, neither sleep
they without shutting not only their doors against their fellow subjects, but
also their Trunks and Coffers against domestics? Can men give a clearer
testimony of the fear and distrust they have each of other, and all of all; and
that the first stop that was put to the state of war, was upon the account of
fear, and that it is not yet quite ended? and therefore are you not ashamed to
fight against your selves, that you may quarrel me? Thus I use to school over
such small objectors, and little observers of humane affairs.


Tim. And I pray, Sir, how did they use to take such a demonstration? and what
did thy use to say again?


Phi. Even as much as thou art able to say now. What do think all people in
the world are amalepert as thy self, and talk again, when there is nothing to
be said?


Tim. However, Philautus, if I had been there, rather than my tongue should
have caught cold, I Would have said over the alphabet, or somewhat or other; if it
had been only this. viz. We see indeed Castles, Walls, Draw-bridges, Guards,
Guns, Swords, Doors, Locks, and the like. But surely it is not absolutely
necessary to say that all this care is taken and these defenses made, because
Humane Nature at first was, and in general still is a Whore, a Bitch, a Drab,
a Cutpurse, etc. But because there be Dogs, Foxes, Hoggs, Children, Fools,
Madmen, Drunkards, Thieves, Pirates and Philautians. And upon that account
(considering the wickedness of the world) it is a most dangerous and frightfull
thing to leave the Dairy-door open: for who knows, but on a sudden the Sow,
having some small scruples about meum and tu^m, may rush in with her train of
little thoughts, and invading the Milk-bowles should rejoice in the confusion.
And in like manner I am almost thoroughly convinced, that if I have a Diamond of
considerable value, it is not the safest way to fling it into the shoe-hole, or
to lay it in the window amongst the Bay Leaves: because perhaps the waggish
Ratts, to make me spend candle, may carry it away, and hide it up in the
cock-loft; or a child may have a mind to try whether it will sink or swim, or
may swallow it instead of a new fashioned Sugar plumb; or lastly because I may
chance to have a ^ervant, who being not well dried of the state of nature, may
make use of the members of his body to remove it from the place where I laid
it. And I must needs tell you, Philautus, if a friend or so should intend me a
visit, who, I was sure, did really believe no good or evil before the Statutes
of the Kingdom, I should count my self in all prudence obliged, to set a very
strong lock upon my mustard pot. But to go on, Philautus, you observe besides
from Constables and watches, that man is a most dreadful creature: but before
you be very sure of that conclusion, I would have you call to mind, that there
be such things in the world as madmen, who may get from their fetters, and fall
to ^iring of houses: and there be such things as Quakers and fifth Monarcy-men,
whose religious frenzy may disturb the peace: and there be also such things
which in the morning were true lawful men, who by night with intemperance have
lost that privilege: and these for a time may be as troublesome in the
streets, as a wild Boar or Ox: And lastly there may be here and there some
besides, called Pilferers, and Thieves, who count it a piece of dull pedantry
to live by any set form and profession, or to be guided by any reason, or to
stand in any Laws: and for you to conclude from hence, that Humane Nature in
general' is a shirking, rooking, pilfering, padding nature, is as extravagant,
as to say that the chief of mankind are perfectly distracted, and that the true
state of nature is a state of perpetual drinkenness. And what if most Nations
have Guards, and Castles, and be upon defense? you must not infer that all men
are Rogues, because Alexander had a mind to try an experiment, and to see how
much mischief he could do in his whole lifetime: or because the Caesar's
spoiled many Kingdoms, and brought them into slavery, for the excellen jest of
pure Latin, and Roman liberty: or because the Turk gave two pence for a Pigeon
to tell him from above that all the earth was his. You know, Philautus, our own
Nation never wanted Horses, Ships, Men and valor to have trampled down many of
its Neighbors: but such have been the equity and generosity of our Kings as
(unless highly provoked) to stay at home.


Phi. You never found that I asserted that all the people in the world are
shirks and raskals: But I may confidently assert that there be some; and seeing
that we do not know them, and cannot distinguish them from the good, there is a
necessity (as I tell you in my Epistle) of suspecting, heeding, anticipating,
subjugating, and self-defending.


Tim. I pray do so much as understand me, Philautus; I am not against your
putting all those words and forty more into practice. Ride with eight
suspecting pistols, and half a dozen heeding swords: Let a file of anticipating
Musketeers walk constantly before you, and as many subjugating ones behind;
plant a defending blunderbuss upon the top of your stairs; put on a headpiece
instead of a quilted cap, and sleep in perfect armor: or if this be not
sufficient, beg leave of his Majesty that you may have a bed set up in the
Exchequer, or surrender your self every night to the Lieutenant of the Tower;
and let him be extraordinarily obliged, that you awake in safety next morning.
In short, take as much care of your self, as you think most just, (for you know
your worth best;) but from your own distrust and fear, I do earnestly desire
that you would not determine any thing concerning the general disposition and
temper of humane nature; and that if a mouse comes to lick the save-all, you
would not alarm the whole Christian world, and cry out that the Turk is
landed. This I say is all that I desire of you; for when you tell us that there
be Thieves, and that we don't know them, and if we did, we do not know what day
we may meet them, this was very well and very fully understood by every Carrier
and Drover many years before you writ your Politics: and now since you have
such an excellent gift of making things plain, be pleased to exercise a little
upon the other reason, why men that are in the state of nature do choose to enter
into society. For, as for people compounding out of ^ear, or not seeking
society for its own sake, I now fully understand. As I remember you seemed to
say further, that society was a thing merely by chance, because that no man in
the state of nature could have any right or pretense to any part of this World.


Phi. I s^orn to be one of those that seem only to say things: If there be any
doubt, I say nothing; if there be none, then I speak, declare and publish. And
therefore I do now make it known, that no man whilst he is in the state of
nature has right or title to so much as one foot of Land or spire of grass. And
now my mouth is open, I do declare further, that whereas a company of
Metaphysical Term-drivers do love to talk of intrinsecal and essential right
and wrong, good and evil, and the like; they are every one utterly besotted,
there being no such thing at all, but what the Magistrate pleases so to appoint.


Tim. As for the latter part of your declaration, I shall not meddle with it as
yet: but of the former I am obliged to take present notice: Wherein you say,
that by nature no man has any right to any part of this world; which if true,
then our four natural Gallants have perfectly lost their Journey, and must
forthwith entreat the Sun, to draw them back again; there being no living here,
unless they might take and enjoy what they find.


Phi. I prithee, Tim, what figure is this objection in? Thou talkest just as if
thou came reeking hot from Barbara -- I must therefore teach thee that these
people that came lately down, are very welcome, and may live very happily; if
they endeavor, and agree so to live: But till they have agreed and bargained,
not any one of them can possibly claim any peculiar right or interest in the
very least spot of the whole Island.


Tim. Your instructions, Sir, I thank you begin now to enter; because Jonas
Moore is not as yet come to divide, and set out the ground, and to call this
piece starve-crow, and the other long acre; and because the white posts or blew
balls are not as yet up at Roger's door; and that Dick has not determined what
livery to give, and what coat of arms to set upon his sheeps backs; and because
there are no hedges, ditches, or walls to keep asunder the Inhabitants cattle:
Therefore say you, none of these have any reason to demand the least right to
any part of the whole Island. You know, Sir, a man may have a right to a
fourth, eighth, or any other part of a ship, though he be not able to say, this
rope is mine; and the other is my neighbors: And a hundred several men may have
a common, and yet certain right to a piece of ground, and yet never a one of
them can set forth, that his share lies just at the gate, and another man's
next the water side.


Phi. This is said so like one not capable of improvement, that I am ashamed to
be seen in thy company: For when thou talkest of common rights, I am confident
thou meanest such grounds as are called Commons (where the Town herd and Town
geese go) which are held by as much bargain, and covenant as thou hold thy
hat or coat by.


Tim. To be just and honest, Philautus, I did mean so, I profess: And I said it
on purpose to see how angry you would be, at one of your own sort of tricks,
when put upon you by another.


Phi. I do abominate all such tricks, and those that devised them. If you will
hear sense, then attend: When I say that no man by nature can have any estate
or right; I don't only understand thereby, that Roger is not as yet fixed in
the East, nor the rest in their particular quarters: but till they have
bargained, they can make no claim to any part or proportion whatever, either in
equity, right, law or justice. Surely thou can not be so ignorant, but one of
those words will fall to thy share to understand.


Tim. I thank you, Sir, that you were so generous, as to give me such choice:
For now I understand you as fully, as if you had blown up your meaning into my
head with a quill. For as much as Roger forgot to bring his black box of
Evidences, and transferred rights along with him; and thereupon has not been
able as yet to obtain a Decree in Chauncery, or a Verdict at Common law for his
share; therefore Roger has none, no^ in reason is likely to have any. What,
would you have had him to have tied up twelve Judges in a corner of his
handkerchief, and brought down Westminster Hall in his trowzes?


Phi. I shall not now be so idle as to say what I Would have him to have done: But
I Will tell thee, Tim, what I would have such a child as thou art to do, (unless
thou art very eager of continuing a fool) namely; ask thy self, or that same
thing within thee* which silly people have got a custom of calling Conscience,
whether thou now have, or ever had any thing in thy whole life, or right to
any thing but by Covenant, contract and law.


Tim. I shall do it, Sir, immediately. Here, where art thou (as they call thee)
Conscience? Come forth and let Tim (according to Philautus's advice) ask thee a
question. How came thou by those shoes? By what means and upon what design
did thou acquire a right and propriety in them, and dominion over them? Did
thy feet bud, and bring forth shoes? Don't cogg now and shuffle, but speak
plain, for very much depends hereupon. Consc. Truly, Tim, having looked a
little into the World, and Ancient Writers, and observing that some stones were
very hard, some very sharp, and others very dirty, for fear I should bruise,
cut or offend the lower part of the man called the feet; I thought fit to treat
with a Shoemaker; and after some parley and overtures we come at last to close
covenant: And, as I was saying before, for fear of catching cold I took the
shoes, and for fear he should never see me again, he took my money.


Phi. And thus thou would find it, Tim, if thou should examine thy self
from top to toe. Viz. That every thing thou have or ever had, is all upon
some immediate or foregoing compact: Neither is there any natural way of
distinguishing between meum and tuum, but only by such means as I have laid
down.


Tim. Truly, Phila^tus, I am very nigh of your opinion: Viz. That it would be a
very hard matter for the most cunning and experienced Midwife to distinguish
exactly between a child that is born Lord of a Manor, and a Tenant. Unless
such as the first were born with the Courtrolls in their mouth, or had all
stars in their forehead; and the latter had all shorn manes and cropped ears.
You have been several times, Philautus, angry, since we began to discourse; it
^s time, I think, for me to be so now.


Phi. With whom?


Tim. Even with your own Political self, as old as you are: For you go and
appoint a company of people to come, I know not whence; and to bring with them
nothing but their pure personalities; and to arrive at a place, where is not the
least Custom, Law, or Statute: And then in your discourse you fetch all your
Arguments from want of such Customs, Laws, and Statutes. That is, I Will suppose
an Island where there is not so much as one dog: And then I Will determine, that
jus shall signify nothing in the world but a dog; and then I will conclude
against all mankind, that if Roger comes thither, he shall not have a bit of
right: i. e. he will find never a dog. If you suppose, Philautus, suppose one
thing with another, viz. that which is possible: As for your state of nature
(though it be sufficiently extravagant) yet I was resolved to keep you company;
and to be either for mushroomes or bubbles, or bladders, or teeth, or
cherry-stones, or any thing that could be devised. But when you determine with
your self that there shall be no Acts of Parliament, and yet all the while
reason so, as if there were such, I must confess that I must then leave you.


Phi. Now have I no mind at all to part with the: but to put my self into such
an odd kind of displeasure, as to suffer thee to talk on without pity; only to
see how far thou would abuse thy self, if thou had but thy full swing. And
therefore I do say again, that where there is no Law, there can be no right.
Now, it is five to one, if thou do not prate presently: do so, thy whole gut
full. Perhaps this may bring thee into some moderation, and beter respect of
those that are aged.


Tim. Truly under favor, Sir, I am thinking thus --


Phi. Nay, for thinking, think till thy heart strings crack: but that will not
satisfy thee, for thou must prate I know.


Tim. Yes, Sir: Suppose a man pays down five thousand pounds for an Estate; and
accordingly receives writings before sufficient witnesses: And it happens that
the following night his writings are all burnt, and his witnesses all die. What
law now has he for his money? His conveyances are gone toward the Moon, and
his witnesses the other way.


Phi. Thou do not understand, that he of whom the Estate was purchased, may
be brought upon his oath: There Is law, Tim, that thou did not think of.


Tim. But I Will have that man the same night to die also; and his Heir shall be
five hundred miles off, when the bargain was made. This is much easier to
suppose, Philautus, than to make men out of bladders. Now here is no Law in the
case for the Purchaser; but he has much right and reason on his side.


Phil. This it is to talk of Law and not understand it: I say there is no reason
at all that he should ever have, or enjoy the least part of the Estate. For if
this were allowed, whenever a man wanted a good house, and gardens, it were but
saying that his witnesses are dead, and his writings lost, and he might even
pick his seat wherever he pleased.


Tim. I grant you, it is not reasonable, i. e. it is not convenient that there
should be room made for such pretenses: But the man notwithstanding has never
the less right to the Estate: which consisted in the bargain and true
performance of Covenants; not in the Parchments, wax and witnesses, which are
requisite only by reason of death, mistakes, forgetfulness, ambiguity of words,
knavery, and the like.


Phi. And art thou now so very ^illy as to dream that any of this is against
me? For thou have given an instance of right in a Commonwealth; where there is
bargaining and Law: And our business lies all this while about the state of
nature, where there is neither one nor the other. But indeed how can any thing
less impertinent be possibly expected from such who having only gone through a
course of the praedicaments --


Tim. And run over your race of the Passions: I pray don't forget that.


Phi. Who, I say, having saved together a few Academical shreds, and
pedantically starched up a few distinctions and trifles got from the Schools,
shall prate and swagger, as if they were well acquainted with both the Poles,
and every thing that lies between them.


Tim. And as if they could square the circle, as well as your self: Let that
come in I beseech you. It was most pedantically done of the University Doctor;
that when you had so painfully squared it for the general good of mankind, he
should spightfully go and unsquare it again. But hold, Sir, we forget our
selves: For we are in a state of nature or war, and we fall to complementing,
as if the peace were concluded: And therefore I shall return to my instance
concerning Right and Law. Which, now I tell you, Philautus, I gave not,
intending therein any great store of proof, (much less any demonstration, as
you use to do) but I did it only to supple and soften you into a little less
difficulty of distinguishing between that which is right and reasonable, and
that which is according to the Laws of the Realm.


Phi. What, do talk of suppling of me, Tim? I prithee go home and put thy
head into a pipkin, and there stew it, till thou gettest more wit. What, do
think, because I look upon my body as a good considerable thing, that therefore
I am so great a Coward as to submit to nonsense, and comply with
impossibilities; and to be mistaken only because it is the general fashion? I
shall not do so, indeed Tim: supple and soften as long as you will. And
therefore to ruin all your hopes at once, I do say that those four men that we
have supposed in the state of Nature, have not the least right to any part of
the Island; not only because their share or portion is not as yet bounded and
marked out, or because they cannot require any part by Humane law: but besides,
because Nature has given to every one of them an absolute, complete, total
right to every thing that is there to be found.


Tim. What has Nature given to Dick; suppose, a right to the whole Kingdom:
with all the profits, privileges, perquisites, and appurtenances?


Phi. I prithee, Tim, climb up some high Steeple or Tower, and wonder there. I
have other business to do than to stay only to see thee stare at sunshine
truths and demonstrations. What I have said, I have weighed, which young toys,
as thou art, never do.


Tim. Then truly Dick has reason to speak very laudably of Nature; for he is in
a very fine thriving condion. I Will have the Rogue add a pair of horses more to
his coach, and to keep two foot-boys, one for sack and another for claret; in
Liveries answerable to the color of their duties. I am resolved he shall never
fit but in a box, drink nothing but flaskes, eat nothing that has an English
name, and wipe his mouth only with Indian Almanacks. But how shall poor Roger
make shift to live? He must even try, to earn his penny with lighting home
Norfolk Attourney's Clerks.


Phi. Thou art so infinitely incapable, Tim, that one had as good pick up old
rags for paper, as labor to make thee understand. For if thou had any brains
thou might know, that Nature has given to Roger all, notwithstanding Dick's
grant.


Tim. Say you so? Then rise up Roger, and tumble down Dick.


Phi. I prithee, Tim, away presently, and according as I gave order, set on thy
head; for it will never make shift to do, as it now lies. Who, except Tim, but
would easily have apprehended, how that Roger might have a right to it all,
notwithstanding Dick to all of it had a right?


Tim. Oh the wonderful works of a black pudden with anchovie-sance! This it is
to have joined Logic with Mathematics! For take one for cunning, and the other
for soundness, and betwixt them both, they will make up such a title, as would
have pusled old Prin himself to have found out a pattern of it. But what
becomes of Tumbler and Towser all this while? The World certainly is very low
with them: For if Dick has got All, and Roger has got the same All, over,
besides, and notwithstanding; the Devil is of it, if between them both they
don't keep out the other two.


Phil. I am quite tired with calling thee fool, though I perceive the occasion
increases very much. I don't say that Dick and Roger have got it all; but I say
they have got a right to get it all, and so have the rest.


Tim. And may Dick or any other of them, in right and reason, get it all, if
they can?


Phi. I prithee step to the gate, and ask the Porter that. Must I spend my self
to tell thee again, that we are in the state of Nature; in which, whatever a
man has a mind to do, and can do, he may do.


Tim. Why so? What, because may and can are of the same Mode and Tense, or that
possum is Latin for them both?


Phi. No; thou perverse trifler; that is not the reason: But because in the
state of Nature, there is no difference at all between May and Can.


Tim. That is; because Roger has a vocal instrument between his chin and his
nose, called a mouth, and being not muzled, gagged or cop'd; but having a free
power, faculty or May to open it, and order it as he think fit; therefore he
May stretch it out as wide as he please, and swear quite cross the Island, that
he will have the whole, or at least half: And because he has other instruments
called hands, which have an ability of holding and directing a knife; therefore
again he May make use thereof to cut the throats of all his Countrymen. And
when he has done this; if he be not tired, and his hands does not much shake,
he May also cut his own.


Phi. Surely I ought not to forgive my self this Month for being within the
noise of such childish talk. My reason that Roger, whilst in the state of
Nature, may do any thing (except hurting himself) or require any thing, was
because he cannot be injurious or unjust to any man: Injury or injustice being
the breach of some Humane laws, such as in the state of Nature there be none.
Do so much, as go to thy Dictionary, Tim, and see if injuria and injustitia be
not derived of jus.


Tim. I perceive we are wheeled about to Westminster Hall again:
notwithstanding you promised not to come there any more. And indeed I see now,
Philautus, it is in vain to expect any better reason from you, why Roger may get
and possess what he list: by reason what you said just before, viz. that, that
only was injustice which was the breach of some humane law, is in your own
Annotations upon the tenth Article of your first Chapter* So that we see
whereabouts we still are: the Parliament is not as yet met, or at least have
not as yet made any Laws, and we will call nothing unjust, but what shall be
done against somewhat that they afterwar^ shall establish: and so we are come
again into the old story of the dog: and no further are we likely to proceed,
unless we change injury and injustice for some other words. And therefore let us
try, Philautus, if Roger may not do that which is hurtful or mischievous, or
that which is unreasonable. As suppose, when all the rest are asleep, he should
contrive some way to pluck out all their eyes, and to suck them instead of raw
eggs. It Is very ingenious, and not the least mischief or hurt at all: for the
Parliament have not as yet declared that blindness is any inconvenience; nor
that such as should occasion it in others, ought to be punished.


Phi. Thou think now that thou talkest wisely: and it is as like a Woodcock
as can be. For if Roger's stomach require it, or he thinks that it does, Roger
may certainly do it.


Tim. Yes, yes: He may do it several ways, either with a Steletto, or a
Penknife, or a pair of Pincers, or many other ways. And so he may contrive to
lop off a leg of each of them: and when the Parliament meet, if they find it
unjust, they may vote it on again. But because we may take occasion to talk a
little more of this by and by, we will go on, and see if these people may not be
guilty of doing or requiring that which is unreasonable.


Phi. I don't at all see how.


Tim. That is, because you are so busy in weighing of Kingdoms, and making
remarkes upon humane affairs, that you don't mind your own writings. For if you
did, you might there find that in your very state of Nature, the will is not
the only measure of right, and that therein a man may be guilty of doing of
that which is unreasonable.


Phi. I do not know why I should say so, or any thing like it.


Tim. Why you said it I know not: and I suppose it had been better for you not
to have said it, because it contradicts much of your design: but thus you say
at the beginning of the forementioned A^notations, Though a man in the state of
Nature cannot be injurious to another, because there are as yet no Hum^ne
Laws; yet in such a state he may offend God, or break the Laws of Nature:
which very Laws, you your self call the Laws of reason. So that you have no
way to come cleaverly off, but to devise some cunning distinction between
breaking a Law of reason, and doing that which is unreasonable.


Phi. What do think, Tim, that ^t these years, and after so much experience,
and after so many victories in discourse, that I will be taught by such a
whister as thou art, to come off. It is sufficient at present, to the case in
hand, to ^ay that nothing can be done or demanded unreasonably as to the matter
of meum and tuum.


Tim. You had best have a care of granting any kind of thing whatever to be
unreasonable in the state of Nature: because you know the Magistrate has not as
yet sealed and stamped good and evil: but (...) that pass now. Suppose then
that they should fight for the Island. Shall we give them a second view, and
another loose? we had best not. For you know, as you teach us: that men by
Nature are all equal. i. e. though Roger may chance to have huge Legs, yet
Dick may have the quicker eye: and though Tumbler may have a very large fist,
and a great gripe, yet Towser may be in better breath, and have longer nails.


Phi. No: no: I prithee don't let them fight by any means; for that is so very
foolish and unreasonable, that it is unreasonable to hear of it.


Tim. Well: imagine then that they do not fight: may not Roger, when they come
to treat, demand more than his share? as suppose (as was before hinted) he
should demand half.


Phi. So he may, if he please; and get it too: there is no Undersheriff to
hinder him: neither has he subscribed to any agreement, nor sworn that he will be
content with less.


Tim. But he ought in reason and equity to be content with less.


Phi. I prithee, Tim, with how much less? Thou look as if thou could tell
to an inch.


Tim. So I can. For he ought to be content just with a fourth part.


Phi. This surely is very pleasant! Why so Tim?


Tim. Because you say that he has a right to no more.


Phi. Where and in what company did I ever say, that Roger had a right but to a
fourth part? but that I don't care to talk of dying, or else I Would be hanged if I
ever said any such thing in my whole life.


Tim. You said it just now. For you said that Roger has a right to the whole
Island, and Dick has a right to the whole, and Tumbler and Towser have each of
them a right also to the whole. And now show me if there be any difference at
all between four men having exactly the very same, same right to the whole, and
one of them having a right to the fourth part, and no more.


Phi. Pish! Tim, thou talkest (as thou usest to do) very weakly. For when I
said that every one of them had a right to all: I meant by right --


Tim. Nay, I care not what you did mean or ever can mean by it. I Will give you
leave to mean by right what you please. A Dog or a Cat or any thing else. For
still Dick's dog will be every whit as good as Roger's, and Towser's Cat as big
as Tumbler's. And so the case will be the same.


Phi. If I may not be suffered, Tim, to make an end of my sentence, who have
instructed above these threescore years, I shall be gone.


Tim. Not so, I pray, Sir: You shall say what you please, for indeed I had like
to have forgot your age and privilege.


Phi, I say then, that there can be no right to any part of this world by
Nature. For we see people dwell in their Fathers houses, and possess their
ancestors estates: and all by custom and right of Law.


Tim. You said all this many times before: and I say so too: and you know I
told you, how I got an interest in these shoes; and I could tell you also that
I got my Gloves by a mere stratagem, and that I hold them only by the Laws of
the Realm. But we must not conclude, Phila^tus, because most of the world is
now shared out, and by Gift, Fortune, Labor, Learning and other means gained
and possessed; that therefore if four men, with equal pretenses, shall fall
upon a place never sought for, nor possessed, one of these (if he so pleases)
may in good reason broile all the rest, to see what mouths and faces they will
make upon the coals.


Phi. This is nothing: give me in short all that you have said, or can say to
prove that the forementioned people have any right to any part of Pines: and I
don't at all question, but that I shall discover all that thou have said to be
very empty and Scholastically dull.


Tim. I say thus: the men that we ^upposed are true Natural men, the place they
come to, is perfectly unpossessed, they all arrive with equal pretenses, and
you your self besides have given them an equal right. And I know nothing
wanting, unless like snayles each of them should have brought their houses on
their heads, and rid down stradling upon their hundred acres: which might have
stretched their thighs, and would have spoiled the supposition. This is that
which I have to say, which I venture only to think reasonable. Now for your
opinion, you have offered nothing but a company of impossible things (excepting
only that May and Can is all one) such as men's shaking hands at a mile's
distance, treating and^ bargaining before they speak, Acts of Parliament
before there be any Parliament, and the like, and this you take your accustomed
liberty to call demonstration.


Phi. I thought I should take thee in some foolery or other: thou talkest of
these peoples coming together, and thereupon of having equal pretenses; and
thou forgettest all this while that possession and invention (as they call it)
are pieces of mere positive humane Law, not of any Natural right. If thou will
call upon me one day, I Will show thee how to turn the Books, where thou mai'st
find abundance about them.


Tim. I believe I might: and about a hundred things more, that are never the
less equitable and reasonable in themselves, because they are to be found in
the Law of Nations, or the particular Law of any Kingdom.


Phi. What, can that be intrinsecally and in reason good or bad, that is made
so by Constitution or Canon?


Tim. What think you, Philautus, of a man's hanging himself? is there any
intrinsecal Natural evil in it?


Phi. Evil! there'^ Death in the case: the chiefest of all natural evils.


Tim. So I remember you say ( Cap. 1. Art. 7.) but there is the severest Law
against him that does it, that can be devised; unless he could be fetched to
life, and hanged again. For he forfeits all his Estate. Do you hear me, Sir?


Phi. Yes: But I am not of such a young man's mind, as you are: neither do I
ever intend to be.


Tim. That Is spoken like a Philosopher indeed.


Phi. It is spoken like one, that good manners might oblige you, to be more
attentive to. Do you think, Tim, that toward my last days (which I hope will
never come) ^'le alter my opinion, upon such childish and insignificant
persuasions as thine? And believe that a man can have any Natural right or
title to Land, when I so certainly know, that in general there is no kind
whatever of just or unjust, right or wrong, good or evil, but what the
Magistrate does sign and determine?


Tim. Upon my word, Philautus, you improve very much as to daringness in your
assertions. For seeing that we have found out already in the very state of
Nature just, and unjust, as to absolute dirt and Earth, I hope we shall be able
with much more ease, to find out a little good and evil.


Phi. You must have better eyes, than ever I met any body had yet.


Tim. However I Will bestow a little looking; and I hope I shall not lose it
altogether so much, as they that went to see the invisible dog. Especially,
Philautus, if you will but continue courageous, and when you talk of justice,
not fetch about as you did before to my Lord Chief Justice, and Justices of the
Peace, and the like.


Phi. What need you fear my giving back? when as you will find it Printed in my
Preface, that there are no Authentical Doctrines concerning just and unjust,
right and wrong, good and evil, but what is so determined by the constituted
Laws in each Realm and Government. And by those, to whom the Supreme has
committed the interpretation of his Laws.


Tim. When you jumble all those words together, Philautus, viz. just, unjust,
etc. I fancy that you still lie upon the old cheat. And because by Bargain,
Indenture or Patent, I hold such a Farm, such a Coalemine, or such and such
Privileges; therefore I must send for a Lawyer to draw me up a Conveyance for
modesty and mercy; and get the Broadseal to give me title to be faithful and
sober.


Phi. Thou talkest of Titles and Conveyances; thou want some body to make
over a little understanding to thee. For what can be more intelligible than
just and unjust? but yet because my Book might possibly meet with such a tool
as thou art, I added besides wright and ^rong.


Tim. You know, Philautus, (as was before hinted) that that is as very a fetch,
as the other. For, because of the relation that is between jus and lex, we face
presently about again to Freehold and Coppyhold, to Messuages and Appurtenances.


Phi. Because, Tim, I would gladly be rid of thee; thou shall put in lawful and
unlawful: My side is so true, that I may give thee leave to pick thy words.


Tim. Now you are sweet indeed: for you suppose a time, wherein there is no Law:
And then to use your own words, by firm reasons you demonstrate that no Law can
be broken during that time: and he that does thus, say you (meaning your self)
is to be looked upon as a great dispeller of clouds, and as one that shows the
high way to peace, and that teaches to avoid the close, dark and dangerous
bypath of Faction, and I know not what more.


Phi. What a slavery it is, to do one good, that labors so hard against it!


Tim. You need not trouble your self any further, Philautus; for you have your
self put in two words that will fully try the business, viz. good and evil.
Each of which, say you, are to be determined by the Supreme Power.


Phi. Yes: I say it; and I am sure no man is able to contradict me: For who is
so fit to judge what is good or evil, as the Supreme Power? and what shall
direct or determine his opinion but his own pleasure.


Tim. I Will tell you what shall direct him --


Phi. Hold: do you know what you are going to say? ^ex in regno suo -- Stat pro
ratione voluntas. Supremus sive summus. What, Tim, art thou so utterly barren,
that thou have neither Divinity, Poetry, nor Grammar within thee? Thou speak
of a supreme power, and then talkest of his being awed and contro^led by
somewhat else. To have such a supreme power is not worth the smoke of a ladle.
Such a one is supreme, suppose, and he thinks such a thing very good and
convenient, and he (...) send it to the Pope or Emperor, (...) I know not
whither, to have it ^ouched and tried, to know whether 'twill pass.


Tim. He need not send so far; he may consult common equity, and his own
reason; which will not only direct him, in determining of those things that are
indifferent, or in controversy (which are the proper object of such
authority;) but which will acquaint him and all mankind besides (excepting
Philautus) that there be several things most firmly and undoubtedly good in
themselves, and will continue so, let all the Supremes in the World meet
together to Vote them down; and there be others which are so famously bad and
unreasonable, that all the P^inces upon earth (if they should conspire) can
never set them up, and give them credit.


Phi. And is not this very pragmatical, and somewhat treasonish besides, to go
about to confine the Power of the Supreme Magistrate, who is therefore called
and acknowledged such, from his undeniable and irresistible pleasure? And
therefore, say I again, he ought most certainly to determine all things.


Tim. So say I, if they be not too nimble for his Power, and determine
themselves before his Supremacy can get hold of them. And truly, Philautus, the
Magistrate has no reason at all to be angry, or to think himself checked and
affronted; if there be some such things that decree themselves to be good and
bad, long before Term begins; viz. in that same supposed Vacation of yours,
the state of Nature. For, when he comes to open, and give sentence, he will not
only find much work done to his hands, but he will find besides that hereby he will
be very much assisted toward well governing, and toward his deciding such
matters as require deciding, and which do belong to his place and profession to
decide. But as for those things we have been now speaking of, he must not by
any means go about to alter or repeal them: For, if he should, it would be
altogether as vain, as to call a Council to make two and three to be nineteen;
or to issue out an order against the next Eclipse, or to mount all the Canons
at the Tower against the next springtide that should offer to come up to
London Bridge.


Phi. Certainly, Tim, these same unalterable and irrevocable goods and bads
that thou talkest of in the state of Nature are very fine things. The
Magistrate, thou say, did not make them; I wonder who did, whence they came,
and who brought them?


Tim. They came down, Sir, the last great rain, we talked of a while ago; for
the very same four men that brought word to Pines, that the Whole is equal to
all its par^^; and that if four have equal right to the whole, each have a
right to the fourth part; brought also abundance of moral rules, that is of
goods and bads, reasonables and unreasonables.


Phi. Abundance do say? I don't think that thou have enough to stop a
hollow-tooth. I would brush up my eyes most mightily, if thou would but show
me one of those rarities. But I am afraid that they are like those same
perpetual Lamps, that some Philosophers speak of, which have got a trick of
going out always when people go to see them.


Tim. What think you of drunkenness, Philautus? Is it a thing altogether
indifferent, till the Magistrate has given his opinion in the case?


Phi. Truly, Tim, I must tell you, that whilst Dick, Roger, and the rest
continue in the state of Nature, they may take a cup of the creature with more
freedom and less inconvenience, than thou do imagine. For the windows are
not as yet glazed, nor the Constables chosen: and if one of them having
received an occasion of being more than ordinary thoughtful, should, by chance,
set his foot not exactly in the path; here is no breach of Law, Trespass or
Action in the Case, because the Land as yet stands wholly undivided.


Tim. But it is not very bad husbandry to make an hundred steps for that, which
might have been done as well with forty?


Phi. Now, Tim, I advise thee to take leave of thy friends; for thou have said
that, which will prove thy utter destruction. I do grant indeed that
intemperance is very silly and unreasonable; not because it is so in it self,
but because (now, Tim, keep thy eye fixed) I say again, but because it is
inpolitick, and perfectly against my interest: for it makes me obnoxious to
many dangers, and several diseases; and besides it destroys and weakens the use
of my reason, and so renders me unable either to defend my estate from cheats,
or my life and limbs from such as are quarrelsom.


Tim. Truly, Philautus, I did never look upon temperance to be altogether so
good to kill Rats, as Arsnick and Raysons; nor to carry one over the water, as
a sculler or oars: But if there be any reason to be given, why it ought to be
approved of before the contrary, besides the Magistrates determination therein,
then (as was before mentioned) you are not so great a dispeller of Clouds, as
you promised to be, when you said, that by firm reasons you would demonstrate
that there was no good or evil till the Supreme Power had set it out: and
therefore at present I resolve to defer speaking to self interest; and shall
show you another rarity. What think you of faithfulness, i. e. of keeping your
promise, or standing to your bargain? Is it not a very reasonable thing, though
there were never a Magistrate in the whole World?


Phi. You talk of showing me rarities, Tim; and you draw out some of my
fundamental wares: for to perform Contracts, or to keep trust is my second Law
of Nature. That is, when people are resolved to end the state of war, by
relinquishing their right to all things, it is very requisite that Contracts
should be stood to, for they direct to peace and self-defence.


Tim. But is it not a good and reasonable thing in it self to perform
Contracts, in the very state of nature?


Phi. What time did thou go to bed last night, Tim? What, would you have a
thing good, before there be any such thing at all? You ask whether it be not
good to stand to Contracts; when it is supposed, that there has not been so much
as one ragg dealt for in the whole world.


Tim. For all that, I can conceive it very just and reasonable for a man to
keep his word, although he never spoke as yet, nor perhaps never shall. For
suppose there were not one drop of Liquor in the whole Island, that we have
been talking of; yet I count it as unreasonable for Roger to be drunk, as if he
were just ready to set the great pitcher to his mouth, and had sufficient
matter to proceed upon. And it seems, I believe, to most men (except your self,
Philautus) a very unnatural and unjust thing for a Judge or Arbiter to incline
to either side; though there never was as yet one Case put to reference, nor
should be these thousand years.


Phi. Thou have gone on, Tim, in thy careless shuffling way, I know not
whither: And now I must dash thee all in pieces, and tell thee; that thou
talkest like one not at all conversant in my Writings: for if thou had, thou
would there have found no less than twenty good and bad things, all fetched
from reason; such as faithfulness, mercy, humility, temperance, reproach,
ingratitude, etc. which I call my Laws of Nature. But here is the pinch of the
business, and that which thou did never attend to; these things I say are
good and bad, not because they are so inwardly in themselves, but because they
either conduce to peace in general, or are for a man's own quiet and safety, or
for his health, or profit, or recreation, or for the advantage of his Family or
Relations, or are a hinderance of these: in short, because they are for, or
against a man's interest.


Tim. This was a great dash indeed, Philautus; and I have improved more by it,
than by all that you have said I know not how long: for if we be discoursing
concerning some action, or disposition of mind that is good; and if the same
chance to prove convenient either to King or Subject, Church or State, for my
self or any body else, for this life or next: That is, if it be good for any
thing that has but a name, then is it not good in it self, but good upon
another account; which, let it be what it will, with a little art^fice of
phrase may be so twisted, as it shall certainly be all driven upon your common
shore of interest. Truly, Philautus, I can scarce tell what you would have
meant by things being good in themselves, unless you would have them only to be
pictured with pretty eyes, mouths and lips; or have a man get the virtues and
hang them upon several strings, or tie them to the end of some sticks, and so
sing over his most excellent and dainty Justice, his curious amiable
Temperance, his bright angelical Mercy, and the like. But I might have taken
much less pains, Philautus, to have shown against you, that all good and evil
does not depend either upon self interest, or h^mane Law; because you are so
very over kind as to acknowledge it, and confute your self.


Phi. You may as well say, that the second Proposition of Euclid does
contradict and void the first.


Tim. You may say so, if you please* but I am resolved I will not, when I see so
much reason to say otherwise.


Phi. About what place, and in what Article, can thou possibly pick out any
such absurdity?


Tim. I did show you one place, you know, long ago; where you said, that a man
in the very state of Nature might be guilty of breaking the Laws of Nature;
which is all one, according to your self, as to say, that a man may act against
reason, before there be any positive Laws; and that is all that I desire you
would acknowledge: Neither do I suppose, that you did intend to excuse your
self, by what you say a little after, viz. If any man pretend somewhat to tend
necessarily to his preservation, which yet he himself does not confidently
believe so, he may offend against the Laws of Nature: For this is a further
acknowledgement of what you said before; and shows plainly that hypocrisy in
the very state of Nature is an unreasonable thing.


Phi. You may fool your self, Tim, and gape for as many acknowledgements as you
will: But I hold and say that the Laws of nature in the state of nature are
silent; provided that they be referred not to the mind, but to the actions of
men.


Tim. I remember you say this, in the second Article of your fifth Chapter.
But, if you had not forgot, what you had said upon the 18. Art. of your 3.
Chap. you would have granted that some natural Laws do more than merely buz in
the mind, during the very state of war or nature.


Phi. Why, what do I say there?


Tim. No great matter, Sir; only I find there these words; viz. but there are
certain natural Laws whose Exercise (I pray mind that word) cease not even in
the time of war it self: For (as you go on) I cannot understand what
drunkenness or cruelty (that is revenge which respects not the future good) can
advance toward peace or the preservation of any man.


Phi. Now what do thou infer from this, Tim? What purchase do thou intend
to make?


Tim. No great purchase, Sir; only I do think that the second Proposition of
Euclid does not altogether contradict the first so much, as these two places do
one another.


Phi. And now thou think, thou have got me so fast; whereas I can come off
easily only by saying, that I did not mean all the Laws of Nature, when I said
that the Laws of nature are silent in the state of nature.


Tim. If you please, Sir, you may so explain your self: But however, if you
your self, Philautus, will bestow upon me only one or two Laws that ought to be
observed in the state of Nature, I take it more kindly, than if any body else
had given me half a score.


Phi. I always found it an endless thing to reason and discourse people into
any soundness of mind, (especially as to Morals) who would not make any
observations of their own. And therefore I prithee, Tim, go spend one quarter
of an hour in the streets, and I Will stay here; and observe well, what people
are doing of; and when thou come back again, I do not at all question but
that thou will fully believe what I have taught thee to be true; namely, that
the world is wholly disposed of, and guided by self-interest.


Tim. I need not go now, Sir; because in the morning as I came hither, I found
it exactly so, as you say. In one place there was a man buying a cloak, as hard
as ever he could, not in the least for me, but for himself wholly; and the
seller he claws up the money, and without saying one word to his Neighbors,
pockets it all up: In another place there was a Porter lying close upon the
lurch at a Tavern-door, who, had he no interest to drive on there, might even
as well have been here, upon the walks.


Phi. Thou need not speak any more, Tim, for I do say thus much unto thee,
that unless thou dyest a fool, thou will perceive that interest is the very
first principle of Nature, and reason; and that men must mind themselves if
they intend to live.


Tim. Yes, Sir: So let them; if they do not overmind themselves: and cry only
Milk, when they should cry milk and water; and score up Claret, when it should
be Cider. People ought, Sir, to take care of themselves: but I would not have
them pick blind men's pockets, and cheat children of there Bread and Butter, and
then admire their own parts, and quickness of sight. Interest, Philautus, is a
word innocent enough, but only when it crosses equity and reason: which,
according to you, it never can do, being the first dictate of right reason.
And therefore if righteousness or mercy, or any other good thing happen to be
against this my first dictate of right reason; I must desire them to withdraw
for a time: for at present they are very troublsome and nonsense beside.


Phi. And will thou be so childish after all these instructions, as not to
believe that interest is, and ought to be the first principle?


Tim. It must needs be the first, Sir, for that very reason your self give:
(concerning seeking of peace) namely, because the rest follow. Which you might
easily make sure of, if the Printer did not misplace things, and so disappoint
you.


Phi. I perceive Tim, that thou art much given to delight in toys, and to
neglect things of moment. My main reason that self interest is to be looked
upon as the first Principle of Nature was, because I found that every man was
desirous of what was good for him, and sh^n'd what was hurtful and evil: and
this he did by a certain impulsion of Nature, no less than that whereby a stone
moves downward.


Tim. By your leave, Philautus, I think that this reason seems to promise
somewhat bigger than the former, but it is not so true. For though children
desire, and use means to get all things that please them; and avoid and fly
back from all things that hurt them, even as a stone comes downward: yet it is
to be supposed that what men desire or avoid, they do it not as a stone comes
downward, but with consideration and reason: and thereupon ought to submit to
poverty and other inconveniences, rather than to reproach Humane Nature, and be
guilty of an unreasonable action. And therefore a child that pulls hard for a
jewel, which cost the owner perhaps much trouble, and many dangerous voiages,
shall be excused: but there is little reason that a great lasie Lubber that
spends his time in the Chimney-corner and Ale, should snatch it away, and not
cry for it first.


Phi. If he and his family be ready to starve, that alters the case very much:
for it is great pity that any rational creatures should be lost.


Tim. Starve, or not starve it is all one for that: for it is a very lawful
cordial, so that it be but his opinion that he wants at present, or may
afterward want. For seeing that right reason tells him that life is to be
preserved: it tells him also (as you well advise Chapter 1. Art. 8.) that he must
use the means to preserve it: and seeing that no man can know when another is
sufficiently alive, so well as he himself, therefore (as you advise further,
Art. 9.) he is to judge what is requisite and convenient for that purpose. And
therefore says the self preserver, There Is a company of people who, when I was
out of the way, have gone and divided the world without asking my leave, or
taking my counsel, or consent: I am sure there is no fault to be found with
Nature: for she was always very careful, and intended every man a sufficient
share. And therefore if they will begin once more, and divide all over again, and
consider all men's deserts, strength and constitution, well and good: But
otherwise I see no reason to stand to this blind bargain they made in my
absence. For I find that my stomach is very cold, and Nature that is famous for
doing nothing that is Idle, ofttime calls for a glass of Wine, and (with shame
to these dividers be it spoken) it comes not, for want of money. I find also
that my head is much given to aching, for want of a lighter Peruke; and for want
of a Boy to comb it, I had lately like to have lost the use of my Thumb. I
cannot do as other people; for my flesh is so soft and gentle, that ordinary
stockings presently plough up my Legs: and if I have not a Watch and a few
Guineas about me, I presently yawn and am as chill as if I had an Ague. And
therefore, I say, I must make use of my parts, and some of Reason's dictates to
preserve me from sorrows and the Grave.


Phi. Thou have now, Tim, talked together, more than becomes thee by forty
years. To all which I say, that I do give thee and all mankind besides leave,
to show me any thing better for peace and Government than that first principle
of self-interest which I laid down, and discovered to the world.


Tim. It is strange ambition, when people will take upon them to be the Author
of that of which they are not, though it be never so false and ridiculous.


Phi. Why, who did ever hold self-interest to be the first principle of Nature
and Government?


Tim. Truly, I believe not many ever held it long, because it was so
egregiously silly. But if you look no further than the 3d. page of an ordinary
School book, viz. Tully's Offices: you will there find that there was a sort
of small philosophers that were of your opinion.


Phil. What, perhaps they talked somewhere in their writings of self-interest:
but that was not the foundation and first principle of their Philosophy.


Tim. If summum bonum be Latin for foundation or first principle (which in
morals, I suppose it is) and that suis commodis metiri signify to measure by
self-interest; then I tell you there were a sort of unreasonable people whose
Philosophy stood upon your very Principle. Concerning whom the Orator justly
says, that if they lived a life exactly answerable to their own opinions, and
were not sometimes overcome by good nature, they must be perpetual knaves.


Phi. I don't understand what you and your Orator mean; but this I Will swear,
that if there be any knavery in my principles, I know not what will become of
your Bible. For I tried all my Laws of Nature which I deduced from self
interest by that Book: and I found (as I tell you Art. 1. chapter 4.) that they are
exactly the same, with those that have been delivered from the Divine Majesty
for the Laws of his Heavenly Kingdom, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Holy
Prophets and Apostles.


Tim. I Will tell you, Philautus, how that might be easily done: You went to the
Bible, suppose, and thence picked out a company of very good Laws, and then
having ordered and wrested them to your own design; then you go again to the
Bible, and finding that they were not flown away, you cry, see here ^ what
ignorant people are they that shall go about to find fault with my principles;
when as Christ and I hold forth the same Doctrine; as is plain by a whole
Chapter full of Scripture which I produce?


Phi. Do not I recommend the same justice, mercy, equity, etc. that are
recommended in the Bible?


Tim. Yes: But you don't recommend them every day in the week: for perhaps at
present there may be no inconvenience in being just and righteous: but to
morrow it may be against my interest: and the Castle-principle must never be
forsaken. This is so very plain, as it need not be insisted on, and besides, it
begins to be time, Philautus, to think of some protection for that inward
member of the body, called the stomach.


Phi. In that, Tim, I agree with thee, but in nothing else. And I am even sorry
that I have stayed thus long: for thou have been so perverse, that I am afraid
I have done thee but little good. And so farewell.


FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Nathaniel Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill near
the Royal Exchange.
Folio.
THe admired Piece of Physiognomy, Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, the symmetrical
Proportion and signal Moles of the Body explained, with the Interpretation of
Dreams; to which is added the Art of Memory; Illustrated with Figures, both
pleasant and profitable; with very large Additions: By Richard Sanders. Price
12 s.

The so well entertained Work, The new World of Words, or, A general English
Dictionary, containing all Terms in Navigation, the Etymology, Definitions, and
perfect Interpretations of the proper significations of hard English words
throughout the Arts and Sciences, Liberal and Mechanic; as also other subjects
that are useful, or appertain to the Language of our Nation; a Work very
necessary for strangers as well as our own Contrymen, for all persons that
would rightly understand what they discourse or read, Collected and published,
with above two thousand words added in this third Edition, by E. P. Gent. 10 s.

Mare Clausum, or, the Right, and Dominion, or Ownership of the British Seas,
laid down in two Books, by John Seldom, Esquire a very learned Piece, fit for
Scholars, and all Gentlemen and Travelers. 10 s.

Quarto.
The Conveyancer's Light, or, The Complete Clerk, and Scrivener's Guide; being
an exact draught of all Presidences and Assurances now in use; likewise the
form of all Bills, Answers, and Pleadings in Chancery, as they were penned by
diverse learned Judges, eminent Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both ancient
and modern; whereunto is added a concordance from Richard III. to this very
time, with very large Additions. Price 12 s.

Don Iuan Lamberto, a Comical History of the late past times in Droll. Price 1
s.

A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions, very requisite for Statesmen, etc. 1 s.

A new Description of the Country of Surinam.

The ingenious Satyr against Hypocrites.

The Batchelours Banquet, or fifteen degrees of Marriage.

St. Foine improved, a discourse showing the utility and benefit England has
and may receive by the Grass called St. Foine. Price 4 d.

Large Octavo.
Moor's Arithmetic, much refined, and diligently cleared from the former
mistakes of the Press. A Work containing the whole Art of Arithmetic, as well
in Numbers as Species, together with many large Additions: by Jonas Moor,
Esabque;

The Gentleman's Jocky and approved Farrier, instructing in the natures, causes
and cures of all Diseases, incident to Horses. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Baker's Arithmetic, with large Additions, fitted for all that desire the
knowledge of Arithmetic. 2 s. 6 d.

Fax Nova Linguae Latinae, a new Torch to the Latin Tongue, useful for all
Gentlemen and Clerks for their improvement, very much enlarged: By Paul Iaz
Berennii a Transylvanian: The fourth Edition. 8 s.

Abecedarium Scholasticum, or the Grammar Scholars Abecedary. By Tho. Huntt,
Master of St. Savior's Free School in Southwark. 1 s. 6 d.

The Psalms of King David Paraphrased, and turned into English Verse according
to the Common Meter. By Miles Smith. 3 s.

Culpeper's last Legacy to his Wife, with the Addition of 200 choice Receipts
and Aphorisms in Physic, never published before. 2 s. 6 d.

Culpeper's School of Physic. 3 s. 6 d.

Culpeper's Semiotica Vranica, or his Judgment upon Diseases, also a Treatise
of Urines, useful for all that study Physic. 2 s. 6 d.

The Accomplished Cook, necessary for all Ladys, Gentlewomen, and others that
desire the knowledge of the Mystery of the whole Art of Cookery, with all kind
of Sawces: By the many years experience of Robert May. 5 s.

Wits Interpreter, with addition of these Courtly Games, viz. L'hombre, Piquit,
Chess, Gleek, and Cribbidge, etc. 5 s.

Loveday's Letters, newly Reprinted. 2 s. 6 d.

The Complete Midwives Practise^ so plain that the meanest Capacity may easily
attain the knowledge of the whole Art, illustrated with several Cuts in Brass.

The History of the Turkish Wars in Hungary, etc. and other Provinces of the
Germ^n Empire, from 1432 to 1664. 2 s.

A Storehouse to the Latin Tongue, an excellent help to Learners, by P. I.
Berennii.

The Glories and Triumphs of his Majesty Charles the Second. 2 s.

A Platform for Purchasers, a Guide for Builders, etc. by W. L. Surveyor. 2 s.
6 d.

An Historical Essay, endeavoring a probability, that the Language of China is
the primitive Language, by I. W. Esquire 2 s.

Small Octavo and Twelves.
The Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy and Religion inquired
into, in a Letter to R. L. 1 s.

Some Observations on the Answer to a Letter of Inquiry into the Grounds and
Occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy and Religion, in a second Letter to R.
L. by the same Author. Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Treatise of Contentation, fit for these sad times, by I. Hall Bishop of
Norwich. 1 s.

The natural History of Nitre, by W. C. 1 s.

The Art of Simpling, etc. by W. Coals. 1 s.

The Queens Closet Opened, etc. 2 s. 6 d.

Ovid's Metamorphosis, Farnaby 's Notes.

Iuvenal and Perseus, Farnaby 's Notes.

Farnaby's Phrases.

Dux Grammaticus, per John Clerk.

The fearful state of Francis Spira. 8 d.

Adagia Scotica, Scotch Proverbs, etc. 6 d.

A Discourse of the Small Pox, and Observations on the French Pox, by T. W.

Cocker's new Copy-Book, or England's Penman, the best ever he graved.

A new and exact Map of the World, with the newest Discoveries of all the Parts
in Persia, and other places, with a Description thereof in Cloth and Colors,
fitted for all Chimney-pieces, etc. Price 8 s.

A large new and exact Map, with a true Description of the City of London, and
its Ruins faithfully surveyed, wherein is declared its Original, Antiquities,
Monuments, Customs, Rights, and Privileges, according to the ancient Charters
granted by several Kings; with its jurisdiction: a distinction of the Wards,
with the names of the Streets, Lanes, and Alleys, etc. and a Relation of the
Firing, with the manner how it is to be Rebuilt, in Cloth and Colors. 12 s.

An historical Discourse of Fixed Stars, with Mathematical Demonstrations, by
Sir Chr. Heydon. 1 s.

Cleaveland revived, Poems, etc. 1 s. 8 d.

Dr. Bunworth on the French Disease.

The Man Midwife, being a Guide for Midwives and Childbearing Women in times
of Conception and Bearing, and Nursing their Children, fit to be known. 12 d.

The Royal Buckler or Lectures for Traitors, being a rational Tract to persuade
men to keep Alliegeance to his Majesty and Successors, declaring the necessity
of Subjects to show their Loyalty. 2 s. 6 d.

An Epitome of Barclay's Summum bonum. 12 d.

The Life of a Reverend Divine, Dr. Tho. Fuller, Author of the Holy War and
State, and many other learned Books. 12 d.

Danger of continuing in, and the greater of Apostatizing to the Romish
Religion, by R. F. 12 d.

There you may be furnished with all sorts of Stationary Wares, Blank Bonds of
several sorts, viz. Bonds single or double, English or Latin: Counter, single
or double; Arbitration: for several Payments; Performance of Covenants; to save
harmless; with Sheriffs Bonds, Bills of Debt, Letters of Attorney* Bills of
Sale, Releases; Bills of Lading, English, French, Dutch, Italian, or Spanish;
Policies for Merchants; of all sorts; Indentures for London Apprentices, and
for Foreign Plantations, etc.

A LETTER TO HIS Old dear Friend R. L. From T. B

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler and R. Holt, for Nathaniel Brook, at the Sign of
the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1672.

A LETTER, etc.
SIR,
YOU had received this, and what follows, long before this time; but I was loath
to trouble the World on purpose, upon so small an occasion: And therefore I
rather chose to wait the pleasure of a Friend, who had promised me the running
of two or three Letters, in his Dialogue concerning Mr. Hobbs. The first
whereof concerns one, who was pleased to send only a short friendly admonition
with his name to it; who being a Person of great worth, piety and gravity, I am
very sorry that he should be so imposed upon by the heats and raylings of
others, as to give under his hand no better Grounds and Arguments for his
Reproof.

After him, Sir, comes a very smart hot-spur, who like a Whis^er at my Lord
Mayor's Show, runs up and down with a spit-fire; crying, make room there for
Euclid: bear back, and take in ten Demonstrations against Learning and Riches:
and (which is much to be wondered at) this Gentleman, Sir, with nothing but the
poor helps of Wits Commonwealth, Godwyn's Antiquities, Clerk's Formulae,
Spencer's Similitdes, or Things new and old, Theatrum vitae humanae, and two or
three smaller Books besides, such as A help to discourse, the Pearls of
Eloquence, Blunt's Academy of Eloquence, proves the strangest kind of things
that ever you heard of in your whole life: and all ordered and managed
according to Euclid. He and Antoninus together make nothing to prove, you, dear
Sir, are no body at all: that you are a mere fiction, a cheat of Sir Politic
would be, an Imposture of a sick brain, a dream, device, and car^wimple. He did
but whistle, and call for his small Greek Diveling, (...), and if I had not
made great haste, and pulled you back by the Leg, you had been quite gone: And
so he had like to have served the Academick Youngster that made the chief of
his speech of Muses, Nosegays, and his own tenuity. He durst not absolutely say
that his name was Nicholas Nemo; but, which is very near unto't, he thinks it
much more probable that the Sea burns, than that there should ever be such
stuff put together. Now, Sir, were it not for the Kings and Merchants Ships
that are now abroad, I had a great mind to have fired the sea; and told it him
in Latin. However look to your selves Ships, for I profess I cannot forbear,
but I must try to call to mind a little of it. Cum tenellam meam in dicendo
peritiam, and coruscantem vestrorum oculorum fulgurationem mecum reputo,
profecto Academici, instar Niobes, pallidus and tremebundus obstupesco: Et cum
oration mea nullis verborum stellis ornata, nullis phrasium sydcribus
illuminata, nullis eloquentiae luminibus dictincta, denique cum ambrosia and
nectaris succo penitus est vacua, ad stillicidia vestri favoris and
benevolentiae, and ad Achilleam vestri patrocinii panopliam confugio: And so
much concerning Nicholas Nemo. But these are but things by the by; for this
Author's masterpiece is concerning Riches and Wisdom; both which he has so
horribly discouraged, by pressing the great duties and conveniences of being
ignorant and poor, from the History of the Jews, the Grecians, the Romans, both
Pagan and Christian, and from our Savior himself and his Disciples: that I am
afraid that money it self, as well as Learning, will go a begging; and that it
will be a very hard matter ever to persuade either Clergymen or others to
undergo again the trouble and scandal of being wise or rich. It cannot but be
expected that hereupon Lands must necessarily fall to eight years purchase,
money to fifty shillings per cent. and as for History, Philosophy, Languages,
and other parts of Learning, take one with another, and they may fetch perhaps
six pence a bushel, heaped as long as they will run; and that is all. And then for
running a man up in a corner, he is the most severe and persecuting that you
ever ^et withal. In one place of his Preface, he drives me up so very close,
concerning my writing my Book, ^ither to inform my self, or others; that I
began to suspect, Sir, whether I ever writ any Letter to you or not: but
looking upon it again, I found at last that he only proved that I ought not to
have written one. And this further I observe of him, that where ever he gets
any advantage, he has no more mercy than a Tiger. He knows, as well as I do my
right hand from my left, that I do not much care for a bit of Greek: and yet to
vex and spite me, and to make me tired of the world, he will bring in at a
venture, I know not how much, though it be nothing at all to the purpose. If
you remember, Sir, we have such a saying in English, that a man that is brought
to be very poor, is brought to great necessity; and (...), being Greek for
necessity, he thought it had been Greek for poverty too; and so urging the
great conveniences of poverty, to choke me, he gives me that golden scrap of
Pythagoras, (as he calls it,) (...). Hoping, poor Gentleman! that (...) had
signified virtue, and (...) poverty: and he might even as well have quoted that
scrap of Camden, (...). For (...) there signifies power, and (...) necessity or
fate: which is plain by their being so rendered, and by the foregoing Verse, in
which Pythagoras advises a man not to quarrel or part with a friend for a small
fault, but to forgive him, (...), as far as he was able; (...) For he that
forgives another to the ^^most of his power, will very near as certainly
forgive him, as if it had been so decreed by the fates. I think somewhere in
the New Testament that (...) do signify necessities, or as we say streights:
under which are comprehended not only money-streights, but all kind of
inconveniences, which are difficultly to be avoided: such as dishonor, false
friends, sickness, or the like. But as for (...) signifying poverty, I fancy
it will be a very hard matter to find it, not only in Pythagoras, but any where
else, except it be in such a Book as Lycosthenes. Now, Sir, after all this, it
is all one to me what the true meaning of the word is: and I had not taken any
notice of it, but only I know as I said before he quoted it out of malice, on
purpose to make me fret, and hang my self. And so he does another piece of
Greek, in what he says concerning Schools; viz. (...) by which he intended
doubly to kill me: First, because 'twas Greek, and then because he tells me,
plodding Aristotle said it; and that it was as well said as if Carts himself
had said it: and think he, that same (...) is a thundering word, and will make
the Rogue eat his very flesh for madness. And I Will translate it thus; (...),
changing foundations is oftentimes of dangerous consequence: Being, Sir, (as
you must needs think) deadly mad to hear a sentence out of Aristotle, so
magnificently translated against me; I was resolved, if possible, that the
sentence should not be in Aristotle; or if it were, it should require nothing
near such a glorious and dreadful Translation. And I profess, to be short, Sir,
I was made happy, and had my design: for (as I believe) that sentence is no
where to be found in plodding Aristotle, but in plodding Themistius, a plodding
Commentator upon plodding Aristotle: and besides, (...) does not signify a
calf with five legs, a colt with three heads, or any such frightful and
monstrous thing; but very mildly, as one can desire. For Aristotle, in the
fourth of his Physics, de iis quae in tempore f^^^nt; finding fault with those
that thought that time it self did alter, and corrupt things, puts in these
words, (...), i. e. that motion (not time it self) is that which alters things,
or that puts things out of that state and condition in which they are; upon
which words Themistius thus comments: (...); that is, if an old barn or an old
tree tumble down; it is not mere time that rots them, or tumbles them down; but
it is (...) that does it, i. e. the wind, the weather, or somewhat else that
makes holes in them, and puts them out of their place. Now, Sir, as I told you
before, it is very indifferent to me what this and what the other word signify;
only I would have had him left out the abuse, and not have told me, that it was
as well said as if Carts had said it; because it is just as well, and no
better; it being a fundamental principle of his Philosophy, that all alteration
is caused by motion.

And so let thus much at present serve for the second Answerer: after whom
comes the Doomster, or Fire and Brimstone it self; who pulling out of his
Magazine, four or five Sermons concerning the existence of a God, the Authority
of the Scriptures, Providence, etc. and raking together an hundred or two of
names for me, and all the curses in the Bible; he bundles up all this together,
and in as dreadful black, as ever was branded upon wool-pack, he writes
Hieragonisticon, or an Answer to my two Letters. I looked, Sir, upon some few
Pages, and I find all this comfort for my self; an Universal repaganizer,
Popeling, a worshipper of the beast, Loyolite, Iesuited Pandor, Herod, Judas,
Pilate, Antiscripturist, Antichrist, Antiprovidentialist, Atheist; to whom,
Sir, I have said very little, but only told him that he was mad, and that I was
not singular, for the rest of the world did think so. Perhaps, Sir, you may
have a mind to know how it is possible that a Sermon for Providence should be
against me, and how he should get it in, or any thing like it. If you remember,
Sir, speaking somewhere in my first Letter concerning the great convenience of
a tolerable maintenance, for the Ministry; it is there said, that people should
not be suffered to take away from God's Priests, what he had designed them,
lest some thereupon should think that he seemed to take no care of them: Upon
which, he springs forth. Say you so! What are you there abouts? Nay, even off
with your Maskarado, and profess your self a right down Atheist, or
Antiprovidentialist: which if you do, then (by the grace of God) I Will pull out
one of my best Sermons, concerning Providence, and so shamefully rout you, as
never Heathen was r^uted: and so away he goes, proving Providence as hard as
ever he can.

I hear, Sir, of eight or ten Answerers more that may possibly come out this
Spring, if it be seasonable and warm: but if they do, I shall make some
interest to get my reply into Muddiman's Letter, or to stand at the bottom of
the Gazette, amongst the strayed Horses and Apprentices. For you know, Sir, I
have nothing more to say; unless it may be here convenient, Sir, to beg so much
room in your Letter, as to desire those (if there be any such) who are still
offended, at what I said concerning Allegories; to read one place of Scripture,
as well as another: and when they have read, and well weighed, what is said by
St. Luke c. 8. v. 9. That his Disciples did not understand the Parable of the
Sower; and not understanding, desired the meaning; and (as the Learned Dr
Hammond notes) Christ answered, that he did it on purpose, as a punishment to
those that had had clear means and perspicuous expressions and manifestations;
that seeing they might not see; that is, clear means was n^w denied unto them,
and none but parables was allowed, as ^ punishment of their former obduraion
against hi^ means: As also, upon what occasion it was that our Sa^iour said,
St. Matthew. 13. 14. And seeing they shall see, and not perceive, i. e. (as the
same Doctor observes) being an obstinate people they shall not receive so much
profit as otherwise they ^ight: things shall be so aenigma^ically and darkly
represented to them, (...) that they (having before shut their eyes) shall now
discern but little; and what follows, v. 15. For this peoples ^^art is waxed
gross, etc. i. e. (speaking still of making use of Parables) and this is a just
judgment of God's upon them, for their former obduration and obstinacy; in that
they would not see nor hear heretofore: I say, when they have considered of
these, and many such like places of Scripture; and after all, they shall still
think, that they have as much reason to punish their Anditors, as (...) Savior
had some of his: Nay, to torture them with Allegories ten times more remote
from common apprehension; I have nothing to say to them, but only to leave them
to their own way, and understanding.

But it is time now, Sir, to take my leave of you, and (setting aside all
fashionable conclusions) I desire that I may do it with what Bishop Saunderson
says in his first Sermon ad Aulam; which possibly may do some body or other
more good, than any complement could ever have done you service. He speaking,
Sir, of making use of Rhetorical Ornaments and Elegancies in popular Sermons,
says thus; That as such things are sometimes very allowable, useful and
approved of by Scripture it self; if it be discreetly and sparingly done, and
counts those uncharitable, and unjust, that in general condemn all such
Rhetorical Ornaments as savouring of an unsanctified spirit: So (says he) I
confess there may be a fault this way, and (in young men especially before
their judgments are grown to a just ripeness) many times there is. For (as he
continues) affectation in this as in every thing else is both tedious and
ridiculous; and in this by so much more than in other things, by how much more
the condition of the person, and the nature of the business require a sober,
serious, grave deportment. Those Preachers therefore by a little vanity in this
kind, take the readiest way to bring both their own discretions into question,
and the sacred word they handle into contempt, that play with words as children
do with a feather.

I have been mistaken by some, but however I hope you will always think that I
am,

Sir, Your most humble Servant, T. B.

A LETTER To B. O.

The Publisher of Mr HERBERTS Country Parson.

From T. B.

LONDON, ^^inted by E. Tyler and R. Holt, for Nathaniel Brook, at the Sign of
the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1672.

A LETTER, etc.
Honored Sir,
I Received your fifth Paragraph (as you call it) long since, wherein you tell
me, that I am the Author of a scandalous Book: and if I had the very next day
sent you word back again, that I am not the Author of any such Book; I had
given you just as full an answer, as you have given reasons that I am so. For
that great service, Sir, that you have done the Church, and are able still to
do it, I have a very great respect for you: but I do much wonder, that you
would not a little defer calling any Book scandalous, till you had thought of
some better ways to make it appear so: or have told me what you meant by
scandalous. For you know, Sir, the word has been taken in so many senses that
there has been a time when Almond butter has been counted rebellion, minced Pie
Idolatry, and if a little Wine were put thereunto, it was as ill as worshipping
the host: and to eat Custards with spoons was abominably scand^lous, but to be
engaged in Sack-posse^t up to the eyes, with Ladles, was Christian, Orthodox,
and Brotherly. Therefore when you say that that Book is scandalous, if you mean
that it puts men in mind of their follies, that it abates the glory of: some
men's preaching, that some people now are longer making their Sermons, if you
mean that some dislike it, wish that it never had been Printed, are very angry,
may are staring raving mad; I know then that it is so very scandalous, that
there be those that are lovers of themselves and only of their own way, that at
a venture they wish the Author hanged, a thousand and a thousand times over.

But if you meant any thing more by scandalous, I wish you had made it out. For
I would not have you think, Sir, that you have done enough toward it, only by
saying (as you do) that I am puffed up, that if I had known the man that
preached upon Weep not, etc. I ought to have cried: That my Book has given
offense to diverse eminent grave and Learned men; and is loathsome to all good
men. That Henry the eight had like to have been in Orders, etc. and that you
know of two or three Noble men's sons that in former times were in Orders, and
of six or seven that at this present are: and that an holy man in a poor Living
is in the kingdom of Heaven, if there be one upon Earth: which (you say) you
believe, because you durst undertake to hold this Thesis against any Jesuit,
viz. Status inopis parochi in Ecclesia Anglicana, est perfector statu
cujuslibet M^nachi in Ecclesia Romana. But I suppose, Sir, when you designed me
a Paragraph, and to call my Book scandalous; you intended some better reasons,
if you had not forgot them. But I pray, Sir, how come you to think that I was
puffed up? I profess, Sir, I do'nt find my constitution to be a whit more
scandalous than formerly: My pulse beats neither faster nor loftier: the same
girdle-still takes me in. I neither sleep deeper, nor eat more. I have not I
confess lately examined my foretop; that possibly may be a little started
forth; but otherwise I know of no alteration in my self.

Again, Sir, you would have me to have cried and pitied him that preached upon Weep
not etc. rather than have etc. I pray, Sir, to what purpose? that man is quiet
in his grave, and I did it not because he or his Executors had ever affronted,
or offended me* but because I knew of no better instance to represent the
vanity of such kind of idle shreddings: and to put an end to the extravagancy
of them. I intended to vex no man now alive in the whole world, not to please
and delight my self in triumphing over the imprudences of the dead: but yet,
for all that, some people are resolved to think, that I am a Devil I know not
how big. However, my Conscience tells me, what was my design: and I bless God
Almighty that he put it into my mind, and that I was enabled to finish it.

Neither would I have you, Sir, so over-confident that that same Book you call
scandalous, is so very offensive and loathsome to all good m^n. For I am sure
you have not lately spoke with all the good men in the Nation: For I know
several that are not of your opinion, and that are very good men too: and for
ought I know, as good as yours: they being as eminent for learning, for piety
and for suffering too: and then I am sure, you will acknowledge them to be without
all doubt good: I say, I know several, and such who were born much above forty
years since, (for if they had not, with some they would not be worth sixpence a
hundred) that at the first reading thought the design to be honest, and the
Book still to be useful: and if I be puffed up with any thing (as you think I
am, Sir,) it is not I Will assure you with any jest, story or gloss, that you
there find; but to hear of some that are thoroughly convinced that it is not the
best way to spend two days of three either in dressing up plain sense and
meaning with obscure Rhimes and Iingles, or with other sorts of elaborate,
useless fineries.

I suppose, Sir, I am to look upon my self concerned in all your fifth
Paragraph: But when you tell (...) of some persons of (...) that have been
herefore, and of others that are now in holy Orders; th^ow not how it should
come into your mind, to think any thing of that against me; whose great design
it was that there might be ten times as many; and though you are pleased to
say, that an holy man in a poor Living is in a kingdom; yet I hope, Sir, that
your ^^entions of augmenting your own Living, for the advantage of your
successors, will not remove you ever a whit the further, from that Kingdom you
there mean.

If you desire, Sir, any further satisfaction, I must refer you to my second
Letter: which I think is plain, even to those very men, that would not
understand my first; notwithstanding those two objectors that now follow.

I have nothing more, Sir, but to let you know that notwithstanding all this, I
have a great esteem for you: not only because you dealt friendlily with me, but
because you ought to be esteemed by all, as you are by.

Your humble Servant T. B.

A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR OF THE Vindication of the CLERGY: From T. B

-- Silvestrem tenui.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler and R. Holt, for Nathaniel Brook, at the Sign of
the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1672*

A LETTER, etc.
SIR,
ALthough for your own convenience and service, you have appointed me to be
young Shimei, Fanatical skip-jack, Secretary to a Committee of plundered
Ministers, and Secretary besides to another company that believe no life after
this (which is very nigh, as bad as the former) yet, for my part, I am fully
resolved to apply my self to you, only by the way of dear Sir, sweet Sir, and
sometimes plainly, Sir. For if I should go and call you Giles of of Tilbury,
Philip of Southampton, Gabriel of Doncaster, or the like; your name perhaps all
this while may be Zoroaster, Zerubbabell, Boreas or Boanerges. But let it be
what it will, and live where you can, on this side or beyond Trent: nay, live
as far as Barwick upon Twede, Sir still holds good, and will find you out there.

And now, Sir, in the first place; I must return you many thanks, for your
extraordinary kindness toward me, in respect of what I found from your Brother
Answerer, W. S. For though you tell me (p. 26.) that he was too civil to his
old acquaintance, and too free and prodigal in his concessions: and though by
your fiery and fierce Latin, (facit indignatio) you put me into a most dismal
fright, and had like to have made me miscarry: Yet I plainly perceive, where
there is any thing of sound and substantial tenderness at the bottom, nature
cannot dissemble long, but must needs discover some of its sweetnesses. For
whereas severe W. S. confined me wholly to cracking of Nutts; you (...)
pleased, Sir, to give me my choice of happiness and employments. For when I am
altogether tired and scorched with chasing Butterflies, then have I your most
gracious leave to retire either to my pilling of strawes, or to cool myself,
and my chicken broth, or to call in at the Market Cross, and rest my self in
the Pillory; a very laudable place, and allowed of by Authority.

And therefore, I say, I must upon all occasions, acknowledge my self to be
yours, for these and many the like affectionate expressions, in your
Vindication: which, when I well consider, are so very sweet and engaging, that
I must need hold my self obliged, for your sake, at any time, either to skip
off a Steeple, or to make an end of that odd jobb of work which Nicanor
Seleucus left unfinished between the Euxin^ and Caspian seas (if you be very
sure, that it was ever begun, for I have a scurvy fellow that doubts of it:)
nay, when my hand is in, I care not a farthing, if I carry on that other massy
business in Achaia; for what is massiness to me, when there is a friend in the
case. In short, Sir, you cannot easily devise a task, to which I shall be
unwilling, unless it be to answer your Book. And, as to that, I must by all
means beg your pardon; being not at all in the humor, to reply to that which
was fully answered, long before it was printed; viz. in my second Letter called
Observations: upon which you have some short reflections, in a Postscript: and
if you had reflected but a little more, I am confident you might have easily
persuaded your self to have burnt your Copy. For in all your Vindication, if
any man, that does but understand sense from words, can show me but six lines
that pretends to Argument, or Objection, that was not half a year before urged
by W. S. and to which some reply was not thereupon made; then will I oblige my
self to get all your Book by heart (which I would not do for a small matter)
or be at the charge, to procure some body to turn it into most stately Heroic
Verse.

Now, I do suppose, it may be convenient for you to call this (as you do all
that I say) a flam, a whisker, a Caprice, a piece of spite* ^alice, calumny
and spleen. But I care not for that: for if the same whole world (to which you
so often appeal) be not of my opinion, I Will give you all my interest in it, for
those same three poor pennies, which, you know, is the full price of my planet.
If you please, Sir, we will try two or three places. My friend W. S. comes ^orth,
and desires to dissent from me, as to the business of schooling. For says h*
(p. 37.) Though the understanding that is in man does indeed early discover it
self, yet memory is the great storehouse of understanding* and if the memory be
sufficiently employed at school, it will lay a good foundation for the
perfecting the understanding afterward. This was W. S. his opinion, and
objection: to whom I replied, your Humble servant W. S. and some little more
besides according as I was able. I know not how long after, out comes the
Vindicationer, and spruces up this objection, with some fine bedeckings, and
embellishments, and a needless quotation out of Plato, and brushes forth, as if
he had discovered a third Indies; saying, Every body knows but the contemner of
the Clergy, that Children have a moist and supple brain, like soft wax capable
of any impressions, and that memory is the most early faculty of the soul,
which exerts it self in the very dawning of sense, and cogitation, (whereupon
Plato calls it the mother of the Muses) and is in its prime and meridian
vigor, before Imagination or Fancy, ^uch less understanding and judgment come
perfectly to them. Now, Sir, do you think that I am such a fool and owl, as
to reply to any such thing as this? You tell me that a child's brain is like
soft wax: and I tell you, that if you had put to your soft wax, plaster of
Paris, Puffed past, Curds and Apple-sauce, I would not have answered you one
word. And what do I care if Plato calls memory the Mother of the Maids? I have
nothing to say against Plato: but I have only this to say, that if that be the
opinion not only of Plato, but of the Brachmans and Gymnosophists of India, the
Bards and Druids of Gaul, the Magi of Persia, the Chaldaeans of Babylonia and
Assiria, the Priests of Egypt, and of every one of the Philos^phers of Greece;
I am so very busy and surly at present, that I will not speak to any such
thing. Indeed, as to what I said, of mixing at School some other pleasant
learning with Greek and Latin; you differ a little in your accounts. For all
that W. S. objected was, that it is more proper to learn those things which I
mentioned afterward. But that you may be sure to out-goe him, and not to grant
so much as he, you are of opinion, that to go about to teach a lad of twelve
years of age a little Arithmetic, or the circles of the Globe or the like, it
is (...) it is every whit as impossible as it was for Nero to cut a channel from
the lake Avernus to the mouth of Tiber, and to pierce the massy Isthmus in
Achaia: or as it was f^r Nicanor Seleucus to cut the straight between the
Euxine and Caspian seas; or for Cleopatra that, which divided the red Sea from
Egypt; nay, it is not only (...) but (...): such a monster, as that tee^ing
Africa never brought forth the fellow of it; and every whi^ as ridiculous, as
if you put Her^ules's shoes upon a dwarf, or as if Lambs could wide, where
Elephants are forced to swim, or as if every little Philistim, could play at
quarterst^ff with Goliah's beam. Now, W. S. did not think it thus vengeanably
impossible; but only that it was not the most proper time.

In like manner, there is some little difference between you, about your
believing that there might be a reason, why Lawyers and Physicians prove better
than Divines, having the same education. As for modest W. S. he only wonders a
little at it, and says it is very strange if it should be so: but he does not
defy all reason, that might be given: not knowing but that there might be one
in Banko. But when you come to consider of it, half a year after the reason was
repeated out of my first letter, you fall on to purpose, and challenge all the
Logicks in Europe to make it out. I wish with all my heart, Sir, you had not
challenged them every one. For I Will warrant you besides Burgers-dicius,
Heereboord, Craccanthorp, and Keckerman there be vourty at least. The King of
Spain (to my knowledge) has abundance of Logicks, and I Will assure you the
French King wants neither men, nor Logicks. Indeed I must wish again, that you
had thought of it a little better: for this same Europe, Sir, that you so
daringly challenge, is a very large place, and will hold many Bushels of
Logic. For as I find in a learned Author; Cl^v^r. in^rod. in Geog.
Europe reaches Eastward as far as the Aegaean Sea, Hellespont, Propontis; nay,
as far as your very ^ontus Euxinus, and beyond; and then Southward, Northward
and Westward, I know not how far.

I must confess, that there be two or three things against my Letter, that are
near upon as massy as the very Isthhmus it self; that wound me for ever, and
make me groan again; which were not at all taken notice of by W. S. but whether
he overlooked them out of friendship, or tenderness of nature, or weakness of
eyes or understanding, I am not able to say; but sure I am he says not one
word of them: The first that I took notice of is page 38. where you are very
severe upon me for maintaining that a breakfast is like a fast; and that any
Text in the Bible is more like an ingenious Picture, than a Breakfast is like
a fast; and you desire the World to judge, if it be not a very odd similitude.
Now because this is an absolute new objection, wherein my reputation is much
concerned, and a matter of so great moment, that it is quoted again, as an
everlasting abuse to me, therefore I must answer as warily and distinctly as
the case will admit of: which I shall do in these three following Propositions.
First, I confess, grant, and acknowledge, that a breakfast strictly and
severely taken, is not at all like a fast: In the second place, I do lay down
and hold (and resolve to do it to my dying day) that a Breakfast may be as
dreadful as a fast; provided it be an old Parliament one; for that alters the
case very much: for the clearing of this, turn to plodding Aristotle, de
oppositis. In the last place I do most stiffly maintain, that I never said that
a Breakfast is as dreadful as an old Parliament fast: but I Will tell you what I
said, that the repetition day for the grammar is usually as dreadful as an old
Parliament fast: and fourteen lines after, I said, (and will say it again for
all you) that to be bound to get two or three hundred Verses out of Homer for
breakfast, is no very pleasant task. Now I profess it was a spiteful,
fanatical, skipjack trick of mine, that I did not right down say, that a break
fast is like a fast; (the two words are but fourteen lines distant one from the
other;) for then you might have enlarged the Title of the accusation, that was
to be written under me -- The Author of the Contempt of the Clergy, etc. and
that s^ies that a fast is like a breakfast.

Another thing that was wholly forgotten by W. S. is that he takes no notice at
all, how greatly convenient it might be, if there were pretty store of such as
were poor and ignorant, mixed with the rest of the Clergy: for as you very well
observe page 21. this makes up the harmony of things: for, say you, were there
not an Ignoramus or two amongst the Lawyers, some Quacks and Empiricks amongst
Physicians, some Idiots in the Schools of Philosophers, some dun^es in the
member of perended scholars, and some poor Gentry amongst the rich; there
(...) be no (...) of things; not any at all, most certainly: but all the clergy
would be as dull as a bamdoor.

There is also one thing more that you urge against me, p. 93. that must go
wholly for your own; and it is this; Supposing a Vicar has but a groat in the
house, it is a most unimaginable thing, that he should break such an entire
(...), and spend his penny. Now I durst not for my ears, go about to make any
reply to this: because you say it is a calumny that has so little of
probability in it, that the Devil himself cannot believe it: and I have no mind
at all to dispute with him: and therefore this must be registered and allowed of
as an unanswerable objection against me; and wholly of your own invention. I Will
take care it shall be filled amongst the Gazetts and Philosophical News-books.
But indeed as to the advantage and convenience of using of Latin in Sermons,
where no body understands it; I must needs do W. S. so much right, as to
confess, it was not altogether forgotten by him; but withal it must never be
denied but that the four Reasons that you have added, have so very much
strengthened and advanced that business, that W. S. cannot come in for above a
fifth part of the glory. For, first of all say you, It may be convenient for
the Minister, to quote out of the learned, Greek or Latin, though no body
understands it, to distinguish himself from such who preach altogether in
English at Conventicles. Admirably well contrived! for if they were
distinguished by nothing else, but by observing the Canons and the Act of
Uniformity, it would be very hard to know one from the other. Secondly, because
Authority is a more effectual Argument ad hominem, than a Demonstration. That
must needs be, because it is supposed that these same homines do not understand
a word of it; and so it must work most wonderfully and effectually. Thirdly, it
is very convenient; for, though the people do not understand a tittle of it,
yet so long as they understand more than they can commonly remember, it is well
enough. O it is extraordinary well! And lastly, because a man may so preach in
English, that all people shall not understand him; (that is, if he gives his
mind to it, and makes it his business:) for there be (...) in a Chapter of St.
Paul read in English. Is it not great pity, that you were not matched to that
same ^see^ing Afri^^ you speak of? what a breed of Reasoners would the World
have had?

Now, would it not make any one in the World raving mad, to hea^ such stuff as
yours boasted of for sense? but for all that, I shall take up my self according
to the Philosophers Rule, (...) and not be so angry, as to answer your Book.
Nay, more than that, I intend to be reconciled to you, to love you, and
entertain some hopes of you, upon condition you will promise me three or four
things, which I must heartily request of you: and if all the World do not say
that they are very seasonable and proper for your Constitution, I Will undertake
never to beg any thing again.

In the first place therefore I do most earnestly request of you, that you do
not for the future print any quibbles. Be as merry as you please, and as witty
as you can afford; but for one so extraordinary full of demonstration, and so
very well acquainted with Euclid, even from a shoulder of mutton to a dish of
wild fowl, for such an one to play and trifle with words will certainly in time
very much abate your reputation, and more than that weaken your rational parts.
What an easy matter had it been for you, when you were speaking of English
Disputations and Declamations being used in St Paul's; to have said, that it was
allowed of by the Usurper, or by Oliver the Tyrant? but you must go and say it
was connived at by one Tyrannus, but you did not mean him in the Acts. It was
great pity indeed that you did not mean him, because he was dead five or six
hundred years before St. Paul's was built. In like manner, when you tell us,
page 75. that it is not at all likely that star-board and lar-board, etc.
should ever come into a Sermon, since Pulpits made of Ships beaks have been out
of fashion: You had better have given any other reason of its being unlikely,
than that: for though by chance I take the Jest of it, because I have read
Godwin's Antiquities: yet how shall those poor Readers make shift to admire
you, that do not understand the full signification of Rostrum, and the History
of Roman Pulpits.

I desire also that you would consider that there be some phansies which at
their first foundation were very good and laudable; but when they have been
torn, and tossed up and down, by every body, for an hundred years together,
they then become tiresome, and degenerate into all the iniquity and
nauseousness of a quibble. For example; suppose you have a mind to abuse a man
to death, and to tell him that he talks like an Apothecary: do so; spare him
not at all, but down with him, and make the Rogue sufficiently ashamed of his
folly, and Apothecaryship: but (if you love the prosperity of your Family) I
desire by all means, that you do not train it in with a Story of Doctor three
or four lines before; telling him that for such a thing to be so or so is
indeed the opinion of one Doctor; but what if be should talk all the while like
an Apothecary. So to tell a man that he is an Hogshead, is searching
questionless, and goes very deep; but if you put empty before it, and tell him
that he is an empty Hogshead, then I count there is little hopes of life: but if
he chance to find the word Tun within five or six lines of this abuse, he
presently takes heart thereupon, begins to crawl again, and does not care at
all for dying.

We must always grant, Sir, that it was very well done of him, who first
observed that where God had his Church, the Devil had his Chappel^ and it was
pretty well done of him, that observed the same in the second place; but to go
on, and observe it over, and over, and over again, without all doubt, does take
very much away from the primitive glory of your observation. And thus Nicholas
Nemo, diebus illis his days, to be born under a threepenny Planet, to ^^nder
quantum dabis into pure cur^ant English money, to correct the defect of
nature's pencil, and many such like (which you abound with) were questionless
at first very ingenious and without all exception; but the jestingness of them,
by too much using is so utterly worn out, that they will work no more than the
powder of an old post.

But amongst all quibbles, as you desire to flourish and be for ever famous, be
very sparing of such that depend wholly upon the Title and outside of Books,
viz. (...), Hobbs his Creed, the Gentleman's calling, Ignoranius, and such
like; for they lying very obvious to every ordinary fancy, you may chance to
make a jest, that has been made an hundred times before. You Will find this, I
promise you, to be very good advice, if you consider well of it.

Now I am, I must confess, perfectly of your mind, as to what you say, page 59.
concerning the great advantages and excellent use of quibbles, if handsomely
managed, by reason that they are a great promoter of health in general, and an
easy amulet against some distempers that hang about sedentary men in
particular; that they unbend the mind, loosen the distended nerves of the soul,
and revive its drooping spirits after a wonderful manner: which agrees very
well, with what the worthy Author Wits Commonwealth says in the first part,
page 215. concerning Music, viz. it is the bodies best recreation, it
overcomes the heart, and comforts the mind, it is the Queen and Mistress of
the soul, it is the loadstone of fellowship, the cheerful reviver of dulled
spirits, the sole delight of da^cing, and sweet-meat of sorrow -- But let me
tell you, that neither your self, nor that learned Author, have spoken half
home to the business. Alas! dear Sir, you speak but timorously and modestly;
this is nothing to what I can tell you. What think you of him that without any
Vulgar Instruments used for that purpose; only by the help of a good lusty
Ioque, and a Iews-tr^mp couched a cataract of seven years standing: and of
another who quibbled a Wen of the forehead, as big as a Gooses egg. Great cures
upon my word! and the greater, because these sorts of Medicines work chiefly
upon the lower parts. You would wonder, Sir, to see what a vast quantity of
gravel has come away upon two or three jests. It is reported of one Harmonides
(not your Harmonides the Fiddler, but another that I have) who having bin
tortured several days with the Stone, and trying several Medicines to no
purpose, was advised at last to send for some ingenious Iester. no sooner was
the ingenious come into the house, but presently the pain much abated, (for a
jest you must know, if it be strong, works at a distance as well as the
Sympathetick powder,) and being carried up into his Bedchamber, he let go a
phansi^ of a good moderate size, (but whether it was quibble or joque, my
Author does not say,) upon which the stone presently turned; and adding to
that, one a little stronger, it was soon after voided. Neither is this at all
unlikely, when we call to mind how plentifully a great Person of our own Nation
bepissed his breeches, after a long stoppage of Urine, merely by one jest of
the Doctors; when all his drugs would not draw one drop. But were there nothing
in all this that tended to the commendation of a jest, yet certainly they (from
what you say) are very allowable, sacred and Orthodox; because (you know) St.
John went a Partridge catching when he writ his mysterious Revelations; and
what is more like a Partridge than a quibble in Feathers?

Now, I would not have you think me so spiteful and malicious, as to say, that
there is nothing of real wit in your Vindication: for let people say what they
will, and carp, and catch, and except, and caprice, yet they are forced to
acknowledge in spite of malice and calumny, that there are in the whole
Vindication, four or five as good, clear, and well dressed humors, as ever
were made: and lest you should think I flatter, I'^e tell you the very places;
that you may know what is approved of, how to value your self, and to do well
again when occasion requires. The first happy thing that is approved of by all,
is your putting in that scrap (as you call it) of the Poet -- Quid enim tentar
nocebit? And then your saying immediately after, that you did it on purpose,
because you knew it would trouble me vilely; and I Will assure you it was well
ghessed; for I hate such a scrap of Latin, as I do a Viper or Toad: and though
I made shift to take a slumber of seven or eight hours that night; yet I found
that your Poet rejounced next morning most horribly: and I Will assure you, it
cost me a glass of aqua mi^abi^is to compound with him, to be quiet. The next
humor that they all grant for good and very allowable, is your telling me that
you had got ground of me, more than I did allow the Vicar for hi^ Glebe. It was
well observed; for I do confess I do allow him but a little. The next is (that
is allowed) your calling Cicero's son Mark a codshead: they acknowledge it to
be well said, and true; for the Rogue proved not otherwise. A fourth is your
forgetting the Roman Lady's Bitch's name that Thesmopolis had the tuition of:
these are all that I can get to be generally allowed. I have put in hard, I Will
assure you, in all companies, for two or three more: as for example; the Papist
and the Puritan being tied together like Sampson's Foxes: I liked it well
enough, and have beseeched them to let it pass for a fancy: but I could never
get the Rogues in a good humor to do it. For, they say, that Sampson's Foxes
have been so very long, and so very often tied together, that it is high time
now to part them. It may be, because something very like it is to be found in a
printed Sermon, which was preached thirty eight years ago; it is no flam, nor
whisker: it is the 43. Page upon the right hand. Yours go thus: viz. Papist and
Puritan like Sampson' s Foxes, though looking and running two several ways,
yet are ever joined together in the tail: My Author has it thus; viz. the
Separatists and the Romanists (there is for your Puritans and Papists)
consequently to their otherwise most distant principles do fully agree like
Sampson' s Foxes, tied together by the tayls to set all on fire, although their
faces look quite contrary ways. I phansied a good while those two Stories you
tell, page 41. how that S^crates (though his Mother was a Midwife) could not
make his Scollars bring forth any Science, unless they had understanding to
conceive it: and that it was ill done of Cicero that he did not examine the boy
Mark' s parts before he went to Athens. But I profess, (I know not how) it came
at last into my mind, that I had learnt this at School; and looking into my
Clerk's formulae (out of which I used to steal my Themes) upon that close and
elegant discourse, E^ quovis ligno non fit Mercurius; there I found them both
in the very beginning of the Speech, viz. Socrates, etc. But this I must
confess was Mr. Clerk's rudeness: for if he had taken care (as he ought to have
done) to have placed those two historical observations, a little deeper into
that great Controversy, you might then have been supposed to have fetched them
from some other Author, that was nearer to the Original. I have heard very
often mention made of your calling a dish of wild fowl a Pyramid: but whether
they approve of it or laugh at it, I cannot yet certainly tell: (when I
certainly know you shall have an account.) But I must seriously tell you that
as to the beards being made of certain she Asses manes, I have very little
hopes of putting that off; (and I am somewhat afraid that the shoulder of
Mutton or Triangle, will lie upon my hand;) but you may be sure I Will do my best
endeavor. Perhaps you may think it convenient to write some small thing, and
explain it: but if it never goes off for a fancy, seeing there be three or
four that Hell it self cannot except against, especially that of the
chasing-dish being an Hypothesis which I had like to have forgot; the truth of
it is, it was a very pretty thought, and I am confident will always be so
accounted.

Now, I must confess to you, that this same phrase of pretty thought, is none
of my own; but (as I remember) it is in some late Play: which I thought fit to
tell you, that you may be sure of what you ghess, that I do sometimes borrow,
and (as I am your friend) I advise you to learn to do so too. For rather than I
would stuff out a Book with Lot and Lottery, Churches and Chapels, Iachin and
Boaz, with my old friend Nicholas Nemo, with Pun's quibbles and small jests a
thousand times said before, and with all the featnesses that three Languages
can afford toward a poor fancy, I would advise you to take that course which
you think I do, and write farees, far^les, frequent company and steal from
clubs, ransack all Romances and Plays, written before or since the King came
in. I would not stick at that; I would be for heyte teyte, a cock or a (...),
an horse-shoe or a mares nest: I would make friends and get to be Secretary to
some learned Commit^ee, (Boccaline perhaps may sell you his place, for two
hundred Guine^^; for he has got stock enough to set up for himself) and then
get by heart their dogmes, resolves and decrees; ^ay, rather than fail, I would
get another to write the Preface, or do any such thing: For, upon my word, if
you go on thus, you will be in as great danger of breaking the neck of your parts,
as you think the poor Lads to be at School by venturing upon any solid
learning. And as I would request you, for the future, that you would be very
careful of breaking the neck of your fancy: so take some care, I beseech you,
of necking your judgment; but above all things be very wary of calling that
Euclid that does not conclude at all. If you had only said that you would
endeavor to make such a thing out, or that you did not much question but that
you should do it, and that very plain too; people would not then have called
for their Rule and Compasses: but to say, that you would make it out as clear
as any Demonstration in Euclid, and moreover to write, quod erat demonstrandum
after such loose and wide reasonings, that would scarce hold a Pike of half a
yard long (a Metaphor taken from a net, which I have seen as well as a Ship)
was very rashly done. You had much better have sworn it off, as the Poet did
his Play: although you had never so little reason for it.

What then belike ( say you) Ignorance and Poverty must be grounds and
occasions of Contempt in the Clergy. I marry, that is a likely business indeed!
that was well devised by a Skip-jack fancy! a most excellent Jachin and Boaz!
a pair of special good pillars or poles for an aerie castle! but if I do not
rattle down poles and pillars, if I do not wholly subvert and unhinge this
confident swaggerer, and venture of Paradoxes, if I do not unjachin, and unboaz
him, before I have done, I Will even renounce Euclid and all pretenses to him.
Come, Mr. Confident, you go and impudently say, that Ignorance and Poverty are
causes of contempt. I pray, by your leave, Sir, how then comes it about that
Poverty was always counted a sacred thing, and Ignorance the Mother of
devotion and admiration? Surely you will not venture to say that Godliness and
devotion are contemptible things: there is one nut for you to crack. I think
there is one brush for your poles: and it is very strange if your castle does
not tumble by and by. Now, Sir, for a little of your skill in Astronomy, to
tight and straighten your poles. Your bold Hypothesis begins to groan already,
and sink it must, unless you can rec^^cile admiration and contempt. I Will teach
you to talk at random about things you do not at all understand. I Will teach you
the meaning of Sumite materiam vestram qui scribitis aequam Viribus -- I know
you don't love it, but I Will make you eat Latin and Greek too, before I have
done with you. Do you see Mr. Clergy-mender, how I have trip'd up both your
poles at one stroke: but lest you should say that this was a surprise, or
think, that I am stinted for demonstrations; I Will give you your Jachin and Boaz
again: but then look to your self; for now I Will take them both away one by one,
so fairly, so evidently, and scientifically, that pull and hold what you can,
you shall plainly perceive your self a very sot, and fool: I say look closely
to it; for I intend to make an home thrust. My demonstration shall go in just
at your navel, and so let out the very guts of all your discourse. Ignorance,
say you, at random, is a cause of contempt; boldly said for a skip-jack indeed!
but I pray Mr. Apothecary answer me this then. Is not Magistracy as well (...)
Ministry an Ordinance of God? How comes it then about that a Thatcher, suppose
he be but Mayor of a Town, although he can neither write nor read, shall be as
much wondered at, and admired, be called as often Worshipful, be stood bare to
as much, have the Mace carried as dreadfully before him, as if he had learning
enough to be Lord Chief Justice: and how comes it to pass that hereditary Kings
have been honored and obeyed, that have had so little parts as to be forced to
dispatch all things by their Council; and if these, though never so ignorant,
are to be honored; are not we bound to seek out, and elect such; suppose we
can tell where to find them. Now you had best cry for one of your causes of
Contempt, do so, cry on, I do'nt pity you at all and if I thought it would vex
you as much (as quid tentare nocebit?) I would make you hang your self. I could
carry you into the bowels and secrets of former Ages, and give you an
historical demonstration. What think you of the Roman Curiones, Augures,
Auspices, Flamines, Extispices, Pontifices, Salii, Aruspices, Cultuarii,
Victimarii, Capnomantes, Diales, and ^antharides; who have no reason to be
believed to be any great Conjurers; and yet it is granted by all, that the
Devil and they together, kept the people in sufficient aw: but you must be for
your Astronomy forsooth, and your Atoms: you must be for your new projects and
models, and for your heyte teyt's; and in the mean time, neglect all solid
Learning, and Godwyn's Antiquities. But say when you have enough, and are
sufficiently ashamed; for I have a whole cloak-bag full of pure Mathematical
stuff still. What think you of your present Popish Priests, that can scarce
tell how to read the Service, and yet with a little of Joseph's Humm, and the
Virgin M^rys Milk, are very well respected and admired? Do you think they would
do half so much good, and ^e half so much respected, if they were considerable
S^hollars? I pray answer me to that. Mr. Castle-keeper. But why should I go
about t^ pour forth such Historical rarities into an empty hogs-head? for
although he should want parts (...) perceive the violence, and breaking in of a
demonstration, yet his Mistress Experience may teach him so much; how Idle a
thing it is to p^ate of Ignorance being a cause of Contempt, or of wishing any
Clergyman should be more learned; whereas it is plain that the ^nlearned
Weavers and Taylours in the late times, could swing the people more after them,
than we can do now with all our Learning. Populus aliquando vult decipi; ^t si
aliquando cur non nunc? And therefore from all this you had much reason to
wonder how egregiously mistaken the little Historian was^ For alas! Ignorance
is so far from exposing a public person to contempt, that (give him but power
and Authority with it) his only way and means to arrive to a great estee^
amongst the generality of men is to renoun^^ all learning, and get (...) much
Ignorance as possible: for the ^ore ignorant, the more valued. And why? it
seems strange at first: but when we hear the reason it is plain: because the
generality of mankind are unlearned themselves.

And thus, Sir, having demonstrated not only that Ignorance is ^ull out as
serviceable as learning (for to have done that would not have argued any
superfluity of parts,) but that of the two, it is much to be preferred: in the
next place you show that poverty carries it at least a length and half before
convenient maintenance. And why? because no wise man esteems things by their
gaudy outsides, the Horse by his trappings, the Ass by his burden. Because the
learned Heathens never deifyed money, and Pythagora^ recommended golden
precepts, no^ gold. Because Lu^ian lashes the blind God of wealth, as if he
were ^ blind Bear. Because the Peripatetical summum bonum, when they (...) put
money to it, was but a Golden Calf. Because Craesus and Midas were but singling
Pack-horses. But this is Heathenish proof, now for Divinity. For, Was not
Christ himself in a low condition? Was not his Jury of life and death most of
them poor? and did not the foreman of the Jury St. Peter say, silver and gold
have I none? Now from such premises as these would not every novice (say you)
in Logic conclude that it were ^etter for a Clergyman to have but twenty
pounds a year and half a dozen books, than an hundred and a good Library? no; I
am confident he would not, if he had read but two Chapters in Logic: nay, if
his Tutor had only promised the poor creature a little of that same, and he
should conclude so, I would have him presently sent home, and never be suffered
to conclude again. Now, Sir, do you think that I will spend any time in
exposing such nonsense as this, which (...) so very plain and palpable that all
the malice in the world cannot misrepresent or make it worse? not I, I Will
assure you. You talk somewhere of bestowing your Mother *upon me: alas! you
do'nt offer like a Chapman. For if you should fling in your Grandmother, Aunts
and all your Sisters into the bargain, I will not put my self to so much
trouble. But yet I cannot forbear just to show what a great demonstrator you
are of your second proposition, as you were of your first: which you set upon
p. 19. but it pierces not deep till p. 24. And if any one desires to see Euclid
in a nutshell, there he may find him.

The case is this (or as you are pleased to read it the ball of contention)
Whether there may not be here and there a Clergyman so ignorant, as that it
might be wished, that he were wiser. For my part I went and ghess'd at random,
and thought there might be one or so: but my Adversary holds and maintains, not
only that there is not so much as one now in the whole Nation: but shows it to
be impossible that there ever was one, or ever shall be one. And for doing all
this he only lays down one very small request, viz. That no man can present
himself to a Living: from whence it follows as fast as hops, that some body
else must do it (for no man can be himself, and some body else with all the
little thingams about him Secundum idem, ad idem etc.) It remains therefore to
be examined, who this some body is. And it will be found to be either the King
himself, or some Nobleman, or College, or Corporation or private Gentleman
(for these are all the some-bodys that can be thought of) but it is as plain as
any thing in Euclid, that it is perfectly impossible that any man unfit or
unable should by any of these means get into a Living. For suppose we try a
little and begin at the highest. Will any body be so bold, saucy and impudent,
so forgetful of all allegiance and have so little dread of Majesty, as to
dishonor the broad Seal, and beg its favor, in that wherein he known himself
unworthy? I^e, pro^ul it^ profani. Nothing certainly (...) comparable to it,
but stealing the Crown it self. In like manner it is as unconceivable, that any
man that is not sufficiently improved, should procur^ a presentation from any
person of Honor. For these being all Cousins to the King, whatever
inconvenience or disgrace falls here, reflects at last upon the Crown it self.
I need not show how impossible it is that either a College or Corporation
should prefer an Hocus, when they have their choice of so many. There is
nothing therefore now hinders the topping of the domonstration, and for ever
confounding all that hold the contrary; but that some Gentlemen possibly out of
fondness, kindred, etc. should not present such as they think fittest, but
those that can beg the handsomest, or love an Horse most, or play at (...) or
(...) best: But he (...) worthy to breath in English air that can think so
meanly of a true English man. But suppose there should be one or so that should
wholly forget himself, and his Nation, so much as to enquire into some other
abilities, and dispositions of mind, besides (...) learning, where is that bold
son of Simon? O that I could but (...) upon that Varlet! how would I tear and
confound that ^wsord^ con^^^nce! I Would teach him to fall in love with Horses,
Gentlewomen, and to play at Tables and Bowls! What? now there never an Horse
in all the Country that would please you, but after such great boun^^ you must
get away your Pa^rons Horse? Would (...) serve you but just your Patrons? and
was there never a Gentlewoman in all the Nation to inveigle, but you must (...)
the House into an uproar, and (...) away my Ladys, and leave her to catch cold,
and the sweet mea^^ to grow moldy, and the morning Broth either not half
boiled, or not rightly seasoned? And to do all this where you were so very
much obliged, and so very civilly used? Cannot you receive a kindness, and then
go home and meditate, and be meek and thank full, but you must grow saucy and
insolent thereupon, and challenge your Patron to play at Bowls, or Tables, and
cheat him of his pennies? So that it is very plain now (as any thing in all
Euclid) that if one should of^er five hundred pounds for a beneficed Ho^us,
there is not one to be bought^ for they are every one demonstrated out of the
Kingdom. O Euclid, Euclid! who would not dye twenty deaths to be akin but to
thy little toe? what a foolish and silly thing is Astronomy! what, a man in the
Moon, Will with the wisp, Jack with the Lantern? it is all a bubble, a cheat and
imposture. But as for Euclid he is stout, sincere and solid at the bottom. But
I must tell you, Sir, that it was a little too triumphantly done, to defy me to
pick out ten Clergymen not fit to discharge their duty, when you had got such
a demonstration, that there could not be so much as one in the whole Nation. It
was ill husbandry in you to spend so much defiance upon me alone, when your
reasons were big enough to have challenged the whole world.

Not less admirable and full are your Answers, than your demonstrations are
binding. I enquire, suppose, how those two hundred that usually commence shall
be maintained or live. Live? I answer (say you) first in general that they do
live somewhere. For as long as we do not hear that they dye in a ditch, or are
knocked on the head, or starved; so long we have sufficient reason to conclude
that they are all alive, and enough is as good as a feast; and the best of all
can desire no more than to live. But after this general proof of their
Metaphysical existence^ then you set upon a more particular resolution of the
case. Two hundred it seems I hold yearly commence. Now, say you, let us bring
things a little to standard, and but observe closely how our s^all Conjecturer
talks at random. First of all, say you, many Gentle^^^ (...), then Lawyers
Common and Civil, then Physicians, and then ^ fifth part are preferred in the
Vni^ersity: and if all these were (...) out of his two hundred, the (...) will
not be very great. Six or seven I suppose or thereabouts. But however, Sir, if
you please we will a little examine this same (...); a fifth part, say you, I must
deduct txcause I haves said so; Well: let that go: I will not repent; that is
(...) Next, the Common Lawyers are to be deducted. Let me see. I cannot afford
above four at the most; for most of them go to the Inns of Courts; before they
safe any degree: And I care not much if I allow four more for Civil Law, and
(...) many for Physic, and then I Will (...) you six to commence that intend no
calling at all (which is more by half than I need to do) and then out of pure
love, I Will ^ling in two more, all which put together make just sixty. Now if
these same sixty be carefully taken out of two hundred according to the best
rules which either Ancient or Modern Arithme^icianss have laid down for this
great affair; I am cruelly afraid that there will remain an hundred and forty.
A ^olly company I profess for a (...). But however let them go: they will make
(...) well enough, so long as you know a way how to make them all exist.

The next thing that I must get you to promise me is, that you would not ghess
where men (...). For it is nothing to your purpose: and besides many a phanise
and jest is lost if you should chance to be mistaken. I shall beg leave, Sir,
to press this upon you only in two or three instances. If you remember, Sir, at
the very first Page of all your Book, you fall into a most dismal strong fit,
that T. B. and R. L. are all one: and that they are intended only for blinds,
to cheat and gull the world. Now I must in the first place tell you that W. S.
was the first that found out this; and therefore you must not look upon your
self as the Author of that suspicion: only he did not make so good a quibble as
you did. But to go on, Sir, I pray why are you so very mistrustfull? what? have
you bespoak or bought up all the R. Ls in the Nation, that you will not let a
man have one? or is the family so very small, that amongst them all, there
should not be one poor dear R. L. that should fall to my share? fear not, Sir;
for upon my word if you were acquainted with them, so well as I am, you would
acknowledge the R. Ls to be a very large, and spreading family: There Is a
plentiful stock of them in Middlesex, and several in other part^ of the
Nation. And if amongst all these there be but one, whom it is worth the while
to admire, to observe or send Letter to; then as to your Greek quibble, of
(...) you are as utterly undone, as ^ver was Oyster. Suppose you had writ by
way of a Letter, and directed yours to Z. X. do you think that I would have
suspected your integrity, or interest in that small family, and abuse you with
the outside of Antoninus. How do I know what interest you may have or make. I
am confident there is no true gentile English spirit, but would have scorned to
have done as you did. And then after you had abused one in Greek, calling me
(...), and (...), your malice must hold out to Latin too, Qui nescit simulare
nescit vivere. Whereas all the world will say, that know any thing concerning
the T. Bs, that they are as far from (...) false heartedness, (...) all your
Greek and Latin that you crowd together is from any wit.

It was^ Sir, a little more modestly done, what you say in the following page,
viz. that I write so as if I had been Secretary to some Committee of plundered
Ministers in the blessed times. For you do not absolutely say that you stood
just behind me, when I leaped a yard and half to snap at the Covenant. Neither
are you certainly sure that I am an Anabaptist, Independent or the like: but
only that any one may guess that I am of some ^eformado congregation, by my
style and canting expressions, and way of talking: which (say you) is the
proper and characteristicall note of a separatist. Thou art a most excellent
characteristicall ghesser indeed. I Would have the Catholic Church employ you to
ghess what the Turk does really intend in his heart, and how much hurt he can
possibly do to the Christian Religion. You can ^asily do it, Sir, by your
signs and badges, by your Characteristicks and indications. O it is a most
admirable thing to have quick senses, and to be able to compare things, and lay
all ends together right! and to find out a Separatist only by his wh^^ and
saddle-cloath: and to be so tender-nosed as to smell a Fanatic as far as
another man shall do broiled Herrings, or a burnt froise. But do you hear,
Sir; have you quite forgot since you were at my house, when Tyrannus his
Sequestrators and Troopers carried away my whole Stable of Horses, not leaving
me so much as old Sorrel to ride on? and do you remember nothing of your
coming to see me when I was kept close Prisoner at Basing-house for carrying a
Letter privately to his Majesty? these are most Characteristicall notes of a
Separatist. I beseech you, dear Sir, do'nt ghess any more, you had (...) all
out of your own fancy, when you intend to abuse one: and say that which shall
certainly and presently take: and not what may possibly be a jest, if you be
not mistaken, or if I please. You know, Sir, you have ordered me to be a
Doctor: which if I will accept of, then to be called Mountebank and Apothec^^y
are great discouragements. But suppose I am already engaged in the Tin-mines:
or am in no have of Commencing, then when I shall be pleased to go out Doctor,
you may possibly creep out for a small wit.

Thus, Sir, you tell me (page 84.) that you have a fine story for me, and that
you will give me the honor to bear a considerable part in it. Now, I tell you,
that I do not intend to receive my Honor from you, nor any disgrace, nor to
be concerned in any story that you can tell, unless you can find out where my
Bastards are at Nurse. Cannot you live where you lift, and let me do so too. I
shall not enquire after you, I Will assure you; nay I would not know you, if you
should lay me down half a Crown toward it. I tell you therefore once again, I
do'nt live any where nor never intend (as far as you shall know) to live any
where, but only to exist, after that manner you provide for the younger Clergy.
But, say you, I must needs know him, and have him live somewhere, or else the
best story and the greatest piece of wit in my whole Book, will be utterly
spoiled. Well, because I am willing to encourage all witty attempts though they
be never so slender, therefore for once I Will hear some of your fine story (upon
condition you will engage never to ghess again.)

Belike then in the first place you give me to understand, that in your
travails you met with a certain Covent where there was an ancient Pigeon-house,
but the inhabitants were all fled. The best way certainly will be to roast a
Cat, and besprinkle her with cumming seed. They say this will fetch back the
creatures again presently, if they were not very much offended. And thereupon,
Sir, I mentioned the business to the Cat: (for you know Boccaline can make a
Cat to speak.) Pusse, said I, we have lost all our Pigeons and thou know as
well as any man in France that a Covent without Pigeons is like a Cow without
cymbals; and therefore if thou will resign up thy self to the Spit, and be
roasted for the bringing home of the Pigeons; thy picture shall be hung in the
Library, thou shall be shown with the Phoenix feathers and Remora's ^^nnes, and
be constantly commemorated with the Benefactors. Upon which the Cat, first
kissing her foot, purr'd, and said. Sir, I must always acknowledge the great
favors that I have received from this place: for where as for many years I
lived only upon course Mice and Ratts; now I have my belly full of Triangles,
and Pyramids, Globes and Circles: But as to what you propound concerning my
being roasted, I must confess I am not altogether free; because I remember my
Grandsire once told me that it was much worse than a ^^eve and scissars; and
therefore charged me, as I loved my life, to avoid it a^ the most vile of all
Conjurations. But this, Sir, I Will do if you please; I Will wait upon them, and
let them know that if they will come home again they shall be very civilly
respected, have every ^orning a peck of Pease, and once a week fresh
Saltpeter: But whether they will come or not upon this invitation, I cannot yet
tell.

The next piece of honor you do me is to let me know that there be people
belonging to this foresaid Covent, that have beards above a cu^it long. Indeed,
Sir, you would have added very much to this kindness of yours, if you had been
pleased to have discovered what cubit you meant; for amongst the Learned I find
there be five several sorts of Cubits: The first kind of Cubit (called the
common) contains one foot and a half, measured from the sharp of the elbow to
the point of the middle finger. The second, (the palm cubit) takes one handful
more than the common. The third, is called Regius Cubitus, or the Persian
Cubit, which exceeds the common Cubit three inches. The fourth, is the sacred
Cubit, which contains the Common or Vulgar Cubit double, wanting but a
quarter or fourth part. Lastly, there is fifth Cubit, called Geometrical, which
contains six common Cubits. Now when you say Above a Cubit; if you chance to
mean this same last sort of Cubits, and withal let but Above signify a good
way bit, the Story thereby will become much the stranger, and your telling of
it the greater favor. But then, as to what you tell me, that you being invited
to Dinner, observed that every man sat down where he pleased, and fell to,
where he liked best. Give me leave, Sir, to tell you, that I am afraid that a
great part of this is of your own invention: for how is it likely that every
man should set down according to his own mind, because another might have a
mind to set in the same place: and therefore some of them must be disappointed;
unless you will grant penetration of bodies, which, you know, neither your
Philosopher nor mine will by any means allow: and as to what you say of every
man falling to, where he liked best, it is such a (...), that I do not intend
to believe one tittle of it, till at least 7 years after the sea be burnt.
What? for every one of them to fall to where he liked best! Cred^t Iudaeus
Apella! it is Epicurisme, Sadducisme, Sorcery, Extortion, and I know not how
much more besides: and indeed it cannot possibly be less; especially, if we do
but consider, what strange kind of Idolatrous diet these Covent Rascals feed
upon. They have already eat up almost all the fifteen Books of Euclid: they
make no more of a Pentagon or Pyramid, than a Porter would do of a farthing
Custard. And if there be not some stop put to them, they will be for fresh pasture
shortly; and gobble down Archimedes too. Nay, I will not trust them, to stick at
the Polyglott Lexicon it self: There Is that snarling curr, and son of a Bitch
Boccaline, can show them the way; his teeth are ready set for such a design,
and to fall on, if they will but follow him: he has made havoc of all Religion
already, and abused and discouraged all witty and saving preaching. I suppose
next he will be for the Word of God it self, and set his Eleutherians to eat up
the Bible, as well as they have done, Euclid; if some care be not taken with
him. And then we shall neither have left a Demonstration from the Broad Seal,
nor Divine Authority to withstand and confound the wicked. Oh that I had but
this gurning Rogue Boccaline in an iron chest! I Would take down the drumminess of
his gut, without goose grease. I Would learn him to rail against fasts, and to
stuff his ungodly paunch, with circles and cylinders; and to unhinge the
Government. O that the High Commission Court would but awake once again, and
appoint a time and place for his suffering at the Market cross! How many miles
would I ride to see such villa^y chastised? and how many Hen's nests would I
examine, to pelt his impudent forchead that stands before, and to eggifie his
she Asses mane that hangs behind? But, my dear, my duck, my sweet, my honey: I
prithee, why so very fierce and furious? You tell me that you know a place
where there is a company of Phantasticks, Sotts, Hypocrites, and Atheists; who
despise all the world, eat and drink till they cannot see, abuse all Religion,
believe no life but the present, and that had a good Library of Books, but
ordered all them to be burnt. Now, if you would have my opinion in the case, to
make up the harmony of things, I would have every one of them to be hanged;
and, I think, that is as fair as any man in the world can say.

It is very strange to observe the great difference that is in Climats. It is
storied of a certain sort of people living toward the South, whose ears are so
very large, that the one reaches down to mid-leg; and attends to all that is
done below: the other stands right up into the sky, like a large Cabbage leaf,
and listens to all that comes from above; upon the same account their eyes are
accordingly placed: for they have one just at the bottom of the foot, the other
is fixed upon the very crown of the head: These people are very much given to
soft corns upon the left foot, they never fail of one about the bigness of an
ordinary Pillion, which they lay under their head instead of a bolster. They
have a great kindness for Tripes and Cow-heels: but that which they chiefly
worship is a Calfe's gin, stuffed full of six penny nayls. If any thing offends
their stomach, they take two or three pounds of lead or iron, and wrapping it
up in a hedge-hogs skins* swallow it whole: the pores of their body are very
near as large as those of a Nutmeg grater, and so they had need; for they never
piss but once a month, and never go to stool but once a quarter; and that
exactly upon the quarter-day, except it be Leap-year; these people, for the
most part, are kind, and obliging; only they have got a scurvy custom of
pickling most of their children at three years of Age: and after a great frost,
they eat them, with gunpowder and mustard; about three months ago, one of them
was burnt for maintaining that an Eele was a living creature. The greatest part
of them hold with the Balo surgians, that the Sun is only an Oxe's liver: that
the heavens turn round upon a farthing candle: and that the earth, some time or
other, will take a frolic, and run into the sea; and so make a huge hasty
pudden.

Now, Sir, I must desire of you that you would do your self so much right, as
to bear a part in this Story. I hope you will interpret all heartily: there is no
foul play at all; it is only trick for trick: You may easily perceive where your
share lies; as also in another, which I have out of a very learned Author,
such as you chiefly trade in. You know, Sir, you tell me, Page 49. how horribly
Thesmopolis's beard was abused by a Roman Lady's bitch. I know there is some
deadly Moral, or other, intended for me; and therefore I must desire you to
take this one trick more.

Callisthenes King of Sicyon, having a Daughter marriageable, commanded that it
should be proclaimed at the Games of Olympus, that he that would be counted
Callisthenes's Son in Law, should within sixty days repair to Sicyon. When many
Woers had met together, Hippoclides the Athenian, Son of Tisander, seemed the
fittest: but when he had trod the Laconick and Antic measure, and had
personated them with his legs and arms, Callisthenes stomaching it, said, O
thou Son of Tisander! thou have danced away my Daughter. I cannot conveniently
stand to explain it, because I have one thing more to request of you, viz. That
you do not absolutely pronounce such things to be flams, forgeries and
whiskers, which, for ought you know, may be all solid, and massi^ truths.

I have heard some people say, that you did not write the Preface: but do you
think I would venture to say so, unless I certainly knew it? No, I would not do
it for my right hand; for though it is said toward the latter end of it, that
you have some charity for T. B. which makes me doubt whether it be yours, (you
having not so much for him in your whole Book, as will lie upon a knifes
point:) yet all the beginning of it smells so very rank of your own kind of
reasoning, that it can scarce possibly be any bodies else but your own; unless
you would give one five or ten pieces to imitate and labor out so much
Nonsense. I say therefore once again, suppose you have a mind to believe that
such and such things are no where to be found, either in printed Sermons, nor
were ever preached out of the Pulpit: I advise you by all means that you do not
presently run on, and say, this is a very flam; that is a most deadly whisker;
here is right down coining, and forgery; there is hammering and filing in
abundance: but rather put on your nightcap, and be very much afraid: bind up
your head very close, and fall to doubting, suspecting, mistrusting as hard as
ever you can. But, I beseech you, go not one inch further, till you have
considered and said thus to your self. Have I read all the Sermons that were
ever Printed since --? and do I exactly remember every Sentence that is in
them? was there never two men in England preached upon the same Text? and can
I, like St. John Baptist's head, be at all the Parishes in the Nation, at the
same time; and hear all the Sermons that were ever preached? If T. B. happens
to be at St. Antholins upon a Sunday, must the bells be stopped, and he not
suffered to go to Church till I be sent for from Edingborough? and was there
never yet one in the world, that thought it lawful to alter his Copy? These and
such like things, I would have you consider of, before you be absolute, and
peremptory; for upon my word, if you do otherwise, you will find a very great
inconvenience of it: for instance; you are of opinion that no one ever preached
upon (...), after that manner, that I have described; and why? because you
heard once a man upon that Text, that did not do so; but only just reflected
upon the word (...), signifying Lords. Well; take that man to your self; much
good may he do you: but now Logic! now Wheel-barrow! may not I, for all that,
have another man that did insist upon it, three quarters of a good statutable
English hour together? You may call it gliding, glancing or reflecting; I call
it preaching. I tell you I have such an one, and will have him in spite of
your teeth; and you shall not have one bit of him. Neither could I possibly
ever intend to meddle with yours: for I verily think I know whom you mean; and
I never heard that in his whole life he did so much as name the word (...) upon
any such occasion, till a long time after my Letter was Printed: and now how
can I help it; if he be offended, or think himself slandered. So you tell me
that you know a very worthy Person, who preaching upon that of St. Matthew. seek
ye first the Kingdom of God, did only observe in transitu, that Monarchy was
the best Government. It may be so; it was well for him: but, for all that, I
have, I Will assure you, one that was in no such great have at all. I perceive,
Sir, you are most woefully afraid that I should want vent for my Stories: but, I
must tell you plainly and truly, that they scramble for them so fast that I
have not half enough: there be no less than three several men that do offer to
take off that concerning Faith, Hope and Charity of my hands: but I desire them
to forbear; for it is already promised. Another sends me word from about Epping
in Essex (it is no flam I profess) that he will undertake for all that business
about the Text being like a Sun-Dial, if I Would alter but two or three things; to
which I answered, No; for I had not mine near that place by above fourscore
miles: but if he would take it altogether, as I found it, he should be very
welcome: and I have one that will engage, think you as you will, not only for
flanking, r^ring, intrenching, etc. but for forty more Military terms than I
mentioned; and you must know that I did not tell you half that Astronomy which
I heard in a Country Village; and, for a need, I could tell you the rest, and
never use either forge, file, or hammer. And now, me thinks, ex pe^^ (...),
would do much better for me than for you, if you had not got it away first.
Parson slip-stockin, say you, quitted the stage long since: so he might
perhaps; but, if he did, I Will swear he came again: for the man died but a
little before Easter last; and the triangular heart of man, say you, is as old
as Paul's: Let it be as old as it will; but, for all that, I Will lay a pot and a
cake that I Will show it in a Sermon printed within these seven years, and bring
you at least three or four men that have preached it within the same compass of
time. I profess, Sir you had a great deal better not be altogether so forward
to charge people with flams and whiskers, when as the great rappers are wholly
upon your own side. I do acknowledge that I added -- Silvestrem ten^i to
quicken a little hic labor hoc opus, and per varior casus -- Which methought
went off but heavily alone; and I do suppose that the points of the Compass are
not in the Original; and no body but a Child could have thought they had: and I
care not much if I let you know besides, that amongst that which I quoted, I
did mistake one word; and if you had but hit on it, then Boccaline had been a
Rogue to purpose. I shall not help you in the case, make it your business: all
that I shall say is this, that it was since the Conquest.

And thus, Sir, I have given you my reasons why I do not at present answer your
Book: and I desire that the same may serve, why I never intend to answer it,
nor any such: the Preface I must confess, were I not in great have, might
deserve some little peculiar respect, for the sake of two as pretty, pretty
objections as ever were devised. I shall only reverentially mention them, and
keep the same awful distance from them, as from the rest of your Book, not
daring to meddle with such impregnable pieces. The first horrible absurdity
that I have committed is this, viz. That I should pretend (as I do in my
Preface) to have a special reverence for the Clergy of England, and yet go
about to give reasons in the Book, why some of the Clergy are contemned: and
besides (which is far worse) should put in the word Contempt into the very
Title Page, which is* I know not how many Leagues off from Reverence. Now, say
you, let all the men in the World make these things hang together. Yes: let
them; for I don't intend to try.

The next absurdity that you catch me in is this, viz. that I ought not to have
enquired into what I did; because it was done either for the information of my
self, or of others: (for belike there is no backdoor to make any escape at.) If
of himself; what need was there of its being printed? Could not he have locked
up himself close in his Study, and there have enlightened and clarified his own
understanding? Or could not he have gone into a Grove, and there (for his own
information) have said it over softly to himself, and come home again with his
lips close shut? It remains therefore, as plain as can be, that he must needs
print his Letter, that others might read it: and if so, then would I fain
understand, whether they knew of it before, or not: if they did; then this is
full out as idle and absurd as to inform himself; and if they did not, then
your only design must be to unhinge the Government: for it is just like a
firework in the powder-room; it blows up all into confusion and brings in
Sedition and Schism, as thick as Hogs go to Rumford.

Sir, you must needs excuse me, that I cannot stay to reply to this, because
there is a new Brother of yours with a deadly hard name, that I must say two or
three words to; and therefore in great haste farwell.

T. B.
R. L. is well, and presents his service to you.



A LETTER To T. D. The AUTHOR of Hieragonisticon, OR Corah's Doom.

From T. B.

(...).

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler and R. Holt, for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the
Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1672.

A LETTER, etc.
Devonshire. Jan. 20. 1671. Sir,
UNderstanding that you are very much concerned for my welfare (as appears at
large by several places in your Letter,) and having not the convenience to let
you know so by the Gazette, according as you desired; these are only to
acquaint you, that (thanks be to God) I am in very good bodily health at the
present writing hereof, wishing that you had been as well in your wits, when
you writ your Book. My Wife remembers her love to you, and thanks you for
sending me to the Devil. Bette had sent you a cake, but she poor child! was
(...) with an ague about the last aequinox, wherewith she is so valde
dilacerated, that she has parum left but skin and bones. We durst not venture
upon the Jesuits powder, lest the Ague should have gone out, and the Devil and
the Pope should have entered in. Last Market day wheat was three shillings a
Bushel at Exeter. But -- tush; not a word of the Captain. Because the Dun Cow
went a maskarado last night, and is not as yet returned. Upon the foruth of
this month our neighbor Geofrey's barn was eclipsed, ab ovo ad mala. And the
night before Widow Wamford was vulpeculated of her brood Goose. -- latet
anguis in herba. The Turkey Cock grows very melancholy. -- Sed fortiter occupa
portum. Mr Davis does not at all question, but he shall get a Decree in
Chauncery.

You may possibly hereupon think, Sir, that I have read your Book: but if you
do, you are much mistaken. For so long as I can get Tolambus's History of
mustard, Frederigo's devastation of Pepper, and the Dragon with cutts;
Mandringo's Pismires rebuffeted, and retro-confounded, Is qui nil dubitat, or a
flie-flap against the maggot of Haeresie, efflorescentia flosculorum, or a
choice collection of the elegancies of F, Wither's Poems, or the like, I do not
intend to meddle with it. Alas! Sir, I am so unlikely to read your Book, that I
cannot get down the Title, no more than a duck can swallow a yoked Heifer. How
is it? Hieragonist^con, Or -- but hold -- let me see -- tush -- have a care --
latet anguis -- not a word -- vulpes -- tread softly -- there is a Bear -- once
more -- no -- Jesuits Powder -- Hieragonisticon, Sir, without the Or, is more
than I can digest these twelve months. And whereas you subscr^be your self T.
D. You ought to have gone on E. F. G. H. I. K. etc. but I pray, Sir, was not
Hieragonisticon enough for your Heliogabaluship^ was not that sufficiently
confoundative, debellative, and depopulative? but you must put in -- or Corah's
Doom. If you had had such a mind to an Or -- it should have been thus. Beroza
Almacantherah: or a mouse-trap to catch Moles. Daemonico -- Diabolico --
Satanico -- Tresleamiano: or a certain amulet against the Devil and fleas.
Phlogerosticon -- polu terastaton -- Boroaston: or Oliver's Porter got out of
Bedlam with his breeches full of Bibles, raging against the whore of Babylon.

I tell you once again that I have not as yet read your Book, neither do I
ever intend to read it. I hear some people say, that have stag'd it over, that
you hold a God, the Trinity, Providence, the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, the Protestant Religion to be the best, etc. and hold many of these
things so violently, that you prove them twenty or thirty pages together. I
have therefore nothing to say to you, but only to let you know that I firmly
believe all those things; and I believe besides (which is no more than the rest
of the world do) that you are quite out of your wits, and are run away from
your keepers. And therefore instead of reading your book, in the first place I
advise you to shave very close all the hair off your Crown. You need not fear
turning Friar, you may lay on an antipapal plaster, that shall certainly
secure you. Then take away fifty or threescore ounces of blood, at several
times, according as it shall be found that you come to your self. If you make
use of Leeches be sure that they be well cleans'd. If you purge, use very
gentle things, such as Manna and Syrup of roses, which they give to children
and mad men. Till your distemper abates, avoid all strong meats, Tobacco, hot
spices, and especially Coffee, for the powder has been sometimes observed to
settle into a Saracens head at the bottom of the dish. And above all things
have a great care of studying, or of writing of Books, till your head be
better; and of sleeping upon your back. For the vapors will be apt to rise,
and you will dream of nothing but invasions, inquisitions, gunpowder plotts,
spiritual maskarados, Popery and Atheism. When you have observed, Sir, these
directions for a while, and that your Brain be a little cooled, I desire that
you would look over your own Book again: and then I do not question, but that
you will freely forgive not only me, but all the rest of the world that cannot read
it.

T. B.

A LETTER TO I. O. From T. B.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler and R. Holt, for Nathaniel Brook, at the Sign of
the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1672.

A LETTER, etc.
SIR,
JUst as the foregoing papers were ready for the press, I happened upon seven
Sermons of W. B's, printed since his death. Before which, I found standing an
Epistle to the Reader from your self; beginning with a very large and solemn
commendation of the departed Divine's labors, both in print and preaching:
that, think I, it is not for me to help: for some people take a delight to
commend things only out of spite. But, reading a little further, I perceived
that, I must be pulled in to thrust forward W. B's praises; or at least to
defend his writings against those, that thought them very blameable, and good
for little. For, say you, this Reverend Author's labors have already praised
him in the gate, and his name and memory will continue like a precious
ointment, notwithstanding the vain endeavors of some to make both himself and
his writings ridiculous: for there is a late Author (meaning I suppose T. B.)
who shows that there is as much folly in the preaching of the Conformists as of
W. B. and such as are of his way. Now, in the first place, I must desire you to
unbelieve all that you have said: for, this is to let you know, that I was
never able to show any such thing at all, and that if I should go about it, my
parts would not hold out to do it.

Some of you I believe, were not a little pleased with my first Letter: Taking
me for a very hopeful and towardly Fanatic (which I could never give my mind
to as yet, and I suppose never shall) and thought that my design was to
balance the imprudences of some of our Clergy, against the follies and frenzy
of your party. I tell you truly, I di^ endeavor to relate very freely what I
found sober and judicious men to blame amongst some of our Preachers: but when
you appoint me to make out, that such of our Clergy who are too painful in
dividing of a Text, or too careless in choosing their prefaces etc. are to be
compared with your people, who are not only full out as blameable in that very
kind, but whose whole discourses under pretense of inspiration and great
acquaintance with the Scriptures etc. shall be nothing else but madness and
distraction, noise, cheat, and words; I must then tell you, that you give me a
task so very unreasonable, as I am no ways able to perform it: and truly, I am
the more unwilling to undertake it, because I am much discouraged by the late
writings of two very learned and Worthy Authors: viz. the Friendly debates and
(...). Whom you think fit, I perceive, in your Epistle, to (...) for a couple
of (...) but I am afraid, Sir, you have to your shame, so (...) very great
weight of their judgments, (...) well as the (...) that you will scarce ever be
thoroughly reconciled again, either to wit or understanding.

And truly, no body need much to wonder why you should fear that Religion it
self would be contemned and slighted by the (...) of such witty men. For, when
you had brought your self into notorious disgrace by going about to reply to
Books, which neither your self nor all your party was able to say word to: then
you thought of another answer: which was, that you would even turn Martyr, and
be persecuted and suffer with Religion it self; which you now found very much
to languish, being made ridiculous and contemptible by those very same men,
that had justly mad^ (...) so.

Neither again is it at all strange, that you should esteem those same Witty
men's endeavors to be in vain; because one may guess at the full reach and
extent of your judgment by the commendations you give of those Sermons. Which
though you ^ope (as you say) are free from all exception, yet he that looks
but very little into them, will soon see that they are as full of s^ovenly
Metaphors, of canting phrases and (...) applications of Scripture, as ever any
Book was, that W. ^. or any body else Printed. And because you think that W.
B^s writings are very found in themselves, and only made ridiculous (...) witty
men: therefore I shall only transcribe some few places by which it may appear,
whether there is any need of wit, to help them to be ridiculous.

In the first p^ace I offer to any man's Judgment (let him live as far of^ as he
will, from the censorious Church of England, so he does but understand sense)
whether it was at all prudent, modest, or reverential for W. B. to say, that
none but God alone can rate off Satan: though he explains himself, and shows
whence he had the Metaphor: as he does, thus: viz. If a great Dog or Mastiff be
worrying a Child or a Sheep, a Stranger comes and strikes him, and calls him
off, but the Dog takes no notice of him, but when the Master comes, he rates
him off presently; none but the Master can do it. So here it is, none but God
that can rate off Satan from worrying the poor drooping soul, when it is under
temptation, none but God the Master.

I desire also to know by what Laws of Rhetoric he tells us, that there is a
time when God will hew down sinners, and lay them upon the ground a drying for
hell: and that people that are upon God's Work must not pocket up* And many
such things which would be very harsh and nauseous to any person of
understanding, and make him very loath to rely upon such a judgment as yours.

Neither d^ I think, that any Body will suddenly trust you again, for a
recommender of Sermons, when he finds such idle and extravagant cantings; as
God's crossing of hands in our salvation, of reading of Graces, and gathering
up of Evidences. Because it is said in Scripture that the last shall be first,
and the first last: Therefore says W. B. there is crossing of hands in our
salvation; and God does cross hands in the matter of our comforts. When Jacob
blessed Joseph's two children he crossed his hands: so God when he comes to
comfort does cross hands. We find sometimes that the greatest sinners are
converted and soonest comforted: Now what is this but crossing of hands in the
matter of our comforts; and whence is the free Grace of God more abundantly
manifested to the soul, but by this crossing of hands. A rich man shall hardly
enter into the Kingdom of heaven; and what is this but only to show that God
does often cross hands in the matter of our salvation. Friends, stay but a
little until the day of Judgment, and then you will see what crossing of hands
there will be. Now when any body reads such idle stuff as this, I pray, Sir, do
you think he need send for a witty man to make it ridiculous?

Neither need the witty man be ^ent for to make him laugh at that which W. B.
has concerning peoples reading of their Graces, viz. When a man is under great
temptations, sorrows, and afflictions, it is a hard thing to read his Graces;
some will say they cannot read their Graces, they lie at the bottom: As to
explain it, take this plain comparison: There are many Fishes in a fish pond,
but now in rainy and foul weather the fish lie all at the bottom, and are not
to be seen; but in fair weather the fish swim and are visible: So if it be foul
weather upon a soul, if it be dark and gloomy weather, the Soul cannot read his
Graces; but now when God shines upon him, then he is enabled to read them; yea
though his Graces lie at the bottom, as I may say, yet the poor Soul is able to
read them; and if it be so, it is no small thing, it is no small matter to read
our Graces, our other Graces. And I believe the witty man may stay at home, and
yet the Work will go on apace about gathering up of Evidences. You know (says
your Reverend Divine) how it is with a Country man that makes hay; the hay
lies abroad, and he sees a black cloud a coming, and he calls to his men to
cock up, and gather up the hay: Why, look into the Nation, and see what a cloud
is over us, this calls upon the people of God to gather up their Evidences:
Here is a black cloud over us; O all ye people of God, gather up your
Evidences: that is, cock up for Heaven.

I am, Sir, in somewhat more than ordinary haste, or else I would a little
further endeavor to make you think it more convenient to read Books better
before you commend them, or at least not to challenge the World to find fault
with them. However I cannot omit to take notice how strong W. B's parts were to
his very dying day, at commanding and applying of Scripture.

I suppose, Sir, you could not but take special notice of that mel^ing
observation that your friend has concerning Brotherly Love, viz. that there are
oftimes breakings and loosings in the love of the Saints. But this is nothing
in respect of that clear Paraphrase which from hence he makes upon that of St.
John: a new Commandment I give unto you, that you love one another: For says
he, because many times there are breakings and loosings in the love of Saints,
upon this account it is, that the Commandment of Love is called a new
Commandment, because it is broken so often, and so often renewed again. I
would by all means have you endeavor to get Mr. Poole to enter down this note
of your friends, when he comes at St. John: for this will certainly add very
much to the preciousness of his name and memory.

Neither ought he to be forgotten, neither I believe will he, for pouring forth
such abundance of Scripture History upon one Observation, which he makes in his
seventh Sermon, viz. those that intend to honor God must go forth and meet
God; Abraham and Lot intended to honor the Angel, and therefore they went
forth to meet him; Joseph would honor his Father Jacob, and therefore he went
forth to meet him. Moses would honor his Father Jethro, and therefore he went
forth to meet him: Abigail would honor David, and therefore she went forth to
meet him: Martha would honor Christ, and therefore went out to meet him:
Cornelius and the believing Romans would honor Paul, and therefore they went
forth to meet him. And so if a man be coming to your house, if you would honor
him, you go forth to ^eet him: And so if a man intend to honor God (thereby
intending to prevent his Judgments) you must take up your Cudgel and Gloves,
and troop out and meet the Lord.

Now, Sir, as I told you just now, I am in haste; but I must stay to tell you
that as I always looked upon W. B. to be very sickly and crazy, so I think you
are stark mad, for being an occasion that any such Sermons as these should be
sent into the World: And yet for all this, I am willing to extend my charity as
far as you do yours; and to believe that W. B. is in Heaven; but not, as you
imagine, by virtue of his preached or printed Sermons; and I also hope that you
may follow him thither; but by no means, because you have recommended this Book.

T. B.

FINIS.

