THE GROUNDS and OCCASIONS OF THE CONTEMPT OF THE CLERGY AND RELIGION Enquired
into. In a LETTER written to R. L. The Eighth Edition.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler and R. Holt, for Nathaniel Brook, at the Sign of
the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1672.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Can very easily fancy, that many upon the very first sight of the Title,
will presently imagine, that the Author does either want the great Tithes,
lying under the pressure of some pitiful Vicaridge; or that he is much out of
humor, and dissatisfied with the present condition of Affairs; or lastly, that
he writes to no purpose at all, there having been an abundance of unprofitable
Advisers in this kind.

As to my being under some low Church Dispensation, you may know, I write not
out of a pinching necessity, or out of any rising Design; and you may please to
believe, that although I have a most solemn reverence for the Clergy in
general, and especially for that of England; yet, for my own part, I must
confess to you, I am not of that Holy Employment; and have as little thoughts
of being Dean or Bishop, as they that think so, have hopes of being all Lord
Keepers.

Nor less mistaken will they be, that shall judge me in the least discontented,
or any ways disposed to disturb the peace of the present settled Church: For in
good truth, I have neither lost Kings nor Bishops Lands; that should incline me
to a surly and quarrelsome complaining: As many be, who would have been glad
enough to see His Majesty restored, and would have endured Bishops daintily
well, had they lost no Money by their coming in. I am not, I Will assure you, any
of those occasional Writers, that missing preferment in the University can
presently write you their new ways of Education; or being a little tormented
with an ill chosen Wife, set forth the Doctrine of Divorce to be truly
Evangelical: The cause of these few sheets was honest and innocent, and as free
from all passion, as any design.

As for the last thing which I supposed objected, viz. That this Book is
altogether needless, there having been an infinite number of Church and
Clergy-Menders, that have made many tedious and unsuccessful offers: I must
needs confess, that it were very unreasonable for me to expect a better reward:
Only thus much I think with Modesty may be said; that I cannot, at present,
call to mind any thing that is propounded, but what is very hopeful, and easily
accomplished. For indeed, should I go about to tell you, that a Child can never
prove a profitable instructor of the people, unless born when the Sun is in
Aries; or brought up in a School that stands full South; that he can never be
able to govern a parish, unless he can ride the great Horse; or that he can
never go through the great Work of the Ministry, unless, for three hundred
years backward, it can be proved that none of his Family ever had Cough, Ague,
or gray Hair; then I should very patiently endure, to be reckoned amongst the
vainest, that ever made attempt. But believe me, Reader, I am not, as you will
easily see, any contriver of an incorruptible and pure Crystalline Church; or
any expecter of a Reign of nothing but Saints and Worthies: But only an honest
and hearty wisher, that the best of our Clergy might forever continue as they
are, rich, and learned; and that the rest might be very useful, and well
esteemed of in their Profession.

THE GROUNDS and OCCASIONS OF THE CONTEMPT OF THE CLERGY and RELIGION Enquired
into.
SIR,
THat short Discourse, which we lately had concerning the Clergy, continues so
fresh in your mind, that I perceive, by your last, you are more than a little
troubled to observe that disesteem that lies upon several of those holy Men.
Your good wishes for the Church, I know, are very strong and unfeigned, and
your hopes of the World receiving much more advantage, and better advice, from
some of the Clergy, than usually it is found by Experience to do, are neither
needless nor impossible. And as I have always been a devout admirer, as well as
strict observer of your actions; so I have constantly taken a great delight to
concur with you in your very thoughts. Whereupon it is, Sir, that I have spent
some few hours upon that which was the occasion of your last Letter, and the
Subject of our late Discourse. And before, Sir, I enter upon telling you what
are my apprehensions; I must most heartily profess, that for my own part, I did
never think, since at all I understood the excellency and perfection of a
Church, but that Ours now lately Restored, as formerly Established, does far
out-go, as to all Christian ends and purposes, either the pomp and bravery of
Rome her self, or the best of Free Spiritual States. But if so be it be
allowable, where we have so undoubtedly learned and honorable a Clergy, to
suppose that some of that sacred Profession, might possibly have attained to a
greater degree of esteem and usefulness to the World; then I hope what has thus
long hindered so great and desirable a Blessing to this Nation, may be modestly
ghess'd at; either without giving any wilful offense to the present Church; or
any great trouble, dear Sir, to your self: And if I be not very much mistaken,
whatever has heretofore, or does at present lessen the value of our Clergy, or
render it in any degree less serviceable to the World than might be reasonably
hoped, may be easily referred to two very plain things; the Ignorance of some,
and the Poverty of others of the Clergy.

And first, as to the Ignorance of some of our Clergy; if we would make a
search to purpose, we must go as deep as the very beginnings of Education; and,
doubtless, may lay a great part of our misfortunes to the old fashioned Methods
and Discipline of Schooling it self: Upon the well ordering of which, although
much of the improvement of our Clergy cannot be denied mainly to depend; yet by
reason this is so well known to your self, as also, that there has been many of
undoubted Learning and Experience, that have set out their several Models for
this purpose; I shall therefore only mention such loss of time and abuse of
youth, as is most remarkable and mischievous, and as could not be conveniently
omitted in a Discourse of this nature, though never so short.

And first of all, it were certainly worth the considering, whether it be
unavoidably necessary to keep Lads to sixteen or seventeen years of Age, in
pure slavery to a few Latin and Greek words? Or whether it may not be more
convenient, especially if we call to mind their natural inclinations to ease
and idleness, and how hardly they are persuaded of the excellency of the
liberal Arts and Sciences, any further than the smart of the last piece of
Discipline is fresh in their memories; whether I say it be not more proper and
beneficial, to mix with those unpleasant tasks and drudgeries, something that
in probability might not only take much better with them, but might also be
much easier obtained?

As suppose, some part of time was allotted them for the reading of some
innocent English Authors; where they need not go every line so unwillingly to
a tormenting Dictionary; and whereby they might come in a short time to
apprehend common sense; and to begin to judge what is true: For you shall have
Lads that are arch knaves at the Nominative Case, and that have a notable quick
Eye at spying out the Verb, who for want of reading such common and familiar
Books, shall understand no more of what is very plain and easy, than a well
educated Dog or Horse. Or suppose, they were taught (as they might much easier
be, than what is commonly offered to them) the principles of Arithmetic,
Geometry, and such alluring parts of Learning: As these things undoubtedly
would be much more useful, so much more delightful to them, than to be
tormented with a tedious story how Phaeton broke his Neck; or how many Nuts and
Apples Tityrus had for his Supper: For most certainly Youths, if handsomely
dealt with, are much inclinable to Emulation, and to a very useful esteem of
Glory; and more especially, if it be the reward of Knowledge; and therefore if
such things were carefully and discretely propounded to them, wherein they
might not only earnestly contend amongst themselves, but might also see how far
they outskil the rest of the World; a Lad hereby would think himself high and
mighty, and would certainly take great delight in contemning the next unlearned
Mortal he meets withal. But if instead hereof, you diet him with nothing but
with Rules and Exceptions; with tiresome Repetitions of Amo's and (...);
setting a day also apart to recite verbatim all the burdensome task of the
foregoing week (which I am confident is usually as dreadful as an old
Parliament Fast) we must needs believe, that such a one, thus managed, will
scarce think to prove immortal by such performances, and accomplishments as
these. You know very well, Sir, that Lads in the general, have but a kind of
ugly and odd conception of Learning; and look upon it as such a starving thing,
and unnecessary perfection, (especially as it is usually dispensed out unto
them) that Nine-pins or Span-counter are judged much more heavenly employments:
And therefore what pleasure, do we think, can such a one take, in being bound
to get against breakfast two or three hundred Rumblers out of Homer, in
commendation of Achilles's Toes, or the Grecians Boots? Or to have measured out
unto him, very early in the morning, fifteen or twenty well laid on Lashes, for
letting a syllable slip too soon, or hanging too long upon it? Doubtless,
instant execution upon such grand miscarriages as these, will eternally engage
him to a most admirable opinion of the Muses.

Lads, certainly, ought to be won by all possible Arts and Devices, and though
many have invented fine Pictures and Games, to cheat them into the undertaking
of unreasonable burdens, yet this by no means is such a lasting temptation, as
the propounding of that, which in it self is pleasant and alluring: For we
shall find very many, though of no excelling quickness, will soon perceive the
design of the Landscape, and so looking through the veil, will then begin to
take as little delight in those pretty contrivances, as in getting by heart
three or four leaves of ungay'd nonsense.

Neither seems the stratagem of Money to be so prevailing and catching, as a
right down offering of such Books which are ingenious and convenient; there
being but very few so intolerably careful of their Bellies, as to look upon the
hopes of a Cake, or a few Apples, to be a sufficient recompense for cracking
their Pates with a heap of independent words.

I am not sensible, that I have said any thing in disparagement of those two
famous Tongues, the Greek and Latin, there being much reason to value them
beyond others; because the best of humane Learning has been delivered unto us
in those Languages. But he that worships them, purely out of honor to Rome and
Athens, having little or no respect to the usefulness and excellency of the
Books themselves (as many do) it is a sign he has a great esteem and reverence
of Antiquity, but I think him by no means comparable for happiness to him who
catches Frogs, or hunts Butter-flies.

That some Languages therefore ought to be studied, is in a manner absolutely
necessary, unless all were brought to one (which would be the happiest thing
that the World could wish for;) but whether the beginning of them, might not be
more insensibly instilled, and more advantagiously obtained, by reading
philosophical, as well as other ingenious Authors, than Ianua Linguarum's,
crabbed Poems and cross-grained Prose, as it has been heretofore by others, so
it ought to be afresh considered by all well-wishers either to the Clergy or
Learning.

I know where it is the fashion of some Schools, to prescribe to a Lad for his
Evening refreshment, out of Commenius, all the terms of Art belonging to
Anatomy, Mathematics, or some such piece of Learning. Now, is it not a very
likely thing that a Lad should take most absolute delight in conquering such a
pleasant Task, where, perhaps, he has two or three hundred words to keep in
mind, with a very small proportion of sense thereunto belonging; whereas the
use and full meaning of all those difficult terms, would have been most
insensibly obtained, by leisurely reading in particular this, or the other
Science? Is it not also likely to be very savoury, and of comfortable use, to
one, that can scarce distinguish between Virtue and Vice, to be tasked with
high and moral Poems? For example: It is usually said, by those that are
intimately acquainted with him, that Homer's Iliads and Odysses contain
mystically all the Moral Law for certain, if not a great part of the Gospel (I
suppose much after that rate that Rablais said his Garagantua contained all the
Ten Commandments) but perceivable only to those that have a Poetical
discerning Spirit; with which gift, I suppose, few at School are so early
qualified. Those admirable Verses, Sir, or yours, both English and others,
which you have sometimes favored me with a sight of, will not suffer me to be
so sottish, as to slight or undervalue so great and noble an Accomplishment.
But the committing of such high, and brave senc'd Poems to a Schoolboy, whose
main business is to search out cunningly the Antecedent and the Relative, to
lie at catch for a spruce phrase, a Proverb, or a quaint and pithy sentence, is
not only to very little purpose, but that having gargled only those elegant
Books at School, this serves them instead of reading them afterward, and does
in a manner prevent their being further looked into: So that all the
improvement, whatsoever it be, that may be reaped out of the best and choicest
Poets, is for the most part utterly lost; in that a time is usually chosen of
reading them, when discretion is much wanting to gain thence any true
advantage. Thus that admirable and highly useful Morality Tully's Offices,
because it is a Book commonly construed at School, is generally afterward, so
contemned by Academicks, that it is a long hours work to convince them, that it
is worthy of being looked into again, because they reckon it as a Book read
over at School, and no question notably digested.

If therefore the ill methods of Schooling does not only occasion a great loss
of time there, but also does beget in Lads a very odd opinion and apprehension
of Learning, and much disposes them to be idle, when got a little free from the
usual severities; and that the hopes of more or less improvement in the
Universities, very much depend hereupon, it is without all doubt, the great
concernment of all that wish well to the Church, that such care and regard be
had to the management of Schools, that the Clergy be not so much obstructed in
their first attempts and preparations to Learning.

I cannot, Sir, possibly be so ignorant, as not to consider, that what has been
now offered upon this argument, has not only been largely insisted on by
others, but also refers not particularly to the Clergy (whose welfare and
esteem I seem at present in a special manner solicitous about) but in general
to all learned Professions, and therefore might reasonably have been omitted;
which certainly I had done, had I not called to mind, that of those many, that
propound to themselves Learning for a Profession, there is scarce one of ten,
but that his lot, choice, or necessity, determines him to the study of Divinity.

Thus, Sir, I have given you my thoughts concerning the orders and customs of
common Schools: A consideration in my apprehension not slightly to be weighed;
being that to me seems hereupon very much to depend the Learning and Wisdom of
the Clergy, and the Prosperity of the Church.

The next unhappiness, that seems to have hindered some of our Clergy from
arriving to that degree of understanding, that becomes such an holy Office,
whereby their company and discourses might be much more than they commonly are
valued and desired, is, the inconsiderate sending of all kind of Lads to the
Universities, let their parts be never so low and pitiful, the instructions
they have lain under never so mean and contemptible, and the Purses of their
Friends never so short to maintain them there. If they have but the
commendation of some lamentable and pitiful Construing-Master, it passes for
sufficient evidence, that they will prove persons very eminent in the Church.
That is to say, if a Lad has but a lusty and well-bearing Memory (this being
the usual and almost only thing whereby they judge of their abilities) if he
can sing over very tunably three or four stanza's of Lilly's Poetry, be very
quick and ready to tell what is Latin for all the Instruments belonging to his
Fathers Shop; if presently, upon the first scanning, he knows a sponde from a
dactyl; and can fit a few of those same without any sense to his fingers ends;
if lastly, he can say perfectly by heart his Academick Catechism, in pure and
passing Latin, i. e. What is his name? Where went he to School? and What Author
is he best and chiefly skilled in? A forward Boy, cries the Schoolmaster, a
very pregnant Child! ten thousand pities, but he should be a Scholar: He proves
a brave Clergyman, I Will warrant you. Away to the University he must needs go;
then for a little Logic, a little Ethics, and God knows a very little of
every thing else, and the next time you meet him it is in the Pulpit.

Neither ought the mischief which arises from small Country-Schools to pass
unconsidered; the little Governors whereof, having for the most part, not
sucked in above six or seven mouths full of University Air, must yet by all
means suppose themselves so notably furnished with all sorts of Instructions,
and are so ambitious of the glory of being counted able to send forth now and
then to Oxford or Cambridge, from the little House by the Church-yard's side,
one of their ill educated Disciples, that to such as these oft-times is
committed the guidance and instruction of a whole Parish: whose parts and
improvements duly considered, will scarce render them fit Governors of a
small Grammar-Castle. Not that it is necessary to believe, that there never was
a learned or useful Person in the Church, but such whose education had been at
Westminster or S. Paul's: But, whereas most of the small Schools, being by
their first Founders designed only for the advantage of poor Parish-Children;
and also that the stipend is usually so small and discouraging, that very few,
who can do much more than teach to write and read, will accept of such
Preferment; for these to pretend to rig out their small ones for an University
Life, prove oft-times a very great inconvenience and damage to the Church.

And as many such dismal things are sent forth thus with very small tackling,
so not a few are predestined thither by their Friends, from the foresight of
a good Benefice. If there be rich Pasture, profitable Customs, and that Henry
the Eighth has taken out no Toll, the Holy Land is a very good Land, and
affords abundance of Milk and Honey: Far be it from their Consciences the
considering whether the Lad is likely to be serviceable to the Church, or to
make wiser and better any of his Parishioners.

All this may seem at first sight to be easily avoided by a strict examination
at the Universities, and so returning by the next Carrier all that was sent up
not fit for their purpose. But because many of their Relations are oft-times of
an inferior Condition; and who either by imprudent Counselors, or else out of
a tickling conceit of their Sons being, forsooth, an University Scholar, have
purposely omitted all other opportunities of a livelihood, to return such,
would seem a very sharp and severe disappointment. Possibly it might be much
better, if Parents themselves, or their Friends, would be much more wary of
determining their Children to the Trade of Learning. And if some of undoubted
knowledge and judgment, would offer their advice; and speak their hopes of a
Lad about thirteen or fourteen years of Age (which I Will assure you, Sir, may be
done without conjuring:) and never omit to enquire, whether his relations are
able and willing to maintain him seven years at the University, or see some
certain way of being continued there so long, by the help of Friends or others;
as also upon no such conditions, as shall in likelihood deprive him of the
greatest parts of his Studies.

For it is a common fashion of a great many, to complement, and invite
inferior Peoples Children to the University, and there pretend to make such an
all-bountiful provision for them, as they shall not fail of coming to a very
eminent degree of Learning: But when they come there, they shall save a
Servants Wages. They took therefore heretofore a very good method to prevent
Sizars over-heating their brains: Bed-making, Chamber-sweeping, and
Water-fetching, were doubtless great preservatives against too much vain
Philosophy. Now certainly such pretended savours and kindnesses as these, are
the most right down discourtesies in the World. For it is ten times more happy,
both for a Lad and the Church, to be a Corn-cutter, or Tooth-drawer, to make or
mend Shoes, or to be of any inferior Profession, than to be invited to, and
promised the Conveniences of a learned Education, and to have his name only
stand airing upon the College Tables, and his chief business shall be to buy
Eggs and Butter.

Neither ought Lads parts, before they be determined to the University be only
considered, and likelihood of being disappointed in their Studies, but also
Abilities or hopes of being maintained until they be Masters of Arts. For
whereas two hundred, for the most part, yearly Commence, scarce the fifth part
of these continue after their taking the first degree. As for the rest, having
exactly learned, Quid est Logica? and Quot sunt Virtutes Morales? down they go
by the first Carrier, upon the top of the Pack, into the West or North, or
elsewhere, according as their Estates lie, with Burgersdicius, Eustachius, and
such great helps of Divinity; and then for Propagation of the Gospel. By that
time they can say the Predicaments and Creed, they have their Choice of
Preaching, or Starving* Now, what a Champion for Truth is such a thing likely
to be? What an huge blaze he makes in the Church? What a Raiser of Doctrines,
what a Confounder of Heresies, what an able Interpreter of hard Places, what a
Resolver of Cases of Conscience, and what a prudent Guide must he needs be to
all his Parish?

You may possibly think, Sir, that this so early preaching might be easily
avoided, by withholding Holy Orders: the Church having very prudently
constituted in Her Canons, that none under Twenty three Years of Age (which is
the usual Age after seven Years being at the University) should be admitted
that great Employment.

This indeed might seem to do some service, were it carefully observed; and
were there not a thing to be got, called a Dispensation; which will presently
make you as old as you please.

But if you will, Sir, we'll suppose that Orders were strictly denied to all,
unless qualified according to Canon. I cannot foresee any other Remedy, but
that most of those University Youngsters must fall to the Parish, and become a
Town Charge, until they be of Spiritual Age. For Philosophy is a very idle
thing, when one is cold: And a small System of Divinity (though it be Wollebius
himself) is not sufficient when one is hungry. What then shall we do with them,
and where shall we dispose of them until they come to a holy Ripeness? May we
venture them into the Desk to read Service? That cannot be, because not
capable: Besides, the tempting Pulpit usually stands too near. Or, shall we
trust them in some good Gentlemen's houses, there to perform holy things? With
all my heart, so that they may not be called down from their Studies to say
Grace to every health: That they may have a little better Wages than the Cook
or Butler: As also that there be a Groom in the House, besides the Chaplain:
(For sometimes to the Ten pounds a year, they crowd the looking after a couple
of Geldings:) And that he may not be sent from Table, picking his Teeth, and
sighing with his Hat under his Arm, whilst the Knight and my Lady eat up the
Tarts and Chickens: It may be also convenient, if he were suffered to speak now
and then in the Parlour, besides at Grace and Prayer time: And that my Cousin
Abigail and he sit not too near one another at Meals: Nor be presented together
to the little Vicarage. All this, Sir, must be thought of: For in good earnest,
a Person, at all thoughtful of himself and Conscience, had much better choose to
live with nothing but Beans and Pease-pottage (so that he may have the command
of his thoughts and time) than to have his second and third Courses, and to
obey the unreasonable humors of some Families.

And, as some think, two or three years continuance in the University, to be
time sufficient for being very great Instruments in the Church; so others we
have so moderate, as to count that a solemn admission, and a formal paying of
College Detriments, without the trouble of Philosophical Discourses,
Disputations, and the like, are Virtues that will influence as far as
Newcastle, and improve, though at never such a distance.

So strangely possessed are People in general, with the easiness and small
Preparations that are requisite to the Undertaking of the Ministry, that,
whereas in other Professions they plainly see what considerable time is spent,
before they have any hopes of arriving to skill enough to practice, with any
confidence, what they have designed; yet to preach to ordinary People, and
govern a Country-parish, is usually judged such an easy performance, that any
body counts himself fit for the Employment. We find very few so unreasonably
confident of their parts, as to profess either Law, or Physic, without either
a considerable continuance in some of the Inns of Courts, or an industrious
search in Herbs, Anatomy, Chemistry, and the like; unless it be only to make a
Bond; or give a Glyster. But, as for the knack of Preaching, as they call it,
that is such a very easy attainment, that he is counted dull to purpose that
is not able at a very small warning, to fasten upon any Text of Scripture; and
to tear and tumble it till the Glass be out. Many, I know very well, are forced
to discontinue, having neither stock of their own, nor Friends to maintain them
in the University. But, whereas a Man's Profession and Employment in this
World, is very much in his own, or in the Choice of such who are most nearly
concerned for him: He therefore that foresees that he is not likely to have the
advantage of a continued Education, he had much better commit himself to an
approved-of Cobbler or Tinker, wherein he may be duly respected according to his
Office and condition of Life, than to be only a disesteemed Pettifogger or
Empirick in Divinity.

By this time, Sir, I hope you begin to consider, what a great disadvantage it
has been to the Church and Religion, the mere venturous and inconsiderate
determining of Youths to the Profession of Learning.

There is still one thing by a very few at all minded, that ought also not to
be overlooked; and that is, a good Constitution, and Health of Body. And
therefore discreet and wise Physicians ought also to be consulted, before an
absolute Resolve be made to live the life of the Learned. For he that has
strength enough to buy and bargain, may be of a very unfit habit of body to sit
still so much, as in general is requisite, to a competent degree of Learning:
For although reading and thinking, breaks neither Legs nor Arms, yet certainly
there is nothing that so flags the Spirits, disorders the Blood, and enfeebles
the whole Body of Man, as intense Studies. As for him that rives Blocks, or
carries Packs, there is no great expense of parts, no Anxiety of Mind, no great
Intellectual Pensiveness: Let him but wipe his Forehead, and he is perfectly
recovered. But he that has many Languages to remember; the Nature almost of the
whole World to consult, many Histories, Fathers, and Councils to search into,
if the Fabric of his body be not strong and healthful, you will soon find him
as thin as Metaphysics, and look as piercing as School subtlety. This, Sir,
could not be conveniently omitted; not only, because many are very careless in
this point, and at a venture determine their young Relations to Learning; but
because, for the most part, if amongst many, there be but one of all the Family
that is weak and sickly, that is languishing and consumptive, this of all the
rest, as counted not fit for any course Employment, shall be picked out as a
choice Vessel for the Church: Whereas most evidently, he is much more able to
dig daily in the Mines, than to sit cross-legg'd musing upon his Book.

I am very sensible, how obvious it might be here to hint, that, this so
curious and severe inquiry, would much hinder the practice, and abate the
flourishing of the Universities: As also, there has been several, and are still
many living Creatures in the World, who whilst young, were of a very slow and
meek apprehension, have yet afterward cheared up into a great briskness, and
became Masters of much Reason: And others there have been, who, although forced
to a short continuance in the University, and that oft-times interrupted by
unavoidable services, have yet by singular care and industry, proved very
famous in their Generation: And lastly, some also of very feeble and crasie
Constitutions in their Childhood, have out-studied their distempers, and have
become very healthful, and serviceable in the Church.

As for the flourishing, Sir, of the Universities; what has been before said,
aims not in the least at Gentlemen, whose coming thither is chiefly for the
hopes of single improvement, and whose Estates do free them from the necessity
of making a gain of Arts and Sciences; but only at such as intend to make
Learning their Profession, as well as Accomplishment: So that our Schools may
be still as full of Flourishings, of fine Clothes, rich Gowns, and future
Benefactors, as ever. And suppose we do imagine, as it is not necessary we
should, that the number should be a little lessened; this surely will not abate
the true splendor of an University in any Man's opinion, but his, who reckons
the flourishing thereof, rather from the multitude of mere Gowns, than from the
Ingenuity and Learning of those that wear them; no more than we have reason to
count the flourishing of the Church, from that vast number of People that crowd
into Holy Orders, rather than from those Learned and useful Persons that defend
her Truths and manifest her Ways.

But, I say, I do not see any perfect necessity, that our Schools should
hereupon be thinn'd and less frequented; having said nothing against the
Multitude, but the indiscreet Choice. If therefore, instead of such either of
inferior parts, or a feeble Constitution, or of unable Friends, there were
picked out those that were of a tolerable Ingenuity, of a study-bearing Body,
and had good hopes of being continued; as hence there is nothing to hinder our
Universities from being full, so likewise from being of great Credit and
Learning.

Not to deny then, but that now and then there has been a Lad of very
submissive parts, and perhaps no great share of time allowed him for his
Studies, who have proved, beyond all expectation, brave and glorious: Yet
surely we are not to over-reckon this so rare a hit, as to think that one such
proving Lad, should make recompense and satisfaction for those many weak ones
(as the common people love to phrase them) that are in the Church. And that no
care ought to be taken, no choice made, no Maintenance provided or considered,
because now and then in an Age, one miraculously beyond all hopes, proves
learned and useful, is a practice, whereby never greater Mischiefs, and
disesteem has been brought upon the Clergy.

I have in short, Sir, run over what seemed to me, the first Occasions of that
small learning, that is to be found amongst some of the Clergy. I shall now
pass from Schooling to the Universities.

I am not so unmindful of that Devotion which I owe to those places, nor of
that great esteem I profess to have of the Guides and Governors thereof, as to
go about to prescribe new Forms and Schemes of Education, where Wisdom has laid
her Top-stone. Neither shall I here examine which Philosophy, the old or new,
makes the best Sermons* it is hard to say that Exhortations can be to no
purpose, if the Preacher believes that the Earth turns round: Or, that his
Reproofs can take no effect, unless he will suppose a Vacuum. There has been
good Sermons, no question, made in the days of Materia Prima, and Occult
Qualities: And there is doubtless, still good Discourses now under the Reign of
Atoms.

There is but two things wherein I count the Clergy chiefly concerned (as to
University Improvements) that at present I shall venture to make Inquiry into.

And the first is this; Whether or no it were not highly useful (especially for
the Clergy, who are supposed to speak English to the People) that English
Exercises were imposed upon Lads, if not in public Schools, yet at least
privately. Not, but that I am abundantly satisfied that Latin, O Latin! it is
the all in all, and the very cream of the Jest: As also, that Oratory is the
same in all Languages: The same Rules being observed, the same Method, the same
Arguments and Arts of persuasion; But yet it seems somewhat beyond the reach of
ordinary Youth, so to apprehend those general Laws, as to make a just and
allowable use of them in all Languages, unless exercised particularly in them.
Now, we know, the Language that the very learned part of this Nation must trust
to live by, unless it be to make a Bond, or prescribe a Purge (which possibly
may not oblige or work so well in any other Language as Latin) is the English.
And after a Lad has taken his leave of Madam University, God bless him, he is
not likely to deal afterward with much Latin; unless it be to checker a Sermon,
or to say Salveto to some traveling Dominatio Vestra. Neither is it enough to
say, that the English is the Language with which we are swaddled and rocked
asleep, and therefore there needs none of this artificial and superadded care.
For there be those that speak very well, plainly, and to the purpose, and yet
write most pernicious and fantastical stuff: Thinking, that whatsoever is
written must be more than ordinary, must be beyond the guise of common speech,
must savor of Reading and learning, though it be altogether needless, and
perfectly ridiculous.

Neither ought we to suppose it sufficient, that English Books be frequently
read; because there be of all sorts good and bad (and the worst are likely to
be admired by Youth more than the best) unless Exercises be required of Lads,
whereby it may be ghessed what their judgment is, where they be mistaken, and
what Authors they propound to themselves for imitation. For by this means they
may be corrected and advised early, according as occasion shall require: Which
if not done, their ill style will be so confirmed, their improprieties of
speech will become so natural, that it will be a very hard matter to stir or
alter their fashion of Writing. It is very curious to observe, what delicate
Letters your young Students write after they have got a little smack of
University Learning! In what elaborate heights, and tossing nonsense will they
greet a right-down English Father, or Country Friend! If there be a plain word
in it, and such as is used at home, this tastes not, say they, of Education
among Philosophers, and it is counted damnable Duncery and want of Fancy:
Because, Your Loving Friend, or Humble Servant, is a common phrase in
Countrey-Letters; therefore the young Epistler is Yours to the Antipodes, or at
least to the Center of the Earth; and because ordinary Folks love and respect
you, therefore you are to him the Pole Star, a Jacob's Staff, a Lodestone, and
a Damask Rose.

And the misery of it is, this pernicious accustomed way of expression, does
not only oft-times go along with them to their Benefice, but accompanies them to
the very Grave: And for the most part an ordinary Cheesmonger or Plum-seller,
that scarce ever heard of an University, shall write much better sense, and
more to the purpose than these young Philosophers, who injudiciously hunting
only for great words, make themselves learnedly ridiculous.

Neither can it be easily apprehended, how the use of English Exercises should
any ways hinder the improvement in the Latin Tongue; but rather be much to its
advantage: And this may be easily believed, considering what dainty stuff is
usually produced for a Latin Entertainment. Chicken-broth is not thinner than
that which is commonly offered for a piece of most pleading and convincing
sense. For, I Will but suppose an Academick Youngster to be put upon a Latin
Oration: Away he goes presently to his Magazine of collected Phrases; he picks
out all the Glitterings he can find; he hales in all Proverbs, Flowers,
Poetical Snaps, Tales out of the Dictionary, or else ready latin'd to his hand
out of Licosthenes: This done, he comes to the end of the Table, and having
made a submissive Leg, and a little admired the number, and understanding
countenances of his Auditors (let the subject be what it will) he falls
presently into a most lamentable complaint of his insufficiency and tenuity:
That he poor thing, has no acquaintance with above a Muse and a half; and that
he never drunk above six-q. of Helicon, and you have put him here upon such a
task (perhaps the business is only, which is the noblest Creature a Flea or a
Louse) that would much better fit some old soker at Parnassus, than his sipping
unexperienced Bibbership. Alas, poor Child! he is sorry at the very soul that
he has no better speech; and wonders in his heart, that you will lose so much
time as to hear him: For he has neither Squibs nor Fireworks, Stars nor
Glories; the cursed Carrier lost his best Book of Phrases, and the Malicious
Mice and Rats eat up all his Pearls and Golden Sentences: Then he tickles over
a little the skirts of the Business: By and by, for a similitude from the Sun
or Moon; or if they be not at leisure, from the gray eyed Morn, a shady Grove,
or a purling Stream: This done, he tells you, that Barnaby-bright would be much
too short for him to tell you all that he could say; and so fearing he should
break the thread of your patience, he concludes.

Now it seems, Sir, very probable, that if Lads did but first of all determine
in English, what they intend to say in Latin, they would of themselves soon
discern the triflingness of such Apologies, the pittifulness of their matter,
and the impertinency of their Tales and Phansies, and would according to their
subject, age, and parts, offer that which would be much more manly, and
to-tolerable sense. And if I may tell you, Sir, what I really think, most of
that Ridiculousness, fantastical Phrases, harsh and sometimes blasphemous
Metaphors, abundantly soppish similitudes, childish and empty Transitions, and
the like, so commonly uttered out of Pulpits, and so fatally redounding to the
discredit of the Clergy, may in a great measure be charged upon the want of
that which we have here so much contended for.

The second Inquiry that may be made, is this: Whether or no punning, quibling,
and that which they call joquing, and such other delicacies of Wit, highly
admired in some Academick Exercises, might not be very conveniently omitted?
For one may desire but to know this one thing: In what profession shall that
sort of Wit prove of advantage? As for Law, where nothing but the most reaching
subtilty, and the closest arguing is allowed of, it is not to be imagined, that
blending now and then a piece of a dry Verse, and wreathing here and there an
old Latin Saying into a dismal Jingle, should give Title to an Estate, or clear
out an obscure Evidence. And as little serviceable can it be to Physic, which
is made up of severe Reason, and well tried Experiments. And as for Divinity,
in this place I shall say no more, but that those usually that have been
Rope-dancers in the Schools, ofttimes prove Iack-puddings in the Pulpit. For he
that in his Youth has allowed himself this liberty of Academick Wit, by this
means he has usually so thinn'd his judgment, becomes so prejudiced against
sober sense, and so altogether disposed to trifling and jingling: that so soon
as he gets hold of a Text, he presently thinks that he has caught one of his
old School-questions; and so falls a flinging it out of one hand into another,
tossing it this way and that; lets it run a little upon the line, then tanutus,
high jingo, come again; here catching at a word, there lie nibling and sucking
at an and, a by, a quis, or a quid, a sic and a sicut; and thus minces the Text
so small, that his Parishioners, until he rendevouze it again, can scarce tell
what is become of it.

But shall we debar Youth of such an innocent and harmless Recreation, of such
a great quickner of parts, and promoter of sagacity? As for the first, its
innocence of being allowed of for a time, I am so far from that persuasion,
that from what has been before hinted, I count it perfectly contagious, and as
a thing that for the most part infects the whole life, and influences upon most
actions. For he that finds himself to have the right knack of letting off a
Joque, and of pleasing the Humsters, he is not only very hardly brought off
from admiring those goodly applauses, and heavenly shouts, but it is ten to one
if he directs not the whole bent of his Studies to such idle and contemptible
Books as shall only furnish him with Materials for a Laugh, and so neglects all
that should inform his judgment and reason, and make him a Man of Use and
Reputation in this World. And as for the pretense of making people sagacious,
and pestilently witty: I shall only desire, that the nature of that kind of Wit
may be considered, which will be found to depend upon some such fooleries as
these: As first of all, the lucky ambiguity of some Word or Sentence. Oh! what
a happiness it is, and how much does a Youngster count himself beholding to the
Stars, that should help him to such a taking Jest? And whereas there be so many
thousand words in the world, and that he should luck upon the right one, that
was so very much to his purpose, and that at the explosion made such a goodly
report? Or else they rake Lilly's Grammar; and if they can but find two or
three Letters of any Name in any of the Rules, or Examples of that good man's
works, it is as very a piece of Wit, as any has passed in Town since the King
came in. Oh! how the Fresh-men will skip to hear one of those lines well laughed
at, that they have been so often yerk'd for? It is true, such things as these
go for Wit so long as they continue in Latin; but what dismally shrimp'd things
would they appear, if turned into English. And if we search into what was or
might be pretended, we shall find the advantages of Latin-wit to be very small
and slender, when it comes into the world. I mean not only amongst strict
Philosophers, and men of mere Notions, or amongst all-damning and illiterate
Hectors; but amongst those that are truly ingenious, and judicious masters of
fancy: We shall find, that a Quotation out of Qui mihi, an Axiom of Logic, a
saying of a Philosopher, or the like, though managed with some quickness, and
applied with some ingenuity, whatever they did heretofore, will not in our days
pass, or be accepted for Wit. For we must know, that as we are now in an Age of
great Philosophers, and Men of Reason; so of great quickness and fancy: And
that Greek and Latin which heretofore, though never so impertinently fetched
in, was counted admirable, because it had a learned twang, yet now, such stuff
being out of fashion, is esteemed but very bad company. For the world is now,
especially in Discourse, for one Language, and he that has somewhat in his mind
of Greek or Latin, is requested now adays to be civil, and translate it into
English for the benefit of the Company. And he that has made it his whole
business, to accomplish himself for the applause of a company of Boys,
Schoolmasters, and the easiest of Country Divines, and has been shouldered
out of the Cockpit for his Wit; when he comes into the World, is the most
likely person to be kicked out of the Company, for his pedantry and
overweening opinion of himself. And, were it necessary, it is an easy matter
to appeal to Wits both ancient and modern, that beyond all controversy have
been sufficiently approved of, that never, I am confident, received their
improvements by employing their time in Puns and Quibbles. There is the
prodigious Lucian, the great Don of Mancha and there is many now living Wits of
our own, who never certainly were at all inspired from a Tripus's, Terrae
filius's or Praevaricator's Speech.

I have ventured, Sir, thus far, not to find fault with, but only to enquire
into an ancient Custom or two of the Universities, wherein the Clergy seem to
be a little concerned, as to their Education there. I shall now look upon them
as Beneficed, and consider their Preaching: wherein I pretend to give no Rules,
having neither any Gift at it, nor Authority to do it; but only shall make some
conjectures at those useless and ridiculous things, commonly uttered in
Pulpits, that are generally disgusted, and are very apt to bring contempt upon
the Preacher, and that Religion which he professes.

Amongst the first things that seem to be useless, may be reckoned the high
tossing and swaggering preaching; either mountingly eloquent, or profoundly
learned. For there be a sort of Divines, who if they but happen of an unlucky
hard word all the week, they think themselves not careful of their Flock, if
they lay it not up till Sunday, and bestow it amongst them in their next
preachment. Or, if they light upon some difficult and obscure Notion, which
their curiosity inclines them to be better acquainted with, how useless soever,
nothing so frequent as for them for a month or two months together, to tear and
tumble this Doctrine, and the poor people once a week shall come and gaze upon
them by the hour, until they preach themselves, as they think, into a right
understanding.

Those that are inclinable to make these useless Speeches to the people, they
do it, for the most part, upon one of these two considerations: Either out of
simple fantastic Glory and a great studiousness of being wondered at; as if
getting into the Pulpit were a kind of staging, where nothing was to be
considered, but how much the Sermon takes, and how much star'd at: or else they
do this, to gain a respect, and reverence from their people; who, say they, are
to be puzzled now and then, and carried into the Clouds. For, if the Ministers
words be such as the Constable uses, his matter plain and practical, such as
come to the common market, he may pass possibly for an honest well-meaning man,
but by no means for any Scholar: whereas if he springs forth now and then in
high raptures toward the uppermost Heavens, dashing here and there an
all-confounding word; if he soars aloft in unintelligible huffs, preaches
points deep and mystical, and delivers them as dark and fantastical; this is
the way, say they, of being accounted a most able and learned Instructor.

Others there be, whose parts stand not so much toward tall words and lofty
Notions, but consist in scattering up and down, and besprinkling all their
Sermons with plenty of Greek and Latin. And because S. Paul, once or so, was
pleased to make use of a little Heathen Greek; and that only, when he had
occasion to discourse with some of of the Learned ones, that well understood
him, therefore must they needs bring in twenty Poets and Philosophers (if they
can catch them) into an hours talk: Spreading themselves in abundance of Greek
and Latin, to a company perhaps of Farmers and Shepherds. Neither will they
rest there, but have at the Hebrew also; not contenting themselves to tell the
people in general, that they have skill in the Text, and that the Exposition
they offer agrees with the Original, but must swagger also over the poor
Parishioners with the dreadful Hebrew it self, with their Ben-Israel's,
Ben-Manasses's, and many more Bens that they are intimately acquainted with;
whereas there is nothing in the Church, nor near it by a Mile, that understands
them, but God Almighty himself, whom it is supposed, they go not about to
inform or satisfy.

This learned way of talking, though for the most part it is done merely out of
ostentation, yet sometimes (which makes not the case much better) it is done in
complement and civility to the all-wise Patron, or all-understanding Justice of
the Peace in the Parish: Who, by the common Farmers of the Town, must be
thought to understand the most intricate Notions, and the most difficult
Languages. Now, what an admirable thing this is? Suppose there should be one or
so in the whole Church that understands somewhat besides English; shall not I
think that he understands that better? Must I out of Courtship to his Worship
and understanding, and because perhaps I am to dine with him, prate abundance
of such stuff, which I must needs know no body understands, or that will be the
better for it, but himself, and perhaps scarce he? This I say, because I
certainly know several of that disposition, who, if they chance to have a man
of any Learning or Understanding, more than the rest in the Parish, preach
wholly at him, and level most of their discourses at his supposed capacity, and
the rest of the good people shall have only a handsome gaze or view of the
Parson. As if plain words, useful and intelligible instructions, were not as
good for an Esquire, or one that is in Commission from the King, as for him
that holds the Plough, or mends Hedges.

Certainly he that considers the design of his Office, and has a Conscience
answerable to that holy undertaking, must needs conceive himself engaged, not
only to mind this or that accomplished or well-dress'd Person, but must have an
universal care and regard of all his Parish. And as he must think himself bound
not only to visit Down-beds, and silken Curtains, but also flocks and straw, if
there be need: So ought his care to be as large to instuct the poor, the weak
and despicable part of his Parish, as those that sit in the best Pews. He that
does otherwise, thinks not at all of a Man's Soul, but only accomodates himself
to fine Clothes, an abundance of Ribbons, and the highest seat in the Church:
Not thinking, that it will be as much to his reward in the next world, by sober
advice, care and instruction, to have saved one that takes Collection, as him
that is able to relieve half the Town. It is very plain, that neither our
Savior, when he was upon Earth and taught the world, made any such distinction
in his discourses: What more intelligible to all mankind, than his Sermon upon
the Mount? Neither did the Apostles think of any such way: I wonder whom they
take for a pattern? I will suppose once again, that the design of these Persons
is to gain glory: And I will ask them; can there be any greater in the world
than doing general good? To omit future reward: Was it not always esteemed of
old, that correcting evil practices, reducing people that lived amiss, was much
better than making a high rant about a Shittlecock, and talking Tara-Tantaro
about a Feather? Or if they would be only admired, then would I gladly have
them consider, what a thin and delicate kind of admiration is likely to be
produced, by that which is not at all understood? Certainly that man that has a
design of building up to himself real Fame in good earnest, by things well laid
and spoken, his way to affect it, is not by talking staringly, and casting a
mist before the peoples eyes, but by offering such things by which he may be
esteemed with knowledge and understanding.

Thus far concerning hard words, high notions, and unprofitable quotations out
of learned Languages. I shall now consider such things as are ridiculous, that
serve for Chimney and Market-talk, after the Sermon be done; and that do cause
more immediately the Preacher to be scorned and undervalued. I have no reason,
Sir, to go about to determine what style or method is best for the improvement
and advantage of all people: For I question not, but there has been as many
several sorts of Preachers as Orators, and though very different, yet useful
and commendable in their kind. Tully takes very deservedly with many, Seneca
with others, and Cato, no question, said things wisely and well: So doubtless
the same place of Scripture may by several be variously considered; and
although their method and style be altogether different, yet they may all speak
things very convenient for the people to know, and be advised of. But yet
certainly what is most undoubtedly useless and empty, or what is judged
absolutely ridiculous, not by this or that curious or squeamish Auditor, but by
every Man in the Corporation that understands but plain English and common
sense, ought to be avoided. For all people are naturally born with such a
judgment of true and allowable Rhetoric, that is, of what is decorous and
convenient to be spoken, that whatever is grossly otherwise, is usually
ungrateful, not only to the wise and skilful part of the Congregation, but
shall seem also ridiculous to the very unlearned Tradesmen, and their young
Apprentices. Amongst which, may be chiefly reckoned these following; harsh
Metaphors, childish Similitudes, and ill applied Tales.

The first main thing, I say, that makes many Sermons so ridiculous, and the
Preachers of them so much disparaged and undervalued, is an inconsiderate use
of frightful metaphors; which making such a remarkable impression upon the
Ears, and leaving such a jarring twang behind them, are oft-times remembered to
the discredit of the Minister, as long as he continues in the Parish. I have
heard the very Children in the streets, and the little Boys close about the
Fire, refresh themselves strangely, but with the repetition of a few of such
farfetch'd and odd-sounding Expressions: Tully therefore and Caesar, the the
two greatest masters of Roman Eloquence, were very wary and sparing of that
sort of Rhetoric: We may read many a page in their Works, before we meet with
any of those Bears; and if you do light upon one or so, it shall not make your
hair stand right up, or put you into a fit of Convulsion; but it shall be so
soft, significant, and familiar, as if 'twere made for the very purpose. But as
for the common sort of people that are addicted to this way of expression in
their Discourses; away presently to both the Indies, rake Heaven and Earth,
down to the bottom of the Sea, then tumble over all Arts and Sciences, ransack
all Shops and Warehouses, spare neither Camp nor City, but that they will have
them. So fond are such deceived ones of these same gay words, that they count
all Discourses empty, dull, and cloudy, unless bespankl'd with these
Glitterings. Nay, so injuditious and imimpudent together, will they sometimes
be, that the Almighty himself is often in danger of being dishonored by these
indiscreet and horrid Metaphor-Mongers: And when they thus Blaspheme the God of
Heaven, by such unhallowed Expressions, to make amends, they will put you in, an
As it were, forsooth, or As I may so say; that is, they will make bold to speak
what they please concerning God himself, rather than omit what they judge,
though never so false, to be witty: And then they come in hobling with their
lame submission, and with their Reverence be it spoken. As if it were not much
better to leave out what they foresee is likely to be interpreted for
blasphemy, or at least great extravagancy, than to utter that, for which their
own reason and Conscience tells them, they are bound to lay in beforehand an
excuse.

To which may be further subjoined, That Metaphors though very apt and
allowable, are intelligible but to some sorts of Men, of this or that kind of
Life, of this or that Profession: For example: Perhaps one Gentleman's
Metaphorical knack of Preaching comes of the Sea: And then we shall hear of
nothing but star-board and lar-board, of stems, sterns and fore-castles, and
such like Salt Water Language: So that one had need take a Voyage to Smyrna or
Aleppo, and very warily attend to all the Sailors terms, before I shall in the
least understand my Teacher. Now, although such a Sermon may possibly do some
good in a Coast-Town, yet upward into the Country, in an Inland Parish, it
will do no more than Syriack or Arabic. Another he falls a fighting with his
Text, and makes a Pitched Battle of it, dividing it into the right wing and
left wing, then he rears it, flanks it, intrenches it, storms it; then he
musters all again, to see what word was lost, or lamed in the Skirmish, and so
falling on again with fresh valor, he fights backward and forward, Charges
through and through, Routs, Kills, Takes, and then, Gentlemen, as you were. Now
to such of his Parish as have been in the late Wars, this is not very
formidable; for they do but suppose themselves at Naseby or Edg-hill, and they
are not much scared at his Doctrine: But as for others, who have not had such
fighting opportunities, it is very lamentable to consider, how shivering they
sit without understanding, till the Battle be over. Like instance might be
easily given of many more Discourses; the Metaphorical phrasing whereof,
depending upon peculiar Arts, Customs, Trades and Professions, makes them
useful and intelligible only to such who have been very well busied in such
like Employments.

Another thing, Sir, that brings great disrespect and mischief upon the Clergy,
and that differs not much from what went immediately before, is their packing
their Sermons so full of similitudes; which, all the World know, carry with
them but very small force of Argument, unless there be an exact Agreement with
that which is compared; of which there is very seldom any sufficient care
taken. Besides, those that are adicted to this slender way of discourse, for
the most part, do so weaken and enfeeble their judgment by contenting
themselves to understand by colors, features, and glimpses, that they
perfectly omit all the more profitable searching into the nature and causes of
things themselves. By which means it necessarily comes to pass, that what they
undertake to prove and clear out to the Congregation, must needs be so faintly
done, and with such little force of Argument, that the conviction or persuasion
will last no longer in the Parishioners minds, than the warmth of of those
Similitudes shall glow in their Fancy. So that he that has either been
instructed in some part of his Duty, or excited to the performance of the same,
not by any judicious dependence of things, and lasting reason, but by such
faint and toyish evidence; his understanding upon all occasions will be as apt
to be misled as ever, and his affections as troublesome and ungovernable.

But they are not so unserviceable, as usually they are ridiculous; for People
of the weakest parts are most commonly overborn with these fooleries; which
together with the great difficulty of their being prudently managed, must
needs occasion them, for the most part, to be very trifling and childish.
Especially, if we consider the choiceness of the Authors, out of which they are
furnished: There is the never-to-be commended-enough Lycosthenes; there is also
the admirable Piece, called the second Part of Wits Commonwealth (I pray mind
it, it is the second Part, not the first:) and there is besides, a Book wholly
consisting of Similitudes, applied and ready fitted to most preaching Subjects,
for the help of young-beginners, who sometimes will not make them hit
handsomely. It Is very well known, that such as are possessed with an admiration
of such Eloquence, think that they are very much encouraged in their way, by
the Scripture it self: For, say they, did not our blessed Savior himself use
many Metaphors, and many Parables? And did not his Disciples, following his so
excellent an example, do the like, and is not this, not only warrant enough,
but near upon a commmand to us so for to do? If you please therefore we will
see what our Savior does in this case. In S. Matthew he tells his Disciples,
that they are the Salt of the Earth; that they are the Light of the world; that
they are a City set on a Hill: Furthermore, he tells his Apostles that he sends
them forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves; and bids them therefore, be as wise
as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. Now, are not all these things plain and
familiar, even almost to Children themselves, that can but taste and see; and
to men of the lowest Education, and meanest Capacities?

I shall not here insist upon those special and admirable Reasons for which our
Savior made use of so many parables: only thus much is needful to be said,
namely, that they are very much mistaken, that from hence think themselves
tolerated to turn all the world into frivolous and abominable Similitudes. As
for our Savior when he spoke a parable, he was pleased to go no further than
the Fields, the Seashore, a Garden, a Vineyard, or the like; which are things,
without the knowledge whereof, scarce any man can be supposed to live in this
world. But as for our Metaphorical and Similitude-men of the Pulpit, these
things to them are too still and languid, they do not rattle and rumble: These
lie too near home, and within vulgar kenn: There is little on this side the
Moon that will content them: Up presently to the Primum-mobile, and the
trepidation of the Firmament: Dive into the Bowels and hid Treasures of the
Earth: Dispatch forthwith for Peru and Iamaica; a Town-bred or Country-bred
Similitude, it is worth nothing! It Is reported of a Tree growing upon the bank
of Euphrates, the great River Euphrates, that it brings forth an Apple, to the
Eye very fair and tempting, but inwardly it is filled with nothing but useless
and deceitful dust: Even so, dust we are, and to dust we must all go. Now, what
a lucky discovery was this, that a man's body should be so exactly like an
Apple? And I will assure you, that this was not thought on till within these
few years. And I am afraid too, he had a kind of a hint of this from another,
who had formerly found out, that a man's Soul was like Oyster; For says he, in
his Prayer, Our souls are constantly gaping after thee, O Lord; yea verily, our
souls do gape, even as an Oyster gapeth. It seems pretty hard, at first sight,
to bring into a Sermon all the Circles of the Globe, and all the frightful
terms of Astronomy. But, I Will assure you, Sir, it is to be done, because it has
been; But not by every Bungler and Text-divider, but by a man of great cunning
and experience. There is a place in the Prophet Malachi, where it will do very
neatly, and that is chap. 4. verse. 2. But unto you that fear my name, shall the
Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his Wings: From which words, in the
first place, it plainly appears, that our Savior passed through all the twelve
Signs of the Zodiak: And more than that too, all proved by very apt and
familiar places of Scripture. First then, our Savior was in Aries; or else
what means that of the Psalmist? The Mountains skipked like Rams, and the
little Hills like Lambs. And again, that in the second of the Kings chapter 3. v.
4. And Mesha King of Moab was a Sheep-master, and rendered unto the King of
Israel an hundred thousand Lambs: and what follows? and an hundred thousand
Rams, with the wool. Mind it; it was the King of Israel. In like manner was he
in Taurus, Psalm. 22.12. Many Bulls have compassed me: Strong Bulls of Bashan
have beset me round. They were not ordinary Bulls: They were compassing Bulls,
they were besetting Bulls, they were strong Bashan Bulls. What need I speak of
Gemini? Surely you cannot but remember Jacob and Esau, Genesis 25.24. And when her
days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold there were Twins in her Womb. Or of
Cancer? when as the Psalmist says so plainly: What ailed thee, O thou Sea, that
thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? Nothing more plain. It
were as easy to show the like in all the rest of the Signs: But instead of
that, I shall rather choose to make this one practical observation: That the
Mercy of God to Mankind in sending his Son into the world, was a very signal
Mercy: it was a Zodiacal Mercy. I say it was truly Zodiacal: For Christ keeps
within the Tropicks: He goes not out of the Pale of the Church. But yet he is
not always at the same distance from a Believer: Sometimes he withdraws himself
into the Apogaeum of doubt, sorrow, and despair, but then he comes again into
the Perigaeum of joy, content, and assurance: But as for Heathens and
Unbelievers, they are all Artick and Antartick Reprobates. Now when such stuff
as this (as sometimes it is) is vented in a poor Parish, where people can
scarce tell what day of the month it is by the Almanac, how seasonable and
savoury is it likely to be? I seems also not very easy, for a Man in his
Sermon to learn his Parishioners how to dissolve Gold: of what and how the
stuff is made. Now, to ring the Bells and call the people on purpose together,
would be but a blunt business; but to do it neatly, and when no body looked for
it, that is the rarity and art of it* Suppose then, that he takes for his Text
that of S. Matthew, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of God is at hand. Now, tell me
Sir, do you not perceive the Gold to be in a dismal fear, to curl and quiver at
the first reading of these words. It must come in thus: The blots and blurs of
your Sins must be taken out by the Aquafortis of your Tears: To which
Aquafortis if you put a fifth part of Sal-Almoniack, and set them in a gentle
heat, it makes Aqua-regia, which dissolves Gold. And now it is out. Wonderful
are the things that are to be done by the helps of Metaphors and Similitudes!
And I Will undertake, that with a little more pains and consideration, out of the
very same words, he could have taught the people how to make Custards,
Marmalade, or to stew Prunes. But pray, why the Aquafortis of Tears? For, if
it so falls out, that there should chance to be neither Apothecary nor Druggist
at Church, there is an excellent Jest wholly lost. Now had he been so
considerate, as to have laid his Wit in some more common and intelligible
Material: For example, had he said that the blots of sin, will be easily taken
out by the Soap of sorrow, and the Fullers-Earth of Contrition; then possibly
the Parson and the people might all have admired one another. For there be many
a Goodwife that understands very well all the intrigues of Pepper, Salt, and
Vinegar, who knows not any thing of the all-powerfulness of Aquafortis, how
that it is such a spot-removing Liquor. I cannot but consider with what
understanding the people sighed and cried, when the Minister made for them this
Metaphysical Confession: Omnipotent All; Thou art only: Because thou art All,
and because thou only art: As for us, we are not, but we seem to be; and only
seem to be, because we are not; for we be but Mites of Entity, and Crumbs of
something; and so on: As if a company of Country people were bound to
understand Suarez, and all the School-Divines.

And as some are very high and learned in their attempts; so others there be
who are of somewhat too mean and dirty imaginations: Such was he, who goes by
the name of Parson Slip-stocking: Who preaching about the Grace and Assistance
of God, and that of our selves we are able to do nothing; advised his Beloved
to take him in this plain Similitude. A Father calls his Child to him, saying,
Child, pull off this Stocking: The Child mightily joyful, that it should pull
off Father's Stocking, takes hold of the Stocking, and tuggs, and pulls, and
sweats, but to no purpose; for Stocking stirs not, for it is but a child that
pulls: Then the Father bids the child to rest a little, and try again; so then
the Child sets on again, tuggs again, and pulls again, and sweats again, but no
Stocking comes; for Child is but Child: Then at last the Father, taking pity
upon his child, puts his hand behind, and slips down the Stocking, and off
comes the Stocking: Then how does the Child rejoice? For child has pulled off
Father's Stocking. Alas, poor Child! it was not child's strength, it was not
child's sweating, that got off the Stocking, but yet it was the Fathers hand
behind, that slipped down the Stocking. Even so -- Not much unlike to this was
he, that preaching about the Sacrament and Faith, makes Christ a Shopkeeper;
telling you, that Christ is a Treasury of all Wares and Commodities: And
thereupon, opening his wide throat, cries aloud, Good People, what do you lack?
what do you by? Will you buy any Balm of Gilead, any Eye Salve, any Myrrh,
Aloes or Cassia? Shall I fit you with a robe of roghteousness, or with a white
Garment? See here! what is it you want? Here Is a very choice Armory: shall I
show you an Helmet of Salvation, a Shield or a Breast Plate of Faith? Or will
you please to walk in, and see some precious Stones? a Jasper, a Saphyre, or a
Chalcedonit? Speak, what do you buy? Now for my part, I must needs say, and I
much fancy I speak the mind of thousands, that it had been much better for
such an imprudent and ridiculous Bawler, as this, to have been condemned to
have cried Oysters or Brooms, than to discredit, after this unsanctified rate,
his Profession and our Religion.

It would be an endless thing, Sir, to count up to you all the Follies, for an
hundred years last past, that have been Preached and Printed of this kind. But
yet I cannot omit that of the famous Divine, in his time, who advising the
people in days of danger to run unto the Lord, tells them, that they cannot go
to the Lord, much less run without feet: There be therefore two feet to run to
the Lord, Faith and Prayer: It Is plain that Faith is a foot, for by Faith we
stand, 2 Cor. 1.24. therefore by Faith we must run to the Lord who is faithful.
The second is Prayer, a spiritual Leg to bear us thither: Now, that Prayer is a
spiritual Leg, appears from several Places of Scripture; as from that of Jonah,
speaking of coming, chap. 2. verse. 7. And my Prayer came unto thy holy Temple:
And likewise from that of the Apostle, who says, Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore go
unto the Throne of Grace: Both intimating, that Prayer is the spiritual Leg,
there being no coming or going to the Lord without the Leg of Prayer. He
further adds: Now, that these feet may be able to bear us thither, we must put
on the Hose of Faith; for the Apostle says, our feet must be shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace. The truth of it is, the Author is somewhat
obscure: For, at first, Faith was a Foot; and by and by it is a Hose; and at
last it proves a Shoe. If he had pleased, he could have made it any thing.

Neither can I let pass that of a later Author; who telling us, It is Goodness
by which we must ascend to Heaven; and that Goodness is the Milkey-way to
Jupiter 's Palace; could not rest here, but must tell us further, that to
strengthen us in our journey, we must not take morning milk, but some morning
Meditations; fearing, I suppose, lest some people should mistake, and think to
go to Heaven by eating now and then a Mess of Morning Milk, because the way was
milkey.

Neither ought that to be omitted, not long since Printed, upon those words of
S. John, These things I write unto you, that you sin not. The Observation is,
that it is the purpose of the Scripture to drive men from Sin. These Scriptures
contain Doctrines, Precepts, Promises, Threatenings and Histories: Now, says he,
take these five smooth stones, and put them into the scrip of the Heart, and
throw them with the Sling of Faith, by the hand of a strong Resolution, against
the forehead of Sin, and we shall see it, like Goliath, fall before us.

But I shall not trouble you any further upon this subject; but, if you have a
mind to hear any more of this stuff, I shall refer you to the learned and
judicious Author of the Friendly Debates; who particularly has at large
discovered the intolerable fooleries of this way of talking. I shall only add
thus much; that such as go about to fetch blood into their pale and lean
discourses, by the help of their brisk and sparkling Similitudes, ought well to
consider whether their Similitudes be true. I am confident, Sir, you have heard
it many and many a time (or if need be, I can show you't in a Book) that when
the Preacher happens to talk, how that the things here below will not satisfy
the mind of man; then comes in, the round world, which cannot fill the
triangular heart of man: Whereas every Butcher knows, that the heart is no more
triangular, than an ordinary Pear, or a child's Top: But because Triangular is
a hard word, and perhaps a Jest, therefore people have stolen it one from
another, these two or three hundred years. And, for ought I know, much longer;
for I cannot direct to the first Inventer of the fancy.

In like manner they are to consider, what things either in the Heaven, or
belonging to the earth, have been found out by experience to contradict what
has been formerly allowed of. Thus, because some ancient Astronomers had
observed, that both the distances, as well as the Revolutions of the Planets,
were in some proportion or harmony one to another; therefore people that
abounded more with imagination than skill, presently phansi'd the Moon, Mercury
and Venus to be a kind of Violins or Trebles to Jupiter and Saturn; and that
the Sun and Mars supplied the room of Tenors; the Primum mobile running
Division all the time. So that one could scarce hear a Sermon, but they must
give you a touch of the Harmony of the Spheres. Thus, Sir, you shall have 'm
take that of St. Paul, about Faith, Hope and Charity; and instead of a sober
instructing the People in those eminent and excellent Graces, they shall only
ring you over a few changes upon the three words: crying, Faith, Hope and
Charity: Hope, Faith and Charity; and so on: And when they have done their
Peal, they shall tell you, that this is much better than the Harmony of the
Spheres.

At other times I have heard a long Chyming only between two words; as suppose
Divinity and Philosophy, or Revelation and Reason; setting forth with
Revelation first: Revelation is a Lady: Reason an Handmaid. Revelation's the
Esquire: Reason the Page. Revelation's the Sun: Reason's but the Moon.
Revelation is Manna: Reason's but an Acorn. Revelation a Wedge of Gold: Reason
a small piece of Silver. Then by and by Reason gets it and leads it away.
Reason indeed is very good; but Revelation is much better. Reason is
Counselor; but Revelation is the Lawgiver. Reason is a Candle; but Revelation
is the Snuffer. Certainly those People are possessed with a very great degree
of dullness, who living under the means of such enlightening Preaching, should
not be mightily settled in the right Notion, and true bounds of Faith and
Reason.

Not less ably, me-thought, was the difference between the old Covenant and
New, lately determined. The Old Covenant was of Works; the New Covenant of
Faith. The Old Covenant was by Moses; the New by Christ. The Old was
heretofore; the New afterward. The Old was first; the New was second. Old
things are passed away; behold all things are become new. And so the business
was very fundamentally done.

I shall say no more upon this subject, but this one thing, which relates to
what was said a little before: He that has got a set of Similitudes, calculated
according to the old Philosophy, and Ptolomy's Systeme of the World, must burn
his common-place-Book, and go a gleaning for new ones: It being now a days much
more gentile and warrantable, to take a Similitude from the Man in the Moon,
than from solid Orbs: For though few people do absolutely believe that there is
any such Eminent Person there, yet the thing is possible, whereas the other is
not.

I have now done, Sir, with that imprudent way of speaking, by Metaphor and
Similitude. There be many other things commonly spoken out of the Pulpit, that
are much to the disadvantage, and discredit of the Clergy, that ought also to
be briefly hinted. And that I may the better light upon them, I shall observe
their common method of Preaching.

Before the Text be divided, a Preface is to be made: And it is a great chance,
if, first of all, the Minister does not make his Text to be like something or
other. For Example: One he tells you, And now (methinks) my Text, like an
ingenious Picture, looks upon all here present; in which both Nobles and People
may behold their sin and danger represented. This was a Text out of Hosea. Now,
had it been out of any other place of the Bible, the Gentleman was sufficiently
resolved, to make it like an ingenious Picture. Another taking (perhaps) the
very same words, says, I might compare my Text to the Mountains of Bether,
where the Lord disports himself as a young Heart, or a pleasant Roe among the
Spices. Another Man's Text is like the Rod of Moses, to divide the Waves of
Sorrow; or, like the mantle of Elijah, to restrain the swelling floods of
Grief. Another gets to his Text thus; As Solomon went up six steps to come to
the great Throne of Ivory; so must I ascend six degrees to come to the high
top-meaning of my Text. Another thus: As Deborah arose and went with Barack to
Kadesh; so, if you will go along with him, and call in at the third Verse of
the Chapter, he will show you the meaning of his Text.

Another he phancies his Text to be extraordinarily like to an Orchard of
Pomegranates; or like Saint Matthew, sitting at the Receipt of Custom; or like
the Dove that Noah sent out of the Ark. I believe there are above forty places
of Scripture that have been like Rachel and Leah: and there is one in Genesis,
as I well remember, that is like a pair of Compasses stradling: And if I be not
much mistaken, there is one somewhere else, that is like a man going to Jericho.

Now, Sir, having thus made the way to the Text, as smooth and plain as any
thing; with a Preface perhaps from Adam; though his business lie at the other
end of the Bible: In the next place, he comes to divide the Text. -- Hic Labor,
hoc Opus.
Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum.
Silvestrem tenui --
Now come off the Gloves, and the Hands being well chafed, he shrinks up his
shoulders, and stretches forth himself as if he were going to cleave a
Bullock's head, or rive the body of an Oak. But we must observe, that there is
a great difference of Texts. For all Texts come not asunder alike: For
sometimes the words naturally fall asunder; sometimes they drop asunder;
sometimes they melt; sometimes they untwist; and there be some words so willing
to be parted, that they divide themselves, to the great ease and rejoicing of
the Minister. But if they will not easily come in pieces, then he falls to
hacking and hewing, as if he would make all fly into shivers. The truth of it
is, I have known, now and then, some knotty Texts, that have been divided seven
or eight times over, before they could make them split handsomely, according to
their mind.

But then comes the joy of joys, when the parts jingle, or begin with the same
letter; and especially if in Latin. O how it tickled the Divider, when he had
got his Text into those two excellent Branches; Accusatio vera: Comminatio
severa. A charge full of verity: A discharge full of severity. And I Will warrant
you that did not please a little, viz. there is in the words duplex miraculum;
miraculum in modo; and miraculum in nodo. But the luckyest that I have met
withal, both for wit and keeping the letter, is upon those words of St.
Matthew. 12.43, 44, 45. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a Man, he
walks through dry places, seeking rest, and finding none* Then he says, I
will return, etc. In which words all these strange things were found out.
First, there was a Captain and a Castle. Do ye see, Sir, the same letter? Then
there was an ingress, an egress; and a regress or reingress. Then there was
unroosting and unresting. Then there was number and name, manner and measure,
trouble and trial, resolution and revolution, assaults and assassination,
voidness and vacuity. This was done at the same time, by the same Man: But, to
confess the truth of it, 'twas a good long Text, and so he had the greater
advantage.

But for a short Text, that certainly was the greatest break that ever was;
which was occasioned from those words of St. Luke 23.28. Weep not for me, weep
for your selves; or, as some read it, but weep for your selves. It is a plain
case, Sir, here is but eight words, and the business was so cunningly ordered,
that there sprung out eight parts: Here are, says the Doctor, eight words, and
eight parts. 1. Weep not. 2. But weep. 3. Weep not, but weep. 4. Weep for me.
5. For your selves. 6. For me, for you selves. 7. Weep not for me. 8. But weep
for your selves. That is to say: North, North and by East. North North East,
North East and by North, North East, North East and by East, East North East,
East and by North, East -- Now it seems not very easy to determine which has
obliged the World, he that found out the Compass or he that divided the
forementioned Text: But I suppose the cracks will go generally upon the
Doctor's side; by reason what he did, was done by undoubted Art, and absolute
Industry; but as for the other, the common report is, that it was found out by
mere foolish fortune. Well, let it go how it will, questionless, they will be
both famous in their way, and honorably mentioned to Posterity.

Neither ought he to be altogether slighted who taking that of Genesis 48. 2. for
his Text, viz. And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy Son Joseph comes unto
thee; presently perceived, and made it out to the People, that his Text was a
spiritual Dial. For, says he, here be in my Text twelve words, which do plainly
represent the twelve hours. Twelve words: And one told Jacob, and said, Thy Son
Joseph comes unto thee. And here is, besides Behold, which is the Hand of the
Dyal, that turns and points at every word in the Text. And one told Jacob, and
said, Behold thy son Joseph comes unto thee. For it is not said, Behold Jacob
or Behold Joseph: But it is, And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son
Joseph comes unto thee. That is to say: Behold And. Behold one. Behold told.
Behold Jacob. Again Behold and. Behold said. (And also:) Behold Behold, etc.
Which is the reason that the word Behold is placed in the middle of the other
twelve words, indifferently pointing at each word.

Now as it needs must be one of the Clock, before it can be Two or Three; so I
shall handle this word And the first word in the Text, before I meddle with the
following. And one told Jacob: This word And is but a Particle, and a small
one: but small things are not to be despised: S. Mat. 18.10. Take heed that you
despise not one of these little ones. For this And is as the Tacks and Loops
amongst the Curtains of the Tabernacle. The Tacks put into the Loops did couple
the Curtains of the Tent, and sew the Tent together: So this Particle And being
put into the Loops of the words immediately before the Text, does couple the
Text to the foregoing Verse, and sews them close together.

I shall not trouble you, Sir, with the rest; being much after this witty rate,
and to as much purpose. But we'll go on if you please, Sir, to the cunning
Observations, Doctrines, and Inferences, that are commonly made and raised from
places of Scripture.

One he takes that for his Text, Psalm. 68.3. But let the righteous be glad.
From whence he raises this Doctrine, That there is a spirit of Singularity in
the Saints of God. But let the righteous. A Doctrine I Will warrant him, of his
own raising; it being not very easy for any body to prevent him.

Another, he takes that of Isai. 41.14, 15. Fear not thou Worm Jacob, etc. thou
shall thresh the Mountains -- Whence he observes, That the Worm Jacob was a
threshing Worm.

Another, that of Genesis 44.1. And he commanded the Steward of the House, saying,
Fill the men's sacks with food as much as they can carry: And makes his Note
from the words; that great Sacks, and many Sacks, will hold more than few
Sacks, and little ones. For look, says he, how they came prepared with Sacks
and Beasts, so they were sent back with Corn: The greater and the more Sacks
they had prepared, the more Corn they carry away; if they prepared but small
Sacks, and a few, they had carried away the less: Verily and extraordinarily
true.

Another he falls upon that of Isa. 58.5. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen?
A day for a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head like a Bulrush?
The observation is, that Repentance for an hour, or a day, is not worth a
Bulrush. And there, I think he hit the business.

But of these, Sir, I can show you a whole Book full, in a treatise called
Flames and Discoveries: consisting of very notable and extraordinary things,
which the inquisitive Author had privately observed, and discovered, upon
reading the Evangelists. As for example: Upon reading that of S. John chap. 2.
verse. 15. And when he had made a scourge of small Cords, he drove them all out
of the Temple: This prying Divine makes these Discoveries. I discover, says he,
in the first place, that in the Church or Temple, a scourge may be made. And
when he had made a scourge. Secondly, that it may be made use on: He drove them
all out of the Temple. And it was a great chance, that he had not discovered a
third thing, and that is, that the scourge was made before it was made use of.
Upon Mat. 4.25. And there followed him great Multitudes of People from Galilee.
I discover, says he, when Jesus prevails with us, we shall soon leave our
Galilees. I discover also, says he, a great Miracle, viz. that the way after
Jesus being straight, that such a multitude should follow him. Matthew. 5.1. And
seeing the Multitude, he went up into a Mountain: Upon this he discovers
several very remarkable things: First, he discovers, that Christ went from the
Multitude. Secondly, That it is safe taking warning at our eyes; for seeing the
Multitude he went up. Thirdly, It is not fit to be always upon the plains and
flats with the Multitude; but if we be risen with Christ, to seek those things
that are above. He discovers also very strange things from the latter part of
the forementioned Verse: And when he was set, his Disciples came unto him. 1.
Christ is not always in motion: And when he was set. 2. He walks not on the
Mountain, but sits: And when he was set. From whence also, in the third place,
he advises People, That when they are Teaching, they should not move too much,
for that is to be carried to and fro with every wind of Doctrine: Now certainly
never was this place of Scripture more seasonably brought in. Now, Sir, if you
be for a very short and witty Discovery, let it be upon that of S. Mat. 6.27.
which of you by taking thought, can add one Cubit unto his stature? The
Discovery is this: That whilst the Disciples were taking thought for a Cubit,
Christ takes them down a Cubit lower. Notable also are two Discoveries made
upon S. Mat. 8.1. When he came down from the Mountain, great Multitudes
followed him. 1. That Christ went down as well as went up; when he came down
from the Mountain. 2. That the Multitude did not go hail fellow well met with
him, nor before him: For, great Multitudes followed him. I love with all my
heart, when People can prove what they say: For there be many that will talk of
their Discoveries and spiritual observations; and when all comes to all, they
are nothing but pitiful ghesses, and slender conjectures. In like manner that
was no contemptible Discovery that was made upon S. Mat. 8.19. And a certain
Scribe came and said, Master, I will follow thee wheresoever thou go. A
[thou] shall be followed more than a [that:] I will follow thee wheresoever
thou go. And, in my opinion, that was not altogether amiss, upon S. Mat.
11.2. Now when John had heard in the Prison the works of Christ, he sent two of
his Disciples. Some also possibly may not dislike that upon S. Luke 12.35. Let
your Lions be girded. I discover, says he, there must be a holy girding and
trussing up for Heaven. But I shall end all with that very politic one, that
he makes upon S. Mat. 12.47. Then one said unto him, Behold thy Mother and thy
Brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee. But he answered and said,
Who is my Mother? and who are my Brethren? I discover now, says he, that Jesus
is upon business. Doubtless, this was one of the greatest Discoverers of hidden
mysteries, and one of the most Pryers into spiritual Secrets, that ever the
world was owner of. It was very well that he happened upon the godly Calling,
and no secular Employment; or else in good truth, down had they all gone, Turk,
Pope, and Emperor; for he would have discovered them one way or other, every
Man.

Not much unlike to these wonderful Discoverers are they, who choosing to Preach
upon some Point in Divinity, shall purposely avoid all such plain Texts, as
might give them very just occasion to discourse upon their intended Subject,
and shall pitch upon some other places of Scripture, which no creature in the
world but themselves did ever imagine that which they offer to be therein
designed. My meaning, Sir, is this: Suppose you have a mind to make a Sermon
concerning Episcopacy, (as in the late times there was several occasions for
it) you must by no means take any place of Scripture that proves or favors
that kind of Ecclesiastical Government: For then the plot will be discovered,
and the people will say to themselves, we know where to find you, you intend to
preach about Episcopacy. But you must take that of the Acts c. 16. v. 30. Sirs,
What must I do to be saved? An absolute place for Episcopacy, that all former
Divines had idly overlooked: For, Sirs, being in the Greek (...), which is to
say in true and strict translation, Lords, what more plain than that of old,
Episcopacy was not only the acknowledged Government, but that Bishops were
formerly Peers of the Realm, and so ought to sit in the House of Lords? Or,
suppose that you have a mind to commend to your people Kingly Government; you
must not take any place that is plainly to the purpose, but that of the
Evangelist, Seek first the Kingdom of God. From which words the Doctrine will
plainly be; That Monarchy or Kingly Government is most according to the Mind of
God. For it is not said, Seek the Parliament of God, the Army of God, or the
Committee of Safety of God; but it is, Seek the Kingdom of God. And who could
expect less? Immediately after this the King came in, and the Bishops were
restored. Again, Sir, because I would willingly be understood, Suppose you
design to preach about Election and Reproprobation: As for the eighth Chapter
to the Romans, that is too too well Known: But there is a little private place in
the Psalms that will do the business as well, Psalm. 90.19. In the multitude of
my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my Soul. The Doctrine which
naturally flows from the words, will be, That amongst the multitude of
thoughts, there is a great thought of Election and Reprobation. And then away
with the point according as the Preacher is inclined. Or, suppose lastly, that
you were not fully satisfied that Pluralities were lawful or convenient: May I
be so bold, Sir, I pray what Text would you choose to preach upon against
Non-residents? Certainly nothing ever was better picked than that of S. Matthew.
1.2. Abraham begat Isaac. A clear place against Nonresidents: For had Abraham
not resided, but discontinued from Sarah his Wife, he could never have begot
Isaac.

But it is high time, Sir, to make an end of their Preaching, lest you be as
much tired with the repetition of it, as the People were little benefited, when
they heard it. I shall only mind you, Sir, of one thing more, and that is the
ridiculous, senseless and unintended use, which many of them make of
Concordances. I shall give you but one instance of it, although I could furnish
you with an hundred printed ones. The Text, Sir, is this, Galat. 6.15. For in
Christ Jesus neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision avails any thing but a
new Creature. Now all the World know the meaning of this to be, that let a Man
be of what Nation he will, Jew or Gentile, if he amends his life and walks
according to the Gospel, he shall be accepted with God. But this is not the way
that pleases them: They must bring into the Sermon, to no purpose at all, a
vast heap of places of Scripture (which the Concordance will furnish them with)
where the word new is mentioned: And the Observation must be, That God is for
new things; God is for a new Creature. S. John 19.41. Now in the place where he
was Crucified, there was a Garden; and in the Garden a new Sepulcher, wherein
was never man yet laid; there laid they Jesus: And again: St. Mark 16.17.
Christ tells his Disciples, That they that are true Believers, shall cast out
Devils, and speak with new Tongues: And likewise the Prophet teaches us, Isa.
42.10. Sing unto the Lord a new Song, and his praise unto the end of the Earth.
Whence it is plain, that Christ is not for old things; he is not for an old
Sepulcher; he is not for old Tongues; he is not for an old Song; he is not for
the Old Creature; Christ is for the new Creature; Circumcision and
Uncircumcision avails nothing, but the new Creature. And what do we read
concerning Sampson, Judge. 15.15. Is it not, that he slew a thousand of the
Philistines with one new Iaw-bone? An old one might have killed its tens, its
twenties, its hundreds; but it must be a new Iaw-bone that is able to kill a
thousand. God is for the new Creature.

But may not some say, is God altogether for new things? How comes it about
then that the Prophet says, Isa. 1.13, 14. Bring no more vain oblations, etc.
your New Mons and your appointed Feasts my Soul hates? And again, what means
that, Deuteronomy. 32.17, 19. They sacrificed unto Devils, and to New-Gods, whom they
knew not; to New-Gods, that came newly up: And when the Lord saw it he abhorred
them? To which I answer; that God indeed is not for New Mons, nor for
New-Gods; but, excepting Moons and Gods, he is for new things: God is for the
New Creature.

It is possible, Sir, that somebody, besides your self, may be so vain as to
read this Letter; and they may perhaps tell you, that there be no such silly
and useless people as I have described; and if there be, there be not above two
or three in a County; or should there be more, it is no such complaining
matter, seeing that the same happens in other Professions, in Law and Physic:
In both which there be many a contemptible Creature.

Such therefore as these may be pleased to know, that if there had been need, I
could have told them either the Book and very Page, almost of all that has been
spoken about Preaching; or else the when and where, and the Person that
Preached it.

As to the Second, viz. That the Clergy are all mightily furnished with
Learning and Prudence, except ten, twenty or so; I shall not say any thing my
self, because a very great Scholar of our Nation shall speak for me, who tells
us, That such Preaching as is usual, is a hindrance of Salvation, rather than
the means to it. And what he intends by usual, I shall not here go about to
explain.

As to the last, I shall also in short answer: That if the advancement of true
Religion, and the eternal Salvation of a Man, were no more considerable than
the health of the Body, and the security of his Estate, we need not be more
solicitous about the Learning and Prudence of the Clergy, than of the Lawyers
and Physicians: But being we believe it to be otherwise, surely we ought to be
more concerned for the Reputation, and success, of the one than of the other.

I come now, Sir, to the second Part that was designed, viz. the Poverty of
some of the Clergy: By whose mean condition, their sacred Profession is much
disparaged, and their Doctrine undervalued.

What large provisions of old, God was pleased to make for the Priesthood, and
upon what reasons, is easily seen to any one that looks but into the Bible. The
Levites, it is true, were left out in the Division of the Inheritance; not to
their loss but to their great temporal advantage: for whereas, had they been
common sharers with the rest, a twelfth part only would have been their just
allowance, God was pleased to settle upon them a tenth; and that without any
trouble or charge of Tillage: Which made their portion much more considerable
than the rest.

And as this provision was very bountiful, so the reasons, no question, were
very divine and substantial: Which seem chiefly to be these two.

First, that the Priesthood might be altogether at leisure for the Service of
God, and that they of that Holy Order might not be distracted with the cares of
the World, and interrupted by every Neighbor's Horse or Cow, that breaks their
hedges, or shackles their Corn: But, that living a kind of spiritual life, and
being removed a little from all worldly affairs, they might always be fit to
receive holy Inspirations, and always ready to search out the mind of God, and
to advise and direct the People therein. Not, as if this divine exemption of
them from the common troubles and cares of this life, was intended as an
opportunity of Luxury and Laziness; for certainly there is a labor besides
digging: And there is a true carefulness without following the Plough, and
looking after their Cattle. And such was the Employment of those holy Men of
old: their care and business was to please God, and to charge themselves with
the welfare of all his People: Which thing he that does with a good and
satisfied Conscience, I Will assure you, he has a task upon him, much beyond them
that have for their care, their hundreds of Oxen and five hundreds of Sheep.

Another reason that this large allowance was made to the Priests, was, that
they might be enabled to relieve the Poor, to entertain Strangers, and thereby
to encourage People in the ways of Godliness: For they being in a peculiar
manner the Servants of God, God was pleased to entrust in their hands a portion
more than ordinary of the good things of the Land, as the safest storehouse
and treasury for such as were in need. That in all Ages therefore, there should
be a continued tolerable Maintenance for the Clergy; the same reasons, as well
as many others, make us think to be very necessary. Unless they will count Money
and Victuals to be only Types and Shadows, and so to cease with the Ceremonial
Law.

For where the Minister is pinched, as to the tolerable conveniences of this
Life, the chief of his care and time must be spent not in an impertinent
considering what Text of Scriptures will be most useful for his Parish, what
Instructions most seasonable, and what Authors best to be consulted: But the
chief of his thoughts, and his main business must be to study how to live that
week: Where he shall have Bread for his Family? Whose Sow has lately Pigg'd?
Whence will come the next rejoicing Goose, or the next cheerful Basket of
Apples? How far to Lammas, or Offerings? When shall we have another Christening
and Cakes, and who is likely to marry or die? These are very seasonable
considerations, and worthy of a man's thoughts. For a Family cannot be maintained
by Texts and Contexts: And the child that lies crying in the Cradle, will not
be satisfied without a little Milk, and perhaps Sugar, though there be a small
German System in the house.

But suppose he does get into a little hole over the oven, with a Look to it,
called his Study, toward the latter end of the week (for you must know, Sir,
there is very few Texts of Scripture that can be divided, at soonest, before
Friday night; and some there be that will never be divided but upon Sunday
morning, and that not very early, but either a little before they go, or in the
going to Church:) I say, suppose the Gentleman gets thus into his Study: one
may very near ghess, what is his first thought when he comes there, viz. that
the last Kilderkin of Drink is near departed; and that he has but one poor
single Groat in the house, and there is judgment and execution ready to come out
against it, for Milk and Eggs. Now, Sir, can any man think that one thus
racked, and tortured, can be seriously intent half an hour to contrive any
thing that might be of real advantage to his people? Besides, perhaps that week
he has met with some dismal crosses and undoing misfortunes. There was a
scurvy-condition'd Mole that broke into his pasture, and plough'd up the best
part of his Glebe: And a little after that, came a couple of spightful
ill-favored Crows, and trampled down the little remaining Grass: Another day,
having but four Chickens, sweep comes the Kite, and carries away the fattest
and hopefullest of all the Brood. Then after all this came the Jack-daws and
Starlings (idle Birds that they are!) and they scattered and carried away from
his thin thatched house, forty or fifty of the best straws: And to make him
completely unhappy, after all these afflictions, another day, that he had a
pair of Breeches on, coming over a perverse style, he suffered very much in
carelessly lifting over his Leg. Now, what Parish can be so inconsiderate and
unreasonable, as to look for any thing from one, whose fancy is thus checked,
and whose understanding is thus ruffl'd and disordered. They may as soon expect
comfort and consolation from him that lies racked with the Gout and Stone, as
from a Divine thus broken and shattered in his fortunes.

But we'll grant, that he meets not with any of these such frightful disasters,
but that he goes into his Study with a Mind as calm as the Evening: For all
that, upon Sunday, we must be content even with what God shall please to send
us. For as for Books, he is (for want of money) so moderately furnished, that
except it be a small Geneva-Bible, so small, as it will not be desired to lie
open of it self, together with a certain Concordance thereunto belonging; as
also a Book for all kind of Latin Sentences, called Polyanthaea; with some
Exposition upon the Catechism (a portion of which is to be got by heart, and to
be put off for his own;) and perhaps Mr. Caryl upon Pineda, Mr. Dod upon the
Commandments, and Mr. Clark's Lives of famous men, both in Church and State;
such as Mr. Carter of Norwich, that uses to eat such abundance of Pudden:
Besides, I say, these, there is scarce any thing to be found but a boudget of
old stitched Sermons, hung up behind the door, with a few broken Girts, two or
three yards of Whipcord, and perhaps a Saw and a Hammer, to prevent
dilapidations. Now, what may not a Divine do, though but of ordinary parts, and
unhappy education, with such learned helps and assistances as these? No vice
surely durst stand before him, nor Heresy affront him.

And furthermore, Sir, it is to be considered, that he that is but thus meanly
provided for, it is not his only infelicity that he has neither Time, Mind, nor
Books, to improve himself for the inward benefit and satisfaction of his
people, but also that he is not capable of doing that outward good amongst the
needy, which is a great Ornament to that holy Profession, and a considerable
advantage toward the having his Doctrine believed and practiced in a
degenerate world. And that which augments the misery, whether he be able or
not, it is expected from him. If there comes a Brief to Town, for the Minister
to cast in his Mite, will not satisfy, unless he can create six pence or a
shilling to put into the Box, for a stale to decoy in the rest of the Parish:
Nay, he that has but twenty or thirty pounds per annum, if he bids not up as
high as the best in the Parish in all acts of Charity, he is counted carnal and
earthly-minded, only because he durst not coin, and cannot work Miracles* And
let there come never so many Beggars, half of these I Will secure you, shall
presently enquire for the Ministe'rs house: For God, say they, certainly dwells
there, and has laid up for us sufficient relief.

I know many of the Laity are usually so extremely tender of the spiritual
welfare of the Clergy, that they are apt to wish them but very small temporal
goods, lest their inward state should be in danger, (A thing they need not much
fear, since that effectual humiliation of Henry the Eighth.) For, say they, the
great Tithes, large Glebes, good Victuals and warm Cloths, do but puff up the
Priest, making him fat, foggy, and useless, and fill him with pride,
vainglory, and all kind of inward wickedness, and pernicious corruption. We
see this plain, say they, in the Whore of Babylon: To what a degree of Luxury
and Intemperance (besides a great deal of false Doctrine) have Riches and
Honor raised up that Strumpet? How does she strut it, and swagger it over all
the world, terrifying Princes, and despising Kings and Emperors? The Clergy, if
ever we would expect any edification from them, ought to be dieted and kept
low, to be meek and humble, quiet, and stand in need of a pot of Milk from
their next Neighbor, and always be very loath to ask for their very right, for
fear of making any disturbance in the Parish, or seeming to understand, or have
any respect for this vile and outward World. Under the Law indeed, in those old
times of darkness and eating, the Priests had their first and second dishes,
their Milk and Honey, their Manna and Quails, their outward also and inward
Vestments: But now under the Gospel, and in times of Light and Fasting, a much
more sparing Diet is fitter, and a single Coat, though it be never so ancient
and thin is fully sufficient. We must now look, say they, (if we would be the
better for them) for a hardy and laboring Clergy, that is mortified to a
Horse, and all such pampering vanities; and that can foot it five or six miles
in the dirt, and preach till starlight for as many shillings; as also a sober
and temperate Clergy, that will not eat so much as the Laity, but that the
least Pig, and the least Sheaf, and the least of every thing, may satisfy
their Spiritualship. And besides, a Money-renouncing Clergy, that can abstain
from seeing a penny a month together, unless it be when the Collectors, and
Visitationers come. These are all Gospel-dispensations, and great instances of
Patience, contentedness, and resignation of affections; to all the emptinesses
and fooleries of this life.

But, cannot a Clergyman choose rather to lie upon Feathers than an Hardle, but
he must be idle, soft, and effeminate? May he not desire wholesome Food, and
fresh Drink, unless he be a cheat, a Hypocrite and an Impostor? And must he
needs be void of all Grace, though he has a shilling in his Purse after the
Rates be crossed? And full of pride and vanity, though his House stands not
upon crutches, and though his Chimney is to be seen a foot above the Thatch?
Oh, how prettily and temperately may half a score children be maintained with
almost Twenty pounds per annum! What a handsome shift a poor ingenious and
frugal Divine will make, to take it by turns, and wear a Cassock one year, and
a pair of Breeches another? What a becoming thing is it, for him that serves at
the Altar, to fill the Dung-cart in dry weather, and to heat the Oven, and pill
Hemp in wet? And what a pleasant sight is it, to see the man of God fetching up
his single Melancholy Cow, from a small rib of Land that is scarce to be found
without a Guide? Or to be seated upon a soft and well grinded pouch of Meal? Or
to be planted upon a Pannier with a pair of Geese, or Turkies, bobbing out
their heads from under his Canonical Coat, as you cannot but remember the man,
Sir, that was thus accomplished? Or to find him raving about the Yards, or
keeping his Chamber close, because the Duck lately miscarried of an Egg, or
that the never-failing Hen has unhappily forsaken her wonted Nest?

And now, shall we think that such Employments as these can any way consist
with due reverence, or tolerable respect from a Parish? And he speaks
altogether at a venture, that either says that this is false, or, at least it
need not be so, notwithstanding the mean condition of some of the Clergy. For
let any one make it out to me, which way it is possible, that a man shall be
able to maintain perhaps eight or ten in his Family, with twenty or thirty
Pounds per annum, without a most intolerable dependence upon his Parish, and
without committing himself to such vileness, as will in all likelihood, render
him contemptible to his People. Now, where the In-come is so pitifully small
(which I Will assure you, is the portion of hundreds of the Clergy of this
Nation) which way shall he manage it for the subsistence of himself, and his
Family? If he keeps the Glebe in his own hand (which he may easily do, almost
in the hollow of it) what increase can he expect from a couple of Apple Trees,
a brood of Ducklings, a Hemp-land, and as much pasture as is just able to
summer a Cow? And as for his Tithes, he either rents them out to a Layman, who
will be very unwilling to be his Tenant, unless he may be sure to save by the
bargain at least a third part: Or else he compounds for them; and then as for
his money, he shall have it when all the rest of the world be paid. But if he
thinks fit to take his dues in kind, he then either demands his true and utmost
Right; and if so, it is a great hazard if he be not counted a Caterpiller, a
Muck-worm, a very Earthly-minded man, and too much sighted into this lower
world; which was made, as many of the Laity think, altogether for themselves:
Or else he must tamely commit himself to that little Dose of the creature, that
shall be pleased to be proportioned out unto him: Choosing rather to starve in
peace and quietness, than to gain his right by noise and disturbance: The best
of all these ways that a Clergyman shall think fit for his preferment to be
managed, where it is so small, are such, as will undoubtedly make him either
to be hated and reviled, or else pitifully poor and disesteemed.

But has it not gone very hard in all ages with the men of God? Was not our
Lord and Master, our Great and High Priest; and was not his fare low, and his
life full of trouble? And was not the condition of most of his Disciples very
mean? Were not they notably pinched, and severely treated after him? And is it
not the Duty of every Christian to imitate such holy Patterns: but especially
of the Clergy, who are to be shining Lights and visible Examples, and therefore
to be satisfied with a very little Morsel, and to renounce ten times as much of
the World as other People? And is not Patience better than the great Tithes,
and Contentedness to be preferred before large Fees and Customs? Is there any
comparison between the expectation of a cringing Bow, or a low Hat, and
mortification to all such Vanities and Fopperies; especially with those who, in
a peculiar manner, hope to receive their Inheritance, and make their Harvest in
the next life? This was well thought of indeed: but for all that, if you
please, Sir, we will consider a little some of those remarkable Inconveniences,
that do most undoubtedly attend upon the Ministers being so meanly provided for.

First of all, the holy Men of God, or the Ministry in general, hereby is
dis-esteemed, and rendered of small account. For though they be called the Men
of God, yet when it is observed, that God seems to take but little care of them
in making them tolerable Provisions for this Life, or that Men are suffered to
take away that which God was pleased to provide for them, the People are
presently apt to think, that they belong to God no more than ordinary folks, if
so much. And although it is not to be questioned but that the laying on of
Hands is a most Divine Institution; yet it is not all the Bishops Hands in the
World, laid upon a Man, if he be either notoriously ignorant, or dismally poor,
that can procure him any hearty and lasting respect. For though we find that
some of the Disciples of Christ, that carried on and established the great
designs of the Gospel, were Persons of ordinary Employments and Education; yet
we see little reason to think that Miracles should be continued to do that,
which natural endeavors, assisted by the Spirit of God, are able to perform.
And if Christ were still upon Earth to make Bread for such as are his peculiar
Servants, and Declarers of his mind and Doctrine, the Laity, if they please,
should eat up all the Corn themselves, as well the tenth sheaf, as the other;
but seeing it is otherwise, and that that Miraculous Power was not left to the
succeeding Clergy; for them to beg their Bread or depend for their subsistence
upon the good pleasure and humor of their Parish, is a thing that renders that
holy Office very much slighted, and disregarded.

That constitution therefore of our Church was a most prudent design; that
says, that all who are Ordained, shall be Ordained to somewhat; Not Ordained at
random, to Preach in general to the whole World, as they travel up and down the
Road, but to this or that particular Parish. And no question the reason was to
prevent Spiritual-Pedling, and gadding up and down the Country with a bag of
trifling and insignificant Sermons; enquiring, who will buy any Doctrine? So
that no more might be received into holy Orders, than the Church had provision
for. But so very little is this regarded, that if a young Divinity-intender has
but got a Sermon of his own, or of his Father's, although he knows not where to
get a Meals Meat, or one penny of Money by his Preaching, yet he gets a
Qualification from some Beneficed Man or other, who perhaps is no more able to
keep a Curate, than I am to keep ten Foot-boys, and so he is made a Preacher.
And upon this account I have known an ordinary Divine, whose Living would but
just keep himself and his Family from Melancholy and Despair, shroud under his
protection as many Curats, as the best Nobleman in the Land has Chaplains. Now,
many such as these go into Orders against the Sky falls; foreseeing no more
likelihood of any Preferment coming to them, than you or I do of being
Secretaries of State. Now, so often as any such as these, for want of
Maintenance, are put to any unworthy and disgraceful shifts, this reflects
disparagement upon all that Order of Holy Men.

And we must have a great care of comparing our small preferred Clergy with
those but of the like fortune in the Church of Rome, they having many Arts and
Devices of gaining Respect and Reverence to their Office, which we count
neither just nor warrantable. We design no more than to be in a likely capacity
of doing good, and not discrediting our Religion, nor suffering the Gospel to
be dis-esteemed: But their aim is clearly, not only by Cheats, contrived Tales
and feigned Miracles, to get Money in abundance: but to be worshipped, almost
deified, is as little as they will content themselves withal. For, how can it
be, but that the people belonging to a Church, wherein the Supreme Governor is
believed never to err, either purely by virtue of his own single Wisdom, or by
the help of his Inspiring Chair, or by the assistance of his little Infallible
Cardinals, (for it matters not where the root of not being mistaken lies) I
say, how can it be, but that all that are Believers of such extraordinary
knowledge, must needs stand in most direful awe, not only of the foresaid
Supreme, but of all that adhere to him, or are in any Ghostly Authority under
him? And although it so happens, that this same extraordinary knowing Person is
pleased to trouble himself with a good large proportion of this vile and
contemptible World, so that should he now and then, upon some odd and cloudy
day, count himself Mortal, and be a little mistaken; yet he has chanced to make
such a comfortable provision for himself and his followers, that he must needs
be sufficiently valued and honored amongst all: But had he but just enough to
keep himself from catching cold, and starving, so long as he is invested with
such spiritual Sovereignty, and such a peculiar privilege of being Infallible,
most certainly, without quarrelling, he take the Rode of all Mankind.

And as for the most inferior Priests of all, although they pretend not to such
perfection of knowledge, yet there be many extraordinary things, which they are
believed to be able to do, which beget in People a most venerable respect
toward them; such is the power of Making God in the Sacrament; a thing that
must infallibly procure an infinite admiration of him that can do it, though he
scarce knows the ten Commandments, and has not a farthing to buy himself Bread.
And then when Christ is made, their giving but half of him to the Laity, is a
thing also, if it be minded, that will very much help on the business, and make
the People stand at a greater distance from the Clergy. I might instance
likewise in their Auricular Confessions, injoyning of Penance, forgiving sins,
making of Saints, freeing people from Purgatory, and many such useful Tricks
they have, and Wonders they can do, to draw in the forward believing Laity into
a most Right-Worshipful Opinion, and Honorable Esteem of them. And therefore
seeing our Holy Church of England counts it not just, nor warrantable thus to
cheat the World, by belying the Scriptures, and by making use of such falsehood
and stratagems to gain respect and reverence: It behooves us certainly to wish
for, and endeavor all such means as are useful and lawful, for the obtaining
the same.

I might here, I think, conveniently add, that though many preferments amongst
the Clergy of Rome may possibly be as small as some of ours in England, yet we
are to be put in mind of one more excellent Contrivance of theirs, and that is
the denial of Marriage to Priests, whereby they are freed from the Expenses of
a Family, and a train of young Children, that, upon my word, will soon suck up
the milk of a Cow or two, and grind in pieces a few sheaves of Corn. The Church
of England therefore thinking it not fit to oblige their Clergy to a single
life, and I suppose are not likely to alter their Opinion, unless they
receceive better reasons for it from Rome, than has been as yet sent over; he
makes a comparison very wide from the purpose, that goes about to try the
livings here in England, by those of the Church of Rome: There being nothing
more frequent in our Church, than for a Clergyman to have three or four
children to get Bread for, by that time one in theirs shall be allowed to go
into Holy Orders.

There is still one thing remaining, which ought not to be forgotten (a thing
that is sometimes urged, I know, by the Papists, for the single life of the
Priests) that does much also lessen the Esteem of our Ministry; and that is
the poor and contemptible Employment that many children of the Clergy are
forced upon, by reason of the meanness of their Fathers Revenue. It has
happened, I know, sometimes, that whereas it has pleased God to bestow upon the
Clergyman a very sufficient Income; yet such has been his carelessness, as
that he has made but pitiful provisions for his children. And on the other
side, notwithstanding all the good care and thoughtfulness of the Father, it
has happened at other times that the children, beyond the power of all advice,
have seemed to be resolved for Debauchery; but to see Clergymens children
condemned to the walking of Horses, to wait upon a Tapster, or the like, and
that only because their Father was not able to allow them a more gentile
Education, are such Employments that cannot but bring great disgrace and
dishonor upon the Clergy.

But this is not all the inconvenience that attends the small Income, the
Portion of some Clergymen; for besides that the Clergy in general is
disesteemed, they are likely also to do but little good in their Parish. For it
is a hard matter for the People to believe that he talks any thing to the
purpose, that wants ordinary Food for his Family, and that his Advice and
Exposition can come from above, that is scarce defended against the Weather. I
have heard a traveling poor man beg with very good Reason and a great stream
of seasonable Rhetoric, and yet it has been very little minded, because his
clothes were torn, or at least out of fashion: And on the other side, I have
heard but an ordinary saying, proceeding from a fine suit, and a good lusty
Title of Honor, highly admired; which would not possibly have been hearkened
to, had it been uttered by a meaner Person; yet by all means, because it was a
fancy of his Worships, it must be counted high, and notably expressed. If
indeed this world were made of sincere and pure beaten Virtue, like the Gold of
the first Age, then such idle and fond prejudices would be a very vain
supposal: And the Doctrine that proceeded from the most tattered and
contemptible Habit, and the most sparing Diet, would be as acceptable as that
which flowed from a Silken Cassock, and the best cheer: But seeing the world is
not absolutely perfect, it is to be questioned, whether he that runs upon Trust
for every ounce of Provision he spends in his Family, can scarce look from his
Pulpit into any Seat of the Church, but that he spies some body or other that
he is beholden to, and depends upon; and for want of money has scarce
confidence to speak handsomely to his Sexton; it is to be questioned, I say,
whether one thus destitute of all tolerable subsistence, and thus shattered and
distracted with most necessary Cares, can either invent with discretion, or
utter with courage any thing that may be beneficial to his People, whereby they
may become his diligent attenders, and hearty respecters.

And as the People do almost resolve against being amended, or bettered by that
Ministers Preaching, whose circumstances, as to this life, are so bad, and his
condition so low; so likewise is their Devotion very cool, and indifferent in
hearing, from such a one, the Prayers of the Church. The Divine-service, all
the World know, is the same, if read in the most magnificent Cathedral, or in
the most private Parlour: Or, if performed by the Archbishop himself, or by
the meanest of his Priests: But as the solemnity of the place, besides the
Consecration of it to God Almighty, do much influence upon the Devotion of the
People: so also the quality and condition of the person that reads it. And
although there be not that acknowledged difference between a Priest comfortably
provided for, and him that is in the Thorns and Briars, as there is between one
placed in great Dignity and Authority, and one that is in less; yet such a
difference the People will make, that they will scarce hearken to what is read
by the one, and yet be most religiously attentive to the other. Not surely that
any one can think, that he whose countenance is chearly, and his Barns full,
can petition Heaven more effectually, or prevail with God for the forgiveness
of a greater sin, than he who is pitifully pale, and is not owner of an ear of
corn: yet most certainly they do not delight to confess their Sins, and sing
Praises to God with him, who sighs more for want of Money and Victuals, than
for his Trespasses and offenses. Thus it is, and will be, do you and I (Sir)
what we can to the contrary. Did our Church indeed believe, with the Papists,
every person rightfully ordained, to be a kind of God Almighty, working
miracles and doing wonders; then would People most readily prostrate themselves
in every thing to holy Orders, though it could but just creep: But being our
Church counts those of the Clergy to be but mortal men (though peculiarly
dedicated to God and his Service) their behavior, their condition and
circumstances of life will necessarily come into our value, and esteem of them.
And therefore it is no purpose for men to say, that this need not be; it being
but mere prejudice, humor and fancy: And that if the man be but truly in
Holy Orders, that is the great matter: And from thence come blessings,
Absolution, and Intercession through Christ with God: And that it is not
Philosophy, Languages, Ecclesiastical History, Prudence, Discretion, and
Reputation, by which the Minister can help us on toward Heaven:
Notwithstanding this, I say again, that seeing men are men, and seeing that we
are of the Church of England, and not of that of Rome, these things ought to be
weighed and considered; and for want of being so, our Church of England has
suffered much.

And I am almost confident, that since the Reformation, nothing has more
hindered People from a just estimation of a Form of Prayer, and our Holy
Liturgy, than employing a company of Boys, or old illiterate Mumblers, to read
the Service. And I do verily believe that at this very day, especially in
Cities and Corporations, (which make up the third part of our Nation) there is
nothing that does more keep back some dissatisfied People from Church, till
Service be over, than that it is read by some Ten or Twelve-pound-man, with
whose Parts and Education they are so well acquainted, as to have reason to
know, that he has but just skill enough to read the Lessons with twice conning
over. And though the Office of the Reader, be only to read word for word, and
neither to invent or expound; yet People love he should be a Person of such
worth and knowledge, as it may be supposed he understands what he reads. And
although for some it were too burdensome a task to read the Service twice a
day, and preach as often; yet certainly it were much better if the People had
but one Sermon in a fortnight or month, so the Service was performed by a
knowing and valuable Person, than to run an unlearned rout of contemptible
People into Holy Orders, on purpose only to say the Prayers of the Church, who
perhaps shall understand very little more than a hollow pipe made of Tin or
Wainscot.

Neither do I here at all reflect upon Cathedrals: Where the Prayers are
usually read by some grave and worthy Person; And as for the unlearned Singers,
whether Boys or Men, there is no more complaint to be made, as to this Case,
than that they have not an all-understanding Organ, or a prudent and discreet
Cornet.

Neither need People be afraid that the Minister for want of Preaching should
grow stiff and rusty, supposing he came not into the Pulpit every week: For he
may spend his time very honestly, either by taking better care of what he
preaches, and by seriously considering what is most useful and seasonable for
the People; and not what Subject he can preach upon with most ease, or upon
what text he can make a brave Speech, for which no body shall be better, or
where he can best steal without being discovered, as is the practice of many
Divines in private Parishes: or else he may spend it in visiting the Sick,
instructing the Ignorant, and recovering such as are gone astray: For, though
there be Churches built for public Assemblies, for public Instruction, and
Exhortation: and though there be not many absolutely plain places of Scripture
that do oblige the Minister to walk from house to house, yet certainly People
might receive much more advantage from such charitable Visits and friendly
Conferences, than from general Discourses levelled at the whole World; where
perhaps the greatest part of the time shall be spent in useless Prefaces,
Dividings and Flourishings. Which thing is very practicable, excepting some
vast Parishes: In which also it is much better to do good to some than to none
at all.

There is but one Calamity more that I shall mention, which though it need not
absolutely, yet it does too frequently accompany the low condition of many of
the Clergy: And that is, it is a great hazard, if they be not idle, intemperate
and scandalous. I say, I cannot prove it strictly and undeniably that a man
smally beneficed, must of necessity be dissolute and debauched: but when we
consider, how much he lies subject to the humor of all kind of Reprobates; and
how easily he is tempted from his own house of Poverty and Melancholy; it is
to be feared, that he will be willing too often to forsake his own Study of a
few scurvy Books, and his own Habitation of Darkness, where there is seldom
eating or drinking, for a good lightsome one, where there is a bountiful
provision of both. And when he comes here, though he swears not at all, yet he
must be sure to say nothing to them that do it, by all that they can think of:
And though he judges it not fit to lead the Forelorn in Vice and Profaneness;
yet, if he goes about to damp a Frolic, there is great danger, not only of
losing his Sunday Dinner, but all opportunities of such future refreshments,
for his niceness and squeamishness. And such as are but at all disposed to
these lewd kind of Meetings, besides the Devil, he shall have solicitors
enough, who count all such revelling occasions very unsavory, and unhallowed,
unless they have the presence of some Clergy man to sanctify the Ordinance:
Who, if he sticks at his Glass, bless him, and call him but Doctor, and it
slides presently. I take no delight, I must confess, to insist upon this, but
only I could very much wish that such of our Governors, as go amongst our small
preferred Clergy, to take a view of the Condition of the Church and Chancel,
that they would make but enquiry whether the Minister himself be not much out
of repair.

I have now done, Sir, with the Grounds of that disesteem that many of the
Clergy lie under both by the Ignorance of some, and the extreme Poverty of
others: And I should have troubled you no farther but that I thought it
convenient not to omit the particular occasions that do concur to the making up
of many of our Clergy so pitifully poor and contemptible.

The first thing that contributes much to the Poverty of the Clergy is the
great scarcity of Livings: Churches and Chapels we have enough, it is to be
confessed, if compared with the bigness of our Nation: But in respect of that
infinite number that are in Holy Orders, it is a very plain case, that there is
a very great want. And, I am confident that in a very little time I could
procure hundreds that should ride both Sun and Moon down, and be everlastingly
yours, if you could help them but to a Living of Twenty five, or Thirty pounds
a year: And this I suppose to be chiefly occasioned upon these two accounts;
either from the Eagerness and Ambition that some People have of going into
Orders; or from the refuge of others into the Church; who being otherwise
disappointed of a Livelihood, hope, to make sure of one by that means.

First, I say, that which increases the unprovided for number of the Clergy, is
people posting into Orders, before they know their Message or Business, only
out of a certain kind of Pride and Ambition. Thus some are hugely in love with
the mere Title of Priest, or Deacon; never considering how they shall live, or
what good they are likely to do in their Office: But only they have a fancy
that a Cassock, if it be made long, is a very handsome Garment, though it be
never paid for: And that the Desk is clearly the best, and the Pulpit the
highest Seat in all the Parish: That they shall take place of most but Esquires
and Right-Worshipfuls: That they shall have the honor of being Spiritual
Guides and Counselors: And they shall be supposed to understand more of the
Mind of God than ordinary, though perhaps they scarce know the old Law from the
new, nor the Canon from the Apocrypha. Many, I say, such as these there be, who
know not where to get two groats, nor what they have to say to the People, but
only because they have heard that the office of a Minister is the most Noble
and honorable Employment in the World, therefore they, not knowing in the
least what the meaning of that is, Orders by all means must have, though it be
to the disparagement of that Holy Function.

Others also there be, who are not so highly possessed with the mere dignity of
the Office, and honourableness of the Employment, but think, had they but a
License and Authority to Preach, Oh how they could pay it away! And that they
can tell the People such strange things, as they never heard before in all
their lives: That they have got such a commanding Voice, such heartbreaking
Expressions, such a peculiar Method of Text-dividing, and such notable Helps
for the interpreting all difficulties in Scripture, that they can show the
People a much shorter way to Heaven, than has been as yet made known by any.
Such a forwardness as this, of going into Holy Orders, either merely out of an
ambitious humor of being called a Priest, or of thinking they could do such
feats and wonders, if they might be but free of the Pulpit, has filled the
Nation with many more Divines, than there is any competent Maintenance for in
the Church.

Another great crowd that is made in the Church, is by those, that take in
there only as a place of shelter and refuge: Thus we have many turn Priests and
Deacons, either for want of Employment in their Profession of Law, Physic, or
the like; or having been unfortunate in their Trade, or having broken a Leg, or
an Arm, and so disabled from following their former Calling; or, having had the
pleasure of spending their Estate, or being (perhaps deservedly) disappointed
of their Inheritance. The Church is a very large and good Sanctuary, and one
spiritual shilling is as good as three Temporality shillings: Let the hardest
come to the hardest; if they can get by heart, Quid est Fides? quid est
Ecclesia? quot sunt Concilia Generalia? and gain Orders, they may prove Readers
or Preachers according as their Gifts and Opportunities shall lie. Now, many
such as these, the Church being not able to provide for (as there is no great
reason that She should be solicitous about it) must needs prove a very great
disparagement to Her: They coming hither just as the old Heathens use to go to
Prayers: When nothing would stop the anger of the Gods, then for a touch of
Devotion: And if there be no way to get Victuals, rather than starve let us
Read or Preach.

In short, Sir, We are perfectly overstock'd with Professors of Divinity; There
being scarce employment for half of those who undertake that Office. And unless
we had some of the Romish tricks, to ramble up and down, and cry Pardons and
Indulgencies: Or for want of a Living, have good store of Clients in the
business of Purgatory, or the like, and so make such unrighteous gains of
Religion, it were certainly much better if many of them were otherwise
determined. Or unless we had some vent for our learned ones beyond the Sea, and
could transport so many Tun of Divines yearly, as we do other Commodities with
which the Nation is over-stocked; we do certainly very unadvisedly to breed up
so many to that Holy Calling, or to suffer so many to steal into Orders, seeing
there is not sufficient Work and Employment for them.

The next thing that does much heighten the Misery of our Church, as to the
Poverty of it, is the Gentries designing, not only the weak, the lame, and
usually the most ill-favored of their children for the office of the Ministry,
but also such as they intend to settle nothing upon for their subsistence;
leaving them wholly to the bare hopes of Church-preferment. For, as they think,
let the thing look how it will, it is good enough for the Church; and that if
it had but Limbs enough to climb the Pulpit, and Eyes enough to find the day of
the Month, it will serve well enough to preach and read Service: So likewise
they think they have obliged the Clergy very much, if they please to bestow two
or three years Education upon a younger Son at the University, and then commend
him to the Grace of God, and the favor of the Church, without one penny of
Money or inch of Land. You must not think, that he will spoil his eldest Son's
Estate, or hazard the lessening the Credit of the Family, to do that which may
tend any way to the reputation and honor of the Clergy. And thus it comes to
pass that you may commonly ride ten miles, and scarce meet with a Divine that
is worth above two Spoons and a Pepper-box, besides his Living, or Spiritual
Preferments. For, as for the Land, that goes sweeping away with the eldest Son,
for the immortality of the Family; and as for the Money, that is usually
employed for to bind out, and set up other children. And thus you shall have
them make no doubt of giving five hundred or a thousand pounds for a stock to
them: But for the poor Divinity-Son, if he gets but enough to buy a broad Hat
at second hand, and a small System or two of Faith, that is counted stock
sufficient for him to set up withal. And possibly he might make some kind of
shift in this world, if any body will engage that he shall have neither Wife
nor Children; but if it so falls out, that he leaves the world, and behind him
either the one or the others; in what a dismal condition are these likely to
be, and how will their sad Calamities reflect upon the Clergy? So dismal a
thing is this commonly judged, that those that at their departure out of this
Life are piously and virtuously disposed, do usually reckon the taking care for
the relief of the poor Ministers Widows, to be an opportunity of as necessary
Charity, as the mending the Highwayes, and the erecting of Hospitals.

But neither are spiritual Preferments only scarce by reason of that great
number that lie hovering over them, and that they that are thus upon the wing
are usually destitute of any other Estate and Livelihood; but also when they
come into possession of them, they finding for the most part nothing but a
little Sauce and second Course, Pigs, Geese, and Apples, must needs be put upon
great perplexities for the standing necessaries of a Family. So that if it be
enquired by any one, how comes it to pass that we have so many in Holy Orders
that understand so little, and that are able to do so little Service in the
Church? If we would answer plainly and truly, we may say, Because they are good
for nothing else. For, shall we think that any man that is not cursed to
uselesness, poverty, and misery, will be content with Twenty or Thirty pounds a
year? For though in the bulk it looks at first like a bountiful Estate; yet, if
we think of it a little better, we shall find that an ordinary Bricklayer, or
Carpenter, (I mean not your great Undertakers and Masterworkmen) that earns
constantly but his two shillings a day, has clearly a better Revenue, and has
certainly the command of more Money: For that the one has no dilapidations, and
the like, to consume a great part of his weekly Wages, which you know how much
the other is subject unto. So that as long as we have so many small and
contemptible Livings belonging to our Church (let the world do what it can) we
must expect that they should be supplied by very lamentable and unserviceable
things: For that no body else will meddle with them: Unless one in an Age,
abounding with Money, Charity and Goodness, will preach for nothing. For if men
of Knowledge, Prudence, and Wealth, have a fancy against a Living of twenty
or thirty pounds a year: There is no way to get them into such an undertaking,
but by sending out a spiritual Press: For that very few Volunteers that are of
worth (unless better encouraged) will go into that Holy Warfare: But it will be
left to those who cannot devise how otherwise to live.

Neither must people say, that besides Bishoprics, Prebends, and the like, we
have several brave Benefices, sufficient to invite those of the best Parts,
Education, and Discretion. For imagine one Living in forty is worth a Hundred
pounds a year; And supplied by a Man of Skill, and wholesome Counsel: What are
the other thirty nine the better for that? What are the People about Carlisle
bettered by his Instructions and advice who lives at Dover? It was certainly
our Savior's Mind, not only that the Gospel should be preached to all Nations
at first, but that the meaning and Power of it should be preserved and
constantly declared to all People, by such as had judgment to do it.

Neither again must they say, that Cities, Corporations, and the great Trading
Towns of this Nation, (which are the strength and glory of it, and that contain
the useful People of the World) are usually instructed by very learned and
judicious Persons. For, I suppose, that our Savior's Design was not that
Majors, Aldermen, and Merchants, should be only saved; but also that all plain
Country People should partake of the same means: Who, though they read not so
many Gazetts, as a Citizen, nor concern themselves where the Turk, or King of
France sets on next; yet the true knowledge of God is now so plainly delivered
in Scripture, that there wants nothing but sober and prudent Offerers of the
same, to make it saving to those of the meanest understandings. And therefore
in all parishes, if possible, there ought to be such a fixed and settled
Provision, as might reasonably invite some careful and prudent Person, for the
Peoples Guide and Instruction in Holy Matters.

And furthermore: It might be added, that the Revenue belonging to most of
Corporation-Livings is no such mighty business: For were it not for the
uncertain and humorsome contribution of the well-pleased Parishioners, the
Parson and his Family might be easily starved, for all the Lands or Income that
belongs to his Church. Besides the great mischief that such kind of hired
Preachers have done in the World: which I shall not stay here to insist upon.

And as we have not Churches enough, in respect of the great multitude that are
qualified for a Living; so, considering the smallness of the revenue, and the
number of People that are to be the Hearers, it is very plain that we have too
many. And we shall many times find too Churches in the same Yard, whenas one
would hold double the People of both the Parishes: And if they were united for
the encouragement of some deserving Person, he might easily make shift to spend
very honestly and temperately the Revenue of both. And what though Churches
stand at a little further distance? People may please to walk a mile without
distempering themselves; when as they shall go three or four to a Market to
sell two pennie-worth of Eggs.

But suppose they resolve to pretend, that they shall catch cold (the Clouds
being more than ordinary thick upon the Sunday, as they usually are, if there
be Religion in the case) and that they are absolutely bent upon having
instruction brought to their own Town: Why might not one Sermon a day, or
rather than fail one in a fortnight, from a prudent and well esteem'd-of
Preacher, do as well as two a day from him, that talks all the year long
nothing to the purpose, and thereupon is laughed at and despised?

I know what people will presently say to this, viz. That if upon Sunday the
Church doors be shut, the Alehouses will be open. And therefore there must be
some body, though never so weak and lamentable, to pass away the time in the
Church, that the people may be kept sober and peaceable. Truly, if Religion and
the Worship of God consisted only in Negatives; and that the observation of the
Sabbath was only not to be drunk; then they speak much to the purpose: but if
it be otherwise, very little. It being not much unlike (as it is the fashion in
many places) to the sending of little children of two or three years old to a
School-Dame, without any design of learning one Letter, but only to keep them
out of the fire and water.

Last of all; People must not say that there needs no great store of Learning
in a Minister, and therefore a small Living may answer his deserts: for that
there be Homilies made on purpose by the Church for young Beginners and slow
Inventers. Whereupon it is that such difference is made between giving Orders,
and License to preach; the last being granted only to such as the Bishop shall
judge able to make Sermons.

But this does not seem to do the business: For, though it be not necessary for
every Guide of a Parish to understand all the Oriental Languages, or to make
exactly elegant or profound Discourses for the Pulpit; yet most certainly it is
very requisite that he should be so far learned and judicious, as prudently to
advise, direct, inform, and satisfy the people in holy matters, when they
demand it, or beg it from him. Which, to peform readily and judiciously,
requires much more discretion and skill, than, upon long deliberation, to make
a continued talk of an hour, without any great discernible failings. So that
were a Minister tied up never to speak one sentence of his own invention out of
the Pulpit in his whole Lifetime, yet doubtless many other occasions there be,
for which neither Wisdom nor Reputation should be wanting in him that has the
Care and Government of a Parish.

I shall not here go about to please my self with the imagination of all the
great Tithes being restored to the Church, having little reason to hope to see
such days of virtue. Nor shall I here question the Almightiness of former
Kings and Parliaments; nor dispute whether all the King Henry's in the world,
with never such a powerful Parliament, were able to determine to any other use,
what was once solemnly dedicated to God and his Service. But yet when we look
over the Prefaces to those Acts of Parliament, whereby some Church-revenues
were granted to Henry the eight, one cannot but be much taken with the
ingenuity of that Paliament: That when the King wanted a supply of Money, and
an Augmentation to his Revenue, how handsomely out of the Church they made
provision for him, without doing themselves any injury at all: For, say they,
seeing His Majesty is Our joy and life, seeing that He is so courageous and
wise, seeing that he is so tender of, and well-affected to all his Subjects;
and that He has been at such large Expenses for five and twenty whole years to
defend and protect this his Realm; therefore in all Duty and Gratitude, and as
a manifest token of our unfeigned Thankfulness, We do grant unto the King, and
his Heirs for ever, etc. If follows as closely as can be, That because the King
had been a good and deserving King, and had been at much trouble and expense
for the safety and honor of the Nation, that thererefore all his wants shall
be supplied out of the Church: As if all the Charges that he had been at, was
upon the account only of his Ecclesiastical Subjects, and not in relation to
the rest.

It is not, Sir, for you and I to ghess which way the whole Clergy in general
might be better provided for. But sure it is, and must not be denied, that so
long as many Livings continue as they now are, thus impoverished; and that
there be so few encouragements for men of Sobriety, Wisdom, and Learning, we
have no reason to expect much better Instructors and Governors of Parishes,
than at present we commonly find.

There is a way, I know, that some people love marvellously to talk of, and
that is a just and equal levelling of Ecclesiastical-preferments. What a
delicate refreshment, say they, would it be, if twenty or thirty thousand
pounds a year were taken from the Bishops, and discreetly sprinkled amongst the
poorer and meaner sort of the Clergy? how would it rejoice their hearts, and
encourage them in their Office? What need those great and sumptuous Palaces,
their City, and their Country-houses, their Parks and spacious Waters, their
costly Dishes and fashionable Sauces? May not he that lives in a small thatched
house, that can scarce walk four strides in his own ground, that has only read
well concerning Venison, Fish, and Fowl; may not he, I say, preach as loud, and
to as much purpose, as one of those high and mighty Spiritualists? Go to then,
seeing it has pleased God to make such a bountiful provision for his Church in
general, what need we be sollicitous about the amending the low condition of
many of the Clergy, when as there is such a plain remedy at hand, had we but
grace to apply it? This invention pleases some mainly well: But for all the
great care they pretend to have of the distressed part of the Clergy, I am
confident, one might easily ghess what would please them much better: If
instead of augmenting small Benefices, the Bishops would be pleased to return
to them those Lands that they purchased in their absence. And then as for the
relieving of the Clergy, they would try if they could find out another way.

But art thou in good earnest my excellent Contriver? Do thou think that if
the greatest of our Church-Preferments were wisely parcell'd out amongst those
that are in want, it would do much feats and courtesies? And do thou not
likewise think, that if ten or twenty of the lustiest Noble-mens Estates of
England were cleaverly sliced among the Indigent, would it not strangely
refresh some of the poor Laity, that cry Small-coal or grind Scissars? I do
suppose that if God should afterward incline thy mind (for I fancy it will
not be as yet a good while) to be a Benefactor to the Church; thy wisdom may
possibly direct thee to disperse thy goodness in smaller parcels, rather than
to flow in upon two or three with full happiness. But if it be my inclination
to settle upon one Ecclesiastical person, and his successors for ever, a
thousand pounds a year; upon condition only to read the Service of the Church
once in a week; and thou take it ill, and find fault with my Prudence, and
the Method of my Munificence; and say, that the stipend is much too large for
such a small task: Yet, I am confident, that should I make thy Laityship Heir
of such an Estate, and oblige thee only to the trouble and expense of the
spending a single Chicken, or half a dozen of Larks, once a year, in
Commemoration of me, that thou would count me the wisest Man that ever was
since the Creation: And pray to God, never to dispose thy mind to part with one
farthing of it for any other use than for the Service of thy self and thy
Family. And yet, so it is, that because the Bishops, upon their first being
restored, had the confidence to levy Fines according as they wore justly due,
and desired to live in their own Houses (if not pulled down) and to receive
their own Rents: Presently they cry out, the Churchmen have got all the
Treasure, and Money of the Nation into their hands. If they have any, let them
thank God for it, and make good use of it. Weep not Beloved, for there is very
little hopes, that they will cast it all into the Sea, on purpose to stop the
mouths of them, that say they have too much.

What other contrivances there may be for the settling upon Ministers in
General a sufficient Revenue for their subsistence and encouragement in their
Office; I shall leave to be considered of by the Governors of Learning and
Religion. Only, thus much is certain, that so long as the Maintenance of many
Ministers is so very small, it is not to be avoided, but that a great part of
them will want learning, prudence, courage, and esteem to do any good where
they live. And what if we have (as by all must be acknowledged) as wise and
learned Bishops as be in the World; and many others of very great
understanding, and wisdom, yet as was before hinted, unless there be provided
for most Towns and Parishes, some tolerable and sufficient Guides; the
strength of Religion, and the Credit of the Clergy will daily languish more and
more. Not that it is to be believed, that every small Country Parish should be
altogether hopeless as to the next Life, unless they have a Hooker, a
Chillingworth, a Hammond, or a Sanderson, dwelling amongst them; but requisite
it is, and might be brought about, that somebody there should be, to whom the
People have reason to attend, and to be directed, and guided by him.

I have, Sir, no more to say, were it not that you find the word Religion in
the Title; of which in particular I have spoken very little: Neither need I,
considering how nearly it depends, as to its glory and strength, upon the
reputation and mouth of the Priest. And I shall add no more but this, viz. that
among those many things that tend to the decay of Religion, and of a due
Reverence of the Holy Scriptures, nothing has more occasioned it, than the
ridiculous and idle discourses that are uttered out of Pulpits. For when the
Gallants of the World do observe how the Ministers themselves do jingle,
quibble, and play the fools with their Texts, no wonder if they, who are so
inclinable to Atheism, do not only deride and despise the Priests, but droll
upon the Bible, and make a mock of all that is sober and sacred, I am,

Sir, Your most humble Servant, T. B.
August 8. 1670.
FINIS.

