THE EMPEROR And the EMPIRE BETRAYED: By Whom and How.

Written by a Minister of State residing at that Court, to one of the
Protestant Princes of the Empire.

Published for the satisfaction of all good Protestants.

LONDON, Printed for B. M. at the Duke of Lorrain's Head in Westminster. 1682.

TO THE READER.
THE extraordinary Conduct of the Imperial Court and Council for some years
past, having raised the Curiosity of a great Prince of the Empire, to find out
at any rate the true Causes and Grounds of Counsels and Actions that had so
much surprised him, he made choice of a Minister whom he judged best capable to
execute this Design, and having given him Instructions for the purpose,
dispatched him privately under other pretenses to the Emperors Court at Prague
The Minister acquitted himself well, and gave his Master an ample account of
his Business by Letter, of the 13. of February 1680. The Master (a right
German, and truly generous Prince) laid his Commands on me to publish those
important Secrets, the value whereof will soon appear by the reading, from
which I will no longer detain you.

Farewell.
THE EMPEROR AHD THE EMPIRE Betrayed. AND By Whom, and How.
In a LETTER.
My Lord,
IT IS the duty of a Servant not to conceal any thing from his Prince and
Master, especially when he is pleased to honor him with his Confidence, as
your Higness has done in sending me to this Court: To clear my self from the
Guilt and Reproach of having been wanting to this Duty, I take the liberty to
give your Highness a faithful and candid account in Writing; what I have
discovered most pertinent and Essential to the business, you were pleased to
employ me in. I shall do it with the less scruple and reserve, having sent this
Letter by an Express, in whom I have entire Confidence, and doubt not but he
will, according to my order, deliver it into your Hands.

To begin with the best part of what I have to deliver, I am to inform your
Highness, that His Imperial Majesty is, in my Opinion, a pious Prince, good
natured, and of a sweet and gentle Disposition, and not at all inclined to
contend with the Princes his Neighbors, or make War on his Inferiors: That,
pursuant to this natural Inclination for Repose and for Peace, this Prince has
an Antipathy against any thing that disturbs or opposes his quiet Disposition,
and has eased himself wholly of the management and direction of his Affairs of
State, and of War, by committing all to the Conduct of his principal Ministers.
It Is hard for a Prince to entrust a Minister with Affairs of this mighty
Importance, without opening to him all his Mind, and imparting the greatest and
deepest of his Secrets: And from hence, I believe it has unhappily followed
that this Prince, having by degrees accustomed himself to leave the greatest
part of his Affairs to the Conduct of his Ministers, has reserved to himself
only the Title and Pomp, the Splendor and Name of the Dignities and Grandeur
proper to his Character. In a Word, had his Imperial Majesty never so little
minded his great Affairs, he would never have yielded to sign that shameful and
ignominious Peace with France, subscribed by the Imperial Ambassadors at the
Congress ad Nimiguen; the unhappy Effects whereof we have seen in seven
Particulars of great importance.

First, His Imperial Majesty, by those few strokes of his Pen, has in all
probability, lost for ever the Esteem, the Friendship and Confidence of the
Princes his Friends and Allies; who would have generously defended and
preserved him from ruin, by the force of their Arms.

Seconldy, That his own Troops have been shamefully forced to quit all the
Countries of the Empire, while those of France have been actually there, and
continue to this day insulting and Domineering as they please over the Princes,
the Cities, the Countries and Provinces of the Empire.

Thirdly, That by the Execution of this Peace, the Estates, the Persons and the
Courts of the three Ecclesiastical Electors of the Empire, and of the Elector
Palatine of the Rhine, stand in a manner exposed every hour to the violences
and irruptions of the Arms of France; and consequently, in case of an Election
of a King of the Romans, we may probably find by their Suffrages what may be
expected from Slaves to that proud and ambitious Crown.

Fourthly, That his Imperial Majesty having by that Peace tacitly consented to
the late Cession on made by Spain of the County of Burgundy to the Crown of
France: It follows, that if His Imperial Majesty, (in Case of failure of Issue
in the House of Spain) should in his own Right, or in the Right of the
Arch-Dutchess his Daughter, the Heir to the Estates of that Monarchy, he has
by that Article of the County of Burgundy, released his Right to it, and
deprived his Successors, and the Empire of the Convenience that Country might
upon a favorable Revolution have afforded them to lead an Army without
opposition into the heart of France: And should Lorrain be ever restored to the
Empire, yet this Article will be an infallible means for France to maintain
continually an Army on the Frontiers of Germany, and invade it as often as it
shall appear to be for the Interest and Grandeur of the French to attack the
Germans.

Fifthly, That though Swizzerland be thoroughly convinced by the building the
Fortress of Hunninges, of the Ambitious designs of France, and consequently
concerned and inclined to make a League with all, or part of the Princes of the
Empire, in defense of the Common Liberty; yet the unfortunate Session of the
County of Burgundy has furnished the Pensioners of France, (whom no Counsel or
Caution of that Republic is free from) with a plausible argument, to persuade
that Republic not to stir in its own defense, till it be perhaps too late, and
out of its power to help it self: For, say they, What shall we do? The Cantons
of Bern, Fribourgh and Sollurre cannot subsist without the Salt of that
Province: Besides the Forces his most Christian Majesty keeps actually on Foot
there, may justly alarm us to be cautious to the utmost, what measures we take,
and consider all things before we engage in any: By such discourses as these
(though groundless if we suppose an Union of the Forces of the Empire with the
Swisse, which would infallibly draw in many more) it may fall out that this
Republic (if the lowest party prevail not against those Traitors to their
Country) may to its own mischief, and the ruin of others, lie still and look
on, as unconcerned, and consequently be a Member wholly useless to the Public,
for defense of the Common Liberty, which would be in the present Conjuncture of
more mischievous Consequence han most are aware of.

Sixthly, That by this peace the Duke of Lorrain, who has had the honor to
Marry a great Queen eldest Sister to his Imperial Majesty, has found as little
respect in this Peace, as if he had married the Daughter of a Burgo-Master of
Colmar; and has been violently robbed, and entirely dispossessed of his Dukedoms
of Lorrain and Bar, and several other Lands he held in Sovereignty, being his
Hereditary Estates, and descended to him by unquestionable right of Succession:
Which others looked on with so little concern, as if this Prince (stripped of all
he could call his own) had lost no more than a Ring, or a Farm of a thousand
Crowns value.

Seventhly, That his Imperial Majesty, and the Empire by Signing a Peace (to
give it its right Name) so unbecoming and unworthy, have raised the courage and
hopes of the most Christian King to that height, that he looks on both with so
much indifference and scorn, that he has openly undertaken at once three
things, which (I believe) were ever heard of in the Empire, at least when it
had the advantage of a Head that had the least jealousy and care for its Glory.

The first, that without any Lawful Mission, the Emperor being young, and in
perfect Health, he solicites vigorously the two Electors of the North side of
the Empire, for their Suffrage at the next Election of a King of the Romans. I
mention only these two Electors, for as for the others, he makes no doubt by
fair means or by force to dispose of them as he shall think fit.

The second, that, as if he were dealing only with the Farmers of his Revenues,
or the Poysoners of Paris, he has by a Declaration erected at Metz (as
formerly at Brisak) a Court composed according to the course of that Kingdom,
of a dozen Hangm -- where though the smallest Duke and Peer of France, is not
obliged to appear; His most Christian Majesty, as Judge and Party, cites by
some Catchpole of that Clandestine Jurisdiction, Princes of the most ancient
Illustrious Houses of the Empire (which he has nothing to do withal) to make
their appearance, to give him Account by what right they possess what their
Predecessors have for three or four hundred Years peaceably enjoyed. This
invention, with the help of the Knight of the Post, and a Map of the Country
drawn out at pleasure, (but of the old fashion, the better to color the
business) is the ground of his pretensions, that the greatest part of Lorrain,
the whole Dukedom of Deuxpents, and the best part of Alsatia, as far as
Lauterbourgh, are ancient Dependencies of the Bishoprics of Metz, Toul and
Verdun, and must consequently be reunited to the Demeans of that Crown with as
much ease, as the Lands of some wretched Treasurers of France have been resumed
by his Majesty.

The third is, that to the end his new Paper-pretences, may be as effectual as
the right of devolution of the low Countries in 1667 and 1668. He has upon the
Frontiers on this side considerable Forces in readiness to Execute the Reunion,
or rather, under that pretense, to do what he shall think fit in the Empire;
when all this while, neithe his Imperial Majesty, nor any Prince of the Empire
dares openly stir. As if what has already been done to the Duke of Lorrain,
and other Princes and Cities of the Empire in Alsatia, were not only a certain
presage, but an unquestionable President, whereby all other Princes and States
of the Empire of what quality and degree soever, may clearly see the Fortune of
those Princes and States, who have the misfortune to hold of that Crown, or be
Neighbors to its Dominions: The consequences that naturally follow so
untoward, and so unhappy a State of Affairs will oblige us to Conclude; Woe to
his Imperial Majesty, if he do not wholly alter his Conduct, and God grant I
speak not prophetically and truly, as Micajah when I say His Imperial Majesty
will dearly rue his trusting his Council with the direction and management of
Affairs of this Nature: And woe to His Imperial Majesty and the Empire, they
ever signed that false and fatal Peace, whereby both will naturally fall
(unless God by special interposition prevent it) under the slavery of that
absolute and despotical Dominion. Yet I would not be thought to be of Opinion,
that if all His Imperial Majesty's Council were such as it ought to be, Affairs
would be in that ill condition we find them; but the greater part of that
Council being weak or corrupted, as I dare say it is, we are not to doubt, but
if it continues, things will still grow worse and worse: I have been bold to
say, the greater part of the Imperial Council is Weak or Corrupt: And to make
my words good, I will proceed by degrees from smaller matters to those of
greatest importance, to prove what I affirm by unquestionable Instances.

The first Instance.
Commissary General Capellier surpised the Steward of his House in the very
act of Traitorous Correspondence with the Minister of France, to whom he gave
an exact Account of all he could discover at his Master's House. The Letters he
sent to the French Minister and those he received from him were seized at the
Imperial Post Office at Frankfort: And though this happened in the heat of the
War between the two Nations, and the Traitor upon discovery of the matter was
arrested, and carried to Philipsbourgh, and From thence to Vienna, yet he (a
Fellow worth nothing) found at Court such powerful support, that he was set at
Liberty, and cleared as a gallant Person.

The second Instance.
The Siege of Phillipsbourg, being formed by the Imperial Troops and those of
the Circles, and the place so much straightened that they began to want Powder in
the Town, two Brothers, Burgesses of Franckfort, corrupted by a French
Minister, undertook to buy several Wagon Loads of Powder in the Empire, and to
conveigh them into Phillipsbourg with other Ammunition. But the Convoy for
executing the Design having been surprised by the Imperialists, and one of the
Rogues taken and sent to Vienna, he was not long there but he was set at
liberty as a very honest Fellow.

The third Instance.
He that commanded in Fribourgh, when taken by Marshal Crequi, could not deny
himself notoriously guilty of Cowardice, or Treason; being arrested for his
Crimes, and carried first to Inspruck, and thence to Vienna: he was looked upon
as a Sacrifice necessary to be offered to expiate so heinous an offense against
Equity, Policy, and the Discipline of War; but because he was related to a
principal Minister, or rather because a Great One was afraid he might (if put
hard to it) make some discoveries: He was fully acquitted, and cleared from all
that was laid to his charge; and in such a manner, that he retired home as
confident, and unconcerned, as ever the French Governor of Phillipsbourgh
could have done, after the generous defense he made of the Post he commanded.

The Fourth Instance.
The Duke of Saxe Eisnach having had the Command of a little Army on the Rnine,
being an active and brave Prince, neglected not any thing that might conduce to
the worthy discharging the Duty of his place; those of the Imperial Council,
who took part with France, having designs contrary to those of that Prince,
were as active on the other side, by close and sudden ways to bring two things
to pass: The first was to raise and establish a misunderstanding between this
Prince, and his Highness of Lorrain; Commander in chief of the great Army of
the Empire: The Second was, to order the distribution of Ammunition necessary
for the Army in such a manner, that when it was provided of one sort, it should
certainly want another: When it had Cannon, it wanted Carriages; and when it
had both these it should have neither Powder nor Bullet: And to give those of
the Council their due, their designs took effect to admiration, for the whole
story of that Campaign is (in short) no more but a misunderstanding between
these Princes, and want of Ammunition. But this was not enough, for the malice
of these Emissaries, they poceeded further to hire one under the name of Dela
Magdelaine, who having been instructed by the Major Domo of the Abbot S. Gall
(of whom we shall have occasion to speak hereafter) was set on to seduce and
surprise this Prince: In a word, he came to the Duke of Saxe Eysenach to
propose to him the surprizal of a Fortress belonging to France in the higher
Alsatia: The proposal was gilded over with so much probability of success,
that the Duke animated with zeal to do something great for the Glory of his
Imperial Majesty, and the Interest of his Country, greedily hearkened, and
quickly embraced the proposal. After some necessary precautions for the
Enterprise, Duneewald was commanded to undertake the Execution, and having in
the Action discovered the Cheat, the Duke used his endeavors to have the
Criminal Arrested: But all to no purpose; for the Major Domo had already
secured him in a place of safety: I make no doubt but every one will grant me,
this Rogue deserved death, and had not any color of pretense, to find esteem
or safety in the Empire: But it proved quite otherwise upon his Capitulation,
(I mean that with the Major Domo) for the Rogue, having played this excellent
trick, had the impudence to go to the Emperors Court, where he was very well
received, and highly treated, and sent thence to Breslaw, where Count
Shaftkutsch, President of the Imperial Chamber in Silesia, pays him constantly,
by order from above, annually a considerable Pension: This arrant Cheat goes
now as formerly under the Name of Cygale, and gives out he is akin to the
Grand Signior: But it has been made appear in France and England, that he is a
Native of Maldavia, and was Groom to a Prince of that Country: This is the true
Character of him, the rest that is said of him are but inventions of Jesuits
and Monks, who go snips with him in the Presents he receives on his Lying
pretenses. I have been more particular in my account to your Highness of this
Fellow, to arm you the better against a surprise, by his Fictions and
Artifices, which he continues to practice every day in hope to get something
from those he can impose upon.

The Fifth Instance.
By what I have said formerly of Swizzerland, it may appear of what importance
it may be to the Emperor and Empire to make that Republic sensible of their
true interest, and treat with them for a League and Union of Forces in defense
of the Common Liberty; and (to bring this about) to employ in the Negotiation,
Persons not only capable and faithful, but acceptable to those they are to
treat with: Yet as if the Emperor's Council made it their business to do in
this as other particulars, only what may gain them the favor, or the Gold of
His most Christian Majesty. It Is fit to know the Person the Emperor's Council
employs in all those important Negotiations they have with that Republic. It
is no other than the Abbot S. Gall's Major Domo, above mentioned, called
Monsieur Fidelle, (Mr. Faithful,) but by the same figure of speech our Divines
call the Prince of Darkness an Angel of Light: For this Fellow is notoriously
known and confessed to be the falsest of Men. Yet being a Person of a very ready
wit, a lively fancy, and naturally active in what he undertakes, sometimes he
openly acts on the part of France, and publicly solicits Suffrages in this
Republic in favor of that Crown; sometimes he turns his Coat, and is on the
sudden all for the House of Austria: This man from a petty Peddler of Italy, is
become excessive Rich, which I mention as a circumstance whereby it may be the
better known what a Man he is, how fit to negotiate the Interests of his
Imperial Majesty, and to be the Confident and Councellor of the Ministers of
State; His Council sends into these parts: And to make appear their Wisdom or
Collution in this particular, I must acquaint your Highness with a matter
generally known throughout the Swisse Cantons.

That this man is owner of a Moity of two Swisse Companies, now actually in the
Service of the French, under the command of his Son in Law: (An Ordinary
Traffic among the Swisses) That his most Christian Majesty has within these
three years bestowed on him a Rich Canonry, in the higher Alsatia, or Brisgow,
which one of his Sons is invested in: That it is this faithful Minister of the
Imperial Court, has since the beginning of the last War, bought all the Horses
his Christian Majesty had need of for his Armies, and caused them to be
transported from the Port of Wasserbourgh in Germany (where his Master has a
Bailiff, and no small Power) to the Port of Rochas, in Swizzerland, which is a
place whereof his Master is Sovereign Prince: That this man being the principal
incendiary and Fomenter of all the troubles and broils happened in Swisserland,
these last twenty years; is so generally hated by all good people of that
Nation, that to procure the miscarriages of any affair of the Dyets of Baden,
there is no surer means than to make the Assembly suspect this man has a hand,
or is any way concerned in it. This appeared clearly in the affair of the
County of Burgundy, for Count Cazatti, the Spanish Ambassador, having very
unadvisedly resolved to make use of this man's Counsel and Conduct in a matter
of that importance, that mighty affair was utterly ruined by that very means:
Notwithstanding all, this man is the Confident and privy Counselor of all the
Ministers his Imperial Majesty sends to that Nation; and their first business,
when arrived there, is to visit him, to consult him and communicate to him all
their instructions: This about three years since, occasioned a pleasant passage
at the Diet of Baden: An Envoy of his Imperial Majesty, (whom I purposely
forbear to name) according to the Custom of his Predecessors in that Employ,
and the Orders established, went presently after his arrival to consult this
Oracle; going afterward to Baden, the Envoy was strangely surprised to find
that Gravelle the French Ambassador had already Communicated to the Assembly
all the private Instructions the Envoy had received from the Council at Vienna:
Thus that Envoy's Nogotiations came to nothing, and so will all others his
Imperial Majesty shall permit to be managed by the false and Corrupt Conduct of
a Man so base, and altogether unworthy the honor of that Employment.

The Sixth Instance.
It Is an infallible Maxim, that every Prince dispossessed of his Estate, may hold
for certain, there will be nothing omitted on the part of the Usurper, or a
Conqueror in possession to ruin him, if possible, and all his Generation.
Therefore it is not strange, that the Ministers of France (though perhaps in
this particular against the intention and without the order of his most
Christian Majesty) leave no stone unturned for the destruction of his Highness
of Lorrain: But it may surprise any man to find that the Imperial Governor of
Phillipsbourgh, should (so openly and notoriously, as he did) have attempted
the destruction of that Prince, by the trap he caused cunningly to be made in
the bridge of that place, for that purpose, through which the good Prince fell
headlong to the bottom of the Ditch: May we not justly infer, this Governor had
capitulated and agreed with some Minister of the Enemy to commit so vile a
Treason? May we not conclude so black an attempt against a Sovereign Prince,
Brother in Law to the Emperor, and at that time representing the Person of His
Imperial Majesty, under the Character of Generalissimo of his Armies,
unquestionably merited exemplary punishment? No honest Man but expected the
Criminal should have been made a Sacrifice to Justice and Vengeance, when he
was taken and carried under a strong Guard to Vienna. But all that was mere
show, for the Favorers of France had that influence over the Council at
Vienna, that this Villain, as the former, past altogether unpunished.

The seventh Instance.
It appears publicly his most Christian Majesty since the Peace Arms by Sea
and Land more powerfully than before; and France being not sufficient for the
Levies he makes, he is come by his Ambassador to the Center of the Empire, to
Frankford and to Prague to complete them. He causes Fortresses and Places of
strength to be every day built on Saar, the Rhine, and all the Frontiers of
Germany, I think there needs no better evidence of his having a Design to
reduce Almayn into a condition of disability of help it self, when he thinks
fit to attacque it; if we consider farther, that he causes his Commissaries to
buy up all the Corn in Swabe and Franconia, which is daily carried away into
his Magazins in Lorrain, Alsatia, and the County of Burgundy. Let us examine on
the other side the conduct of the Head and Natural Defender of the Empire, or
rather of his unhappy Council: This Prince has since the Peace reformed all
his Troops; and in particular the Garrison of Rhinefeld, which is of principal
consequence: Let us weigh the matter without prejudice: He has disbanded most
of his old Regiments, and kept on foot only part of the new. A man must be
blind, and void of common sense, who comprehends not that the Imperial Council
has in this particular acted by inteligence with the Council of France, and by
their direction, to deprive the Emperor of the only Officers and Soldiers
capable to defend him, and to make them immediately go over into the service of
France: The matter has fallen out according to their design, and I leave it to
any man versed in matters of State or of War, to judge what a Conduct so
extraordinary as this does naturally signify.

I should be too tedious to give you all the Instances I know whereby to prove
the Emperor is certainly betrayed by the greater part of his Council. But to
be short, let it be observed, that the same Council that cleared the Steward of
Commissary Capelliers, the Traitors of Frankfort who would have furnished
Philipsbourgh with Powder in the Siege, and the Governor of Fribourgh: The
same Council that has protected at Brestaw the Villain who abused the Duke of
Saxe Eisnach, and procured a Pension to be settled on him; the same Council that
has settled the Major Domo of the Abbot S. Gall. to be the Imperial Minister in
Switzerland, and prevented the exemplary punishment of the Governor of
Phillipsbourgh; the same Council that advised His Imperial Majesty to reform
the greatest part of his Troops, and in the manner I have told you; this is the
very Council has clearly acquitted and approved of all the Conduct and public
Robberies and Insolences of Commissary Capelliers, and others: and by causing
His Imperial Majesty, to sign the late shameful Peace, have reduced the too
good Prince into such a Condition, that (without a special Providence of God to
the: contrary) no Prince will henceforth without much difficulty and caution
rely on his Word or his Signet: So that considering the Activity, the Power
and Interest of his Enemy, with the credit and influence he has in the
Emperor's Council, His Imperial Majesty, as to his Elective Imperial Crown (and
I know not what to say of his Hereditary Dominions and Estates) seems reduced
to the Condition of a Chilperic, or a Charles in France; for he has more than
one Pepin, or one Hugh Capet to deal with. Nor do I see he has any greater
Authority than had those two unfortunate Kings, who were violently thrust out
of their Thrones; which neither they, nor any of their Posterity ever regained.
The better to convince the World how foully His Imperial Majesty is betrayed by
his Council, and in him all the Princes and States of the Empire, and that
there has been of a long time a horrid and villainous Plot carried on against
them with great cunning and caution, give me leave to observe that it proceeds
from the secret Engines of this Plot, that His Imperial Majesty's two Sisters
were Married to Princes, both Robbed of their Dominions and Estates: As to the
Duke of Lorrain, Husband of the Elder, he continues to this day stripped of all
his Estates, and if the late Peace hold, I see little hopes of his
Re-establishment. And it cannot be denied but that the Duke of Newbourgh,
though restored by the Peace to the Dukedoms of Juliers and Berg, was out of
possession of both at the time of the Marriage of his Son to the Emperor's
younger Sister. The Reasons of these Marriages were, that the Princesses being
Married (as they are) to Princes incapable to afford His Imperial Majesty any
Succor at need, neither His Majesty nor his Allies might have any benfit by
the Marriages. And that when ever France should be desirous of Peace, there
might be those in the Imperial Councils and Court, whose Interest would oblige
them to desire and procure it, in order to their restoration and
re-establishment in their Estates, and to free themselves from the necessity of
begging their Bread elsewhere. It has happened accordingly as to the Duke of
Newburgh at least, for having not wherewith to bear the Charge of the Marriage
of his Son with the Emperor's Sister, without being restored to the Dutchies of
Juliers and Berg, which could not (at least so speedily) be effected without a
Peace, what wonder is it, that this Prince has for the time past (being forced
by his Necessities) joined with that part of the Emperor's Council that was for
Peace, and assisted them in persuading His Imperial Majesty to sign it on any
Condition: Nor can it appear strange, if this Prince for the suture join with
the same Council, and use all his Credit and Interest with His Imperial
Majesty, never to enter into a War with France, though he have never so great
Reason for it. For when wants and Necessities enter in at the Door, Honor and
Friendship flies out at the windows.

His Highness of Lorrain (to give him his due) has done bravely on his
occasion, having generously chosen to run the Risque of losing all, rather than
sign so shameful and unjust a Peace, as that proposed to him by France: And I
shall be very much deceived, if he or his recover not their Estates rather by
this than any other Conduct: For Revolutions are Common to all, and I have
particular Reasons to believe it may one day happen so in the Affairs of his
Highness.

This I think is more than sufficient to Evince that His Imperial Majesty has
been basely betrayed by his Council.

My next business is to show by what sort of People he has been chiefly
betrayed, and with what Covers they have gilded those Pills, which they have
made this Good and August Prince swallow from time to time.

To find the bottom of this business, we must look a great way back, as far as
the beginning of the War, which France by Concert with England, the Elector of
Cologne, the Duke of Newburgh, and the Bishop of Munster, made against the
United Provinces in 1672. After several Alliances with the Deceased Elector of
Bavaria, and Duke of Hanover, and others, which were but too visible during
that War.

Several pretenses have been made use of to color that Rupture, but the truth
is, it was fomented only by the Court of Rome and the Jesuits: To give your
Highness full and clear satisfaction in this particular, be pleased to permit
me to put you in mind, that a little before the breaking out of that War, his
Royal Highness of Savoy Deceased, having taken his Measures with the Court and
Council of France, made open War against the Republic of Genoa. The Court of
Rome wisely judging the Duke of Savoy would not have engaged in that Enterprise
without assurance before hand of Succor and Protection from France, if
needful; and that those petty Sparks might raise a General Conflagration in
Italy, which in time might draw over thither all the French Forces, and
consequently expose that Country to inevitable Ruin; that subtle and cunning
Court, to save themselves from the storm, applied themselves seriously,

In the First place, to put an end upon any terms to the War between the Duke
and the Republic, which Monsieur Gaumont soon after effected.

In the next place, being sensible what formidable Forces His Most Christian
Majesty had then on foot, and that that Monarch could not forbear breaking out
into a new War; the Court of Rome resolved to use all their endeavors to
divert from themselves and their Neighbors, the Effects of the French Arms,
and cause them to fall on some other Country of Europe, the most remote that
might be from Italy, and where it might be most Convenient for the Interest of
the Pope: The Jesuits having given directions to this purpose, the affair was
managed with that subtilty, the Storm fell altogether on the United Provinces,
the Court of Rome assuring it self, that if that Republique were once
destroyed, the whole Protestant Party would naturally come to ruin, and the
Papal Authority in a short time recover it is primitive Grandeur and Glory.
Great Obstacles were quickly discovered against the carrying on this mighty
Project: The most Christian King who clearly saw what the Court of Rome aimed
at, was, or pretended to be, unwilling to engage in Open War against the United
Provinces, but on two Conditions.

First, That the Court of Rome should secretly consent and give way that he
might, if he could, join the Provinces of the Spanish Netherlands and Lorrain,
with what he could Conquer from the States of the United Provinces, to form or
restore the Ancient Kingdom of Austrasia.

Secondly, that the Court of Rome should assure him, to their Power, to procure
his Majesty and the Dauphin, (who was designed the New King of Austrasia,) the
Imperial Crown.

As to the point of the Spanish Netherlands, it must be observed, that to bring
about the Design, it was absolutely necessary to manage his Majesty of Great
Britain, (whose interests there were very considerable) and there could be no
hopes to give him satisfaction without Sacrificing to him something very
considerable of what belonged to the Spaniard. It would have been almost
impossible for any but the Jesuits Interests, so different, to reconcile and
overcome so great and Numerous Difficulties. The two Branches of the most
August House of Austria, had heaped most considerable Favors, and showed their
Bounties, on the Society of Jesuits: But when they are concerned for the
Grandeur of the Pope, and the Interests of the Miter (which (by the way) the
Society looks on with the same Ardour a young Prince in Love would eye the
advantages, the Glory and Interests of a Beautiful and rich Queen, whom he made
no doubt but he should one day enjoy) all Thoughts and memory of the favors
received from the August Family, are wholly laid aside on that occasion; the
Jesuits fell immdiately to find out Expedients for two Reasons, full of Justice
and Equity, according to the Politic Maxims of that Blessed Society.

The first was that whereas the House of Austria in the present Conjuncture was
notoriously unable to raise the Roman Bishops to their former Estate of
Grandeur and Glory, and that there was not any but His most Christian Majesty,
who by his Forces and Interests could work this kind of Miracle it was
absolutely necessary to remove all Difficulties and Obstacles that might hinder
the effecting an enterprise so Profitable and Glorious.

The Second, That in case the Design should take effect, the Society was
assured of having in recompense of their pains, two great Abbeys, Heads of
their Orders, the one in the Ancient Kingdom of France, the other in the New
Conquests: Which Abbys were to be added to the vast Patrimony of this Society,
besides the assurances they had by the protection of France, to obtain a
Settlement in Amsterdam, and elsewhere. Upon these Grounds they procured the
Treaties to be privately signed between France and Rome, and between France and
England, by virtue whereof the War was quickly begun against the United
Provinces.

I pass over in silence the satisfaction his Majesty of Great Britain was to
have, as impertinent to my present business: It may be observed, that as under
the Reign of Philip the second France was to have been made (as far as it lay
in the Power of Rome) a Sacrifice to the Interests of the Papal Miter, and the
Monarch of Spain, it is now become the turn of the most August House of Austria,
(according to this Project) to be Sacrificed to the interests of the Papacy,
the Jesuits and his most Christian Majesty. And that as the principal design of
the Jesuits, and of France, was the absolute destruction of the Protestant
Party, it was from hence it proceeded, that a League was formed and signed by
most of the Catholic Princes of Germany, and incorporated into the Treaties
above mentioned, wherein every of the Confederates had, or at least thought to
have had his design, and compassed his ends, as afterward appeared: Hence also
it proceeded that France, having anciently had very strict alliances with the
Protestant Princes of Germany, concealed very carefully the present design from
all its ancient Allies of that Communion. The Court of Rome, and the Society as
carefully concealed it from both branches of the House of Austria; and all this
for reasons, than which nothing is more easily apprehended: For the same reason
it was, that in the beginning of this War, nothing was omitted by the Popes
Nuncio, the Jesuits, and their Emissaries, to lull asleep the Councils of
Vienna and Madrid; and that afterward they did with all possible diligence
reveal to the Ministers of France, all they could discover of the deliberations
of the Imperial Council, or the Spanish. For the same reason it was, that his
Imperial Majesty by the clear Remonstrances of the Elector of Brandenbourgh
being made sensible of the Trap cunningly laid for him by the French, and
having commanded an Army to join with that Elector on the Rhine, those
Emissaries of Rome laid all their heads together, and for their Masterpiece to
carry on the Design, effected two things.

The first was the Rebellion of the Male Contents in Hungary, not yet
Suppressed, whereby they endeavored, if possible, to give the Emperor so
strong a diversion, that it might not be in his Power to assist his Allies.

The second, I have from an Anonimous Author of an Essay of the Interest of the
Protestant Princes and States, Printed in the year, 1676. and treating of
several things, in this respect very considerable: The Author in my Opinion
deserves the more Credit, in that he has lashed the Society to some purpose in
his Discourse, yet not one of it is Patrons or Partisans has undertook to
refute him: The account he gives of the first Campaign, I will repeat Word for
Word from the Original, as very suitable to my purpose.

In the Year 1672. when the Arms of France were so prosperous, that all Europe
looked on the States of the United Provinces as very near Destruction, His
Electoral Highness of Brandenbourgh wisely foreseeing the Consequences to be
expected from the Ambitious Enterprises of France, if not stopped in time,
gained himself the Reputation, not only of having been the first Prince of
Christendom who drew his Sword in Protection of that broken State, but by
vigorous Remonstrances to the Court of Vienna, was the cause that His Imperial
Majesty, awaking out of the Lethargy some corrupt Counselors had cast him
into, resolved to Arm vigorously, and join with his Electoral Highness in
Defense of that Republique: His Electoral Highness in pursuance of this
Resolution being advanced toward the Rhine, with a considerable Army, and
Count Montecuculi being on his way thither in the Head of an Imperial Army,
with design to act jointly, and to do something considerable in favor of the
Republique. France, alarmed by the March of the two German Armies, had
detached Marshal Turenne, with a Body of an Army to observe the motions of the
other two: But by the several Marches and Counter-Marches these two Armies had
made, especially that of Brandenbourgh, sometimes making as if they would pass
the Rhine in several places, sometimes in being ready to fall upon the Allies
of France beyond the Rhine, Turennes Army was so tired out and harassed, that
about the end of the Campaign it was almost quite dissipated, and found it self
in so miserable a Condition, that it is certain all Turenne was able to do, was
to be on the defensive against one of those Armies, and that if both Armies had
joined, Turenne had been inevitably lost, as was publicly confessed. His
Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh knowing how easy it was to destroy Turenne,
and the Consequence of his Defeat, caused a vigorous Remonstrance of all to be
made to the Council of Vienna; it was so effectual, that positive Orders were
sent Montecuculi to join his Electoral Highness and Fight Turenne, without
further loss of time; which would have broken all the open and hidden Measures
of France, and by one blow freed the Empire and Holland from Oppression. But
other matters were in hand for the Interest of Rome. His Majesty of Great
Britain had permitted himself to be persuaded to publish about that time, a
Declaration (whereof he made Report to his Parliament,) whereby a Tolleration
and Indulgence was granted in favor of the Nonconformists of his Kingdom.
Though it may be thought it was not so much for favoring the particular
Conventicles of the Sectaries of the Protestant Party, as, under the name of
Non-Conformists, to introduce Popery again into that Estate, though contrary to
the Designs and Intentions of His Majesty, who granted it only in favor of the
tender Consciences of his Protestant Subjects: This Step toward Popery being
the First Fruits the Court of Rome had promised it self from the Ruin of the
States of the United Provinces, it is no wonder that Court set all hands at work
to effect that Ruin. The then principal Obstacles of the Design, was the
Resolution of His Electoral Highness against Turenne, the Destruction of his
Army being capable to Re-establish the States of the United Provinces, and that
Re-establishment would have destroyed all the Projects of the Jesuits in
England. Here it was the Jesuits played their part to prevent the blow from
fallin on Turenne, and they acted it too well for the general Good of Europe:
for Montecuculi instead of receiving Express Order to join Brandenbourgh's
Army, and fight Turenne, received Orders quite contrary; whereby he was
absolutely forbidden to do the one or the other. To drive this Nail to the
head; the venerable Society (whose impudence nothing can parallel) made it
their business several ways to infuse into his Electoral Highness a jealousy
of the Emperor, as insincere in his intentions: this was effected with the
greater facility, for that his E. H. of Brandenbourgh, having received from the
Court of Vienna, a formal Letter, which gave him an exact account of the true
order his Imperial Majesty had sent Montecuculi to join him and fight the
French, and his E. H. having summoned Montecuculi to execute that Order,
Montecuculi, who knew he had Orders quite contrary, but knew nothing of the
former, of which the Elector had account, could do no less than refuse the one
and the other, nor could his Electoral Highness choose upon the refusal, but
suspect the sincerity of the Emperor's Intentions. This was not enough for
those Masters of mischief, for at the same time those Emissaries omitted
nothing that might instill into Montecuculi, a suspicion of the sincerity of
the Elector's Intentions. These Jealousies being but too deeply established,
especially on this last side, it is no wonder His Electoral Highness was at last
persuaded (as these Emissaries had by a third Hand infinuated to him) that the
House of Austria treated underhand a separate Peace with France: Which
appeared the more probable, by the daily Advice he had of the miserable estate
of Turenne's Army, growing every hour worse and worse, and the obstinacy of
Montecuculi, neither to join him, nor fight. The Emissaries foreseeing this
misunderstanding would vanish intime time, when the truth should appear, made
use of that conjuncture to set on the Duke of Newbourgh to manage a particular
Peace between his Electoral Highness and France; which the Electoral, jealous
of the Imperialists, and vexed at their proceedings, was at last persuaded to
accept, and with so much the more reason, that as to Holland he pretended they
had not satisfied their Engagements to him, and as to the Interests of the
Empire he reserved himself entire liberty to arm in its defense, if France
should attacque it.

The Elector was concerned in Reputation to make the Emperor sensible of his
just Resentments of Montecuculi's proceeding: Montecuculi was strangely
surprised, when at his return to Vienna his Master called him to a strict
account of his Conduct, and the Reasons why he had neither joined
Brandenbourgh's Army, nor fought Turenne, when express Orders had been sent him
for both. But if Montecuculi was surprised at the Question, his Imperial
Majesty was no less at the Answer, when his sage General produced for his
discharge an Order of his Imperial Majesty, in very good form, expressly
forbidding him either to join with Brandenbourgh or fight Turenne: And it is
certain, this General found all the justice of his Cause, and the assurance his
Master had of his fidelity, little enough to clear him of this unhappy Affair.
I know this business is one of those Riddles never to be decypher'd, unless the
Author will voluntarily give us the Key. I know it is from hence it proceeds,
that one of the principal Wretches of this Court has been formerly charged
with this Forgery: But to speak the truth, the whole guilt of this Affair lies
at the Doors of the Emissaries of Rome in this Court, who by secret
Contrivances with those of France, found the means to intercept the true
Original Order, and in the same dispatch to transmit a false one, but very well
Counterfeit both the Hand and Seal: And that by People who are not now to learn
that Trade. It being certain we should not have seen so many Troubles in
Hungary, as daily are there, had these Emissaries less credit in the Emperors
Court.

His Imperial Majesty, the Elector of Brandenbourgh, and Count Montecuculi know
the truth of all that concerns them in this Affair: But I am well assured not
one of the three knows the secret Engines set at work in the business. What I
know thereof comes not from them, but from a place where every particular of
this Negotiation was known, and by whom it was animated. Certain it is, if the
point of the Catholicon in England had not been found; the Ministers of France
could not have so easily compassed this Forgery; but by that every thing became
feasible, the Directors of the Society having voluntarily undertaken to master
all Difficulties.

By the ingenious Deduction of this Relation, where the Author speaks plainly,
as a man well instructed and acquainted with the fineness, and superfineness of
the management, and by what I have said before, on the same Subject, and every
one may of himself apprehend it appears that it proceeds from a Principle of a
Papal, or Jesuitical Ambition, the Council of Vienna, from the beginning of the
War, has been so well penetrated, directed, or altered, that all the
Expeditions of the Imperial Army (except with convenient distinctions, the
considerable Important taking of Bonne, the long and langushing Siege of
Phillipsbourgh, and the taking it at last, and the death of Turenne, which was
merely accidental) I say all the Expeditions, these three Points excepted, have
been from the beginnings of the Campaigns to the end of them, but so many
Processions and Pilgrimages of Shame and of Misery, of Disorder and confusion,
as the Subjects of the Empire know too well, who have been flayed to the bone,
and had their Marrow suckedout by Winter quarters, without consideration, or
mercy, but especially the Protestant States and people, and other Princes,
Lords, Magistrates, Countries and Towns, who have felt the smart of that fiery
Trial.

From the same principle it is, that when by the Expulsion of the Swedes out of
the Patrimony of the Empire, his Electoral Highness of Brandenbourgh, and his
Highness of Zell and Osnabourgh were in a condition (notwithstanding the
particular peace of the United Provinces and Spain) to transport the chief of
their Forces upon the Frontiers of France, and by so glorious an Action, to
oblige France infallibly to make a peace with the Empire in general and
particular, according to Justice and Equity, then were the Emissaries of Rome,
so powerful in the Council at Vienna, that they obliged his Imperial Majesty,
to the prejudice of all his Treaties, to seal privately such a peace with
France, as we have mentioned before; which has been managed with so much
dexterity, that that good (but for that time too credulous) Prince did believe,
and perhaps is still of the same mind, that he acted according to the most
judicious Maxims of Religion and Prudence: And because it may concern your
Highness to be informed what Artifices were used by the Jesuits and Ministers
of France, who went hand in hand, acting by concert in all this Affair, to
engage his Imperial Majesty to sign that fatal Peace, there were sent from
France under other pretenses the Duchess of Meclenbourgh to the Court of Zell,
and the Count of D' Epause to that of Brandenbourgh, and at the same time the
Jesuits labored so effectually, that his Imperial Majesty was made believe
(though certainly without just ground) that the Houses of Brandenbourgh and
Lunenbourgh had already agreed, or were just upon agreeing, to a separate Peace
with France; whereby his Imperial Majesty would be left alone a prey to the
French Ambition. True it is, if those Princes were in that Conjuncture (as is
very probable) very willing to keep what they had conquered from the Swede: I
think they had done well to have dismissed those Envoys from their Courts, which
had they done, it would at least have taken away from the Emperors corrupt
Council, all pretense of rendering them suspicious to his Imperial Majesty, and
hastening him in pursuance of that suspicion to sign the peace under
Consideration.

To sum up all, we may from what has been said, reasonably infer these three
particulars.

First, That his Imperial Majesty has been basely betrayed by the greater part
of his Council; for I am not so malicious and unjust to confound the innocent
with the guilty, and not to make an exception (out of the general clause) in
favor of those of his Council, who are men of Integrity and Honor, who in
truth I think are very few, and not much in Credit.

Secondly, That his Imperial Majesty being so villanously betrayed by his
Council, the Empire in general and particular, through the indissoluble union
of the head and Members cannot but miserably participate the misfortune and
sufferings of its Sovereign, as is very well known by a fatal, and too long
experience.

Thirdly, that it is easy for his Imperial Majesty, and the Empire, to know
whom they have equallly cause to complain of, and from what Principle not only
this Treason is derived, but all the mischiefs that have afflicted Christendom,
for above an Age, but especially the Empire since the beginning of the late
War: I say for above an Age, as to the General; because that which his most
Christian Majesty, instigated by the Jesuits, undertakes in our days, is but
the same, which, by instigation of their predecessors, Charles the first, the
Emperor Fardinand the Second, and Philip the Second of Spain, did in their
days. As to the Empire in particular I say, since the beginning of the last
War; because it is certain his Imperial Majesty has been since that time by the
means I have mentioned, so closely beset, and so strictly observed, that it is
not in his power to speak, to advise, to wish, or do any thing, but the Society
knows, and absolutely destroys it, if not suitable to their particular
Interests and Designs: There is not a person in the Emperor's Court, but knows,
that no man without certain ruin dare oppose in that Court that Cabal in any
matter though never so little: To conclude this Point, His Imperial Majesty, as
a Slave to the Society, as things stand at present, serves only to Authorize
his own Ruin, the Ruin of his August Family, and of the Empire in general and
particular: For the very Moment I write, France publicly solicits in the
Empire, (as I said before) the Nomination of a King of the Romans in favor of
the Dauphin, which in all probability will be managed with so much dexterity
and subtilty, that his Imperial Majesty, if he follow the advice of his
Council, Spiritual or Temporal, will think himself obliged in Conscience
voluntarily to give way to it.

This, my Lord, is the true state of his Imperial Majesty, and his Council
since the last Peace. Three things remain to be considered.

First, The particular Advantages the Court of Rome, and the Jesuits procured
themselves by the late War.

Secondly, What Advantages they designed themselves by the late Peace, and its
consequences.

Thirdly, What the Empire in general and particular may expect from the present
state of Affairs.

The Advantages the Court of Rome and the Jesuits procured themselves, by the
late War, have not been so great as they promised themselves, for God having
preserved the United Provinces, whose utter Destruction they had projected;
it is certain, most of their Projects in England, and elsewhere, were defeated:
Yet the Advantages of the Papacy over the Protestant Party, in the late War,
are very considerable; and consist in five Particulars.

1. That by the fire of War, kindled by the Artifices of Rome, and the Jesuits,
between England and the United Provinces; those two Protestant Powers have
unhappily consumed very considerable Forces in Men, Money, Ships, Ammunition,
and loss of Trade, the Soul and Substance of the Riches of both Countries.

2. That the United Provinces have in defense of themselves against France and
its Allies in Germany, been forced to spend their Men and their Money, besides
loss of Trade during the War.

3. That Swede, Denmark, Brandenbourgh, and Zell, have consumed their Forces
during all this War, kindled by the Artifices of the same Party, between Swede,
and the three Princes of Denmark, Brandenbourgh, and Lunenbourgh, both by Sea
and Land.

4. That under pretense of this War, the Protestant States of the Empire, as
well during the Campaignes as by Winter Quarters, have been miserably harrassed
and exhausted with Exactions, Burnings, Contributions to that degree, that most
of the Protestant Imperial Towns are almost ruined; and several of them as well
as the Palatinate, and other Countries, out of hopes of recovery in an Age;
while the Hereditary Countries, and Bavaria, and many other places of the Roman
Communion in the Empire, have been preserved as the Apple of an Eye, or so
little oppressed they scarce feel it.

5. That France by this War, having conquered the County of Burgundy, and kept
it by the Peace free from Condition of Exchange, it is to be observed, that
whereas this Province, belonging heretofore to Spain, was, by reason of its
distance from the heart of that Kingdom, not in a condition to hurt the
Protestant Cantons of the Swisses; now that it belongs to France, we art not to
flatter our selves, but it belongs to a Power which may every hour make a
sudden irruption into the Canton of Bern, and under the specious pretense of
Religion put the Protestant and Roman Cantons in disorder, and by degrees work
their inevitable ruin; unless that Republic have the Courage and Judgment to
enter into confederacy with those that ought to preserve it from destruction,
which the building the Fortress of Hunningen, may sufficiently instruct them,
is certainly intended them.

I reckon all these to be real advantages the Court of Rome and the Jesuits
have by the last War procured themselves against the Protestant Party: For
where resolution is taken to ruin an Enemy under several heads, the best way
to effect it, is to divide the Powers, and engage them as much as may be in
War, one against another, to the Consumption of their Forces; and to fortify
your self on their Frontiers, that you may make sudden Inroads into their
Countries when you please: The Court of Rome, and the Jesuits, by the Access
they have had to the Council of France, and the House of Austria, and by the
help of the Counselors there, and in the Protestant Courts, have with great
dexterity put these Maxims in practice during the late War: For His Majesty of
Swedland, managed by France, His Majesty of Denmark, His Electoral Highness of
Brandenbourgh, and His Highness of Zell, managed by the Imperial Court, will
take the pains to search to the bottom, by what Motives and Artifices they have
been all four engaged in a War, which has ruined their Estates for more than
ten years. I doubt not (with the respect and submission that is due to them)
but they will find that the modern Romans have with great insolence and
perfidiousness practiced upon them what the ancient Romans did for
divertisement to their Gladiators: for when these men had by bloody, and
oftentimes mortal Combats, sufficiently diverted the Spectators, and the
Magistrate made them a Sign to give out, they were bound to do it, and in what
condition soever they were to go every one home, as these four Princes were in
the end forced to do. This may serve for an excellent and important instruction
for England, Holland, Swede and Denmark, and all the Protestant States and
Princes of Germany, to avoid effectually the snares the Court of Rome every day
lays for them the ways I have observed, with a settled design to destroy not
only their Religion but their Temporal Estates.

The Second Point.
The Advantages the Court of of Rome and the Jesuits proposed to themselves by
the conclusion of the Peace between his Imperial Majesty and France, may be
reduced to three principal Heads.

1. By the Maxims observed in the first part of my Letter, to fix (without
danger of any probable variation) the Designs of France, and the Efforts of
their Arms, against the Empire and Northern Countries, as most remote from
Italy, and most convenient by the progress of those Arms to ruin the
Prorestant Party and consequently to advance the re-establishment of the Papal
Grandeur and Authority, the fall of the one producing naturally the exaltation
of the other. And for attaining this end, to procure this Peace to be so made,
that his most Christian Majesty might be fully persuaded the Court of Rome and
the Jesuits (in prejudice to all other Powers of Christendom) studied nothing
more than his exaltation, and an effectual settling and establishing in time an
absolute Monarchick Authority over Europe: And that this project might be made
appear so facil and easy to this Prince that he might be the better tempted to
undertake it: In order to these ends, the Court of Rome and the Jesuits could
not have done any thing whereby more effectually to demonstrate their zeal and
close adherence to the Grandeur and Exaltation of the most Christian King, than
by making (as they have done with so much craft and perfidiousness) a Sacrifice
of the Emperor and Empire (with all that concerned the Glory and Interest of
both) the better to carry on the Designs of the French: Their project in this
particular has proved so effectual, and discovered so many divisions, so much
ignorance, weakness, and baseness, in the Empire, that his most Christian
Majesty may by these appearances rationally judge he may probably succeed in
whatever he shall attempt against the Empire (though I am not of opinion he
will find it so easy a matter as he has been made believe it is.) But we are
to believe this Prince is persuaded, that to attain all his ends, the Empire
being the natural obstacle against an Universal Monarchy, it must be his
business to attempt the Empire in the first place. Nor can it be doubted, but
the Court of Rome and the Jesuits, making full account the most Christian King
will be very well able by his Forces to master the Empire, have hastened with
all diligence possible the signing the Peace between his Imperial Majesty and
France, upon design that his most Christian Majesty being by this expedient of
the Peace free from War, in case the perpetual Plots of the Court of Rome, and
the Jesuits in England, or elsewhere, should be so prosperous, as, with the
help of Foreign aid, to effect the re-establishment of the Popes Authority
there, they might make use of the French Forces to invade that Kingdom, or
other Countries, for the ends I have mentioned: And if by Gods Providence the
perfidious and damnable Conspiracy of the Jesuits against the King the Religion
and State of England had not been discovered the last year, I believe England
had e're this felt the Effects of what I observe. Be pleased to allow me leave
on this occcasion to say, that unless his Majesty of Great Britain be willing
to fall, with all his People, under the slavery of the Pope, the Jesuits, and
France, he has great Cause to take heed left the Warlike Preparations of all
sorts made by the French in all their Ports, and on the Coasts of the Ocean, be
not made upon some such design; for by the Scheme of the Plot Ireland is looked
upon as a Country which may unquestionably procure France the absolute Dominion
of the Sea, and of Trade, and the Conquests of the West Indies, according to
their ancient and primitive project.

3. The Court of Rome and the Jesuits having that influence over the Imperial
Council, that it was in their power to do what they pleased there, there is no
doubt but the signing of the Peace was pressed on this farther design, that His
Imperial Majesty (the Peace concluded) finding himself in a condition to
dispose of the greatest part of his Forces, they might easily persuade him to
employ them to root out the Protestant Party in Hungary, and perfect the
pretended Reformation in Silesia: And it was well for that People that God
provided for their safety by very extraordinary means, I mean the Plague; for
had not that broken out, it is not credible but Dunewald the Apostate, now a
formal Creature of the Jesuits, had been sent thither with an Army to do
something. Happy would it be for His Imperial Majesty, if by just and solid
Reflections on the Disasters successively fallen upon his August Family, for
having too much espoused the violent and cruel passions of the Court of Rome
and the Jesuits, and by considering this Scourge of God which has forced him
to quit his Capital City, and in a manner follows him visibly wherever he goes,
he would be sensible the Hand of God is not stretched out against him, as
heretofore against David, for his Sin, but because he has stretched out his
hand to oppress the only Congregations of Christians in his Dominions, whose
Worship is not infected with Idolatry, and who according to the Precepts of the
Gospel adore the Sovereign and Supreme Creator in Spirit and in Truth. But far
happier should His Imperial Majesty be, if by such reflections God would give
him the Grace, as he did to the Emperor Charles the Fifth before de died, to
acknowledge and own the Truth he persecutes; and (setting aside Policy) embrace
generously the Profession of it. God Almighty would then certainly bless him,
and it is credible he would not deny him the Power to humble the Proud, and
those who by their enormous. Ambition, put all Europe into Combustion. I beg
your Highnesses Pardon for this Digression; which the Matter I treat of, and my
Zeal for the Faith and Salvation of others naturally led me to.

The Third Point.
To make some solid Prognostic, in a matter so dilicate, I say, as to what the
Empire in general and particular is no expect from the present state of
affairs; we are to believe his most Christian Majesty (unless notably changed
in his dispositions) would boldly and courageously carry on his business, I
mean his pretension to make his Son, the Dauphin, King of the Romans: His
Marriage with the Princess of Bavaria, the Envoys and magnificent Presents he
sends to the Electoral Courts of Saxony and Brandenbourgh, and his arming so
furiously, signify sufficiently two things. First, His Contempt of the
Alliances and Oppositions His Imperial Majesty may make against him. Secondly,
That he will certainly pursue his pretension. It Is of extreme importance for
the Empire in general and particular to know, whether it be for the interest of
the Empire to favor this pretension, or to oppose it. This with your
Highnesses leave, I intend briefly to examine; and to observe some order: It is
to be considered,

1. Whether it be better for the Empire in general, and every Member of it in
particular, to live according to the ancient Customs, Rights and Privileges,
under which they have lived for many Ages; or that the Empire, without striking
a blow, submit voluntarily to the Yoke of a Government which acknowledges no
Law, but that of a Power purely Despotical and Absolute?

2. As a Dependent on the former Point, Whether it be better, as to the
Revolutions since the Wars for Religion, that the Empire live occording to the
Concordats and Agreements in the Peace of Munster, or Osnabrug, and the last
Capitulations with His Imperial Majesty since his Election: or without regard
to the one, or the other, that the Empire engage anew in a Civil War, which by
a final Victory may decide the Quarrel in favor of one of the parties,
concerning the Concordats, and those two Treaties of Peace, or the late
Capitulations, as if never agreed or capitulated?

I think it the more necessary to examine before hand these Points, for that we
may hold it for certain.

As to the first Point.
In case the Dauphin be ever Elected King of the Romans, that from the days of
that Election, whatever Capitulations shall be signed to the contrary, the
German Empire will be annexed to, and made an Hereditary Province of the Crown
of France. To justify this, you need only read several French Authors, who
have treated of the Rights and pretensions of France, upon the Empire,
particularly that of the Advocate Awbrey; for though he has with good reason
been laughed at for his Writings, yet if that Election take effect, we shall
find his discourse solid and well grounded. Besides, you may soberly weigh what
France has already practiced upon that part of the Empire which has fallen to
its share, and the Neighboring Parts, both in Temporals and Spirituals: as to
the Temporal Concerns, France seizes all boldly and openly in the Face of the
Sun, without pretense of other Law, or Right, but that of convenience, with as
much freedom and confidence, as it would take possession of any ancient
Patrimony of that Crown: The Dukes of Lorrain and Deuxponts, Mentbeleuard, and
the Ten free Towns of Alsatia, sufficiently prove this; as to Spiritual matters
you need only read the public Ordinance of the Bishop of Metz against the
Lutherans of those Countries.

For the Clergy in general, all the free Chapters of the Empire, whether
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Deans, or Priors, may assure themselves, if this
Election take place, they must go to France e're they come to those Dignities;
for to imagine the free Suffrages of the Chapters shall be continued, is
sortishness and folly. The Bishoprics of Metz, Toul and Verdun, and (I doubt
not for the future) Cambray, which were heretofore Principalities of the
Empire, may teach us that under a French Government the only way to those
Dignities is by a Writ of Presentation by the Kings, and consequently all that
seek or depend on those Bishoprics must be Courtiers and Slaves. Not but that
I believe if the Dauphin be chosen King of the Romans, his Council is too
cunning not to make him promise expressly to maintain the Privileges and
Ecclesiastical Benefices of the Empire: And that till he be fully settled they
may be content to write Letters to the Chapters to choose the person the Court
shall recommend, but in such a manner there will be no fear of refusal: Yet
this course is not to be expected to hold ten Years to an end: Which I believe
the rather for that France pretends (as has been declared at large by several
politic Treatises) that most of the great Benefices in Germany have been
founded by Emperors, Kings of France, and that consequently the Court of France
is the true Patron of them.

The Princes of the Empire, Ecclesiastical and temporal, of what Rank or Degree
soever, may from the day of that Election, provide for three things which will
certainly follow.

First they shall be reduced to the natural Rents and Revenues of their ancient
Patrimonies, which cannot with Probability be denied to depend upon the ancient
Kingdom of Austrasia, (which the Ministers of France suppose to be part of the
French Monarchy) and consequently all natural Rights there being subject to the
Law Salique, admit neither of Alienation nor Prescription. For as to the Taxes
and Contributions now paid these Lords by their Vassals and Subjects, there is
no doubt but they will be obliged to disclaim them, and consent with a very
good Will, that the Head of the Empire shall in this Case Order what Taxes and
Exactions he please to be Levied, and all for his use: To pretend Capitulations
or Reasons to the contrary, will be to insist on Trifles, or commence Suits to
be decided only by Military Execution.

Secondly, They will be Disarmed, it being against the Honor of the policy of
France, to permit any Prince, or Lord, under their Dominion, to have the Power
to defend himself by force, be his Right to do so never so ancient and
authentic.

Thirdly, To gain the favor of the Head of the Empire, the Head of every House
of the Secular Princes must actually wait on His Imperial Majesty at an
excessive Expense, or send in his stead his Brothers or Sons to make his Court,
or to receive Orders and Caresses, and sometimes Repulses and Checks: And the
Empire being full of Divisions and Jealousies, there is cause enough to fear
the Princes will strive who shall be most Officious, as the Princes and other
Great men of France have done, to their utter Ruin, and total Consumption of
their Estates.

As for the Counts, and Barons, and all Gentlemen of the Empire, who are
Vassals to Electors and particular Princes, my Heart bleeds to think how
certainly and strangely their Condition will be changed, if ever a French King
be made Emperor. Is it probable the Ministers of France will have more pity of
the German Nobility and Gentry, than the Dukes, Marquesses, Counts, Barons and
particular Nobility of their own Country have found at their hands? There is no
doubt but the day they change their Master, they must bid an Eternal Adieu to
all their Rights of Sovereign Justice and Freehold: The Great Men and private
Gentry of France, several of whom have the Honor to be descended in a right
Line from Sovereign Princes, had no less Courage, nor were heretofore less
Privileged, nor less Jealous of their Rights, than many of the Body of the
Empire are at this present. Yet have they been forced one after another to
submit to the Yoke, and lose all their ancient Privileges: Nor must they think
any more (though they have right) to lay any imposition on their Subjects. For
(as I said before in the Article of the Princes;) This is a sweet bit, which
the absolute and Despotical Dominion of France always reserves for it is own
Tooth. They must never think more by Offices and Employments under particular
Princes, or the Head of the Empire, to render themselves considerable, make
their Fortunes, or Recover their spent Estates, as they could have done
heretofore: At least but few of them shall be ever able to do it. For as to
particular Princes, they will in case of a French Emperor be absolutely
ruined, and forced to Retrench themselves and their Families to a very low
Condition; and as to the Head of the Empire, whoever will have Office or
Employment in his House or Courts of Justice, must think of buying it with
ready Money, there being not an Office or Employment in the French Kings House,
from the Steward of his House to the Scullion in his Kitchen, nor in his Courts
of Justice, from that of Chief President to the meanest Sergeant, but is sold
for ready Money. So that there remains not for the Nobility and Gentry of the
Empire, any Office or Employ, but what must be bought, save only the Military:
But the Nobility and Gentry of the Empire are too Judicious, (at least, unless
(as the French Proverb is) They are willing to be taken for Fools,) not to know
they have no reason to promise themselves in this particular of Military
Employment, any greater Privilege than is allowed the ancient Nobility of
France, and consequently, that to procure the favor of the Prince or his
Principal Ministers, they must serve in the Wars at their own Charge, as the
French Nobility have done. The necessary Expenses of every Office exceeding
yearly, by three fourths, the pay of the Prince: That is, they most resolve to
consume the Bulk of their Estates to be known at Court, and frequently spend a
real Patrimony in pursuit of vain and chimerical hopes, which will infallibly
Ruin their Families; and bring most of those who take these Courses to end
their lives in Languishing Griefs and cruel Repentings: For thus it is, all the
Nobility of France serve in the Wars, and such is the end most of them make. If
we have heard of a Schomberg or a Ransan that became considerable in France by
the Wars. Let the Nobility of the Empire be assured it was but a Lure which the
Ministers of France (who have long since Plotted the Conquest of the Empire)
thought fit to hold out to Delude and Cheat the German Nobility: They are like
the Fires in the Night that lead them into Precipices, who are indiscreet
enough to follow them: All this I know to be true, grounded on very Authentic
Memoirs, and certain knowledge of the matters I mention.

As for the Imperial Towns and free Cities of the Empire, Colmar, Schlestat,
and Haguenau, and the rest of that Rank, situate in Alsatia, may teach their
Magistrates and Councils, what value the Ministers of France put upon their
ancient Rights and Privileges, for those are the things the Ministers there,
or their Envoys under the name of Commissaries or Intendants, call in Derision
Stories to make one Sleep, Illusions, and Old Wives Tales, that is, things
nothing worth. If ever France come to the Empire, all the Cities of that Order
are with Metz, Toul, and Verdun, and (last of all) Bezanson to denounce and
disclaim all Rights of Justice, Magazines, Garrisons and Impositions, and to
prepare themselves (at least all those that cannot, will be kept under
otherwise) to see built in the highest place in the Town a strong Citadel at
their Charge, and a Garrison put into it, which they must maintain, and
consequently by degrees undergo, as well as all the Subjects of Princes, Earls,
Barons, and particular Lords; and all Counts, Barons, and private Lords for
their Estates in Land and all Necessaries for Life, with very little Exception,
all the Impositions following.

First upon Estates in Land, Money, and Trade.
Aid, Octroy, Preciput, Equivalent, Crew, Taille, Estaste, Subsistence de
quartier d'hyver, Garinzons, Mortpayes, Appointments des Governeurs, Debtes and
Affairs du Roy, Gratifications Extraordinaries, Den Gratuit, Frais de Recoua
usemens and Contabilite.

More upon Drinks.
Aids sur le vin, Bieres, and Cidres, Plus le huitieme denier, Le Souquet, Le
Patae, Imposts and Billets.

[Instead of Censuring the Translation imperfect, in giving the Names of these
Impositions (as in the Original) in French, let the Reader Congratulate his
Happiness, that very few of these Most Christian Impositions have been
Christened in England, and therefore they want Names in our Language.]

More upon things Eatable.
The Gabelle on Corn and Meal, which is taken in Markets or at the Mill, in
several places, under the Name of Mesure Coupee, or Octroy.

The Toll called Pied Forchu, taken for all sorts of Beasts sold in Fairs and
Markets.

The Toll taken by Weight for every Pound of Meat sold in the Shambles.

The Gabelle on Salt, which will raise the price of Salt so high, that what is
now sold for a Florin, will then cost Fourteen Crowns.

More upon all Necessaries for Life.
The Mark of Paper, The Mark of Silver, The Mark of Tin, The Mark of Hats, The
Mark on all Silk Stockins and Woollen, The Mark of Shoes, The Gabella on
Perukes, The Gabelle on Tobacco, The Mark on all Stuffs of Wool or Silk, The
Mark on Linen, The Gabelle on Ice, The Control of Exploits.

More upon Noble Estates, from five Years, to five Years.
The Tax of free Fifes, The Tax of new Purchases, The Fifths and Refifths,
Amortissements.

More upon the Offices of Judicature and the Treasury.
The price of Valuation, The Mark of Gold, The two Sols in the Pound, The Seal
duty, The Duty of Control, The Registers Duty, The Duty for Oaths; The Pressed
for being admited to the Annual, The Annual or Paulette.

Besides many other Taxes to be paid from time to time, and many Retrenchments
of Wages to be yearly undergone; for the Sovereign Courts have but three
quarters Wages, the Subordinate but two, and the base or lowest Courts
frequently but one.

Add to all these the Reunion to the King's Demesnes, newly Executed throughout
France on all Commonalties or Corporations of the Empire, that is, all that
belongs in Common to any Commonalty, as Fuel and Pasture in Woods and Forests,
Rivers, Ponds, and all other Common Rights of what nature soever.

More on all sorts of Merchandises Imported or Exported.
The Custom, The Custom for the Value, The Foreign.

Besides the Custom of Lions, Bordeaux and Roan, which take their Names from
the Places, and are levied with all Rigor imaginable, not only upon
Importation into the Realm, or Exportation out of it into Foreign Countries,
but in most of the Frontiers of the Provinces, upon passing out of one into
another, within the Kingdom. And we may expect the like Exactions to be
established in the several Provinces of the Empire, on several pretenses.

All these Subsidies, and many others, (which, to avoid Prolixity, I pass over
in silence) are one way or other punctually paid, wherever any Subjects of
the French Monarchy live, with no other distinction, but that the Lords and
Gentlemen have Right to hold free from Imposition so many Acres of Land, for
their Maintenance, as may be Husbanded with two Yoke of Oxen, (provided the
Owner hold that Estate in Demean) for as to what is let out to Farmers, as they
pay the King Taxes for the profit of the Farms, they pay so much the less Rent
to the Landlord; so that in effect the Nobleman in France pays Taxes as well as
the Boor: Which the Princes, the Nobles, the Magistrates, and Subjects of the
Empire, of what Degree soever, have reason seriously to consider. For, it is
folly to fancy they can make their Capitulations so advantageous as to exempt
them from paying these intolerable Subsidies. The Provinces of Guienne,
Languedoc, Provence, Dauphine, Bourgundy, and Britain, and most of the other
Provinces of France, had herefore their particular Princes, as most of the
Provinces of the Empire now have; and the principal Cities and Towns in these
Provinces of France, had then as great Privileges and Immunities as any Free
Towns of the Empire: But the Kings of France having invaded all these
Principalities, and seized the Liberties of the Cities, have, since the taking
of Rochel, reduced them into so absolute Slavery, that the Citizens and
Inhabitants have quite lost the Resolution and Generosity to endeavor a
Recovery of their Liberties, and are so bridled with strong Garrisons and
Citadels (and we may expect the like in all Countries of the Empire, if ever
under a French Government) that they are not in a condition to stir, at least
to any considerable purpose.

This may suffice for the first point: I pass to the Second.

The second Point.
This deserves the more exact consideration, for that if ever the Dauphin be
chosen King of the Romans, since the Court of Rome and the Jesuits, by the
important Services these have done the Crown of France of late, and promise to
do for the future, and the Cardinalships they flatter the Nephews and Relations
of the principal Ministers of France with the hopes of, do what they please in
the Council of France; and what is published to the contrary, on the account of
Regalities, now in controversy, is but Cheat and Illusion; the cruel
persecution raised and carried on some years last past against the Protestants
of that Kingdom, the disgrace of Pompone, being not of their Cabal, and of
Theatin the Princess of Brvaria's Confessor, intimating sufficiently the
extraordinary Credit that Society has in the Court of France: I say, if ever
the Dauphin be elected King of the Romans, the Empire is to expect two things.
First, To see him at the Head of the best Forces of France, (upon the specious
pretense of Religion, and restoring the Estates belonging to the Church)
undertaking in the Empire aganst the Protestant Party what Charles the Fifth,
and Ferdinand the Second attempted to execute. Secondly, That this affair will
be so obstinately fomented and protected by the Court of Rome, that the Empire
will be in danger to be involved in a War more cruel, more bloody, and
dangerous, than any the former Wars raised for that Cause. And there is reason
enough to believe, that the late War, as well as the Peace since made, were
hatched and carried on by the Court of Rome, in hopes of being able, by the
Power of the French Forces, to work the entire Ruin of the Protestant Party of
Europe, which we see every day decay by degrees: And I am much mistaken if the
Money sent by the Pope into Poland was not designed for a Project of this
nature. Prince William of Furstenberg might, if he pleased, furnish us with
clear Evidence of authentic Memoirs to this purpose; but we are not to expect
it from him, lest by such a Discovery he lose the Recompense the Court of Rome
designs him for the Pains he has taken, and continues, to bring to effect this
Popish Project in the Empire, and consequently in all Europe.

By what has been said, your Highness may see the Fortune of the Empire, if
ever it fall (by any means whatever) under the intolerable Yoke of the
Despotical Government of France: And I think I need say no more to convince
every Member of the Empire, and all the States of it in general, (without any
great depth of Policy, or knowledge of War) what their Duty to Religion, their
Glory and Interest oblige them to do, for preserving themselves from falling
under a Yoke of that nature.

But to preserve themselves effectually from this Yoke, I conceive it extremely
considerable to enquire first, Whence all this Mischief proceeds? Which known,
will give us light what must further be done: And particularly, from what Part
the first Attack may be expected, and what Defense is to be made.

The Mischiefs I have mentioned unquestionably have their rise from the Designs
and Fomentations of the Court of Rome and the Jesuits, who (at present at
least) direct and dispose of the French Projects and Forces, and without any
Mercy or Respect, pretend, with the Assistance of those Forces, and their own
secret Managements of Affairs, to sacrifice all to the Re-establishment of the
Papal Grandeur.

I conceive in Right and Justice two things are to be done; but I doubt much
whether the one will be. The first is, That since the Public Good and Safety
of the Empire consists in living (without Innovation) according to the Ancient
Rights, Immunities, and Privelidges, and the Concordats established by Law,
(which every Member of the Empire is obliged to observe) and that the
Pretensions of the Court of Rome and the Jesuits, are as inconsistent as those
of France, with the Public Good and safety of the Empire: Every Member of the
Empire, without flattering themselves any longer with hopes of Favor from Rome
or from France, and without distinction of Religion, applying themselves
seriously to procure and promote the Preservation and Public Good of the
Empire, should without delay take such Measures, that neither the Court of
Rome, the Jesuits, nor France, may attain their Ends. And in order to this,
That every Member of the Empire should put it self into a Posture and
Condition, by uniting their Forces, to oppose Force to Force: And if the
Princes of the Roman Communion will Bona fide engage in this Union, it will be
necessary, first, That his Imperial Majesty find means to gain the Amity and
Assistance of the three Northern Princes whom I have formerly mentioned,
engaged in War by his means, and afterward cruelly abandoned to the Mercy of
France and of Swede: Which (by the small Intelligence I have of Affairs) will
be difficult enough to effect, especially with the Elector of Brandenbourgh,
without giving him satisfaction in two Points, on which he does with much
equity insist. Secondly, That his Imperial Majesty gain over to the Interests
of the Empire the Forces of the Crown of Swede; which will be no easy Task.
Thirdly, That the Emperor, and all the Princes of the Roman Communion in the
Empire, banish and root out of their Councils not only all Jesuits and Monks,
(who by themselves or their Superiors have all Resort to their General at Rome)
but every one that any way depends on, or has Society with these Hypocrites,
or rather Free Spies of the Empire; a Capuchin in this particular being as bad
as a Jesuit. Though this be absolutely necessary, as matters now stand, yet (to
speak freely) I very much doubt whether the Princes of the Roman Communion will
have the Generosity and Courage to do it.

The Second, and that I take to be the only solid means, is, That the
Protestant Party being now clearly convinced that they are the sole Persons
aimed at, and that all that has been done since the beginning of the last War
was really in order only to work their Destruction; all Kings, Princes, and
Magistrates of that persuasion are every one in his Sphere to apply themselves
with all industry and vigor, first, To Arm with all their Power, that they may
be able to oppose Force to Force: Secondly, To enter into mutual Leagues and
Alliances, that by joint Strength they may resist Forces so considerable as
those of France, and others the Court of Rome and the Jesuits may by their
Artifices bring over to that party. To begin so great and necessary a Work, we
will for a while leave the Territories of the Empire; and looking abroad, I am
of opinion that England and the United Provinces ought without further delay to
use all means possible to enter into a League Offensive and Defensive, which
may (if possible) be indissoluble; That Denmark and Swede are to follow that
Example; and, That all the Protestant Princes and States of the Empire, with
the Protestant Cantons of the Swisses and the Grisons, ought to do the like:
For, it is not a Concern of particular Quarrels and Jealousies, but the Faith,
the Religion and Temporal Estates of all the Protestant Party are now at stake.
This I conceive will be more easily effected in this Conjuncture, for that by a
special Providence of God there is no War at present between England and
Holland, nor between Swede and Denmark, nor between the Princes of the
Protestant Communion in Germany. If these three things be effected, and the
particular Leagues incorporated into a General, and consequently, an entire
Union of the Protestants of Europe, we need not fear the Designs or Attempts of
the Court of Rome, or the Jesuits, or the Council and Forces of the French: for
(these things effected) we shall have power enough not only to deliver the
Empire from all just apprehensions of the Designs of the Court of Rome, the
Jesuits, and of France, against its Liberties, but to reduce his Most Christian
Majesty (by way of justice and right) to keep himself modestly within the
Frontiers of his Kingdom, and (in case of Refusal) to do something more; which
would infallibly produce a sure and general Peace.

I am the more induced to be of this Opinion, while England and Holland on the
one hand, and Swede and Denmark on the other, are laboring to put an end to
all former Quarrels; and the Protestant Princes and Magistrates of the Empire
endeavor (as I suppose) a League with the Protestant Cantons and the Grisons,
that (to say the truth) I see no other solid and effectual Means to defend the
Empire from the Oppression of France, and the Protestant Party in particular
from the Oppression of the Court of Rome, the Jesuits, and France, all at once:
For, (to rid our Hands of all false Maxims at once) What else can the Empire
and Protestant Party reasonably ground their Safety upon? Will they ground it
on His Imperial Majesty, as they ought, and without doubt might have done, had
his Council been guided with right and sound Maxims? I cannot think, after all
that his Council have caused him to do publicly, and what he still continues
to put in Execution against the Protestant party, that any rational person of
that party can expect the least Favor on that side, at least as long as the
Jesuits and Court of Rome have that Credit, that Countenance and Support they
have now in his Court. And that we have little reason to hope this Prince will
rid himself of them, who have dangerously corrupted his Understanding and
Reason, by their Education of him, and the prejudices instilled into him. And
should the Protestants on this occasion expect help from the Court of Bavaria,
as their Interest in the Empire obliges them, we may very well imagine the
expectation will be vain, if we consider the late strict Alliance of that Court
with France, or the ridiculous Monastic Bigotry reigning in that Court. If
then you will rely on the Ecclesiastical Princes, who knows not their
Disability, and that the greater part of them will do nothing but what the
Jesuits shall insinuate into them?

So that for the future (as well as the time past, at least, for the last Age,
and more) the Natural Defense of the Empire has (under God) no solid Ground,
but the Forces and Industry of the Protestant Party. It was that Party saved it
from the intended Oppression of the House of Austria in former times: And in
the late War, when France attempted to Master it by its Arms and Intrigues, it
was the same Party not only preserved the Empire, but the Emperor, from the
Yoke of the French. And it will be the same Party which (by the Grace of God)
shall easily preserve it for the future; at least, if the Potentates of that
Party, or the greater part of them, apply themselves to do what I conceive they
are obliged to.

But to speak plainly, and make appear the necessity of such a Protestant
League and Confederacy, we are to consider; His Imperial Majesty will either
effectually perform what he ought in defense of the Empire, by saving himself
from falling under the Dominion of France; or that he will do nothing but in
show and appearance.

If His Imperial Majesty perform as he ought, against the Enterprises of
France, such a League can never be more seasonably made to second the Imperial
Forces; nor can His Imperial Majesty in that case rely on any Forces (the
Nature of the Quarrel considered) that will be more true to him than those of
the Protestants.

But if His Imperial Majesty intend merely to look on, as unconcerned, and not
to engage really and effectually against the French Designs, which he is so
highly concerned to oppose, there can be no doubt, but the Court of Rome and
the Jesuits have secretly carried on a close Intelligence and private League
between their Imperial and Most Christian Majesty's, for the Ruin and
Destruction of the Protestant Party; and, That by some private and mysterious
Stipulation, some Protestant Estate in the Empire, or on the Frontiers, in the
Low Countries, or Swisserland, is, according to their Project, designed a
Recompense to the Duke of Lorrain, for the Dukedoms of Lorrain and Bar, which
France has taken from him, and has no mind to restore. And by a captious
Contrivance of this nature, the Protestant Party in the Empire shall find it
self at once assaulted by the united Forces of their Imperial and most
Christian Majesty's (who are both of a Communion.) I leave to your Highness to
judge, how much it concerns the Protestant party, by the Industry and Union I
have mentioned, to prevent so great and dangerous an Inconvenience.

My Suspicion of His Imperial Majesty is the greater, for that it is notorious
there are in the Society of Jesuits Men of several sorts; some of whom are
dispensed with not only to lay aside the Habit of their Order, but to Marry,
and bear all sorts of Offices and Dignities: And that if his Imperial Majesty
was in his younger days, out of too great a zeal for his Religion, unhappily
engaged in this Order, under the Dispensations I suppose, there is no cause
left for wonder at his Proceedings against the Protestants: For, though he had
been but of the Lower Order, which is that wherein Marriage is permitted, and a
Capacity allowed of bearing Offices and Dignities; yet as to all other things,
and particularly in matters of Religion, he must have been under the Obedience
of the General of the Jesuits, and consequently obliged to make Peace and War,
as the General of the Society should judge most convenient for the Interest of
the Pope and the Society. The continual War this Prince makes against the
Protestants of Upper Hungary, contrary to all the Maxims and Rules of sound
Policy, and contrary to the Privileges (one of his Ministers told me, and I am
otherwise well assured) he has sworn to that Nation; the vast Gifts he has
bestowed on the Society in Bohemia, Silesia, Hungary, Moravia, and generally in
all his Hereditary Countries; with his shameful signing the late Peace, in
prejudice, and contrary to all his Treaties with the Protestant Princes, smells
rankly of an Obedience which acknowledges no Obligation, nor owns any Rule of
Justice or Piety, other than the absolute Command of his Superior. And I see
nothing in this Prince, as to his manner of Living, and constant Attendance at
Jesuitical Comedies, Music, and Pilgrimages, sometimes to one Relic,
sometimes to another, with all that may make out his natural or acquired
inclinations, that may any way convince this Opinion of mistake.

So that if it be so, (as to speak the truth) I very much suspect it is; and I
am not alone in this Suspicion: I leave it to the Judgment of the Empire in
general, and the Protestants in particular, what ground they have to rely on,
or expectany Succor or Assistance from the Head of the Empire: For, in case
this prove true, should his Imperial Majesty promise and design effectually to
assist the Protestants, in defense of the Common Liberty; yet if on the morrow
the General of the Society should order him, for some greater Good, (which,
according to their Maxims consists frequently in a Massacre, a Poisoning, or
Assassination) to join at a precise Day and place his Arms to those of France,
for the entire extirpation of the Protestant Party in the Empire, there is no
doubt but this Prince would be obliged to do it, either on the account of
Obedience due to his General, or for fear the Society, in case of his
disobedience, should dispatch him, as they did by themselves, or their
Emissaries, Henry the Third and Fourth in France, Don Carlos in Spain, Duke
Bernard of Weymar in Germany, and lately the Illustrious Princess of Inspruck,
second Wife of that Prince, the last Duke of Brieg in Silesia: or as they have
newly attempted to do against his Majesty of Great Britain. For Incendiaries,
Assassins, and Murderers are the faithful Servants and inseparable Instruments
of that blessed Society. Your Highness will not be surpised at the vehement
Suspicion I have expressed of his Imperial Majesty, when you have considered,
there have been two Kings of Poland of that Order, and that Philip the Second
of Spain did (out of Policy) cause himself to be enrolled amongst them. But the
Order of the Jesuits is composed (as others) of two sorts of People, whom
Politicians distinguish by the Names of Directors and Directed: And we are to
observe, the two Kings of Poland were in this latter Class. The former, by
promoting too zealously the Passions of the Society, having lost the Kingdom of
Swede, to which he was Heir; and the second having by the same means incurred
the irreconcilable hatred and aversion of the Nobility of Poland, to so
extreme a degree, that to avoid the threatening effects of it, he was forced at
last to quit his Crown, from a Sovereign to become a Subject, and go end his
days in a strange Country, with no better a Character than that of Abbot of St.
German in France. But as for Philip the Second (setting matter of Conscience
aside) considering him only in quality of a Politician* I boldly assign him a
Place in the Class of Directors; for he directed his Affairs so well, he mist
but little of subduing France, and effectually seized the Crown of Portugal,
and the East Indies as an Appurtenant. I am obliged, by the Respect I bear his
Imperial Majesty, to leave it to your Highness to think which of the two
Classes he is to be ranked in.

But whether his Imperial Majesty be a Member of this Society, or not, I have
said enough to make appear to your Highness the absolute necessity of a League
and Consederacy between the Protestant Powers of Europe, to enable them to
defend themselves against the pernicious Designs of their Enemies. I will
conclude with minding your Highness, That this is the Occasion that calls upon
you, to show to all the World your zeal for your Religion, and the Good of the
Public; And that since my longer stay in this Court will be useless, your
Highness will do me the Favor to permit me to leave it as soon as may be, that
I may have the honor to wait on your Most Serene Person, and continue the
performance of my most humble Services. To that happy time I respite
acquainting you with many Particulars I dare not trust to Paper, (though
altogether confirming what I have most confidently affirmed, as to the most
Essential Points of my Letter.) And in hopes to receive speedily the honor of
your Commands to that purpose, which I humbly beg, I remain with all due
Respects,

My Lord, Your Serene Highnesses most humble Servant, etc.
Prague, 13 Febr. 1680.
FINIS.

