AN EPISTLE TO FRIEDNS.
By Thomas Ellwood.
DEar Friends, unto whom the gathering Arm of the Lord has reached, and who
have known, in your Several measures, a being gathered thereby into the
heavenly Life, and are Witnesses of the preserving Power, by which ye have been
kept faithful to the Lord, and regardful of his Honor; Unto you, in an
especial manner, is the Salutation of my true and tender Love in the Lord, and
for you, as for my self, are the Breathings and fervent desires of my Soul
offered up, in the one Spirit, unto him, who is your God and mine; that both
you and I may forever be kept in the fresh sense of his tender mercies, and
great loving kindness unto us, that therein our Souls may cleave firmly unto
him, and never depart from him. For Friends, it is a trying day, a day of great
difficulty and danger, wherein the Enemy is at work, and very busy, setting
his Snares on every side; and spreading Temptations on every hand: And some,
alas! have entered there into, and are caught and held therein, for whom my Soul
in secret mourns.

And truly Friends, a great weight has been upon my Spirit for many days, and
my mind has been deeply exercised, in the sense I have of the Enemy's
prevailing, by one bait or other, to unsettle the minds of some, whom the Arm
of the Lord had reached unto, and in some measure gathered to a resting place:
But not abiding in that pure Light, by which they were at first visited, and to
which they were at first turned, the Understanding has been Veiled again, the
Eye which was once in some measure Opened, has the God of the World insensibly
Blinded again, and Darkness is again come over, to that degree, that they can
now contentedly take up again what in the day of their Convincement, and in the
time of their true Tenderness, they cast off as a burden too heavy to be born.
Oh, my Friends, this has been the Enemy's work; Therefore it greatly behooves
all to watch against him: for it has been for want of watchfulness, that he
has got entrance into any. For when the mind has been from off the true
Watch, in a secure and careless State, then has he secretly wrought, and
presented his fair baits, his allurements and enticements by pleasure or
profit, to catch the unwary mind. And hence it has come to pass that some, who
have come out fairly, and begun well, and have seemed in good earnest to have
set their hand's to God's Plow, have looked back, and been weary of the Yoke of
Christ, and have either lusted after the Fleshpots of Egypt again, or turned
aside into some By path or crooked way in the Wilderness, and thereby have
fallen short of the promised good Land.

But you, my dear Friends, in whom the Word of Life abides, and who abide in
the virtue and favor thereof, ye know the Wiles of the Enemy, and the Power
which subdues him, and the Rock in which the Preservation and safety is. So
that I write not these things unto you, because ye know them not: But the end
of my thus writing is, to stir up the pure mind in all, upon whom the Name of
the Lord is called, that we all may be provoked to Watchfulness against the
workings of the wicked one. Therefore dear Friends, bea^, I beseech you, the
word of Exhortation, though from one that is little and low (and through mercy
Sensible of it) and who has not been accustomed to appear after this manner:
For The Wind, ye know, blows where it lists.

Friends, call to mind the former times, and remember the days that are past
and gone, when the day of the Lord first dawned unto you, and his Power seized
upon you. Ye know how weighty and retired the Spirits of Friends then were, how
Grave and Solid their Deportment and Carriage; how few and savoury their words,
tending to edify the hearers; now great a fear and backwardness was in them, to
enter into familiarity with the World's People. O Friends, That was a good day,
and that was a safe state; for fear begets Watchfulness and watchfulness is a
means to prevent Danger. Therefore all Friends, keep in the holy fear, and
therein watch against the Enemy, that he entangle you not, and hurt your
Spirits, by a too near Familiarity and intimate Conversing with the People of
the World; for therein, I assure you, lies a snare. For though it be both
lawful and necessary, and in some cases also useful and serviceable to the
Truth to Converse with them that are without: Yet if any Friend should
adventure in a frank and free mind, beyond the limits of the pure fear, to
entertain Familiarity with the World's People, the Spirit of the World in them
will seek an Entrance, and, if not diligently watched against, will also get an
Entrance; and bring a hurt and a loss upon him or them into whom it so gets.
For being once entered, it will insensibly work, and dispose the mind into which
it is got, to a Condescension to, and Compliance with the People of the World
it conver^es with, first in one thing, then in another, in Words, in Behavior,
etc. (little things in appearance, but great in consequence) till at length an
Indifferency gets up in the mind, and the Testimony of Truth by Deg^^es is let
fall. But while the pure fear is kept to, and dwelt in, the Watch is always
set, the Spirit is retired and weighty, and an holy Awfulness rests upon the
mind, which renders such Converse both safe to the Friends, and more
serviceable to them they converse withal.

And Friends, not only in your conversing with the World's People, but in all
your Conversation and Course of life, Watch against the Spirit of the World,
for it lies near to tempt, and to draw out the mind, and to lead back into the
World again. You know, Friends, that at the first, when the visiting arm of the
Love reached to us, he led us out of the World's Ways, Manners, Customs and
Fashions, and a close Testimony, both in word and practice, was born against
them. But how has this Testimony been kept up, and kept to by all, that have
since made profession of the Truth. Ah, how has the Enemy, for want of
Watchfulness, stole in upon too too many, and led out their minds, from that
which did at first convince them, into a Liberty beyond the Cross of Christ
Jesus; And in that liberty they have run into the Worlds Fashions, which the
Worldly Spirit continually invents to feed the vain and airy minds withal, that
they may not come to Gravity and solidity.

Thence it has come to pass, that there is scarce a New Fashion comes up, or a
Fantastic Cut invented, but some or other, that professes Truth, is ready,
with the foremost, to run into it. Ah Friends, the World sees this and smiles,
and points the Finger at it. And this is both a hurt to the particular, and a
Reproach to the general. Therefore, O let the Lot be cast, let search be made
by every one, and let every one examine himself, that this Achan, with his
Babylonish Garment, may be found out and cast out: for indeed he is a Troubler
of Israel. And all Friends, who upon true search shall find your selves
concerned in this particular, I warn and exhort you all, Return to that which
at first convinced you; to that keep close, in that abide, that therein ye may
know, as at the first (not only a Bridle to the Tongue, but) a Curb to the
roving mind, a Restraint to the wandering desire. For assuredly, Friends, if
Truth be kept to, none will need to learn of the World what to wear, what to
put on, or how to shape and Fashion their Garments: but Truth will teach all
how best to answer the end of Clothing, both for useful service and modest
decency. And the Cross of Christ will be a Yoke to the unruly will, and a
Restraint upon the wanton mind; and will crucify that nature that delights in
Finery and in Bravery of Apparel, in which the true adorning does not stand,
but in the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even a
meek and quiet Spirit, 1 Pet. 3, 4. And the Grace of God, which has appeared
to all, and which has brought Salvation to many, will not only teach to deny
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present World, Titus 2.11, 12. but will also lead them that obey it out of
all Excess, and out of all Superfluities and worldly vanities, and will teach
them to order their Conversation aright. Therefore to this heavenly Grace be
every mind turned, and therein staid, that thereby all who profess the Truth
may be kept within the holy Limits of it; that in the whole Conversation and
Course of life, in Eating, in Drinking, in putting on Apparel, and in
whatsoever else we do, or take in hand, all may be done to the glory of God, 1
Cor. 10.31. that our Moderation in all things may appear unto all men.

And let not any deceive and hurt themselves with a false Plea, saying, I will
be left to my liberty; I have Freedom to do, go, or wear so and so; And
Religion stands not in Clothes, etc. For that liberty which the worldly Spirit
leads into, is not indeed true liberty, but is a false and feigned liberty,
which leads into true and real Bondage. And though Religion stands not simply
in Clothes; yet true Religion stands in that which sets a bound and limit to
the mind with respect to Clothes, as well as to other things. So that where
there is a running out into Excess and vanity in Apparel, that is a certain
indication and token that the mind is got loose, and has cast off the Yoke,
and is broke away from its due Subjection to that divine Power, in which the
true Religion stands.

Great has been the hurt which the Enemy has done in this day, by leading
into a false Freedom, and crying up a wrong Liberty: for under this Pretense
have crept in great Disorders, some running out one way, and some another; some
mixing in Marriages with the World's People, and some going to the Priest to be
married. And many loose and unclean Spirits have shrouded themselves under this
plausible Pretense of being left to their liberty, unto whom Truth's Order is
irksom and uneasy; and they kick against it, and call it Imposition because it
checks their licentious Liberty. Therefore all, who join with their Plea,
examine and try what Liberty it is ye claim and stand for: for the true Liberty
is not inconsistent with the Cross of Christ, nor repugnant to his Yoke; but
agrees with it, and is obtained through it, and maintained by it. And none whom
the Son has made free indeed, will, or can plead, or make use of that Liberty
in Opposition to any Means, which the God of Order has appointed, or set up in
his Church for the keeping out Confusion, disorder and Looseness. And hereby all
may take a right Measure, and may certainly know what kind of Liberty that is,
which some have so hotly contended for in Opposition to that necessary and
commendable Order, which God has led his People into, and which the Enemy, in
his Agents, labors so hard to lead, or drive them out of. For the Enemy well
knows, that the tendency and service thereof is to detect and discover his
secret workings, and to bring his Deeds to Light and Judgment; and therefore he
strives with might and main to overturn it, crying out through his Instruments,
Away with your Order, Let every one be left to his Liberty. By which seemingly
fair and specious Plea, not only the loose, disorderly, factious Spirits have
been let up, and encouraged to greater boldness and licentiousness: but some
simple and well meaning Friends also, not seeing the design of Satan herein,
have been misled thereby, and made use of by the Enemy, and the more subtle of
his Instruments, to oppose the good Order of Truth. Thus has the Enemy
wrought, and sought to lay waste the work of the Lord. But the Lord (magnified
be his holy Name) has not been wanting to his People, that in sincerity of
Heart have diligently waited on him, and trusted in him; for he has all along
raised up some, whose Eye he has opened to see the Design and working of the
Evil One; and whose Spirits he has engaged to stand up in a faithful Testimony
against him, contending for the way of Truth. Which when they in whom the Enemy
wrought, perceived, and found they could not run over the heads of Friends, and
carry things on as themselves pleased, they set themselves, in a heady willful
Spirit, to raise Disturbances in Meetings for business, by encouraging and
abetting such heady, loose, contentious and disorderly persons as would join
with them; thus hardening themselves, and provoking the Lord to give them up to
blindness and hardness of Heart, till at length the Enemy prevailed so far upon
them, as to work them, by degrees, from Discontent to Prejudice, then to
Enmity, and so at length, in diverse places, to an open defection, Apostasy and
Separation.

Now although I know, my dear Friends, that ye who have kept your Habitation in
the Light of the Lord, and whose Eye is single therein, have a clear sight and
understanding that the Spirit, which has thus wrought and fought against the
Truth, is not, nor can be, of God, but is of the Wicked One; And although the
Fruits it has brought forth, through the Agents and Instruments in and by
which it has wrought, viz. making Disturbances in Meetings, to the Breaking
the Churches Peace, Causing Divisions amongst Friends, Publishing to the World
most wicked, Malicious, railing and scandalous Books, against Friends (an
effect of the greatest Enmity) shutting and keeping Friends out of their common
Meeting Houses, in which they have a just Right and Property, and not suffering
them to meet therein (which is a part of the Persecution inflicted on Friends
by the World) and at length, also setting up separate Meetings, in Opposition
to the Meetings of God's People; Although, I say, these Fruits are sufficient
of themselves to discover and manifest, to an Vnclouded mind, what Spirit that
is, and must needs be, that has brought them forth: Yet inasmuch as some,
partly through weakness of Judgment, and partly through personal Affection to
some of those leading Separatists, are yet in danger to be betrayed by their
fair words and fained speeches, wherewith they ly in wait to deceive, I feel a
concern remain upon my Spirit, in the love of God, to warn all such, that they
join not with, nor give Countenance unto that Spirit, that has thus wrought
against the Lord, and against his People. For Friends, In the holy fear of the
living God, and in the Openings of the Spring, of his pure life in my Soul, at
this time, and from the certain knowledge and clear demonstration which I have
received from him therein. I testify and declare unto you, that this Spirit,
which in this day has run out, and has drawn out some, into Opposition
against the way and work of the Lord, into Division and Separation from the
People of the Lord, and from the holy Assemblies which the Lord has gathered,
and by his powerful presence has owned, and daily does own; this Spirit, I
say, is the same with that which has formerly wrought, in other appearances,
against the Truth in our time, and is the same with that Spirit, that wrought
against the work of the Lord in the days of the holy Apostles. This Mystery of
Iniquity then wrought, and caused many to turn aside; and to leave the right
way of the Lord, and to forsake the Assemblies of Gods People, Heb. 10.25. yea,
and to run into Separation too, Jude 19. Upon whom the Holy Ghost has set this
Brand, That they were Sensual, having not the Spirit. And many close and sharp
Testimonies did the Lord give forth through his Servants in that day against
this Spirit, and against those that were joined to it and acted by it, as may
be seen in the holy Scriptures.

Yea, Friends, this Spirit that has led some now to set up their Separate
Meetings, is the same that led Jeroboam the Son of Nebat to set up his Separate
Altar at Be^hel, of which you may read, 1 Kings 12, and 13, Chapters. He was
afraid, that if the people should continue to go up to the House of the Lord,
to do Sacrifice there, as they had been accustomed to do, and as the Lord had
required, they would then forsake him, and return to the Lord again. And this
Spirit now is afraid, that if they whom he has seduced, and drawn aside,
should still frequent the Assemblies of God's People, and continue to meet with
Friends as before, that heavenly Power which is eminently manifest in the
Meetings of God's People, might at one time or other reach unto them, touch
their Hearts, open the right Eye in them, and give them to see the Mischief and
Misery he is leading them into. And therefore to prevent this, and to keep his
Captives close unto him, he has contrived to set up separate Meeetings, in
Opposition to the Meetings of God's appointment, as Jeroboam set up his
separate Altar, in Opposition to the Altar which God had commanded to be set
up* and to keep the People from going thereto. And so subtill^ did this Spirit
work then, as well as now, that Jeroboam contrived to have his false Worship
bear some resemblance to the true, that he might he more easily beguil the
people: For he ordained a Feast, like unto the Feast that was in Judah, 1 Kings
12.32. but it was in the Month which he had devised of his own heart, verse. 33.
Mark that; there is a Blot upon it: how fair or specious soever the Worship he
set up appeared or seemed to be, yet it was but the device of his own heart; it
was neither appointed by God, nor accepted of God. For you may read in the 13th
Chapter, that the Lord sent a Prophet, a Man of God, out of Judah to Bethel;
And he cried against the Altar in the Word of the Lord, and prophesied the
Destruction thereof by Josiah, which was afterward outwardly fulfilled, as you
may read, 2 Kings 23 15, etc. Now Josiah signifies, The fire, or burning of the
Lord. And in the holy dread of the living eternal God I declare, The fire of
the Lord is kindled, and kindling against this accursed separating Spirit, and
against its work, and against all that join with it therein. Therefore all fear
before the mighty God, and stand still and consider your ways: and let none
resist or reject the warning of the Lord, lest such be hardened to destruction.
For Jeroboam, you may read, stood by his separate Altar, verse. 1. And when he
heard the saying of the man of God, which he cried against the Altar in Bethel,
he put forth his hand, saying, Lay hold on him. But his hand which he put forth
against him, dried up, so that he could not pull it in again to him, ver. 4. O
Friends consider, How has dryness and withering come upon many a great and
stout One in this day, who have lifted up themselves against the Lord, and have
sought, by the devices of their own Hearts, to establish themselves in their
own way, against the way of the Lord; so that the hand they have put forth in
that work, they could not pull in again. Now mind I pray you Friends, and
observe the way of the working of this Spirit in that day. Here was the Enmity,
the rough nature of Cain and Esau, the Spirit of Persecution, got up first in
Jeroboam, to dismay the man of God: Lay hold of him, says he. But when he saw
that would not do; then the Subtle Serpent, the Crafty Fox, the Fair Speeches,
the Smooth Words, the Seeming Friendship and Show of kindness to Betray him.
Come home with me, says he to the man of God, and refresh thy self, and I will
give thee a Reward, ver. 7. O Friends, stand in the Fear and Counsel of the
Lord, and in the Dominion of his Power, over this wicked Spirit in all its
Twistings and Twinings. Let neither the Frowns nor the Fawnings, the Threats
nor the Flatteries, the hard Speeches nor the Oily Words, the Pharisaical
Friendship, the dissembling Love, the seeming Kindness, the familiar Carriage,
the free Entertainment, the fine Bit, the Offer of Advantages, etc. have any
Influence upon you, to draw you, in the least measure, to join or touch with
God's Enemy, with him that sets up a separate Altar, a Separate Meeting, in
Opposition to, and to draw or keep from the right way of the Lord; mind well
the Answer, which the man of God gave to Ierobam's tempting invitation. If
(said he) thou will give me half thine house, I will not go in with thee,
neither will I eat Bread nor drink Water in this place, ver. 8. (This was where
the Separate Altar was set up) And he gives a forcible Reason for it; For so
was it charged me by the Word of the Lord, ver. 9. Here now you see both the
Charge of the Lord, and the good Resolution of the Man of God: I will not go in
with thee who have revolted from God; neither will I, eat or drink in this
place, where an Ensign of Separation and Opposition to the way of God is set
up. Consider this well I warn you All, in whom there is yet any true Breathings
after the living God, who retain any Tenderness, and in whom there is any
Simplicity left; Consider this well, I say, when thy pretended Friend or
Friends, in a great deal of Seeming love and kindness, shall invite thee to
partake with them at their Separate Altar, to sit down with them in their
Separate Meeting. Thou can not be a Man of God, and go in with them, or Eat
or Drink in that place: Thou can not sit down there, to wait for the Bread of
Life, or the Water of Life, to be given thee there: No, The Word of the Lord,
if thou give heed unto it, will Charge thee otherwise: Therefore to that pure
living Word let every mind be turned, and thereto kept, in a diligent waiting
to receive Wisdom, Strength and Power from the Lord therein, that none may be
betrayed by the Subtilty of the Enemy, with whatsoever fair pretense He may
come. For remember how the Man of God, that was enticed by another to eat and
drink outwardly at Bethel, the place where the Separate Altar was set up, lost
his outward life therefore, verse. 18. and 24. And if thou shall presume to go
in, to Eat or to Drink Spiritually, that is, to join in Worship with the Sons
of Nebat at this day, in the separate Meetings, that any of them have set up,
in Opposition to the Assemblies of God's People, and to the Blessed Way and
Work of the Lord, how know thou but thou may for ever lose thy Spiritual
life, and never know a day of Quickening more?

Therefore all Friends, watch against every Temptation thereunto, as you love
your lives, as you regard the good and eternal welfare of your Souls; and let
not the Name, nor person of any Man have Power over you, to draw you aside,
neither let Numbers sway with you, in which, I know, these Adersaries of Truth
do not a little boast (though, blessed be God, with little reason) but remember
that Jeroboam of old had Ten Tribes out of Twelve to cry up his separate Altar;
Notwithstanding which, he is branded to Posterity in the holy Record, with this
Brand; Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, WHO MADE ISRAEL TO SIN, 2 Kin. 14.24.
Therefore let not any follow a Multitude to do Evil, Exodus 23.2. but all follow
that which is good, both among your selves, and to all Men, 1 These. 5.15. For
Friends, you know whither the broad way leads, and what it is the wide Gate
opens into, which the MANY, go in at: But keep ye to the strait Gate, and walk
ye on in the NARROW way; sor in it is safety, and at the end of it everlasting
happiness.

But Friends, because of the straitness of this Gate, and the Narrowness of
this way, some that have attemped to walk in it, are grown weary of it, and
have sought out another way, a way which ( Jeroboam like) they have devised of
their own Heart; wherein they may have more room, more scope* more Company,
Ease in the Flesh, Liberty to the Flesh, and all without control. And this I
am satisfied, has not been the least motive to the Separation in this day (as
it was the greatest in days past) though some that have been drawn into it, may
not perhaps, see the Ground upon which it was undertaken. But the Lord has
opened an Eye in many, which sees the Rise and Ground, Entrance and End of this
libertine Spirit and its work. And this Eye will the Lord daily open more and
more in all, that diligently and in sincerity wait upon him. Therefore All
Friends every where, who have not yet a clear sight, and a through Understanding
of the Nature and Work, Design and Drift of this Dividing Spirit, Wait, I
beseech you, in Simplicity of Heart and Lowliness of mind, upon the Lord, and
keep to the measure of the Grace you have received, from him, and suffer not
your minds to be swayed or byass^d by any personal Kindness, natural Affection,
Relation, Kindred, or Acquaintance; but stand Single and open to the Lord, not
joining to or any way countenancing that which the Testimony of Truth, in the
arisings of the Heavenly Life, and breakings forth of the divine Power through
any, goes forth against. So will your present standing be safe, and you be
preserved out of the snares of this insinuating and treacherous Spirit; And the
Lord, in his appointed time, as ye abide with him, will open your
understandings further, and give you a clearer Sight of that, which at present
you do not fully see, and thereby bring you to that Certainty and assurance,
which (blessed be his Name) he has brought many unto

And you, my dear Friends, whose Spirits the Lord has stirred up, and whose
Hearts he has engaged, in an holy Zeal, to stand up for his Blessed Name and
Truth, and to bear a faithful Testimony against this wicked rendering Spirit; Go
on in the strength and power of the Lord, in the might of the God of Jacob: for
you are assuredly on the Lord's side; and the Lord Jehovah, the strength of
Israel, is on your side. Therefore Friends, be encouraged in the Lord to stand
steadfast in your Testimony, not giving way to the Enemy, no not for a moment.
And take heed, I beseech you in the Love of God, how ye enter into any Treaty
of Peace, or Terms of Agreement with this ungodly treacherous Spirit, which is
out of the Truth, and draws out of the Truth, and fights against the Truth, For
there is no Peace unto it, says my God. And they who have joined themselves
unto it, and have Wickedly given themselves up to be acted by it, and to act
for it, must pass through the River of Judgment, if ever they be Redeemed from
under its power. Friends, Condemnation must first be felt and owned, before
Reconciliation can be known; and the fire of the Lord must pass upon the
Transgressor, to consume the works of darkness, the Ungodly Deeds, the Envious
Reviling Speeches, the wicked malicious slanderous Books and Pamphlets, etc.
and to burn up the Ground from whence they Sprang. For a Flaming Sword has the
Lord God set in his Eden, which turns every way, and none that are gone out
can ever come in again, but they must pass under the flaming Edg thereof.
Therefore my dear Friends, stand your ground in the authority of the heavenly
life, and tamper not with God's Enemies: Remember the word of the Lord to the
Prophet, Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them, Jer. 15.19.
And then what follows? I will make thee unto this People a fenced Brazen Wall,
and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for
I am with thee to save thee, and to deliver thee, says the Lord, ver. 20. So
the God of Life fill your Hearts daily more and more with a Phineas Zeal for
the honor of his Name, and furnish you abundantly with Wisdom and Counsel,
with Boldness and Courage, with Strength and Power, to encounter and overcome
the Enemy; And make every one more watchful against the Spirit of the World, to
withstand it in all its allurements to vanity, of whatsoever kind, that
whatsoever would defile the Camp of the Lord, may be purged out, and kept out,
that the Lord may more and more delight in his People, and shower down his
Blessings upon them; which is the fervent desire of,

Your Faithful Friend, in the Love and Service of the Unchangeable Truth,
Thomas Ellwood.
The 24th. of the 2 d. Month. 1686.

