A CAUTION TO CONSTABLES, And Other INFERIOR OFFICERS, Concerned in the
EXECUTION of the Conventicle-Act. WITH Some Observations thereupon, humbly
offered, by way of Advice, to such Well-meaning and Moderate JUSTICES of the
PEACE, As would not willingly ruin their peaceable Neighbors, but act (in
relation to that Act) rather by Constraint, than by Choice. By THOMAS ELLWOOD.

Prove. 21. 21. He that follows after Righteousness and Mercy, finds Life,
Righteousness and Honor.

Cat. de Mor. Lib. 3. Did. 15. Iudicis auxilium sub iniqua Lege rogato,
Ipsae etiam Leges cupiunt, ut jure regantur.
LONDON, Printed, for William Skeate, and are to be Sold in George-yard in
Lombard Street, 1683.

A CAUTION TO Constables, etc.
HAving observed of late, that diverse Constables and other inferior Officers,
have either run themselves within the danger of the Law, or brought upon
themselves trouble of mind, by acting too officiously against their honest
Neighbors, upon the Conventicle-Act, at the Instigation of (that shame of
Christianity, and Pest of Mankind) Informers; and considering with my self,
that this Mischief for the most part happens through fear, occasioned by want
of a right understanding what is positively required of them by that Act, what
not: I thought I should do no unacceptable Work, in presenting the following
Observations upon that Act, by way of Cautionary Information, to the view and
consideration of such of those Officers, as are willing to act warily with
respect to themselves, and yet favorably with respect to their peaceable
Neighbors.

First then, be pleased to observe, That no Constable, or other Officer, is
bound to be an Attendant upon an Informer, to be at his Reck, and run like a
Lacquey after him whenever, or whethersoever he shall think fit to call him.
The Officer is not obliged to stay at home, to wait the Informer's coming: but
is at liberty to follow his own Affairs, and to go whithersoever his own
Occasions draw, or his Inclinations lead him. And if casually the Informer
light upon him, either at home or abroad, and inform him of a Meeting or
Conventicle within his Parish or Precinct, he is not bound to take notice of
it, unless he take the Information to be credible. For that is the Word used in
the Act in this very Case, viz. Be it further Enacted, etc. That is any
Constable, etc. who shall know or be credibly informed of any such Meetings,
etc. So that it is not every idle and groundless Information from sorry Fellows
of no repute nor credit, the Officer is obliged to take notice of; but such
Informations only as are credible, (or his own knowledge) upon which he is
required to act. And by his own knowledge here, is to be understood a certain
knowledge, a personal knowledge, not a knowledge by Heresay, Report, or common
Fame only; for that may be as little credible, as the least credible
Information. The Officer then it seems, must have either a personal and certain
knowledge, or such an Information as he shall judge credible, that there is an
unlawful Assembly or Meeting in his Parish, before he is obliged to stir.

2. And if the Officer should receive a credible Information of such a Meeting;
yet he is not bound to wait upon the Informer to the place where he informs the
Meeting is: But the first thing that is required of the Officer by this Act is,
to give in Information thereof some Justice of the Peace. And having done that,
then in the next place to endeavor the Conviction of the Parties according to
his Duty. For so are the Words of the Act, viz. [ Be it Enacted etc. That if
any Constable etc. who shall know, or be credible informed of any such
Meetings, or Conventicles held within his Precincts, Parish or Limits, and
shall not give Information thereof to some Justice of the Peace, or the chief
Magistrate and endeavor the Conviction of the Parties according to his Duty;
But, etc.] Instead of which, many Constables, and other Officers, are trickt in
by cunning and swaggering Informers, to go along with them to Meetings, and
there take Observations of the persons present (yea, and sometimes also to
inform the Informer who the persons are, and where they live) and from thence
wait on the Informer to the Justice, and so are unawares drawn in by the
Informer, to join with him in swearing against their Neighbors; thereby
unadvisedly bringing their quiet Neighbors into needless trouble, and
themselves under the foul Brand, and hated Name of being themselves Informers
also. Now all this is more than the Officers are obliged to do. 1. They are not
bound to go with the Informer, to the place where he shall tell them there is a
Meeting. 2. Neither if they do go with him, are they bound to tell him the
Names, or places of abode, of any persons that they shall see there. 3. Neither
are they bound to go with him to a Justice, nor yet, without him, to the same
Justice that he goes to. But when they have received the Informer's
information, leaving him to pursue his own projects, they are to repair to some
Justice, or chief Magistrate (and it is in their own choice to what Justice
they will go) and give him Information thereof, if they think it Credible. And
although they are further required, after such Information given to the
Justice, to endeavor the Conviction of the Parties: yet that is to be done but
according to their duty. And sure it is not the duty of Officers to turn
Informers. They would be very troublesome and thankless Officers indeed, if all
Constables, Headboroughs, Tithingmen, Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor,
should be bound by the duty of their Offices to turn Informers.

3. These Officers would not be so scared by Informers, nor terrified with the
talk of forfeiting 51. if they did rightly understand and well consider how
hard a thing it is, for them to be Convicted by this Act. The words of the Act
are these, viz. [ But such Constables, etc. shall wilfully and wittingly omit
the performance of his Duty in the execution of this Act, and be thereof
convicted in manner aforesaid, he shall forfeit for every such offense the sum
of 5 l.] Observe here, the Officer does not forfeit 5 l. unless he be convicted
of omitting the performance of his duty wilfully and wittingly. And this
Conviction must be made either by the Confession of the Party, or Oath of two
Witnesses, or by notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact. As to the
Confession of the Party, that need not be: for no man is bound to accuse
himself; and he has not much Wit, sure, that will, especially in such a case as
this. The second way of Conviction is by the Oath of two Witnesses. But how is
it possible for two Witnesses to swear (unless they be such as regard not what
they swear) that the Officer did wilfully and wittingly omit the performance of
his duty? Such Witnesses put their Ears in the Officers hands, as having a mind
(one would think) to look through the Pillory. And indeed, scarce any would
dare to swear so desperately, that had not deserved the Pillory before. Then
for the notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact (the only remaining
way of proof) how can it be thereby proved that the Officer did wilfully and
wittingly, omit the performance of his duty, when so many just excuses may be
alleged, as of Absence, Illness, Urgency of Business, Ignorance,
Misunderstanding, and the like; all which, if the Officer fined, do appeal, a
Jury of his Neighbors is to try. And besides, it is a Question among the
Lawyers, how this sine or forfeiture of 5 l. can be levied upon the Officers,
there not being in the Act, any particular and express direction for the
levying of it; as there is in the other Cases, both of the Meeters and of the
Justice: for it is not to be supposed, that the Officers of a Town or Parish,
should levy the fine upon themselves; and it they do not, none else is required
or empowered by the Act to do it.

4. If a Warrant under the hand and Seal of a Justice of the Peace, be
delivered to any Constable, or other inferior Officer, to levy any fines upon
the Goods and Chattels of any person within his Limit, such Warrant ought to
express for what Offense the Conviction was made, and at what time the Offense
was committed; which if it do not, the Warrant is not formal, nor good in Law,
to make a distress by.

5. But if the Warrant be formal and sufficient, yet the Officer cannot thereby
justify the breaking open any dwelling House, or Out-house belonging
thereunto, to take distress (no, not although the Warrant should expressly
require it) as the Opinion of able Lawyers is: For a man's House is to him as a
Castle of Defense, and so is every part or room therein. And therefore, as the
Officer may not break or force open any Door or Lock to get into a man's House:
so if, finding the outward Door open, he be got in, he may not break or force
open any Doors or Locks, to get into any other parts or Rooms in the House,
that are locked; but must content himself with what he finds there. Neither may
he climb over any Hatch, or in at any Window, whether it be the Shop-window or
other: for the entering through or in at any Window, though open, is held by
Lawyers to be a breach of the House: Nor is he bound to lie perdue, and wait
continually at the Door to get an entrance; but may take such times and seasons
for it as he shall judge most fit and proper: for he is not wholly to neglect
his own Occasions to attend upon this. That were a way to ruin the Officers,
as well as their Neighbors, only to enrich the Informers. But if, as often as
the Officer comes, he shall find the Doors shut, and entrance upon demand
denied him, and no Distress to be taken without Doors; he need not fear the
penalty of forfeiting 5 l. or that he can possibly be convicted of wilfully and
wittingly omitting the performance of his Duty in that respect. And besides, it
is the Opinion of some Lawyers, that the penalty of 5 l. is not imposeable upon
the Officers for not levying the fines imposed upon others; but only for not
Informing the Justices, and endeavoring the Conviction of the Parties
according to their duty. And the Reason of such their Opinion is this, that in
that part of the Act where the said Officers are authorized and required to
levy the said fines, there is no mention of any forfeiture on their part, for
not doing it. And in this part of the Act, where the 5 l. forfeiture is
imposed, there is no express mention of levying the Fine upon others. It is
said here indeed [ If he shall wilfully and wittingly omit the performance of
his Duty] but the word [Duty] being mentioned just before, with particular
relation to his informing the Justice, and endeavoring the conviction of the
Parties, that wilful and witting omission of Duty, to which the forfeiture of 5
l. is annexed, must (say they) by intendment be restrained or applied only to
the subject matter of that branch of the Act, and be extended no further than
to the neglect of that Duty, therein particularly enjoined. But of this let
Lawyers judge.

6. If the Constable, or other Officer, has opportunity and open way to make
Distress, yet he is not bound to take more than the Fine comes to; but he may
(and indeed in Justice ought) proportion the Distress in its real value, as
near to the Fine as he can. And when he has so done, and taken such Distress
into his custody, he is not bound to drive or carry, the Goods so distrained,
to any Fair or Market, out of the Limits of his Constableship, to fell; for he
is not to act any thing in relation to his Office, further than those limits
extend (save only in some especial cases, where he is particularly
necessitated, or empowered by Act of Parliament to go further, which in this
Case he is not.) Nor may he imbezil any of the Goods, for he is accomptable for
every particular of what he has so distrained. Nor is he bound to sell such
Goods at under rates, and below the real worth or Market-price of such
Commodities; but having offered them to public Sale, and tried the Markets,
Fairs and Chapmen, within his Liberty, if none will give a reasonable price for
them, he is not bound forth with to sell them, but may keep them in hopes of a
better Market. And if they remain unsold till he is out of his Office, if he
then return them again to him from whom he took them, I know no danger he can
incur thereby; I am sure I have known it done without any detriment to him that
did it. But if he be not willing to return them, he will do well to consider
how he can justly keep them (being out of his Office, and then but a private
man) or safely turn them over to any other, without good security to
indempnifie him, in case he from whom they were taken; should hereafter call
him to account for them.

Some Observations upon the Conventicle-Act, humbly offered, by way of Advice,
to such well-meaning and moderate Justices of the Peace, as would not willingly
ruin their Peaceable Neighbors, etc.
WHen I consider the quality and qualifications of Justices of the Peace, how
many of them are professed Lawyers, and how generally they are (or at least
should be) Men of Learning and Knowledge, in those Laws especially by which they
are to act; I am ready to withdraw my Pen and desist, out of a modest fear,
least it should be thought presumption in me, to offer Advice to them, who are
so much better able to give it. But when, on the other hand, I call to mind,
that many great and very wise men, have not disdained to hear, what some, as
mean, it may be, as my self, have had to say, I am thence again emboldned to go
on, hoping that what is so well intended, will not be ill taken. They that have
suffered by this Act, and are still liable to suffer more, may be allowed to
have looked more narrowly into it, than others, who are not under its lash. And
if upon a through search, any thing can be found in the Act it self, which may
fairly be made use of to abate, in any measure, the force of the blow which we
lie under, I hope none will blame us, for modestly representing it to those, by
whose hands the stroke is appointed to be given. And in this confidence I
proceed.

Observe. 1. Since the Title of the Act; (which is not unaptly called the Key,
because it opens the Intention and purpose of the Lawmakers therein) and the
Preamble of the Act also, describes the Assemblies and Meetings designed by
this Act to be suppressed, to be Seditious Conventicles, and the persons
against whom this Act was made, to be Seditious and disloyal Persons, who under
pretense of tender Cons^t^nces, have or may at their Meetings contrive
Insurrections; it seems but reasonable that a Justice of the Peace, when
Informers come before him, to inform against any person for being at a
Conventicle or Meeting, may examine them, severally and apart, what Token of
Sedion they saw or heard in that Assembly, which they inform against? If there
were any Sedition there, it must appear in word of Action: and of that it may
be expected the Informers should give Account. If there were no Seditious words
spoken, no Seditious Cestures used, why should it be taken for a Seditious
Meeting, and the persons punished for what they are not, nay, for what they most
abhor to be? Besides it rarely happens but the Justice him self both knows,
what sort of people they are that are informed against, and is more or less
acquainted with some of them. Now if he be so, and upon his own knowledge of
the Persons or their Principles, be persuaded and satisfied in his own
Conscience, that they are not Seditious or disloyal Persons, that they never
have contrived Insurrections at their Meetings; nor is it consistent with their
Principle so to do; has he not good cause then to reject such Information, and
let such peaceable Meetings and Meeters alone, as not coming within the
Intention of the Act?

2. Since that which the Act calls an Offense, is by the express words of the
Act declared to be, Any persons, of the Age of 16 years, and more in number
than four besides the Family, being present at any Assembly, etc. under Color
or Pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner than according to the
Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England; and directs that this Offense
must be proved to the Justice, either by Confession of the Party, or Oath of
two Witnesses, or by notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact: It seems
reasonable that the Justice may put the Informers to prove every part of this
Offense. For the Offense consists of many Particulars. The Offender must be 16
years old; He must be a Subject of this Realm; (whence quere whether Scottish
and Irishmen, though living in England, are not exempt) He must be one above
four besides the Family; He must be met under Color or Pretense of some
Exercise of Religion, and that Exercise of Religion must be in other manner
than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England. All these
must go to the making up of the Offense, and the Offense so made up must be
proved: and if any of these be wanting, or the Proof fail in any of these, it
is then no Offense within this Statute. Now the Onus Probandi, the Burden of
proving, this lies upon the Informers, and that with great Reason and Justice,
according to the known Maxim, Affirmanti incumbit Probatio; He that affirms
must prove: And he must prove all that he affirms. But the Informers must
affirm every one of these Particulars, in order to make it an Offense within
the Act, and therefore they must prove every one of them also. It Is true, the
Party informed against may be Confession convict himself, if he please; but it
is at his own pleasure whether he will or no: And if he do not, the next way of
Proof is the Oath of two Witnesses. And I conceive that if the Party should
confess he was at a Meeting, and that there were more there present than four
besides the Family, yet this would not subject him to the Penalties of the Act:
for this he might be justifiably enough, unless he would also confess the
others parts, essential to an Offense within the Act, viz. that he met there
under Color or Pretense of some Exercise of Religion, and that it was in other
manner than according to the Liturgy, etc. Now as the Parties Confessing some
parts only, and not every part of the Offense, would not Convict him of the
Offense, nor Subject him to the Penalties of the Act: so neither will the
Informers Swearing some parts only, and not every part of the Offense, convict
the Party against whom they so swear, or subject him to the Penalties of the
Act. As therefore it is but reasonable that the Justice should see due and full
Proof made against the Party, in every particular Branch of the Offense, before
he makes Record of it as an Offense, in order to convict the Party thereof: so
it may reasonablely be supposed, that if the Justices would hold the Informers
closely to their Evidence, and examine them strictly and punctually concerning
their knowledge, in every particular of the Offense they complain of, they
might ease themselves of a great deal of trouble, and their honest Neighbors
of a great deal of wrong. For how could Informers dare to Swear, that the
Parties informed against, did meet under Color of Pretense of some Exercise of
Religion, and not really and sincerely in the Exercise of Religion? Or how
could Informers take upon them to Swear, that that Exercise of Religion was in
other manner than according to the Liturgy, etc. unless they were present the
whole time of the Meeting, from the very beginning to the very end thereof
(which they rarely, if ever, are) and heard and saw whatsoever was said or done
there? And unless they themselves also better understood, than they commonly
do, what is according to the Liturgy, what not?

3. Since by the Stat. 18. Eliz. 5. it is provided, that Informers for certain
Offenses therein expressed, shall not only stand on the Pillory, and be for ever
disabled from being Informers more, but also, in some Cases shall pay unto the
Defendant his Costs, Charges and Damages, and in other Cases shall forfeit the
Sum of 10 l. It seems reasonable, that a Justice may demand an Account of the
Habitation and Ability of any Person, that offers himself as an Informer; that
so he may be satisfied of the Informer's Sufficientcy to answer the Law, in
such respects. And if the Informer cannot give the Justice a good and
satisfactory Account of himself, there is no reason sure that the Justice
should be obliged to take his Information. And since that Act of the Queen is
still in force, (being made perpetual by 27 Eliz. 10.) I humbly offer it to the
Justices Consideration, whether they ought not so far to take notice thereof,
as not to admit every idle Vagabond, and beggarly Runnagate to be an Informer,
who is so far from having 10 l. that some of them have scarce a pair of whole
Ears, to answer the Law withal.

4. It seems very strange to some, that they should be convicted and never
convened, be fined and not know of it (unless casually by report) till the
Officers come to distrine for the Fine. This being a course so directly
contrary to all Legal Procedures in all Ages, and condemned by the Practice not
only of Christians and Jews, but of very Heathens also; gives the greater cause
of wonder and amazement, that it should be used by any now. The practice of
Christendom in this Case is well known. Among the Jews the Witnesses were not
only to be present, but to lay their hands on the head of the Party whom they
witnessed against, while Sentence was given against him, as Godwyn shows in his
Moses and Aaron, l. 5. c. 6. And our Savior Christ, when the Scribes and
Pharisees brought a Woman unto him, whom they accused of Adultery, and then
slipped away themselves; took that occasion to dismiss the Woman, saying, Woman,
where are those thine Accusers? John 8. 10. Does our Law judge any man before it
hear him, and know what he does, said Nicodemus a Pharisee, John 7. 51? For
Instances are among the Heathens, not to search profane Authors, the
Scriptures tells us, That the Roman Claudius Lysius, when he sent Paul Prisoner
to Felix, gave commandment to his Accusers to go also, and say before Felix
what they had against him, Acts 23. 30. And Felix having received the Prisoner,
told him, I will hear thee when thy Accusers are also come, ver. 35. And
accordingly, when his Accusers were come, he brought them Face to Face, Chap.
24. 2. and ver. 8. 19. And indeed, Paul seems to claim it as his Right, when
speaking of certain Jews of Asia, (that were the first Occasion of his Trouble,
Chap. 21. 27.) he says, who ought to have been before thee, and object, if
they had ought against me, Chap. 24. 18. 19. And he might well claim it as his
Right, since it was according to the Roman Law, as Festus answered the Jews; It
is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he which
is accused, have the Accuser face to face, and have License to answer for
himself concerning the Crime laid against him, Chap. 25. 16. And surely our
Laws in general require the same. Nay, in this Act it seems to be plainly
intended, that the Party accused or informed against, should be first summoned
to appear before the Justice to whom the Information is given, to be examined
by the Justice concerning the Offense charged against him, and to make answer
for himself. For the first way of Proof appointed by the Act for the Conviction
of the Party charged, is his own Confession; and that must be made before the
Justice: For the Words of the Act expressly are, [ upon proof to him made of
such offense, either by confession of the Party, or Oath, etc.] So that the
Party ought first to be convened before the Justice, and examined touching the
alleged Offense, in order to his Conviction. And this seems regularly to be
the first step toward the Conviction. If the Party accused confess the
Offense, there needs no other Proof; that is sufficient. If he deny it, or do
not confess it, in whole, or in part, then (and not till then) is other Proof
needful: Then the Oath of two Witnesses is required. Moreover, in that part of
the Act which directs the Preachers Fine, in some Cases, to be laid upon
others, it is said, If he be a Stranger, or is fled and cannot be found; which
implies he ought to be sought after, and found (if it may be) before any Fine
on him, or on others for him, be set. Again, (says the Act) Or if in the
judgment of the Justice, before whom he shall be Convicted, he shall be thought
unable to pay, etc. This again implies he should be brought before the Justice:
for how should the Justice be able to judge of the ability of one he never spoke
with nor saw? So that by many strong Implications it appears, that by this Act,
as well as by the general course of all Laws, the Party accused ought to be
sent for before the Magistrate to whom he is accused, that he may know his
Accusers, and have liberty to make his defense, before any penalty be inflicted
on him. And if upon his being summoned before the Justice, and denying, or not
confessing the Charge, the proof must be made by the Oath of two Witness:
surely, methinks both Law and Reason will persuade, that those Witnesses: ought
to depose their Evidence in the presence of him, against whom they bear
Witness. For besides that it would be an awe upon the Witnesses, to be the more
wary what they swear, and more careful to speak the truth, when they see him
present who they know can contradict them, if they speak not the truth; The
Law, as I take it, gives liberty of exception (upon sufficient ground) against
a Witness; which liberty I am deprived of, if the Witses Depositions be taken
in private, and I not suffered to be present to hear what it is that is deposed
against me, or see who they are that depose it. Had I been present, I might
happily have assigned such lawful exception against the Witness, as might have
taken off the Evidence, and acquitted me: or if not so, yet who knows but my
presence might have prevented the Witnesses from forswearing themselves against
me. However, I had then had my Remedy against them, to recover my Damages of
them, if they were able, or at least for their Perjury to have utterly disabled
them from such undertakings for the future. But by the Evidence being taken in
private, and the Informers concealed, I am deprived of these Benefits and Legal
Privileges: and by such means may the most innocent man be ruined. He that
never went to such a Meeting in his Life, may by this means be made to suffer
for being at such a Meeting, if a couple of graceless Informers, either out of
malice, revenge, advantage or mistake (and hope of concealment) shall swear
against (...) and he has no remedy: for if his Fine do not exceed 10 s. he
(...) the privilege of an Appeal, but must sit down by the loss. And though 10
s. seems but a little, yet 10 s. a week is 26 l. a year; and that perhaps by
that time it is levied, may be more than -- 100 l. damage to him from whom it
is taken. However, be the suffering greater or less, the wrong is the same. I
entreat the Justices therefore to take this Matter (of concealing Informers,
and receiving the Depositions of Witnesses against men in private, and
condemning and sentencing Persons unheard) into their serious consideration,
and do herein as they would be done unto. It was a true saying, though spoken
by an Heathen, Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet sta^uerit, haud aequus fuit,
Sen. in Medea, Act. 2. Which may bear this English. He that, but one part
heard, a Fine shall-lay,
Not hearing what the Accused has to say:
Although his Sentence should prove just, yet he
An unjust Judge w^ll still reputed be.


5. What has been said of Informers swearing, has been spoken with respect to
present practice only: for otherwise it is the opinion of able Counsel, that no
Informer's Oath ought to be taken in this case. And therefore, since the Act
directs, that if the Party accused do not confess the Charge, he is to be
convicted by the Oath of two Witnesses, it may not be unworthy the Justices
consideration, what persons in this Case are fair and legal Witnesses, what
not. In which Inquiry I will not insist on that general qualification of a
Witness, viz. that he must be Probus and legalis Homo: (for little Probity to
be sure, whatver of Legality in that large Sense, is to be looked for in that
sort of men, who commonly turn Informers.) But I will propose the Question,
whether any man can be a fair and lawful Witness, who Swears on his own behalf,
and for his own advantage? If he cannot (which I suppose will be granted) then
is the Informer excluded from being a Witness, since if he Swear, he Swares
clearly (no man more) for his advantage: And he is not put upon Swearing, but
puts himself upon it, merely for advantage-sake to himself. If it be said, he
Swares for the King; the Answer is, and for himself too: He swears no more for
the King, than he does for himself; the King is to have but a third part of the
Fines, and the Informer himself as much. If in Trials at Law, no man is
admitted for a Witness who is interessed in the Cause, and is to reap advantage
by it; there is then great reason sure, that the Informers should be set aside,
in point of Evidence: Since he is not only interessed in the Cause, and to reap
advantage by it; but is Spurred on to the undertaking merely by the hope, and
desire he has of gaining thereby. If in a Trial it should be proved, that a
Witness was promised to have so much money given him, in case by his Evidence
the Cause should be gained: Would it not be a fair exception against that
Witness, and a just ground to set him aside? The Informer is the Accuser: and
is it reasonable that he should be both Accuser and Witness too? It Is he that
makes the Complaint: and shall he be admitted to prove his own Complaint by his
own Evidence only! If he has ought to charge any man with, let him in this, as
in all other Cases, make good his Charge by the Evidence of such Witnesses, as
are uninteressed in the Cause, and of unsuspected Credit. But this Exception
lies not against Informers only, but against all others also who are to reap
benifit to themselves, by the Conviction. Such I take to be, The Poor of that
Parish where the Offense is alleged to have been committed: for if the Party
accused be convicted, they are to have a third part of the Fine; so that they,
like the Informers, Sweat for their own immediate Advantage; and therefore, by
a Parity of Reason, are equally to be excluded from giving Evidence in such a
Case. To these may be added all such as are Rated to the Relief of the Poor in
that Parish, where such Offense is alleged to have been committed. For though
these do not, as the former, swear for their own immediate advantage; yet the
Evidence of these does mediately, and in the Consequences of it, tend to their
own advantage, in easing themselves thereby of the Charge of maintaining their
Poor, in whole or in part. I could instance a Parish, in which the Overseers of
the Poor do at this present forbear making a Rate for the Relief of the Poor,
upon a Prospect they have, and a declared expectation, of Moneys likely to come
in by Fines and Forfeitures upon this Act; by which they hope and propose to
ease the Parish of that Charge. Now is not every Contributer to the Poors Rate
in that Parish, justly to excepted against as an Evidence in this Case, when
their Evidence so plainly tends to their own advantage and interest? If a man
offer to swear for the enlarging his own Parish-Bounds, he is not allowed for a
good Witness, nor will his Evidence be taken in that Case. The Reason is,
because by the enlarging his Parish-(...) it is supposed some profit or
advantage may accrue to him (...) be so in that Case, why should it not rather
be so in this; the same reason in this Case being no less forcible, and more
obvious than in that? Nor are the Constables and other Officers free from being
excepted against as Witnesses in this Case. For the Act giving a third part of
the Penalties to the Informers, and to such Person and Persons as the Justice
shall appoint, having regard to their diligence and industry in discovering,
dispersing and punishing of the said Conventicles; it cannot well be understood
that this is meant of any other Persons than the Constables, and those other
Officers mentioned in the Act, because none but they are authorized to disperse
and punish the Conventicles. And therefore, since they are by this Clause of the
Act put into a capacity of sharing with the Informers; (at the Justice's
direction) and consequently may be tempted with hopes of advantage; it seems
but reasonable that they also should be set aside, in point of Evidence, and
that the proof should be made by Persons of other Parishes, to whom no profit
can accrue thereby, and against whom no color of exception may lie.

6. Although the Act does require every Justice of the Peace, upon Proof made
to him, to make a Record of the Offense proved, and thereupon to impose upon
the Offender so convicted, for the first Offense 5 s. and for every after, 10
s. yet it does not enjoin the Justice to prosecute. He is not by the letter of
the Act expressly injoynned, so much as to issue out a Warrant for the Levying
the fine; much less is he obliged to drive on the Officers to take distress.
Nay, it is doubtful to some professed Lawyers, whether a Justice of the Peace may
grant such a Warrant, or not; in as much as in this particular he is not
expressly required or authorized so to do, as in other parts of the Act he is.
But however, this seems clear, that inasmuch as there is a reasonable ground of
Doubt, the Justice does not incur the forfeiture of 100 l. in case he do refuse
to grant such Warrant, provided he ground his Refusal upon that doubt, and
declare that to be the reason of his refusal at the time when he so refuses:
for then he cannot be convicted of wilfully and wittingly omitting the
performance of his Duty, as the words of the Act are in relation to that
forfeiture, and which must be proved in order to the Recovery of it

7. The Act does not inflict the Penalty of 20 l. or 40 l. upon any Person for
Praying, as it does for Preach or Teaching.

The Words of the Act are, [ That (...) Person who shall take upon him to
Preach or Teach in (...) ^uch Meeting etc. and shall thereof be convicted as
aforesaid; shall forfeit for every such first offense the sum of 20 l. -- And
if such Offender, etc. shall at any time again commit the like Offense, etc.
and he thereof convicted; etc. than such Offender so convicted of such like
Offense or Offenses, shall for every such offense, incur the penalty of 40 l.]
Here the Penalties of 20 l. and 40 l. are restrained to Preaching and Teaching;
Not a Word of Praying. Now Praying is neither Preaching nor Teaching: for
Preaching and Teaching are directed to Men, but Prayer is directed to God, whom
no man can Teach. If therefore any man shall be informed against for Preaching,
and upon Examination it appear that he was only heard to Pray, he cannot be
thereby Legally Convicted of being a Preacher, or incur the Fines imposed by
the Act on such as Preach or Teach. This has been tried upon an Appeal, and
Judgment given for the Appellant.

8. This Act does not forbid Women to Preach or Teach: For though it seems at
first to speak indefinitely of every person, yet it immediately restrains it to
the Male Sex, by using the Masculine Gender only, [Him and His.] The Words of
the Act are, That every person who shall take upon him to preach etc. shall
forfeit, etc. to be levied upon his Goods, etc. and if the said Preacher or
Teacher be a stranger, and his name not known, etc.] It is not said, who shall
take upon him or her, etc. or to be levied upon his or her Goods, etc. Or if
his or her name be not known, etc. as in the next Paragraph of the Act,
relating to the Meeting-Places, it is. For there it is said [ That person who
shall wittingly or willingly, suffer any such Conventicle, etc. to be held in
his or her house, etc. shall forfeit 20. l. to be levied upon his or her Goods,
etc. or in case of his or her poverty, etc.] Here the Gender is very carefully
varied. And as this variation of Gender from him to her does clearly subject
Women to the Fines for suffering such Conventicles, mentioned in the Act, at
their Houses: So the omi^sion of that variation, and using only the Masculine
Gender, Him and His, not Her at all, does as clearly exempt Women from being
fined for Preaching. This also has been tried upo^^ an Appeal, and judgment
thereupon given for the Apellant.

9. If above the number of four persons, besides the Family, be met together,
and sit in silence, so that the Informers are not able to prove that there was
any words spoken among them, and so no overt act of religious Exercise. Such a
Meeting has been adjudged not to come within this Act, nor the Persons so met
to be justly liable to any of those Fines, ^mposeable by this Act. For they who
are finable by this Act must be such, as are Convicted of having been at a
Meeting where was some Exercise of ^el^gion, in other manner than according to
the Liturgy, etc. But what Exercise of Religion can those persons be Convicted
of, who only sit still* and neither say a^y thing, nor do any thing? If their
minds and spirits be inwardly gathered into a spiritual Exercise toward God,
who is the Father of Spirits; That methinks should not be in other manner than
according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England. However, that
falls not under the Cognizance of outward Evidence. But that which the Justices
may well hold the Informers and their Witnesses to is, what Exercise of
Religion they saw there? And if they are not able to give account of some
Exercise of Religion there used, and that in other manner than according to the
Liturgy, etc. the Justice has very good ground to reject their Information. In
this Case also upon a Trial, the Persons so met have been acquitted.

11. And lastly, concerning the House or Place where the Meeting is held, there
seems to be a great mistake. For some eager Prosecutors of this Act, for every
time that proof has been made to them, of a Meeting being held at such or such
an House, have imposed a fresh Fine for the House, which in my apprehension,
(with submission notwithstanding to more able judgment) the Act affords no
color for. The words are these [ And be it further enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, that every Person who shall wittingly and willingly suffer any such
Conventicle, Meeting or unlawful Assembly aforesaid, to be held in his or her
house, out-house, Barn, Yard or Backside, and be convicted thereof in manner
aforesaid shall forfeit the sum of 20 l. to be levied in manner aforesaid, upon
his or her Goods and Chattels; or in case of his or her poverty or inability as
aforesaid, upon the Goods and Chattels of such persons who shall be convicted
in manner aforesaid, of being present at the same Conventicle; and the Money so
levied to be disposed of in manner aforesaid.] This is the whole of that matter
verba^im: In which there is no mention of any more or other than one Fine, and
that of 20 l. No iteration or repeating of the Fine, for every such Meeting; as
in other parts of this Act, where the Fine is to be repeated, It is expressly
said. For instance, In the case of the Hearer, there is not only the Fine of 5
s. set for the first Offense; but a double Fine afterward for every such
Offense, expressly. Again, In the case of the Preacher, There is not only the
Fine of 20 l. for the first Offense; but a double Fine afterward for every
such Offense, expressly. Again, In the Case of a Constables wilfully and
wittingly ^mitting the performance of his duty, it is said expressly, He shall
forfeit for every such Offense the sum of 5 l. But in this Case of the
Meeting House, there is no such Expression used, no such Provision made, no
such Direction given, ^o such Course required. Nay, here is not so much as an
Implication of a Second; for the Word [First] is not here used, as in the other
Cases, of Preacher and Hearer, it is. Now since in all places of the Act, where
the Penalty is to be repeated or more than once inflicted; it is expressly said
[for every such Offence] which Sentence in this Place is wholly omitted, take
it for a very persuasive Argument, That it was never intended any more than one
Fine should be set for one Meeting House, how often foever met in. But if any
apprehend otherwise, and should think the Intention of the Lawmakers reached
further; yet since the Letter of the Law extends no further, since also the
Clemency of English Natures has resolved it into an Axiom, That poenal Laws
are to be taken, in mitiori Sens^ in the more mild and favorable Sense: there
seems to be here at least fair Scope for all (who would not be Severer than
Severity, and even exceed Summum Jus) to exercise some degree of Compassion
toward the afflicted. To which Christian Temper; and tends frame of Spirit,
what words can be more moving and apt to dispose, than those of our blessed
Savior, in his Sermon in the Mount, viz. Blessed are the Merciful; for they
shall obtain Mercy, Mat. 5. 7.

THE END.

