TO 'EN 'AP: OR, An Exercitation UPON A MOMENTOUS QUESTION IN Divinity, and
Case of Conscience:

VIZ. Whether it be lawful for any Person to Act contrary to the Opinion of
his own Conscience, formed from Arguments that to him appear very Probable,
though not Necessary or Demonstrative.

WHERE The Opinions of the Papists, Vasquez, Sanches, Azonius, etc. are showed,
as also the Opinions of some Protestants, viz. Mr. Hooker, Bp Sanderson, Dr.
Fulwood, etc. and compared with the Opinions of others; The Negative Part of
the Question Maintained; the Unreasonableness of the Popish Opinions, and some
Protestants, for Blind Obedience, detected; and many other things discoursed.

By a Protestant.

Cum ergo Opinionem aliquam, non ob assensum aliorum, sed ob Causas Probabiles,
pro vera habes, obligatus es in Conscientia ne contra eam agas, licet
Superiores aliud a te exigant, donec rations veriores audias; etc. Baldvinus
in Cas. Cons. l. 1. cap. 9. Quicquid fit contra Conscientiam, peccatum est:
Sive Conscientia sit Errans, sive Opinans, sive recte informata. Alsted. in
Theol. Cas. c. 2. n. 2. Nunquam licet contra propriam Opinionem, vel certam vel
probabilem agere, propter aliorum Authoritatem. Ames in Cas. l. 1. cap. 5.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1675.

TO THE Christian and Protestant READER.
Reader,
THou can not but think we have been a little sensible of the many Attacques,
have been made upon our Reputation in the sight of the World, representing us
as persons hardened with Prejudice, blinded with Passion, biassed by some
false, yet plausible Principles which we must not recant, Men who have nothing
to say for our selves, factious, seditious, ungovernable, fit for Galleys, etc.
Insomuch as a late Author tells his Lord, That all the Saying and Writing in
the World concerning us, will be to no purpose; (nor indeed will it, if it be
no more nervous than any thing we see in his Book,) for as to his two Cases, he
first supposes, That we judge the things required of us lawful, (is not this
Noble disputing, to Beg the Question?) we would fain have him name us one
Non-con. of that mind: But it was not enough for him to beg it once, but in
his Case of Scandal, he beggs again; That those who urge Scandal as an
Argument, understand by it, only Grieving or displeasing some. Most ridiculous!
Can he show us any Non-con. that ever said, That indeed he judged the thing
Lawful, but because some People would be grieved or angered, therefore he would
not Conform. Ad Populum phaleras. It is true, the Argument from Scandal is
sometimes used, but always in that Sense wherein himself judges it good; That
is, because by our doing of it, supposing any of us do think some thing
lawful, yet should we do it, we should be occasion of sin to others, probably
inducing them to do it, who judge it unlawful. But the truth is, take the
Argument in this sense, it is not valuable, not one of us of a thousand thinks
the things required, Lawful; for those that do so, we should advise them, to
contemn the Scandal, because of the Superiors Command. In his Second Case he
quits himself as well, for he beggs again the Question: That the suffering
Nonconformists would grant him, that they do not judge they suffer in the
Exercise of True Religion; that is surely, that they may not presumptuously sin
against God. Indeed here he endeavors to prove it by a series of Propositions,
but there he pitifully beggs both his 5th Conclusion, and his 6th; upon which
two all the rest hang. For though it be granted, that it belongs to the
Magistrate, to determine Circumstances in the Worship of God, i. e.
Circumstances of Action, quatenus an humane action, whether necessary to it, as
Time and Place; or convenient for it, and decent, i. e. manifestly so, from the
Light of Nature, and the universal Guise and Custom of the place: Yet the
Nonconformists never yielded any Power under Heaven, a Right to appoint
Ceremonies, i. e. Circumstances appropriated to the Action as Religious; these
they say, (contrary to his third Conclusion,) are determined in Scripture, or
if not, may be left to liberty, (contrary to his fourth Conclusion.) Thus
Reader, judge how fairly we are dealt with. One writes like a Bedlam, and rails
like a Female out of Billings-gate, instead of arguing; another comes out like
a man of War, but will not sight, unless we will first lay down our Arms,
grant him the things are lawful, and then he will crow over us at an
insufferable rate. It Is time to put an end to these things; we have therefore
thought fit, To revoke this whole Controversy to an Original Question;

Whether it be lawful to act against an Opining Conscience?

If our Brethren will agree with us in the Negative, we will join Issue with
them there, Whether we have not probable Arguments to induce us, to conclude
the things required of us, unlawful; or at least to supply what in this point
is defective. For we think we need ask our liberty for no longer time than,
till Cotton, Ames, Gillespy, Calderwood, Bradshaw, and forty more be answered.
If these Eager Gentlemen, be Men, and Scholars, let them come forth, leave
railing, and misrepresenting our Opinions, and take them as we state them, and
answer strictly. If not, Silence would tend more to their reputation amongst
all intelligent persons, than such impertinent Scriblings.

We have been more willing to speak to this Question, because it is the very
Foundation of Popery, (so much feared.)

That it is lawful for men to act contrary to the Opinions of their own
Consciences, if other Doctors think it lawful and necessary, if Superiors
command it.

Possess but people of the Brutishness of this Opinion, and you have done more
to bar out Popery, than confuting twenty of their particular Opinions, which
are but Superstructures upon this Foundation. It Is obliging men to Believe as
the Church believes, and to do all they are commanded by Ecclesiastical
Superiors, without disputing with, or harkening to their own Judgments, that
must bring Popery into any Nation, so full of Knowledge as England is, if ever
it comes on. Other things indeed may bring in Persecution, but not Popery; and
that Persecution will not be of many days. Seeing therefore the Author of the
Cases of Scandal and Persecution thought it worthy of him, to lay aside his
thoughts of writing against the Papists, as he tells us, p. 3. of his
Introduction, to speak against Nonconformists, (and that when he had no more to
say than that Book has,) and that upon the advice of so grave a Person as Bp
Sanderson, (whom we reverence, as better understanding his Learning, and candid
stating Questions, and judicious speaking to them.) We hope we shall be excused
in our Adventure to speak to a Question, which while it offers something in our
own defense, does manifestly strike at the very root and Foundation of the
Popish Religion, which almost wholly owes it self to Blind Obedience. Reader,
we shall not complement thee: Read, acquit or condemn us, as thou see cause,
upon weighing what we say, and judge what is against us, praeter merum imperium
and convitia.

Whether it be lawful to act contrary to an Opining Conscience?
CHAP. I. The Question shortly stated. The terms [Conscience,] and [Opining]
opened: The Various complexions of Conscience; arising from the different
mediums by which light shines into a soul about a Practical Proposition. The
terms of Faith, Science, Opinion, Doubting, Suspicion, Scruple, opened. The
true notion of a Fixed Conscience, an Opining Conscience, a doubting, and a
Scruputons Conscience. The Schoolmens Notion of an Opinion. The Question fully
stated. The method propounded for handling it.
SECT. I.

THe question is shortly and plainly this. Whether without sinning against God,
a man can act contrary to the dictate of his own Conscience, though but
Opining. By Conscience, not to trouble our Reader with the various Notions, and
Homonymies of it; which have little relation to our intended discourse: we
mean, That Judgment in man, by which he determines concerning good or evil,
as it relates to practice, according to the Dictate of Natural, or enlightened
Reason. We think it well described by the Schoolmen, Judicium quo aliquid bonum
esse vel malum judicamus. Sanehes. in Op. mor. lib. 1. cap. 9.1. Reason is a
noble faculty in man, by which he discourses Conclusions from Principles; and
these either Connate or Natural, or acquired from exercise, reading and
comparing things, with things, Now the work of Reason is, when a practical
Proposition is exhibited to it, to sit as a Judge upon it, enquiring either
upon the Truth or falshod of it, by comparing it with these Principle, hence it
makes up a Judgment whether the Proposition be true or false, good or bad.
This Judgment Divines call Judicium singular: or Judicium conscientiae
practicum, The Judgment of Conscience, or Conscience it self.

Sect. 2. This Judgment is made up by certain Mediums, or arguments, which do
not in all cases, shine with the like degree of light upon the soul: for as
there is a difference in Propositions, some are True, some are false; of those
which are, some are necessarily so: So as it is impossible they should be
false. Some are contingently so, which are true, but it is possible they may
be, or might have been false; as now That God is good, is a Proposition
necessarily true. That Peter was good is true, but no more than contingently
so, for he was bad: So there is likewise a great difference in the minds assent
to Propositions; some it agrees to, some it denies. Of those to which it
agrees, There are some to which it agrees firmly, and fixedly, without the
least doubt of them. Now these are either such as are Propositions of faith,
being things plainly revealed in the word of God: or, Matters evident to sense.
Thus every man will agree the fire is hot, and that the Sun shines at noon day:
or else such, which have a certain cause of their truth, which we can see. The
Assent of the mind to the first is called Faith, which is the minds assent to
the truth of a Proposition, upon the authority of God revealing it. The Assent
of the mind to the two latter is called Science. Now there are other
Propositions, for which the soul can have no such Mediums as these to discern
them by, But either, some Humane Authority, or some probable Reason. The Assent
which the mind gives upon either of these accounts is called Opinion, which is
but the Judgment of Conscience, from probable Arguments, usually called
dialectick arguments, for there are not many things capable of demonstration.

. 3. Hence the certainty of the Mind, as to the Truth, or Falsehood of any
proposition, is, 1. Either Supernatural, from Divine Revelation; or 2. Natural,
from the Evidence of Sense, or Demonstration; or 3. Moral, from probable
Authority or Arguments. But now in regard of the differing Force of Arguments,
and the variety of them, for, or against the same proposition: This assent is
capable of various degrees, and may variously be encumbered. A Christian may
give some Credit to a proposition, yet have some scruples about it (which like
little stones in the shoe, from whence the term is borrowed) may trouble his
Practice: Or may have some doubts whether the thing be true or no: Or I may
have an Opinion, that is, verily judge the thing to be so, or not so.

. 4. The Philosopher tells us, that in Moral things, a Moral certainty is
enough to Act upon; and indeed it must be so, for as to most things of
particular practice, we can neither be Naturally nor Supernaturally
ascertained. Not Naturally, because we cannot see the certain Causes. Not
Supernaturally, for it had been impossible that God's Word should have set
every individual Man a particular Rule for every individual Action. In these
Cases therefore (as we said) a Moral certainty is ground enough for Action,
which is, or may be consistent with some Scruples or Fears. For Example,
suppose this the Question.

Whether a Man be sit to Receive the Supper of the Lord?

It may be he cannot fully satisfy himself, but he may have some fears, and
jealousies, and Scruples, of the Reasonableness of which, he can give himself
no very good Account; but yet he finds so much ground to conclude he is, that
he is Morally certain. In this case he is bound not to omit it. Suppose one
sick of a Quinsie, or Pleurisy, or some other Disease, usually Mortal without
timely Bleeding, and application of means: He is not Mathematically, or
Demonstratively certain, that he shall dye, if he does not use such means, (his
Natural strength may Conquer it) but he may be Morally certain, and so Obliged
to Act. Whether a Man may be said to know, that of which he is only Morally
certain, is a little Velitation among Critical Philosophers. Aristotle tells
us, that what falls under Science, considered as an Habit of the Mind, must
be something demonstrable, but this is only a strife about words.

. 5. Much in the present Debate, depending upon the term Opining, the fixing of
the true Notion of an Opinion, or at least, such a one as we understand in the
Question is of great Consequence. It is sometimes used to signify a sudden and
rash assent of the Understanding to a proposition. But in this sense, we have
nothing to do with it. 2. It is taken for the assent of the Mind to one part of
a proposition as true, yet not without fear of being mistaken. 3. But Thirdly
(in which sense we use it) It is also taken to signify the Souls assent to a
proposition upon probable Arguments. That is such Arguments as do not
demonstrate the thing to the Soul, so as to put it out of all possibility of
doubting, but make it appear very like to be true. Probabile est quod quum
certum non sit magis tamen videtur esse verum vel falsum, says the Logician.
Aquinas, in his Sums, Qu. 1. Art. 4. Describes an Opinion according to the
Second Notion, thus.

It is (says he) the Act of the Understanding, inclining to one part of a
Contradiction, not without a fear of the Truth of the other part.

Valentia (as he is quoted by Sanchez, Op. Mor. l. 1. c. 9.) will allow no Man
any longer to keep within the Latitude of on Opinion, than while he persuades
himself, that although he has probable Reasons to judge this, or that Lawful,
or unlawful, yet they are not such; but (if he could hit on it) might be
Answered by himself, or some other: But yet neither Sanchez, nor Vasquez, nor
Azorius will allow this straightened Notion of an Opinion, though we cannot see
how they will avoid it, till they put [cum formidine alterius] out of their own
Descriptions, for what should he who opens be afraid of, but that his
Arguments are Answerable? So as in effect they all agree, That a Man persuaded
upon probable Arguments, of the Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness of a thing, no
longer Opineth, than he fears his own Reasons may be Answered. But to us, Be
it so, or so, it is all a case; we call that an Opinion, which is The Assent of
the Mind to a Proposition upon Arguments, not Demonstrably, but Probably
certain. And we have here the Advantage; for if we prove it not Lawful to act
against an Opining Conscience in their sense, they will yield it much more
Unlawful to act against an Opining Conscience in this sense, which with them is
a fixed Conscience, either in good or evil. And that it is unlawful to act
against such a Conscience: Vasquez is so confident, that he Disputes against
Almainus, and Andreas de Castra, who had reserved unto God a Liberty to
dispense with a Man acting against a fixed Conscience, so as that a Man may do
it without guilt; and contends, That God himself cannot dispense with it,
because it is an acting against the Law of Nature, Vesquez in 12. Disp. 61.
Cap. 2.

. 6. There are [besides Opinion] some other terms, Divines take Notice of:
Suspicion, which they make the Jealousy of the Mind, or some light Inclination
to one part, yet without an Assent. Aquinas makes it the Younger Daughter of an
Opinion, and calls it an Opinion with a very light Evidence. Doubting is
another, which they make the Pendulousness of the Mind, as to the Lawfulness or
Unlawfulness of a thing after Debate. Now, from this variety of Propositions,
and the variety of Mediums, through which a Light comes into our Minds,
discovering the Truth, or Falsehood of them, and the variety of our assent
consequent to such Mediums, arise the various Notions of a fixed Conscience. A
Doubting Conscience. An Opining Conscience. A. Scrupulous Conscience. These are
but the several Complexions of Conscience, caused from the variety or degree of
that Light in which it sees a Proposition as true or false.

. 7. If the Matter in Question be of that Nature, that it thinks it can find a
plain, and particular Evidence for it in Scripture, or can judge of it by the
certain Evidence of sense, or see it in the certain Causes, the Conscience is
fixed, either truly, or erroneously; and (as to this thing) bears the Name of
a fixed, Good, or Erroneous Conscience, as it is, or is not deceived in its
apprehension of the Medium. If the Matter of the Proposition, or that part to
which the Soul adhereth, be of that Nature, that the Soul cannot find a plain
Revelation in Scripture, nor discern it by sense, nor see it in the certain
necessary Causes, but has many probable Arguments, rather for the one part
than the other: Whether it thinks these Arguments Answerable or no, or thinks
that possibly they may be Answerable, but as yet it can see no Answer to them
which it judges sussicient; this now is an Opining Conscience. If the Mind be
equally balanced on both sides with Arguments, that it has as much to say why
such a thing should be Lawful, as why it should be unlawful, or unlawful, as
Lawful; this is now a Doubting Conscience, and rarely happens to a knowing
and intelligent Soul. If the Soul be afraid, that this or that is not Lawful,
or fancieth that such a thing is Lawful, but has none, or if any very light
Reasons for it, possibly such or such Men say so, or such or such Men do it, or
do it not; this is a Suspicious, or Scrupulous Conscience.

. 8. In short, in Order to a Man's spotless walking. There are infinite
Propositions to be weighed; God has hung up a Beam, called Conscience, in
every individual Soul, in Order to the weighing of them; upon this Beam is
written, 1 These. 5.21. PROVE ALL THINGS, hold fast that which is good. The
Weights which God has allowed us to weigh things by, are, Divine Revelation,
Demonstrations, Evidence of Sense, Topics or more probable Logical Arguments,
made up from Logical places, and Conclusions formed from the comparing of
Rational and Spiritual things it is Evident, with Rational or Spiritual things
more Evident; when any of these fully weigh down the Souls assent, there is a
Fixed Conscience: When they equally incline the Balance one way, or another,
there is a Doubting Conscience. When they strongly incline the Soul more one
way than another, there is an Opining Conscience. When they cause a very light
inclination of the Soul to one part rather than to the other, there is a
Suspicious, or a Scrupulous Conscience.

. 9. Now, what the Duty of Christians is, under these various Complexions of
Conscience, is a point, which has justly exercised valuable Divines of all
persuasions, for as we are capable by any of our Actions to incurr the wrath of
God, so as to them generally, our Consciences are Complexionated, one way or
another; for if we Act, we either do a thing, being fixedly persuaded, it is
Lawful, or unlawful, or doubting whether it be so, or strongly inclined to
think it is so or so; or suspecting, and being scrupulous. Concerning a
Conscience that is fixed in that which is truly good, none ever doubted of the
Lawfulness of Acting according to it; or unlawfulness to Act against it: But
concerning Conscience in all the other Circumstances, there have many Questions
been started, as to the Truth in which the World is very far from being
Universally agreed. Whether a Man may Act against a Conscience fixed in an
Error, is a Question spoken to by most Schoolmen and Casuists. It is usually
said, that such a Conscience does Ligare non Obligare. It is not our business
to dispute, how well that distinction (Ordinarily Fathered upon Durandus,) is
worded: but we do not remember, we ever met with any Deliberate Divine, that
would affirm. That in case a Man were fully (though falsely persuaded) that this
or that thing was unlawful to be done, yet he might Lawfully do it. Though
indeed (if the thing be a necessary Duty) he sins in not doing it. Vasquez
says, it is against the very Law of Nature. Sanchez says, that although the
Law of God be the primary Rule, yet every man's Conscience is the proximate Rule
of his Actions, and therefore be cannot Act against it. Dr. Ames says, That he
who does it Interpretatively, sins against God: For he must needs do contrary
to what he believes to be the will of God. Eiliacius. tract. 21. M. Qu. c. 4.
says, That he which does it, does that which he thinks to be sin: And, says
he, hoc ipso amat peccatum, by this thing he shows he loves to sin, and
chooses sin. But this is not our Question: We suppose a Man not to be fully and
demonstrably persuaded, that this or that Action is unlawful, but only upon
Arguments, which seem to him very probable, verily to believe it is unlawful,
and Quaery whether, while he so believes he can do that thing. And this
Question divides it self, according to the different Notion of an Opinion
which we before hinted, viz. Whether a Man thus persuaded of the unlawfulness
of an Action, by Arguments indeed, not demonstrative, but such as he judges
very probable, and which he himself cannot Answer, so neither does he think
others can: may yet, because his Principles are not Supernaturally, or
Mathematically made certain to him, act against the Opinion of his own
Conscience, in Obedience to the will of any Creature. 2. Whether a Man thus
persuaded of the unlawfulness of any thing, by Arguments not demonstrative, but
probable (as before said) though at present he can neither himself answer them,
nor see them answered by any other; yet suspecting they may be answered, may
while this is the Condition of his Conscience, act against the present judgment
of it, though it be encumbered with such a Jealousy or Suspicion.

Now, as to the first of these Questions, we find little or nothing spoken in
the Affirmative, by any Popish Casuists, or Schoolmen. They generally making
some fear of the contrary part of the Practical Proposition, to which the
Person inclines, and Jealousy that this part of the proposition is false, and
his Arguments Answerable, essential to an Opinion, conclude, that a Soul
persuaded, though but upon probable Arguments (if it has no such fear,
suspicion, or Jealousy, to have a fixed Conscience, and though fixed in an
Error, yet conclude it utterly unlawful for a Man to Act against it. But if
there be in any Soul any fear, suspicion, or Jealousy, that its Arguments may
be Answered, then they conclude the Soul but Opining, and do indeed d^spute for
a Lawfulness to Act against it, though under several Cautions and limitations.
At this rebound therefore we will take the Question, and state it thus.

Quest. Whether, supposing a Man or Woman not Demonstrably persuaded, that this
or that Action is unlawful, but from arguments, which to him or her appear very
probable, verily believing so, yet not without some Jealousy, Fear, or
Suspicion that he may be mistaken, and his arguments may be answered: may,
whiles he thus believes, do that thing in Obedience to Men, which in this
manner he judges sinful and unlawful to be done.

For the clearer handling of this momentous, and important Question, we shall
with all Candor Examine.

1. What Divines of all sorts, whether Popish, or Protestant, have determined
in the case, and upon what grounds? 2. We shall endeavor to defend the
Negative part of the Question, proving it wickedness for any to act contrary to
the judgment of their own Consciences, though that Judgment be only made up
from intrinsic, probable arguments. 3. We shall answer the Objections of
those, who have spoke any thing for the affirmative, with any color of Reason.
CHAP. II. The Opinions of Popish Schoolmen, and Casuists in the Case
particularly of Vasquez, Sanchez Medina, Filiucius, Azorius. Their Monstrous
Assertions, what they make necessary to make an Opinion probable. The Opinion
of one Doctor according to them sufficient to warrant Men to Act contrary to
their own Opinions. Their Opinions what a Man ought to do, when Superiors
Command Inferiors, what the Inferiors judge unlawful. The sum of their
detestable Doctrine.
. 1. WE will begin with the Popish Authors. Vasquez tells us, that the Question
is not, Whether a Man ought not to follow the Judgment of his own Conscience,
or could act against it; but when it happens, that there are two opposite
Opinions about a thing to be done: One saying, it is a sin to do it; another
says, it is not: The difficulty is, says he, how a Man should carry, himself
betwixt them, so as to form up a singular Judgment of Conscience, which without
sin he may embrace. Vasquez in 12. disp. 72. cap. 2. So then the Jesuit (it
seems) does yield the case, viz. That if once a Man has formed a particular
Judgment of Conscience, that the thing is unlawful, though it be but from
probable Arguments, he cannot do it, he only prescribes in a variety of
Opinions in the World, as to a singular Matter, how Men should well form that
Judgment. But not to wrong him in the 4. cap. of that Disputation, n. 15. he
seems to be of another mind, and asserteth. That a Man in some Cases, may act
contrary to his own Opinion, yea, that a Learned Man may Lawfully act contrary
to his own Opinion, according to the Opinion of others, though it be less safe,
and less probable than his own, provided there be any Reason and probability
for the Opinion of those others. Yet still retaining his Opinion, as more
probable, looking upon that Opinion of others; as probable by extrinsecal
Arguments [that is the Authority, Judgments, and Testimony of others] though he
judges his own Opinion more probable by intrinsic Arguments.

The Reasons he gives for this, are these.

1. Because we may act according to any Opinion which seems probable to us.
We will anon Argue that Case, whether it be possible that any thing, from mere
extrinsick Arguments can seem probable to a reasonable Soul. The contrary to
which at the same time seems probable from intrinsic Arguments: But we know
how far the Doctrine of Probabilities serves the woeful Interest of that
Apostate Synagogue of Rome.

-- Largo
Proventu est, gnavum non deceptura colonum.
2. Because it seems incredible to be true, that a Man may not do what all the
World judges Lawful, if he alone judges it unlawful. All the World, we
confess, is a large term, and puts the Case to the highest pinch, but yet it
seems not at all incredible, if that be true which the Schoolmen Universally
agree; That the particular Conscience must be the proximate Rule of action: For
what shall it profit a Man, more to follow all the World, than to gain all the
World, if be loses his own Soul? A Man is certainly bound to follow his own
Rules, not another. These are that Jesuits best Reasons: He confesses that
in this he follows Medina, some of whose Reasons he yet rejects. Further, to
make the Opinion of another probable to us, he requires,

1. That it be the Opinion of many; not one single Doctor. 2. That it be
commonly Judged to contain no Error. 3. That we know that those Doctors have
considered, and Examined our Reasons.
These things supposed, he thinks that although in a Matter of Practice we have
a more probable Opinion, and that from Arguments fetched from the Nature of the
thing, and Scripture appearances, yet a Man may act contrary if others judge it
is Lawful, yea, though he has some fear, that that Opinion of others is not
true: In which Case, both Cajetan and Navarrus (as he confesses) differ from
him: But he concludes it, ib. Cap. 5. n. 26. provided that this fear amount not
to a doubt or haesitation (we wonder how that is possible to be avoided) for in
that Case, he avoweth it not Lawful to act contrary to our own Opinion, in
Compliance with others. This is the Doctrine of Vasquez and Medina; and which
Vasquez says is Common in the Schools.

. 2. Sanchez, Op. mor. lib. 1. cap. 9. n. 13. States the Question thus: Whether
it be Lawful for any to act according to the Opinion of others which he judges
probable, though in respect of the danger of sin it is safe, against the Opinion
of his own Conscience which be judges more probable, and more safe. He
confesses that some deny it, because of those two Ordinary Rules.

In dubiis animae tutior pars est eligenda, and Tene certum and relinque
incertum, i. e. In doubtful Cases we ought to take the more certain part, and
to leave what is more uncertain, and to hold what is certain. And again,
Because a Man cannot act against the dictate of his Conscience. But Sanchez is
himself of another mind, as he there declares, viz. That it is Lawful for a
Man to act contrary to the Opinion of his own Conscience, which he judges
safest, according to the Opinion of others which he judges less probably true,
and less safe. Of this mind besides Vasquez and Medina (before mentioned by us)
he says are Mercado, Velentia, Julier, Suarez, Enriquez, Azorius, Bannes,
Nauarrus, Arragon, Salon, Lopez, Ledesma, Salas, Sairus, and Leonardus. More
than a full Jury, were they all good Men and true: But let us hear their strong
Reasons. Sanchez gives us them thus.

1. Because he who thus acts, acts according to Reason, and therefore his
action is not to be charged with rashness or imprudence. 2. Because in this
case, a man may have a Moral certainty. 3. Because as that is a probable
Opinion in matters of Speculations, which a man may embrace without danger of
Error or deceit. So in Moral things, that Opinion is probable which a man may
embrace without sin. 4. Because it is only sinful to act doubting.
. 3. But is it possible that a reasonable Soul should understand so wild
ratiocinations? Suppose a Papist, or at least, one who has been so bred, upon
the Question,

Whether there be Idolatry in the Mass or no?

Sees very probable intrinsecal Arguments to make him conclude, That the Mass
is Idolatrous, and that it is unlawful for him to go to it any more. On the
other side, he finds many Doctors of their Church, positive, that it is not
Idolatrous, and that he may be present at it (we will suppose that they urge
it, not as necessary, but only plead it Lawful.) Here now the private Opinion,
is both more probable, and more safe. More probable it must be, because it is a
man's own Opinion, and that formed from intrinsic Arguments; so that to him it
must be more probable. More safe it must be, supposing it be only attested by
others, as Lawful. We would fain know now whether under these Circumstances,
this Man may Lawfully go to Mass against the dictate of his Conscience. Yes
(say they) for the Opinion of the Doctors makes the contradictory part of the
Proposition probable too. Possibly something might be said for this if the
Person had no intrinsecal Arguments to incline him to the other part. But is
not this Nonsense to any Reasonable Soul? That it should judge contradictions
both probably true; the one from one sort of Arguments, the other from another
sort. Yet this is a Postulatum begged in the Case, both by Vasquez and Sanchez,
and all their Brethren; That one and the same thing, at the same time, and to
the same Soul, upon differing Arguments, may appear in all probability Lawful
and Unlawful, which we confess is a Riddle too hard for us; or we think any
others but themselves. But suppose this were possible, as both Sanchez and
Vasquez plead. Yet it is not Lawful for a Man to act according to the Opinion
of another (says Cajetan and Navarr) if he be in any fear that others are in
the wrong; and though both Vasquez and Sanchez reject this, yet even they are
so kind, as to grant, that the Person cannot act in this case, if he does
doubt. Now, we would fain know how a Man can possibly have intrinsic Arguments
against what is propounded to him for Practice, and not haesitare ac dubitare
(which are their words) doubt at all, whether he may Lawfully act. Or how he
can act with that Moral certainty which Sanchez speaks of. Can a Man (think we)
be Morally certain of that, against which he has probable intrinsecal
Arguments, merely because others say the contrary. And this too, although what
they say appear to the Person concerned both less probable, and less safe. What
strange Apprehensions have these Men, both of themselves, and of God?

. 4. Filiucius (another of the Popish Casuist^) tells us. That it is Lawful
to follow the more probable Opinion, leaving that which is less probable. Qu.
mor. tr. 21. c. 4. n. 126. Compare this with what we heard Vasquez even now
saying. That a man's own Opinion is more probable (and so it must be to him, or
he would never hold it.) The Case by this Conclusion seems to be granted; but
in the very next Paragraph he again concludes, That it is also Lawful to
follow the less probable Opinion, though it be less safe: and this he says, is
the Common Opinion of more Modern Casuists and Schoolmen, and quotes for it
Medina, Vasquez, Bannes, and Navarrus; his Reason is,

1. Because whosoever does so, acts prudently, believing those that are skilled
in that Art, and submitting to their Judgment.

He says well, if we were speaking of Actions, as to which there is no danger
of immediate sinning, and running the guilt of Damnation, but he begs the
Question shamefully, while he averreth with Sanchez, That there is no danger of
sin in such Actions; and one of his Brethren (with whom he is very angry for
it) calls this Opinion of his, and Sanchez his seventeen Doctors Perni ciosae
inscitiae prolapsionem; a slip of perncious Ignorance: And he used him kindly
too, for Prolapsio was doubtless too mild a word; it was unquestionably a
wilful Error, but such a^one as those Learned Men saw necessary to be
maintained, or the Doctrine of Blind Obedience could not stand.

5. Azorius, Institut. Moral. lib. 2. cap. 26. In this Case determines, That we
may follow an Opinion that is less certainly safe, if it be more probable or
certain; from which we might conclude, that in regard the Opinion of our own
Consciences is always to us more probable and certain, than the Opinion of any
other is, or can be, though there be a possibility of our sinning in following
our own, and no possibility in following of another, yet we may follow it.

2. He concludes, That if both Opinions be Equally safe, we are not bound to
prefer that which is more probable. (Yet he confesses, that Major, Corduba,
and Medina think otherwise) he thinks the probability of an Opinion is enough
to guide our Practice, and that we are not bound to follow that which is most
probably true. But besides that, some of his own Brethren tell him, and that
truly, that That Opinion which is (though not demonstratively, yet most
probably true) has least danger of sin in it. Whether an Opinion can to any be
probably true by extrinsick Arguments, which at the same time we judge from
intrinsic Arguments probably not true, as Question not yet resolved. We do not
at all doubt, but the Judgment and Testimony of others may give a Proposition
some show of Probability to be true. If we have no Arguments against what they
say, from some appearances (at least) of Scripture, or some Logical Topics.
But when we have such Arguments, that yet their Opinions in the contrary should
seem probable to us, is a great Riddle, and seems a great baffling of a
Reasonable Soul. Especially considering that these Foreign Arguments are but
Common, and may be brought in most Cases on both sides.

. 6. And indeed here all the Popish Doctors are at a great loss, viz. To
determine what those Doctors must be; how many must concur in an Opinion,
before they may overrule us in Practice, against the Judgment of our own
Consciences formed from proper intrinsecal Arguments. Sanchez says, one Doctor
is enough, and quotes on his side, Anges, Sylv. Navarrus, Valentia, and Sa;
yea, and he proves it by this Learned Argument: That is a probable Opinion
which is not built upon a light Foundation. Now (says he) the Opinion of one
Doctor is not a light Foundation. Ay, but what if one Doctors Opinion be for
us, another be against us? They will tell you, They are both probable. Take
then the sum of the Jesuits Doctrine.

1. A probable Opinion is that, which is not built upon a light Foundation. (So
says Sanchez.) 2. Any one Doctors Opinion is a considerable, and no light
Foundation. That is Sanchez his medium. 3. Let a man have never so many
intrinsecal, proper Arguments, not demonstrative, to prove a thing unlawful;
yet he may do it if he can but find one Doctor who judges it Lawful. 4. If one
Doctor judges it Lawful, another judges it unlawful, he may do what he
pleases in it, for both parts are probable. Hence Sanchez raises these
Conclusions.
1. That if a Man, according to the Judgment of his own Conscience, perfectly
doubts, from intrinsecal Arguments, which in a practical case, he can find on
the one side, or the other. Yet if he can from Extrinsecal Arguments, persuade
himself that either part is Lawful, he may do either.

2. That he who probably judges it unlawful, to Act according to a less
probable Opinion, may yet Act according to that which he judges less probable,
if he judges, That it is probably Lawful for him to follow that which is less
probab^e.

3. That Learned Men may advise others to act contrary to what themselves, the
Adviser^ think Lawful, if another Doctor has judged it Lawful.

These, and many other damnable and absurd Opinions they most impudently
conclude, from these most wretched premises. And now, let any Judge, whether
according to these Principles, there be any thing Unlawful or no; and one would
think, that they do not judge any thing Unlawful, that will but read their
Escobar, Layman, Diaena, Filucius, Azorius, Sanchez. Or a breviate of some of
their Propositions, p. 17. in the Additionals to the Mystery of Jesuitism,
where he shall be directed also to the Authors.

. 7. But hitherto they have only told us, what a Man May do: Let us hear
shortly their Opinion of what Men Must do: and particularly, where Superiors
Command us to act contrary to what we from proper intrinsecal Arguments judge
Lawful. Adrianus, as he is quoted by Vasquez, positively affirms, That none
can Lawfully Obey their Superiors, against the Opinion of his own Conscience:
he tells us also, That Corduba says the same in effect, though he would save
himself from this inconvenience by asserting, That what in it self absolutely
considered, is evil, may by some Circumstances be good; as when it is necessary
for us, of two evils, to choose one; here the lesser evil is made good,
comparatively, and that (says he) is the Case here ( Vasquez 12. disp. 62.
cap. 6.) It is an evil thing for a man to act contrary to the opinion of his
own Conscience. And it is an evil thing to disobey our Superiors, but one of
these we must do; in this case, says he, It is Lawful for a man to act against
his own opinion, in obedience to his Superiors; thus far the Jesuit.

A Man might have expected such an unboyled Mess of Divinity from a John of
Leiden, or a Knipperdolling; but is this spoken like Divine? Can there then be
any necessity of sinning? (where is Man's free will in the mean time?) does God
ever bring the Soul into such a strait? Is it not a known Rule, That of two
evils of punishment, we may indeed choose the least; but of two evils of sin,
none? An Erroneous Conscience indeed is under a necessity of sinning, but
surely he has no choice in the case, whether he will sin this way, or that
way, but must follow the dictate of his Conscience, Whether the distinction of
Ligat, non obligat be worth any thing or no; surely all will say, he cannot Act
against his fixed erring Conscience. Is it not a known Rule, That nothing can
be made good by a Circumstance, though indeed Circumstances may make a thing
evil, because Bonum esse Causis integris Malum e quolibet defectu. Therefore
Vasquez (who Diana says, is instar omnium) explodes this Doctrine of Corduba,
telling us truly, That the Obedience which any Man owes to his Superiors,
supposes the matter of the Superiors Command, not to be contrary to the
Command of one who is higher than he; for in such Cases no Obedience is due,
nor is it any sin to disobey, viz. where the thing required, is contrary to the
Law of Nature, the Law of God, or the Law of a Superior in an higher Order.
Again, it is very possible (as Vasquez says) that it may be a greater sin to
contradict my own Conscience, than not to Obey my Superiors, supposing my
Conscience tells me the thing required is contrary to the Law of Nature.

But yet Vasquez himself thinks, that in case the Superior Commands, a
thing otherwise probably Lawful (that is, as we before heard, which some Doctor
or Doctors judge so) then it is Lawful for a Man to Obey contrary to the
private Opinion of his own Conscience, because he might do it in such case,
though it were not Commanded; and this is his Principle.

That when the Precept of a Superior may Lawfully be Obeyed, he is then bound
to do it, and it becomes necessary.

This indeed is a strong Argument, if we could yield the premises, viz.

That a Man may Lawfully contrary to the probable Opinion of his own
Conscience, follow the Opinion of another. Quod adhuc est Demonstrandum.

We shall anon show the Cursed Fruit of this Root, yet Vasquez limiteth this
Doctrine a little, by telling us,

1. That the Superior must be unquestionably our Superior.

2. That the Subject must know, and believe, that the Supirour Commands
according to a probable Opinion, and must not think it probable, merely because
he is his Superior; for (says he) The Dignity of the Superior Commanding,
does not make an Opinion probable. Thus far now we have heard the Judgment of
the Popish Casuists and Schoolmen in this Case. The Sum is this.

That it is Lawful for a Man to do, what his own Conscience from intrinsic,
probable Arguments judges Unlawful, if one or more Doctors do but Judge it
Lawful, and in such Cases, if the Superior Commands, he is bound to do what
he in his own Conscience judges unlawful, if it be not apparently, and
demonstratively so.

How near this comes to the Sentiments of some Modern Protestant Doctors, we
may enquire hereafter, but before we come to that, let us enquire what the
Ancienter Protestants have judged in the Case.

CHAP. III. The Opinion of former Protestants, about the lawfulness, or
unlawfulness of Men's Acting contrary to the Opinion of their own Consciences.
Such Acting condemned by all former Protestant Casuists. Baldvinus, Alstedius,
Amesius, Perkins: The difference of some later Divines from their Forefathers,
particularly, Mr. Hooker. The Vanity of his Proof, from Deuteronomy. 17.18. Acts 15.
Or from Reason. Bishop Sanderson agreeing with Ancient Protestants. So Mr.
Fulwood, in his Cases. The differing Expressions of some Divines of this
present Age, The tender touching of the Question, and nibbling at the Opinion
of the Popish Doctors in the Case by others. The Question again stated, and
made ready for Debate.
. 1. WE will begin with Fredericus Baldvinus, Professor at Wittenbergh, he, in
his Cases, l. 1. cap. 9. Professedly disputes this great point, he takes
Notice of the two sorts of pretended probable Arguments, and determines, in
reference to both.

1. That an Opinion only raised from the multitude of others Testimonies in
the Case, binds no Man. 2. That an Opinion taken up upon probable Reasons,
does bind, and so bind, that a man cannot Act against it.
His words in Latin are these:

Cum ergo opinionem aliquam, non ob assensum aliorum, sed ob causas probabiles
pro vera habes. Obligatus es in Conscientia ne contra eam agas, licet
Superiores aliud a te exigant, donec rations veriores audias in contrarium, ad
quas tamen audiendas semper paratus esse debes: Et opinionem tuam audita
meliore sententia deponere. That is,

When thou have taken up any Opinion for true, not for the Testimony of others,
but for probable Reasons, thou art bound in Conscience not to act against it;
no, not though Superiors require thee to act, till thou hear better Reasons
to the contrary: To hear which thou ought to be always ready, and lay down
thy Opinion, hearing a better. The Opinion of this Grave and Learned Professor
is what we take it, and will be found to have been the Opinion of all
Protestants of former Ages. For, the Observing Reader will find, as to this
point, the same proportionable difference betwixt Ancient Protestant Divines,
and a Modern brood, as betwixt the Old Fathers and Schoolmen, and the later
Jesuits, who have traded in Scholastical, and Moral Divinity. The latter
professing wholly to differ from the former: We shall, I say, find, that all
former Protestants have agreed, That although he that is possessed of an
opinion, that the thing which is by his Superiors required, is unlawful, out
of Reverence to his Superiors, ought thoroughly to Examine his Opinion, and to
hear better Reasons, if they can be brought, and being by them convinced, to
lay down his opinion: Yet while he can do that, he cannot do the thing.

2. Let us, in the next place, enquire of Alstedius. He distinguishes
concerning Opinion, as relating to a more External Court, or to the Court of
Conscience: As to the former, he says, In Disputations, etc. the Common
Opinion is to be preferred before our own. But as to Conscience, he says,
Whatsoever is done against our Consciences, is sinful; whether our Conscience
be Erring, Opining, or Rightly informed. vid. Theol. casuum, cap. 2. n. 2. Dr.
Ames, cas. l. 1. c. 5. determines, That it is never Lawful for the Authority of
other Men to act against our own Opinion, be it certain, or only probable. We
do not remember more than four Protestant Casuists we had, whose Writings are
more than forty Years Old. These were three, the fourth was Judicious Mr.
Perkins, who seems to reduce this to a doubting Conscience, and determines,
That it is sin to act against it, because he cannot act in Faith, if his
Conscience be doubting, or erring, or gainsaying.

These being all our former Divines, who wrote Treatises of Cases, further
Testimony is not to be expected. It were easy to produce multitudes
collaterally speaking the same things. But for them, we shall but refer the
Reader to any Protestants, that have formerly wrote upon Romans 14.23. and see
what they say upon these words; Whosoever doubts, is damned, if he eats,
because he eats not of Faith: For whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. And v.
5. Let every Man be fully persuaded in his oven mind; he will find enough, we
pass it over, intending our selves to make some use of that Text anon.

. 3. But (as we said before) look as in this very point there is a very great
difference, betwixt the Ancient Fathers and Schoolmen and the Modern Jesuits,
in so much, that the latter will not allow the Judgment of any of the Ancients,
in these Cases; and both Vasquez and Sanchez think fit to Caution their Readers
against it, and both Cellot and Reginaldus expressly determine: That in Moral
Questions, the Modern Casuists are to be preferred before the Ancient Fathers,
though they lived nearer the times of the Apostles. So we shall Observe, that
some later Protestant Divines have delivered themselves, either something odly,
or expressly contrary to the Sentiments of all Ancient Protestants in this case.
Let us hear now what they say.

. 4. The Learned Author of the Ecclesiastical Polity, Mr. Hooker, in his
Preface to it, directed To such as seek Reformation, persuading those whom in
that Preface he is Treating, to an end of Controversy, concludes it not
possible to be obtained.

Without submitting to some judicial and definitive Sentence, whereunto neither
part that contendeth may under any pretense, or color refuse to stand: -- Ways
of peaceable conclusion (he says) there are but two certain: The one a
Sentence of Judicial decision, given to Authority thereunto appointed within
our selves. The other, the like kind of Sentence, given by a more Universal
Authority. The former of which God himself in the Law prescribes: And his
Spirit it was which directed the first Christian Churches in the World to use
the latter: this he proves by Deuteronomy. 17.8. and Acts 15. (both which we will
examine anon.) Afterward he comes in with this passage. Neither wish we, that
Men should do any thing which in their Hearts they are persuaded they ought not
to do; but this persuasion ought, we say, to be fully settled in their Hearts.
That in Litigious and controverted Cases of such Quality, The Will of God is to
have them to do, whatsoever the Sentence of Judicial and final decision shall
determine. Yea, though it seems in their private Opinion, utterly to swerve
from that which is right. as no doubt many times the Sentence amongst the Jews
did seem unto one part or another contending, and yet in this Case God did not
then allow them to do what in their private Judgment it seemed, yea, and
perhaps, truly seemed, that the Law did dis-allow. This passage must be a
little examined, especially at such a time when there is such a strict scrutiny
upon those who seem to have their Faces toward Rome; for as on the one side,
if this Doctrine be not true, Mr. Hooker, neither in his Preface, nor in his
bulky Book (those Oracles we are so Ordinarily sent to) has said much to
persuade those whom he treated, That it is their Duty to conform; and our late
Writers have said much less, who have thought to jeer, and rail, and Hector Men
out of their Religion, and have indeed all built upon this Foundation [If the
thing be not Demonstratively evil, or as others apparently evil.] On the other
side, if this be true, and be not very cautiously expounded, it over-throweth
all Old Practical Divinity, and takes away what we doubt whether ever any
considerate Learned Man ever denied, viz. That the Practical Conscience is the
proximate Rule of all our Actions. It shows a necessity of an Infallible
Judge; or if not so, most certainly establishes Blind Obedience, the very
Basis and Pillar of Popery; yea, of Jesuitisme (the worst of Popery. (for what
is Blind Obedience, but an Obeying of Superiors contrary to the Light of our
own Reason and Conscience.) Nay, more, it is a peg beyond the Doctrine of
Vasquaez, Sanchez, Azorius, Layman, or the boldest Jesuit who ever wrote.

. 5. I can see but two terms, which can be supposed to regulate this Learned
Man' sense by any Sobriety. He says, only [in litigious and controverted
Causes of such Quality] he should have done well to have told us, of what
Quality, and what makes a litigious and controverted Case? Whether some few, or
more men's denying, or controverting, and disputing a points? For else suppose
that in France, the King should Command his Protestant Subjects to go to Mass;
according to Mr. Hooker's Divinity, they are bound to go: why? For (says he)
It is the Will of God that they should, in litigious and controverted Causes do
whatsoever the Sentence of judicial and final decision shall determine. But
will some Advocate for Mr. Hooker, say, the Protestants judge going to Mass
unlawful. What then? It follows in Mr. Hooker. Though in their private
Opinion it seem to swerve utterly from that which it right. Sit anima nostra
cum Philosophis; Commend us to the Jesuits, for none of them speak so broad.
And it in well worth the Observing, what Excellent use Serenus Cressy has made
of this very passage, in his Answer to Dr. Pierce his Sermon, and indeed it is
very improveable for their turn. Shall those blind words, Of such Quality, help
this Father of Conformity: The Question recurs, Of what Quality? Can any other
Quality of Cases be here considerable, but either as the things appear Lawful,
Unlawful, or Indifferent. If he means, in Cases appearing to the Person, Lawful
or Indifferent, the thing is granted: But it is impossible this should be his
meaning, for he says, Though the Command seem to him utterly to swerve from
what is right, If therefore the word, Seem, will not help him, he is not to be
helped, but must be affirmed to have made the boldest overture for Blind
Obedience (the most brutish piece of Popery) that ever Protestant made; and
let our Brethren send us no more for Conscience-satisfaction to Mr. Hooker,
till they can defend him in this Hypothesis; and when they have done that, they
will have paved his Holiness a fairer way into all Protestant Tents, than he
ever yet had. Indeed there are various degrees of Seeming. A thing may seem to
us to swerve from what is right, merely from extrinsick Arguments, because we
Reverence the Learning, or Piety of some that say so; in this sense it may be
true: But this cannot be Hookers Sense; for he says, In his own private
Opinion. But his meaning must be, That we ought to be fully persuaded, that in
all Litigious, and Controverted Cases reserring to Practice. It is the Will of
God that Christians should do, whatsoever the Sentence of Judicial and final
decision shall determine, though that thing determined seem to the Person
required to do it, and that from proper intrinsic Arguments (if not
demonstrative) in the Christians private Opinion, to be quite contrary to what
God's Law requires of him. Which is a position so contrary. To the Law of
Nature, the whole Current of Scripture, the force of Reason, the Liberty of a
Christian, and the Judgment of all Protestant Divines, that it will ask very
good Proof before we shall believe a tittle of it true.

. 6. He offers a double Proof of it. 1. Because he supposes there must be an
end of Controversy, and that can be no other way. 2. Because of the Law of God
of Old, Deuteronomy. 17.8. and the determination of the Council, Acts 15. guided, no
question, by the Spirit of God. We will consider both. As to the first;
Controversies are of several Natures. There are Political Controversies, and
Ecclesiastical Controversies; and these either relating to Matters of mere
Speculation or Practice. And there are mixed Controversies, partly of a Civil,
partly of a Religious concern.

1. For Civil Controversies, they are of several Natures; for many of them it
is absolutely necessary, in Order to the consistency of Polities; there should
be an end of them, without the end of some of them, the Order of Justice cannot
bold; nor Kingdoms and States be preserved: As now, suppose a Controversy
about the Title of the Supreme Magistrate, etc. There must be an end to these,
and it must be by one parties submission to the final decision of some power.
Men may do it without sinning against God: And it is the will of God, even
written in Nature, that they should do it. Suppose there be a plea betwixt Man,
and Man, concerning a right of Inheritance, and they have had a long Suit about
it; there must be an end to this Controversy, and the end must be by a
submission of one party to the final decision (at least) of the Supreme Court
of Justice in a Nation; Beyond which lies no appeal. What further can be done,
unless this private Person should take up Arms against this Court, and so
disturb all Civil Orders? nor shall he who suffers in this Judgment need fear
sinning against God, by parting with his Inheritance, no Law of God Obliges
him to keep it. He is before this Judgment, at perfect Liberty to part with it,
and by this Judgment it becomes necessary: We fear that we shall anon find the
Text, Deuteronomy. 17.8. Concerning such Controversies; and so nothing to the purpose
in our Case.

2. But there are other Controversies, which are in Matters of mere
Speculation, or Practice. Some things there are, which are merely Speculative,
which infer no Practice, which side soever we take; as now, Whether the Virgin
Mary lived, and dyed a Virgin, etc. For these Controversies, we know no need of
an end of them, nor why they should be Controversies; Men may Opine one thing
or another in them, without hazard to their Souls. There are other
Controversies in Religion, which being determined, require of us, either an Act
of Faith and Assent from us, as our Duty, or more, i.e. the guidance of our
Conversation, according to our belief. And these again are either such as are
Fundamentally necessary to Salvation, or such as are not so necessary. As now,
suppose that, Whether Jesus Christ be the Eternal Son of God, is Matter of
Controversy betwixt the Arrians, the Socinians, the Orthodox. Whether a Man
may Lawfully adore the bread in the Eucharist, is Controverted betwixt the
Papists and Protestants. It is necessary that the Magistrate or Church should
put an end to these Controversies, at least, as to the evulging of them,
because there is a part in them so necessary to be believed, or done, as Men's
Salvation depends upon it immediately; and those entrusted with the Charge of
Souls, stand Obliged by the Law of Charity, as much as in them lies to obviate
their eternal Ruin. But there are a third sort of Controversies in Religion,
which relate to Practice, in those things, where Gods Word has left nothing
particularly, and (...) determined. Such Controversies there ever was, and ever
will be in the Church. But as it is only the Pride and Corruption of Men,
which makes these Controversies (for why should any Quarrel with his Brother
for using his own Latitude, where God has determined nothing?) So there is no
need to put an end to them, but only to Men's Lusts and Passions in the Arguing
of them. For there is no hazard of Salvation, either one way or other. We dare
be bold to say, that the silly humor of some, judging it necessary, that all
Men should say, It is a Hen-Sparrow, when some think it a Cock-Sparrow. Or
write [it] when some think it is better wrote [yt] Or that all Men should keep
and Easter Day; such a day, when as others think it not the right, has been
the cause of so much sin and wickedness, so much Blood and Cruelty, as all that
these Humorists are worth, is no way able to recompense, either to Gods Glory,
the Churches Peace, or the Profit and Advantage of Princes so infinitely
hindered by it

. 7. We suppose, Peace will be urged as necessary to put an end to
Controversy. And is there no other way to obtain it, but by Men's doing quite
contrary to what they Judge right? The Apostle has showed Men a nearer way to
it, if their Lusts would let them see it, Phil. 3.15, 16. What a strange fancy
it is that there should be no way to Peace, but what is impossible, viz. Men's
persuading themselves, That it is the Will of God, that in such Cases they
should do whatsoever Men determine, though in their own Opinion it seems quite
to swerve from what is right: As if there were no way to keep a Man from
burning his shins, but by pulling down a Chimney, and setting it further off.
This is a sad end. His Most Excellent Majesty has showed them a quicker End,
viz. Not Enacting the doing of such things of those who judge them Unlawful;
but leaving them to their Liberty; and only requiring, as the Apostle, in such
Cases, Romans 14. 2. That he who eats should not despise him that eats not;
nor he who eats not, despise him that eats. Could our Brethren be quiet,
and not represent us to the World, as Factious Persons, Schismatics;
unreasonable, ungovernable, Dunces, we wonder what hindered Peace now.

. 7. But, says Mr. Hooker (and he is the Delphick Oracle it seems in this
Case) He must needs persuade himself, That it is the Will of God, That in
Litigious and Controverted Cases, etc. he should submit to the Decision of his
Superior, though in his own Opinion it seems quite to swerve from that which
is right. We would fain know how he should persuade himself of this. This
persuasion cannot be of Faith; for where does the Word of God speak a tittle to
this sense? It speaks the contrary, Romans 14.5.23. How shall we know a thing to
be either according contrary to the Will of God. Certainly we must know it from
Nature, or from Divine Revelation. Does the Light of Nature show us any such
thing? Indeed in Controversies of a Civil Nature, the Determination of which
the Light of Nature shows us must be by Superiors, and where a submission is
necessary, and not to be avoided, without disturbance of Polities, and all
Order of Justicer: The Light of Nature may show us some such thing. But
certainly, where the Light of Nature shows us no need of a Controversy, nor
of determining it, if there must be one, it can show us nothing as to the Will
of God, for a submission to such Determination. Nor indeed is it pretended, and
it were strange if it should, when the Schoolmen determine, That Acting against
an erroneous Conscience (much more Opining) is against the Light of Nature.
This piece of the Will of God then which we must (says Mr. Hooker) persuade
our selves of, must be from Revelation, and that is either New (some
Enthusiasm) or Old, which is the Word of God. Where shall we find such a piece
of the revealed Will of God in Scripture? Mr. Hooker tells us, Deuteronomy. 17.8. Acts
15. we will Examine both these Texts.

. 8. The words in Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. are these.

If there arise a Matter too hard for thee in Judgment betwixt Blood and Blood,
betwixt plea and plea, betwixt stroke and stroke, being matters of Controversy
within thy Gates. Then shall thou arise, and get thee up unto the place which
the Lord thy God shall choose.

And thou shall come unto the Priests, the Levites, and unto the Judge who
shall be in those days, and enquire, and they shall show the Sentence of
Judgment.

And thou shall do according to the Sentence which they of that place, which
the Lord shall choose, shall show thee: and thou shall Observe to do according
to all that they shall inform thee.

According to the Sentence of the Law which they shall teach thee, and
according to the Judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shall do, thou shall
not decline from the Sentence which they shall show thee, to the right hand,
nor to the left.

And the Man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Priest,
that stands up to Minister before the Lord thy God, or unto the Judge, even
that Man shall dye, and thou shall put away evil from Israel. These words are
fully that Text. As to which, we desire our Reader to Observe,

1. That this is Bellarmines first Text to prove Blind Obedience the Duty of
Christians: So that we may easily judge, which way the Face of these Disputants
does stand. It might suffice but to refer our Reader to Chamer, or any that
have Answered Bellamine, for an Answer to this Objection.

2. Secondly, In case this Text will serve the turn now, it will infallibly
prove the Lawfulness of Priests and Judges putting to death such as shall not
do what they have once determined in any case, that is indifferent of it self,
and once by them made necessary. But surely this must be asserted by none that
value their words at any rate. But to come close to the Text; if any Argument
in this case can be drawn from it, it must be this.

What the Israelites were bound to do, upon any determination by the Priest or
Judge in the place where the Lord should choose: In hard Matters, between plea
and plea, blood and blood. That Christians under the Gospel are bound to do,
upon the final decision of the Priest or Judge, in hard matters, between plea
and plea, blood and blood, trespass and trespass, stroke and stroke.

But the Israelites were bound to do according to the final decision of the
Priest or Judge, sitting in the place which the Lord should choose, and Judging
in hard Matters, between Plea and Plea, Blood and Blood, etc. -- Ergo.

If the Argument be thus laid, it concludes nothing like the Question, but is
transitus degenere in genus. Our Question is not about Civil things in
Controversy, where a Man may take any part, and not sin against God, and where
Submission only infers Sussering in matters of a temporal concern, but
about Religious Actions, where a Practice is required, which the Party
Commanded Judges sinful: And hazarding the damnation of his Soul. Whence also
it may be Observed, That no Conclusion can from hence be fetched from any
purity of Reason.

But if Mr. Booker intends from that Text to conclude the Question, his
Argument must be laid thus.

What the Israelites were bound to, as to hard Case^, in Judgment betwixt plea
and plea, blood and blood, trespass and trespass, stroke and stroke. That
Christians are bound to do, in all Litigious Controverted Cases of Religion; or
(at least) in such Cases where the Superiors Judge the things, by them
Commanded, to be in themselves of an indifferent Nature.

But the Israelites, in hard Cases in Judgment, betwixt plea and plea, Blood
and Blood, trespass and trespass, stroke and stroke, were Obliged to do
according to, and not decline from the Sentence of the Law, which the Priests,
the Levites, or the Judges should teach them, and according to the Judgment,
which they should show them, though in the Opinion of their own Consciences it
swerved utterly from that which was right.

Ergo. Christians also under the Gospel, in all Litigiout controverted Cases,
especially of such Quality, where the Superior Judges the things indifferent,
are bound to do according to, and not to decline from the Sentence of the Law,
which the Civil or Ecclesiastical Superiors, now adays shall teach them;
though in the Opinion of their own Consciences it utterly swerveth from that
which is right.

To which we Answer, 1. The whole concludes nothing to the purpose, for it
concludes not that they ought to do any thing contrary to the Sentence of the
Divine Law. That was of Old to the Priests a Regula Regulans; an Original Rule,
and must be so, to all Superiors; and it is impossible any should be Obliged
to Act contrary to it. But, lest any should say, they were bound to take the
Priests and Levites, and Judges Sentence, to be the Sentence of the Divine Law,
we further Answer.

. 9. By denying the Major, which is most notoriously false, and before it can
be made good, those that inherit Mr. Hooker's Spirit, must make good these
things.

1. That there it the same Reason, or Equity for Superiors final decision, and
a Christians submission as to his Practice, to a final decision in things of a
Religious Nature, which the Superior Judges indifferent, and the Inferior,
(from Arguments which in the Judgment of his particular Conscience, seem
probable) judges unlawful. As there was for a final decision amongst the Jews,
and their submission to such decision, in Matters between Blood and Blood, plea
and plea, trespass and trespass, stroke and stroke; which apparently there is
not, a determination in the latter being absolutely necessary for upholding the
Beings of Polities, the Course, and Order of Justice, the preservation of
Humane Society, and not making the World a Den of Thieves and Murderers. But
no such things can be pretended for things in Religion, by the Superiors owned
in their own Nature, but indifferent, and so left by God. Neither is there the
same Equity or Reason for the Inferiors Submission. For what harm could the
Inferior have by submitting to the final decision of the Priests, Levites, and
Judges, in those Civil things? He might possibly be enforced to put up a wrong,
to part with a little Money, or with some part of his Inheritance, or suffer in
case of Blood operatly, which was his due by a Divine Law: He was in no danger,
by such submission, of damning his Soul, or wounding his Conscience by finning
against God; though he might judge he were severely, or unrighteously dealt
with. He might possibly think the part contrary to the decision more just and
right: But what was he to do? Nothing, but part with his own Right in Temporal
things for the sake of public Justice, and Order, and Peace, which is every
good Christians Duty, and Choice: But here we are required to do some things,
and that in so tender a thing, as Divine Worship; which if we do, we shall
wound our Consciences, run the hazard of Damnation by sinning, so far as we can
apprehend it. Can any one in his wits now judge these two Cases alike? If not,
the Proposition is false. There is a manifest Transition in the Argumentation
from the Lawfulness of things of one kind, to prove the Lawfulness of things of
a quite different Kind, Nature, and Influence.

. 10. Further, to make good the Proposition, it must be proved, That God has
under the Gospel erected such a Court, for the final decision of all Litigious
and Controverted Cases of like Quality. For certain it is that Old Court is
down; where is the Law Erecting the New? Nay, where are the Persons so
Qualified for it? Those who know any thing, know that the Highpriests amongst
the Jews had any Vrim and Thummim, and so were hardly (in their Judicature)
subject to Fallibility, to be sure, less than any now under the Gospel. It was
at Jerusalem, or at Siloh, at the place the Lord was to choose, where the Ark
was, and the Linen Ephod, and the Vrim and Thummim, that this bending Judgment
was to be made, no where else. Besides, all know that their High Priest: was
the Type of Christ, who is The Truth; and to whom alone now we reserve
Infallibility.

The Papists have a better plea in this Case than any Protestants, because they
have provided for it, by Creating to themselves an Infallible Judge, and, at
least, cheating themselves with such a previous Foundation fit to Build such a
Structure upon.

. 11, We have showed the vanity of Mr. Hooker's plea from the Law, let us see
now what he says from the Gospel. He Observes, that under that, the Spirit of
God directed a Court for Final decision, Acts 15. The Case was this, Some who
came from Judea, had taught the Brethren, that unless they were Circumcised,
they could not be saved; upon this, Paul and Barnabas were sent, with others,
to meet and consult with the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem about this
Matter. Hear their Resolution, v. 28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to
us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things; That you
abstain from Meats offered to Idols, and from things strangled, and from
Fornication, from which if you shall keep your selves, you shall do well. That
in multiplying word we may not lose our Proposition from hence to be proved, it
will not be amiss here to repeat it.

That it is the Will of God, that in all Litigious, and controverted Cases of
this Quality. (Suppose where the Superior Judges the thing Commanded in its
own Nature, indifferent, though the Inferior from Arguments which to him seem
probable, judges them unlawful) that Inferiors should do whatsoever their
Superiors Command, though in their own private Opinion, it seems utterly to
swerve from that which is right. This Proposition is by Mr. Hooker made a
Conclusion, to be taken de fide, upon the Authority of this Text: The
Assembling and determination of this first Council. The Argument must lie thus.

If the Spirit of God directed the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, in the
Controverted Cases of Circumcision, Fornication, and things Offered to Idols,
and things strangled; to meet together, and to make a final determination, in
reference to Christians Practice: And it were the Will of God, that all private
Christians should do according to their determination, though in their own
Opinions it utterly swerved from that which was right: Then it is the will of
God, that in all other Matters of Religious Practice, that are Litigious, or
Controverted, and of such Quality, as the Superior judges the doing of the
things in Question, Matters of indifferency, though the Inferiors judge them
unlawful: That Superiors should make a final decision, and private Christians
should do according to their determinations, though their determinations their
private Opinions* seem utterly to swerve from that which is right.

But the Spirit of God directed the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, in the
Controverted Cases of Circumcision, Fornication, things Offered to Idols, and
things strangled; to meet together, and to make a final decision: And it was
the Will of God, that all Private Christians should Practice according to their
determinations, though in their own private Opinions, they might seem utterly
to swerve from that which is right -- Ergo.

Now, to this Argument, the Answer, we say, is not difficult, for neither
Proposition is true, or can be made good, But to speak distinclly.

. 11. First, we deny the Consequence of the Major, and that for these three
Reasons.

1. There is an apparent difference betwixt Apostles, Men guided by an
Infallible Spirit, and any other Superiors unquestionably more Fallible than
they. They could not err, the best Council now may err.

2. But Secondly, there is a vast difference betwixt the cases mentioned in the
Text, and other Litigious, Controverted Cases of such Quality, as Mr. Hooker
mentions: So as there is no Arguing, from the one to the other. Those
mentioned, Acts 15. are by the Apostles called (...). Things necessary; these
we speak of are confessedly (...) indifferent, and not necessary; either
considered in themselves, or in respect of any Circumstance abstracted from the
Superiors Precept; if it be said, That one or two of those things mentioned,
Acts 15. were but indifferent, viz. To abstain from blood, and things
strangled, it is easily Answered, That a thing may be necessary, either with
respect to some direct precept (as Fornication, and forbearing eating things
first Offered to Idols, was. The Apost;e, 1 Cor. 10. Judges it a participation
at the Idolaters Altar) or with Respect to Circumstances, (and those
Antecedaneous to the Superiors Precept) thus abstaining from blood, and things
strangled were, because of the Jews, who by the Ceremonial Law (the abolition
of which they had not yet discerned) were forbidden blood, and by reason of the
Converted Gentiles eating blood, were much estranged from, and hardened against
the Doctrine of the Gospel. Therefore the Apostle calls them necessary; not
made so only by their Command, but made so by this great Circumstance, the
doing of them hindering the Glory of God, and his great Design then on Foot.
Now, to Argue from the Authority of Superiors to make a sinal decision, as to
things simply necessary, as forbidden directly by a Divine Law; Or Accidentally
necessary (being in their own Nature indifferent) made so by some emient
scandal, or mischief, which would plainly follow from our not disceding from
our Liberty in such things, especially too where the things required to be
forborne, were before expressly forbidden by a Divine Law. We say, from hence to
conclude the Authority of Superiors to make final decisions in other matters,
and Command the doing of things never required by God's Law, and confessed to
be, neither in themselves necessary, nor in respect of any other Circumstance
Antecedaneous to the Superiors Precept, is, (with Reverence to Mr. Hooker and
his Friends) very wide Arguing, and shooting at a great distance from the Mark.

3. But Thirdly, What says this Grave and Reverend Synod; From which if you
keep your selves, you shall do well. They do not say, These things, though
indifferent in themselves, you must do, because we have made them necessary by
our command, though you in your private Opinions judge some of them utterly
unlawful. But we foresee some will say, That although this Council used a soft
Expression, yet it manifestly follows, That if they did not abstain from
these things, they should do ill. We Answer, that without Question, if they had
not abstained, they had done ill, whether the Synod had so determined or no.
The Council did but declare What was the Will of God, i. e. That Men must not
use their Liberty in things indifferent, when the use of it will prejudice the
Glory of God, in so high a concern, as that of Converting Souls. The matter of
the Decree here, was not a thing in that state of the Church, in that place
indifferent, Antecedaneously to their Decree, but what was every Christians
Duty, precedent to the Councels determination. The Council only instructed
them in what was the will of God, not make it necessary by their Canon.

2. Again, they were things which the Christians could not possibly judge
Unlawful; nothing was required but abstaining, either from such things as Gods
word at that present Obliged them to abstain from, or had before Obliged the
Jews to abstain from. If the Christians judged themselves at Liberty to eat of
things strangled, and blood, it was impossible yet, they should judge it sinful
not to eat of them. Now, none of us will deny, that in Controversies of such
Quality, where known necessary Duties are Controverted, or things necessary
eminently with respect to some Circumstances apparent, and inavoidable; but it
is the Will of God, that the Church should consult and declare the Will of God
as to them, and Christians ought to hearken, and do according to such their
Declaration.

1. Principally, because it is the Will of God. 2. Because of the Churches
Authority, Advising or Commanding from God; especially if their required
Practice too reaches no further than a restraint of their Liberty, in doing
some things: not doing things, which their Consciences judge utterly unlawful.
This is enough to show the Vanity of the Proposition, or the Consequence rather
of the Major Proposition.
. 12. But neither is the Assumption true. No such thing appears from Acts 15.
That the Christians were bound to do what the Synod required [though in their
private Opinions, the things required swerved utterly from what was right.] As
the things were such, concerning which we before said, the Conscience of none
could so dictate. So the Blessed Apostles knew the mind of God too well, to
engage Christians to Act contrary to the Opinion of their own Consciences; Nor
do we Read, that ever the Authority of this Synod was quoted by the Apostle, in
his Epistle to the Corinthians, where he professedly, and largely handles one
of these Cases, about things Offered to Idols. Does he tell the Corinthians any
such thing, as, It is unlawful for you now to eat such things. It is indeed in
it self a thing indifferent, but your Superiors have decreed you should not
eat, therefore now it is necessary for you not to eat; the Council of
Jerusalem made it necessary. No such thing, but he uses Arguments proper to
Christians Consciences from the Nature of the thing; The Scandal, The Concern
of Gods Glory in their forbearance.

. 13. Thus far we have dealt with the great Champion for the Blind Obedience of
Protestants, to whom those unsatisfied, as to Conformity, are sent upon all
Occasions, not only to persuade them that they may, but that they are bound to
conform, and it is Sin and Schism (and any thing) if they do not; and we hope,
however unanswerable, to be proclaimed: Yet the Candid Reader will judge that
he is not such a Lion, but he may be taken by the beard, and that without an
Enchanted Hand. Multa videntur and dicuntur quae non sunt. We have taken the
more pains to Examine this New Dictate of his about The Will of God, and his
Arguments for it, because so much hangs upon it, that it being proved false and
absurd, and his Arguments for it invalid. His Folio is of no further use, than
to inform Men, and when that is done, they still stand Obliged to Act according
to the abiding Opinion of their own Consciences.

. 24. There is yet another Father, whom they much rely upon, but (far more
sparingly quote in this Case, and there is Reason for it) it is the Reverend
Dr. Sanderson (the late Bishop of Lincoln) a Man, who though we know he
differed from us, yet we must give him his Character. That we have not, nor
ever had such another Adversary. He had praeparatum pectus for an Argument; and
seldom determines a Question but clearly, and distinctly. So as though we find
him something against us, yet we can understand him speaking to the point, and
clearly, expressing what he says. Let us therefore hear him, and where can we
better hear him, than in his Book of Praelections, concerning the Obligation of
Conscience? There he speaks not by the by, and collaterally, but purposely to
the Question, Praelect. 6.. 16 He puts this Question, What certainty is
required in the Mind of the Inferior to secure him in Conscience, that he is
not bound by the Law of his Superior? To which he Answers,

1. That if the Law be manifestly, and notoriously unjust, the Subject may be
sure he is not bound by it; which is also true, if by a Moral certainty he
judges it simply unjust, having used all diligence to find out the Truth. This
is the Case, what needs any more? But he goes on. 2. If he does but think the
Command unjust, from some rooted Error in Judgment, of which he cannot easily
quit himself; The Obligation of the Command abides, notwithstanding the Error
of his Mind, so that he sins, if he does not Obey; but he should sin in an
higher degree, if he did Obey. Errore illo nondum deposito, whiles he thinks it
unlawful. 3. If a Man does only from some light Scruple or Objection suspect
the Law unjust, he ought to contemn that Scruple and Obey.
Here is now a Man speaks like a Divine, clearly, and distinctly
distinguishing, betwixt a demonstrative certainty, or a certainty of Faith, and
a Moral certainty; betwixt the assent of a fixed Conscience, and of an Opining
Conscience, and Scruple, or Suspicion, and determining Christians Duty in all
Cases, and so solidly, that we believe there is no valuable Nonconformist in
England but will subscribe what he says: He durst not tell us, We must believe
it the Will of God, we should submit to the sinal decision of Superiors,
though it our private Opinion it utterly swerveth from that which i^ right; he
understood Divinity a little better. And this we think was his last Resolve in
the Case. If his first Conclusion reach not an Opining Conscience, which we are
sure it does (if probable Arguments be opposed to Revelation and
Demonstrations, for then a Moral certainty makes but an Opinion) yet we wear
sure the Second does. As to both he determines Acting unlawful; which is all we
contend for.

. 15. But there is another passage more usually quoted in this Case, in a
Sermon which that Reverend and Learned man has on Romans 14.23. which we will
consider, though not half so valuable as this.

1. Because but in a Sermon, where he spoke to it collaterally.

2. And in a Sermon Preached in his Younger Years: But neither can we find any
thing there to their purpose, for, having there determined concerning a
Conscience fully Resolved about the unlawfulness of a thing, viz. That a Man
cannot without sin do the thing so by his Conscience judged unlawful. He
comes, in the next place, to treat of a Man's Duty under a doubting Conscience
(where we desire the Reader to consider, that he either comprehends the
Opining Conscience under the Notion of the Conscience fully Resolved, as one
would think by that passage,. 25. This is now where the Conscience apparently
inclines one way; but say the Scales hang even, etc. Or else he quite leaps
over the Opining Conscience, as not so much concerned in his Text.. 25. He
manifestly speaks not of it, but of such a Conscience (as he expresses
himself) where the Scales hang even, and a Man cannot resolve which way he
should take. And again,. 29. Answering the Objection: I cannot do it, it is
against my Conscience. He says, It is not against thy Conscience, for,
doubting is properly an indifferent motion to either part of a Contradiction;
when the Mind is held in suspense betwixt two ways, uncertain which to take,
when the Scales hang even (as I said before) in aequilibro. This manfiestly is
not an Opining Conscience, but perfect dubia, a Conscience which perfectly
doubts. Now, under such a Complexion of Conscience as to some matter of
Practice he determines,

That if the Liberty of the Agent be determined by a Superior Power -- A Man
is bound in Conscience to do the thing Commanded.

This is a very disputable point in Matters where the Soul is concerned: but be
it so or so, it nothing concerns us in the present Debate. That Conscience
which we are speaking of is not a Conscience hanging betwixt the two
contradictory parts of a Practical Proposition, but upon Arguments which appear
to it very probable, (though not demonstrative) strongly inclining to judge one
part unlawful, and that the part Commanded, and Morally certain of it. The
Question is, Whether this Man can do it or no, because he is not, as Hooker
says, fully and settledly persuaded, or because, as others say it is, not
plainly, and demonstratively, and apparently evil, tending to debauch Men in
their apprehensions of the Godhead, etc. To this Dr. Sanderson either says
nothing, or speaks quite contrary; for indeed here the Conscience is repugnant;
in which Case, like a good Protestant Divine, he determines quite contrary to
our Neotericks,. 29. That no Repect nor Circumstance whatsoever can free such
an Action from sin.

. 16. We find a late Casui^t speaking as honestly. It is Mr. Fulwood (whom the
Author of Toleration not to be abused, declares himself so much pleased with,
that he assures us, he is much of his Mind) and it is in one of the three Books
he is in such Love with, Entitled, Some necessary and seasonable Cases, (...)
126. though he advises, That in such Cases where things are Commanded, which
the Inferior Judges unlawful, Men should suspect their private Judgments, and
read, and search still yet, at last, (says he) if the thing required appear to
thee sinful still. Thou art bound to the Peace of thy own Conscience, Gods
Vicegerent within thee, and thou may not Obey. How come we then to be
Felons de se. and Sacrilegious? Stealing our selves out of the Ministry, when
this is plainly the case. Nothing could be spoken more truly, or like a Divine;
and it speaks the more honesty in Mr. Fulwood, because in saying this he spoke
against himself, kicking down all the good Milk, which his Conformable Brethren
thought he had given in those three Books.

. 17. We find another Recent Doctor, in a Pamphlet, called Pulpit Conceptions:
Popular deceptions; nibbling, and but nibbling at this most important Question,
p. 61. He forms an Objection thus.

But suppose I should Scruple my Obedience, thinking my Superiors impositions
to be against the Command of God: Why, in this case I am Obliged to lay aside
my Scruples, and to bring such thoughts into Captivity to the Obedience of
Christ, who has commanded me to Obey those that have the Rule over me. Pulpit
Concept. p. 61.

Right. But had we been any of us at this Doctors Elbow, who thus dictates, we
would have told him, Doctors, this none will deny you; but they are not
Scruples that are in our way, but great Massy stones, called Dialectick
Arguments; yea, almost Millstones: that is, we have not only a Jealousy, or
Suspicion, or Fear, that the thing may (...) unlawful: But we are as sure or it
as we can be of any th^^^ that it is not (...) said in Scripture, nor the
Object of o^^ Sense, nor demonstrable from certain and necessary causes. Good
Doctor, speak to the purpose; may we Act against the Judgment of our
Consciences, made up from these, or no? The Men you deal with in that Boo^^ ^e
many of them Men of great Learning and Reason, whose Arguments none in in their
wits will think you have Answered in that Book. What shall be done in this
case, Doctor? Speak to the point. Is there nothing to do, but up and ride your
pace? Where Is the Stirrup? we see the Whip, but we see not that. Scrupulous
Doctor, you know it is a little stone? a thing without the Foot (much like an
Ipse dixit for an Argument to prove an action Lawful) if a Man indeed has such
a thing in his shoe vexing his Foot, it is an easy thing for him to pull it
out, and case himself, and run presently. But suppose a Man has the Gout, or
some intrinsic Humor, which Lameth him; is it no more than to say, up, and
Run? Good Doctor, he must be cured first, I hope. The Divines which you have to
deal with, have such impediments, intrinsic, Arguments, which makes the
unlawfulness of the things required very probable to them. If you will call
them Scruples, they cannot help that, but they are no more of Kin to them, than
a grain of Sand is to a Millstone. They are ready (...) Argue the Case with
you at any fair Bar of any Reformed Church in Europe: You have their
Arguments: Against Set Forms of Prayer to be imposed upon all Ministers, in Mr.
Cottons Discourse against Set Forms. Against the Ceremonies, in Dr. Ames his
Fresh Suit? In the Dispute against English Ceremonies, in Mr. Bradshaw's Books.
Against Re^rdination, in R. A. his Letter to a Friend, Printed 1661. and A
Serious Review of Presbyters Reordination by Bishops, Printed about the same
time. As also in Altar Damascenum, upon the two first Heads: Besides many
other Books they could never yet see Answered. What shall these Men do? You
hear what they say; you say nothing, but rail at them, and conclude them
peevish, wilful, ungovernable, without Answering an Argument, but taking it for
granted (as a late Triumphant Author) that they think all Lawful, only Scruple
offending their Party. Will you tell them as you do, p. 61, 62, 63. That Melior
est conditio possidentis. He that is in possession has the bettter Interest,
and that he is possessed of his Right in Commanding, is unquestionable; and
therefore they are bound, in Conscience, to stand to his Command, till it be
evinced that his command is of a thing that is sinful, or above the Sphere of
his Authority. Alas! they will presently grant it you, with this difference.
They will tell you, they will not say, their Superior Commands things which
are apparently, and demonstrably sinful. But the things Commanded are to them
sinful, being such as their Consciences so Judge, and that from Arguments which
appear to them highly probable, enough to beget in them a Moral certainty. You
gag them at the Press, what you can, but they have found times from thence to
tell you what those Arguments are; what is their Answer? You are a Company of
peevish, factious, Schismatical Fellows. Is this Righteous dealing? Or had not
these kind of Answerers, think you, need of some more Righteousness than their
own works, to justify them? They will presently grant, That the Superior is
possessed of an unquestionable Right to Command in such things, as God by his
Word has not forbidden, either by some particular word, or by some general
Law, requiring every one to use their Power derived from God, for good, for
Edification, not for Destruction; to use it so, as not to destroy Souls, for
whom Christ dyed. And to all such Commands, they profess themselves ready to
stand.

And further, when you have proved, that either the Word of God, or right
Reason has put the Superior in a possession of a larger Right than this is.
They will tell you, That the King of Spain is in a possession too of a Right to
Command; so was Queen Mary here in England, who Commanded many things, she, or
her Bishops, or both; which Cranmer, Hooper, Ridley, Latimer, etc. in their
Consciences judged unlawful; how was it Evinced (to use your term) to those and
other good Men, that what these their Superiors Commanded, was unlawful? The
Bishops affirmed them Lawful, so that (according to the Modern Divinity) the
unlawfulness of them could be but the Sufferers private Opinion, and that
against the Church. Did these Men sin, in not doing the things required? Did
they dye as Fools dye? Or did they do their Duty in choosing to Suffer rather
than Act? If the latter, why may not others do the same? Will you say, because
those things to the Martyrs were evinced unlawful. We ask, how were they
evinced? Did they plead Scriptures against: those things, and do not the
Non-Conformists do so now? Had they not a far greater appearance of Scripture
for Transubstantiation, in that Text, This is my Body, than any can bring for a
Liturgy, a Surplis, etc. Will you say, the Scriptures now pleaded, are wrested,
and mis-understood? Would not Bonner and Gardener say so then? Shall the
Magistrate now determine betwixt the Bishops and dissenters? And had not Queen
Mary the same Right? Or (at least) she and her Parliament? See where you are,
Doctor. Who shall Judge whether your opposite Objections be Scruples, Doubts,
or Opinions? Shall the Supreme Magistrate or the Bishops? Had not Queen Mary
and her Bishops the same Right? And then all those Holy Men dyed, as the
Papists say, as Rebels and Traitors, and those things were all suffered in
vain. You have no way to avoid this, unless you will say, Queen Mary and her
Bishops were no Superiors; for you know, Quod convenit alicui qua tali,
convenit omni tali. But it may be when this Doctor writes next, he will think
himself Obliged to speak strictly, and not confound, a Doubting, Scrupulous, an
Opining Conscience. Any School-man, or Casuist will show him the difference
betwixt them.

. 18. The last we shall take Notice of, speaking in this Case, is one, who
calls himself Ireneus Freeman, in a Treatise styled by him, The Reasonableness
of Divine Service, p. 33. he tells us right. That there are but a few Actions
but are disputable; and -- In disputable Actions, we must Obey our Superiors
Commands. This is now right down, that is, There are very few Actions, but let
our own Consciences say what they will to us against them, if our Superiors
Command us to do them, we must do them: Or say what they will for them, if the
Magistrate Command us to forbear them, we must forbear them. In p. 15. Those he
had to deal with having said, that it was not clear to them, That it was Lawful
for all Persons at all times to limit themselves in Praycr by any stinted
Forms, This acute Author roundly tells them.

The Lawfulness of an Action is not clear to him that doubts of its
Lawfulness, not being certain that the Action is Lawful, nor yet certain that
it is unlawful. But yet such a Man is bound to do the Action when Commanded by
the Magistrate. The Reason is, Because it is certain the Magistrate is to be
Obeyed, Commanding Lawful things. But it is uncertain whether the thing be
unlawful; it is safer to Obey doubtingly, than to disobey doubtingly.

Now, in these words, there is either a Notorious Cheat, or else a Potion of
Divinity, which taken down, will bring up all our Protestant Religion: If there
be a Cheat, it lies in those words, Doubting, and Certain. A Conscience may be
said to be doubting, either strictly, or largely. Strictly, Bishop Sanderson
tells us what a doubting Conscience is, when the Mind is pendulous, the Scales
hang even: a Man has as much to say for the Lawfulness of an Action, as for
the unlawfulness. Largely, One that is merely Jealous, Scrupulous, or
Suspicious of an Action, may be said to doubt.

2. One that is not fully persuaded a thing is unlawful, but upon Arguments,
which he judges very probable, he believes it unlawful. Again, a Man may be
certain of a thing, by a certainty of Faith, believing a Divine Revelation, or
by a certainty of Sense, or arising from Demonstration.

2. A Man may be Morally certain, and of most things we have no other certainty
than this latter. If this Author had not designed to cheat his Reader, he would
have spoken distinctly (as we showed Dr. Sanderson did) when he speaks of
Doubting, he must either say nothing to the purpose, for he knows his
Adversaries have given him Arguments, which appear to them very probable why
they Judge the things required unlawful. Or else he must mean, that if a Man
has any doubt, and be not fully persuaded, that the Action is unlawful, though
he has never so many Arguments, which make it appear to him probably such:
Notwithstanding them, he is bound to do the thing. Now, if this be his Sense,
he says that which is not to be made good by any but Mr. Hooker's Principles,
before spoken to, and that which I will think never any Protestant spoke before
him. For his Rule of Tene certum, relinque incertum; besides that, it must be
understood of the two parts of the same Proposition, not of two distinct
Propositions (as he wrings it.) By his leave that is not uncertain, of which we
are Morally certain.

Nor 3. Is it certain, or can be to any Soul, either by Faith, or
Mathematically, or Morally. That the Superior is in all things to be Obeyed:
Nay, the contrary is certain. Nor is it certain that he is to be Obeyed in
things, which the Inferior, upon Arguments which he judges very probable,
Judges unlawful for him to do. For his confounding the Notions of Disputable,
and uncertain, it is ridiculous; for if all things disputable be therefore
uncertain, because they are disputed, and that by some Learned Men too, whether
the particular Soul, dispute them or no. There Is hardly an Article of our Faith
will be left us certain, or indeed any thing else but only this, That we must
Obey our Superiors. In the mean time, Reader, Observe whither these Modern
Casuists are driving.

1. There are few Actions (he might have added Propositions too) that are not
Disputable, Freeman, p. 33. 2. In Disputable Actions we must Obey Superiors
Commands, ibid. p. 15. 3. Yea, we must Obey, though we doubt, i. e. though upon
Arguments which to us appear very probable; we think the things unlawful to be
done, because it is certain (says Freeman) That Superiors are to be Obeyed in
things Lawful, and in disputable things it is uncertain that what is required
is unlawful. 4. Ergo. There are very few Actions, but if we be Commanded this
or that part, let our Consciences say what they will, we must do as we are
commanded.
. 19. These now are Doctrines not fit to be openly, and plainly asserted in
this Noonday of Truth. Therefore the particular Judgments of Private Persons,
Founded on Arguments, which to them seem very probable, and infer a Moral
certainty, must be confounded with the Notions of Doubts, Scruples, Fears,
Jealousies. Let this Doctrine obtain a little, and let the World Judge, if the
exploded, brutish, odious Doctrine of Blind Obedience (the Pillar, and Basis of
Popery) be not by slight of hand established. The Consequence of this Doctrine,
if true, would be this, That Men need no more look to Scripture, to see whether
an Action were Lawful or no, but look upon it as the Will of God; to believe as
the Church believes, and do as their Superiors command, without any regard to
the command of God. Of this, more anon.

. 20. The Advantage of this Doctrine (pretended) is Peace, by which they can
mean no more, than an outward Harmony in Action.

2. The stretching the bounds of Morality. For, if two successive Superiors
Command me the two contradictory parts of the same Proposition: One Commands me
to go to Church: Another, to tarry at home, and I am bound to Obey in things
disputable; it must follow, that all things in the World that are disputable,
are indifferent. Now, there being (as Mr. Freeman says) few actions not
Disputable. It must follow, that there are few Practical Propositions, but a
Man, as to them may do what he list, take what part he pleases; so all things
shall become Lawful. But now the woeful dis-advantage of it, is, that he who
practices according to these Principles.

1. Shall be sure to have no Peace in his Conscience, but a continual regret
within himself.

2. He will be at last damned. For (says the Apostle) he that doubts, is
damned if he eats, Romans 14. Except somebody can prove what has been
impudently enough said, That Superiors must another day answer to God for all
the sinful actions which their Inferiors have done at their command, (a
Doctrine no Superior has cause to thank them for.) Nor is there any way to
avoid the first, unless it were possible for Men to persuade themselves, as Mr.
Hooker would have them, That it is the Will of God, that in Litigious and
controverted cases of such Quality, Men should submit to the judgment of final
decision; though in their private Opinions they Judge it utterly to swerve from
that which is right; as to which we have said enough. We therefore stick to the
Protestant Doctrine,

That it is not Lawful, under any circumstance of Command, to act against an
Opining Conscience.

CHAP. IV. The Question stated; It is proved, that it is not Lawful to Act
contrary to the Opinion of a Man's particular Conscience, by five Arguments;
because the particular Conscience is the Proximate Rule of Action, granted by
all Divines. Because of that Text, Romans 14.23. Because it Subjects a Man to
continual Terrors of Conscience. The contrary Principle over-throws the Natural
Order of the Souls Operation, and plucks up a great Pillar of the Protestant
Religion, and would make the Scriptures and Argumentative Books of little Use
but to Torment Men.
. 1. WE come now to assert our Proposition, That it is not Lawful for any
Person to act against an Opining Conscience, i. e. (as we have largely opened).
That, supposing a Person, though he has not demonstrative Arguments, to prove
this or that unlawful, which he is required to do: Yet if he has formed up a
particular Judgment of Conscience, from Arguments, which seem to him very
probable, so as he cannot Answer them, nor rest satisfied in the Answers of
others, while he so judges, it is sin and wickedness in him, especially in
Matters which concern the Worship of God, to do that Action, however required
of him. This we shall make good by several Arguments.

. 2.1. To swerve from what God has made the Proximate Rule of our actions, is
sinful. But to act contrary to the Opinion of our own Consciences, is to swerve
from what God bath made the Proximate Rule of our Actions -- Therefore it is
sinful. The Major can with no Modesty be denied; for, what is sin, but a
Transgression of, or deviation from the Rule of our actions? The Minor is as
Evident. It is granted by all Divines we have met with, both Popish and
Protestant, that the Practical Conscience is the Proximate Rule of our Actions;
nor did we ever meet with it denied by any Learned Man. And indeed it must be
so; For, That Gods Word and Law is the Remote Rule, must be owned. Now, we
would ask how we shall know what the Will of God in his Word is, but by the
Judgment of our particular consciences at last; be the Will of God in it self
what it will: The Will of God to us must be Interpreted as to Practice by our
own Judgments and apprehensions. Hence Dr. Ames says well, that he who acts
against his Conscience, Interpretatively acts against the Will of God. And
Filiucius says right; such Actions declare, that Men choose, and love sin: For
so far as they know what is sinful, they do sin; and if they miss of sinning in
their Actions, it is but as the blind Man hits the Crow, there is no thank to
them; out of choice they sin: It is involuntarily, if they do that which is
right. No Action materially good, can possibly be so formally, if done contrary
to the Judgment of our Conscience; because it is impossible it should have the
concurrence of the Will, whiles the Practical Conscience faith it ought not be
done. The Will cannot will what it judges evil, it may indeed be mis-guided by
the Understanding, but it cannot will evil, sub ratione mali; and so
consequentially cannot will what the Conscience tells the Man he ought not to
do. So as indeed it is but a Natural Principle, That the Practical Conscience
is, and must be the Proximate Rule of our actions. Filiucius says right, that
the Law of God, and the Law of Nature respects our Actions as they are free,
which they cannot be, unless they proceed a Principio cognoscente, from a
knowing Principle within our selves. We proceed to a second Argument.

. 3. That Principle, which allowed perverteth the whole Order of Nature in the
operations of a Reasonable soul, must be false. But this opinion, That it is
Lawful for us to act contrary to what appears to us Lawful, from probable
arguments, perverteth the whole Order of Nature in the Operations of a
Reasonable Soul -- Ergo. The Major needs no proof to any who will believe,
that it is not the Will of God, a Man should be Metamorphosed into a Beast. So
that all our business must be to prove the Minor. To which purpose let us but
take a view of the Noblest Empire in the World, I mean, that of Reason in Man;
and Observes the Order which God has (by the Law of Nature prescribed) by
which Reason, sitting as a Queen, should Rule there.

The Will is the great Minister in this State, the great wheel, which by its
imperate Acts moves the whole Man. The Object of it is Good or Evil; about
these two it is Exercised, choosing the former, refusing the latter, and then
Commanding all the Inferior Faculties of the Soul, and Members of the Body, to
move according to its Judgment and Choice. The Philopsoher tells us, The Will
is blind, and that its work is only to keep its Seat, and Judge, and Command.
The Understanding serves it with the Notion of things that takes cognizance of
them, discerns, and represents them as true, or false; whether reference to
Speculation or Practice. The Understanding in its work is served by the
Interior and exterior Senses. So then this is the Order of the Ceasonable Soul
in Man, whereas all Objects are either Sensible, Rational, or Spiritual. The
exterior Senses, the Eye and Ear, etc. bring Intelligence of sensible Objects.
The Fancy, Memory, and Imaginative Power bring Intelligence of Objects proper
to their Sphere. The Understanding takes notice of all Propositions thus
brought in to it, discerns them, and judges concerning them, whether they be
true or false according to Principles of Sense, Reason, and Revelation,
according to the variety of the Matter; upon this the Will makes its choice.
Those which the Understanding discerns true and good, it wills and chooses;
what it discerns false and evil, it refuses, nillete, and rejects; and
accordingly Commands the Soul to believe, or not believe; to love, or hate;
to desire, or fl^e from whatsoever the Understanding discerns, and judges
evil and noxious. Here now is the Government of a Reasonable Soul. Now, let us
Observe how guilty the Principle we oppose is of Treason and Sedition against
this Noble Government of the Soul instituted in it by God himself. We cannot
make a better Judgment, than by putting a particular case. Suppose this the
Proposition.

It is, or it is not Lawful for Persons once Ordained to be re-ordained.

The Case now is to be Judged in the Court of Reason.

(...) Senses bring in this Proposition; as what they have some where seen or
heard to be brought into Practice. Upon this the Court of the Reasonable
Understanding takes cognizance of it. The Understanding discerns it a
Proposition relating to Instituted Worship, and that the Truth concerning it,
is to be determined, not from Principles of Sense, or Principles of Natural
Reason, but from Scripture and Reason working upon things Revealed, and
comparing things Spiritual with Spiritual. The Eye is therefore employed to
Read what can be. The Ear to hear on all sides what is spoken about it. The
Fancy or Imagination is also set on work to find out Mediums to prove the one
part or other, and so the thing comes with all these helps to be Discoursed by
the soul within it self. Then the Understanding discerns and judges which
part of the Proposition is true, and consequently, fit to be Practiced; which
is false, and fit to be rejected. It either concludes one part Demonstratively,
and certainly false, or probably, and in all likelihood false; or else it hangs
in equilibrio, not knowing what to determine. In the present Case we suppose
the Understanding to bring in its report in this Sense.

As to this Practical Question, Whether it be Lawful for them, who by Ministers
have been Ordained and made Ministers, to be re-ordained, and made, first,
Deacons, then Priests, by Bishops.

I have done my best to try the Truth or Falsehood of either part. The Eyes and
Ears have given me an account of what they have seen in any Books, or heard
from any Discourses of Learned Men about it. The Fancy has also been employed
to weigh, and consider Propositions to consider Arguments brought by others on
one side, and the other; and devise Mediums for one part, and for the other.
Now, upon my utmost Judgment of the thing from weighing Arguments on all sides,
it is not demonstratively certain, that this Proposition is false. That Persons
once Ordained, may not be re-ordained, and that a Submission to such a
reordination would be sinful: But it does appear to me very probably so; I
cannot Answer the Arguments which I have thought on, or others have brought to
prove it so; and though I dare not arrogate infallibility to my self, and
determine the Arguments I have for the Negative unanswerable; yet I can find no
Answer I can acquiesce in, and so far as I can judge, it is sinful; and will
certainly issue in horror of Conscience, or Eternal Damnation, or both, without
pardoning Mercy. Now, the business is ripe for the Will's Election. What shall
the Will do? Shall it, can it (notwithstanding this) choose the thing, and
command the soul, to will, desire, embrace it, or the outward Man to do it,
because it is Commanded. If this be not to turn a Man into a Beast, to turn the
Rational soul out of doors, and set a Man with his heels upward, and to pervert
the Natural Order of the Souls Operations, we know not what is?

. 4. Willany say, the Case is here partially represented, because under the
Circumstance of Superiors Command. The Understanding has also a report to
bring in about that Proposition, That it is by Divine Precept necessary to Obey
Superiors. We Answer, if the Proposition be laid down so Universal, the
Understanding must either Deny it, or distinguish about it. It must therefore
be only laid down thus.

In all Lawful things it is necessary to obey Superiors.

Now, it hinders not, for this is (...) this is the Question, whether the thing
be Lawful or no: The Soul judges otherwise. Now, we would gladly know of our
Modern Casuists, Whether the Law of Nature having obliged the Will to move
According to the dictate of the Understanding, is be possible that a rational
Soul without presumptuous sinning, and offering violence to the very Law and
Principles of Humane Nature, should, will, choose, command, or allow a thing so
represented to it as before, probably unlawful. What we cannot apprehend good,
I hope we cannot will it, for this were to will evil under the Notion o^ evil
(a thing Naturally impossible.) Now, how shall^^ judge that good (being to take
all its Evidence from the ^^^^llect) which the understanding judges false, and
naught? Will any one say, that it is possible that from extrinsecal Arguments
(such as the Authority, and Testimony of Men, the Will and Command of
Superiors) etc. it may judge that true and good, which from intrinsecal
Arguments, it judges false and naught. This is indeed the Jesuits Doctrine.
(Yet they will not allow a Superiors merum imperium, a sufficient Topic in
the case) but as was said before, it is justly abominated by all Protestants,
of what sort, size, or persuasion soever.

. 5. Exabundanti, if any will be so vain, as to say, the Soul has warrant
enough to judge the thing probably Lawful, because Superiors bave Commanded
it; when in the mean time from Arguments appearing to it very probable, it
judges it sinful and unlawful. We would gladly know, from what Principles it
should form such a Judgment; the Principle must be one of these.

1. Either these Superiors are Infallible, so am not I in the Exercise of my
Reason. So inded the Papists hold, as to the Pope, and so may be justified in
their perverse Judgments in this case from that Maxim, (...). Granting one
absurdity, a thousand will follow: But all Protestants reserve Infallibility
from him, who is Truth it self, and deny it to any Creature.

2. It must therefore be this Principle: Though Superiors be fallible, yet it
is better their Judgments (though in following them there be a danger of a
troubled Conscience, and eternal damnation) than my own. But is it possible an
ingenuous, Rational Soul should so Judge? This being neither sensibly, not
rationally demonstrable: It is impossible that the Soul should apprehend any
such thing but upon Revelation. It must teerefore (as Hooker says) appear to
be The will of God; and to that (as to the highest Reason) (if it can be
showed) Reason Sanctified and Regulated by Religion, will submit. Aut alas! who
shall show us any such Text? Ante retro Simoeis stuet, etc. Will they urge Romans
13. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, and other Texts of the like
import. We allow the Scripture, we say, the matter to be our Duty, but we say,
it must be in things which do not appear to us sinful and wicked (this were to
set up some higher than the highest?) Otherwise the Apostles, Acts 3. much
erred, not only in their Practice, but in their Principle too there laid down,
It is better to obey God than Man: In vain had they said that, if every
Obedience to Man as a Superior were, co nomine, Obedience to God, will any
say? But this was where a Magistrate Commanded a thing unlawful. How did that
appear, but by the dictate of their Consciences? It indeed now does otherwise
appear to us, because the Scripture so represents it since written; but how did
it appear to them otherwise? Why might not the Magistrate have then told them,
as some now Interpret that revealed will of God to us. He that doubts, is
damned, if he eats; that is, (except his Superior Commands ^^m to eat.) And
why might not Nebuchadnezzar have told the three Children, It is true, God had
forbidden them to Worship Graven Images, but it must be understood, excegt the
Magistrate Commanded them so to do: But this Objection is too ridiculous to
Answer further. Let this be enough for our Second Argument.

. 5. We proceed to a Third Argument, which we form thus.

For any Person to do that in the doing of which he can never have any quiet,
and peace in his own Conscience, is sinful and wicked.

But for a Man to Act (under any Circumstance) contrary to the Opinion of his
own Conscience, is to do that, in the doing of which he can never have any
quiet, and Peace in his own Conscience. -- Ergo.

We are much at loss to fancy which Proposition any can be hardy enough to
deny. Will any deny the Major? Surely Charity begins at home; and every Man, in
the first place, is bound to keep Quiet within himself, if he can. Thou art
bound to the Peace of thy own Conscience. Thou can not Obey (says Mr.
Fulwood, in the place before cited) a very remarkable Sentence for the Author
of the Doctrine of Schism, to think upon professing so much oneness of mind
with Mr. Fulwood, in that Book) and certainly, he is the greatest
Self-destroyer in the World, that does not first look in his Actions, to secure
the Peace of his Conscience. Next, throwing a Man's self into Hell, the
greatest mischief he can do himself, is to set his Conscience upon a continual
belching in his Face.

. 6. For the Minor: It is as plain, for he must have a dull, a very dull and
lazy Conscience, that will let him Act contrary to its Judgment, and yet be
quiet, and not continually tell him, thou subjectest thy self to the wrath of
God, thou sinnest wilfully, presumptuously; and there is nothing remains for
thee, but either a quick Repentance, a sorrow for what thou have done, and a
leaving off to do it any more; or a certain dreadful looking for of Divine and
fiery Indignation.

. 7. Will any say, why should not a Man's Conscience be as unquiet while a man
contrary to the Command of God for Obeying Superiors, does not Obey them? The
Answer is easy. No Law of God Obliges a man to Obey Superiors in things
which he verily believes are unlawful; about other things we have no Dispute.
This Argument is so Evident, as it needs not more words. We therefore proceed
to a fourth.

. 8. He that doubts is damned, if he eats; and whatsoever is not of Faith,
is sin, Romans 14.23.

But he who does that, which upon probable Arguments he verily believes
unlawful; doubts, and yet actethnd acts not of Faith. -- ergo he sins,
is damned, etc.

The Proposition is the Apostles, Romans 14.23. therefore not to be denied; but
yet we find some, who will not allow it a Proposition of immutable Truth, but
with some Circumstances. That is (as they expound themselves) if the Person be
sui juris, at Liberty, and Perfectly in his own Power, not required to do the
thing, by the Command of his Superiors, of the Lawfulness of which he
doubts: But (say they) if the Superior Commands, then he who does the
^^ing, (though he doubts of the Lawfulness of it) runs no guilt, no hazard
of Damnation. Now, we would fain believe this if we could, for it would ease us
of many perplexing thoughts, but we cannot, for these Reasons, amongst others.

. 9. First, because what the Apostle says, seems to us but to be according
to the Law, and Order of Nature in a rational Soul. That the Understanding
should first represent that as true, and good, and therefore Eligible, which
the Will should choose.

. 10. Because it seems to us possible by admitting their Interpretation to
elude the whole Law of God, and make any thing Lawful. For what Reason can
there be, why what God says in one place, should be understood with that
limitation, and not what he says in another? Why may we not Venerate Images,
Go to Mass, Pray for the Dead, Profane the Sabbath, Use Oil, Spittle, Cream,
etc. in Baptism, if the Superior Commands, as well as wear a Surplis, use
the Cross in Baptism, etc. Does any one doubt whether these things be Lawful or
no, or upon probable Arguments, believe the contrary? And is he restrained by
this Text? Not at all by this Interpretation; if Superiors Command these, or
any of these things, will any say, That this Text speaks of things only in
their own Nature indifferent? We ask, who shall Judge what those things are?
Shall the Superior? If so, what we said, holds; for it is not to be
presumed, he would Command them, if he judges them sinful. Shall the
Inferior? He Judges them from probable Arguments Unlawful.

. 11. Thirdly, Because (whatsoever some Modern Doctors say) We see no Scripture
Translating the guilt of any Personal Action of ours to our Superiors, which
in Reason we should find, if his Command would Justify us, in doing any thing
we judge wicked. Especially considering, that whether we Judge it right or no,
it may in it self be sinful, and therefore we had need have our Souls secured,
as to the guilt of it. We think, with the Apostle, that Sin is an Anomie; a
transgression of the Law, by Omission, or Commission, or Nonconformity, how we
believe, that there is an inseparable guilt which he cleaves to every Omission
or Oblique Action: every sin binds over the Doer or Omitter to an Eternal
death: and want one Scripture to prove, that the sin, or Personal Obliquity of
an Inferior Action, should be Translated to the Superior, and set upon his
score: Thus while some deny Christ's imputed Righteousness, they have devised a
new Doctrine of Imputed guilt to the Magistrate or Superior; a Doctrine which
no Superior will thank them for, that understands the weight of Divine wrath
for sin. We have heretofore heard, that Superiors may make themselves guilty
of sin, by Commanding others to sin: But that the guilt of the Inferiors
Personal Action, should also be Translated from him, and that not to Christ,
but to the Superior, is a Novel, idle Fancy, a brutish, and irrational, as
well as unscriptural figment, and such a one, as if admitted, would make the
Crowns of Kings, and Mitres of Bishops not worth taking up in the Streets. Let
God therefore be true, and these New Diviners all Liars; God has said, That
Soul that sins, shall dye, and that every Soul shall bear its own Iniquity; and
Iniquity that must be (if St. John describes sin right) whatsoever is a
Transgression of the Divine Law.

.12. Fourthly, We cannot admit of this Interpretation, because of what
follows in the Apostle, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. By Faith, says
Dr. Sanderson, in his Sermon on Romans 14.23. is meant, A Certain persuasion of
the Mind, that what we do, may Lawfully be done; that (says he) whatsoever
Action is done by us, either directly contrary to the Judgment and Verdict of
our own Consiciences, or, at least, doubtingly, and before we are in some
competent measure assured that we may Lawfully do it; that is it which St. Paul
here denies to be of Faith, and of which he pronounces so peremptorily, that
it is (eo nomine) sin. Now, we are sure, that he who does a thing at the
Command of others, which seems to him (from probable Arguments) unlawful,
cannot, in this sense, do it of Faith, i. e. with no competent persuasion of
the Lawfulness of it, with no certainty, either Supernatural, Mathematical, or
Moral. The Vanity therefore of this limitation being discovered, we hope the
Proposition will stand good.

. 13. For the Minor, he who denies it, must say, That he who Opineth does not
doubt, which indeed we think strictly he does not; for he has, as we said, a
Moral certainty, but that does but raise the Argument to a fortiori: If he,
whose Conscience is pendulous, and who hangs in Equilibrio, is damned if he
does the thing, of the Lawfulness of which he doubts; then is he much more
damned, who does verily think the thing unlawful, and yet will do it. But in
the largest Notion, Opining is a Species of doubting; and if that Text of the
Apostle be true, of Doubting, in any sense, it must be in that sense, which is
of all, the highest. We are able to discern no chink, at which our Adversaries
may creep out from the Prison of this Argument, but shall leave it, attending
to any thing they shall any of them hereafter offer in Answer to it.

. 14. Our next Argument shall be this.

That Principle which destroys the Pillar and Foundation of the Protestant
Religion, is not to be granted by those who own that Religion.

But to assert it Lawful under any Circumstance, to Act contrary to the Opinion
of a Man's own Conscience, destroys the Pillar and Foundation of the
Protestant Religion -- Ergo.

We confess this is but Argumentum ad homines, and concerns not those whose
business is to oppose, and Root up the Religion of Protestants; but we are
speaking to Protestants, who cannot deny the Proposition.

For the Assumption, all that we have to do, is to prove that the Asserting of
this Principle, destroys, at least, one of the Foundations of the Protestant
Religion, as it stands disting^^^^d from Popery. This is that, which Divines
call The Judgment of Private and Practical Discretion. Divines say, there is
(...) ^^^^fold Judgment concerning Propositions of Truth.

1. The first is Authoritative, or Nomothetick. This belongs only to God;
all the Men in the World, all their Opinions and Arguments cannot add a Cubit
to the stature of Truth, nor make an hair of its Head either white or black.

2. The Second is Ministerial, and Declarative. This belongs to the Church (in
the Scriptural Notion of it.) The Apostle therefore calls her the Pillar and
ground of Truth: She keeps the Sacred Records, and when there is a doubt about
any portion of them, Ministerially declares what is the Truth.

3. The third Divines call, The Judgment of Private and Practical Discretion.
This, Protestants say, belongs to every private Christian, who, by his own
Conscience, (using the best means first which he can for the Information of it)
is to determine (as to his own belief and Practice, what is true, and Lawful.
And indeed here lies the great difference betwixt the Religion of Papists and
Protestants. The Papists will not allow the Private Christian to Judge of Truth
with reference to his own Practice, but Obliges People To believe as the
Church believes, and defends Blind Obedience to Superiors as Christians
Duty. They make it Lawful for Men, contrary to their own Judgment, and the
Dictate of their Conscience from intrinsic Arguments, to Practice according to
the Opinion of one or more Doctors, and necessary to Obey all the Decrees of
the Popes, and the Commands of Superiors, if things be not apparently and
demonstratively unlawful. It may be one Adrianus or another, or two may enter
their dissent to this Brutish Doctrine, but they do generally agree it, and
this is Fons and Origo mali. The very first thing to be taught their
Prosilytes, (as silence was in the School of Pythagoras.) Hence their
vernacular Bibles are burnt, and all their other Doctrines are easily
swallowed. The necessity of an Infallible Judge is Concluded, etc.

. 15. On the other side it is essential to a Protestant to be free and in
Bondage to no Man, nor as to his Practice to be guided by any but God alone,
and his own Conscience, and his Superiors Commanding him what his own
Conscience first persuades him to be necessary, or, at least, Lawful. He who
denies this, and pretends to hate Popery, does but abhor Idols, and commit
Sacrilege. Nay, he does indeed but deny that in words, which he owneth,
chooses, and prefers; nor is it possible, there should be greater Factors
for Popery in any place, than those that persuade Men, that it is Lawful for
them under what Circumstances they can Imagine to Act contrary to the Opinion
of their own Conscience, and do what (from which to them seem very probable)
seems utterly to swerve from that which is right, (to use Mr. Hooker's Phrase.)

. 16. Now, let any pluck up this Flood-gate of Private and Practical
Discretion, and tell us what should hinder most of the absurd Doctrines of
Popery coming in upon us like an overflowing Flood, if ever we should be so
miserable (which is not a thing impossible) as in Future Ages, to have a
Superior that shall Command the receiving of them, or Practice according to
them. As to the falsehood of most of them, we have but a Moral certainty, at
least, our persuasion must be Judged no more according to the Modern Divinity;
for how can we be Infallibly, and demonstratively certain in things, as to
which so great a part of the World is of another mind, and so many such Learned
Men, as Bellarmine, Stapleton, and an hundred more, who dissent from us?
Besides, as we showed before, we are told, that in Disputable things, we can
have but an Opinion of one part. And this we take to be a Meditation worthy of
those Honorable Persons amongst the Nobility and Gentry of England, who have
showed their Zeal so much of late against that Religious Pageantry of Rome. If
any doubt whether Christians have such a Privilege given them by God, as this
of Private and Practical Discretion; let them consider those Texts, 1 These.
5.21. 1 John 3.1. usually quoted for it; and but Read what Bishop Davenant, in
his most Learned Treatise, De Judice and Norma fidei, and all other Protestant
Writers have said for it. Whoever plucks up this Hedge, we understand not if he
does not feel the Romish Serpent quickly biting him by the heel; and we cannot
but think that Man will be Cursed, that goes about to remove this Landmark of
all Protestants; and cry out to our Superiors, in the words of Solomon, Prove.
22.28. Remove not the Ancient Landmark, which our Fathers have set.

. 17. We might further add, that the admission of this absurd and brutish
principle, that if a thing be not apparently and demonstratively sinful, it is
Lawful for Men to Act contrary to the Opinion of their own Consiciences,
representing it to them (from Arguments, which seem to them very probable)
unlawful: All Books of Topics, as to Matters of practice, all Argumentative
Books in Divinity would be of no Use at all, but noxious, and mischievous
rather: Yea, the Holy Scriptures themselves would be of very little or no use
for the use of Argumentative Discourses, in any Science or Discipline is to
make a proposition either Demonstrative, or Probable to us. Yea, this is the
use of the Holy Scriptures, as they inform us of Truth. Things are Demonstrable
to us upon the Evidence of Revelation, Sense, or Reason, (indeed the first is
improper, for the certainty arising from Divine Revelation, is called Faith,
not Demonstration, or Demonstrative certainty, but it is quiddam majus, what is
certain to us upon a certainty of Faith, or Demonstrative Reason, is not so
Ordinarily in a moment. This Certainty is Ordinarily hatched out of Topics,
and most Propositions even of Divine Truth usually at first appear to the Soul
probable, before they appear indubitably certain. The Gray hairs of that other
certainty (which is distinguished from Moral Certainty) rarely grow up in a
Night. This being granted, which every one experienceth. Suppose but a
Convocation, or a College of Superiors, to determine de Omnibus agendis, of
all things to be Religiously Observed, and done. To what purpose should any
read, or study any Books for the disquisition of Truth, as to any part of a
Proposition; for when he has done, so long as the thing to be done appears to
him but probably Lawful, or probably unlawful, which it must do before it
appears to him indubitably, and out of all Question the one, or the other, he
is according to this Opinion bound in Conscience (if he be by Superiors
Commanded) to do quite contrary to what he Judges Lawful, if he be not
indubitably certain it is unlawful. What need he Read and study the Scriptures,
as to Matter of Practice? When he has found out the most he can there, some or
other will dispute the Truth of what he thinks he has found out; and if so, it
is disputable; and if it be disputable, his Notion is not indubitable
(according to this Novel Doctrine) and he is bound to do what he is bidden. So
as his Notion shall be crushed in the Egg, and never be suffered to hatch into
a Demonstration, or indubitable certainty, and all his Reading for the finding
out of the truth, shall serve for nothing but to torture him, with a continual
regret, and checking of Conscience, which will never let a Man be quiet whiles
he Acts in Repugnancy to it. Will any say yet, he shall do well to Read, to
persuade himself of the Lawfulness of what he is Commanded. Suppose another
Superior should then come and Command him the quite contrary (as he may
doubtless.) But it may be some will say, so long as he by Reading only
persuades himself it is Lawful; not necessary antecedaneously to the Superiors
Command, he is well enough; he may first Obey the one, then the other: But how
shall a Man be able so to govern himself, as by Reading to secure himself that
he shall not convince himself the thing is necessary? Thus according to this
absurd position, we may part with all the practical part of Scripture, and, as
the Popish Proselytes use to do, burn our Bibles, only excepting some few
Precepts about Obedience to Superiors, in that will lie the whole Duty of Man,
for whatever else the Scripture says (unless in things unlawful, according to
the Law and light of Nature) must be expounded with a Salvo. This you must not
do, except Superiors Command. This you must do, unless Superiors Command the
contrary. If not all Scripture, we would willingly know where these Divines
will set the Limits? Will they say (as indeed they do) it is only in things in
their own Nature indifferent; this looks like something, but is indeed nothing:
Who shall be Judge of those things which are so? Shall the Inferiors
Conscience, as to his practice, be Judge? Then the Question is granted on our
side. Shall the Superior Judge, for the Inferiors practice? Then the
Limitation signifies nothing. How any will get out of this Noose, we cannot
Divine; but enough is said in this case, we Conclude it An absurd,
unreasonable, unscriptural, Popish, Brutish Assertion, for any to affirm it
Lawful, for Christians under any Circumstances, in Matters of Worship
especially, to Act contrary to what in the particular Judgment of his own
Conscience, formed from Arguments which to him appear very probable, he Judges
to be Lawful from intrinsecal Nature, affections, and adjuncts of the Action
Let us now shortly enquire what inconveniences our Opinion in this case is
encumbered with, or are charged upon it.

CHAP. V. The Grand Objection answered. This Principle does not take away all
Power from Magistrates, nor at all dissolve the Bonds of any due Obedience. The
Magistrates Power opened, granted, limited; he has no power to Judge as to the
Inferiors practice, what is, or is not indifferent. The strange variety of
conformable Writers, in stating, and determining the Question. The
Reasonableness, and Necessity of Indulgence. Dr. Ashton's late Book examined,
his Notion of Persecution inquired into, the true Notion of it. An Introduction
to the next Case.
. 1. THE Common and Grand, and we think, the only valuable Objection against
this Proposition, is, That this Principle takes away all power from
Superiors, and dissolves all Inferiors Obligations to Obedience; and this we
hear of often enough, and it were Objection enough if it were but half true.
But let us go down into this Field, and see whether the Principle be so guilty,
according to the Cry against it. That which they Offer in Justification of
this, is, That the World is now grown so cunning, that there is hardly any
thing which can be Commanded by Superiors, but the Wit of Man will find out
some probable Arguments to prove that it is unlawful, which if it be once so
proved, the Inferior is discharged from his Obedience. Again, they say, All
things are either Necessary, Lawful, or Unlawful. for things Necessary, and
unlawful, let Superiors Command what they please, the Inferiors must not Omit
things necessary, nor do things unlawful. If the Superior holds his Peace, the
Inferior must do the former, and forbear the latter; so as the Superior has
only a proper power as to things indifferent. Take away this, and you leave
him nothing. This is the strength of what we find said here and there in more
words.

. 2. In Answer to both which we say, 1. That it is most certain that God has
not set up Superiors for Nothings, there is in them a Power, and a great Power
to Command, and Obedience to their Commands is a Duty, a great Duty. This is
not Disputed betwixt us; now to open wherein the Power of the Magistrate lies,
we say, 1. That the Magistrate being as a God to us, and God's Vicegerents,
his first and great work unquestionably lies in seeing that the Commands of
God be fulfilled, both his Moral Laws, and his Positive Laws about Divine
Worship; and this alone (if his Power were no more) were not only a Noble
Employment, but full, and sufficient to employ the Head and Hands of any Mortal
Man in any large Jurisdiction.

2. Whereas as to the Government of Political Bodies, and Matters merely
Circumstantial concerning the Worship of God, which are yet necessary to the
upholding of Polities, and the administration of Justice in them; and without
which, in Matters of Religion, the Worship of God either could not at all be
performed, or at least, not so performed, but that in the Eye of Common Sense
and Reason it would be Judged by the most,. disorderly and indecently
performed. In these things Gods Word has only generally determined, and the
Superior has a confessed Power in these things (which even the highest
Non-Conformists will grant) to make particular Laws in these things; and indeed
rightly considered, these are but Laws in things necessary, though not
Originally, yet upon supposition of the general Commands of Scripture. It Is one
thing to Create Order and Decency, another thing to Command that things be done
in the Church Decently and in Order. The Decency and Order of things in
Religion neither must nor can arise but from the Law of Nature, the Common
sense of Christians, and the particular guise and Custom of places. Now, the
Magistrate has an undoubted Power to Command Circumstantials of Order and
Decency, that is, which are truly so, antecedent to his Command. Is this no
Power, and proper to him, think we?

3. We say, that if the Superior Judges a thing thus necessary in pursuit of
the general Rules of Gods Word, if they indeed be so, the Inferior is bound in
Conscience, to do, or to omit them. If the Superior only Judges them so, it
is his Duty to Command them. If the Inferior cannot Judge so of them, if he
Judges them in their Circumstances, but such as he may do, or Omit, he is
bound to do them, or omit them (according to the Nature of the Superiors
Precept.) But if the Inferior Judges them unlawful for him to do, though this
his Judgment be formed but from probable Arguments (that is, such as to him so
appear) not from indubitably certain Arguments; he cannot Obey, but is bound
patiently to submit to the penalty imposed upon him for Disobedience. So that
these Objections are perfectly vain, and no encumbrances at all upon our
Proposition.

. 3. But we say, It is one thing for us to allow a Power in Superiors to
determine us, where both we and they agree the thing in its own Nature, and
clothed with such Circumstances, of a middle and indifferent Nature; And quite
another thing for us, (and that as to the things of God too) and such things,
where for doing, or not doing, the danger of sin and Eternal Damnation lies,
to make him Our Judge what is, and what is not Indifferent. It is impossible
any intelligent Soul should allow the latter to his Superior without also
making him a Judge both of Good and Evil. For Indifferency being a middle
betwixt those two extremes, there is no possibility of his being a Judge of it
without also determining concerning the extremes. And if we could allow this,
we should as to private Christians use see little need of the Scriptures, for
the Superior must Interpret them too, or all will come to nothing.

. 4. Nay, we further say, that there may be some stresses of Providence, as to
which the being of Polities, and the Preservation of Justice lies at stake,
where some things may be Lawful which in Ordinary Cases God will not allow. You
know (says our Savior) what David did when he was an hungry, how he did eat
the Shewbread, which was not Lawful for any (in Ordinary Cases) to eat, but
for the Priests only. It was a Case of real Necessity to save his Life: It
would have been a sin, both in David, upon a lighter pretense to have done it,
and for the Priest to have suffered it.

. 5. We have been the more willing to search this business to the bottom,
because of that andacious Liberty, which some have taken, either openly to
assert, or cunningly to insinuate the contrary; a thing (undoubtedly) of as i^l
a tendency as can well be imagined, leading directly to a Blind Obedience, one
of the Capital Errors of the Church of Rome, and possibly a more sottish, and
brutish Error, than any other which they have, as devesting Man of his Humane
Nature, and that which is the Mother of most other of their abominable
Doctrines, any absurdities, as Naturally following that first, as the Thread
follows the Needle: If it can be supposed, that there may be a Superior absurd
in his Sentiments or Practice; which that it may be, we need no other Evidence
than what the Infallible Choice it self has given the wiser part of the World
often enough Evidence of.

. 6. We have been amazed to Observe how tenderly Modern Writers have touched
this Question. Mr. Hooker indeed, as we have before said, is peremptory enough
against us, to that degree as we find none of his Posterity in that thing
approving his saying. The Author of the Pulpit Conceptions, Popular deceptions,
fairly skips it over, telling us what should be done by us, if we scruple our
Obedience; but not a word what we should do, if we from probable Arguments
judge the thing unlawful. Freeman (as we showed before) is peremptory enough
beyond all Reason or Religion. But another, writing a Book professedly about
Tenderness of Conscience, when he comes to Answer the Case of Doubting, speaks
almost to every thing else, but (prudently) leaves out this Case. Others tell
us, that if the thing Commanded be apparently, demonstratively, indisputably
evil, if it tends to debauch us in our Sentiments concerning the Godhead, etc.
we must not Obey; but if otherwise, either they say nothing, or else tell us we
ought to Obey. The Reverend Bishop Sanderson, and Mr. Fulwood, are the only
two Modern Divines that we have met with, daring to state the Case distinctly,
and speaking to it in the Dialect of Protestants. But others, in their
Writings, either show little of Divines, stating the Case falsely, and not
speaking ad idem. Or little of Protestants, saying that which no Protestant
Divines ever durst say before them.

. 6. And from hence to every considerate Reader, will be inevitably concluded
the Reasonableness, if not the Necessity of an Indulgence from all Superiors,
who will think themselves under any Obligation to the Royal Law of Love. For as
that Law will Oblige them not to suffer sin in their Inferiors, Lev. 19.17.
So. it will also Oblige them not to lay a stumbling block before them that are
weak, by which they both sin against Christ, 1 Cor. 8.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and do
not walk Charitably, Romans 14.15. Nor yet to make them to suffer, because they
dare not sin: For to Act against their Conscience (though but Opining) is sin.
For all this Suffering must unquestionably be a Suffering for Righteousness
sake, for to depart from Iniquity is unquestionably a piece of Righteousness.
Hence though the Superior upon the first Account be bound to Oblige his
Inferiors by his Civil Sanction, to do all that which the Law of God has made
necessary for them to do, and to forbear what the same Law has forbidden,
otherwise he should suffer sin upon them: Yet if he thinks fit to Command other
things in Religion, which (possibly) himself, and some of his Inferiors Judge
not sinful, and tendent to some State or Decency, but the want of them makes
not the Servite indecent or disorderly, according to any Light or Law of
Nature, or the general guise and Custom of the place; and many other his
Inferiors Judge so far from tendency to Order and Decency, that they from
Arguments, which to them appear very probable, judge them sinful and unlawful,
and so capable of no such Notion, how he can possibly exact an Obedience to any
such Commands, without

1. Either putting his Inferiors upon sin, and continual disturbance of their
Consciences.

2. Or making them Sufferers, because they dare not sin against God; which is
(as we said before) a species (at least) of Suffering for Righteousness-sake.
We must confess our selves (which possibly is our weakness) not Divines
sufficient to understand, and should thank any one that could inform us. Now,
betwixt these there lies no Medium, but a Gracious Indulgence, the very
Remedy, which His Most Excellent Majesty has suited to this fore Evil.

. 7. And here we would have finished our Discourse, but for a late Book,
called, The Cases of Scandal and Persecution, which yet has no such depths in
it, as to ask us long time to sound. The Author spends one part of his Book, in
persuading us to believe what we know none ever doubted, viz. That in Case the
thing Commanded us be by us Judged Lawful (for that he beggs all along) we
ought not to forbear doing it, because some of our Brethren would be grieved
and teachy at it, provided our doing of it laid no stumbling block before them,
to give them Occasion to sin against God. We would fain know what
Nonconformist ever said the contrary. Thus Men Exercise themselves in Combats
with fancied Enemies, for really the Doctor has none in this Case that ever we
heard of. The Second Part of his Book comes nearer what we last said, and
notwithstanding all he says, we do think, That it is at least a Mute Case (as
they say in Law) Whether the forcing any to Suffer, because he cannot, or dare
not Act contrary to the Opinion of his Conscience, guided by Arguments, which
to him appear probable, be not Persecuting. To pass by his other
impertinencies, allowing him to use a very true Method to try the issue, in
fixing the Notion of Persecution, we there join Issue with him.

. 8. In his 44 p. he tells us, Persecution is an Inflicting of outward temporal
Evils for the Exercise of true Religion. The Genus we agree, and think he might
have shortened the Description by leaving out Outward and Temporal, because no
Man can Inflict any other Evils upon his Brother. The difference he makes to
lie in those words [For the Exercise of the True Religion.] But why might not
our Saviors terms have been taken, for Righteousness sake? Yet if Religion be
taken in the larger Notion of it, for doing any part of our Duty, in which we
bounden to toward God, we cannot fault the Description; but this Description
makes but the Major Proposition. The Minor must be this, [But the Outward
Temporal Evils.] Imprisonments, Deprivation of Ecclesiastical preferments,
pecuniary mulcts, Slanderings, Revilings, Reproachful speeches.] Inflicted upon
Non-Conformists are not inflicted upon them, for doing any part, of that Duty,
wherein they are bounden to God. There are very many Non-Conformists will put
the Doctor to prove this, and tell him, It is a piece of Righteousness, a part
of true Religion, and every Man's bounden Duty toward God, not to Act contrary
to what his Conscience, Gods Vicegerent, in him, tells him, and that upon
Arguments which appear very probable to him, is Lawful. And in Matters of Gods
Worship also to do According to what his Conscience tells him is the Will of
God he should do. And we take Notice too of an Excellent passage in the Doctors
Book, p. 45. l. ult and penult.

That God has as much Right to appoint the way of his Worship, as to be
Worshipped. A passage we are so much in Love with, that it is one of our
greatest Topics to prove many things Commanded us probably unlawful. Prayer is
Worship: Praying by Forms, or by words formed first in our own Hearts, is a way
of Worship. Now, say we, God has as much right to prescribe the way as the
Worship, and has done it. As every Man has received the gift, says the
Apostle, so let him Minister, 1. Pet. 4.10. Praying and Preaching are Worship.
The doing these Acts in a peculiar Habit appropriated to these Actions, is a
way of Worship; And God (says the Doctor) has as much right to appoint the
way of his Worship, as the Worship. The like might be said of the other
Ceremonies.

. 9. But suppose we allow the Doctors Description of Persection. The next
Question is, how we shall know what is True Religion: Who shall be the Judge?
Shall the Scriptures? But who shall Interpret the Scriptures as to a Christians
private Practice? Shall the Superiors? Then certainly there was never any
Persecution in the World: For it were very uncharitable to presume, that any
Superior should punish another for the Exercise of what himself owned to be
the true Religion. We have more Charity for Bonner himself. Shall the Inferior
be Judge what is true Religion? Then I fear the Doctor will be cast; many of
them will say, they are mischievously, and violently Prosecuted, Imprisoned,
Punished, Reviled, for what they Judge the Exercise of the True Religion.

. 10. The upshot of this Discourse is, that who they be, who are truly guilty
of Persecuting, will not be determined till the Day of Judgment, when God shall
determine, which was the True Religion; and whether Men truly ran those
hazards, because they were afraid of sinning against God. In the mean time, as
to us, he is Persecuted, who can truly say, That he suffers for doing any
thing, which he thinks he should sin against God if he did not do; and for
forbearing any thing, which he truly ^^^n^s he should sin against God if he
should do. And we believe, that those who thus Suffer, though another day they
shall be adjudged by God to have been in a mistake, and so not Persecuted, yet
as to what they have done, will be Judged guilty of no more than an Humane
Infirmity.

.11. We have so much Charity, as to believe, that that Popish Priest who
suffers according to the Law, for Seducing: If he can truly say, that he did
believe, Gods Word Obliged him to do what he did, may properly enough say he is
Persecuted; but we also believe, that God will not Judge so another day, and
that the Magistrate does but his Duty; because by Gods Law none ought to be
endured that entice others to Idolatry. But whosoever makes another to Suffer
because he durst not sin against God, Acting contrary to what his Conscience
judges unlawful from probable Arguments, we believe far less excusable,
because there is no necessity upon him to lay any such Commands, and enforce
them by any such penalties. But there does lie a necessity of suffering in this
Case upon the Inferior to avoid sinning against his Conscience: whether his
Conscience be in the right or in the wrong, will be determined another day. In
the mean time he should sin, if he should not hearken to it; to avoid which, he
suffers, which is so far as he can possibly Judge to suffer for Righteousness
sake. After the saying of which we think little more need be said to the
Doctor's Book.

. 12. To Conclude our Discourse upon this Question, we have observed in all
those almost who have wrote for Conformity, great insisting upon the Authority
of former, and present Churches, and the Testimonies of many Divines, dead, or
alive; some of which they tell us were Old Non-Conformists. And this has been
the general Method of all late Writers almost, to pass over all our, and our
Forefathers Arguments, and in Order to make us as odious to the World, as they
would have us; to represent us as singular, and differing from the Church in
all Ages, yea, from our selves, and our Forefathers, etc. To what better
purpose than this, these in artificial Arguments are used we cannot tell,
unless those that bring them have a little tincture of the Jesuits Doctrine we
before showed at large;

That extrinsick Arguments may make an Action appear probably Lawful; though at
the same time from intrinsic Arguments, we Judge it probably unlawful.

A Pill so nauseous, so brutish, as it is impossible we should swallow it, till
we have vomited up our rational Souls. And it is the more odious to us because
it is of such affinity to the detestable Blind Obedience of the Church of Rome.
But to defeat these men of any hopes of prevailing by such Mediums, we will
shortly enquire into another Question, though not the same, yet of great.
Cognation with this which we have now so largely discussed.

CHAP. VI. Second Quest. Whether it be Naturally possible for any Person in a
Practical Proposition to judge that part probably Lawful from extrinsick.
Arguments; the contrary to which he at the same time Judges probably unlawful
from intrinsic Arguments. The Question opened. The Opinions of Vasquez,
Sanchez. The Negative part of the Question maintained, because this is contrary
to the Principles of a Rational Soul. The Conclusion.
. 1. WE have had Occasions once and again to hint the known distinction between
Speculative and Practical Propositions: Divines call those Propositions
Speculative, whose use and advantage is only terminated in Speculation and
Knowledge, and from whence nothing in Practice is Directed. They call those
Practical, whose end is the guidance and direction of the Practice. But
Speculative Propositions must be again distinguished into such. 1. From which
no Obligation arises to the Exercise of any rational Act of ours: Such as
these. That there was such a City as Troy, such a King of France, as Pipin,
etc. with a thousand such like. 2. Such, the Truth of which infers the
performance of some Rational Action of ours, and such as is our Duty toward
God, as these. That the Scriptures are the Word of God.That Christ is the
Eternally existent Son of God. But our Question relates to none of these, but
to such Propositions only where the Question is, Whether it be Lawful for me
to do this or that, or no: This is that we mean by a Practical Proposition.

. 2. In our Discourse upon the former Question we have also often hinted, what
we mean by Extrinsecal, and Intrinscal, Arguments. The singular Judgment of
every intelligent Person's Conscience is formed from some Arguments, drawn
either from Principles of Reason, or Propositions of Scripture. These Arguments
are either from plain letter of Scripture, or Principles of Reason accounted
Infallible, which fix the Conscience. Or else they are drawn from Logical
Topics, and called Dialectick Arguments, or Probable: For Optimus Philosophus
nondum nascitur. We say, These probable Arguments are again either Intrinsecal,
called Artificial Arguments by the Logicians, fetched from the Causes, Effects,
Consequents, Adjuncts, or other Affections of the Subject or predicate in the
Question. 2. Such as are merely Extrinsick. Logicians call them In-artificial,
because every Dunce may bring them, they have no Art at all in them. Divines
call them Extrinsecal, because they are Foreign to the in ward parts of the
Question, and the Soul that brings them. These are such as are fetched from
Authority and Testimony of others; Testimonies of Fathers, Schoolmen, former,
or Modern Divines, etc. Now, it is demonstratively Truth, That it is possible,
that a soul should have a great many Arguments appearing to it very probable,
and such as it cannot Answer, and scarcely believes that any other can, to
prove a thing unlawful; and at the same time meet with many Testimonies and
sayings of Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, Casuists, Ancienter, or more Modern
Divines, speaking the thing Lawful. It is the Case of the Non-Conformists this
day. Though they meet not with any Fathers, Councils, etc. who judge the things
Lawful, which they do judge unlawful; yet many present Divines they do meet
with, yet they cannot but from Intrinsic, Dialectick Arguments think the
things utterly unlawful.

. 3. Now, the Question is, in this Case, what they shall do? They do not deny
but it is their Duty, upon the Testimonies of Superiors, and their Commands;
or hearing the Judgment of so many Learned Men of another Mind, to examine
again their own Arguments, and to try them to the utmost: But supposing at last
(which is the Case) the things yet seem to them from very probable Arguments
unlawful, what shall they do? They may (say the Jesuits) do such things, or
not do them; For this is the Jesuits help against the abominable absurdity of
Acting contrary to an Opining Conscience. They say, While it it but an Opinion,
a Man may Opine both contradictory parts of the same Question; the one upon
Intrinsic, the other upon Extrinsick Arguments; and although (as we showed
before) the Opinion which is formed upon Artificial, proper, intrinsic
Arguments must needs be more probable; Yet they say, a man is not tied up to
magis and minus in the Case. It is ground enough (say they) for any man to act
Conscientiously, if the thing appear any way probable, he is not bound to act
according to that which he judges more probable. So that, say they, if a thing
appear probably Lawful, by Extrinsick Arguments the Opinion of some Doctors,
etc. we may do it, though at the same time we judge it never so unlawful from
Intrinsic, Artificial Arguments, fetched from all the Topics in Logic, and
affections of the subject, and Praedictate of the Question.

. 9. The Case is so weighty, and this Opinion so unmanly, and Brutish, that it
is reasonable we should bring forth one or two, who shall vouch for themselves
and their Brethren, that this is what they say and hold. Let Vasquez (a Man of
no small repute amongst them) speak first, out of his Disput. in 12 ae. disput.
62. Cap. 3. n. 11.

Tertio Observandum est, eum qui habet assensum unius partis propositionis, per
propria and intrinseca principia etiamsi assensus ille tantum sit probabilis,
non posse habere assensum alterius pactis per intrinseca, and propria
principia: been tamen posse per externa principia existimari oppositam partem
esse probabilem. v. plura ibid. and cap. 40. n. 15.

Sanchez sings the same Song, Op. Moral. l. 1. cap. 9. n. 12. Vltimum
fundamentum est ut duas Opiniones ediametro sibi contradicentes idem
intellectus judicet probabiles, aut aeque, aut alteram probabiliorem; he shows
this is according to the Opinion of Azorius and Vasquez (before quoted.) And
then goes on, telling us, that he sees no Reason, but the same Understanding
may judge the contradictory parts of the same Proposition both probably true,
or false; lawful, or unlawful; and that Experience proves it. But this is
surely a Note above Ela, and a Riddle in Philosophy. The Jesuits being pinched
with that obvious Argument, That then the same Soul, and at the same time, and
the same thing may assent to contradictions; and blow hot and cold, bless and
curse, with the same breath: They think to avoid it by telling us, that the
Understanding affirms neither part, we wonder how it should Opine then?

. 10. This is a great point in Popery ( Jesuitisme especially) and of no small
gain to them, for by this mea^^ they can resolve Cases as they list, absolve
Men's Consciences as they please, and Interpret the Law of God into a very
pleasing consi^tency with the Lusts, and Passions of all Men: If it were
admitted for true, it would open a wide door for Men to do what they listed,
without any check or control of Conscience. There being but few things in
practice, which one Doctor or other, under one Circumstance or other, has not
judged Lawful. There are few actions but are disputable, says Mr. Freeman, in
his Reasonableness of Divine Service, p. 33. And if one or more Doctors affirm
it lawful (say the Popish Casuists) the private Christian may assent to it as
probably Lawful, though at the same time, from Artificial Intrinsic Arguments,
formed in his own Breast, he judges it probably unlawful. And we wish, some
professing themselves Protestant Divines, did not cant after this Tune (though
it may be they will not as the Papists) rest it upon the Opinion of one Doctor,
but many Learned Men; if they did not a little linger after this, we cannot
tell what means their constant choking of us, with the bare Opinions of others
contrary to ours, in which surely we are no further concerned, than as quickened
by them to re-examine our own Intrinsecal Arguments more strictly.

. 11. We must declare our selves in the Negative of this Question, and do
affirm, That it is Naturally impossible for a Rational Soul, in a practical
proposition, to Judge that part from Extrinsecal in-artificial Arguments
Probably Lawful, which, at the same time, from Intrinsecal artificial
Arguments, formed in its own Breast, it judges Probably Unlawful; and in this
Judgment we are confirmed.

. 12. Because it is contrary to the innate Principles of a reasonable Soul. 1.
We suppose every one will without difficulty grant it a Principle of a
Reasonble Soul, To Conclude nothing but from Rational Foundations: Reason is a
Power within us, Discoursing Conclusions from Principles. It acknowledged there
is a God, and that he has revealed his will in those Books which we call The
Holy Scriptures, and must acknowledge it the most reasonable thing imaginable,
that he should be acknowledged true in his word. Hence it concludes many
Propositions of Faith, upon the bare Authority of God revealing them, and
exercises it self no further, than to compare Spiritual things with Spiritual.
But having not that Evidence for other things, it makes use of inbred Notions,
and from those Principles raises Conclusions. Now, let us consider from what
Principle it is possible; that Reason should infer such a Conclusion as this.

That is probably Lawful for me to do, which such or such Divines (be they more
or fewer, more or less Learned) think is Lawful; or which Superiors require
(under that Notion) notwithstanding any Artificial, Intrinsic Arguments which
make my own Conscience Judge it very probably unlawful.

It must be this: Those Doctors, or those Superiors, know better than I. Does
Reason in a man allow any such conclusion? Modesty indeed upon such an Account,
may make a reasonable Soul Jealous, and Suspicious, and to issue out a Writ for
a better enquiry upon its Arguments, but it is impossible that it should rest
in such a Conclusion to guide its Practice, where the hazard of the Eternal
Felicity of a Soul is concerned. Reason speaks in the Language of Job to his
Friends, Job 12.3. I have Understanding as well as you; and be it what it will,
gradually compared with all the Doctors reason, it is the Candle of the Lord
set up in my Soul, according to the Light of which I must walk. Or in the words
of Elihu, Job 32.8. There is a Spirit in Man, and the Inspiration of the
Almighty gives him Understanding: Reason says, Bring forth your strong
arguments, and I will answer them; or hear mine, and do you answer me.

. 13. Besides, Reason says, If this were belonging to all Doctors, or all
Superiors, that Wisdom (as Job says) must dye with them, how is it they are
not agreed amongst themselves? Such, and such are on my side; if it does not
agree to all Superiors, and all Doctors, how shall I be assured, that it more
agrees to those on the adverse side, than to those on my fide; to Dr. Vasquez
more than to Pope Adrian?

S. 14 Further, (says Reason) do not know and see, that there are many
Doctores, who are not Docti, and that many Learned men in all Ages have been in
Factions? does not Dr. Vasquez himself tell me, in 12. disp. 62. Cap. 4. That
he cannot deny but a whole rout of Doctors may embrace an Opinion without any
Reason, against whom (says he) another Doctor of great Authority may bring
into the Schools, an Opinion maturely deliberated? Vasquez need not be
Credited, if we did not upon Experience find daily, that not one of many
Doctors examines things, but follows some Leader, as diligently as Sheep do one
another over an Hedge; that many either understand not the true Question, about
which they will be Writing in this Age, or of choice mistake it, and write far
more passion than Divinity, or Reason, which made Vasquez, and some others of
his Brethren deliver their Opinion, That a Learned Man may act according to his
own Opinion, though contrary to the Opinions of other Doctors.

.15. Reason tells a Man, that Reason is not entailed to the Relation of a
Superior, or the Degree of a Doctor. Animae rationales sunt aequales in
perfectione Substantiali, and Superiority or Doctorship make no difference.
Experience teaches us, that improvement by Study, makes not a difference, as
to the Exercise of Reason, between all Superiors and Inferiors; nor between
all those who are Doctors and no Doctors. It remains therefore, that the
particular Reason of every Soul must stand up in defense of it self, especially
in matters of Practice, as to which Eternal Salvation or Damnation are
concerned; so as it is not Naturally possible, that a Reasonable Soul should
from Foreign Authority conclude a thing probably Lawful, which from its own
Rational conclusions it judges probably Unlawful.

. 16, But further yet, certainly it is repugnant to the connate Principles of
Reasonable Souls, to assert contraries, both at the same time to be true,
because it is of the Nature of contraries to destroy one another. Now, the
Understanding which shall thus assert, must at the same time speak these two
things, which are manifest contradictions: This is Lawful. This is not Lawful.
I think and Judge it Lawful, because A, B, C, D, etc. say so. I think it
Unlawful, because my own Reason, comparing things Spiritual with Spiritual, or
concluding from confessed Principles, tells me it is so. Must not this be a
very odd Soul, that can Discourse after this rate? Vasquez was aware of this,
and thought to avoid it, by denying these two Propositions to be Contradictory,
viz. 1. This is probably Lawful. 2. This is probably unlawful. But he deludeth,
and his fallacy lies in the word probably, which in the Question signifies not
the Affection of the proposition, but the Nature of the Arguments, or
Complexion of the Conscience. The Understanding (let the Jesuit say what he
will) must say, This is Lawful, and This is unlawful, of the same thing, and at
the same time' and these are perfect contradictions. The Notion of Probable
refers to the Understanding, not to the Nature of the Opinion, and must in
the Question be Interpreted by Opinor, or Credo, or some such like word; not by
probari potest (which is the Jesuits cheat) that is, something may be said, in
Argument to prove this thing Lawful, and something may also be said to prove it
unlawful. These two Propositions are not indeed Contradictions; but to say, I
think this Lawful, and at the same time to say, I also think this is unlawful,
Can be no Language of any Man's Soul, till the Philistines have got it, and put
out its Eyes, on purpose to make themselves sport with it.

. 11. Finally, Is it not the Principle of a Reasonable Soul, to embrace that
which it Judges Best, either upon the Account of Truth or Righteousness? Now,
where both parts of a Proposition appear but probable. i. e. Such as something
in Argument may be said for either; but one (in appearance to the particular
Soul) far more probable, both as to Truth and Righteousness, than the other. Is
it not contrary to its principles to own and embrace that which it Judges less
true in it self, and consequently, less Righteous to be done? even the Popish
Schoolmen and Casuists will confess our own Opinion to be more probable,
though indeed they most absurdly say, That a man is not bound to follow that
which probably is more True and Righteous, (so great a Power has Corrupt
Interest) we conclude therefore,

That it being Naturally impossible for a Reasonable Soul to act Reasonably
contrary to Naturally Rational Principles, it is also naturally impossible for
it to Judge at the same time, the same thing, probably Lawful, from
in-artificial and Extrinsick Arguments, which it Judges probably, and more
probably unlawful from Artificial intrinsic Arguments.

. 12. By this time, we hope we have gained one Post (and that not
inconsiderable) which we doubt not to make good against all the Attaques of
Popish, or Protestant Divines, but such as are only made from-their Bitter
words, which wound only (by recoiling) the malicious hearts of those that cast
them: We have shown that there is (as Job says) a Spirit in every Man, and
the Almighty has given to every one, a peculiar practick Understanding, which
mu^t to him be Gods Interpreter, and the proximate Rule and Guide of all his
Actions; which particular Conscience acknowledges God only as its immediate
Superior, and where the Eternal welfare of the soul is concerned in the
Action, can neither bow down to the New Erected Idol of the Public Conscience,
and much less, to the private Consciences and Judgments of any, to do things
which they Judge Lawful, merely because They say they are Lawful, and so will
the Practice of them as lawful, because their Superiors, or such Doctors say
so; when as it judges the thing wicked and unlawful, from Arguments, which
though it cannot call Demonstrative, and indubitable, yet it self cannot
Answer, nor see Answered by any other, so as it can acquiesce in the Answer as
sufficient, and therefore seem to it very probably concluding the thing
unlawful. We have (as we hope) also gained this. That it is Naturally
impossible for a reasonable Soul, at the same time, to Judge the same thing
Lawful, from inartificial extrinsick Arguments; which from intrinsic Arguments
formed within it self, or accepted by it, though formed by others, it Judges
probably unlawful.

. 13. It is therefore the business of those who think themselves conc^rned to
make all the World in Practice uniform, even to a Letter and a Syllable, and a
rite, and posture, not to tell them, that in case the thing be disputable, or
doubtful, or not apparently and demonstratively evil, it is their Duty, if
Commanded, to do it. For this we have showed to be the very Foundation of
Popery, and a perfect Innovation in Protestant Doctrine, and can be no other
than a Blind Obedience. But (as we said before) they will be concerned to call
to Dissenters for their Arguments, upon the probability of which to them, the
things required seem to them unlawful; and (if they can) to destroy that
appearance which they have of probability, which done, they will attain their
end, and not before.

. 14. The things are many which are required of us, in Order to our having a
station in the public Ministry of England, some of which are questioned by
some, others of them by others; in short, from them these Questions arise.

1. Whether the Non-Conformists have not probable Arguments to induce their
Consciences to judge it unlawful to perform their Ministerial Office in public
Prayer, by the prescribed forms of other Men. 2. Whether they have not probable
Arguments to judge it unlawful, to Minister before the Lord in a Surplis, or
any Habit peculiarly appropriated to the Worship of God, to sign with the sign
of the cross in Baptism, and to Kneel in the Act of Receiving the Lords Supper.
3. Whether those of them who have been solemnly set apart to the Ministry by
Fasting and Prayer, and laying on of hands of a Presbytery, can without sin,
submit to a reordination by Bishops, and there be not, at least, very probable
Arguments to the contrary. 4. Whether they have not probable Arguments to
induce them to judge it unlawful for them to subscribe, That the Oath, commonly
called, The Solemn League and Covenant, obliges neither them nor any others,
and that it is in it self an unlawful Oath. 5. Whether they have not probable
Arguments to induce them to judge it unlawful for them to declare and
subscribe, That they do assent and consent to all and every thing, or to the
use of all and every thing contained in the Common Prayer. 6. Whether they have
not probable Arguments to induce them to judge it unlawful for them to
subscribe the Second and Third Article in the 36 Canon. 7. Whether they have
not probable Arguments to induce them to judge it unlawful to take the Oath,
Ordinarily called, the Oath of Canonical Obedience.
Those who know any thing of the State of Ecclesiastical affairs in England
this day, know, that those who will conform, must do all these things; and the
Non-Conformists are so far from judging all these things Lawful, that they
think they have very probable Arguments, why (many of them at least) cannot
judge any one of them Lawful; and while they so judge, act they cannot contrary
to the Opinion of their own Consciences, as we have before proved.

. 15. Neither do they desire to talk of Arguments only in Justification of
their own Sullenness, or Peevishness, as they are maliciously represented by
some Modern Doctors (far better at Reviling than Disputing.) Their Arguments,
in the first Case, are many of them in Print, as in Mr. Cotton's Discourse
against Set-forms (many years since Printed, but that we know of, never
Answered) as also in Mr. Calderwood's Altar Damas. never Answered neither, and
in diverse other Books. In the Second Case, their Arguments never yet Answered,
are to be found, In Mr. Bradshaw's Discourses about things Indifferent, and
about Worship and Ceremonies. In Dr. Ames his Irish Suit against the
Ceremonies. In Mr. Calderwood's Altar Damasceum. In Mr. Gillespie's. Disp.
against the English Ceremonies. Upon the 3d. Case, diverse of their Arguments
are in R.A. his Letter to a Friend, Printed 1661. And The Serious Review of
Presbyters Ordination by Bishops, Printed about the same time; and in all the
other Cases, Our Brethren know, that Arguments are in Print to prove them
unlawful, which never yet received any Answer. Besides, as there is a variety
of Mediums, so the same suit not every Fancy, nor are all produced, and the
work of them who should undertake to show the Arguments of all not probable,
would be almost infinite.

Sect. 16. What shall be done in this Case by those Superiors who will believe
themselves, as well as their Inferiors, obliged, recording to the Apostles
Precept, To Walk Charitably, not laying a stumbling block, before others, nor
doing, as much as in them lies, to destroy poor Souls, for whom Christ dyed.
We say, what can be done by such Superiors in these Cases? unless this: Either
that in the things of God, they be very tender, and enjoin no such things, as
any considerable Number of their Inferiors thus Judge unlawful, (at least, if
they Judge them not by God Commanded to be done, or to be avoided,) Or if they
Judge it expedient to Command some other things for Splendour, or (as they
Judge) Decency which the Inseriours cannot Judge Lawful; Indulge them, who so
cannot Judge of them, as themselves do, but verily believing them, from
Arguments which appear to them probable, unlawful for them to do; which is our
present Case. For whiles the Superior in such things as these, insisteth upon
his Authority, he unavoidably forces them to sin against God, who so Judge
them unlawful, yet through some Fear, or out of some Temptation of want, or the
like, will adventure to do them. Now, no Soul can Justify it self before God,
in Commanding another to do what he knows would be sin to him, unless it would
also be sin in him, not to Command or force him. And for others who dare Act,
he forces them to suffer, in which Case, because (their Consciences so Judging
of the things) they should sin in doing of them, they must suffer to avoid
sinning, which we are sure is, (in one sense at least) to suffer for
Righteousness sake; and for what they Judge (to use Dr. Ashton's phrase) the
Exercise of the True Religion; and all Sober Persons will so judge in the first
sense: and whether it be so or no, The great day of the Lord must Evidence.
Both which certainly are Rocks, which all Superiors ought to avoid, and all
Wise Masters, and Masters Mates, in the great Ships of Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths will avoid, though some less advised Boat-swains, passionate
Chaplains, or ignorant Mariners in those Ships, may clamor, to take the
Advantage of the Wind of Passion and Revenge, which blows (they think) in these
Cases fair for the Advantage of their private Lucre, but must certainly drive
them, either upon this Seylla, or that Charibdis. Every considerate Superior
will Judge the price of Souls purchased with the Blood of him who was the Son
of God, at another rate. Indeed if the Superior judges the things which he
Commands, in their own Nature necessary, and what it is the Will of God
(antecedaneous to his Command) that all Men should do, whether indeed they be
so or no. He is also tied to the Peace of his own Conscience; he is Gods
Vicegerent, he must Command, and enforce them; and the doing of what is plain
to him, to be the great Creators Will, in his place, must be attended before
the danger of any Creatures Souls; and this alone (where the Superiors
Conscience is fixed in an Error) necessarily causes a Persecution.

Sect. 17. This appears to us so clear, both from Scripture, and the
Concurrent Judgment of all Protestant Divines, for a Man's not Acting contrary
to the Opinion of his own Conscience; that we cannot be so Charitable, but we
must think, that those Divines who indeed are Protestants, and are for the
upholding these impositions, and against any Indulgence to those that dissent
because of them, and are Authors to Magistrates, to enforce the things by
Penalties; are (...) Condemned by their own Consciences. For they cannot but
know, that the Dissenters, thus Opining, must sin, should they do the things:
and if they Suffer, they must Suffer that they might avoid sinning. And for the
Interpretation of that, What it is for a Superior, not contrained in his own
Conscience from the express revealed Will of God, to make his Inferiors
Suffer, because they will not do what they cannot do, without running the
hazard of their Souls by wilful sinning: We shall only say, Let the
Interpretation be to them that hate our King, and to the Enemies of all English
Nobility or Gentry.

Sect. 18. To Conclude then, this we Judge enough to demonstrate the exceeding
Reasonableness, and great Religion of a Gracious Liberty; to which His most
Sacred Majesty has Declared his Willingness, and the Perfecting of which has
once and again been under the Deliberation of the High and Honorable Assembly
of Parliament: as to those, whose Suffering by it is obviated, because they
cannot do what they Charitably believe their Superiors would not have willed
them to do, had they not Judged them in themselves Lawful; But yet themselves
will not say are necessary (otherwise than as they are pleaded to be so made by
their Command) but they who are their Inferiors, do bona fide and ex animo,
Judge them Unlawful; and that from Arguments, which they will not call
necessary, indubitable, and demonstrative (for they confess themselves not
Infallible) but which appear to them very highly probable, such as they cannot
Answer, nor find Answered by others, so as to give them any Satisfaction.

FINIS.

