AN Earnest CALL To the PEOPLE of ENGLAND, TO Beware of the TEMPTATIONS OF THE
Regicide. LUDLOW,

To Contract the Guilt of the MURDER of KING CHARLES the First, by a Conceit
that the Shedding of that Royal Blood was no MURDER, but an Act of Justice.

My Enemies (being more solemnly cruel) will, it may be seek to add (as those
did who Crucified Christ) the Mockery of Justice to the cruelty of Malice.
(...) the First Edition p. 256.

Printed in the Year, 1692.

An Earnest Call to the People of ENGLAND, etc.
My Dear Countrymen,
BE not Deceived, GOD is not Mocked: for whatsoever a man Sows that shall he
also Reap. Consider these words of the Apostle, and be Assured that all those,
who had an Hand in Shedding the Blood of our Gracious Sovereign, and all those,
who being then Unborn, do Now involve themselves in the Guilt of that Innocent
Blood, by concurring with the REGICIDES in the Approbation of their Diobolical
Fact, Be Assured, I say, that one day they shall all Feel (if they do not truly
Repent) what it is to Fall into the hands of the Living GOD. This Impenitent
REGICIDE Pretending a great Love for Old England (as he speaks; My Love, says
he, to Old England is such as can never be shaken!) endeavors with all his
might to Seduce the People of England to their Eternal Destruction, by making
them to Partake of His Guilt in the most Horrid Murder that was ever Committed
since the Crucifixion of the LORD of Glory. He would fain impose upon the minds
of his Readers, the Belief of a thing so Incredible, that the bare mention of
it is sufficient to Inflame any one of common Ingenuity with an Everlasting
Indignation against so Impudent an Attempt, viz. to Persuade us to believe that
King CHARLES the First was Guilty of the Death of his Father, and that by
Poisoning; That King CHARLES the Second, says he, Letter p. 5. went off by
poisoned Chocolate to make way for his Brother, when matters were well prepared
to set up the Romish Idolatry, is a thing generally believed, and so it was
that King JAMES the First was so dispatched. -- Well, right, or wrong, King
CHARLES ascended the Throne upon the Twenty-seventh of Mar. 1625, and at the
first gave the World a Prospect what was to be expected from him; for he
instantly took the Duke of Buckingham, and Laud (the Bishop of Bath and Wells)
into admired Intimacy, and Dearness, and made them the chief Conductors of all
Affairs in State, and Church: and that aspiring Prelate had the Guidance of his
Conscience.

Answ. Since that Admirable Learned Prelate had the Guidance of His Conscience,
it is manifest the Duke had no Influence upon Him, so as to Pervert Him to any
course of Irreligion. This Man (says he) after the Death of the Duke of B. was
the Sole Favorite, and was preferred to the Bishopric of London in his way to
Canterbury.

What blessed Effects there were of the same Inclinations, which Moved this
Incomparable Knowing and Virtuous Prince, to Admit this most Learned Prelate to
such an Intimacy, and Participation of his deepest Counsels, will be seen by
the Learned and Pious, throughout All Generations, in the Writings of this
Admirable Exemplar of Royal Fortitude, and Christian Patience, who so
Gloriously laid down his Life for the Preservation of a Pure Conscience from
the Polution of Perjury, in Violating his Oath to maintain the Laws of this
Kingdom, particularly those, that Concern the Church, the Matter of those Laws
being most Agreeable to His Judgment, so that He Knew it would have been His
Duty to have Desired that such Laws should have been Made in his Time, if they
had not been Made before He came to the Throne: So Unreasonable, so
Unconscionable, so Traiterous, so Diabolical was it for LUDLOW, and his
Companions to Urge Him to the Abrogation of those Laws, and at length to
Murder Him for Adhering to the Dictates of so Pure a Conscience. Oh, My Dear
Brethren, hearken I beseech you, to these words of Our Persecuted, Our
MURDERED SOVEREIGN, whose Blood will most certainly Cry for Vengeance against
this whole Nation, if the Approbation of the Shedding of it (which God Forbid)
should ever become a National Sin, through the Instigation of the DEVIL, By
such Instruments as LUDLOW. Thus speaks this Mirroir of Royal Virtue in his
Discourse concerning The Differences between the King, and the Two Houses in
point of Church Government. As to My particular engagement above other men, by
an Oath agreeable to My Judgment, I am solemnly obliged to preserve that
Government, and the Rights of the Church.

I have often wondered how men pretending to tenderness of Conscience, and
Reformation, can at once tell Me that My Coronation Oath binds Me to Consent to
whatsoever they shall propound to Me (which they urge with such violence) tho
contrary to all that Rational, and Religious freedom which every man ought to
preserve; and of which they seem so tender in their own Votes; yet at the same
time these men will needs persuade Me, That I must and ought to dispense with,
and roundly break that part of My Oath, which binds Me (agreeable to the best
light of Reason and Religion I have) to maintain the Government, and Legal
Rights of the Church. Yet upon this Rack chiefly have I been held so long, by
some men's ambitious Covetousness, and Sacrilegious Cruelty; torturing (with Me)
both Church and State, in Civil dissentions; till I shall be forced to consent,
and declare that I do approve, what (God knows) I utterly dislike, and in My
Soul abhor, as many ways highly against Reason, Justice, and Religion.

I shall not undertake to meddle with History in this Paper farther than what
concerns A. B. LAUD, and B. MOUNTAGUE. By the Notoriety of the Falsehood of
LUDLOW'S Reflections upon Them, any man may Judge what Credit is to be given to
him in other Matters. How Prodigiously False his Charge against Mountague is, I
have shown in My Paper Entitled, A Vindication of the Honor of King Charles
the First. It is certainly to the Praise and not to the Dishonor of A. B. Laud
what this Regicide Truly Reports of Him p. 9. Laud solicited the King to
shelter Mountague from the Prosecution of the Commons, and upon the occasion of
that Prosecution said, I seem to see a Cloud arising, and threatening the Church
of England, God for his Mercy dissipate it. The words following, tho He
designed by them to Reproach the King, do most certainly tend to his Eternal
Praise in that He saw the Resplendent Merit of that wonderful Learned Man, tho
Overcast with the Mists of so much Obloquy and and Public Reproach. The King
appeared incensed at the Prosecution, and sent a Message to the Commons, that
Mountague was his Chaplain, and he had taken the business into his own hands:
he afterward granted him a Pardon of all Offenses, and made him Bishop of
Chichester. Well, Sr and what then? Most certainly for fo doing this Blessed
Prince, throughout all Generations, shall have the Praise of all Learned Men
that read the Latin Writings of this excellent Prelate, and are themselves as
he was, steadfast, and Judicious Adversaries of the grossest Errors of the
Church of Rome. I do not undertake to Vindicate all his opinions, but I can
prove that the Errors of his most Confident Adversaries were far worse than the
worst of His. p. 15. This State-Sophister falls again upon A. B. Laud, Bishop
Laud, says he, took Sibthorp into his Bosom, and that he might undermine Good
Old Abbot, whose Bishopric he Coveted, he put it into the Kings head to
require the Archbishop to License Sibthorp's Sermon -- The good Old Man
persisted in his Refusal.

Whose Bishopric He Coveted! This he can never prove to be True, unless he can
Prove himself to have a Faculty of searching the hearts of Men. I can hardly
think that LUDLOW himself could believe that so Wise a Man as B. Laud could be
so Silly in any thing, as to conceit that A. B. Abbot should have been put to
Death or deprived of his Archbishopric (that it might be conferred on him) for
refusing to License a Sermon. I never read or heard that Archbishop Abbot was
ever Formally Suspended: if he were, most certainly it was not for refusing to
License Sibthorp's Sermon, but for that casual Homicide, which he was guilty
of, concerning which, in the late History of Oxford Writers we find these
words. At length he being found guilty of casual homicide, Retired for a time
to Guilford in Surrey, the place of his Nativity, where he had erected an
Hospital for Men and Women. Here you see the Occasion that the Archiepiscopal
Jurisdiction was committed to Five Bishops as Ludlow reports p. 16. The King
instantly suspended the Archbishop, and also Confined him, and committed the
Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction to Five Bishops, all of the New Church of England,
and Sibthorp's Patrons, viz. London, Durham, Rochester, Oxford, and honest Laud
of Bath and Wells.

Let any man judge, whether honest Laud were for Novelties or a New Church,
that reads his Book: And whether it be not the height of Impudence for Ludlow
to endeavor thus to Impose upon the World a conceit that King Charles the
First, and his Bishops (of which Bishop ANDREWS, BELLARMINE'S Victorious
Antagonist, was one) Designed to bring in Popery p. 26. He Charges the King [
Horresia referens] as an Accessory to the Horrid MURDERS of those many
Thousands of Miserable Protestants who fell in Ireland. Oh, my Dear Countrymen,
can you believe that such words could proceed from any other Principle than the
Instigation of the Father of Lies! Hearken, I beseech you, to these words of
Our Gracious Sovereign speaking in his own Defense against this Hellish
Calumny. Indeed that Sea of Blood, which has there been cruelly and
barbarously shed, is enough to drown any man in eternal both infamy and misery,
whom God shall find the malicious Author, or Instigator of its effusion.

It fell out, as a most unhappy advantage of some men's malice against me; that
when they had impudence enough to lay any thing to my charge, this bloody
opportunity, should be offen'd them, with which I must be aspersed. Although
there was nothing which could be more abhorred to me, being so full of Sin
against God, Disloyalty to my self, and destructive to my Subjects.

God knows, as I can with Truth wash my hands in Innocence, as to any guilt in
that Rebellion; so I might wash them in my Tears, as to the sad apprehensions I
had, to see it spread so far, and make such waste. And this in a time when
distractions and jealousies here in England, made most men rather intent to
their own safety, or designs they were driving, than to the relief of those,
who were every day inhumanely Butchered in Ireland: Whose tears, and blood
might, if nothing else, have quenched, or at least for a time repressed, and
smothered those sparks of Civil dissentions, and Jealousies which in England
some men most industriously scattered. See, Reader, and Admire the Charity of
this Blessed Prince Expressed in the Prayer he makes upon this Occasion. Let the
scandalous, and unjust Reproaches cast upon Mc, be as a breath more to kindle
my compassion; Give me grace to heap charitable coals of Fire upon their heads
to melt them, whose malice, or cruel zeal has kindled, or hindered the
quenching of those flames, which have so much wasted my three Kingdoms.

O rescue, and assist those poor Protestants in Ireland, whom thou have
hitherto preserved.

And lead those in the ways of thy saving Truths, whose ignorance, or errors
have filled them with rebellious, and destructive Principles

I have lately seen in Print a Device to make people believe that the King was
not the Author of (...). who then? why, Bishop Gauden. At this I should Laugh
heartily; but that I consider that the Wickedness of the Lie is as Notorious,
as the Absurdity of the Fiction, that the Author of this Malicious Invention
discovers himself to be a person Near to Hell, and Far from any understanding
of the Difference of the Genius and Style of Writers. Bishop Gauden's Way of
Thinking and Expression was as Different from what we find in this Admirable
Book, as the Glittering of Ice from the Shining of Diamonds; or any thing that
is most Loose, and full of Air from that which is most Solid, and Compact. I
attribute so much to the Wit, and Scholarly Education of LUDLOW, as to think He
could not but Laugh in his Sleeve (as the Vulgar Phrase is) at the Absurdity of
such a Fiction: neither can I conceive but that if He would most seriously
peruse all that has been Written by Our Gracious Sovereign on this Subject, The
Rebellion, and Troubles in Ireland, Defending his Innocence with that Strength
of Reason, and Perspicuity of Expression; I say I cannot conceive but that if
LUDLOW would but Read what the King has written in His own Defense, he would
Condemn himself, if not for his Wickedness, yet at least for his Shameful
Inadvertency in venturing upon so Notorious a piece of SATANISM, as this
Hellish Calumny. Now, Reader, let us consider the words of the Challenge of
this bold Champion of Malice and Falsehood, p. 27. In whatsoever I have said, I
have had a Due, and Faithful Regard to Truth, and do Challenge even Pelling
himself (who ought for his own Vindication to do it, if he can) to Convict me
of Falsehood in any one Particular charged upon his INCOMPARABLE PRINCE.

I am as much Concerned in the Challenge as Mr. Pelling, having in Many
Sermons, Preached on the Thirtieth of January, set forth the Praise of this
Incomparable Prince, (tho not with so much Eloquence) with as much Zeal, and
Ardency of Love to His Blessed Memory, as any Preacher in the Kingdom: And by
the Help of God I shall be ever ready to Contend with Any Man, or Any Number of
Men, who shall Endeavor to Stain the Honor of so Gracious a Prince, so
Sincere a Christian, a Person so Wonderfuly Adorned with All the Excellencies
of Wit, Learning, and Virtue. Whether I have Convicted LUDLOW of any Falsehood,
I leave to the Judgment of any Impartial Reader: And in Confidence that I have
done so, I shall Conclude with these words of the Psalmist: What shall be done
unto thee, thou False Tongue!

FINIS.

