Encouragements to Builders and Planters OF LITTLE YARMOUTH.
What Privileges the Town of Little Yarmouth has formerly enjoyed.

THe Town of Little Yarmouth has formerly enjoyed the privileges of lading
and unlading Herrings, and other Merchandise, and of exporting and importing
Goods, of all sorts, in Vessels of their own, for many years formerly; whereby
it came to be in a very flourishing condition.

From what cause it is fallen into Decay.

The Town of Great Yarmouth having by their much greater power procured several
Grants and Letters Patent from the Kings and Queens of this Nation, upon many
plausible and specious pretenses, whereby they appropriated to themselves, and
those who are Freemen of Great Yarmouth, the Monopoly of lading and unlading
all sorts of Merchandise within seven miles of Great Yarmouth, whereby the Town
of Little Yarmouth were necessitated to forsake their habitations for want of
employment; whereby the said Town in a short time fell into decay, and became
almost forsaken by the Inhabitants.

By what Authority the Town of Little Yarmouth has its former Rights and
Privileges restored and enlarged.

The Town of Little Yarmouth is not only incorporated with the Town of Great
Yarmouth, to partake and enjoy equal Privileges with them, by an Act of
Parliament made in the sixteenth and seventeenth year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, Entitled, An Act for settling of
differences between the Towns of Great and Little Yarmouth, touching the lading
and unlading Herrings, and other Merchandise; but also by Letters Patent from
the King, bearing date the tenth of February, in the twentieth year of this
present King: and has as well by the said Act, as Letters Patent, this
privilege above any other Corporation in England, that the Inhabitants of this
place, from their first habitation, are entitled to all the privileges of it,
as much as if they had purchased their Freedom, for which in Great Yarmouth
men pay thirty, forty, fifty pounds, or had served an Apprenticeship.

The manner of the Situation of Great Yarmouth, and of its Trade and
Buildings.

Within a mile on the East of the Town, lies the Main Ocean; on the North-west
is the River called Brayden, where three Rivers ( Wavenee, which parts the
Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk; Yare, which runs through the City of Norwi^
the (...) which comes from the North-parts of Norfolk) meet; from whence this
River falls East and by South; and before it runs into the Sea, continues its
course on the Key of Yarmouth. By these three Rivers to the Landward, all sorts
of the growths and Manufactures of these Countries are with great ease and
little charge brought to Yarmouth: And up these streams, the Town of Yarmouth
with like ease and small charge, furnishes those Countries with all sorts of
Foreign and Domestic Commodities; and this done with much facility, by reason
the Flux of the Sea does make the Current into the Country, almost equal with
the Current out of the Country.

As the Town is naturally seated with these advantages for the Trade of these
Countries above any other of the Eastern Coast, so it lies in the same Latitude
as Amsterdam; and by consequence, more convenient then any other Town on the
Eastern Coast of England, for the trade of the United Netherlands, and
Flanders; and almost equal with Hull and Newcastle, for the trade of Hambrough,
the Haunce-Towns, the Baltic and Norway. It is moreover enriched above any
Town in England, or perhaps in the world, with a yearly Revenue of the
Fishing-trade; which if it were managed and improved to the best advantage,
might equallize, if not be superior to the Dutch Fishing-trade. But this for
many years, by reason of this Towns appropriating this trade to a few hands,
has both rendered this trade useless to the rest of this Nation, besides the
Freemen of Yarmouth, who have not Vessels enough to maintain the same; but
has also given the Dutch an opportunity of being the greatest gainers by it,
who have for many years last past brought over their Busses, and other Fishing
Vessels, and have taken the Herrings on this Coast, and brought the same into
Yarmouth, and sold the same to them for ready money; which money might as well
have been got by our selves, and kept at home.

Though this place be thus naturally and advantagiously seated for trade, both
abroad and at home, yet it is no way conveniently built for it: for the
back-part thereof is so narrowly built in Lanes, or Rows, as no access can be
made to it but by Barrows, used no where in England but in this place, and for
this reason only: besides, the houses are built so low, as also being
straightened for Ware-house-room, they cannot receive such quantities of
Merchandise as their trades are capable of. And though the houses to the Key
are fair and well built, yet they are not of sufficient capacity to entertain
the fourth part of such Merchants as might trade upon the account of this
Harbor; neither have they the conveniences of fresh water.

Notwithstanding which, by reason of the advantages aforesaid, they have and do
flourish and prosper in trade above any other Town in England, but London and
Bristow; which they are able to do upon their own account, without any
dependency of any other place.

The Situation of Little Yarmouth.

The Town of Little Yarmouth lies South and by West of Great Yarmouth, on
Suffolk side, upon the same River, opposite to the said Town; and so is equally
capable of all Foreign and Domestic trade, as Great Yarmouth; and capable of
a farther improvement in these following particulars.

1. That the building may be built more commodious and convenient for trade.

2. Secondly, These buildings may be continued further upon that River, then
they can be in Great Yarmouth side.

3. The Channel runs deeper on this side then it does on the other.

4. It has the convenience of fresh water.

5. The Privileges are greater then the Town of Great Yarmouth: for if any
Proprietor in any house already built, or to be built, shall be willing to let
out his house to any under-Tenant, he shall sooner have a Chapman for his house
then those of Great Yarmouth side; such Tenant being by his Tenure a Freeman
of Great Yarmouth, as well as Little Yarmouth.

This Town to be built is contrived with all imaginable conveniences as to the
Key, for lading and unlading Merchandise, convenient Warehouse-room,
Storehouses and Cellerage, or any other conveniences whatsoever.

The Proprietors of the said grounds of Little Yarmouth, do hereby publish and
declare these Proposals following, to such as shall accept thereof in
convenient time.
Proposals as to the houses which front the Key, and their conveniences.

THat such Undertakers may have from twenty to eighty foot front to the Key, or
more, or less, as will suit his or their occasions, the Key being to be fifty
foot wide; such Undertakers paying for every foot which he has front, two
shillings six pence per foot per annum, every foot front having one hundred
foot deep: at which rate, a house twenty foot front, and a hundred foot deep,
amounts unto two pound ten shillings per annum; and so in proportion, be the
same more or less in front, on which he is to build a house suitable to the
place, and uniform, according to the example of the houses there a building.

And for his or their further direction, he shall, before he proceed in his
building, have a printed paper directing him therein.

There is no further Obligation on the Undertaker, then his building even with
his Neighbors in the front, and no higher: he may build backward as he pleases.

These Undertakers also have the advantage of the Key of fifty foot wide, only
for Wharfing and repairing the same, where they may have liberty to lay their
goods.

Materials in this place for building are very reasonable: as, Brick eleven
shillings or twelve shillings a thousand; Lyme made just upon the place; Oaken
Timber brought down by the three Rivers at reasonable rates; Firr-timber and
Deal very reasonable, being just against Denmark and Holland, Ships going daily
from this Harbor thither. Any person by building according to the ^are that
houses yield in the Town of Yarmouth, may have for every hundred pounds he
shall expend, twelve or thirteen pounds in the hundred, besides his
conveniences and privileges.

The buildings here designed, and suitable to the place, are to be two Stories
and a half high, besides Cellars: so one hundred, or one hundred and twenty
pounds, will build an indifferent large and convenient habitation.

The Proprietors in the ground will Lease out the same for the term of one
hundred and forty years, or for ninety nine years, determinable upon the death
of any five persons as such Undertakers shall nominate.

Proposals for Undertakers that build in the street next the Key, to be called
New-street.

The houses, whose back-sides join with the back-sides fronting the Key, are to
have what front the Undertaker will, and one hundred foot in depth allowed to
each foot front, the front to be built as the front next the Key; for which
each Undertaker is to pay two shillings per annum for every foot which he has
in the front, and a hundred foot in depth. It is contrived and proposed, that
every eighty, or one hundred foot front, shall have a free Key belonging to
those which build in this Street, as also a back-Row, or Lane, in every eighty
or one hundred foot, which is to be ten foot wide; out of which Lane they may
discharge their carriages of Merchandise into their Warehouses, so that their
houses need not to be troubled therewith: by which means the greatest part of
the Town will be as commodious, as if it were all to be built on the Key.

The opposite buildings which are to front these on the other side, are to be
built in this manner following:

The Street to be thirty eight foot wide, and to be built as the other side.
Those houses which have the same dimensions in front and depth, are to pay
twenty pence per annum for every foot front, and a hundred foot deep.

The Proprietors in the ground are willing to erect a convenient Market and
Chapel in the old place, at their own proper costs and charges.

The place to be built so far as fronts the Town of Great Yarmouth to the Key,
^s near a mile in length, and near a quarter in depth.

This place is convenient for Merchants of all sorts, Coopers, Fishermen,
Ship-Carpenters, Firkin-makers, Ship-Chandlers, Sail-makers, Curers of
Red-Herrings, Curers of White-Herrings, Coal and Woodmongers, Pulley-makers,
Cable-makers, Smiths, or any other Trades which do particularly belong to
Navigation; as also for Drapers, Mercers, Grocers, and other Retailers, etc.

Those persons who would be Undertakers, are to repair to Mr. Stephen Primatt,
late of Cliffords-Inne, but removed from thence to a Ground-Chamber, at the
second Stone-steps in Figg-tree-Court in the Inner Temple, who is authorized by
the Proprietors to draw their Conveyances with such suitable Covenants as are
requisite: Or may give in a particular of their desires to Thomas Corry
Esquire, or Mr. Austin Bridges Alderman, at their houses in the City of
Norwich; or to Mr. Petitt, at the Griffen in Little Yarmouth; or to Mr. Joseph
Waller in the New-brand Roe in Great Yarm^^^^ Merchant, who will take an
account, and return an answer thereof with cons(...)ent speed.

London, Printed for Samuel Speed at the Rainbow in Fleet Street, 1668.


