REFLECTIONS Upon some Passages in George Keith's Third Narrative.
P. 2. HE recites some words of G. Whitehead, as if they were Haeretical, which
are not only Inoffensive, but such as import the Profession of that Faith,
without which no Man can be Sanctified. Again, in Answer to T. Smiths Question,
p. 23. Q. 43. When you tell us that ye have Faith in Christ, do you mean
Christ, whose Person is now Ascended into Heaven above the Clouds? Or do you
mean only a Christ within you? G. W. replyeth. Answ. Here thou would make two
Christ's, a Christ, whose Person is above the Clouds, and a Christ within. But
how provest thou two such Christ's? We have Faith in that Christ that Descended
from The Father, who is The SAME that Ascended far Above all Heavens, that He
might Fill All things, and this CHRIST We Witness IN US, who is not divided.

P. 6. On these words, 'His HUMANE PERSON (Agreeable to the Haeresie of
NESTORIUS) used by John Faldo, G. Keith has this Note: He means His Nature of
Manhood, Personally United to his Godhead. Why Nature of Manhood, and not the
usual words His Humane Nature? If G. K. would put so favorable a construction
on the Words of the Quakers, as he does upon those Haeretical words of John
Faldo, the Bulk of his Narrative would shrivel into a very Narrow Compass.

P. 10. He recites these words of William Penn: The Seed of the Promise is an
Holy and Spiritual Principle of Light, Life, and Power, that being received
into the Heart, bruiseth the Serpents Head. And because the Seed which cannot
be that Body, is Christ, as testify the Scriptures, the Seed is one, and that
Seed Christ, and Christ GOD over all, Blessed for ever; we do conclude, and
that most truly, that Christ was, and is the Divine Word of Light and Life,
that was in the Beginning with GOD, and was, and is GOD over all Blessed for
ever. It Is Evident that when W. P. says, the Seed cannot be that Body, he means
the Body of Christ considered Abstractly from His Person or Essence which is
Eternal. The SEED in the Language of the Apostle, signifies The SON OF GOD,
considered with reference to that Body which he Assumed in the Womb of the
Blessed VIRGIN. The rest of William Penn's words in this Place, contain a
plain, and evident Confession of Faith in the SON of God.

P. 17. G. K. has these words: Nor will G. Whitehead, nor yet his Moderate,
and Learned Churchman, their Evasion Excuse G. Whitehead his Gross Error, in
thus Opposing by Socinian Arguments the Godhead of Christ, etc. And his
Moderate Churchman is Idle, and Weak in granting the word Co-creating, and not
Co-creator. Answ. Co-CREATING signifies there are More Creating, or who do
Create, than One: Co-CREATOR signifies there are More CREATORS, than One: The
first Saying I Approve, the latter I Abhor. The Father, Son and Holy Ghost are
Co-creating, but ONE CREATOR. Whether I Deserve the Epithets of Idle and Weak;
or G. Keith of Proud and Insolent, the Learned and Pious Reader may Determine.

In his Letter to G. W. He says that I take part with G. W. in his Vile Errors.
I CHALLENGE GEORGE KEITH to Prove that I have Asserted any one Error, in any
one of the several Papers that have been Published for Me by the People called
Quakers. He would have the World to Believe that I am one of those who call
themselves DEISTS, viz. who Deny that Jesus Christ is the True and Eternal GOD.
E. El. says he, by name, and some other Deists. Here he is Guilty of a most
Notorious LIE: For he knows that I do most Earnestly Profess the Belief of the
Godhead of JESUS CHRIST.

That this Malicious Aspersion may not in any measure stick on Me, I shall
entreat the Learned Reader to Peruse my Treatise entitled, DEI INCARNATI
VINDICIAE, and my Paper against CRELLIVS. I would have G. Keith to Know, that
the Moderate Churchman most earnestly Desires, that both Himself and G. Keith
may be ever Mindful of those words of the Blessed Apostle: Let your MODERATION
be known unto all Men. The LORD is at hand.

Edmund Elys.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street,
and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, School.


